
the oxford handbook of
MANAGEMENT
INFORMATION
SYSTEMS

This page intentionally left blank 

the oxford handbook of
...............................................................................................................................................................................
MANAGEMENT
INFORMATION
SYSTEMS
CRITICAL PERSPECTIVES AND
NEW DIRECTIONS
...................................................................................................................................................................
Edited by
ROBERT D. GALLIERS
and
WENDY L. CURRIE
1

3
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford ox2 6dp
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With ofﬁces in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
# Oxford University Press 2011
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published 2011
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose the same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Typeset by SPI Publisher Services, Pondicherry, India
Printed in Great Britain
on acid-free paper by
MPG Books Group, Bodmin and King’s Lynn
ISBN 978–0–19–958058–3
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2

Acknowledgements
...............................................................................................
We gratefully acknowledge all the many contributors to this book, not least the authors
of each of the chapters who so willingly gave of their time to make this Handbook a
reality. We recognize that book chapters are not a high priority given the many
demands placed on the academy these days: university rankings and accreditation
exercises have seen to that. We also acknowledge their patience in the long gestation
period that was needed to bring this collection to completion. We fervently hope that
they will be pleased with the fruits of their collective labours, and that this collection
will serve as a strong foundation for the development of the still emergent ﬁeld that is
management information systems (MIS).
We also wish to make special mention of our late colleague, Heinz Klein, whose
many contributions to our ﬁeld will be sorely missed. His untimely death, in June 2008,
meant that he would not see his contribution in published form. May this Handbook
serve as something of a memorial to him and his work.
Special mention should also be made of David Musson, the commissioning editor
for this Handbook. He, and his former colleague, Matthew Derbyshire, were hugely
encouraging and supportive, and we thank them for their faith in our ability to bring
this collection of disparate contributions together into a coherent whole. More recently,
we have had Emma Lambert, Carol Bestley and Joy Mellor supporting us in bringing
the book to publication. We thank them in addition.
Support in our own institutions was and is crucial too, and we want to acknowledge
with profound thanks, Diane Whelan and Maria Skaletsky in particular.
We, the editors, together with the publisher would like to thank:
Elsevier, for permission to reprint as Chapter 17: M. C. Lacity, S. A. Khan, and L. P.
Willcocks, ‘A review of the IT outsourcing literature: Insights for Practice’. From The
Journal of Strategic Information Systems 18 (3), 130–46. Copyright 2009 by Elsevier B.V.
and to acknowledge:
Palgrave Macmillan and the authors, for some of the material to be found in
Chapter 18 by Jacky Swan, which was ﬁrst published in: S. Newell, M. Robertson,
H. Scarbrough, and J. Swan, Managing Knowledge Work and Innovation, 2nd
edition, Houndmills, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009. Copyright 2009 by
S. Newell, M. Robertson, H. Scarbrough, and J. Swan.
Bob Galliers and Wendy Currie

This page intentionally left blank 

Contents
.............................................
List of Contributors
x
PART I SETTING THE SCENE
Introduction
1
Robert D. Galliers and Wendy L. Currie
1. Historical Reﬂections on the Practice of Information Management
and Implications for the Field of MIS
3
M. Lynne Markus
2. Tracing the History of the Information Systems Field
16
Rudy Hirschheim and Heinz K. Klein
PART II THEORETICAL AND
METHODOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVES IN MIS
Introduction
63
Wendy L. Currie
3. The Truth, the Whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth:
High-Quality Research in Information Systems
67
John Mingers
4. Systems Thinking and Soft Systems Methodology
87
Peter Checkland
5. Structuration Theory
113
Matthew Jones
6. Institutional Theory of Information Technology
137
Wendy L. Currie
7. ‘Everything is Dangerous’: Rethinking Michel Foucault and
the Social Study of ICT
174
Leslie P. Willcocks and Eleni A. Lioliou

8. Critical Social Information Systems Research
199
Bernd Stahl
9. Hermeneutics and Meaning-Making in Information Systems
229
Lucas D. Introna
10. Phenomenology, Screens, and Screenness: Returning to the
World Itself
253
Lucas D. Introna and Fernando M. Ilharco
11. Post-structuralism, Social Shaping of Technology, and
Actor-Network Theory: What Can They Bring to IS Research?
292
Nathalie Mitev and Debra Howcroft
PART III RETHINKING THEORY
IN MIS PRACTICE
Introduction
323
Robert D. Galliers
12. Further Developments in Information Systems Strategizing:
Unpacking the Concept
329
Robert D. Galliers
13. Rethinking Business–IT Alignment
346
Yolande E. Chan and Blaize Horner Reich
14. IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives and Sustained Competitive
Advantage: A Review, Synthesis, and an Extension of the Literature
373
Michael Wade, Gabriele Piccoli, and Blake Ives
15. Changing the Story Surrounding Enterprise Systems to Improve
our Understanding of What Makes ERP Work in Organizations
394
Erica Wagner and Sue Newell
16. A Multi-theoretic Approach to IT Governance: The Need for
Commitment as well as Alignment
415
Sue Newell and Cynthia Clark Williams
17. Rethinking Information Systems Security
444
Amy W. Ray
viii
CONTENTS

18. Mobile IT
467
Carsten Srensen
19. A Review of the IT Outsourcing Literature: Insights for Practice
496
Mary C. Lacity, Shaji A. Khan, and Leslie P. Willcocks
PART IV RETHINKING MIS PRACTICE
IN A BROADER CONTEXT
Introduction
529
Robert D. Galliers
20. Managing Knowledge Work
535
Jacky Swan
21. Rethinking Gender and MIS for the Twenty-First Century
560
Eileen M. Trauth
22. Green Digits: Towards an Ecology of IT Thinking
586
Pierre Berthon, Philip DesAutels, Brian Donnellan,
and Cynthia Clark Williams
23. Ethics and ICT
601
Simon Rogerson
24. IT, Globalization, and Human Development: A Personal View
623
Geoff Walsham
25. Discourses on Innovation and Development in Information
Systems in Developing Countries Research
647
Chrisanthi Avgerou
26. From Instrumentality to Emergence in Information Systems
672
Richard T. Watson, Pierre Berthon, and Leyland F. Pitt
Index
683
CONTENTS
ix

List of Contributors
........................................................................................................
THE EDITORS
..................................................................................................................
Bob Galliers was appointed as Bentley University’s inaugural University Distinguished
Professor in July 2009. He served as Bentley’s Provost and Vice President for Academic
Affairs for seven years following his arrival in July 2002, during which time he lead
Bentley’s development to become the USA’s ﬁrst business university. Bentley is accre-
dited by EQUIS and AACSB International, and has recently been elected as the USA’s
ﬁrst full member of EDAMBA, the European doctoral consortium in Management and
Business Administration. Previously Professor of Information Systems and Research
Director in the Department of Information Systems at the London School of Econom-
ics (LSE), he retains his connection with the LSE as Visiting Professor. He is also
Visiting Professor at the Australian School of Business, UNSW; King’s College,
London; the University of Witwatersrand, Johannesburg; and Brunel Business School,
Brunel University. Before joining LSE, Galliers served as Lucas Professor of Business
Management Systems and Dean of Warwick Business School, UK, and earlier as
Foundation Professor and Head of the School of Information Systems at Curtin
University, Australia. He holds an AB (honours) degree in Economics from Harvard
University; a Master’s with distinction in Management Systems from Lancaster Uni-
versity; a Ph.D. in Information Systems from the LSE, and an Honorary Doctor of
Science degree from Turku School of Economics & Business Administration, Finland.
He is the editor-in-chief of the Journal of Strategic Information Systems, and a fellow of
the British Computer Society (FBCS); the Association for Information Systems (FAIS),
and the Royal Society of Arts (FRSA). He was President of the AIS in 1999. Galliers has
had published over seventy articles in many leading international journals, three of
which have received best paper awards. He also has eleven books to his name, including
the fourth edition of the best seller, Strategic Information Management: Challenges and
Strategies in Managing Information Systems (Routledge, 2009); Exploring Information
Systems Research Approaches: Readings and Reﬂections (Routledge, 2007); Rethinking
Management Information Systems (Oxford University Press, 1999), and IT and Orga-
nizational Transformation (Wiley, 1998). His work has been cited over 3,000 times. His
research is transdisciplinary in nature, focusing primarily on information systems
strategizing and organizational innovation; knowledge management, and intra- and
extra-organizational impacts of ICT.

Wendy L. Currie combines academic, business, and charity (not-for-proﬁt) roles. She
currently holds a professorial post at the University of Greenwich Business School and
was formerly Professor at Warwick Business School. She holds a Ph.D in Management
and a B.Sc. in Sociology. Her research focuses on the intersection between international
policy and technology with particular emphasis on cross-national comparisons on the
adoption and diffusion of information and communications technology. Her current
research projects include a large-scale study of eHealth across the twenty-seven
European Union member states supported by Microsoft and a coalition of partners
including Accenture, GE, and Phillips. Other projects are looking at regulation,
compliance, and auditing using ICT in the ﬁnancial services sector. Another study
has focused on an eight-year (longitudinal) analysis of the National Programme for
Information Technology (NPfIT) in the UK National Health Service. She has obtained
research funding from the European Union, EPSRC, ESRC, and from industry. In 2005,
she set up the M.Sc. Information Systems and Management course at Warwick Business
School, which aims to promote the ‘university apprentice’ scheme by placing students in
organizations as interns. The course is now a leader in this market and is currently
expanding each year. Currie is on the editorial board of ten academic journals and
regularly publishes her research work. She currently serves as Hon Treasurer for the
Fellowship of Postgraduate Medicine charity and is a Trustee of the Cardiovascular
Research Trust. She regularly consults on the interface between business, management
and technology and has recently completed assignments with Microsoft, Mouchel,
7 Layer, Deloitte, the Church of England, and Barclays Capital.
CONTRIBUTORS
..................................................................................................................
Chrisanthi Avgerou is Professor of Information Systems at the London School of
Economics and Political Science. Her main research interests concern the relationship
of ICT to organizational change and the role of ICT in socio-economic development.
She is chairperson of the IFIP Technical Committee 9 on Social Implications of
Information Technology and she chaired the IFIP WG 9.4 group on computers in
developing countries from 1996 till 2003. Among her recent publications are Informa-
tion Systems and Global Diversity, The Social Study of Information and Communication
Technology: Innovation, Actors, and Contexts, and The Oxford Handbook of Informa-
tion and Communication Technologies all published by Oxford University Press.
Pierre Berthon holds the Clifford F. Youse Chair of Marketing and Strategy at Bentley
University. Berthon has held academic positions at Columbia University in the USA,
Henley Management College, Cardiff University, and University of Bath in the UK. He
has also taught or held visiting positions at Rotterdam School of Management, Co-
penhagen Business School, Norwegian School of Economics and Management, Cape
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
xi

Town Business School, University of Cape Town, and Athens Laboratory of Business
Administration. His research focuses on the interaction of technology, corporate
strategy, and consumer behaviour, and has appeared in journals such as Sloan Man-
agement Review, California Management Review, Information Systems Research, Tech-
nological Forecasting and Social Change, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
Journal of Business Research, Journal of International Marketing, Long Range Planning,
Business Horizons, European Management Journal, Journal of Interactive Marketing,
Journal of Information Technology, Information Systems Review, Journal of Business
Ethics, Marketing Theory, and others.
Yolande E. Chan is Professor, MIS, and Director, The Monieson Centre at the School
of Business at Queen’s University in Canada. She holds a Ph.D. from the Richard Ivey
School of Business, an M.Phil. in Management Studies from Oxford University, and
SM and SB degrees in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science from MIT. She is a
Rhodes Scholar. Prior to joining Queen’s, she worked with Andersen Consulting (now
Accenture). Dr Chan conducts research on strategic alignment, knowledge manage-
ment, and information privacy. She serves on editorial boards and has published
ﬁndings in several leading MIS journals.
Peter Checkland is Emeritus Professor of Systems at Lancaster University. After ﬁfteen
years in industry he started teaching and researching at Lancaster. Seeking a better
approach to complex management problems, he led the thirty-year programme of
action research which yielded Soft-Systems Methodology and the distinction between
‘hard’ and ‘soft’ systems thinking. His work has received many honours, including four
honorary doctorates, the Beale Medal of the OR Society, the gold medal of the UK
Systems Society, the ‘Pioneer’ award of the International Council on Systems Engi-
neering, and a Fellowship from the American Systems Engineering Honor Society.
Philip DesAutels is a researcher at Bentley University and Director of Academic
Evangelism at Microsoft. He holds M.S. and B.S. degrees in Industrial and Manage-
ment Engineering from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Prior to Microsoft, Philip was
founder and CTO of Ereo, an image retrieval search company. He worked as Chief
Scientist for Excite@Home and as a researcher on the staff of the World Wide Web
consortium as well as with IBM, Anderson Consulting, and John Hancock. As a Peace
Corps volunteer, he served in Uzbekistan, where he lectured, established a micro-
lending programme, and installed part of the country’s ﬁrst email infrastructure. Philip
serves as the Chair of the Globe Award for Sustainable Innovation. In addition, he
serves as a board member and adviser to numerous NGOs. His research interests lie in
the areas of sustainability, the future of sustainable business, and society and technolo-
gy and he has published research in the areas of operations research, marketing, and
information systems.
xii
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS

Brian Donnellan is a lecturer in Information Systems at NUI Galway. His Ph.D. was
entitled ‘Knowledge Management Systems for New Product Development’. His re-
search interests lie primarily in the area of knowledge management systems, a broad
area which encompasses the use of information systems to support knowledge man-
agement, innovation, new product development, and technology management. He has
been successful in a number of research funding proposals from the Irish government
and the EU. He has been actively involved in a two-year (2004–5) STREP project under
the EU FP6 programme. The consortium aims at introducing, analysing, and support-
ing the use of Open Data Standards (ODS) and Open Source (OS) software for
personal productivity and document management in European Public Administrations
and comprises universities and public administrations in Ireland, Italy, UK, Denmark,
Belgium, and Hungary. He has spent twenty years working in industry. His most recent
position was in Analog Devices Inc. (ADI), the European R&D centre of a US
electronics company with headquarters in Boston. While at ADI his responsibilities
included management of the Knowledge Management Business Process and manage-
ment of engineering computer services for New Product Development Teams.
Rudy Hirschheim is the Ourso Family Distinguished Professor of Information Systems
in the E. J. Ourso College of Business, Louisiana State University. He has previously
been on the faculties of the University of Houston, Templeton College Oxford (UK),
London School of Economics (UK), and McMaster University (Canada). He has held
visiting appointments at Monash University (Australia), University of New South
Wales (Australia), University of Bayreuth (Germany), University of Jyvaskyla (Fin-
land), University of Warwick (UK), University of Linz (Austria), and University of
Paris-Dauphine (France). He is past Senior Editor for the Journal of the Association for
Information Systems and on the editorial boards of the journals: Information and
Organization; Information Systems Journal; Journal of Strategic Information Systems;
Journal of MIS; and Journal of Information Technology; and has previously been on the
boards of: European Journal of Information Systems and MIS Quarterly. He was VP for
Publications for the Association for Information Systems. In 2006, he was awarded an
honorary doctorate from the University of Oulu (Finland). And in 2007, he was made
‘Fellow’ of the Association for Information Systems. His research interests relate to IT
management, especially outsourcing.
Debra Howcroft is Professor of Technology and Organizations at Manchester Business
School and a member of the ESRC-funded Centre for Research on Socio-Cultural
Change (CRESC). Broadly, her research interests are concerned with the drivers and
consequences of socio-economic restructuring in a global context.
Fernando Ilharco is Assistant Professor of the Catholic University of Portugal, Lisbon,
where he is Director of the Ph.D. in Communication Sciences Programme. He holds a
Ph.D. from the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE), Department
of Information Systems, 2002, and an M.B.A. from the business school of the Catholic
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
xiii

University of Portugal (1993). Since his Ph.D., Ilharco has been publishing regularly in
academic journals and books. His areas of interest are (i) ICT and Society and (ii)
Leadership and Organizational Theory, both informed by phenomenological lenses.
For ten years he kept a regular column on societal issues on Público, a leading
Portuguese reference newspaper.
Lucas D. Introna is Professor of Technology, Organization, and Ethics at Lancaster
University. His research interest is the social study of information technology and its
consequences for society. In particular he is concerned with the ethics and politics of
technology. He also has an active interest in business and research ethics. He is co-
editor of Ethics and Information Technology, associate editor of Information Systems
Research, and a founding member of the International Society for Ethics and Informa-
tion Technology (INSEIT) <http://www.lums.lancs.ac.uk/owt/proﬁles/119/>.
Blake Ives holds the C. T. Bauer Chair in Business Leadership at the Bauer College of
Business at the University of Houston. He is the past Director of Research for the
Society for Information Management’s Advanced Practice Council and a former
Director of the Information Systems Research Center at the University of Houston.
Blake is a past president of the Association for Information Systems, a fellow of the
Association for Information Systems, and a past editor-in-chief of the MIS Quarterly.
He currently serves on a number of editorial boards including as Senior Editor of MISQ
Executive and a member of the board of the Communications of the Association for
Computing Machinery (CACM). He has held distinguished fellowships at the Harvard
Business School, Oxford University, and IBM. According to Google Scholar, his
scholarly research has been cited close to 5,000 times. His work includes publications
in, among others, Management Science, MIS Quarterly, Information Systems Research,
Communications of the ACM, MISQ Executive, Decision Sciences, Organization Science,
and the Sloan Management Review.
Matthew Jones is a university lecturer in Information Management at the Judge
Business School and the Department of Engineering at the University of Cambridge.
He previously held postdoctoral positions at the University of Reading and the
University of Cambridge where he was involved in the development of computer-
based models for public policy decision-making. His current research interests are
concerned with the social and organizational aspects of the design and use of informa-
tion systems, especially in healthcare settings, the relationship between technology and
organizational and social change, and theoretical and methodological issues in Infor-
mation Systems research.
Shaji Khan is a Ph.D. candidate in business administration with information systems
emphasis at the University of Missouri-St Louis. His research interests include collec-
tive mindfulness and its impact on IS performance, outsourcing, knowledge sharing
and transfer, user involvement and IS success, user innovativeness, agent-based
xiv
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS

modelling, and entrepreneurship. He has published in the International Journal of
Entrepreneurship and Innovation, as well as in the conference proceedings of AMCIS,
Academy of Management Annual Meetings (AOM), and Babson-Nankai International
Entrepreneurship Research Conference. He also has extensive IS related industry
experience working in positions such as senior systems analyst, web developer, and
IS manager and still maintains an active interest in his entrepreneurial IT venture.
Heinz Karl Klein (1940–2008) was a professor and scholar who made fundamental
contributions to the philosophical foundations of the ﬁeld of Information Systems, and
the subﬁelds of systems development, data modelling, and interpretive research in
information systems. He is a widely cited scholar in these areas <http://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Heinz_Klein-cite_note-0>. Dr Klein earned his Dipl.Kfm. (equivalent of an
MBA) and Ph.D. from the Faculty of Business Administration, University of Munich.
In 1998, he received an honorary doctorate from the University of Oulu for his
academic contributions to the development of information systems research in Fin-
land. He received the Paper of the Year award for 1999 from MIS Quarterly. From 2001
to 2004 he was a doctoral programme director at Temple University. In his last years he
was Invited Chair at Salford University, and Adjunct Professor at the School of
Management of the State University of New York at Binghamton. He also held a
variety of research and teaching appointments at major research universities in
Germany, Canada, Finland, Denmark, New Zealand, and South Africa. His mentoring
of doctoral students and junior faculty produced several nationally and internationally
renowned university professors.
Mary C. Lacity is Professor of Information Systems and an International Business
Fellow at the University of Missouri-St Louis. Her current research focuses on global
outsourcing of business and IT services. She was the recipient of the 2008 Gateway to
Innovation Award sponsored by the IT Coalition and Society for Information Man-
agement and the 2000 World Outsourcing Achievement Award sponsored by Price-
waterhouseCoopers and Michael Corbett and Associates. She has published twelve
books, most recently China’s Emerging Outsourcing Capabilities (Palgrave, 2010, co-
editors Leslie Willcocks and Yingqin Zheng) and Information Systems Outsourcing:
Theory and Practice (Palgrave, 2009; coauthor: Leslie P. Willcocks). She is Senior Editor
of the Journal of Information Technology, Co-editor of the Palgrave Series: Work,
Technology, and Globalization, and on the editorial boards for MIS Quarterly Execu-
tive, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, Strategic Outsourcing: An International
Journal, and Journal of the Association for Information Systems (JAIS).
Eleni Lioliou is currently pursuing her Ph.D. research at LSE. Her research has been
funded by the Karelia Foundation, Leventis Foundation, and the LSE. She holds a B.Sc.,
a B.A., an M.Litt., an M.Sc., and an M.Phil. She has worked as a research assistant for the
LSE, University of Warwick and the University of Loughborough, as well as a teaching
assistant at the LSE, London Business School, University College London, and the Cass
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
xv

Business School. Her research interest revolves around IT outsourcing and offshoring,
governance, control as well as the Foucauldian approach into the study of ICTs.
M. Lynne Markus is the John W. Poduska, Sr., Professor of Information and Process
Management at Bentley University. Professor Markus’s research interests include IT
governance, the organizational architectures of multinational enterprises, data and
process standardization, and interorganizational information sharing and systems.
She is the author or editor of ﬁve books and over 100 other scholarly publications,
two of which have received the Association for Information Systems (AIS) Publication
of the Year award. She was named a fellow of the AIS in 2004 and received the AIS LEO
Award for Exceptional Lifetime Achievement in Information Systems in 2008.
John Mingers is Professor of Operational Research and Information Systems at Kent
Business School, and Director of Research. Prior to this, he was at Warwick Business
School. His research interests include the development of theory concerning the nature
of information, meaning and knowledge; the use of systems methodologies in problem
situations, particularly the mixing of different methods within an intervention (multi-
methodology); the development of critical realism as an underpinning philosophy for
information systems; research metrics and autopoiesis and its applications. He has
published the only comprehensive study of autopoiesis, Self-Producing Systems: Im-
plications and Applications of Autopoiesis, and has also edited Information Systems: An
Emerging Discipline? (with Prof. Frank Stowell), Social Theory and Philosophy for
Information Systems (with Prof. Leslie Willcocks), Multimethodology: The Theory
and Practice of Combining Management Science Methodologies (with Tony Gill), and
Rational Analysis for a Problematic World (with Prof. Jonathan Rosenhead). His latest
monograph is Realizing Systems Thinking: Knowledge and Action in Management
Science. He has published widely in journals including Information Systems Research,
Information Systems Journal, JORS, Information and Organization, and The Sociologi-
cal Review. He is an academician of the Academy of the Social Sciences. He joined the
Editorial Board of MIS Quarterly in 2010.
Nathalie Mitev is a senior lecturer at the London School of Economics, held previous
positions at Salford University and City University, and has been teaching information
systems (IS) for the last twenty years. She holds several French postgraduate degrees, an
M.B.A. and a Ph.D. Her research interests focus on IS and organizational change, and
she has researched IS in the travel, health, small business, and construction industries.
She has applied theories from the sociology of technology to analysing IS failures.
Sue Newell is the Cammarata Professor of Management, Bentley University, USA, and
a part-time Professor of Information Management at Warwick University, UK. She has
a B.Sc. and Ph.D. from Cardiff University, UK. Sue’s research focuses on understanding
the relationships between innovation, knowledge, and organizational networking
(ikon), primarily from an organizational theory perspective. She was one of the
xvi
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS

founding members of ikon, a research centre based at Warwick University. Her
research emphasizes a critical, practice-based understanding of the social aspects of
innovation, change, knowledge management, and inter-ﬁrm networked relations. Sue
has published over eighty-ﬁve journal articles in the areas of organization studies,
management, and information systems, as well as numerous books and book chapters.
Administratively, Sue is the Director of the Ph.D. at Bentley and led the effort to design,
develop, and implement two new Ph.D.s, one in Business and one in Accountancy. In
terms of teaching Sue has taught at all levels—undergraduate, graduate, post-graduate,
and executive—and focuses on designing innovative courses that emphasize the prac-
tical relevance of solid theoretical foundations.
Amy Ray currently serves as Trustee Chair in the Information Process and Manage-
ment Department at Bentley University. Dr. Ray teaches, consults, and conducts
research in information security, with special interests in interorganizational systems
and processes, particularly in healthcare. Dr. Ray has worked extensively with leaders
in the healthcare and consumer packaged goods industries and has taught a variety of
information security courses in executive and university education programmes. She
has received numerous grants, including grants from Symantec and NSF to complete
security and other practice-oriented research. Her research appears in numerous
scholarly MIS journals including the Journal of Management Information Systems,
Information and Management, the Journal of Information Systems, and the Journal of
Strategic Information Systems as well as several scholarly accounting journals.
Blaize Horner Reich worked for many years in the IT industry as a practitioner,
project manager, and consultant before developing an academic career. She is currently
a board member for several academic journals and a corporate director. Dr. Reich has
been published in many journals, including MIS Quarterly, Journal of Information
Technology, Journal of Management Information Systems, and the Journal of Strategic
Information Systems. Her current IT project research focuses on knowledge manage-
ment and modelling performance. Her IT governance work focuses on managing risk
and attaining business-IT alignment.
Simon Rogerson is Professor and Director of the Centre for Computing and Social
Responsibility at De Montfort University. He researches into the ethical issues of new
technologies. He is Europe’s ﬁrst Professor in Computer Ethics. He received the 2000
IFIP Namur Award and 2005 was awarded the SIGCAS Making-a-Difference Award
by the ACM. He conceived and co-directs the ETHICOMP conference series. He is
Chair of Council and VP of IMIS and a member of the Ethics Strategic Panel of BCS.
Gabriele Piccoli is Professor of Information Systems in the Management of Technolo-
gy and Strategy department at the Grenoble École de Management. Prior to moving to
Grenoble, Prof. Piccoli was Associate Professor of Information Systems at Cornell
University (USA) and subsequently Associate Professor of Applied Economics at the
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
xvii

University of Sassari. Prof. Piccoli began his career as an Assistant Professor at Cornell
in 2000, receiving indeﬁnite tenure at the School of Hotel Administration and Hospi-
tality Management upon his promotion to Associate Professor in 2006. Prof. Piccoli is
the author of the book Information Systems for Managers: Text and Cases, published by
John Wiley & Sons. His recent research interests span strategic information systems
and the use of information systems to enable customer service. This work has appeared
in leading Information Systems and applied journals, including MIS Quarterly, Deci-
sion Sciences Journal, Communications of the ACM, Harvard Business Review, and MIS
Quarterly Executive.
Leyland F. Pitt is Professor of Marketing, Segal Graduate School of Business, Simon
Fraser University, Vancouver, Canada, and is Senior Research Fellow of the Leeds
University Business School in the United Kingdom. He has also taught on executive
and M.B.A. programmes at major international business schools such as the University
of Chicago, Columbia University, and London Business School. His work has been
accepted for publication by such journals as Information Systems Research, Journal of
the Academy of Marketing Science, Sloan Management Review, California Management
Review, Communications of the ACM, and MIS Quarterly (for which he also served as
Associate Editor).
Dr Carsten Sørensen lectures on Information Systems and Innovation in the Depart-
ment of Management at the London School of Economics and Political Science, United
Kingdom. He studies how ICT shapes and is shaped by emerging working practices
and organizational forms and has, since 2001, studied enterprise mobility (<mobility.
lse.ac.uk>). Carsten has since 1990 worked on and managed a range of large EU,
Swedish, and UK research projects. He has published broadly within Information
Systems and is Senior Editor for the Information Systems Journal. Carsten is actively
engaged with executive education and has consulted for a range of organizations. He
can be reached at <www.carstensorensen.com>.
Bernd Carsten Stahl is Professor of Critical Research in Technology in the Centre for
Computing and Social Responsibility at De Montfort University, Leicester, UK. His
interests cover philosophical issues arising from the intersections of business, technol-
ogy, and information. This includes the ethics of computing and critical approaches to
information systems.
Jacky Swan is Professor in Organizational Behaviour at Warwick Business School,
University of Warwick, Associate Dean (Ph.D. Programme) and Director of the
Innovation Knowledge and Organizational Networks (IKON) research centre. Her
research interests are in linking innovation and networking to processes of managing
knowledge across different industry sectors and national contexts. Of late she has been
Principal Investigator on research projects looking at the translation of knowledge into
xviii
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS

medical practice via clinical trials and commissioning decisions. She is co-author of
Managing Knowledge Work and Innovation (Palgrave, 2009).
Eileen M. Trauth is Professor of Information Sciences & Technology at the Pennsyl-
vania State University. She has afﬁliate professorships in Women’s Studies, Labor
Studies & Employee Relations, International Affairs, and Management & Organization.
Dr. Trauth’s research is concerned with societal, cultural, and organizational inﬂuences
on information technology and the information technology professions with a special
focus on the role of diversity and social inclusion. She has published nine books and
over 150 scholarly papers on her work on gender and social inclusion, the information
economy, qualitative research methods, critical theory, global informatics, information
policy, information management, telecommunications policy, and information sys-
tems skills.
Mike Wade is Associate Professor of Management Information Systems at the Schu-
lich School of Business, York University, Toronto, where he also holds the position of
Academic Director of the Kellogg-Schulich Executive M.B.A. Programme. He received
a Ph.D. from the Ivey Business School at the University of Western Ontario. Professor
Wade has worked extensively with public and private sector organizations to further an
understanding of the strategic use of information systems for sustainable competitive
advantage. He has lived and worked in seven countries across four continents and
consulted for top international organizations including Cisco Systems, Microsoft, and
IBM. His research has appeared in journals such as MIS Quarterly, Strategic Manage-
ment Journal, and the Communications of the ACM. He is Senior Editor at the Journal
of the AIS and Associate Editor at ISR. Professor Wade has co-authored four books in
the areas of Information Systems, eCommerce, and Management Theory.
Erica Wagner is an associate professor in the Department of Management at Portland
State University’s School of Business. She earned her Ph.D. from the London School of
Economics and has an undergraduate degree in accounting. She has previously taught
at Cornell University and the London School of Economics. Her research interests
focus on the ways software is ‘made to work’ within different organizational contexts,
with particular emphasis on how work practices are designed into artefacts, standard
processes, and methods of accounting. Her research has been published in a variety of
outlets including The Journal of the Association for Information Systems, Information
and Organization, Communications of the ACM, and the Journal of Strategic Infor-
mation Systems. Dr Wagner’s paper entitled ‘The Creation of “Best practice” Soft-
ware: Myth, Reality and Ethics’, was awarded ‘Best Research Paper 2006’ by leading
scholars in her ﬁeld. In addition, she was one of four faculty members across Cornell
University to receive a three-year grant from the National Science Foundation’s
(NSF) Digital Government project (2005) on Natural Language Processing Support
for eRulemaking. While at Cornell University she also won two awards related to her
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
xix

teaching: The Merrill Presidential Scholar award for Outstanding Educator and the
Faculty Innovation in Teaching Grant.
Geoff Walsham is Professor of Management Studies (Information Systems) at Judge
Business School, University of Cambridge. In addition to Cambridge, he has held
academic posts at the University of Lancaster in the UK where he was Professor of
Information Management, the University of Nairobi in Kenya, and Mindanao State
University in the Philippines. His teaching and research is focused on the question: are
we making a better world with information and communication technologies? He was
one the early pioneers of interpretive approaches to research on information systems.
Richard Watson is the J. Rex Fuqua Distinguished Chair for Internet Strategy in the
Terry College of Business at the University of Georgia. He has published nearly
150 journal articles and given invited presentations in more than thirty countries.
His current research focuses on Energy Informatics. He is a consulting editor for John
Wiley & Sons, a former President of AIS, a visiting professor at the University of Agder
in Norway, and co-leads the Global Text Project.
Cynthia Clark Williams is the Director of the Harold S. Geneen Institute of Corporate
Governance at Bentley University and an assistant professor of management. She holds
a Ph.D. from the honours programme at Boston University and an M.A. from
Northwestern University. Her research interests are primarily in the areas of ethics,
corporate disclosures, and governance. Her research has been published in MIS
Quarterly, Business Ethics Quarterly, Business & Society, and the Case Research Journal
to name a few. She teaches courses in strategy and social issues in management.
Leslie Willcocks is Professor of Technology Work and Globalization at the London
School of Economics and Political Science, head of the Information Systems and
Innovation group, and director of The Outsourcing Unit there. He is known for his
work on global sourcing, information management, IT evaluation, e-business, organi-
zational transformation, as well as for his practitioner contributions to many corpora-
tions and government agencies. He holds visiting chairs at Erasmus, Melbourne, and
Sydney universities and is Associate Fellow at Templeton, University of Oxford. He has
been Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of Information Technology for the last twenty years,
and is Joint Series Editor, with Mary C. Lacity, of the Palgrave book series Technology
Work and Globalization. He has co-authored thirty-one books, including most recently
Major Currents in Information Systems (Sage, 2008, with Allen Lee), and Global
Sourcing of Business and IT Services (Palgrave, 2006, with Mary C. Lacity). He has
published over 180 refereed papers in journals such as Harvard Business Review,Sloan
Management Review, MIS Quarterly, MISQ Executive, Journal of Management Studies,
Communications of the ACM, and Journal of Strategic Information Systems.
xx
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS

P A R T I
...............................................................................................
SETTING THE
SCENE
...............................................................................................
In this volume, The Oxford Handbook of Management Information Systems: Critical
Perspectives and New Directions, we include twenty-six chapters by leading scholars in
the ﬁeld. We present this body of work in four parts, including Setting the Scene
(Part I), Theoretical and Methodological Perspectives in MIS (Part II), Rethinking
Theory in MIS Practice (Part III), and Rethinking MIS Practice in a Broader Context
(Part IV).
In the opening chapter to this volume, Lynne Markus provides valuable insights into
the development of the MIS ﬁeld, considering how changing technology has posed a
series of important challenges to organizations and individuals. This is followed by a
chapter by Rudy Hirschheim and Heinz K. Klein (1940–2008) where they trace ﬁve
decades of the information systems academic ﬁeld. They divide the decades into four
eras from 1964 to 1974, 1975 to 1984, 1985 to 1994, and from 1995 onwards. They
include important developments in technology, research themes, schools of thought,
education and the curriculum, and infrastructural advancements and the launch of
professional societies. This historical overview is critically important for gaining a wide
appreciation of how the information systems ﬁeld has developed from the early 1960s
to the present day.

This page intentionally left blank 

c h a p t e r 1
...............................................................................................
HISTORICAL REFLECTIONS
ON THE PRACTICE OF
INFORMATION
MANAGEMENT AND
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE
FIELD OF MIS
...............................................................................................
M. LYNNE MARKUS
A Handbook is meant to provide concise and current coverage of essential topics in an
area of knowledge. On these criteria, the Oxford Handbook of Management Informa-
tion Systems succeeds admirably. This Handbook gives the reader an expertly guided
tour through the contemporary management information systems (MIS) landscape—
the leading social theories applied in studies of MIS, the major concerns of contempo-
rary information management practice, and the larger social issues in which informa-
tion technology (IT) is implicated at present.
Even the weightiest handbooks have little space to spare for history, although
this one starts with an in-depth look at the history of the Information Systems
academic ﬁeld (Hirschheim and Klein, this volume). Therefore, it seems opportune
to use this introductory chapter to comment on the evolution of the practice of
information management. In the pages that follow, I brieﬂy characterize three
co-evolving trends in the practice of information management: the professionaliza-
tion of management and information management, the externalization of IT work,
and the transformation of in-house IT services. These trends are likely to continue
unfolding for some years to come, leading to new opportunities and challenges for
the ﬁeld of MIS.

THE PROFESSIONALIZATION OF MANAGEMENT
AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT
..................................................................................................................
In many ways, the history of information technology is the history of management
professionalism. (See Swan in this volume.) For example, the concept of the economic
order quantity (EOQ) and the formulas for calculating it were developed in the early
1900s, but the concept was not widely applied in practice until the 1960s, when
companies began developing software that automated its computation. In other
cases, the attempt to apply computing power to organizational tasks stimulated the
invention of new management practices. Some years ago, I had a conversation with a
man who had programmed one of the ﬁrst manufacturing control programs in the
early 1960s. He explained that, at that time, the ‘bill of materials’ concept was unknown
(in his organization, at least); he and his colleagues and clients had to invent (or
possibly reinvent) the concept in the process of building their system.
As time went on, management ideas such as EOQ and the bill of materials diffused
among organizations via many channels: personnel movements, professional societies,
management education, research organizations, and the growing software and profes-
sional services industry. Whether or not these new ideas actually constitute ‘best
practices’ (Wagner and Newell in this volume), they have become institutionalized as
beliefs about the best ways for people in organizations to do things (Currie in this
volume). Furthermore, encoding these beliefs in software often imbues them with the
force of law. It is now impossible to do many things in organizations without informa-
tion systems. Business rules are increasingly captured in black-box analytic engines
that few, if any, people can understand or override. As one CIO recently asserted:
‘There are no more business processes any more; the system is the business process’.
Whereas formerly the systems that codiﬁed management ideas were ‘home-grown’
and unique to the cultures and practices of individual organizations, they are increas-
ingly ‘off-the-shelf’ packages or services that themselves have the aura of ‘best practice’
standards. Accountants, planners, marketers, human resources specialists, and ﬁnan-
cial analysts are all expected to know how to use certain ‘best of breed’ IT applications
in doing their work. These experts in turn urge their organizations to adopt the
applications, reinforcing transorganizational understandings about how the practice
of management is to be done. Thus, the growing use of standard software contributes to
the shaping of practitioners’ identities and their identiﬁcation with the communities of
practitioners outside their organizations. In addition, driven in part by the relentless
process of releasing software ‘upgrades’, packaged software use promotes the ongoing
development of professional knowledge and standardized practices.
Professionalism supported and reinforced by IT has also accelerated in the informa-
tion management domain. Professional associations such as the Association for Com-
puting Machinery (ACM), the Association for Information Technology Professionals
(formerly the Data Processing Management Institute and originally the National
4
M. LYNNE MARKUS

Machine Accountants Association), and the Society for Information Management date
back to the 1950s and 1960s. But the last two decades have seen a profound and rapid
increase in the professionalism of the major IT-related occupations: IT operations,
software development, project management, and the general management of the IT
function.
The ﬁrst book describing the methods of the IT Infrastructure Library (ITIL), which
sought to codify practices related to the management of IT services, was published in
1989. Although widely adopted in Europe, ITIL was virtually unknown in the US until
2000, when ITIL v.2 was released and consultants began organizing US conferences
and training. By 2006, however, CIO magazine was able to report that ‘most [US]
companies’ were using ITIL, at least to some extent (Lynch 2006). The Capability
Maturity Model (CMM), which deﬁned a process for continuous improvement in
software engineering, was ﬁrst released in 1991. By 2004, large US organizations letting
contracts for outsourced software development reportedly considered Level 5 (the
highest level) of CMM assessment ‘a condition for getting into the game’; as a result,
some unscrupulous software providers were claimed to exaggerate their ratings in
order to qualify for contracts (Koch 2004). The Project Management Institute (PMI)
released the ﬁrst version of its ‘Book of Knowledge’ in 1996. By 2005, PMI certiﬁcation
was considered a sign of a ‘well qualiﬁed’ IT project manager (Meyer 2005). Other IT
professionalism initiatives include the IT Financial Management Association, founded
in 1988, the Control Objectives for Business and Related Information Technology
(COBIT), ﬁrst published in 1996, and the IT Governance Institute, established in 1998.
Today, every area of IT-related practice is supported by professional associations,
trained practitioners, and IT applications that teach, standardize and enforce, or
automate prescribed professional behaviours.
In summary, information technology has contributed to the professionalization of
management over the last ﬁfty years. In addition, information management itself has
been professionalized—a process supported and reinforced by the use of IT—signiﬁ-
cantly during the last two decades. As a result, whereas the practice of information
management was originally a craft occupation with practices customized by individuals
and organizations, its increasing professionalization gives information management a
transorganizational character. Among other consequences, professionalism facilitates
the movement of IT workers among IT-using organizations. It also promotes external-
ization, discussed below. By externalization, I mean the movement of IT professionals
out of IT-using organizations and into organizations that specialize in the provision of
IT services. (See Lacity and Willcocks in this volume.)
THE EXTERNALIZATION OF IT WORK
..................................................................................................................
The practice of information management evolved the way it did because of how it got
started. Although executives at IBM reportedly saw little commercial potential in the
HISTORICAL REFLECTIONS ON THE PRACTICE OF INFORMATION
5

ﬁrst computers, large organizations disagreed and began to order them in the early
1950s. (Hirscheim and Klein, this volume, cited the introduction of the LEO—the
Lyons Electronic Ofﬁce—in 1951.) However, using the analogy of purchased consumer
goods, the computing machines delivered to these pioneering users required more than
a little assembly and came with few operating instructions. Furthermore, there was no
pool of knowledgeable and experienced IT staff who could be employed to help.
Basically, it was up to the organizations that bought computers to ﬁgure out how to
train people to apply computers to business tasks. In the process, computer-using
organizations began developing the procedures and methods that have since become
the professional standards described in the preceding section.
It did not take long, however, for a market in software and services to emerge. The
market was arguably launched by IBM’s decision to unbundle software and services
from its hardware sales in 1969. This move was motivated by the US Department of
Justice’s antitrust proceedings against the company. By the time those proceedings
ended in 1982, the heyday of mainframes and of computer hardware generally was
drawing to a close. Owing in no small part to the strategic vision of Bill Gates at
Microsoft (incorporated in 1981), software soon generated the largest share of the
proﬁts in the information technology space. (Around 2000 Microsoft faced its own
antitrust proceedings in the US and Europe over its bundling of the browser and search
tools with the operating system.) IBM languished but was later turned around by Lou
Gerstner (hired in 1993), who, among other transformative measures, emphasized IT
services such as outsourcing.
Outsourcing IT operations and software maintenance had become a booming
business since 1989, when a poorly performing Eastman Kodak Company shocked
the business community by announcing its intention to outsource all IT activities.
Similar major contracts were also being made in Europe. In the ﬁve years that followed,
more than sixty organizations let major outsourcing contracts (Caldwell 1995). The
decision to outsource IT was consistent with the business ideology of the time, in which
‘sticking to our core business’ and ‘re-engineering business processes to drive business
value’ were familiar mantras. Recall that Michael Hammer and Thomas Davenport
published highly inﬂuential articles on business process re-engineering nearly simulta-
neously in 1990.
The outsourcing movement was also likely spurred by the recession of 1990–1, when
for the ﬁrst time middle managers and white collar workers were laid off in massive
numbers—victims of what the press erroneously called ‘re-engineering’. By the time
the value of the Internet for delivering services became clear (Amazon was founded in
1995), the IT and business process outsourcing trend was well established. To empha-
size this growing market, IBM launched its Global Business Systems division in 1996.
Software vendors began promoting ‘application hosting’ and ‘software-as-a-service’.
For instance, start-up Salesforce.com ﬁrst offered its customer relationship manage-
ment software on a services basis in 1999; today its Force.com—an enterprise system
development environment offered as a service—has become a phenomenon. The
current popular vision is ‘cloud computing’, in which organizations are expected to
6
M. LYNNE MARKUS

access computing power and applications services that are distributed ‘on the grid’.
Although the services market suffered some deﬂation from the dot-com crash in 2000,
it has continued to grow—much of it ‘off-shore’. By 2004, IBM was promoting ‘services
science’ as an emerging academic discipline.
While the services market was building steam, the market for corporate enterprise
software applications exploded. Until the early 1990s, many large organizations had the
policy of building all applications in house, and companies that wrote software target-
ing large enterprises struggled. The tide began to turn in the early-middle 1990s, for
several reasons. First, many companies were disappointed in their re-engineering
efforts because of the inﬂexibility of their legacy systems. Their newly redesigned
processes could not be implemented, since their custom-built systems were too expen-
sive to change. Second, by the middle of the decade, the ‘Year 2000 (Y2K) problem’
ﬁnally came into general public awareness. Although IT specialists had been warning
for years that legacy software programmed with two-digit date ﬁelds was vulnerable to
failure at the turn of the millennium, their requests for funding to rewrite information
systems fell on deaf ears in the aftermath of the 1990–1 recession. When corporate
executives ﬁnally began to acknowledge Y2K risks, they also recognized the risks and
expense of trying to rewrite the mass of legacy code with a tight and ﬁxed deadline. Still
another impetus for the purchase of packaged software was the impending launch of
the Euro currency in 2002, which required major changes to legacy systems.
In the face of inﬂexible systems, the Y2K problem, and the Euro launch, implement-
ing enterprise resource planning (ERP) system packages suddenly seemed the answer.
(See Wagner and Newell in this volume.) ERP system vendors made presentations to
CEOs and Boards of Directors, who sometimes concluded deals over the objections of
their in-house IT staffs. By 1998, SAP was acknowledged the clear winner in the
enterprise software space, and the consulting arms of leading consulting ﬁrms, which
had grown tremendously from their enterprise system implementation services, began
to sever their relationships with their audit partners. In 2001, Andersen Consulting
became Accenture and made its initial public offering.
Enterprise software and the related services got another growth spurt as a result of
notorious accounting scandals at Enron (2001) and WorldCom (2002). The US passed
its Sarbanes–Oxley legislation in 2002, mandating evidence of rigorous internal con-
trols, and many other countries soon followed suit. Enterprise software vendors argued
that their systems had been thoroughly vetted; new enterprise systems were sold to
manage compliance with Sarbanes–Oxley legislation.
Although many large companies continue to run enterprise systems (packaged or
home-grown) in-house, the trend toward outsourcing appears to be increasing. The
recession of 2001–3 and the current economic crisis undoubtedly deserve some credit.
Although outsourcing may not reduce IT costs in the short run, it can allow companies
to ‘monetize’ their IT investments and exchange ﬁxed for variable costs. Other motiva-
tions can also be discerned. Despite the recession, North American and European
companies have experienced local shortages of skilled IT labour, while vast talent pools
can be found overseas. Some Western companies have set up their own IT operations
HISTORICAL REFLECTIONS ON THE PRACTICE OF INFORMATION
7

abroad, but others do not want to acquire the skills required to manage offshore IT
personnel. These companies turn to IT service providers with their access to overseas
talent and their managerial expertise. Current technologies allow IT service providers
to run systems and processes for their clients in distant locations, if not seamlessly, at
least with acceptable levels of reliability and quality.
Another outsourcing driver is the desire of many executives to achieve business
agility, of which one type is the ability to grow quickly—and shrink quickly—as
business conditions require. Appropriately designed outsourcing relationships can
leverage the resources and capabilities of IT services providers to achieve that goal.
The leading exemplar of outsourcing for scale is Bharti Airtel’s outsourcing contract
with IBM (IBM 2005), rumoured to have exceeded $2 billion. The Indian company’s
partnership with IBM, which gives IBM incentives to propose process changes and new
automation that will improve Airtel’s effectiveness, has allowed the telecommunica-
tions company to grow at phenomenal rates. Interestingly, while a number of Indian IT
companies have entered the ranks of the world’s largest IT service providers, IBM has
become the largest provider of IT services to companies in India.
Observing these trends, more than a few high-tech analysts have predicted the
demise of in-house IT operations. In 1987, a Sloan Management Review article
proclaimed that the IS organization would ‘wither away’ as a result of outsourcing
(Dearden 1987). In 2003, Nicholas Carr outraged the information management and
MIS communities with a Harvard Business Review article entitled ‘IT doesn’t matter’
(Carr 2003). In a recent book, The Big Switch, Carr argued that in-house IT organiza-
tions may survive in some form, but ‘they will have little left to do after the bulk of
business computing shifts out of private data centers and into “the cloud”’ (Carr 2008:
118). To assess the plausibility of Carr’s claim it is helpful to know to know what
typically happens when IT services are performed in-house—the topic discussed next.
THE TRANSFORMATION IN
IN-HOUSE IT SERVICES
..................................................................................................................
The starting point for a discussion of in-house IT services is the changes that have
occurred in organizational design and functioning over the last two decades. Although
it may seem too obvious to mention, business has globalized considerably since the
early 1990s (see Walsham in this volume), when the UN Council on Trade and
Development began publishing data on the largest transnational enterprises. Although
sceptics claim that most businesses are much less global than is commonly thought
(Rugman and Verbeke 2004), there is little doubt that transnational business activity
has increased substantially (Dunning, Fujita, and Yakova 2007) and continues to
increase, according to the latest reports.
8
M. LYNNE MARKUS

To a great extent, large corporations increased their global reach through mergers
and acquisitions (M&A). An unprecedented boom of M&A activity began around 1995
and has continued almost unabated since then. There was an understandable fall-off in
M&A activity during the 2001–2 recession, but it picked up shortly thereafter. Again,
the current recession has put a damper on M&A activity, but many analysts expect it to
resume as the economic situation improves. The scale of this activity is such that one
scholar was motivated to ask in 2001 whether ‘most of us [will] be working for giant
enterprises by 2028’ (Pryor 2001). Whether or not that will be the case, there is little
doubt that the largest companies are huge: Siemens, for example, approaches 500,000,
and Wal-Mart 1,000,000, employees worldwide. There are smaller countries!
Interestingly, while some organizations are growing larger, others appear to be
shrinking as a result of outsourcing, virtual organizing, radical decentralization, and
business networks connected by market and clan relations (see, for example, Malone
2004). Although evidence of the trend toward organizational unbundling is harder to
come by, striking examples can be found. It seems possible that both giant enterprises
and disaggregated networked enterprises can ﬂourish side by side. A few years ago, a
report from a leading consulting ﬁrm predicted that most industry segments would
support only 3–5 global competitors: intermediate-sized companies would vanish,
leaving a large number of regional or local players. Not explored in the report was
the possibility that smaller organizations could band together to offer global business
services that are comparable in scale and scope to those of the largest integrated
organizations.
In a less well-noticed trend, organizations of all sizes in a number of different
industries are getting together to develop standards, and sometimes also technologies
and information services providers, to support joint business processes. For example,
spearheaded by the Mortgage Bankers Association of America, organizations in all
segments of the mortgage industry have come together to develop MISMO information
systems and business process standards that enable electronic data exchange and ‘all-
electronic’ mortgages (Markus et al. 2006). A related development was the creation of a
new organization, MERS, to streamline the trading of loans by electronic means. This
trend may accelerate the externalization of IT—not just to IT services providers as
discussed earlier—but also to industry consortia governed by industry members.
Returning to the theme of globalization, one can see that transnational organizations
are not only getting larger, they are changing how they manage their global operations.
The multidivisional organizational form, ﬁrst designed in the early twentieth century,
has been the norm for multi-product, multi-market companies since the 1970s.
However, in recent years, analysts have noted a distinct movement toward a different
form they call the multidimensional organization, which attempts to manage synergies
across business units as well as the proﬁtability of each (cf. Bartlett 1982; Galbraith
2000; Strikwerda and Stoelhorst 2009).
The management philosophy of multidivisional enterprises is one of decentraliza-
tion. Each business unit is responsible for the proﬁt and loss of some self-contained
area of business activity. Therefore, the belief is, business unit managers need to control
HISTORICAL REFLECTIONS ON THE PRACTICE OF INFORMATION
9

all activities—such as information systems—that contribute to the bottom line. The
role of corporate headquarters in such an enterprise is to deﬁne the scope of the units’
activities and to allocate capital to them. The strength of the multidivisional enterprise
is its ability to accommodate different product technologies and different market
demands. Its weakness is its tendency to promote competition among business units
with overlapping technologies or markets.
The disadvantages of the multidivisional form became apparent to global organiza-
tions as a result of two previously discussed trends. First, as the customers of multidi-
visional enterprises themselves globalized, they demanded to be treated as single global
entities. Second, multidivisional enterprises began to emphasize services and bundled
‘solutions’ of diverse products and services. Both trends required much greater coordi-
nation among formerly autonomous business units.
Global account management was plausibly the ﬁrst major sign of change in the
structure and functioning of multidivisional organizations (Yip and Masden 1996). In
addition to products and markets, global organizations created new units, roles, and
coordination mechanisms to ensure that business units cooperated in serving global,
‘corporate’ customers. And many enterprises found that they needed to manage even
more organizational dimensions, including business processes, technologies, and
projects. IBM, said to be one of the world’s most complex organizations, manages
six organizational dimensions (Galbraith 2009) as a ‘globally integrated enterprise’
(Palmisano 2006).
Managing the multidimensional organization involves, among other things,
planning and performance measurement and reporting for each dimension as well as
coordination of the interactions among the dimensions. That in turn requires a much
more inﬂuential role for corporate headquarters, for information systems, and for the
IT management function, than is common in the multidivisional organization (Goold
and Campbell 2002). For the decentralized, multidivisional organization, MIS—mean-
ing both integrated information systems and centralized control of information sys-
tems via a staff group—has been called ‘a mirage’ (Dearden 1972). But for the
‘integrated’, multidimensional organization, globally integrated (or at least standar-
dized) enterprise systems and the shared services and planning organizations needed to
support them are considered necessities. (See Galliers, Chan and Reich, Wagner and
Newell, and Newell and Williams in this volume.)
The shared services organization for activities such as accounting and management
information systems is not a new concept. One of the ﬁrst documented cases of shared
services was a ﬁnance unit in GE Canada in 1984 (Applegate 1989), and shared
provision of IT services was described as the ‘centrally-decentralized IS organization’
in a 1990 Harvard Business Review article (von Simson 1990). Although shared services
units superﬁcially resemble simple centralization, they are distinguished by a strong
customer service orientation, a menu of standardized service offerings, professional
service-level agreements, and (occasionally) market-like pricing schemes—often insti-
tutionalized through adoption of ITIL practices. These arrangements are said to
provide signiﬁcant organizational beneﬁts in terms of cost and service quality without
10
M. LYNNE MARKUS

infringing on business unit autonomy for product or market decisions. For example,
accounting units are reported today to spend 40 per cent less on ﬁnancial activities than
they did in 1992 (Hackett Group 2009). Perhaps more signiﬁcant than cost and service
quality improvements, however, is the role that shared services units and standardized
systems play in supporting the management of multidimensional organizations, such
as Procter & Gamble (P&G) and Nestlé.
In the late 1990s, in response to serious performance problems, P&G announced a
major organizational restructuring plan that set up global business units for various
product families (Piskorski and Spadini 2007). As part of this reorganization, P&G
created its Global Business Services division to provide more than seventy shared
business services to all operating units from three worldwide locations. The division’s
ﬁrst priority was to consolidate and standardize the majority of the company’s infor-
mation systems on a single shared SAP system. The services supported by this platform
included not only traditional administrative processes such as human resource bene-
ﬁts, desktop IT support, and expense reporting, but also a number of business activities
such as demand management, shopper intelligence, and packaging design (Weill, Soh,
and Sia 2007). In 2002, P&G claimed to have received $500 million in savings since
implementing ITIL discipline in its Global Business Services division four years
previously (Dubie 2002).
Nestlé followed a similar course a few years later. In April 2000, the company’s chief
ﬁnancial ofﬁcer approved a $2.4 billion ‘attempt to force its confederation of global
businesses to operate as if they were a single entity’. As at P&G, signiﬁcant changes in
how Nestlé was structured and managed included a common global information
system (also SAP) and a global shared services unit to provide standardized business
processes throughout the company (Steinert-Threlkeld 2006). Both organizations
subsequently outsourced major portions of these shared services to external service
providers.
Procter & Gamble and Nestlé exhibit the convergence of trends discussed above: IT
professionalism, externalization of IT work, and organizational design changes that
have led to changes in the design of the organization as a whole and of the information
management function. Thus, it appears that, in multidimensional organizations, orga-
nization design and governance are co-evolving with changes in IT and its governance.
Will all global enterprises follow a similar course? That seems unlikely, as far as
outsourcing is concerned: organizations in which IT forms the product or a core service
delivery mechanism (e.g. organizations in ﬁnancial services, information products and
services, research and high technology, transportation, etc.) are likely to retain at least
the most strategic parts of their information management capabilities in house. In
addition, some large enterprises undoubtedly have the scale to provide in-house
information services as efﬁciently and professionally as external service providers. In
2008, for example, Intel had 5,700 IT employees (Intel 2008) for enterprise support in
addition to the IT professionals involved in creating the IT-related company’s products
and services.
HISTORICAL REFLECTIONS ON THE PRACTICE OF INFORMATION
11

Furthermore, it is likely that many organizations will choose not to pursue consoli-
dation and standardization of information technology and IT services to the extent that
Procter & Gamble and Nestlé do. For example, The Dow Chemical Company has
internationalized as much by joint ventures as by mergers and acquisitions. Having
early decided to integrate and standardize its systems and business processes on an SAP
platform, Dow Chemical later sought a more ‘federated’ approach for IT-enabled
business with its joint ventures (Ross and Beath 2005). Some observers now believe
that most large organizations will have several IT platforms, some managed in house,
some externalized to service providers ‘in the cloud’, and some managed on a shared
basis by industry consortia and professional associations.
Regardless of where and by whom IT and business process services are provided,
organizations that use these services will need to continue managing their consump-
tion, if not also their design and the related organizational changes. The roles of in-
house IT professionals are shifting away from traditional activities of system design and
operations; roles such as vendor management, customer relationship management,
process redesign, and organizational change management are becoming more impor-
tant. Central management and professionalism of IT staff appear to be increasing.
IT staff concerned with ‘enterprise systems’ are less likely than formerly to report to
business unit heads. Many in-house IT jobs are starting to resemble those of the client
management personnel of external service providers. In-house IT services may not be
‘withering away’, but it is clear that they are changing.
THE FIELD OF MIS
..................................................................................................................
What does this all mean for the academic ﬁeld of MIS? Hirschheim and Klein (this
volume) have traced the history of the Information Systems ﬁeld; now those of us in the
ﬁeld must chart its future course. The simple answer is that MIS needs to change,
although how the ﬁeld should change is a topic for debate.
MIS is a ﬁeld that arose to address the needs of organizations that began to apply
computers at a time when external service providers and professional IT staff were few
or non-existent. Reckoning from when the ENIAC computer was built (1946) and the
LEO (Lyon’s Electronic Ofﬁce) introduced (1951), information technology is around
65 ﬁve years old today. The practice of information management arguably dates from
the mid-1950s when computers were ﬁrst used for commercial purposes. About ten
years later, forty years ago, the ﬁeld of MIS emerged through the teachings and writings
of scholars such as C. W. Churchman, G. B. Davis, B. Langefors, E. Mumford, and
F. Land. (See Hirschheim and Klein, this volume.)
The early concerns of information management practice and MIS scholarship
centred on the development of information systems. The ﬁrst MIS scholars tackled
the challenges of building software applications and organizational processes in ways
that would reliably meet the needs of clients and workers. That this was (and remains)
12
M. LYNNE MARKUS

a difﬁcult task is nicely captured in the adage ‘software is hard’. Yet, this problem no
longer dominates MIS scholarship, as the contents of this volume attest. Yes, organiza-
tions still need to strategize about deploying speciﬁc IT applications to achieve business
value and competitive advantage. (See Chan and Reich, and Wade, Piccoli, and Ives in
this volume.) But software increasingly comes prepackaged as enterprise systems or
outsourced services. As a result, software development has generally become the
headache of specialist IT vendors and service providers; the organizations that use
their services have different headaches now.
The ﬁeld of MIS can adapt to the evolving trends in professionalization, externaliza-
tion, and organizational information management in either, or both, of two ways. First,
while continuing to focus on our historical constituency—organizations that use IT—
we can de-emphasize the technical activities of applications development and infra-
structure design and service provision and increase our attention to strategic consid-
erations and the management of external information services and IT service providers,
as the editors of this Handbook have done. Here, we may need to explicitly differentiate
the information management requirements of different kinds of organizations, such as
smaller enterprises that completely externalize their IT services, larger enterprises that
collaborate with external partners in the provision of their IT services, and companies
that deliver IT-based products and services to external customers that largely provision
IT in house. Second, we can shift our focus from the needs of companies that use IT to
the needs of companies that provide IT services. This would require an emphasis on
entrepreneurship in the IT industry, for example the development, pricing, and
support of commercial IT products and services (such as the mobile IT services
discussed by Srensen in this volume) and client or customer management. Many of
the topics analysed in each stream would be the same, but the point of view and the
practices emphasized would differ. Finally, we can attempt to combine both ap-
proaches. This would involve front-and-centre awareness that technology continues
to evolve, creating opportunities and challenges for organizations that use IT products
and services as well as for the companies that provide them. For example, the rise in
Web 2.0 technologies creates both technical and organizational integration issues with
which IT-using companies are currently struggling. Similarly, many large organiza-
tions like Procter & Gamble and Nestlé have just ﬁnished creating integrated enterprise
system architectures and may now have to learn how to disassemble them into
multiple, coordinated architectures comprising ‘cloud’ offerings and industry plat-
forms in addition to in-house systems.
This volume suggests that the MIS ﬁeld is predominantly taking the ﬁrst course.
Whether or not we turn more toward the second or the third, this brief historical
excursion suggests that it is time for the MIS ﬁeld and for information management
practitioners to assess and possibly re-engineer our own ‘legacy processes’, not just
those of other areas of management.
HISTORICAL REFLECTIONS ON THE PRACTICE OF INFORMATION
13

REFERENCES
Applegate, L. M. (1989). GE Canada: Designing a New Organization. Boston, MA: Harvard
Business School Case 9-189-138.
Bartlett, C. A. (1982). ‘How Multinational Organizations Evolve’, Journal of Business Strategy,
3(1): 20–32.
Caldwell, B. (1995). ‘Outsourcing Megadeals: More than 60 Huge Contracts Signed since 1989
Prove They Work’, InformationWeek, 6 November.
Carr, N. C. (2003). ‘IT Doesn’t Matter’, Harvard Business Review, May: 41–9.
——(2008). The Big Switch: Rewiring the World, From Edison to Google. New York:
W. W. Norton & Company.
Dearden, J. (1972). ‘MIS is a Marriage’, Harvard Business Review, 50(1): 90–9.
——(1987). ‘The Withering away of the IS Organization’, Sloan Management Review, 28(4):
87–91.
Dubie, D. (2002). ‘Procter & Gamble Touts IT Services Model, Saves $500 Million’, Computer-
world, 1 October, <http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/74762/Procter_Gamble_-
touts_IT_services_model_saves_500_million?taxonomyId=14&pageNumber=1>, accessed
18 August 2009.
Dunning, J. H., Fujita, M., and Yakova, N. (2007). ‘Some Macro-Data on the Regionalization/
Globalisation Debate: A Comment on the Rugman/Verbeke Analysis’, Journal of Interna-
tional Business Studies, 38: 177–99.
Galbraith, J. R. (2000). Designing the Global Corporation. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
——(2009). Designing Matrix Organizations that Actually Work: How IBM, Procter &
Gamble, and Others Design for Success. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Goold, M., and Campbell, A. (2002). Designing Effective Organizations. San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.
Hackett Group. (2009). Hackett Study: Finance Shared Services Now Standard Approach;
Shared Services as a Cost-Cutting Tool Shows Dramatic Expansion, 21 February, <http://
www.thehackettgroup.com/about/alerts/alerts_2009/alert_02172009.jsp>,
accessed
18
August 2009.
IBM. (2005). Bharti Airtel: End-to-end Business Transformation Provides Flexibility for
Rapid Growth, 20 January <http://www-935.ibm.com/services/us/index.wss/casestudy/
imc/a1008559?cntxt=a1000414>, accessed 18 August 2009.
Intel. (2008). IT@Intel 2008 Information Technology Performance Report, <http://download.
intel.com/it/pdf/IT_2008_apr.pdf>, accessed 19 August 2009.
Koch, C. (2004). ‘Software Quality: Bursting the CMM Hype’, CIO.com, 1 March, <http://
www.cio.com/article/32138/Software_Quality_Bursting_the_CMM_Hype>,
accessed
5
August 2009.
Lynch, C. G. (2006). ‘Management Report: Most Companies Adopting ITIL Practices’, CIO.
com, 1 March, <http://www.cio.com/article/17921/Management_Report_Most_Compa-
nies _Adopting_ITIL_Practices>, accessed 5 August 2009.
Malone, T. W. (2004). The Future of Work: How the New Order of Business Will Shape Your
Organization, Your Management Style and Your Life. Boston, MA: Harvard Business
School Press.
Markus, M. L., Steinﬁeld, C., Wigand, R. T., and Minton, G. (2006). ‘Industry-wide IS
Standardization as Collective Action: The Case of the US Residential Mortgage Industry’,
MIS Quarterly, 30, Special Issue: 439–65.
14
M. LYNNE MARKUS

Meyer, N. D. (2005). ‘Understanding the Project Management Ofﬁce’, CIO.com, 25 September,
<http://www.cio.com/article/12263/Understanding_the_Project_Management_Ofﬁce>,
accessed 5 August 2009.
Palmisano, S. J. (2006). ‘The Globally Integrated Enterprise’, Foreign Affairs, 85(3): 127–36.
Piskorski, M. J., and Spadini, A. L. (2007). Procter & Gamble: Organization 2005 (A). Boston:
Harvard Business School Case 9-707-519.
Pryor, F. L. (2001). ‘Will Most of Us Be Working for Giant Enterprises by 2028?’, Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization, 44: 363–82.
Ross, J. W., and Beath, C. M. (2005). The Federated Broker Model at The Dow Chemical
Company: Blending World Class Internal and External Capabilities. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Sloan CISR W.P. 355.
Rugman, A. M., and Verbeke, A. (2004). ‘A Perspective on Regional and Global Strategies of
Multinational Enterprises’, Journal of International Business Studies, 35(1): 3–19.
Steinert-Threlkeld, T. (2006). ‘Nestlé Pieces it Together’, Baseline, January: 37–52.
Strikwerda, J., and Stoelhorst, J. W. (2009). ‘The Emergence and Evolution of the Multidi-
mensional Organization’, California Management Review, 51(4): 11–31.
von Simson, E. M. (1990). ‘The “Centrally Decentralized” IS Organization’, Harvard Business
Review, July–August: 158–62.
Weill, P., Soh, C., and Sia, S. K. (2007). Governance of Global Shared Solutions at Procter &
Gamble. Cambridge, MA: MIT Sloan CISR Research Brieﬁng, 7(3A).
Yip, G., and Masden, T. (1996). ‘Global Account Management: The New Frontier in Rela-
tionship Marketing’, International Marketing Review, 13(3): 24–42.
HISTORICAL REFLECTIONS ON THE PRACTICE OF INFORMATION
15

c h a p t e r 2
...............................................................................................
TRACING THE HISTORY OF
THE INFORMATION
SYSTEMS FIELD
...............................................................................................
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN
‘Those who do not know history are condemned to repeat it’
(Santayana)
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
The ﬁeld of Information Systems (IS) has been around since the 1960s and has been
evolving ever since. It formed from the nexus of computer science, management and
organization theory, operations research, and accounting (Davis and Olson 1985: 13–
14).1 Each of these areas or disciplines brought a unique perspective to the application of
computers to organizations, but each was also far broader in orientation. None focused
speciﬁcally on the application of computers in organizations.
Because of its roots in multiple disciplines, it is hardly surprising that the ﬁeld of IS is
broad and embodies many themes and areas. Nor is it surprising that there is
considerable disagreement about what the ﬁeld actually includes and does not include,
and what its core features are.2 Mason and Mitroff (1973), for example, in their classic
framework of IS, characterize the core components to be: psychological type (of the
user), class of problems to be solved, organizational context, method of evidence
generation and guarantor of evidence, and mode of presentation of the output. Ives,
Hamilton, and Davis (1980) deﬁne IS in terms of ﬁve environments (external, organi-
zation, user, IS development, and IS operations), three processes (user, IS development,
and IS operations), and an information subsystem. Lyytinen (1987) divides the ﬁeld
into nine components: the information system itself, IS operations environment,

IS development environment, user environment, organizational environment, external
environment, use process, development process, and operations process. Swanson and
Ramiller (1993) discuss the ﬁeld in terms of the broad areas people write papers on:
computer-supported cooperative work, information and interface, decision support and
knowledge-based systems, systems projects, evaluation and control, users, economics
and strategy, introduction and impact, and IS research. Others have used co-citation
analyses to identify intellectual subﬁelds upon which IS draws (cf. Culnan 1986, 1987;
Culnan and Swanson 1986; Cheon, Lee, and Grover 1992). Culnan (1986) for instance,
noted the existence of three categories of ‘referents’ upon which IS draws: fundamental
theory (e.g. systems science); related applied disciplines (e.g. accounting, computer
science, ﬁnance, management, and operations research); and underlying disciplines
(anthropology, political science, psychology, sociology). Keen (1987) categorized the
ﬁeld in terms of the problem areas each historical era chose to focus on. For example,
in the early 1970s the focus was on ‘managing systems development, design methodol-
ogies, economics and computers’. In the mid-1970s the focus changed to ‘decision
support, managing organizational change, and implementation’. In the early 1980s the
focus was on ‘productivity tools, data base management, personal computing, organiza-
tional impacts of technology, and ofﬁce technology’. And in the mid-1980s, it changed
to ‘telecommunications, competitive implications of information technology, expert
systems, impact of IT on the nature of work’ (Keen 1987: 1).3
Keen (1987: 3) goes on further to articulate what he thinks the mission of the ﬁeld is:
The mission of Information Systems research is to study the effective design,
delivery, use and impact of information technologies in organizations and society.
The term ‘effective’ seems key. Surely the IS community is explicitly concerned with
improving the craft of design and the practice of management in the widest sense of
both those terms. Similarly, it looks at information technologies in their context of
real people in real organizations in a real society.
The growth of IS ﬁeld over the past four decades has manifested itself in many ways.
For example, as the ﬁeld has grown, new specialties and research communities have
emerged, and the level of research has increased dramatically. New journals, new
conferences, new departments, and new IS programmes are indicative of the dramatic
growth of the ﬁeld.4 We have witnessed the generation of a wealth of literature in
information systems. On the whole, this literature can be characterized as diverse and
pluralistic. There is diversity of problems addressed; diversity of theoretical founda-
tions and ‘referents’; and diversity of research methodologies (Benbasat and Weber
1996). Consider, for example, the phenomenon of IS implementation. It has been
examined from such diverse perspectives as technical implementation (DeMarco 1978;
Gane and Sarson 1979), planned change models of Lewin and Schein (Alter and Ginzberg
1978; Keen and Scott-Morton 1978), political theories (Wilensky 1967; Bardach
1977; Keen 1981; Newman and Rosenberg 1985), action learning (Argyris and Schon
1978; Kolb 1984; Heiskanen 1994), Marxist economic theory (Nygaard 1975; Sandberg
1985) and institutional economics (Alchian and Demsetz 1972; Williamson 1975;
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
17

Kemerer 1992; Heikkila 1995). To make matters worse, there are probably as many
conﬂicting messages about what constitutes ‘good IS implementation’ as there are
perspectives. Regardless of whether diversity is considered a blessing (e.g. Robey 1996;
Galliers 2003) or a curse (e.g. Benbasat and Weber 1996), it is widely accepted as a
hallmark of the ﬁeld (Cooper 1988; Alavi, Carlson, and Brooke 1989; Banville and
Landry 1989; Keen 1991; Orlikowski and Baroudi 1991; Swanson and Ramiller 1993;
Markus 1997; Hirschheim and Klein 2003; King and Lyytinen 2006; Klein and
Hirschheim 2008).
Beyond the ﬁeld’s diversity in terms of its multidisciplinary base, it is possible to
note its development as it moves through different historical stages. For example,
the earliest stage of the ﬁeld might be thought of as the ‘data-processing’ period
where IS was mainly treated as a tool to automate clerical work. During this time
organizations adopted IS for the purpose of helping to automate tasks and reducing
costs. Next came the stage when IS was used as a supporting tool to facilitate
management in decision making. This was known as the period of ‘management
support’ and embraced tools such as DSS, GSS, TPS, ES, etc., when organizations
began to realize that IS added value to not only operations but also the manage-
ment of organizations. As perhaps an extension to ‘management support’ came the
period where IS was seen to help situate organizations in a competitive position
against others in the marketplace. Many organizations believed IS functioned as a
competitive weapon (Ives and Learmonth 1984) and could be used to increase their
competitiveness (McFarlan 1981; Porter and Millar 1985; Clemons 1986), improve
productivity (Hitt and Brynjolfsson 1996) and enhance performance (Brynjolfsson
and Hitt 1996). Indeed, IS is thought to be strategic in today’s organizations and
executives speak of the importance of aligning their business strategy with IS strategy
(Venkatraman 1991; Henderson and Venkatraman 1992; Chan et al. 1997; Sabherwal,
Hirschheim, and Goles 2001).5
With such extensive development and advancement in the IS ﬁeld, one would expect
the ﬁeld to have established a strong position in both practice and academia. However,
that is not the case. Instead, the IS ﬁeld continues to struggle (Mingers and Stowell
1997; Checkland and Holwell 1998; Benbasat and Zmud 2003; King and Lyytinen
2006). It continues to face questions about its identity and its legitimacy. Today, more
than forty years after its conception, researchers in the ﬁeld raise questions regarding
‘whether IS is in crisis’ (Hirschheim and Klein 2003), and ‘what would happen if the IS
ﬁeld goes away?’ (Markus 1999). In response to the dilemma faced by the ﬁeld, IS
researchers have tried to articulate ‘what is IS’ and ‘how IS differs from other dis-
ciplines such as Computer Science and Management’. Early researchers such as
Blumenthal (1969), Davis (1974), and Langefors (1974) provided conceptualizations
of IS. But no agreement was ever reached and this helps to explain why we have such
difﬁculty deﬁning even today what IS is or is not. Other researchers such as Gorry and
Scott Morton (1971), Mason and Mitroff (1973), Ives, Hamilton, and Davis (1980),
and Nolan and Wetherbe (1980) attempted to categorize IS research and its boundaries
through the development of frameworks. Again, numerous conﬂicting frameworks
18
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

were proposed during different eras leading to the lack of a tacit agreement on the core
of the ﬁeld. It also explains why in fact, at various times different names such as MIS,
IT, IS, DSS, information management, information science, etc., have been proposed to
label the IS ﬁeld (cf. Avgerou, Siemer, and Bjorn-Andersen 1999; Davis 2000), because
each framework’s architects thought to have discovered the true core of IS, but later the
majority of IS researchers recognized that the new framework shed light on just
another aspect of the proverbial elephant: the whole Gestalt of the ﬁeld remained
elusive. Such work shows continuous efforts to deﬁne and redeﬁne IS to reﬂect the
evolving boundaries of the ﬁeld testifying that we still cannot deﬁne the ﬁeld’s identity
in simple terms.
Thus, despite signiﬁcant and seemingly continuous efforts toward deﬁning the
boundary of the IS ﬁeld, the boundary remains ﬂuid. On the one hand, such ﬂuidity
provides the ﬁeld with the strength and ﬂexibility to allow a wide variety of ideas to
enter the ﬁeld (Robey 1996; Davis 2000; Galliers 2003; Hirschheim and Klein 2003). On
the other hand, this characteristic has led to what Banville and Landry (1989) describe
as a ‘fragmented adhocracy’ where researchers adopt ‘piece-meal research tactics’
(Hirschheim, Klein, and Lyytinen 1996) and work on a wide variety of topics that
are often quite disjointed (Bjrn-Andersen 1984; Benbasat and Weber 1996). The
diversity ranges from the problems and topics addressed to the theoretical foundations
and reference disciplines used to guide IS research and to the methods used in
collecting, analysing, and interpreting data (Benbasat and Weber 1996). Such diversity
often makes the ﬁeld look disorganized (Lucas 1999) and raises the question of whether
research in the IS ﬁeld has contributed to a cumulative research tradition (Keen 1980).
The ‘ﬂuid boundary’ of the ﬁeld also introduces the possibility of the ﬁeld being
dispersed into other disciplines, particularly in Business schools (Lucas 1999). Some
Deans of Business schools contend that there is no need for a separate area of IS study
(Lucas 1999; Watson, Sousa, and Junglas 2000). They argue that since IS is a service
function to other organizational units such as Management and Marketing, research in
IS should naturally occur within the context of problems faced by these business areas.
As such, the study of IS should be taught as a service course by other ﬁelds. In fact,
other disciplines in Business schools are already offering what might be perceived as ‘IS
courses’. For example, some Marketing departments offer courses in e-Commerce and
data-mining, while Accounting departments offer courses in Accounting Information
Systems.
The ﬁrst step in trying to understand and resolve these issues is to step back and
reﬂect on the history of the IS ﬁeld. This chapter attempts to look at factors and events
that led to the birth of the IS ﬁeld, and traces how the ﬁeld has changed over time and
evolved to what it is today. It is hoped that IS researchers will make use of our work to
help sort out what has happened in the IS ﬁeld over the past forty years. Such an
understanding would facilitate IS researchers in (1) answering the question ‘what is
IS?’, (2) differentiating the IS ﬁeld from other disciplines, and (3) developing a sense of
an ‘IS identity’.6
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
19

THE HISTORY OF IS
..................................................................................................................
Since its inception in the mid-1960s (Davis 2000), the IS ﬁeld has made signiﬁcant
progress. In order to capture the most signiﬁcant changes of the last forty years, this
section will divide IS history into four eras:7 ﬁrst era (1964–74), second era (1975–84),
third era (1985–94), and fourth era (1995 onward), and discuss each era in turn. The
delineation of these eras on ﬁrst sight may appear to be somewhat arbitrary, but they
are carefully chosen based on two principal considerations: technology shifts and
theoretical shifts. The ﬁrst aspect distinguishes eras by major changes of ‘the nature
of the technology and how it has been applied and managed’ (DeSanctis, Dickson, and
Price 2000; Hevner, Berndt, and Studnicki 2000). To some extent this aspect also
captures what happened in industry (Davis 2000) and to a limited extent the techno-
logical changes in industry also reﬂect signiﬁcant changes in academic eras. However,
the academic evolution of IS has also been driven by internal forces, independently of
and sometimes even in contradiction to industry trends. An example of the latter might
be the concern with participatory system development or with proposing quality of
work life as a major requirement for IS user acceptance (cf. Mumford 1983). Thus, an
equally important aspect for determining era boundaries surrounds the theoretical
shifts in thinking (cf. Mitroff 1983) within academia. Therefore, to characterize each
era, the major development and advancements in (1) technology and (2) theory
(including the typical research themes, inﬂuential school of thoughts, and research
methodologies) are described ﬁrst. This is followed by highlights of other signiﬁcant
events that can help to understand the ﬂavour and ‘Zeitgeist’ (spirit of) each era. These
are (3) the emergence of IS degree programmes and professional societies plus
(4) infrastructure advancements, in particular the establishment of peer refereed IS
journals and of national and international of conferences, which are still inﬂuential.
First Era (1964–74)
After the ﬁrst computer (‘electronic calculator’) applications with a business ﬂavour
had succeeded (with Lyon’s Electronic Ofﬁce (LEO) in 1951 and various logistics
systems),8 special IS groups or departments began to emerge in organizations at the
beginning of this era. It is therefore typically taken to mark the beginning of MIS or IS
as a discipline in business schools as opposed to the establishment of computer science
concerned primarily with technology. At that time, the management of organizations
saw the need for consolidating a variety of disparate processing functions each using
incompatible hardware and software. The introduction of third-generation computers,
in particular the 360 series computers by IBM in 1964, however, created an awareness
of the need for standard platforms. The 360 computer series—followed by the devel-
opment of integrated circuits and eventually, microprocessors—pushed along the
20
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

advancement in information technologies. With an increase in the use of IS in
organizations, academics began to see the need for formal IS education. The ﬁrst
university programme in business computing was developed by Bőrje Langefors at
the Royal Institute of Technology and the University of Stockholm in Sweden in 1965
(Galliers and Whitley 2007). In 1967, Gordon Davis and Gary Dickson formed the ﬁrst
MIS programme in the USA at the University of Minnesota. At the same time, Frank
Land introduced an information systems programme at the LSE in London. Concomi-
tantly, several schools of thoughts emerged to lay the foundation of future IS research.
These schools of thought included Churchman’s systems thinking, Langefors’s infolo-
gical approach, Teichroew’s automation concept, and Emery’s socio-technical think-
ing. Formal curriculum guidelines were also formulated during this era by both the
ACM and IFIP/BCS. Research efforts in this era concentrated on deﬁning and con-
ceptualizing IS. Researchers also studied decision support systems, information sys-
tems development, and human computer interface. As both industry and academics
paid more attention to IS, several professional societies that were tangential to the IS
ﬁeld also began to attribute small parts of their activities to serve the needs of the
emerging IS community.
Technology
IS organizations ﬁrst appeared at the beginning of this era as organizations began using
computers. During this time, the focus of organizations shifted slowly from mere
automation of basic business processes of the 1950s and the early 1960s to consolidat-
ing control within the data processing function. To achieve that, organizations cen-
tralized their IS function to consist of routine data processing operations, with some
inventory management and transaction processing systems. This function was, in most
cases, led by the manager of computer operations who reported to the Controller of
Accounting. There were few users, with most concentrated in Engineering and Ac-
counting departments. The Engineering users performed CPU-intensive applications
for number crunching, while the accounting users had I/O-intensive operations pri-
marily for report generation. These users were relatively computer literate and could
communicate well with computer personnel. Nearly all computing systems were
developed internally by corporate programming staffs using an Assembler language
or a standardized programming language such as COBOL or FORTRAN. These
development processes tended to be highly technical and the systems usually took
very long to develop and were very costly.
Mainframes were the dominant computers used in organizations as they had more
speed and power to run complicated business transactions. However, each new model
mainframe required new hardware and software. As a result, the computers were not
compatible with each other. In 1964, the nature of the market changed when IBM
introduced its 360 family of compatible computer systems. The 360 series introduced
the notion of integrated, uniform computer system architecture across organizations,
and highlighted the importance of software that was compatible across different
platforms. The 360 series allowed organizations the alternative of purchasing
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
21

low-capability models for business data processing. Along with IBM computers, new
technologies such as the integrated circuit and microprocessor were also evolving.
Gordon Moore, a co-founder of Intel, noted that integrated circuit density was
doubling every year and predicted that by the end of this era all circuits of a mainframe
could be implemented on a single chip. His observation was later known as the Moore’s
Law. In addition, the introduction of database technology, the development of direct-
access storage devices (DASD) and the innovations in the realm of data communica-
tions (i.e. the Ethernet in 1973) allowed data transmission to extend outside the
computer room for the ﬁrst time, thus making networking a reality. All these innova-
tions led to the decrease in the cost of hardware and software and therefore improved
the cost/performance ratio of computing. Nonetheless, the rising corporate costs for
computing drew the concern of senior management (cf. Somogyi and Galliers 1987).
Schools of Thought
During this era, many schools of thought emerged. They were the bases for what IS
fundamentally was, and have greatly inﬂuenced the research direction and perspective
of IS. They also span the range of technical and social IS camps. One of the earliest
schools of thought can be attributed to C. West Churchman. Churchman, a philoso-
pher at the University of California, Berkeley, is well known for his conceptualization of
‘inquiring systems’ that was founded on the systems approach.9 He argues that in order
for one to conceptualize a problem, one has to conduct an inquiry. This inquiry will
address the nature of the problem and will collect information about the problem.
According to Churchman, there are ﬁve types of inquiry systems: Leibnizian IS, Lock-
ean IS, Kantian IS, Hegelian IS, and Singerian–Churchman IS. Each of these systems is
distinct from the others and as a result, each will have a different representation of a
problem and will produce different kinds of information. In addition, each of the
systems will also have different methods to verify the content of the information
produced. Churchman’s thoughts on systems concept and inquiry systems were
recorded in his (1971) and (1979) seminal works on The Design of Inquiring Systems:
Basic Concepts of Systems and Organization and The Systems Approach and Its Enemies
respectively.10 Churchman’s thoughts had great inﬂuence on early work in the area of
IS development. Moreover, with the drive toward globalization, his thoughts will likely
become even more useful as organizations start building global IS that are large and
complex in nature.
Daniel Teichroew, at the University of Michigan, adopted a technical conceptualiza-
tion of IS. He was concerned with the development of computer-based information
processing systems by using the computer itself in the process, and by applying
management science techniques to the problem. In the mid-1960s, he saw the need
to build a system that would facilitate system developers in their work and decided to
develop such tools to automate systems development. He envisioned a set of routines
that would interact to automatically build computer systems. Teichroew’s idea took
shape in the form of a research project called the ISDOS project. This project involved
the building of many pieces of software to automate systems development. However,
22
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

only two of the major pieces were ever fully developed and implemented. These pieces
were the Systems Optimization and Design Algorithm (SODA) and the Problem
Statement Language/Problem Statement Analyzer (PSL/PSA). Fundamentally, Tei-
chroew, was concerned was the automation of IS design including software generation
from an exact ‘problem statement’ (expressed in PSL) using AI techniques. When this
proved impossible the research moved to supporting the speciﬁcation process, i.e. IS
modelling. For Teichroew an IS was whatever could be speciﬁed consistently in a
repository.11 Even though Teichroew’s ideas were never fully developed, his ideas were
instrumental in the eventual development of CASE tools.
At about the same time, researchers in Europe began a stream of research based on
hard systems thinking. Bjőre Langefors, an inﬂuential ﬁgure in Scandinavia countries,
developed a rather theoretical view of IS from the system approach. He applied this
view into his work on ‘systemeering’12 where he pioneered the infological approach to
ISD. The basic idea of this approach is to differentiate between an ‘infological problem’
(i.e. what information should the system provide in order to satisfy users’ information
needs) and a ‘datalogical problem’ (i.e. how should the information and system
be structured using IT) (Langefors 1974). His Infological equation was insightful:
I = i(D, S, t) where
I
= the information produced by the system
D = the date made available by system processes
S = the recipient’s prior knowledge and experience (world-view)
t
= the time period during which interpretation process occurs
i
= the interpretation process that produces information for a recipient based on
both the data and the recipient’s prior knowledge and experience.
Langefors’s equation recognized that information is not simply the result of algorith-
mic processing. Rather, information included the result of prior knowledge and
experience of the individual receiving the results of the processing data. As such, no
two individuals would receive exactly the same information from one data processing.
However, the equation acknowledged the fact that individuals having similar prior
experience and knowledge could possibly share meaningful interpretations of the same
data. Even though Langefors’s work was criticized as being too rigid and mechanical
(Kling and Scacchi 1982; Morgan 1986), his work paved the way for the dominance of
Scandinavian research among the European IS research communities in the 1970s and
the early 1980s. Such dominance explains why Langefors and Scandinavian researchers
were key players in founding IFIP TC8 (Technical Committee of Information Sys-
tems). Langefors’s ideology on the infological approach has also become the foundation
for other approaches to ISD in the Scandinavian research community (Iivari and
Lyytinen 1999).
In the late 1960s, Sherman Blumenthal undertook the task of documenting a process
for the development and use of computer-based information systems for business
organizations. His book Management Information Systems: A Framework for Planning
and Development published in 1969 was most likely the ﬁrst detailed North American
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
23

treatment of the subject and might have rivalled Langefors work had Blumenthal lived
long enough to ﬁnish his book and promote his ideas. In the end he died before the book
was ﬁnished and it was left up to one of his colleagues to complete it. The result was
bittersweet. While the book was indeed a comprehensive attempt at the development of
IS theory, it never quite lived up Blumenthal’s claim that his ideas were ‘the long awaited
intelligent, scientiﬁc approach to determining an organization's information needs and
developing the kind of system that is responsive to sound decision making’. It would be
more accurate to characterize Blumenthal’s ideas primarily as a modular, incremental
design strategy of building reporting and control information systems on top of
transaction-based systems. His implied IS ‘theory’ was that of a parametric feedback
loop hierarchy of the type envisioned by Forrester’s Industrial Dynamics.
In the early 1960s, Emery and Trist began to work on extending previous thinking
on hard systems. While studying the British coal industry, they found that existing
thoughts on system development could not fully explain the phenomena they observed
in their study. They contended system thinking was technical in nature and could not
explain the impacts of systems on the work environment. They argued that in order to
better understand the complete picture, one needs to also look at the social dimensions
of the system. They used the term ‘social-technical system’ (STS) to capture the need to
consider jointly social and technical issues in systems design (DeGreene 1973). The
ideology of Emery and Trist has been very inﬂuential in Europe. In the early 1970s,
Mumford took the idea of STS and applied it to the design and development of
computer systems. This idea emphasizes the relationship between the technical systems
and the social system and the necessity for working with both when designing a new
production system. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, the focus of attention shifted
from STS design and development towards STS implementation. This resulted in the
emergence of ‘participative design’ that emphasized the importance of user participa-
tion in system development process, cf. Land and Hirschheim (1983).
At Lancaster University, a group of researchers led by Peter Checkland began to
provide consulting services at British Aircraft Corporation during the 1970s. During his
research in the company, Checkland found that ‘hard system thinking’ as applied in the
1960s by Churchman, Ackoff, and others in the Operations Research community could
not explain many incidents that occurred in the company. Instead, he found that the
complexity of the world not only made it difﬁcult for hard systems to deﬁne their
objectives precisely, it also made the results produced at the end of the project irrelevant.
He therefore saw the need to ﬁnd an explanation for the phenomena in the British
Aircraft Corporation. By combining the sociological and philosophical ideas of Weber
and Husserl respectively, Checkland added a phenomenological twist to the traditional
hard systems thinking to introduce his famous Soft System Methodology (SSM)
(Checkland 1972, 1981, 1999). The SSM is a learning system that provides a way of
conceptualizing the social processes that a particular group of people is involved in
within a particular organizational context. It stresses the importance of differentiating
the various meanings attributed by individuals to the same phenomena. When applying
SSM to IS, Checkland refers to IS as a ‘meaning attribution system in which people
24
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

select certain data and get them processed to make them meaningful in a particular
context in order to support people who are engaged in purposeful action [italics added]’
(Checkland 1999: 53). To further understand the ‘meaning attribution system’ or the
‘human activity system’, Checkland proposed a seven-stage methodology (Checkland
and Scholes 1990). His methodology has been adopted and adapted in a number of
other approaches, cf. Schäfer et al.’s (1987) ‘FAOR’ and Avison and Wood-Harper’s
(1990) ‘Multiview’. (See Stowell (1995) for a review of the contribution of Soft Systems
Methodology to IS.)
Another research stream was begun by Gordon Davis and his colleagues at the
University of Minnesota. This stream is not as theoretical as previous schools; rather it
was the ﬁrst truly empirical research stream in IS history. Davis, often referred to as the
‘father of the [IS] ﬁeld’ in the USA (Sipior 1997), has been instrumental in the
conceptualization, development, and advancement of the ﬁeld of IS. In the 1960s
when the ﬁeld focused on data processing (DP), Davis envisioned the value and the
need to extend DP to include an understanding of managers, organizations, informa-
tion, systems (in general), and computer systems (in particular). He saw the need to
add a business-oriented perspective to the notion of DP. To accomplish this, Davis
envisioned a formal programme for teaching IS. In 1967, Davis and his colleagues
(mainly Gary Dickson) began the ﬁrst formal academic degree programmes (Ph.D.) in
MIS in the United States at the University of Minnesota. Following the establishment of
the programme, Davis and Dickson saw the need to have a close relationship with
practitioners. To promote and facilitate such a relationship, they established the
University of Minnesota Management Information Systems Research Center
(MISRC) in 1968. Davis and Dickson have had signiﬁcant impact on IS research,
and what constitutes ‘valid’ IS research. Their interest in IS analysis and the beha-
vioural aspects associated with it led them to conceive a series of laboratory experi-
ments to develop a knowledge base about IT speciﬁcally on the topic of the relationship
between the decision, the decision maker, and the IS supporting the decision. This
proved to be very successful and has had a major impact on the ﬁeld resulting in
forming the foundation of the Decision Support Systems (DSS) research stream that
continued into the mid-1980s (DSS research will be discussed next in the era of the
1970s). These experiments, best known as the Minnesota Experiments, resulted in a
series of publications, the most famous of which was the paper by Dickson, Senn, and
Chervany (1977) summarizing a set of ten experiments that were conducted over a
period of eight years to examine the nature of IS on decision-making behaviours. These
experiments are all ﬁrmly rooted in the empirical camp and are classically functionalist in
orientation.
Table 2.1 summarizes the key ‘Schools of Thought’ and how each conceived of what
an information systems was.
Research Themes
In this era, researchers put a great deal of effort into describing why IS was
different from other disciplines. Dickson (1968: 17), for example, saw IS as a way to
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
25

‘integrate . . . these techniques [e.g. operations research, systems analysis, integrated
data processing and management] and to provide the analytical frames of reference
and the methodologies necessary to meet the new management requisites’. Gordon
Davis also saw the need to extend the notion of DP to include an understanding of
managers, organizations, information, and computer systems. He intended to provide
and deﬁne the idea of MIS in his classic book, Management Information Systems:
Conceptual Foundations, Structure and Development. He deﬁned IS as ‘[an] integrated,
man/machine system for providing information to support the operations, management,
and decision-making functions in an organization. The system utilizes computer hard-
ware and software, manual procedure, management and decision models, and a data base’
(Davis 1974: 5). Davis’s book was the ﬁrst textbook in the IS ﬁeld. Other signiﬁcant books
that provided topical coverage of IS included Gregory and Van Horn (1960), Sharpe
(1969), Sanders (1970), Li (1972), Coleman and Riley (1973), and Davis and Everest
(1976).
Besides books, many framework articles appeared during this time period attempt-
ing to deﬁne IS by providing templates to guide the direction of research in the 1970s
and into the 1980s. Mason and Mitroff (1973), for example, characterized IS from an
individual perspective where they saw IS as composed of ﬁve main components: (1) the
psychological type of the individual, (2) the classes of problems to be solved, (3) the
method of evidence generation, (4) the organizational context, and (5) the mode of
presentation of the output. Gorry and Scott-Morton (1971) argued that ‘IS should exist
only to support decisions’ and suggested that IS should be looked at from a decision-
making perspective. Lucas (1973) took an organizational approach and developed a
model of the impact of situational, personal, and attitudinal variables on the systems
usage and systems users. Chervany, Dickson, and Kozar (1972) proposed the relation-
ship between decision outcomes and several input variables. Young (1968) developed a
detailed model of organization as an adaptive total system and proposed that problems
within organizations be treated with a ‘total systems’ approach. He therefore proposed
a structure for ‘total management information systems’.13 Note that these early
Table 2.1 Key schools of thought
Original school of thought
Concept of information systems
Langefors (1966, 1973)
datalogical and infological systems
Blumenthal (1969)
reporting and control systems
Teichroew (1972, 1974); Yourdon (1978)
formal speciﬁed technical systems
Churchman (1971)
inquiry systems
Dickson (1968, 1981); Davis (1974)
behavioural systems
Mumford (1974); Mumford and Henshall (1978);
Bostrom and Heinen (1977)
socio-technical systems
Checkland (1972, 1981)
human activity systems
26
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

conceptual deﬁnitions of IS focused on ‘elements making up the system of information
storage and processing and the applications supported by the system . . . [These deﬁni-
tions] were based on the interaction of information technology, information systems,
organizational systems, and individuals and groups employing or affected by the
systems’ (Davis 2000: 72–3).
While some were very enthusiastic about IS, some were not. Ackoff (1967), for
example, outlined his concerns about the nature of IS. In his article Management
Misinformation Systems, Ackoff warned against the widespread but false assumptions
about IS. He argued that these false assumptions had led to major deﬁciencies in the
resulting systems. Similarly, Tolliver (1971) presented his myths on pitfalls resulting
from management being oversold on the advantages and capabilities of computers.
Dearden (1972), in his article MIS is a Mirage, took a highly sceptical view of the MIS
idea. Speciﬁcally, he questioned the existence of the systems approach as an indepen-
dent ﬁeld of specialization and doubted the practical feasibility of an integrated IS in
supplying the needs of organizations. Brooker (1965) refuted the ‘total systems ap-
proach’ proposed by Young (1968) by arguing that systems theory functions were not
the only analytical tool needed to explain and predict an organization’s total perfor-
mance. Instead, he proposed a ‘human-oriented’ theory of business. The disagreement
between the supporting and the dissenting views of the IS ﬁeld resulted in a series of
debates on the efﬁcacy of IS (Rappaport 1968; Emery and Sprague 1972). Nevertheless,
overall, both IS academics and practitioners were generally enthusiastic about the
emergence of IS.
The way IS researchers conceptualized IS (i.e. as a supporting tool in decision
making as shown in the various deﬁnitions presented above) along with the series of
laboratory experiments conducted in Minnesota formed the foundation of the DSS
research stream14 in the mid-1970s. The conceptual thinking of DSS was mostly
inﬂuenced by early work of Michael Scott Morton (1971), Peter Keen (Keen and
Scott Morton 1978), and John Bennett (1983). This line of thinking integrated beha-
vioural decision making and cognitive science with ideas from mathematical modelling
and operations research. Early DSS research sought to explain how to build an effective
decision support system and whether a DSS actually improved decision quality and
decision performance (Sprague 1980; Sprague and Carlson 1982). They argued that an
unstructured decision process could be structured with the appropriate system. As the
research developed, studies attempted to link the user’s cognitive style to the design of a
DSS as the decision maker who helped to design the system would ultimately be using
the system (Zmud 1979). This issue was debated during the late 1970s and into the
1980s, with Huber and Robey debating the issue in Management Science in 1983.
Individual and design characteristics were also debated throughout the development of
DSS research in the attempt to determine how these features affected decision-making
effectiveness. Mixed results have been found in the area of DSS, but researchers
continued to investigate the linkage between design and individual characteristics
and decision-making effectiveness. Researchers also continued to study how to reduce
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
27

effort using DSS capabilities and guide efforts toward a favourable decision (Todd and
Benbasat 1992, 1999).
Closely related to DSS research and Minnesota research has been the study of
human-computer interactions. This stream of research seeks to understand how to
build a system that is easy to use. Various results such as hypertext, ergonomics, screen
displays, and graphical output emerged from this research (Shackel 1997). This
research stream continues to undertake studies on how to develop systems that can
empower users and present information in a manner that is relevant to the audience.
In addition, researchers also continued to show interest in studying the IS develop-
ment (ISD) process. Research in this area was greatly inﬂuenced by Churchmanian
‘hard’ systems thinking. Many studies were conducted to examine each step of the
Systems Development Life Cycle (SDLC) or the ‘waterfall model’ of the systems
development processes (Daniels and Yeates 1971; Avison and Fitzgerald 1999). These
studies focused on the technical dimensions of SDLC. However, this technical SDLC
method has been criticized for failing to meet the needs of management, for its
instability across the whole process, and for its inﬂexibility (Avison and Fitzgerald
1995). Research in ISD continued into the 1980s and 1990s (the research will be
discussed under each of the era respectively).
Education/curriculum
During this era, IS grew outside of its shell of the 1950s and early 1960s where its
main function was the automation of clerical tasks. IS now became more than
simply a data processing tool; organizations began looking at IS as a potential tool
to support decision making in organizations. As a result, the tasks performed by
computers became more complex. Organizations began to realize that many in-
dividuals hired for IS jobs did not have the formal educational background ade-
quate for their positions. The few who knew how to do IS jobs accumulated much
of their knowledge through experience, most of which was mainly technical in
nature. These individuals did not have an understanding of the integration between
technology and organizations. As a consequence, organizations feared that as they
grew more and more complex in the future, a point would be reached where these
few individuals with experience would not have the knowledge and the skills
required to perform their jobs efﬁciently and effectively. Even though other aca-
demic disciplines at that time offered courses related to computers, these courses
were too speciﬁc in nature. For example, while Computer Sciences offered courses
that emphasized algorithmic problem solving and Management offered courses on
decision making based on the available data, neither of these programmes was
designed to equip students with both the technical and the organizational knowl-
edge required to perform an IS job.
ACM determined that the only way to solve the problem was to formulate a formal
guideline of IS courses for higher education. However, there were no governmental
college accreditation procedures in the USA that would govern such a process. So, the
ACM formed a committee to draft and make recommendations for an IS programme
28
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

appropriate for an entry-level position. The members of the committee included Dan
Teichroew, Robert Ashenhurst, Dan Couger, Gordon Davis, James McKenney, Russell
Armstrong, Robert Benjamin, John Lubin, Howard Morgan, and Frederic Tonge. After
extensive discussions with representatives from industry and educational institutions,
the ﬁrst ACM graduate curriculum for IS was published in 1972 (Ashenhurst 1972).
This curriculum attempted to add a new perspective to the IS ﬁeld by integrating the IS
knowledge (technically oriented) with organizational knowledge (managerially orient-
ed) (Davis 1974). The curriculum report provided detailed course outlines for major
new courses necessary for a professional programme in systems design, and recom-
mended new ﬁelds of specialization for IS in existing educational programmes. In the
following year, the ACM published the curriculum for an undergraduate IS degree
programme under the leadership of Daniel Cougar (Cougar 1973). An updated version
of the ACM curriculum was later published in 1982 (Nunamaker, Cougar, and Davis
1982). It should be noted that the ACM curriculum was only intended to provide
guidance for the design of an IS programme with the expectation that individual
schools would modify the speciﬁc courses to reﬂect their own identity. Even when
schools stated that they were following the ACM curriculum, the ACM did not accredit
the programmes nor attempt to enforce compliance of its guidelines. However, it
should be noted that this was the ﬁrst formal guideline marking the beginning of a
shared educational format.
Besides the higher educational institutions in the USA, academic institutions in
Europe also faced the same issue of the lack of formal educational guidelines for an IS
degree. In 1968, the IFIP Technical Committee for Education (TC3) and the IFIP
Administrative Data Processing Group (IAG) initiated a working group to prepare a
suitable curriculum for an IS degree. Again, the objective was to provide an educational
guideline that would prepare individuals for a professional career as information
analysts and system designers. This curriculum was designed to accommodate indivi-
duals with different educational backgrounds and experiences. The curriculum was
also designed in such a way that institutions in different countries could adopt it.
However, unlike the curriculum proposed by the ACM, the IFIP/BCS curriculum
required students to have practical experience as part of the programme. After six
years of effort, the completed report was ﬁnally published in 1974 under the title ‘An
International Curriculum for Information System Designers’ (Buckingham et al. 1987).
In 1987, a revised version of the curriculum was published. Schools such as the London
School of Economics, the Royal Military College of Science (Shrivenham), Hatﬁeld
Polytechnic, and North Staffordshire Polytechnic were the early adopters of the IFIP/
BCS curriculum.
In addition to the formalization of degree guidelines, IS academics also began to
recognize the importance of conducting research in the IS ﬁeld. Besides the Minnesota
school discussed above, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) also formed
its own Center for Information Systems Research (CISR) in 1974. Similar to the mission
of MISRC, the mission of CISR was ‘to develop concepts and frameworks . . . [that
would] help executives address the IT-related challenges of leading increasingly
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
29

dynamic, global, and information-intensive organizations’. Compared to the research
at Minnesota, which was highly laboratory oriented at that time, most of the work at
MIT was ﬁeld-based research aimed at studying the management and use of IT in
organizations (Canning 1979). Around the same time, other programmes also began at
the University of Michigan, University of Pennsylvania, New York University, the
University of California at Los Angeles, and the University of Colorado at Colorado
Springs.
Infrastructure Advancements: Professional Societies
Prior to 1964, societies that were tangentially related to IS existed. These included the
Institute of Management Science (TIMS), the Academy of Management, and the
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). During this era, other societies such
as the Data Processing Management Association (DPMA), the Association for Systems
Management (ASM), and the Society for Management Information Systems (SMIS)
emerged to serve practitioners. At the same time, the American Institute for Decision
Sciences (AIDS)15 and the IFIP technical committee 8 (TC8)16 were formed to serve
academics. While IS was only a small subset of the overall activities in AIDS, it was the
main focus in IFIP TC8. Speciﬁcally, IFIP TC8 was dedicated to promoting coopera-
tion worldwide among IS researchers in studying IS-related issues and to increase
understanding among practitioners about IS.
Second Era (1975–84)
In this second era, technological advancement continued to soar. The major advance-
ment was the introduction of PCs (personal computers) by IBM. With the introduction
of PCs, organizations began to distribute their computing/processing powers across
organizations as the hardware cost of PCs was much cheaper compared to mainframes.
Nevertheless, the operational costs continued to make leading organizations question
the value of IT investment. Researchers began to conduct research to ﬁnd out whether IS
provided competitive advantage to organizations and whether user participation during
systems development improved the success of systems implementation. In addition, the
IS ﬁeld held its ﬁrst conferences (IRIS and ICIS), published its ﬁrst IS journal (MIS
Quarterly), and raised the issue of the need for new research methodologies.
Technology
In this era, business units other than the accounting and the engineering departments
began to compete for computer resources. As the range of users broadened, organiza-
tions took a stronger management orientation to their traditionally technical-oriented
approach to IS operations. They tried to address and satisfy user requirements by
forming steering committees. Many organizations also began to involve users in their
systems development projects where these users would help in determining application
30
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

requirements as well as monitoring the deliverability of IT systems as developments
took place (DeMarco 1978; Gane and Sarson 1979). Later, some users even took charge
of IS projects. However, corporate level strategies for IT were not very well developed.
Nor for that matter was there much discussion about alignment of IT with business
strategy. Rather, individual functions or departments were developing IT applications
of critical importance to their particular areas.
Computing technology had also evolved to the point where new processing options
became available. Midrange and mini computers had arrived to enable organizations
to process some applications locally. Still, most organizations relied on corporate
mainframes for most core business applications. However, in 1981, the reliance on
mainframe computers shifted with IBM’s introduction of PCs. PCs made desktop
computing a real possibility. These computers had open architectures and were
available at lower individual unit cost compared to mainframes. As a result, organiza-
tions began to replace mainframes with PCs and used PCs to distribute processing
power throughout their organizations. Organizations also began to redesign their
business processes based on the new distributed computing architectures. While
organizations continued to develop their own systems in-house, some commercial,
externally developed software packages now became available.
Research themes
During this era, the effort to deﬁne the IS ﬁeld continued. Nolan (1979), for
example, presented a stage growth model of IS.17 The model contained six stages:
initiation, contagion, control, integration, database administration, and maturity. Ives,
Hamilton, and Davis (1980) deﬁned IS in terms of ﬁve IS environments (external,
organization, user, IS development, and IS operations), three processes (user, IS devel-
opment, and IS operations), and an information subsystem. Nolan and Wetherbe (1980)
deﬁned IS as an ‘open system (technology) which transforms data, requests for informa-
tion, and organizational resources (inputs) into information (outputs) in the context of
an organization (environment of MIS) and provides a feedback system’, while Keen
(1987) categorized the IS ﬁeld in terms of problem areas that each historical era (from the
1970s to the 1980s) chose to focus on. While these researchers tried to deﬁne IS from the
perspective of different research areas, other researchers chose to search for the identity
through the identiﬁcation of reference disciplines. Culnan (1986, 1987), for instance,
conducted co-citation analyses and identiﬁed three categories of ‘referents’ that IS
research drew on. These referents were fundamental theory (e.g. systems science), related
applied disciplines (e.g. management, ﬁnance), and underlying disciplines (e.g. sociology,
psychology). However, one important point worth noting here was that the scope of the
research in identifying the IS ﬁeld expanded beyond those of the 1960s and 1970s.
Whereas earlier frameworks (such as Mason and Mitroff, and Gorry and Scott-Morton)
stopped with the identiﬁcation of research areas, frameworks that surfaced in the 1980s
evaluated the contribution of IS research. For example, Ives, Hamilton, and Davis (1980)
categorized 331 doctoral dissertations into their framework while Nolan and Wetherbe
(1980) tested their framework with samples from the IS literature.
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
31

In addition to working on deﬁning the ﬁeld, IS researchers also conducted research
on a variety of diverse topics. One of these topics focused on examining the organiza-
tional impact of IT. As DeLone and McLean (1992) discussed the relationships between
different surrogates for IS success, researchers have attempted to use a variety of
dependent variables of ‘success’ at this level; the most famous being the group of
researchers who attempted to determine the impact of IT on an organization’s com-
petitive advantage (Ives and Learmonth 1984; McFarlan 1984; Porter and Millar 1985;
Rackoff, Wiseman, and Ullrich 1985; Clemons 1986). The concept of ‘competitive
advantage’ originated at the Harvard Business School by Michael Porter. He proposed
that in order for organizations to achieve competitive advantage, they could adopt two
different strategies: (1) being a cost leader or (2) being a differentiator (Porter 1980).
Research in this area has found that IT can function as a competitive weapon. However,
IT in itself does not implicitly lead to the desired outcome. Rather, it is management’s
ability to conceive of, develop, and exploit IT applications that leads to a sustainable
competitive advantage (Ives and Learmonth 1984; McFarlan 1984; Porter and Millar
1985). Further research has also concluded that the use of IT allows organizations to
change their competitive boundaries in the marketplace (Parsons 1983; Cash and
Konsynski 1985) and create organizational structures that are more nimble and able
to adapt to the external environment more quickly (Huber 1990). This last result has
initiated a widely debated issue on the causal link between the presence of IT and
organizational change (Markus and Robey 1988). Some researchers argued for a direct
link while others argued for a contingency view. Another research stream that studies
organizational impact is research on the effect of IT on the economic performance of
organizations (Mahmood and Mann 1993; Hitt and Brynjolfsson 1996). Researchers
attempted to assess IT value through performance metrics such as return on invest-
ment (ROI) and market share. Results found in this area around this time show
primarily no correlation between IT investment and improved performance (Barua
and Mukhopadhyay 2000). This led Roach (1988, 1989) to coin the term ‘IT produc-
tivity paradox’ to capture the conﬂicting results. This research stream on IT produc-
tivity continued into the 1990s (additional discussion will be presented under the
section on ‘the era after the 1990s’).
Participative design was another area of interest during the 1980s (Mumford 1981;
Ives and Olson 1984; Hirschheim 1985; Cavaye 1995). This stream of research origi-
nated in the social-technical school led by Emery in the 1960s. Here, researchers such
as Enid Mumford, Rudy Hirschheim, Frank Land, and Robert Bostrom applied the
original STS ideas through user participation. Speciﬁcally, they studied how user
participation during the systems development process led to a successful system
implementation. While this research had mixed empirical results, it was clear that
user involvement and participation are important in the systems development process.
This research also tried to identify factors that increase involvement and participation
and argued that by increasing involvement and participation, users will be more likely
to accept and be satisﬁed with the system. To measure end-user satisfaction, a variety of
researchers developed scales (Bailey and Pearson 1983; Ives, Olson, and Baroudi 1983;
32
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

Doll and Torkzadeh 1988) that assess the satisfaction of users. While user participation
research around this time focused on the traditional system development process, in
the 1990s research expanded to include the areas of the Internet and e-commerce.
Along the lines of user participation (i.e. focusing on individual users), a stream of
research that studied user acceptance emerged in the late 1980s. This research, based
mainly on Davis’s (1989) Technology Acceptance Model (TAM), posits that users will
intend to use a system based upon its perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use.
This model has been investigated over the years in a variety of contexts using a number
of technologies and has been found to predict up to 40 per cent of intentions to use
(Davis and Venkatesh 2000). Other researchers in this area have attempted to reﬁne
what it means to ‘use’ a system (DeSanctis and Poole 1994; Chin, Gopal, and Salisbury
1997), arguing that the faithfulness of use is important as well. Besides user acceptance,
Rogers’s (1983) diffusion of innovation has also formed a considerable body of IS
research in the study of IT diffusion. Speciﬁcally, researchers studied the rate, pattern,
and factors that determine an organization’s decision to adopt a particular innovation
(Moore and Benbasat 1991; Fichman 2000).
In the area of ISD research, various sociological perspectives emerged to explain
issues in ISD research. This is in contrast with the primarily technically focused
perspective of the 1970s. These sociological perspectives come from Checkland’s
SSM, Emery’s social-technical approach, and Kling’s interactionist approach. Re-
searchers such as Hirschheim, Klein, Iivari, and Lyytinen have done considerable
work in this area (cf. Hirschheim, Klein, and Lyytinen 1995).
Research methodology
In 1984, researchers began expressing their concerns over research methods in IS. They
questioned the adequacy of traditional research methods in investigating social needs
and problems in IS research. To address this issue, IFIP Working Group 8.218
organized a colloquium that was held at the Manchester Business School in 1984.
The conference, chaired by Enid Mumford, allowed researchers to ‘look critically at the
kinds of research associated up to now with information sciences, and . . . [to discuss]
the need for new approaches’ (Fitzgerald et al. 1985). It also allowed researchers to ‘call
into question the notion of research in information systems being a science, in the same
sense as research in the physical or natural sciences, and to ask whether the scientiﬁc
research methodology is the only relevant methodology for information systems
research or indeed whether it is an appropriate one at all’ (Fitzgerald et al. 1985: 2).
This colloquium not only marked a milestone in the effort to inaugurate additional
research approaches that are needed to explain and understand IS (Lee, Liebenau, and
DeGross 1997), it also demonstrated the willingness of IS researchers to appreciate the
different approaches to IS research (Mumford et al. 1985).19
Education/curriculum
In 1981, a curriculum called the Data Processing Management Association (DPMA)
Computer IS curriculum was published by DPMA Education Foundation (Adams and
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
33

Athey 1981). This curriculum had the same objective as the ACM and IFIP/BCS
curricula, that is to provide a structure for an IS degree. The DPMA curriculum,
however, differed from previous curricula in that it was initiated by practitioners
who in turn deﬁned the skills and education required for an entry-level position of
data processing personnel. As such, it tended to be narrow and focused only on skill
sets related to data processing. It also differed from the ACM curriculum as it required
schools that adopt its curriculum to follow the structure without any modiﬁcation. This
requirement explained why the curriculum only had a signiﬁcant impact on data
processing education at the undergraduate level but not at the graduate level (Davis
2000). Also since this curriculum employed strict rules, it provided certiﬁcation to
schools that met the requirements of the curriculum.
Infrastructure advancements: conferences
The late 1970s and early 1980s marked another signiﬁcant milestone in the history of
IS, with the advent of the ﬁrst IS conferences. In 1978, the ﬁrst conference solely for the
IS discipline20—Information Systems Research in Scandinavia (IRIS)—was launched.
Primarily a Finnish event, the conference soon became Scandinavian, with increasing
numbers of non-Scandinavians attending (Iivari and Lyytinen 1999). This was quickly
followed by the ﬁrst International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS),21 which
was held in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, in 1980. The conference was supported by
SMIS, TIMS, and ACM to serve primarily IS academicians along with invited IS
practitioners. The objective of the conference was to provide a direction to IS research
as it moved into the 1980s. Many signiﬁcant issues were addressed during this
conference. Peter Keen (Keen 1980), for example, stressed the importance of building
a cumulative research tradition. To that extent, he urged researchers to identify the
dependent variable of IS research and clarify the reference disciplines of the IS ﬁeld.
Davis (1980) discussed the roles of publication for tenure and promotion for IS
academics while Dickson, Benbasat, and King (1980) identiﬁed problems, challenges,
and opportunities for IS research. Their advice and concerns later became the subject of
discussions and research for some time. While most conferences have been held in
North America (mainly in the USA, with the exception of 1994 and 1997 in Canada),
ICIS is internationally oriented and has been held in Europe (Denmark in 1990, the
Netherlands in 1995, Finland in 1998, and Spain in 2002) and Australia (in 2000). It is
to be held in Shanghai, China, in 2011. Today, ICIS attracts over a thousand leading
academicians worldwide. Researchers welcome the conference as the presentations and
panel discussions held during the conference provide a single place for researchers to
get together to share and exchange their research ideas and knowledge. Through these
interactions, researchers stimulate each other’s thinking and nurture their research
relationships. In addition to the presentations and panel discussions, ICIS has also
organized various activities to guide newcomers in the ﬁeld. For example, ICIS has
doctoral consortia where Ph.D. students in their dissertation stage can get together to
discuss their research areas and interests. ICIS also has junior faculty workshops where
newly graduated Ph.D. students and assistant professors can discuss the problems they
34
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

face in the process of building their careers. Recent ICIS sessions have brought together
senior faculty to discuss and plan the direction of the IS ﬁeld. All these activities are
useful in building and shaping the future of the IS ﬁeld.
Infrastructure advancements: journals
As more and more research was being conducted in the IS ﬁeld, IS researchers began
producing more articles and thus needed more journal space to publish their scholarly
work. Until 1977, there was no publication outlet that was IS speciﬁc. Instead, IS
researchers had to depend on journals that belonged to other disciplines such as
Management Science, Communications of the ACM (CACM), and Academy of Man-
agement Journal to get their IS articles published. As a result, some researchers were
pressured to ‘force-ﬁt’ their work to suit the style and themes of the particular journal22
(Keen 1980: 10). Even then, many manuscripts were rejected because they did not ﬁt
closely enough with the focus of a particular journal. Facing these problems IS
academicians saw the need to have a journal of their own. SMIS, which was short on
products and services to offer its members at that time, welcomed the idea of a journal.
So, with SMIS needing a service and product for its members and MISRC wanting to be
the home for a journal in the IS area, the ﬁrst journal that belonged to the IS ﬁeld—MIS
Quarterly (MISQ) was born. Gary Dickson, the founding editor of MISQ, stated in his
ﬁrst editorial note that MISQ ‘attempts to break the new ground in the information
systems ﬁeld’ (1977: p. iii) by providing a vehicle of communication for IS communities
(Dickson 1982). During the early days of MISQ, there were two target audiences, the IS
academics and the practitioners. However, the focus tended to be on practitioners23 as
the primary source of funding at that time came from SMIS, a society with primarily IS
practitioners. Yet, MISQ strived to satisfy the need of both audiences by creating a two-
section journal, one on Application and the other on Theory and Research. Dickson
stated that the goal of MISQ was ‘to be managerially oriented [to] . . . offer something of
beneﬁt to the practitioner . . . [and] at the same time . . . to provide a vehicle for the
researchers working in the information systems ﬁeld to communication with each
other and with practitioners’ (1977: p. iii). Over the years, MISQ has shifted its
target audience from practitioners to academics. It has maintained its quality and
reputation as the top IS journal of the ﬁeld, highly regarded both within and outside
the IS ﬁeld (Jackson and Nath 1989; Gillenson and Stutz 1991; Walstrom, Hardgrave,
and Wilson 1995) as well as both within North America and abroad (Chen and
Hirschheim 2004).
Besides MISQ, another IS-oriented journal published by Elsevier Science, Informa-
tion and Management (I&M), emerged in 1977. I&M evolved from Management
Datamatics, which in turn came from Management Informatics.24 This journal had a
new editorial focus and tended to have a more European ﬂavour. In 1984, the Journal of
Management Information Systems also began publication.
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
35

Third Era (1985–94)
During this era, IS began to gain more ground in organizations with the creation of
separate IS departments. Another area where IS made an important leap was in the
establishment of AIS (the Association for Information Systems), a professional society
to represent the IS academic community. Furthermore, regional conferences, topic-
speciﬁc conferences, and topic-speciﬁc journals also emerged and that helped research-
ers in the study of some speciﬁc research topics in IS. Research themes that emerged in
this era included GDSS, IT value, and outsourcing.
Technology
This is the era where PC hardware, software, and telecommunications evolved rapidly.
New products were continually being introduced with each more appealing than its
predecessors. This phenomenon further improved the price/performance ratio of
computer devices. As a result, many business units resorted to purchasing their own
hardware and software to suit their departmental needs. This trend led to new
problems of data incompatibility, connectivity, and integrity across functional depart-
ments. The dire need to provide improved access to corporate DP resources to users all
over the organization and organization-wide connectivity led to the creation of sepa-
rate IS departments. This IS department was responsible for maintaining organization-
wide data, applications, and computer architecture as well as developing new systems
for future needs. The head of the department was given the title of CIO. As competition
became stiffer and proﬁt margins shrank, organizations looked to outside vendors for
IS solutions. At the same time, they began to align their corporate strategies with their
IT strategies.
Research themes
In terms of research, the era saw the emergence of new research topics in addition to
research areas from the previous era. New topics included implementation, strategy
alignment, and outsourcing. The research stream on IT productivity continued the
tradition of economics-based research of the 1980s. Contrary to the negative results
found earlier, more recent research showed that IT signiﬁcantly improves productivity.
Nonetheless contradicting results continue. Researchers argue that the reason behind
the contradicting results is due to the fact that economics-based approaches cannot
pinpoint where and how IT impacts are created and where management action may be
needed to increase the payoff from IT investments (Barua Kriebel, and Mukhopadhyay
1995; Barua and Mukhopadhyay 2000). Another perspective on measuring the value of
IT progressed concurrently and independently. This perspective took the ‘process-
model’ orientation and proposed a multiple dimensional approach to study IT value
creation (Kauffman and Kriebel 1988; Banker and Kauffman 1991). This perspective
can be seen as a complement to the earlier economics-based approach. Speciﬁcally, this
36
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

perspective analyses the impact of IT and other factors through a network of relation-
ships between various variables of interest.
The research stream that began in DSS shifted into the area of GDSS at the beginning
of this era. The focus of GDSS is individual users and groups within organizations
(Kramer and King 1988). Two universities, the University of Arizona and the Univer-
sity of Minnesota, have contributed signiﬁcantly to the development of GDSS. Howev-
er, each university adopted different research philosophies and methods when studying
GDSS. The University of Arizona adopted the EMS model proposed by Jay Nuna-
maker, Alan Dennis, Benn Konsynski, Doug Vogel, Joe Valacich, and colleagues
(1988). This model was grounded in an engineering world-view and believed that
group performance and behaviour could be improved by imposing an efﬁcient struc-
ture on the group through speciﬁc processes and technologies. The University of
Minnesota, on the other hand, adopted the Adaptive Structuration Theory (AST)
framework proposed by Michael Scott Poole and Gerardine DeSantics. This frame-
work, grounded in a traditional social science world-view, believes that since each
group appropriates technology in a unique way, it is important to understand how
groups interact with and adopt technology. Even though early research in GDSS
produced inconsistent results (Gray, Vogel, and Beauclair 1990; Rao and Jarvenpaa
1991), GDSS had been found to have impacts on some aspects of group processes and
outcomes (Dennis et al. 1988; Nunamaker, Chen, and Purdin 1991). While the
traditional focus of GDSS was to support management decision making, this research
expanded into other types of technologies and users.
With the concern for various technical and sociological issues that arose as technol-
ogies were being introduced in organizations, researchers began studying the issue of
IT implementation. This research stream stems mostly from a process-based view
(Kwon and Zmud 1987), arguing that there are stages that the process of implementing
technology progresses through. Cooper and Zmud (Cooper and Zmud 1990) present a
famous model of implementation that includes the stages of initiation, adoption,
adaptation, acceptance, routinization, and infusion. The implementation process has
also been viewed from a variety of perspectives including politics (Markus 1983), a
change perspective (Zmud and Cox 1979), a factor-based view (Zmud 1979; Aggarwal
1995), and social system view (Bostrom and Heinen 1977; Robey 1987).
As organizations got frustrated with the uncertainty of their IT investment and were
faced with problems in their IT implementation, they began looking for a less expensive
way to get the job done. They looked outside their organizations to vendors for solutions.
With Kodak pioneering the ﬁrst outsourcing contract, many organizations began to
adopt the belief that outside vendors whose core competence was in IT would be able to
provide more cost efﬁcient and effective services (Loh and Venkatraman 1992). This
trend initiated an outsourcing research stream that sought to understand various out-
sourcing issues such as motivation (Lacity and Hirschheim 1993; Hirschheim and Lacity
2000), scope (Gupta and Gupta 1992; Benko 1993), performance (Arnett and Jones 1994;
Loh and Venkatraman 1995), insourcing-or-outsourcing (Reponen 1993; Meyer 1994),
contract (Fitzgerald and Willcocks 1994) and partnership (Klepper, 1995; Grover,
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
37

Cheon, and Teng 1996). Recent research in this area has expanded to include offshore
outsourcing (Rajkumar and Dawley 1998; Rajkumar and Mani 2001), backsourcing
(Hirschheim 1998; Falaleeva 2003) and the study of the vendors’ perspective (Fitzgerald
and Willcocks 1994; Clark, Zmud, and McGray 1995).25
The decision to outsource shows a shift in IS strategy in organizations. Comple-
mented by previous research on IT value and IT competitiveness, researchers began to
study how to align business strategy and IT strategy (Henderson and Venkatraman
1992; Brown and Magill 1994; Chan et al. 1997; Sabherwal, Hirschheim, and Goles
2001), how IT and business units relate and formulate strategy (Sambamurthy and
Zmud 1999), how business and IT plan (Teo and King 1999), and how IT accomplishes
its tasks (Sambamurthy and Zmud 1998).
Research methodology
In this era IS researchers continued to pay attention to the importance of the state of IS
research. In response, Harvard Business School organized a research colloquium
discussing the state of IS as a ﬁeld of study. A steering committee comprising James
Cash, James McKenney, Warren McFarlan, Jack Rockart, Jay Nunamaker, Gordon
Davis, and Richard Mason identiﬁed ﬁve subject areas that needed further attention.
One of these subject areas was ‘research methodology’: qualitative research, experi-
mental research, survey research, mathematical models, and software systems demon-
strations. The methodology colloquia resulted in the publication of three volumes of
research on qualitative research methods, survey research methods, and experimental
research methods respectively.
In addition to the Harvard Business School colloquium, IFIP also continued its
previous efforts to address issues on qualitative research. Another colloquium was held
in Copenhagen in 1990 and the result was documented in the book, IS Research:
Contemporary Approaches and Emergent Tradition (Nissen, Klein, and Hirschheim
1991).
Education/curriculum
As technology developed and requirements for skill level changed in organizations,
academics also tried to ensure that they equipped future IS professionals with current
and necessary skill sets. In 1987, a revised version of the IFIP/BCS curriculum was
published. This revised curriculum updated the previous curriculum published in 1974
(Buckingham et al. 1987).
Infrastructure advancements: professional societies
As the IS ﬁeld grew more diverse, IS research communities saw the need for a
professional society to represent the ﬁeld.26 Such a need was ﬁrst spelled out in an
editorial authored by the ﬁrst ﬁve editors-in-chief of the MISQ in March of 1993. IS
communities envisioned the professional society providing a shared vision that would
unify the diverse communities (Dickson et al. 1993). They also envisioned a society that
would provide the leadership needed to lead the IS ﬁeld (Dickson et al. 1993). Based on
38
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

the hard work of many individuals, in 1994, the premier international association for IS
academics, AIS, was formed. AIS has a governance structure that represents three
international regions: (1) Americas, (2) Europe and Africa, and (3) Asia and the Paciﬁc.
Its leadership comes from various regions and rotates annually—Bill King (from the
USA in 1995), Niels Bjorn-Anderson (from Europe in 1996), Ron Weber (from Asia/
Paciﬁc in 1997), Gordon Davis (from the USA in 1998), Bob Galliers (Europe/Africa in
1999), Michael Vitale (from Australia in 2000), Blake Ives (from the USA in 2001),
Philip Ein-Dor (from Europe in 2002), K. K. Wei (from Asia/Paciﬁc in 2003), Rick
Watson (from the USA in 2004), Claudia Loebbecke (from Europe in 2005), Michael
Myers (from Asia/Paciﬁc in 2006), Dennis Galletta (from the USA in 2007), David
Avison (from Europe 2008), Bernard Tan (from Asia/Paciﬁc in 2009), and Joey George
(from the USA in 2010).
Since its inception, AIS has worked to improve the IS ﬁeld. For example, it publishes
two electronic journals—Communications of the Association for Information Systems
(CAIS) and Journal of the Association for Information Systems (JAIS). CAIS publishes
tutorials, comments, and pedagogical articles that fall outside traditional research. JAIS,
on the other hand, publishes traditional research articles. These electronic journals
have moved the ﬁeld into a different mode of publication. They lift the concern of
limited journal space and reduces the turnaround time for the review process.27
AIS offers various other services to its members. The AIS-ICIS placement service, for
example, provides a very useful service to both the institutions and Ph.D. candidates
searching for jobs. AIS e-library provides access to AIS journals (CAIS and JAIS), AIS
conference proceedings (both ICIS and AMCIS), and MIS Quarterly. AIS also sponsors
the establishment of Special Interest Groups (SIGs). These groups bring together
researchers who are interested in speciﬁc research areas and allow them the opportu-
nity to exchange knowledge and ideas and to form a close relationship with each
other. The focus of these groups includes, but is not limited to, human-computer
interaction, E-business, knowledge management, cognitive research, Internet and
network security, process automation, and management and agent-based IS, outsour-
cing, philosophy, etc. In addition, AIS forms loose afﬁliations with other international
organizations such as SIGMIS, TC8 (IFIP), and INFORMS (formerly called TIMS and
then ORSA/TIMS). It also runs ICIS and AMCIS and supports PACIS (Paciﬁc-Asia
Conference on Information Systems) and ECIS.
Apart from providing services to its members, AIS also works towards recognizing
signiﬁcant contribution by individuals to the IS ﬁeld. In 1999, under Bob Galliers’s
leadership, it established two awards, (1) the LEO award for lifetime achievement and
(2) Fellow of the AIS award, which are to be presented annually at ICIS. The former,
which is the highest honour in the IS ﬁeld, is presented to a very small number of truly
outstanding individuals who have devoted themselves to the ongoing development of
the IS ﬁeld over the years; the latter recognizes major contributions made by indivi-
duals in national, regional, and international settings.
As envisioned by the committees who formed AIS, today AIS is recognized as the
academy for the IS ﬁeld. Through its various services, AIS has established an
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
39

administrative and legal structure for managing the IS community. It has also estab-
lished a formalized political voice to lead the direction of IS research and IS education.
In addition to AIS, the launch of the ISWorld Net in 1994 marked another signiﬁcant
milestone for the IS ﬁeld. ISWorld was formed under the vision of Blake Ives. Today, it
is the premier communication and cooperation vehicle for the ﬁeld. It provides various
resources such as information related to research, teaching, and professional activities;
an online directory of IS faculty members,28 links (i.e. portal) to country-speciﬁc pages
and discussion lists. In 1998, ISWorld formed an alliance with AIS.29 Such an alliance
uniﬁes and coordinates the services provided to the IS community.
Infrastructure advancements: conferences
This era saw the emergence of a number of regional conferences. The European
Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), for example, was ﬁrst held in 1993. As
noted by Galliers and Whitley (2007), the formation of ECIS can be traced back to two
independent initiatives to run a primarily European conference in IS. The ﬁrst was led
by Dan Remenyi, then at Henley Management College, while the second arose from
discussions following the publication of the European Journal of Information Systems
by the UK’s Operational Research Society. The editors of EJIS were based at the LSE
at the time, and Edgar Whitley began working with the OR Society to organize a
European conference that mirrored the new journal’s focus. Having learned of both
initiatives, Frank Land worked to ensure that the merger of the two initiatives and ECIS
was born and held at Henley Management College. With the foundation of the
Association for Information Systems (AIS) in 1994, PACIS and ECIS were recognized
as regional AIS conferences and the Americas Conference on Information Systems
(AMCIS) was established to complement these already existing conferences. The
brainchild of Frank Land and Bob Galliers, the UK Academy for Information Systems
(UKAIS) was a separate but related development, and pre-dated AIS by a year. The ﬁrst
Australasian Conference on Information Systems (ACIS) was held in 1990 while the
ﬁrst Paciﬁc-Asia Conference on Information Systems (PACIS) was held in 1993. Both
conferences have the objective of serving the interest of IS scholars from Australasia
and from the Asia Paciﬁc Region respectively.30 The ﬁrst AMCIS was held in 1995 in
Pittsburgh, PA. Other conferences focusing on speciﬁc research areas are also being
held. Examples of these types of conferences are the International Conference on
Outsourcing of Information Services (ICOIS), the European Conference on e-Govern-
ment, and the International Conference on Electronic Commerce.
Infrastructure advancements: journals
During this era, the number of professionals with an IS degree and the number of
programmes offering IS degrees increased dramatically. Concomitantly, the produc-
tion of IS research by academics brought with it the need for more publication outlets.
With MISQ being the only high-quality IS-oriented journal, researchers began to seek
additional high-quality publication outlets. During ICIS in 1985, Chris Bullen, the
Chair of the TIMS College on IS, organized an informal discussion that led to the
40
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

establishment of an Ad Hoc Committee to investigate the need for a new journal. This
committee was chaired by Bill King. Other members of the committee included
Gordon Davis, E. Burton Swanson, Omar El Sawy, George Huber, Charles Kriebel,
Robert Rouse, and Michael Treacy. The committee conducted a survey to 400 random-
ly selected IS faculties and received 196 responses that showed substantial support for a
new journal. In the following ICIS, King and Bullen led a discussion to reﬁne the idea of
publishing a new IS journal. In the same year, King and Bullen formally proposed the
idea to TIMS Council meeting in 1986. The proposal was approved and Information
Systems Research (ISR) was established. It was published by the Institute for Operations
Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS, formerly TIMS)31 and began
publishing papers in 1990. ISR took a different focus from the early MISQ. It targeted
research communities and focused on publishing ‘theoretical and empirical works’. ISR
publishes a variety of articles including ‘those of organizational application of IT,
conceptual work in IS, how different literatures may be jointly drawn upon to explain
signiﬁcant IS phenomena, theoretical analysis where the connection to IS practice is a
strong one, good qualitative as well as quantitative, empirical research’ (Swanson
1990). ISR is generally considered as the IS ﬁeld’s other top journal.
In Europe, several journals emerged to serve those whose research interests are
broader than the more orthodox positivist camp which dominates IS research in North
America. These journals included the Journal of Information Technology (JIT) pub-
lished in 1986, the European Journal of Information Systems (EJIS), the Journal of
Information Systems (JIS),32 Information & Organization (formerly Accounting, Man-
agement and Information Technologies), and Journal of Strategic Information Systems
which all started publishing in 1991. In Scandinavia, the Scandinavian Journal of
Information Systems (SJIS) began publishing in 1988 as a place for Scandinavian
researchers to publish their work. In Australia, the Australian Journal of Information
Systems (AJIS) was formed in 1993. AJIS has now has changed its name to Australasian
Journal of Information Systems to better reﬂect the wider arena of its author base.
Many topic-speciﬁc journals have emerged to serve the interests of particular
research areas. For example, Decision Support Systems began in 1985 to support the
DSS community, and the Journal of Global Information Management (JGIM) began in
1993 to serve the community whose interests lie in the area of global IT management
and cross-cultural research.
Fourth Era (1995 Onwards)
This era marks a signiﬁcant shift of IS technology and the business environment. The
commercialization of the Internet enables new methods of communication and new ways
of conducting business that were not possible in the previous eras. The Internet allows the
dissemination of knowledge to different parts of the world regardless of time and space.
Due to this changing environment, organizations started to modify their business
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
41

strategies to take advantage of the new technological opportunities afforded by the
Internet. Additionally, more focus was placed on aligning IS strategy with business
strategy. As the focus of organizations shifted, new research topics emerged. Researchers
now focus their attention in areas such as knowledge management, the Internet, virtual
teams, and e-commerce. With globalization, researchers are encouraged to look at the
areas of cross-cultural research and IS in developing countries. Further, IS communities
are also becoming more receptive of interpretive research methods.
Technology
As organizations entered the mid-1990s, the focus turned from the invention and
development of new technologies to reaching a ‘critical mass’ of this ‘Internet age’
(Hevner, Berndt, and Studnicki 2000). The commercialization of the Internet in 1995
dramatically changes the environment organizations compete in. The Internet provides
a stage of connectivity where organizations are networked and constantly connected to
their customers and suppliers. This eliminates previous concerns for differences in time
and space. All these changes dissolve traditional organizational boundaries and make
the traditional ‘bricks-and-mortar’ business model obsolete. In order to compete with
new forms of organizations such as Amazon.com and eBay, many existing organiza-
tions are now re-engineering and consolidating their operations to move towards
networked organizations. Intranets and extranets were developed to further support
the re-engineering process. As the price/performance ratio for technology continues to
improve, the use of PCs becomes pervasive within organizations. Organizations now
equip their employees with various mobile technologies such as laptop computers,
digital assistants (PDAs), mobile phones, etc., that allow their employees to extend
their work beyond the formal workplace. Organizations have also shifted their focus to
provide better services to their customers. To that end, they customize services and
products to meet individual needs. The pervasiveness of technology means more
challenges for IT managers to manage the widely distributed technologies, IT person-
nel, and users. The recent collapse of the ‘dotcoms’ tightens up the IT job markets and
raises some questions of the viability of IS. Nonetheless, it is believed that technological
advances will continue to push the world towards ubiquitous computing (Lyytinen and
Yoo 2002).
Research themes
Most of the themes studied by researchers extended from the previous eras. However,
the commercialization of the Internet began the streams of research that surrounds the
Internet. Research in this area ranges from the investigation of general use of the
Internet to the more speciﬁc business adoption of the Internet (i.e. e-commerce). These
include the study of the adoption of the Internet/e-commerce (Iacovou, Benbasat, and
Dexter 1995; Tan and Teo 2000; Chau and Jim 2002), the implementation of the
Internet (Purba 2002), and the value and performance of the Internet (Applegate,
McFarlan and McKenney 1996; Armstrong and Hagel 1996; Bakos and Nault 1997;
Chatﬁeld and Yetton 2000).
42
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

Globalization that began to expand during this era encouraged researchers to pay
attention to environments other than one’s home country. As a result, cross-cultural
research in IT (Tricker 1999; Hunter and Beck 2000; Myers and Tan 2002; Straub et al.
2002) began to emerge. Generally, researchers investigated similar research topics as
when they were focusing within one environment, except now researchers had to take
into consideration the differences in culture. In addition, cross-cultural researchers
began to pay more attention to IT in developing countries (Avgerou 2002; Heeks 2002;
Walsham and Sahay 2006).
Both the commercialization of the Internet and the emergence of the phenomena
of globalization bring another research stream: the study of virtual organizations and
virtual teams (Saunders 2000). Researchers study issues such as the factors affecting
the effectiveness of virtual teams (Jarvenpaa, Knoll, and Leidner 1984; Brandon and
Pratt 1999; Duarte and Snyder 1999) and the performance of virtual teams (Citurs
and Yoo 1999; Furst, Blackburn, and Rosen 1999). Further, with the changes in the
business environment and strategy, organizations began to understand the signiﬁcant
implications of managing organizational knowledge. Researchers have also begun to
pay more attention to the area of knowledge management (Davenport and Prusack
1997; Alavi and Leidner 1999; Alavi 2000) and IT personnel (Ang and Slaughter
2000).
Research methodology
This era further developed the state of IS research methodology. Prior to this era, IS
research was primarily grounded on functionalist philosophical assumptions. Re-
search that adopted this assumption was conducted using positivist research meth-
ods such as laboratory experiments and survey research methods, and was analysed
using quantitative analysis. Interpretive research was virtually non-existent (Gal-
liers and Land 1987; Orlikowski and Baroudi 1991; Alavi and Carlson 1992).
However, this era marks tremendous progress in terms of the ﬁeld’s acceptance
of interpretive research methods. In 1997, IFIP 8.2 held another colloquium in
Philadelphia. The purpose of the colloquium was to take a ‘self-reﬂective’ and
‘evaluative’ stance to examine qualitative research and its history within the IS ﬁeld
(Lee, Liebenau, and DeGross 1997). Again, in 2000, IFIP 8.2 held another colloquium
in Aalborg for qualitative researchers to discuss the issues they faced in their research.
It was concluded from these two colloquia that the IS community is becoming more
understanding and appreciative of other philosophical assumptions such as the inter-
pretive and critical research paradigm and more journals are beginning to publish
qualitative research. MISQ, for example, has devoted a special issue to address qualita-
tive research (Markus and Lee 1999, 2000). Further, there have been publications of
books on qualitative research. For example, an edited book on ‘Qualitative Research
in IS’ by Eileen Trauth was published in 2001. In addition, conferences have also
begun to organize workshops and panel discussions on qualitative research (Cash
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
43

and Lawrence 1989; Nissen et al. 1991; Lee, Liebenau, and DeGross 1997; Myers and
Walsham 1998; Trauth 2001). ICIS in the year 2001 had a speciﬁc panel discussion
on confessional research (i.e. ethnography research). More recently, IFIP 8.2 held its
fourth research colloquium on ‘IS Research Methodologies’ in Manchester (a twenty-
year anniversary of the ﬁrst Research Methods conference) to explore the progress of
alternative research approaches (Kaplan et al. 2004).
Education/curriculum
In terms of curriculum, AIS, as the professional association of the IS community, took
an active role in revising the existing curriculum. To that extent, AIS worked with
ACM and AITP (formerly DPMA) to revise the curriculum. The result is the IS 1997
report that was published in the Winter 1997 issue of Database.
Infrastructure advancements: journals
As in the end of the previous era, many topic-speciﬁc journals have emerged to serve
the interests of newly emerging research areas. For example, in the year 2000, the
Journal of Electronic Commerce Research was published to serve researchers who study
issues surrounding electronic commerce, while the E-Journal on Information Systems
in Developing Countries (EJISDC) was established to publish research originating in
developing countries. Additionally, Information Systems Frontiers—a more general IS
journal—came on stream. MIS Quarterly, in an attempt to address the needs to be more
‘practical’, started publishing a new journal—MISQ Executive—which speciﬁcally fo-
cuses on more applied articles. It in many ways competes with journals such as Sloan
Management Review and California Management Review. This era also saw a change in
Communications of the ACM, previously a key publication outlet for scholarly IS
research which morphed into an outlet for short articles appealing to the wider
practitioner and academic computing communities.
Discipline critiques
Recently, the ﬁeld has started to question its very existence and a rich debate has
ensured. Markus (1999) openly wonders: ‘what happens if the IS ﬁeld as we know it
goes away?’ For her, the ﬁeld is at a crossroads. On the one hand, it could become one of
the most important areas for business since no organization can ignore the inexorable
development and application of new information technology and expect to survive. On
the other hand, there is a move to emasculate and devolve the ﬁeld, moving IS tasks and
skills into the business functions and/or overseas. Lucas (1999) supports Markus’
concern noting that the migration of IS skills to other business disciplines is occurring.
Hirschheim and Klein (2003) suggest another reason the skills are disappearing: the
dramatic increase in the ‘offshoring’ of IS jobs to places like India, China, and Russia.
Whether these concerns are real has been the subject of much debate; cf. Watson,
Rosemann, and Stewart (1999); Benbasat and Zmud (2003), the special issue of the Com-
munications of the AIS (Volume 12, 2003), and several papers appearing in Journal of
44
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

the AIS commenting on the Benbasat and Zmud position (DeSanctis 2003; Galliers 2003;
Robey 2003; Ives et al. 2004; Lyytinen and King 2004).
Another aspect of disciplinary critique which has also been widely debated involves
the issue of relevancy. Markus (1997), in her IFIP8.2 keynote address, argued that one
of the directions the ﬁeld should take is ‘the appreciation of practicality in IS research’.
She felt that researchers in the IS ﬁeld need to complement theoretical research with
‘rigorous research that describes and evaluates what is going on in practice’. This was
underscored by the conference theme of ICIS97 with its emphasis on ‘the issue of
relevance and relationship of IS research to practice’ (Kumar 1997: p. xvii). In 1999, the
editor-in-chief of MISQ, Allen Lee, announced a renewed thrust aimed ‘at better
imbuing rigorous research with the element of relevance to managers, consultants,
and other practitioners’ (Lee 1999a: p. viii). The discussions presented in Applegate
and King (1999), Benbasat and Zmud (1999), Lyytinen (1999), and Lee (1999b)
supported this thrust. In March 2001, Communications of the AIS (Volume 6) had a
special issue on ‘Relevancy’. The interest in the topic of relevance vs. rigour continues
even more recently (King and Lyytinen 2006).33
DISCUSSION
..................................................................................................................
The IS ﬁeld has made signiﬁcant progress since the 1960s and has, in the view of some,
‘fully emerged as a discipline in its own right’ (Baskerville and Myers 2002). Many
universities now offer an IS degree at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. In
fact, the number of degree programmes has increased tremendously over the years as a
result of the growing need for IS skills in industry (Watson, Rosemann, and Stewart
1999; Abraham et al. 2006). The ﬁeld has also tried to educate the business community
as a whole on what it needs to know about IS (Ives et al. 2002).
The IS ﬁeld has also begun to accumulate its own distinctive subject matter and now
studies a wide range of issues surrounding technology within an organizational context.
Examples of research themes that have emerged are DSS, GDSS, organizational impact
of IS, user acceptance, ISD, IS implementation, outsourcing, etc. A cumulative research
tradition is also evident as current and previous IS research have served as a foundation
for further IS research. The ﬁeld has also begun to embrace different research perspec-
tives in addition to the traditional positivist stance. Compared to the time when the ﬁeld
ﬁrst began, the IS ﬁeld is now more receptive to interpretive, action, and critical research.
An indication of this is MISQ’s publication of a Special Issue on Intensive Research in
Information Systems over three volumes (Markus and Lee 1999; Markus 2000). Further,
the IS ﬁeld has produced well-known scholars. These scholars have published a variety of
exemplar articles that are highly inﬂuential and widely cited. Markus’s (1983) article on
Power, Politics and MIS Implementation, for example, has been cited more than 200
times since 1993 by researchers from a variety of disciplines such as communication,
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
45

human resources, organization change management, sociology, manufacturing, medical
informatics, and urban planning (Baskerville and Myers 2002).
Moreover, the ﬁeld has journals such as MISQ and ISR that publish IS-oriented
articles. These two journals have grown in quality over the years and have established
reputations as top IS scholarly journals both within and outside the ﬁeld (Watson,
Rosemann, and Stewart 1999). The same can also be said of newer journals such as JAIS
and JMIS as well as the more ‘European’ journals such as EJIS, ISJ, JSIS, JIT, and
Information and Organization. Indeed, the ﬁeld of IS has become truly global with IS
conferences and journals being produced across the globe. Each of these regions has its
own history of IS, some of which have been well documented (cf. Avgerou, Siemer, and
Bjorn-Andersen 1999; Iivari and Lyytinen 1999; Galliers and Whitley 2007; Gable,
Gregor, and Smyth 2008).34
The ﬁeld has its own international society (AIS) that functions as a ‘political voice’ for
the IS community. AIS has provided leadership and various services that are contributing
to the uniﬁcation and the development of the ﬁeld. Further, the ﬁeld has other services
such as special work groups and ISWorld that equip IS researchers with better resources.
Collectively, these form an excellent communication network for IS scholars to interact
with each other, to share knowledge, and to build research relationships.
The IS community has set its own standards and procedures to measure the
performance of IS academics. For example, journal rankings are used to measure the
quality of publications. This measurement, while not perfect, is in turn used for tenure
and promotion purposes. The IS community recognizes and supports the establish-
ment of such standards as a way to make the tenure and promotion process more
transparent.
But whilst the ﬁeld has achieved a certain level of maturity, there is considerable
diversity amongst its members in terms of research interests, research communities,
and beliefs about what belongs and does not belong in the ﬁeld (Klein and Hirschheim
2008). Such diversity can be seen as valuable if we see it as evidence of past progress.
Only by knowing and understanding the many streams which have shaped the current
landscape can we collectively prepare for the ﬁeld’s future even if we cannot agree what
the best future or futures might be. Perhaps a shared sense of history is more effective
in helping with bridging the communication gaps than with obtaining consensus on
preferred forms of knowledge creation. Isn’t it easier for all of us to agree on what has
been accomplished by the ﬁeld in the past than on what we should do in the future for
advancing knowledge creation?
By seeing alternative visions of the discipline’s future against a shared historical
backdrop, each of us can obtain a sense of the larger meaning of our individual
contributions and a better understanding of the potential contribution of the work of
others. We believe that a better grasp of IS history is a more feasible strategy for
improving mutual understanding between differing communities. The ﬁeld would
beneﬁt in addressing its current and future issues if we could align our perspectives
at least about past accomplishments even if we continue to disagree about current and
future research priorities and strategy. This would not only nurture identity-forming
46
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

discussions about historical controversies but also facilitate boundary spanning
amongst the ﬁeld’s diverse communities for the following reasons. (1) Historical
analyses lead to shared concepts, (2) a shared history makes communications easier
across boundaries, (3) a shared history forms emotional bonds and commitments, and
(4) historical awareness supports reﬂection and critical distance to the present helping
to divorce discussions from personality conﬂicts and various forms of dogmatism. We
hope our attempt at offering an IS history will help the ﬁeld develop such a shared
understanding. It is long overdue.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We are indebted to Siew Fan Wong for her assistance in gathering much of the material for
the four eras identiﬁed in this chapter.
NOTES
1. Another area that is often thought to be signiﬁcant for the growth of IS is systems theory.
Additionally, disciplines such as psychology, anthropology, economics, sociology, politi-
cal science, and architecture are considered to have had an impact on the IS ﬁeld.
2. Or indeed whether there is a ‘core’ at all (cf. Lyytinen and King 2004). See also Lyytinen
and King (2006) and Weber (2006).
3. A similar historical analysis can be found in Friedman and Cornford (1989), who
speciﬁcally focus on the evolution and growth of the systems analyst and the systems
analysis function.
4. Although the ﬁeld has been experiencing a decline of late in terms of IS majors
(cf. George, Valacich, and Valor 2005; Hirschheim et al. 2007).
5. On the other hand, the explosive growth of IT outsourcing might suggest otherwise
(cf. Lacity and Hirschheim 1993; Dibbern et al. 2004).
6. It is somewhat surprising to us that the discipline of IS has few published reﬂective pieces
tracing the historical roots of the ﬁeld. We are not sure whether the ﬁeld considers itself
too young to need such a reﬂection or whether there simply are not enough ‘old timers’
around who could provide such a view. Whatever the case, we believe this to be a serious
shortcoming of the IS discipline.
7. Note that this chapter does not discuss the era before 1964 as most of the academic work
in IS only began during the mid-1960s.
8. See e.g. Caminer et al. (1998), Aris, Land, and Maller (2003), and Ferry (2003).
9. Systems thinking is a mode of inquiry which focuses on synthesis. At the core of systems
thinking lies the concept of an ‘adaptive whole’—a whole entity which can adapt and
survive, within limits, in a changing environment.
10. Mitroff and Sagasti wrote an article in 1973 that summarized Churchman’s idea on
inquiry systems.
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
47

11. De facto this was very similar to what Yourdon (1978) tried to teach with manual
speciﬁcations even though Teichroew claimed that the ISDOS project was independent
of any speciﬁc methodology.
12. Systemeering is the early non-English word which refers to ISD.
13. Researchers such as Blumenthal have argued that the concept of ‘total management
information systems’ commenced with a sometimes naive, sometimes sophisticated
theory of the ﬁrm. Blumenthal said that attempts towards total MIS fell short of
translating what is merely perspective and overview into something concrete, in the
form of a comprehensive and integrated corporate-wide plan.
14. Research on IT support for decision making originated in the 1960s with the work by
Herbert Simon, Allan Newell, and their colleagues. In fact, their work established a
behavioural perspective on the relationship between IT and decision making. The
development of management science and operations research around the same time
frame provided the mathematical framework for DSS research.
15. AIDS was later changed to DSI.
16. TC8 was formed by IFIP. Among those who founded this society included Langefors and
other Scandinavian communities who dominated the European IS community at that
time.
17. Note that even though other researchers have found that Nolan’s (1979) stage model is
inconsistent with empirical studies, Nolan’s model has been widely adopted by practi-
tioners because it made sense and because it gave managers a tool for proactive control
over the IS function.
18. Note that the area of interest and focus of IFIP Working Group 8.2 is the relationships
and interactions between IS, IT, organizations, and society.
19. Even Davis said this colloquium altered his once only positivist view of IS research. He
stated that now he believes a ‘world-class scholar must be competent in both hypothesis
testing using quantitative data and qualitative, interpretive methods using observations,
interviews, and participations (2000: 80).
20. Before IRIS or ICIS, a popular conference which supported IS research was the Hawaiian
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS). While somewhat broader than
just IS, it started in the late 1960s, and continues to bring together members of the IS
community on an annual basis.
21. Note that the name ICIS came in the mid-1980s. Initially, the conference was simply
called ‘Conference on Information Systems’.
22. Management Science, for example, was mainly quantitative in orientation; CACM pub-
lished computer science (technical material) Academy of Management Journal/Academy
of Management Review published decision-making research or organizational studies.
Periodicals such as Datamation and Journal of Systems Management were practitioner
oriented.
23. Even though the primary referees of the articles published under the ‘Theory and
Research’ section of MISQ were academicians, a practitioner referee was also on duty
to make the judgement as to whether or not the articles had any practical value (Dickson
1982).
24. Management Datamatics and Management Informatics were no longer in publication.
25. See Lacity, Kahn, and Willcocks (2009) for a review.
26. During this time, there was no professional society that was IS oriented. Instead, IS
communities joined other societies such as DSI, TIMS, etc.
48
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

27. For a paper journal, a turnaround time of two to three years is not atypical.
28. The Americas database online access was developed by Janice DeGross, David Naumann,
and Jesper Johansson. Europe/Africa and Paciﬁc/Asia directories were developed by Niels
Bjrn-Andersen and Guy Gable.
29. Two main reasons that led to the formation of the alliance between ISWorld Net and AIS:
(1) Lack of support to develop and maintain Web repositories and the list server and (2)
Lack of resources to support the operations of ISWorld Net.
30. With the exception of PACIS, the rest of the conferences are held annually.
31. Note that at that time, the Institute for Operations Research and the Management
Sciences (INFORMS) had already published many scholarly journals for speciﬁc areas.
For example, Management Science was publishing OR-related articles; Organization
Science was publishing organizational-related articles; and Marketing Science was pub-
lishing marketing-related articles.
32. The Journal of Information Systems has changed its name to Information Systems Journal.
33. An interesting anomaly of this ‘call for relevancy’ is that much European IS research is
curiously considered by North Americans to be too practically focused and lacking in
rigour. Many European and Australasian IS researchers have been quick to point out the
irony in this relevancy plea by the North Americans.
34. In fact, the Gable, Gregor, and Smyth (2008) book might serve as a model of how the rest
of the world could document its speciﬁc IS history.
REFERENCES
Ackoff, R. (1967). ‘Management Misinformation Systems’, Management Science (December):
B147–56.
Adams, D. R., and Athey, J. H. (eds.) (1981). DPMA Model Curriculum for Undergraduate
Computer Information Systems Education, DPMA, Park Ridge, USA (Document
ED239584).
Aggarwal, S. (1995). ‘Flexibility Management: The Ultimate Strategy’, Industrial Manage-
ment, 37(6): 20–6.
Alavi, M. (2000). ‘Managing Organizational Knowledge’, in R. W. Zmud (ed.), Framing the
Domains of IT Management: Projecting the Future . . . Through the Past. Cincinnati, OH:
Pinnaﬂex Educational Resources.
——and Carlson, P. (1992). ‘A Review of MIS Research and Disciplinary Development’,
Journal of Management Information Systems, 8(4): 45–62.
————and Brooke, G. (1989). ‘The Ecology of MIS Research: A Twenty Year Review’, in
J. I. DeGross, J. C. Henderson, and B. R. Konsynski (eds.), Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Information Systems, Boston, MA: MIT, 363–75.
——and Leidner, D. E. (1999), ‘Knowledge Management Systems: Issues, Challenges, and
Beneﬁts’, Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 1(7): 1–37.
Alchian, A., and Demsetz, H. (1972). ‘Production, Information Costs and Economic Organi-
zations’, American Economic Review, 62(5): 777–95.
Alter, S., and Ginzberg, M. J. (1978). ‘Managing Uncertainty in MIS Implementation’, Sloan
Management Review, 19: 23–31.
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
49

Ang, S., and Slaughter, S. (2000). ‘The Missing Context of Information Technology Personnel:
A Review and Future Directions for Research’, in R. W. Zmud (ed.), Framing the Domains
of IT Management: Projecting the Future from the Past. Cincinnati: Pinnaﬂex Educational
Resources.
Applegate, L., and King, J. (1999). ‘Rigor and Relevance: Careers on the Line’, MIS Quarterly,
23(1): 17–18.
——McFarlan, W., and McKenney, J. (1996). Corporate Information Management: Text and
Cases. Boston: Irwin/McGraw-Hill.
Argyris, C., and Schon, D. (1978). Organizational Learning: A Theory of Action Perspective.
Reading: Addison-Wesley.
Aris, J., Land, F., and Maller, V. (eds.) (2003). ‘Special issue: LEO Conference 2001’, Journal of
Strategic Information Systems, 12(4): 253–395.
Armstrong, A., and Hagel III, J. (1996). ‘The Real Value of Online Communities’, Harvard
Business Review (May/June): 134–40.
Arnett, K. P., and M. C. Jones (1994). ‘Firms that Choose Outsourcing: A Proﬁle’, Information
& Management, 26: 179–88.
Ashenhurst, R. L. (1972). ‘Curriculum Recommendations for Graduate Professional Pro-
grams in Information Systems’, Communications of the ACM, 15(5): 364–98.
Avgerou, C. (2002). Information Systems and Global Diversity. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
——Siemer, J., and Bjorn-Andersen, N. (1999). ‘The Academic Field of Information Systems
in Europe’, European Journal of Information Systems, 8(2): 136–53.
Avison, D. E. and Fitzgerald, G. (1995). Information Systems Development: Methodologies,
Techniques and Tools. 2nd edn., New York: McGraw-Hill.
————(1999). ‘Information Systems Development,’ in W. L. Currie and R. D. Galliers (eds.),
Rethinking Management Information Systems: An Interdisciplinary Perspective. New York:
Oxford University Press, 250–78.
——and Wood-Harper, A. T. (1990). MULTIVIEW: An Exploration in Information Systems
Development. London: Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications.
Bailey, J., and Pearson, S. (1983). ‘Development of a Tool for Measuring and Analyzing
Computer User Satisfaction’, Management Science, 29(5): 530–45.
Bakos, J. Y., and Nault, B. R. (1997). ‘Ownership and Investment in Electronic Networks’,
Information Systems Research, 8(4): 321–41.
Banker, R., and Kauffman, R. (1991). ‘Quantifying the Business Value of Information
Technology: An Illustration of the “Business Value Linkage” Framework’, NYU working
paper no. IS-91-21, August.
Banville, C., and Landry, M. (1989). ‘Can the Field of MIS be Disciplined?’, Communications
of the ACM, 32(1): 48–60.
Bardach, E. (1977). The Implementation Game. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Barua A., Kriebel C., and Mukhopadhyay T. (1995). ‘Information Technology and Business
Value: An Analytic and Empirical Investigation’, Information Systems Research, 7(4).
——and Mukhopadhyay, T. (2000). ‘Information Technology and Business Performance:
Past, Present, and Future’, in R. W. Zmud, Framing the Domains of IT Research: Projecting
the Future through the Past. Cincinnati, OH: Pinnaﬂex Educational Resources, 65–84.
Baskerville, R. L. and Myers, M. D. (2002). ‘Information Systems as a Reference Discipline’,
MIS Quarterly, 26(1): 1–14.
50
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

Benbasat, I., and Weber, R. (1996). ‘Rethinking Diversity in Information Systems Research’,
Information Systems Research, 7(4): 389–99.
——and Zmud, R. (1999). ‘Empirical Research in Information Systems: The Practice of
Relevance’, MIS Quarterly, 23(1): 3–16.
————(2003). ‘The Identity Crisis within the IS Discipline: Deﬁning and Communicating
the Discipline’s Core Properties’, MIS Quarterly, 27(2): 183–94.
Benko, C. (1992). ‘If Information System Outsourcing is the Solution, What is the Problem?’,
Journal of Systems Management, 43(11): 32–5.
Bennett, J. (1983). Building Decision Support Systems. Reading: Addison-Wesley.
Bjorn-Andersen, N. (1984). ‘Challenge to Certainty’, in T. Bemelmans (ed.), Beyond Produc-
tivity: Information Systems Development for Organizational Effectiveness. North-Holland,
Amsterdam: 1–8.
Blumenthal, S. C. (1969). Management Information Systems: A Framework for Planning and
Development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Bostrom, R., and Heinen, S. (1977). ‘MIS Problems and Failures: A Sociotechnical Perspec-
tive—Part I: The Causes’, MIS Quarterly, 1(3): 17–32.
Brooker, W. (1965). ‘The Total Systems Myth’, in J. C. Wetherbe, V. T. Dock, and
S. L. Mandell (1988) Readings in Information Systems: A Managerial Perspective. Eagan,
MN: West Publishing.
Brown, C. V., and Magill, S. U. (1994). ‘Alignment of the IS Function with the Enterprise:
Toward a Model of Antecedents’, MIS Quarterly, 18(4): 371–403.
Brynjolfsson, E., and Hitt, L. (1996). ‘Paradox lost? Firm-Level Evidence of the Returns on
Information Systems Spending’, Management Science, 42: 541–58.
Buckingham, R. A., Hirschheim, R. A., Land, F. F., and Tully, C. J. (1987). ‘Information
Systems Curriculum: A Basis for Course Design’, in R. A. Buckingham et al. (eds.),
Information Systems Education: Recommendations and Implementation. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 14–133.
Caminer, D., Aris J., Hermon, P., and Land, F. (1998). LEO: The Incredible Story of the World’s
First Business Computer. New York: McGraw Hill.
Canning, R. C. (1979). ‘The Analysis of User Needs’, EDP Analyzer, 17(1).
Cash, J. I., and Konsynski, B. R. (1985). ‘IS Redraws Competitive Boundaries’, Harvard
Business Review, 63(2): 134–42.
——and Lawrence, P. (eds.) (1989). The Information Systems Research Challenge: Qualitative
Research Methods—Vol. 1. Boston, MA: Harvard University Press.
Cavaye, A. L. M. (1995). ‘User Participation in System Development Revisited’. Information &
Management, 28: 311–23.
Chan, Y. E., Huff, S. L., Barclay, D. W., and Copeland, D. G. (1997). ‘Business Strategy
Orientation, Information Systems Orientation and Strategic Alignment’, Information Sys-
tems Research, 8(2): 125–50.
Chatﬁeld, A., and Yetton, P. (2000). ‘Strategic Payoffs from EDI as a Function of EDI
Embeddedness’, Journal of Management Information Systems, 16(4): 195–224.
Chau, Y. K., and Jim, C. F. (2002). ‘Adoption of Electronic Data Interchange in Small and
Medium Enterprise’, Journal of Global Information Management, 10(4): 61–85.
Checkland, P. (1972). ‘Towards a Systems-Based Methodology for Real-World Problem-
Solving’, Journal of Applied Systems Engineering, 3(2): 87–116.
——(1981). Systems Thinking, Systems Practice. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
——(1999). Soft Systems Methodology: A Thirty Year Retrospective. Chichester: John Wiley.
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
51

Checkland, P. and Holwell, S. (1998). Information, Systems and Information Systems: Making
Sense of the Field. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
——and Scholes, J. (1990). Soft Systems Methodology in Action. Chichester: John Wiley &
Sons.
Cheon, M., Lee, C., and Grover, V. (1992). ‘Research in MIS—Points of Work and Reference:
A Replication and Extension of the Culnan and Swanson Study’, Data Base, 23(2): 21–9.
Chervany, N. L., Dickson, G. W., and Kozar, K. (1972). ‘An Experimental Gaming Framework
for Investigating the Inﬂuence of Management Information Systems on Decision Effective-
ness’, MISRC Working Paper No. 71–12, Management Information Systems Research
Center, University of Minnesota, MN.
Chin, W. W., Gopal, A., and Salisbury, W. D. (1997). ‘Advancing the Theory of Adaptive
Structuration: The Development of a Scale to Measure Faithfulness of Appropriation’,
Information Systems Research, 8(4): 342–67.
Churchman, C. W. (1971). The Design of Inquiring Systems. New York: Basic Books.
——(1979). The Systems Approach and Its Enemies. New York: Basic Books.
Citurs, A. B., and Yoo, Y. (1999). ‘Development of Expertise Coordination Patterns in
Electronic Teams’, Presented at the 1999 Academy of Management Meeting, Chicago, IL.
Clark, T. D., Zmud, R. W. and McCray, G. E. (1995). ‘The Outsourcing of Information
Services: Transforming the Nature of Business in the Information Industry’, Journal of
Information Technology, 10(4): 221–37.
Clemons, E. K. (1986), ‘Information Systems for Sustaining Competitive Advantage’, Infor-
mation & Management, 3 (October): 131–6.
Coleman, R. J., and Riley, M. J. (eds.) (1973). MIS: Management Dimensions. San Francisco,
CA: Holden Day.
Cooper, R. (1988). ‘Review of Management Information Systems Research: A Management
Support Perspective’, Information Processing & Management, 24(1): 73–102.
——and Zmud, R. W. (1990). ‘Information Technology Implementation Research: A Tech-
nology Diffusion Approach’, Management Science, 36(2): 123–39.
Cougar, J. D. (1973). ‘Curriculum Recommendations for Undergraduate Programs in Infor-
mation Systems’, Communications of the ACM, 16(12): 727–49.
Culnan, M. (1986). ‘The Intellectual Development of Management Information Systems,
1972–1982: A Co-Citation Analysis’, Management Science, 32(2): 156–72.
——(1987). ‘Mapping the Intellectual Structure of MIS, 1980–1985: A Co-Citation Analysis’,
MIS Quarterly, 11(3): 341–53.
——and Swanson, E. B. (1986). ‘Research in Management Information Systems, 1980–1984:
Points of Work and Relevance’, MIS Quarterly, 10(3): 286–301.
Daniels, A., and Yeates, D. A. (1971). Basic Training in Systems Analysis. 2nd edn, London:
Pitman.
Davenport, T., and Prusack, L. (1997). Information Ecology. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Davis, F. D. (1989). ‘Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use, and User Acceptance of
Information Technology’, MIS Quarterly, 13(3): 319–39.
——and Venkatesh, V. (2000). ‘A Theoretical Extension of the Technology Acceptance
Model: Four Longitudinal Field Studies’, Management Science, 46(2): 186–204.
Davis, G. (1974). Management Information Systems. New York: McGraw-Hill.
——(1980). ‘A Systematic Evaluation of Publications for Promotion of MIS Academics’,
Proceedings of the First Conference on Information Systems, Philadelphia.
52
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

——(1982). ‘Strategies for Requirements Determination’, IBM Systems Journal, 21(1): 4–30.
——(2000). ‘Information Systems Conceptual Foundations: Looking Backward and Forward’,
in R. Baskerville, J. Stage, and J. DeGross (eds.), Organizational and Social Perspectives on
Information Technology. Boston, MA: Kluwer Publishers, 61–82.
——and Everest, G. (eds.) (1976). Readings in the Management of Information Systems.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
——and Olson, M. (1985). Management Information Systems: Conceptual Foundations,
Structure, and Development, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Dearden, J. (1972). ‘MIS is a Mirage’, Harvard Business Review (January–February): 90–9.
DeGreene, K. (1973). Sociotechnical Systems: Factors in Analysis, Design and Management.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
DeLone, W. H., and McLean, E. R. (1992). ‘Information Systems Success: The Quest for the
Dependent Variable’, Information Systems Research, 3: 60–95.
DeMarco, T. (1978). Structured Analysis and Systems Speciﬁcation. New York: Yourdon Press.
Dennis, A., George, J., Jessup, L., Nunamaker, J., and Vogel, D. (1988). ‘Information Tech-
nology to Support Electronic Meetings’, MIS Quarterly, 12(4): 591–624.
DeSanctis, G. (2003). ‘The Social Life of Information Systems Research’, Journal of the
Association for Information Systems, 4(7): 360–76.
——Dickson, G., and Price, R. (2000). ‘Information Technology Management’, in Information
Technology and the Future Enterprise: New Models for Managers. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
——and Poole, M. S. (1994). ‘Capturing the Complexity in Advanced Technology Use:
Adaptive Structuration Theory’, Organization Science, 5(2): 121–47.
Dibbern, J., Goles, T., Hirschheim, R., and Jayatilaka, B. (2004). ‘Information Systems Out-
sourcing: A Survey and Analysis of the Literature’, Database, 35(4): 6–102.
Dickson, G. (1968). ‘Management Information-Decision Systems’, Business Horizons, 11
(December): 17–26.
——(1981). ‘Management Information Systems: Evolution and Status’, in M. Yovits (ed.),
Advances in Computers. New York: Academic Press.
——(1982). ‘Management Information Systems: Evolution and Status’, MISRC Working
Paper Series, University of Minnesota, 81–02.
——Benbasat, I., and King, W. R. (1982). ‘The MIS Area: Problems, Challenges, and Oppor-
tunities’, Data Base, 14(1): 7–12.
——Senn, J. A., and Chervany, N. L. (1977). ‘Research in Management Information Systems:
The Minnesota Experiments’, Management Science, 23: 913–23.
——Emery, J. C., Ives, B., King, W. R., and McFarlan, F. W. (1993). ‘Professional Societies:
A Service to Members and Professional Leadership’, MIS Quarterly, 17(1): iii–vi.
Doll, W. J., and Torkzadeh, G. (1988). ‘The Measurement of End-User Computing Satisfac-
tion’, MIS Quarterly, 12(2).
Emery, J., and Sprague, C. (1972). ‘MIS: A Mirage or Misconception?’, Harvard Business
Review, 50(3): 22–3.
Falaleeva, N. (2003). ‘Antecedents to Backsourcing’, in Proceedings of the Americas Conference
on Information Systems.
Ferry, G. (2003). A Computer Called LEO: Lyons Teashops and the World’s First Ofﬁce
Computer. London: Fourth Estate.
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
53

Fichman, R. G. (2000). ‘The Diffusion and Assimilation of Information Technology Innova-
tions’, in R. W. Zmud (ed.), Framing the Domains of IT Management: Projecting the Future
through the Past. Cincinnati, OH: Pinnaﬂex Publishing, 105–28.
Fitzgerald, G., and Willcocks, L. P. (1994). ‘Outsourcing Information Technology: Contracts
and Client/Vendor Relationships’, Working Paper RDP94/10. Oxford Institute of Informa-
tion Management.
——Hirschheim, R., Mumford, E., and Wood-Harper, T. (1985). ‘Information Systems
Research Methodology: An Introduction’, in E. Mumford, R. Hirschheim, G. Fitzgerald
and T. Wood-Harper (eds.), Research Methods in Information Systems. Amsterdam: North
Holland, 3–9.
Friedman, A., and Cornford, D. (1989). Computer Systems Development: History, Organiza-
tion and Implementation. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
Furst, S., Blackburn, R., and Rosen, B. (1999). ‘Virtual Team Effectiveness: A Proposed
Research Agenda’, Information Systems Journal, 9(4): 249–69.
Gable, G., Gregor, S., and Smyth, R. (eds.) (2008). The Information Systems Academic
Discipline in Australia. Canberra: ANU Press.
Galliers, R. D. (2003). ‘Change as Crisis of Growth? Toward a Trans-disciplinary view of
Information Systems as a Field of Study’, Journal of the Association for Information Systems.
4(6): 337–51.
——and Land, F. F. (1987). ‘Choosing an Appropriate Information Systems Research Meth-
odology’, Communications of the ACM, 30(11): 900–2.
——and Meadows J. (2003). ‘A Discipline Divided: Globalization and Parochialism in Infor-
mation Systems Research’, Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 11
(5): 108–17.
——and Whitley, E. (2007). ‘Vive les differences? Developing a Proﬁle of European Informa-
tion Systems Research as a Basis for International Comparison’, European Journal of
Information Systems, 16: 20–35.
Gane, C., and Sarson, T. (1979). Structured Systems Analysis: Tools and Techniques. Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
George, J., Valacich, J., and Valor, J. (2005). ‘Does Information Systems Still Matter: Lessons
for a Maturing Discipline’, Communications of the AIS, 16: 219–32.
Gillenson, M. A., and Stutz, J. D. (1991). ‘Academic Issues in MIS: Journals and Books’, MIS
Quarterly, 15(4): 447–52.
Gorry, G., and Scott-Morton, M. (1971). ‘A Framework for Management Information
Systems’, Sloan Management Review (Fall): 55–70.
Gray, P., Vogel, D., and Beauclair, R. (1990). ‘Assessing GDSS Empirical Research’, European
Journal of Operational Research, 46(2): 162–76.
Gregory, R., and Van Horn, R. (1960). Automatic Data-Processing Systems. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth.
Grover, V., Cheon, M. J., and Teng, J. T. C (1996). ‘The Effect of Service Quality and
Partnership on the Outsourcing of Information Systems Functions’, Journal of Manage-
ment Information System, 12: 89–116.
Gupta, U. G., and Gupta, A. (1992). ‘Outsourcing the IS Function: Is It Necessary for Your
Organisation?’ Information Systems Management (Summer): 44–50.
Heeks, R. (2002). ‘Information Systems and Developing Countries: Failure, Successes, and
Local Improvisations’, The Information Society, 18(2): 101–12.
54
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

Heikkila, J. (1995). ‘The Diffusion of a Learning Intensive Technology into Organizations:
The Case of PC Technology’, Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Computer Science,
University of Tampere.
Heiskanen, A. (1994). ‘Issues and Factors Affecting the Success and Failure of a Student
Record System Development Process: A Longitudinal Investigation Based on Reﬂection-in-
Action’, Ph.D. Dissertation, Helsinki School of Economics and Business Administration,
Helsinki.
Henderson, J., and Venkatraman, N. (1992). Strategic Alignment: A Model for Organizational
Tranformation through Information Technology’, in T. A. Kochan and M. E. Useem (eds.),
Transforming Organisations. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 97–117.
Hevner, A. R., Berndt D. J., and Studnicki, J. (2000). ‘Strategic Information Systems Planning
with Box Structures’, IEEE Proceeding of the 33rd Hawaii International Conference on
Systems Science, Hawaii, January.
Hirschheim, R. (1985), ‘User Experiences with and Assessment of Participative Systems
Design’, MIS Quarterly, 9(4): 295–303.
——(1998). ‘Backsourcing: An Emerging Trend?’, Infoserver, September, <http://www.out
sourcing-academics.com/backsourcing.html>.
——and Klein, H. (2003). ‘Crisis in the IS Field? A Critical Reﬂection on the State of the
Discipline’, Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 4(5): 237–93.
————and Lyytinen, K. (1995). Information Systems Development and Data Modeling:
Conceptual and Philosophical Foundations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——————(1996). ‘Exploring the Intellectual Structures of Information Systems Develop-
ment: A Social Action Theoretic Analysis’, Accounting, Management and Information
Technologies, 6(1/2): 1–64.
——and Lacity, M. (2000). ‘Information Technology Insourcing: Myths and Realities’, Com-
munications of the ACM, 43(2): 99–107.
——Newman, M., Loebeckke, C., and Valor, J. (2007). ‘Offshoring and the Implications for
the IS Discipline: Where Perception meets Reality’, Communications of the Association for
Information Systems, 20(51): 824–35.
Hitt, L., and Brynjolfsson, E. (1996). ‘Productivity, Proﬁt and Consumer Welfare: Three
Different Measures of Information Technology’s Value’. MIS Quarterly (June): 1–23.
Huber, G. P. (1983). ‘Cognitive Style as a Basis for MIS and DSS Designs: Much Ado About
Nothing?’, Management Science, 29(5): 567–77.
——(1990). ‘A Theory of the Effects of Advanced Information Technologies on Organizational
Design, Intelligence, and Decision Making’, Academy of Management Review, 15(1):
47–71.
Hunter, M. G., and Beck, J. E. (2000). ‘Using Repertory Grids to Conduct Cross-Cultural
Information Systems Research’, Information Systems Research, 11: 93–101.
Iacovou, C. L., Benbasat, I., and Dexter, A. S. (1995). ‘Electronic Data Interchange and Small
Organizations: Adoption and Impact of Technology’, MIS Quarterly, 19(4): 465–85.
Iivari, J., and Lyytinen, K. (1999). ‘Research on Information Systems Development in Scan-
dinavia’, Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 10(1/2): 135–85.
Ives, B., Hamilton, S., and Davis, G. (1980). ‘A Framework for Research in Computer-Based
Management Information Systems’, Management Science, 26(9): 910–34.
——and Learmonth, G. (1984). ‘The Information System as a Competitive Weapon’, Com-
munications of the ACM, 27(12): 1193–201.
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
55

Ives, B., and Olsen, M. H. (1984). ‘User Involvement and MIS Research: A Review of
Research’, Management Science, 30(5): 586–603.
————and Baroudi, J. (1983). ‘The Measurement of User Information Satisfaction’, Com-
munications of the CACM, 26(10): 785–93.
——Valacich, J., Watson, R. T., Zmud. R. et al. (2002). ‘What Every Business Student Needs to
Know about Information Systems’, Communications of the Association for Information
Systems, 9.
——Parks, M. S., Porra, J., and Silva, L. (2004). ‘Phylogeny and Power in the IS Domain: A
Response to Benbasat and Zmud’s Call for Returning to the IT Artifact’, Journal of the
Association for Information Systems, 5(3): 108–24.
Jackson, W. M., and Nath, R. (1989). ‘Publication Patterns of MIS Researchers’, Interface, 11
(2): 15–20.
Jarvenpaa, S., Knoll, K., and Leidner, D. (1998). ‘Is Anybody Out There? Antecedents of Trust
in Global Virtual Teams’, Journal of Management Information Systems, 14(4): 29–64.
Kaplan, B., Truex, D., Wastell, D., Wood-Harper, T., and DeGross, J. (eds.) (2004). Informa-
tion Systems Research: Relevant Theory and Informed Practice. Boston, MA: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Kauffman, R. J., and Kriebel, C. H. (1988). ‘Modeling and Measuring the Business Value of
Information Technology’, in Measuring the Business Value of Information Technologies.
Washington, DC: ICIT Press.
Keen, P. (1980). ‘MIS Research: Reference Disciplines and Cumulative Tradition’, in
E. McLean (ed.), Proceedings of the First International Conference on Information Systems,
Philadelphia, 17–31.
——(1981). ‘Information Systems and Organizational Change’, Communications of the ACM,
24(1): 24–33.
——(1987). ‘MIS Research: Current Status, Trends and Needs’, in R. Buckingham, R. Hirsch-
heim, F. Land, and C. Tully (eds.), Information Systems Education: Recommendations and
Implementation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1–13.
——(1991). ‘Relevance and Rigor in Information Systems Research: Improving Quality,
Conﬁdence, Cohesion, and Impact’, in H. E. Nissen, H. K. Klein, and R. Hirschheim
(eds.), Information Systems Research: Contemporary Approaches and Emergent Traditions.
Amsterdam: North-Holland, 27–49.
——and Scott-Morton, M. (1978). Decision Support Systems: An Organizational Perspective.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Kemerer, C. (1992). ‘How the Learning Curve Affects CASE Tool Adoption’, IEEE Software, 9
(3): 23–6.
King, J., and Lyytinen, K. (eds.) (2006). Information Systems: The State of the Field. Chiche-
ster: J. Wiley & Sons.
Klein, H. K., and Hirschheim, R. (2008). ‘The Structure of the IS Discipline Reconsidered:
Implications and Reﬂections from a Community of Practice Perspective’, Information &
Organization, 18(4): 280–302.
Klepper, R. (1995). ‘The Management of Partnering Development in I/S Outsourcing’,
Journal of Information Technology, 10(4): 248–57.
Kling, R., and Scacchi, W. (1982). ‘The Web of Computing: Computer Technology as Social
Organization’, Advances in Computers, 21: 1–90.
Kolb, D. (1984). Experiential Learning: Experience as the Source of Learning and Development.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
56
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

Kramer, K. L., and King, J. L. (1988). ‘Computer-Based Systems for Cooperative Work and
Group Decision Making’, ACM Computer Surveys, 20: 329–380.
Kumar, K. (1997). ‘Program Chair’s Statement’, in K. Kumar and J. DeGross (eds.), Proceed-
ings of the Eighteenth International Conference on Information Systems, Atlanta, GA, 15–17
December 1997, xvii–xix.
Kwon, T. H. and Zmud, R. W. (1987). ‘Unifying the Fragmented Models of Information
Systems Implementation’, in R. J. Boland and R. A. Hirschheim (eds.), Critical Issues in
Information Systems Research. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 227–51.
Lacity, M., and Hirschheim, R. (1993). Information Systems Outsourcing: Myths, Metaphors
and Realities. Chichester: J. Wiley & Sons.
——Khan, S. A., and Willcocks, L. P. (2009). ‘A Review of the IT Outsourcing Literature:
Insights for Practice’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 18(3): 130–46.
Land, F., and Hirschheim, R. (1983). ‘Participative Systems Design: Rationale, Tools and
Techniques’, Journal of Applied Systems Analysis, 10: 91–107.
Langefors, B. (1966). Theoretical Analysis of Information Systems. Lund: Studentlitteratur.
——(1973). Theoretical Analysis of Information Systems. Philadelphia, PA: Auerbach.
——(1974). ‘Information Systems’, in Information Processing 74. Amsterdam: North-Holland,
937–45.
Lee, A. (1999a). ‘The MIS Field, the Publication Process, and the Future Course of MIS
Quarterly’, MIS Quarterly, 23(1): v–xi.
——(1999b). ‘Rigor and Relevance in MIS Research: Beyond the Approach of Positivism
Alone’, MIS Quarterly, 23(1): 29–33.
——Liebenau, J., and DeGross, J. (eds.) (1997). Information Systems and Qualitative Research.
London: Chapman & Hall.
Li, D. (ed.) (1972). Design and Management of Information Systems. Chicago, IL: SRA Publishers.
Loh, L., and Venkatraman, N. (1992). ‘Diffusion of Information Technology Outsourcing:
Inﬂuence Sources and the Kodak Effect’, Information Systems Research, 3(4): 334–78.
————(1995). ‘An Empirical Study of IT Outsourcing: Beneﬁts, Risks and Performance
Implications’, International Conference of Information Systems (ICIS), Amsterdam.
Lucas, H. (1999). ‘The State of the Information Systems Field’, Communications of the AIS,
5(1).
Lucas, H. C., Jr. (1973). ‘A Descriptive Model of Information Systems in the Context of the
Organization’, Proceedings of the Wharton Conference on Research on Computers in
Organizations, Data Base (Winter): 27–36.
Lyytinen, K. (1987). ‘A Taxonomic Perspective of Information Systems Development: Theo-
retical Constructs and Recommendations’, in R. Boland and R. Hirschheim (eds.), Critical
Issues in Information Systems Research. Chichester: Wiley, 3–41.
——(1999). ‘Empirical Research in Information Systems: On the Relevance of Practice in
Thinking of IS Research’, MIS Quarterly, 23(1): 25–7.
——and King, J. (2004). ‘Nothing at the Center? Academic Legitimacy in the Field of
Information Systems’, Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 5(6).
————(2006). ‘The Theoretical Core and Academic Legitimacy: A Response to Professor
Weber’, Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 7(10).
——and Yoo, Y. (2002). ‘Introduction to the Special Issue on Issues and Challenges in
Ubiquitous Computing’, Communications of the ACM, 45(12) (December): 62–5.
McFarlan, F. W. (1981). ‘Portfolio Approach to Information Systems’, Harvard Business
Review 59(5): 142–50.
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
57

McFarlan, F. W. (1984). ‘Information Technology Changes the Way You Compete’, Harvard
Business Review (May–June): 98–103.
Mahmood, M., and Mann, G. (1993). ‘Measuring the Organizational Impact of Information
Technology Investment: An Exploratory Study’, Journal of Management Information
Systems 10(1): 97–122.
Markus, M. L. (1983). ‘Power, Politics, and MIS Implementation’, Communications of the
ACM 26(6): 430–44.
——(1997). ‘The Qualitative Difference in Information Systems Research and Practice’, in
A. Lee, J. Liebenau, and J. DeGross (eds.), Information Systems and Qualitative Research.
London: Chapman & Hall, 11–27.
Markus, M. L. (1999). ‘Thinking the Unthinkable: What Happens if the IS Field as We Know
it Goes away?’, in W. Currie and R. Galliers (eds.), Rethinking MIS. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 175–203.
——(2000). ‘Special Issue on Intensive Research in Information Systems: Using Qualitative,
Interpretive, and Case Methods to Study Information Technology—Second Installment,
Foreword’, MIS Quarterly, 24(3).
——and Lee, A. S. (1999). ‘Special Issue on Intensive Research in Information Systems: Using
Qualitative, Interpretive, and Case Methods to Study Information Technology; Forward’,
MIS Quarterly, 23(1): 1–2.
————(2000). ‘Using Qualitative, Interpretive, and Case Methods to Study Information
Technology’, MIS Quarterly, 24(1).
——and Robey, D. (1988). ‘Information Technology and Organizational Change: Causal
Structure in Theory and Research’, Management Science, 34(5): 583–98.
Mason, R., and Mitroff, I. (1973). ‘A Program for Research on Management Information
Systems’, Management Science, 19(5): 475–87.
Meyer, N. D. (1994). ‘A Sensible Approach to Outsourcing’, Information Systems Manage-
ment 11(4): 23–7.
Mingers, J., and Stowell, F. (eds.) (1997). Information Systems: An Emerging Discipline?
Maidenhead: McGraw-Hill.
Mitroff, I. (1983). Stakeholders of the Organisational Mind: Toward a New View of Organisa-
tional Policy Making. London: Jossey-Bass.
——and Sagasti, F. (1973). ‘Epistemology as General Systems Theory: An Approach to the
Design of Complex Decision-Making Experiments’, Philosophy of Social Sciences, 3:
117–34.
Moore, G., and Benbasat, I. (1991). ‘Development of an Instrument to Measure the Percep-
tions of Adopting an Information Technology Innovation’, Information Systems Research,
2(3): 192–222.
Morgan, G. (1986). Images of Organizations. London: Sage.
Mumford, E. (1974). ‘Computer Systems and Work Design: Problems of Philosophy and
Vision’, Personnel Review, 3(2): 40–9.
——(1981). ‘Participative Systems Design: Structure and Method’, Systems, Objectives, Solu-
tions, 1(1): 5–19.
——(1983). Designing Human Systems: The ETHICS Method. Manchester: Manchester Busi-
ness School Press.
——and Henshall, D. (1978). A Participative Approach to the Design of Computer Systems.
London: Associated Business Press.
58
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

——Hirschheim, R., Fitzgerald, G., and Wood-Harper, T. (eds.) (1985). Research Methods in
Information Systems. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Myers, M., and Walsham, G. (1998). ‘Exemplifying Interpretive Research in Information
Systems: An Overview’, Journal of Information Technology, 13: 33–4.
——and Tan, F. B. (1997). ‘Beyond Models of National Culture in Information Systems
Research’, Journal of Global Information Management, 10(1): 24–32.
Newman, M., and Rosenberg, D. (1985). ‘Systems Analysts and the Politics of Organizational
Control’, Omega, 13(3): 393–406.
Nissen, H-K., Klein, H., and Hirschheim, R. (eds.) (1991). Information Systems Research:
Contemporary Approaches and Emergent Themes. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Nolan, R. L. (1979). ‘Managing the Crises in Data Processing’, Harvard Business Review
(March–April): 115–26.
——and Wetherbe, J. C. (1980). ‘Toward a Comprehensive Framework for MIS Research’,
MIS Quarterly, 4(2): 1–19.
Nunamaker, J., Chen, M., and Purdin, T. (1991). ‘Systems Development in Information
Systems Research’, Information Systems Research, 7(3): 89–106.
——Cougar, J. D., and Davis, G. B. (1982). ‘Information Systems Curriculum Recommenda-
tions for the 80’s’, Undergraduate and Graduate Programs: A Report of the ACM Curricu-
lum Committee.
Nygaard, K. (1975). ‘The Trade Unions New Users of Research’, Personnel Review, 4(2).
Orlikowski, W., and Baroudi, J. (1991). ‘Studying Information Technology in Organizations:
Research Approaches and Assumptions’, Information Systems Research, 2(1): 1–28.
Parsons, G. L. (1983). ‘Information Techonology: A New Competitive Weapon’, Sloan
Management Review, 25(1).
Porter, M., and Millar, V. (1985). ‘How Information Gives you Competitive Advantage’,
Harvard Business Review, 63(4): 149–60.
Purba, R. (2002). ‘Greening the Supply Chain: A New Initiative in South East Asia’, Interna-
tional Journal of Operations and Production Management, 22: 632–55.
Rackoff, N., Wiseman, C., and Ullrich, W. (1985). ‘Information Systems for Competitive
Advantage: Implementation of a Planning Process’, MIS Quarterly, 9(4): 285–94.
Rajkumar, T. M., and Dawley, D. L. (1998). ‘Problems and Issues in Offshore Development of
Software’, in L. P. Willcocks and M. C. Lacity (eds.,) Strategic Sourcing of Information
Systems: Perspectives and Practices. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 369–86.
——and Mani, R. V. S. (2001). ‘Offshore Software Development: The View from Indian
Suppliers’, Information Systems Management (Spring): 63–73.
Rao, V. S., and Jarvenpaa, S. L. (1991). ‘Computer Support of Groups: Theory-Based Models
for GDSS Research’, Management Science, 37(10): 1347–62.
Rappaport, A. (1968). ‘Management Information Systems: Another Perspective’, Manage-
ment Science, 15(4): B133–6.
Reponen, T. (1993). ‘Strategic Information Systems: A Conceptual Analysis’, The Journal of
Strategic Information Systems, 2.
Roach, S. S. (1988). ‘Technology and the Service Sector: America’s Hidden Competitive
Advantage’, in B. Guile and J. B. Quinn (eds.), Technology in Services. Washington,
DC: National Academy Press, 125–45.
——(1989). ‘The Case of the Missing Technology Payback’, Tenth International Conference on
Information Systems. Boston, December.
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
59

Robey, D. (1983). ‘Cognitive Style and DSS Design: A Comment on Huber’s Paper’, Manage-
ment Science, 29(5): 580–2.
——(1987). ‘Implementation and the Organizational Impacts of Information Systems’, Inter-
faces, 17: 72–84.
——(1996). ‘Diversity in Information Systems Research: Threat, Promise, and Responsibility’,
Information Systems Research, 7(4): 400–8.
——(2003). ‘Identity, Legitimacy and the Dominant Research Paradigm: An Alternative
Prescription for the IS Discipline’, Journal of the Association for Information Systems,
4(7): 352–9.
Sabherwal, R., Hirschheim, R., and Goles, T. (2001). ‘The Dynamics of Alignment: Insights
from a Punctuated Equilibrium Model’, Organization Science, 12(2): 179–97.
Sandberg, A. (1985). ‘Socio-technical Design, Trade Union Strategies and Action Research’, in
E. Mumford, R. Hirschheim, G. Fitzgerald, and A. T. Wood-Harper (eds.), Research
Methods in Information Systems. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 79–92.
Sanders, D. (1970). Computers and Management: In a Changing Society. New York: McGraw-
Hill.
Saunders, C. (2000). ‘Virtual Teams: Piecing Together the Puzzle’, in R. Zmud (ed.), Framing
the Domain of IT Management: Projecting the Future through the Past. Cincinnati, OH:
Pinnaﬂex.
Schäfer, G. et al. (ed.) (1988). Functional Analysis of Ofﬁce Requirements: A Multiperspective
Approach. Chichester: Wiley.
Scott Morton, M. S. (1971). Management Decision Systems: Computer-Based Support for
Decision Making. Boston, Mass.: Graduate School of Business Administration, Harvard
University.
Shackel, B. (1997). ‘Human-Computer Interaction: Whence and Whither’, Journal of the
American Society for Information Science, 48(11): 970–86.
Sharpe, W. (1969). The Economics of Computers. New York: Columbia University Press.
Sipior, J. C. (1997). ‘Congratulations to our ACM Fellows’. DATA BASE, 28(1): 14–16.
Somogyi, E., and Galliers, R. (1987). ‘Applied Information Technology: From Data Processing
to Strategic Information Systems’, Journal of Information Technology, 2(1): 30–41.
Sprague, R. (1980). ‘A Framework for the Development of Decision Support Systems’, MIS
Quarterly, 4(4): 1–24.
——and Carlson, E. D. (1982). Building Effective Decision Support Systems. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Stowell, F. (ed.) (1995). Information Systems Provision: The Contribution of Soft Systems
Methodology. Maidenhead: McGraw-Hill.
Straub, D., Loch, K., Evaristo, R., Karahanna, E., and Strite, M. (2002). ‘Toward a Theory-
Based Measurement of Culture’, Journal of Global Information Management, 10(1): 13–23.
Swanson, E. B. (1990). ‘Distributed Decision Support Systems: A Perspective’, Proceedings of
the 23rd Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 111: 129–36, Hawaii,
January.
——and Ramiller, N. (1993). ‘Information Systems Research Thematics: Submissions to a
New Journal, 1987–1992’, Information Systems Research, 4(4): 299–330.
Tan, M., and Teo, T. S. H. (2000). ‘Factors Inﬂuencing the Adoption of Internet Banking’,
Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 1: 1–42.
Teichroew, D. (1972). ‘A Survey of Languages for Stating Requirements for Computer Based
Information Systems’, Proceedings of the Fall Joint Computer Conference.
60
RUDY HIRSCHHEIM AND HEINZ K. KLEIN

——(1974). ‘Improvements in the System Life Cycle’, Information Processing 74. Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
Teo, T., and King, W. (1999). ‘An Empirical Study of the Integration Business Planning and
Information Systems Planning’, European Journal of Information Systems, 8(3): 200–1.
Todd, P., and Benbasat, I. (1992). ‘The Use of Information in Decision Making: An Experi-
mental Investigation of the Impact of Computer-Based Decision Aids’, MIS Quarterly, 16
(3): 373–93.
————(1999). ‘Evaluating the Impact of DSS, Cognitive Effort, and Incentives on Strategy
Selection’, Information Systems Research, 10(4): 357.
Tolliver, E. M. (1971). ‘Myths of Automated Management Systems’, Journal of Systems
Management, 22(3): 29–32.
Tricker, R. (1999). ‘The Cultural Context of Information Management’, in W. L. Currie and
R. Galliers (eds.), Rethinking Management Information Systems. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 393–416.
Venkatraman, N. (1991). ‘IT-induced Business Reconﬁguration’, in M. S. Scott-Morton (ed.),
The Corporation of the 1990s: Information Technology and Organizational Transformation.
New York: Oxford University Press, 122–58.
Walsham, G., and Sahay, S. (2006). ‘Research on Information Systems for Developing
Countries: Current Landscape and Future Prospects’, Information Technology and Devel-
opment, 12(1): 7–24.
Walstrom, K. A., Hardgrave, B. C., and Wilson, R. L. (1995). ‘Forums for Management
Information Systems Scholars’, Communications of the ACM, 38(3): 93–102.
Watson, E., Rosemann, M., and Stewart, G. (1999). ‘An Overview of Teaching and Research
Using SAP R/3’, in W. D. Haseman and D. L. Nazareth (eds.), Proceedings of the 5th
Americas Conference on Information Systems, Milwaukee.
Watson, H. J., Sousa, R. D., and Junglas, I. (2000). ‘Business School Deans Assess the Current
State of the IS Academic Field’, Communications of the AIS, 4.
Weber, R. (2006). ‘Reach and Grasp in the Debate over the IS Core: An Empty Hand?’ Journal
of the Association for Information Systems, 7(10).
Wilensky, H. (1967). Organizational Intelligence: Knowledge and Policy in Government and
Industry. New York: Basic Books.
Williamson, O. (1975). Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications.
New York: Free Press.
Young, S. (1968). ‘Organization as a Total System’, California Management Review, 10(3):
21–32.
Yourdon, E. (1978). Modern Structured Analysis. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Zmud, R. (1979). ‘Individual Difference and MIS Success: A Review of the Empirical Literature’,
Management Science, 25(10): 966–79.
——and Cox, J. F. (1979). ‘The Implementation Process: A Change Approach’. MIS Quarterly
(June): 35–43.
TRACING THE HISTORY OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEMS FIELD
61

This page intentionally left blank 

P A R T I I
...............................................................................................
THEORETICAL AND
METHODOLOGICAL
PERSPECTIVES
IN MIS
...............................................................................................
Part II includes nine chapters which consider a variety of theoretical and methodological
perspectives currently used in the MIS ﬁeld. The intellectual antecedents of these theories
are not found in the MIS ﬁeld, but in the more traditional disciplines of, for example,
sociology and philosophy. However, their relevance and applicability to MIS is without
question. The various contributions can be treated as ‘stand-alone’ although each theory
or methodology can be applied to a range of MIS-related practices, particularly if we
consider the wider implications of the discipline to include societal and environmental
factors.
This section begins with a chapter by Mingers (Chapter 3) raises important philo-
sophical and practical issues in undertaking research in the pursuit of knowledge,
including some of the questions and debates that are of interest within the philosophy
of IS. Five themes are identiﬁed: being systemic, being critical and realist, being
pluralist in approach, having a concern for truth and recognizing a variety of forms
of knowledge. This chapter demonstrates the importance of philosophical and practical
issues in research and the production of knowledge, and presents ﬁve propositions

which are the hallmarks for producing rigorous and relevant research in a complex
world. They include: adopting a systemic and holistic approach to the world; using
critical realism as an underpinning philosophical perspective; employing multiple
research methods to reﬂect the complexity of the real world; recognizing a variety of
forms of knowledge; and accepting concomitantly the importance of truth or warrant-
ability. It is interesting to contrast this chapter with our next chapter (4) by Checkland,
who presents his seminal work on systems thinking and soft systems methodology,
which has greatly inﬂuenced the development of the IS ﬁeld. The chapter examines
‘basic systems’ ideas and what it means to do ‘systems thinking’. A distinction is made
between ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ systems thinking, both of which are relevant in the creation of
an information system in a real-life situation. The development of the approach is
discussed to show how the ‘hard/soft’ distinction in the use of systems ideas is linked to
the Soft Systems Methodology (SSM) and how these ideas are relevant to the IS ﬁeld.
Delineating between hard/soft approaches to IS is noteworthy given that the European
tradition in IS draws heavily from the philosophical writings of various scholars, as we
shall see below.
The next seven chapters review leading theoretical perspectives including structura-
tion theory, institutional theory, Foucault’s ideas of techne and technology, critical
theory, hermeneutics, phenomenology, and post-structuralism. We begin with a
chapter by Jones that deals with structuration theory, which emerged as a signiﬁcant
development in European sociology in the late 1970s. The theory has its origins in
Berger and Luckman’s (1967) concept of the mutual constitution of society and
individuals. Other strands of structurational analysis are found in the work of Bourdieu
(1977), Bhaskar (1979), and Giddens (1991). In focusing on the contribution of
Giddens, Jones points out that structuration is a general theory of social organization,
and not one speciﬁc to IS, which has led to many studies in IS pursuing ideas and
debates that are ‘at odds’ with the work of Giddens. As information systems are seen
as social systems, which exist in social and organizational contexts that inﬂuence their
development and use, and are also implicated in sustaining and changing these
contexts, the theory potentially offers useful insights for the IS ﬁeld. Jones shows
that, in recent years, structuration has become an important theoretical lens for
many scholars in the organizational and IS ﬁelds, with contributions from such
leading IS scholars as Orlikowski and Robey (1991), DeSanctis and Poole (1994), and
Orlikowski and Yates (1994).
In Chapter 6, Currie considers institutional theory as an important contribution to
the IS ﬁeld. Noting that institutional theory has its roots in core disciplines of sociology,
economics, anthropology, and political science, its varied and complex concepts
provide an interesting and relevant backdrop for understanding IS phenomena. This
chapter provides an overview of institutional theory from the seminal papers of the
1970s to the more recent contributions which consider institutional change and
deinstitutionalization. In the IS ﬁeld, the ‘organization’ is often used as the primary
unit of analysis, where researchers operationalize institutional concepts as a lens to
interpret and analyse data. However, institutional theory also shows how macro-units
64
THEORETICAL AND METHODOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVES IN MIS

of analysis, i.e. regulatory, legal, and policy frameworks, are also important in inﬂuen-
cing and determining organizational and behavioural change. Equally, while institu-
tional theory is traditionally concerned with stability and persistence, information
technologies are often associated with rapid, and sometimes disruptive, societal and
organizational changes. The more recent work in institutional theory which considers
institutional entrepreneurship and change is therefore relevant for the IS ﬁeld, particu-
larly in understanding why many large-scale IT projects fail to become embedded in
highly institutionalized contexts, for example, in the healthcare sector. Willcocks and
Lioliou, in Chapter 7, continue our focus on theoretical perspectives by looking at the
contribution of Michel Foucault’s work, which they see as ‘unjustly neglected’ in the IS
ﬁeld. In particular, they assess Foucault’s views of techne and technology and argue that
IS could learn from a deeper Foucauldian genealogy. This chapter assumes a degree of
familiarity with Foucault’s main work, but not with its application to information and
communications technology.
Stahl (Chapter 8) continues the theme of applying theory to IS research by focusing
on the contribution of ‘critical theory’ or ‘critical research’. This chapter presents an
overview of the usage of critical theory in contemporary IS research and practice. The
author follows Klein (2009) in using the term ‘critical social information systems
research’ (CSISR) and reviews the growing body of work on CSISR to offer an in-
depth understanding of the meaning and history of this tradition. CSISR is character-
ized by the intention to change social reality and promote emancipation, which is a
departure from other research approaches and traditions. The CSISR discourse is
inﬂuenced by the philosophical writings of Jürgen Habermas, particularly in the light
of the ethical dimension of his work. See also Chapter 23. The chapter discusses
problems of the approach and ﬁnishes with a critical reﬂection CSISR in general and
this present narrative in particular.
In Chapter 9, Introna discusses the complex ideas surrounding hermeneutics which
emerged as an interest in the IS ﬁeld in the 1980s and 1990s through the work of
Richard Boland. Hermeneutics is the study of interpretation theory, and includes the
art of interpretation, as well as the theory and practice of interpretation. The author
claims the theory involves the ‘rendering meaningful of a text (object or phenomenon),
which has become obscured or “distanced” in some way, thereby making it no longer
immediately obvious’. Applied to the IS ﬁeld, it is noteworthy that IT which is a
repository of large amounts of data and information may lead to a form of distancing.
A distinction is made between IS research and computer science research, since the
former is largely a social science, ‘in which researchers are always in some sense
“distanced” from the social phenomena they are studying’. He continues with ideas
in the philosophy of social science in Chapter 10, with an exploration of phenomenol-
ogy, both in terms of its philosophical underpinnings and as a methodology. Phenom-
enology is widely used in management studies, notably in organizational analysis, and
the core disciplines of anthropology, sociology, history, psychology, among many
others. This chapter draws on literature on the phenomenological movement and its
relevance to the IS ﬁeld.
THEORETICAL AND METHODOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVES IN MIS
65

Our ﬁnal chapter in Part II is by Mitev and Howcroft, who address an omission in IS
research concerning the debate in social science on postmodernism and post-structur-
alism. They outline the fundamental arguments of this debate and draw attention to the
relevant discussions and disputes. In so doing, they introduce the basic ideas surround-
ing Actor Network Theory (ANT) and show its origins in post-structuralist debates in
the ﬁeld of science and technology studies (STS).
The diverse theories and methodologies in Part II are intended to provide the reader
with a ﬂavour of past, present, and future ideas and debates which are relevant to the IS
ﬁeld. Implicit in these contributions is the notion that IS is not simply about the
‘technical imperative’ but incorporates a rich tapestry of issues and concerns which are
central to social science. These theories and methods are therefore an invitation to IS
academics to broaden their repertoire of perspectives and approaches in undertaking IS
research, not least to provide greater depth in our understanding and appreciation of
how information systems are inﬂuenced by, and seek to inﬂuence, actions, behaviours,
and outcomes. Complementary readings to Part II of this volume are Mingers and
Willcocks (2004) and Mansell et al. (2007).
REFERENCES
Berger, P. L., and Luckmann, T. (1979). The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the
Sociology of Knowledge. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Bourdieu, P. (1977). Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bhaskar, R. (1979). The Possibility of Naturalism. Brighton: Harvester.
DeSanctis, G., and Poole, M. S. (1994). ‘Capturing the Complexity in Advanced Technology
Use: Adaptive Structuration Theory’, Organization Science, 5(2): 121–47.
Giddens, A. (1991). ‘Structuration Theory: Past, Present and Future’, in C. G. A Bryant and
D. Jary (eds.), Giddens’ Theory of Structuration: A Critical Appreciation. London: Routle-
dge, 201–21.
Klein, H. K. (2009). ‘Critical Social IS Research Today: A Reﬂection of Past Accomplishments
and Current Challenges’, in C. Brooke (ed.), Critical Management Perspectives on Informa-
tion Systems. Oxford: Butterworth Heinemann.
Mansell, R., Avgerou, C., Quah, D., and Silverstone, R. (2007). The Oxford Handbook of
Information and Communication Technologies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mingers, J., and Willcocks, L. P. (2004). Social Theory and Philosophy for Information Systems.
New York: Wiley.
Orlikowski, W. J., and Robey, D. (1991). ‘Information Technology and the Structuring of
Organizations’, Information Systems Research, 2(2): 143–9.
——and Yates, J. (1994). ‘Genre Repertoire: Examining the Structuring of Communicative
Practices in Organizations’, Administrative Science Quarterly, 39: 541–74.
66
THEORETICAL AND METHODOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVES IN MIS

c h a p t e r 3
...............................................................................................
THE TRUTH, THE WHOLE
TRUTH, AND NOTHING BUT
THE TRUTH: HIGH-
QUALITY RESEARCH IN
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
...............................................................................................
JOHN MINGERS
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
Our research careers usually begin by doing doctoral research. The objectives of a Ph.D.
are clearly stated—‘to make an original contribution to knowledge’—and this remains
the primary objective of all research. From this simple statement it would seem that the
nature of ‘knowledge’ is fundamental to conducting research. In order to be able to
contribute to knowledge we need to understand what knowledge is; what distinguishes
knowledge from mere opinion or belief; what kinds of things we can have knowledge
of; and how we might acquire knowledge. However, when we look at textbooks that
give guidance on methods for doing research, and this is one such, we rarely ﬁnd much
discussion of the nature of knowledge. An admittedly ad hoc survey of research
methods books that are easily available to me shows that none has a chapter on
knowledge and many do not even refer to it in the index (Bryman 2001; Bryman and
Bell 2003; Easterby Smith, Thorpe, and Jackson 2008; Creswell 2009), a useful excep-
tion being Lee and Lings (2008). How can they tell us how to discover knowledge if they
do not even tell us what it is?
This would not be so strange if knowledge were in fact a very straightforward matter
that everyone would agree on but this is far from the case as the literature on
epistemology or even knowledge management would show. ‘Knowledge’ is actually a
highly contentious and much debated subject and this may be precisely why such

books tend to ignore it—because any serious discussion would raise so many issues that
the research methods themselves would become lost. The assumption is that if the
methods are rigorously followed the result will be knowledge even if we cannot say
precisely what knowledge is.
Interestingly, knowledge is not the only fundamental concept that dare not speak its
name—another is truth. If we look at the literature of knowledge management then
there is actually much discussion of the nature of knowledge, although perhaps little
agreement. Surely a fundamental characteristic that distinguishes knowledge from
belief or prejudice is that it is true—philosophically, knowledge has traditionally been
deﬁned as true, justiﬁed belief. Yet within the knowledge management literature, for
example, there is almost no discussion of the nature of truth (Mingers 2008).
The aim of this chapter is to highlight some key themes that I believe are vital for
producing rigorous contributions to knowledge in answer to questions that are of real
signiﬁcance today. These themes are not at the level of particular research methods, or
even research paradigms, but concern the very scaffolding that underlies all research. To
begin with we need to consider philosophy and the role that it should play in IS research.
Broadly speaking, if science is reﬂective activity about the workings of the everyday
world then philosophy of science is reﬂective activity about the workings of science
itself. After this, I want to put forward ﬁve propositions concerning high-quality
research. First, that we approach the world systemically or holistically. That is, that
we recognize it is a complex web of interacting systems and that cutting it up reductio-
nistically into small isolated chunks is likely to destroy the very relationships and
interactions that actually matter. Second, that we adopt a particular philosophical
position—critical realism—that offers a way out of the sterile battle between positivism
and interpretivism that has so dogged IS research for many years (Mingers 2004a).
Third, and following on from the ﬁrst two, that we should be pluralist in our methodo-
logical approach. That is, we must recognize that the world is complex and multidi-
mensional, and that the objects of our knowledge take on many forms—material, social,
and cognitive—thus requiring a range of research methods. Fourth, that we need to be
concerned with truth as a distinguishing characteristic of knowledge and recognize that
truth itself has different forms dependent on the type of knowledge we wish to attain.
This brings us full-circle back to knowledge itself and the ﬁfth proposition which is that
we can validly talk of ‘knowing’ many different things, and the differing natures of the
objects of knowledge leads to different forms of knowledge and truth.
PHILOSOPHY AND IS RESEARCH
..................................................................................................................
I would like to begin by giving a brief review of the role of philosophy with respect to IS
research with the help of Figure 3.1 which draws in part on the ideas of both Bhaskar
(1978) and Checkland (1999).
68
JOHN MINGERS

We can begin in the bottom of Figure 3.1 with the ongoing ﬂux of events and ideas.
Following Bhaskar, we can term this the domain of the Actual, the actual occurrences
and non-occurrences of the everyday world. We can then see that these events are the
manifestations of underlying mechanisms or systems, often unobservable, which
through the interactions of their properties and powers generate the events. Bhaskar
terms this the domain of the Real. We should note two things: that the events are part
of the causal dance in that they can be triggers of the underlying mechanisms; and that
human beings are also part of this picture, being powerful generative mechanisms.
Moving up Figure 3.1 we can see that science emerges as a domain of reﬂective
action in which people try to understand and explain the workings of the everyday
world. This involves observation and interrogation of the Actual and the Real, as well as
attempts to test and validate theories and, in the case of action research, explicitly to
bring about change. In Bhaskar’s terms, this is the domain of the Empirical in which a
small subset of all the actual events that occur is captured for scientiﬁc activity.
We can now move to another meta-level and consider the emergence of philosophy,
more speciﬁcally the philosophy of science, as a domain of reﬂective action that
considers the nature of science and research and, in particular, tries to offer guidance
Flux of events and ideas
Generative mechanisms 
THE ACTUAL
THE REAL
THE EMPIRICAL
Research/science
Philosophy of Science
Ontology
Epistemology
Axiology
Methodology
FIGURE 3.1 The domains of Science and Philosophy with respect to the Real, the Actual, and the
Empirical
THE TRUTH, THE WHOLE TRUTH, AND NOTHING BUT THE TRUTH
69

about how science can and/or should be carried out. The main philosophical questions
that arise can be classiﬁed in terms of Mingers (2003a):
· Ontology: what kinds of objects or entities may be taken to exist, and what are their
types of properties or forms of being?
· Epistemology: what is our relationship, as human beings, to the objects of our
knowledge (including ourselves), and what distinguishes valid (i.e. true?) knowl-
edge from belief or opinion?
· Methodology: given the ﬁrst two, what methods should we use to acquire valid
knowledge?
· Axiology: what are the purposes or values of science? What are the ethical or moral
limits of science (if any?).
We can see from Figure 3.1 how these four elements relate to various aspects of the
world and of science. The whole of Figure 3.1 constitutes what Bhaskar would call the
domain of the Real.
A particular set of assumptions about these four questions can be called a paradigm
(Kuhn 1970; Burrell and Morgan 1979). Kuhn originally used the term to describe the
historical development of one set of theories (e.g. the theory of relativity) from another
(e.g. Newtonian physics) but now, especially in the social sciences, paradigms are often
seen to be coexisting. For much of the twentieth century the prevailing scientiﬁc
paradigm was empiricism, more speciﬁcally positivism, which sees science as limited
to explaining events that can be empirically observed. Events are expected to display
regularities or patterns that can be explained as being particular instances of universal
laws of the form ‘given certain conditions, whenever event X occurs then event Y will
occur’. Science is seen as the systematic observation of event regularities (Humean
causality), the description of these regularities in the form of general laws, and the
prediction of particular outcomes from the laws.
This view of science was extensively critiqued. The idea of pure, objective perception
and observation was exploded by psychologists, sociologists, and philosophers; others
showed that observational terms were not an atomistic picturing of reality but part of a
pre-given linguistic structure—in short that all observation was theory dependent; and
Popper (1959, 1969), based on Hume, rejected the possibility of veriﬁcation and
induction, replacing it with falsiﬁcation and deduction. In response there developed
the standard ‘deductive-nomological (D-N)’ or ‘hypothetico-deductive’ method.
This view leads to a much greater recognition of the social and psychological nature
of scientiﬁc activity. The idea of paradigms replacing each other over time has
developed, particularly within social science, to the idea of there being competing
paradigms existent at the same time (e.g. positivist, interpretive, and critical). This is
often combined with the claim that paradigms are incommensurable. Clearly, the
Kuhnian view has major relativistic implications for empiricism. It highlights the
constructed, conventional nature of scientiﬁc theorizing, and truth is that which is
accepted by a scientiﬁc community rather than correspondence to some external
reality. The incommensurability thesis is even more undermining since in makes it
70
JOHN MINGERS

impossible to judge between paradigms or even assert that a later paradigm is actually
superior to an earlier one.
There are also major philosophical debates concerning the nature of social science in
relation to natural science that can only be sketched here. Broadly, there are three
possible positions: (i) the naturalist view that there is one general approach to science
that applies to all domains. Within this category, positivists hold that for anything to be
scientiﬁc it must follow the canons of positivism/empiricism and thus be based on
universal generalizations from empirical observations. (ii) The antithesis is the view
that the social world is intrinsically different to the natural world, being constituted
through language and meaning, and thus involves entirely different hermeneutic,
phenomenological, or social constructivist approaches. The argument here would be
the idealist one that ontologically social objects do not exist in the way physical ones do
(i.e. as subject independent), and that epistemologically there is no possibility of facts
or observations that are independent of actors, cultures, or social practices. (iii) The
most radical position denies the possibility of objective or scientiﬁc knowledge at all,
in either domain. Arguments here come from the strong sociology of knowledge
programme; post-structuralists such as Foucault (1980), and more generally postmo-
dernists (Best and Kellner 1991) who attempt to undermine even the most basic
categories of modernist rationality.
In the rest of the chapter, I want to put forward ﬁve themes which I value in terms of
generating signiﬁcant and reliable knowledge: systems thinking, pluralism, critical
realism, and truth and knowledge.
THE SYSTEMS APPROACH OR
HOLISTIC THINKING
..................................................................................................................
The systems approach at its most general involves deciding explicitly to employ
systems concepts in theorizing and research. Some of the basic concepts are: a system
as a collection of elements that are linked together such that the behaviour or
characteristics of the whole depends on the relationships between the parts rather
than the nature of the parts themselves; a boundary separating the system from its
environment; subsystems and wider systems that form a nested hierarchy; multiple-
cause relations and feedback loops; communication and control systems; the inevitable
entanglement of the observer with the observed; and a commitment to holism rather
than reductionism. Beyond these basic concepts there are many particular systems
approaches that have been developed, for instance systems engineering, cybernetics,
system dynamics, soft systems, General Systems Theory (GST), living systems theory,
and complexity theory.
How does systems thinking relate to the philosophical questions and paradigms
outlined above? It could be argued that it could be conceived of as a paradigm in its
THE TRUTH, THE WHOLE TRUTH, AND NOTHING BUT THE TRUTH
71

own right in the sense that it does have implications for each of the levels, but I think
that it is actually orthogonal to the paradigms. That is, one can have positivist,
interpretive, or critical versions of systems thinking just as one could also have such
versions of non-systems thinking.
To what extent is the systems approach evident in the IS/IT literature? At one level
one could say that systems thinking is at least implicit in most IS research. The
discipline is called information systems after all, and I suspect that few researchers
would say they were reductionists, or deny that they ultimately assume a systems
approach. However, the number of papers that formally or explicitly claim to use
systems theory is actually relatively small, leading Alter (2004), who argued for a
systems thinking approach as opposed to a ‘tool thinking’ approach within IS, to title
his paper ‘Desperately Seeking Systems Thinking in the IS Discipline’.
We can ﬁnd examples drawing on the main areas of systems thinking—complexity,
GST, SSM, and cybernetics—although I have found nothing using system dynamics. Xu
(2000) provides a reasonable overview. Beginning with general systems concepts and
GST several authors are concerned with using ST to improve the integration of the
discipline either overall (Mora et al. 2007); with regard to research methods (Mingers
2007); or in developing actual IS systems (Garrity 2001; Wainwright and Waring
2004). Porra, Hirschheim, and Parks (2005) examined the history of Texaco’s IT
function using GST, interestingly using several different ‘lenses’ thus showing that
GST can be used in an interpretive manner, while Wennberg, Brandt, and Revay (2006)
used GST to examine information security within Swedish pharmacies.
Complexity and chaos theory have also been used to provide new lenses with
which to view organizations and information systems within them (Courtney et al.
2008). Vidal and Lacroux (1999) argue that complex society becomes decentred,
away from a single decision maker with a particular problem towards a nexus of
participants/organizations/problems. This means that an important function for an
IS is intermediation between such elements, in particular between individuals,
organizations, and reality. McBride (2005) uses complexity concepts such as
‘strange attractors’ and the ‘edge of chaos’ to better understand the history of the
development of an IS strategy within the UK Probation Service. Samoilenko (2008)
uses concepts such as ‘ﬁtness landscapes’ and ‘self-organization’ to suggest improve-
ments to ISD methodologies.
Finally we will consider the contribution of two related approaches—SSM and
Churchman’s dialectical inquiring systems. These are related in that Checkland
(1999) drew on Churchman’s work on dialectical systems in developing SSM. Church-
man was one of the founding fathers of both OR and systems thinking and his major
work was The Design of Inquiring Systems (Churchman 1971) which considered
systems for generating knowledge from different philosophical perspectives, especially
Hegelian and Singerian. This has led to a stream of work exploring these approaches
within the context of DSS (Courtney 2001), e-business (Bajgoric 2006), and knowledge
management (Richardson, Courtney, and Haynes 2006).
72
JOHN MINGERS

SSM has had a long history of application within information systems from one of
Checkland’s earliest papers (Checkland and Grifﬁn 1970) through to one of his more
recent books (Checkland and Holwell 1998). Considerable work was done on linking
SSM to more conventional systems development methodologies (Mingers 1988; Stow-
ell 1995; Bustard, He, and Wilkie 2000) particularly in the area of requirements
deﬁnition. This has led to the generation of a range of speciﬁc IS development
methodologies based primarily on SSM such as Multiview (Wood-Harper, Antill,
and Avison 1985), SISTeM (Atkinson 2000), and CLIC (Champion, Stowell, and
O’Callaghan 2005). We can also ﬁnd examples of the use of SSM in speciﬁc areas
such as information system failures (Yeo 2002) and the validation of IS (Petkova and
Petkov 2003). Finally, SSM has been suggested as an alternative paradigm within
information systems—Hirschheim, Iivari, and Klein (1997) suggest it as an alternative
to the mainstream approaches such as structured systems design, and Vo, Chae, and
Olson (2006) discuss three systems thinking approaches (SSM, Senge’s Fifth Discipline
(Senge 1990), and Mitroff and Linstone, Unbounded Mind (Mitroff and Linstone
1993)) as paradigms for developing IS education.
CRITICAL REALISM
..................................................................................................................
Critical realism (CR) is a position within the philosophy of science that has been
developed primarily by Roy Bhaskar over the last thirty years (Bhaskar 1978, 1979,
1993). In essence, it maintains a position that is opposed to both positivism (empiri-
cism) and interpretivism (idealism) while accepting elements of both. CR strongly
espouses ontological realism—i.e. the existence of a reality independent of our knowl-
edge of it, yet also accepts epistemological relativism—i.e. that our knowledge of that
reality will always be locally situated and provisional. Critical realism is becoming
increasingly inﬂuential within information systems (Mutch 1999; Dobson 2001a,
2001b; Klein 2004; Mingers 2004b; Monod 2004; Pather and Remenyi 2004; Wikgren
2005; Longshore Smith 2006) and management more generally (Ackroyd and Fleet-
wood 2000; Reed 2001; Fleetwood and Ackroyd 2004; Contu and Willmott 2005; Hunt
2005; Mutch 2005; Reed 2005; Willmott 2005).
In fact, we can distinguish between Critical Realism (CR) and ‘critical’ ‘realism’.
What I mean is that CR is one speciﬁc philosophical approach but there are other ways
of being both critical (e.g. critical hermeneutics (Myers 2004) or critical theory (Klein
and Huynh 2004)) and realist (e.g. critical scientiﬁc realism (Niiniluoto 2002) or
scientiﬁc realism (Hunt 2005)).
The idea of ‘being critical’ or of critique has a long history rooted in the work
of both Kant and Marx. At its most general we can see it as a deep form of
questioning, of refusing to take things for granted or accept the status quo
(Mingers 2000). We can distinguish two main senses: one linked to epistemology
and one to axiology in Figure 3.1. The ﬁrst, Kantian idealist sense, is concerned
THE TRUTH, THE WHOLE TRUTH, AND NOTHING BUT THE TRUTH
73

with knowledge and the limits to or conditions of knowledge. Here we are questioning
particular forms or types of knowledge; the explicit, or often implicit, assumptions
made by particular theories; or indeed the transcendental limits of knowledge itself.
The second, Marxist materialist sense, involves questioning the oppressive nature of
society and its institutions and organizations. The two senses can be seen to come
together in the work of Habermas (Habermas 1978, 1984, 1987) and later Foucault
(Foucault 1988a, 1988b), who had epistemological concerns about the nature of
knowledge and portrayed how knowledge was constituted and distorted by the
operation of power within society.
Within IS there has been a long if somewhat thin line of critically inspired
research based mainly on the work of Habermas going back to Mingers’s (1980)
comparison of Habermas and soft systems methodology, Mumford et al.’s (1985)
exploration of alternative research approaches, and Lyytinen and Hirschheim’s
(1988) application of communicative action theory. Klein and Huynh (2004) provide
a comprehensive coverage of Habermas’s theory and its relevance for IS while
Heng and de Moor (2003) and Shefﬁeld (2004) are recent empirical studies. Foucault
has been less well used although Zuboff’s (1988) seminal book is inspired by his
ideas. Willcocks (2004) provides an exceptionally clear introduction to Foucault’s
complex works and covers applications within IS and more broadly within manage-
ment studies. There are other philosophers whose work falls within the critical realm
but who have made less impact on information systems so far including Adorno
(Probert 2004) and Callon and Latour (actor-network theory) (Walsham 1997; Mitev
and Wilson 2004). Howcroft and Trauth (2005) have produced a handbook on
critical research in information systems which covers theories as well as practical
applications. There have been several recent empirical studies based on a critical
realist perspective (Volkoff, Strong, and Elmes 2007; Bygstad 2008; Reimers and
Johnson 2008; Wynn and Williams 2008).
All research is inevitably embedded within the messy real world of power, politics,
and interest yet it is often described in papers as though it were pure and perfect. This is
a delusion that we all collectively maintain. As authors we do it because we fear our
papers will be rejected, and as referees/editors we do it because we fear the journal’s
reputation for rigorous research will be tarnished. In reality, however, as has been
continually shown by the critical research discussed above, it is a fallacy to suppose that
rigour comes from sanitized results; that facts can be divorced from values; or that
research can be isolated from power and interest (Cordoba and Robson 2003; Doolin
2004; Backhouse, Hsu, and Silva 2006). It is much better to be open and explicit about
the real context of the research so that readers can judge for themselves any potential
effects or biases. A framework of questions for assisting this process can be found in
Mingers (1997).
74
JOHN MINGERS

ONTOLOGICAL AND METHODOLOGICAL
PLURALISM
..................................................................................................................
We have seen how different paradigms developed within IS and other social science
disciplines—positivism, interpretivism, critical, and perhaps postmodernist—and for a
period these became like silos, each separate and isolated from the others (Burrell and
Morgan 1979). Each paradigm developed its own research methods and research had
to be conducted from within one paradigm. There were divisive debates between the
paradigms (Mingers 2004a).
However, this polarization could not continue and it came to be recognized within
social science generally that the world does not divide itself up neatly into hard and
soft, quantitative and qualitative, and that to understand its full complexity we need to
combine methods from a variety of perspectives. Tashakkori and Teddlie (1998)
published one of the ﬁrst methodology books entirely on mixed methods in social
science based on many studies that had already been carried out, and Mingers and Gill
(1997) published a book on ‘multimethodology’, i.e. combining management science
methodologies. This movement has grown considerably with a new handbook of
mixed methods (Tashakkori and Teddlie 2003); a new journal—Journal of Mixed
Methods Research; and discussion of mixed methods in general research methodology
textbooks, e.g. Bryman and Bell (2003).
There are several different positions with respect to mixed methods or multimetho-
dology. My own view is a strong one in that I argue for plurality not just of methods but
of all the four philosophical dimensions in Figure 3.1. Moreover, I suggest that this
stance actually follows from both a systems perspective, seeing the world in a holistic
way, and a critical realist perspective which accepts a plurality of objects of knowledge.
To employ Habermas’s (1984) model (discussed further below) we can say that
communications and actions relate to three different ‘worlds’—the objective or material
world that consists of all actual or possible states of affairs; the social or normative
world that consists of accepted and legitimate norms of behaviour; and the subjective
or personal world that consists of individuals’ emotions, feelings, and ideas. As human
beings we have different epistemological access to each of these ontological domains:
we observe the material world, we participate in our social world, and we each experi-
ence ‘my’ own personal world. This in turn generates the need for distinctive meth-
odologies which then need to be combined together to synthesize our understanding of
the whole. Finally, we have distinct axiological relations to the worlds (Habermas
1993), pragmatic with respect to the material world, moral for the social world, and
ethical for the personal world.
This leads into the view that there are actually different forms or types of knowledge
and that these are distinguished by different forms of truth (Mingers 2003b).
THE TRUTH, THE WHOLE TRUTH, AND NOTHING BUT THE TRUTH
75

FORMS OF TRUTH
..................................................................................................................
It is paradoxical that ‘truth’ is one of the great unspoken concepts of the IS literature. If
we assume that the purpose of scholarly research is the generation of valid and reliable
knowledge, and that truth is a central characteristic of valid knowledge, then we might
expect that there should be discussion and debate about the nature of truth and
procedures for discovering the truth. In fact, the subject is never mentioned in the IS
literature, even in the literature on knowledge management where one might expect
that a concern with the validity of knowledge was central. I searched the ISI Web of
Knowledge using the very general key words ‘information systems’ and ‘truth’ going
back to 1970. Amazingly only two proper IS papers were returned (Shefﬁeld 2004;
Zhou, Burgoon, and Twitchell 2004), neither of which had any sustained discussion of
truth.
This situation could be explained if the concept of truth was essentially simple and
uncontested yet this is actually far from the case. Differing positions in terms of
ontology and epistemology inevitably lead to different views on the nature of truth,
and even as to whether truth is a necessary or attainable characteristic of knowledge.
The most common view, in Western philosophy, is that knowledge is true, justiﬁed,
belief (TJB). These three conditions have been taken to be both necessary and sufﬁcient
for a proposition to count as knowledge. In other words, to validly assert ‘I know that
p . . . ’ implies:
1. You must sincerely believe that p is the case.
2. You must have justiﬁable grounds, evidence, or explanation for p.
3. p must, indeed, be true.
Although this sounds straightforward, there are in fact many problems with each
condition as well as their conjunction. For instance, there is much debate about what
would constitute proper justiﬁcation for such a belief—empirical evidence, rational
argument, personal experience, perception, or what? How in any case can we deter-
mine if something is actually true? More fundamentally, however, there are several
different and competing theories of truth (see Mingers (2003b) for a fuller discussion
and references).
Correspondence theories are the main and most obvious view of truth. They hold that
truth (and falsity) is applied to propositions depending on whether the proposition
corresponds to the way the world actually is. Coherence theories stress the extent to
which a proposition is consistent with other beliefs, theories, and evidence that we
have. The more that it ﬁts in with other well-attested ideas the more we should accept it
as true. This approach avoids the need for a direct comparison with ‘reality’. However,
it is more concerned with the justiﬁcation of beliefs rather than their absolute truth.
Pragmatic theories hold that truth is best seen in terms of how useful or practical a
theory is—that which best solves a problem is the best theory. A version of this is
76
JOHN MINGERS

instrumentalism, which holds that a theory is simply an instrument for making
predictions, and has no necessary connection to truth at all. This also leads into
consensus theories. An obvious argument against this view is that a true theory is
likely to be most useful and powerful1 and therefore should be an important compo-
nent of a useful theory. Consensus or discursive theories hold that truth is that which
results from a process of enquiry resulting in a consensus amongst those most fully
informed—in the case of science, scientists. At one level, we can see that this must be
the case if we accept with critical realism the impossibility of proving correspondence
truth. But, today’s accepted truth is usually tomorrow’s discarded theory and so this
does not guarantee truth. Finally there are redundancy, deﬂationary, and performative
theories which argue, in different ways, that the whole concept of truth is actually
redundant. If we say ‘it is true that snow is white’ we are saying no more than that
‘snow is white’, the two propositions will always have the same truth values and are
therefore equivalent.
Turning now to critical realism, what view of truth does it espouse? The ﬁrst thing to
say is that the whole approach is fallibilist. That is, since CR accepts epistemic relativity,
the view that all knowledge is ultimately historically and locally situated, it has to accept
that theories can never be proved or known certainly to be true. Thus, if provable truth
were to be made a necessary criterion for knowledge there could be no knowledge
within critical realism.
Bhaskar does discuss the notion of truth and comes up with a multivalent view
involving four components or dimensions (Bhaskar 1994: 62) that could apply to a
judgment about the truth or falsity of something. The ﬁrst level is sincerity or
trustworthiness: truth as being that which is believed from a trustworthy source—
‘trust me, I believe it, act on it’. Second is warranted or justiﬁed: based on evidence and
justiﬁcation rather than mere belief—‘there’s sound evidence for this’. Third is weak
correspondence: corresponding to or at least being adequate to some intransitive object
of knowledge. Whereas the ﬁrst two dimensions are clearly in the transitive domain
and strongly tied to language, this aspect moves beyond to posit some sort of relation
between language and a referent. Finally, ontological and alethic: this level is the most
controversial (Groff 2000) as it moves truth entirely into the intransitive domain. It is
the truth of things in themselves, and their generative causes, rather than the truth of
propositions. It is no longer tied to language although it may be expressed in language.
It is also interesting to consider Habermas’s theories of knowledge and truth as his
work has been applied within information systems. His ﬁrst framework was known as
the theory of knowledge-constitutive interests (KCI) (Habermas 1978). This suggested
that humans, as a species, had needs for, or interest in, three particular forms of
knowledge. The technical interest in moulding nature led to the empirical and physical
sciences. For Habermas these were underpinned by a pragmatist philosophy of science
(inspired by Peirce) and a consensus theory of truth. The practical interest in commu-
nication and mutual understanding led to the historical and interpretive sciences
underpinned by a hermeneutic criterion of understanding. And the emancipatory
interest in self-development and authenticity led to critical science which identiﬁed
THE TRUTH, THE WHOLE TRUTH, AND NOTHING BUT THE TRUTH
77

repressions and distortions in knowledge and in society. Its criterion of success was the
development of insight and self-expression free from constraint.
This theory of transcendental interests was the subject of much criticism (see
Mingers 1997 for a review), and Habermas later transmuted it into the theory of
communicative action (TCA) (Habermas 1984, 1987). Utterances and, I would
argue, actions as well raise certain validity claims that must, if challenged, be justiﬁed.
These claims are comprehensibility, truth, rightness, and truthfulness (sincerity). This is
premissed on the argument that utterances stand in relation to the three different
‘worlds’ discussed above. When such a claim is challenged, the process of justiﬁcation
must always be discursive or dialogical. That is there should ideally be a process of open
debate unfettered by issues of power, resources, access, and so on until agreement is
reached by the ‘unforced force of the better argument’ (Habermas 1974: 240), what
Habermas calls the ‘ideal speech situation’. Thus, Habermas held a consensus or
discursive view of truth both in the moral or normative domain of what ought we to
do, as well as in the material domain of external reality. To say of a proposition, ‘it is
true’ is the same as saying of an action, ‘it is right’, namely ideal, warranted assert-
ability.
However, more recently Habermas (2003) has returned to the issue of truth and now
rejects his discursive theory for propositions about the material world in favour of one
with an irreducible ontological (i.e. realist) component. In essence, Habermas now
maintains that there is a substantive difference between the moral domain of normative
validity which can only ever be established through discussion and debate within an
ideal speech situation, and the domain of propositional truth where properly arrived at
and justiﬁed agreement may still be proven wrong by later events. Our experience of
living in and coping with the world shows us that even the most strongly held and well-
justiﬁed views may turn out to be false.
The experience of ‘coping’ accounts for two determinations of ‘objectivity’: the fact
that the way the world is is not up to us; and the fact that it is the same for all of us.
(Habermas 2003: 254)
Thus the whole question of truth is linked intimately with that of knowledge and
thus with research and the whole scholarly and scientiﬁc enterprise.
KNOWLEDGE AND TRUTH
..................................................................................................................
In this section, I want to put forward ideas about how the different forms of knowledge
relate to truth. I argue that there is not one form of knowledge but several distinct types
with different characteristics. These differ in terms of their nature, their source, their
form of representation, and their criteria for validity. Truth as usually understood
does not apply equally to all of them. The primary forms of knowledge that
I distinguish are: performative knowledge—knowing how to do something; experiential
78
JOHN MINGERS

knowledge—knowing, through one’s own personal experience, a person, place, occur-
rence etc; propositional knowledge—knowing that some state of affairs is the case; and
epistemological knowledge—knowing scientiﬁcally how and why something is the case.
See Table 3.1 for a summary.
Actual human knowledge can never be certain or known to be correct (even an
actually true theory could not be proved to be true). From a critical realist perspective,
this is because we can never have pure unmediated access to the intransitive domain;
from a Habermasian perspective, ultimate truth could only emerge from a never-
ending, impossibly perfect discourse although now mediated by interactions with a
constraining outer world. We therefore need to think of knowledge in terms of degrees
of conﬁdence and warrantability or justiﬁcation rather than pure truth. We can link the
different forms of knowledge with the different validity or truth claims.
Performative knowledge can best be judged by its actual success or failure. A claim to
be able to do something, whether a physical skill or a social role, can only be vindicated
by a performance. In some ways, this is actually quite close to Bhaskar’s concept of
alethic truth that I critiqued above. It is also related to ideas of tacit knowledge (Polanyi
1958; Nonaka and Takeuchi 1995) in that competent performers may well not be able
to fully articulate how they perform. To demonstrate that one is a pianist by actually
performing validates itself without need of propositions or assertions. Even here, there
are of course degrees of performance and competence. We can also bring in here
Habermas’s validity claim of comprehensibility. Before a speech act or indeed any other
social action can be judged it must be understood, that is it must be performed in a
competent manner. Habermas draws on Chomsky’s (1957) notion of a competent
speaker of a language (Habermas 1979: 29) but this can be enlarged to cover all the
aspects of performative knowledge.
Experiential knowledge must ultimately come down to a matter of Habermas’s
truthfulness or sincerity (normative-ﬁduciary in Bhaskar’s terms) since it concerns a
particular person’s experiences or feelings. Of course, one does not just have to accept a
person’s discursive justiﬁcation, one might try to discover or provide some sort of
evidence or justiﬁcation as well which could include documentary evidence—letters,
photos, transcripts, etc., or corroboration from other people.
Propositional knowledge is explicit knowledge concerning the presence or absence of
particular states of affairs—truth for Habermas, referential-expressive for Bhaskar.
Here we can go beyond belief and even justiﬁcation towards conﬁrming a relation
between the proposition and the intransitive world to which it refers. Indeed, if we
follow Dretske (1981) we can see a direct causal relation between information and the
knowledge that it generates. The information carried by a petrol gauge for example
(which must be true to be information) leads us to know that the tank is nearly empty
and so our knowledge in this case is true justiﬁed belief. Even so, we cannot ﬁnally
prove our knowledge is true for we might be mistaken either in our interpretation of
the sign (the gauge might actually read half-full), or in believing it was (true) informa-
tion when in fact it was not (the gauge was faulty).
THE TRUTH, THE WHOLE TRUTH, AND NOTHING BUT THE TRUTH
79

Table 3.1 Forms of Knowledge and Truth
Type of knowledge
Object of knowledge
Source of knowledge
Form of representation
Criteria for validity
Propositional
I know it’s raining
I know there’s a train
at 3.00
I know there’s someone
at the door
States of affairs in the
physical and social world.
To know that x
Direct perception, receipt
of information,
communications, the media
Generally explicit and
propositional although
some may be tacit
(Ontological) truth
Referential-expressive
Experiential
I know her well
I know the feeling
I know I left my key there
I know how the system
works
People, places, events we
know through personal
experience.
To know x
Personal experiences
Memories, some aspects
of which may be tacit
and embodied
Sincerity Normative-
ﬁduciary
Adequating
Performative
I know how to ride
I know how to read an
X-Ray
I know how to present
Skills, abilities, and
competences.
To know how to do x
Personal experience, learning,
training
Embodied
Competence, (Epistemic)
rightness
Alethic
Epistemological
I know what black
holes are
I know linear algebra
Reasons for the (non-)
occurrence of things
and events.
To know why x
Formal methods of discovery
e.g. in science
Explicit, discursive,
‘objective’, open to
debate.
Truth, rightness, sincerity
Ontological, alethic
80
JOHN MINGERS

Epistemological knowledge takes us to the realm of science where its primary
characteristic is the huge effort in trying to ensure that the knowledge generated is
reliable even whilst accepting that we can never be certain of it. This is ontological
(incorporating a causal explanation) truth for Bhaskar. The key feature distinguishing
this from propositional knowledge is the need to go beyond immediate appearances to
form an underlying explanation of why might be as they appear. This is not conﬁned to
the material world but applies equally to Habermas’s social and personal worlds. In the
social world we are interested in explaining why certain norms or patterns of behaviour
exist and are maintained, and perhaps why others are not. In the personal world we
want to understand why a person behaves as they do, why they do certain things and
not others.
Finally, I should say that in real-world situations and activities these different types
of knowledge will typically be involved together and will interact with each other. To
take just one example, suppose you are chairing a meeting. This will draw on proposi-
tional knowledge about particular facts and states of affairs; experiential knowledge of
people, events, and practices; performative knowledge, perhaps of body language and
physical gestures; and epistemological knowledge perhaps of economics or a particular
industrial process.
CONCLUSIONS
..................................................................................................................
The aim of this chapter has been to raise important philosophical and practical issues
in research and the production of knowledge, and to argue for ﬁve propositions which
are, I believe, the hallmarks for producing research that is both rigorous and relevant to
the complexities and seriousness of the problems we face in the organizational world.
These keys are: adopting a systemic and holistic approach to the world; using critical
realism as an underpinning philosophical perspective; employing multiple research
methods to reﬂect the complexity of the real-world; recognizing a variety of forms of
knowledge; and accepting concomitantly the importance of truth or warrantability.
I would also argue that as well as each one being warranted in its own right, they also
all interlock so that it is actually difﬁcult to accept any one without also accepting the
others. Taken together they form a more consistent, coherent, and comprehensive
account of the philosophy and methodology of IS research than any other position.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This chapter is developed from Mingers (2007).
THE TRUTH, THE WHOLE TRUTH, AND NOTHING BUT THE TRUTH
81

NOTE
1. Although postmodernists argue that it is the theory that is deemed most powerful that is
accepted as true.
REFERENCES
Ackroyd, S. and Fleetwood, S. (2000). Realist Perspectives on Management and Organisations.
London: Routledge.
Alter, S. (2004). ‘Desperately Seeking Systems Thinking in the Information Systems Disci-
pline’, in International Conference on Information Systems 25. Washington, DC: Associa-
tion for Information Systems.
Atkinson, C. (2000). ‘The “Soft Information Systems and Technologies Methodology”: An
Actor Network Contingency Approach to Integrated Development’, European Journal of
Information Systems, 9: 104–23.
Backhouse, J., Hsu, C., and Silva, L. (2006). ‘Circuits of Power in Creating de jure Standards:
Shaping an International Information Systems Security Standard’, MIS Quarterly, 30:
413–38.
Bajgoric, N. (2006). ‘Information Systems for e-Business Continuance: A Systems Approach’,
Kybernetes, 35: 632–52.
Best, S., and Kellner, D. (1991). Postmodern Theory: Critical Interrogations. New York:
Guilford Press.
Bhaskar, R. (1978). A Realist Theory of Science. Hemel Hempstead: Harvester.
——(1979). The Possibility of Naturalism. Brighton: Harvester Press.
——(1993). Dialectic: The Pulse of Freedom. London: Verso.
——(1994). Plato Etc. London: Verso.
Bryman, A. (2001). Social Research Methods. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— and Bell, E. (2003). Business Research Methods. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Burrell, G., and Morgan, G. (1979). Sociological Paradigms and Organisational Analysis.
London: Heinemann.
Bustard, D., He, Z., and Wilkie, F. (2000). ‘Linking Soft Systems and Use-Case Modelling
through Scenarios’, Interacting with Computers, 13: 97–110.
Bygstad, B. (2008). ‘Information Infrastructure as Organization: A Critical Realist View’, in
International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS2008). Paris: Association for Infor-
mation Systems.
Champion, D., Stowell, F., and O’Callaghan, A. (2005). ‘Client-Led Information System
Creation (CLIC): Navigating the Gap’, Information Systems Journal, 15: 213–31.
Checkland, P. (1999). Systems Thinking, Systems Practice: Includes a 30-Year Retrospective.
Chichester: Wiley.
——and Grifﬁn, R. (1970). ‘Management Information Systems: A Systems View’, Journal
Systems Engineering, 1: 29–42.
——and Holwell, S. (1998). Information, Systems and Information Systems: Making Sense of
the Field. Chichester: Wiley.
Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic Structures. The Hague: Mouton.
82
JOHN MINGERS

Churchman, C. W. (1971). The Design of Inquiring Systems. New York: Basic Books.
Contu, A., and Willmott, H. (2005). ‘You Spin Me Round: The Realist Turn in Organization
and Management Studies’, Journal Management Studies, 42: 1645–62.
Cordoba, J.-R., and Robson, W. (2003). ‘Making the Evaluation of Information Systems
Insightful: Understanding the Role of Power-Ethics Strategies’, Electronic Journal of Infor-
mation Systems Evaluation, 6: 55–64.
Courtney, J. F. (2001). ‘Decision Making and Knowledge Management in Inquiring Organi-
zations: Toward a New Decision-Making Paradigm for DSS’, Decision Support Systems,
31: 17–38.
——Merali, Y., Paradice, D., and Wynn, E. (2008). ‘On the Study of Complexity in Informa-
tion Systems’, International Journal of Information Technologies and the Systems Approach,
1: 37–47.
Creswell, J. (2009). Research Design. Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Dobson, P. (2001a). ‘Longitudinal Case Research: A Critical Realist Perspective’, Systemic
Practice and Action Research, 14: 283–96.
——(2001b). ‘The Philosophy of Critical Realism: An Opportunity for Information Systems
Research’, Information Systems Frontiers, 3: 199–210.
Doolin, B. (2004). ‘Power and Resistance in the Implementation of a Medical Management
Information System’, Information Systems Journal, 14: 343–62.
Dretske, F. (1981). Knowledge and the Flow of Information. Oxford: Blackwell.
Easterby Smith, M., Thorpe, R., and Jackson, P. (2008). Management Research. London: Sage.
Fleetwood, S., and Ackroyd, S. (eds.) (2004). Critical Realist Applications in Organisation and
Management Studies. London: Routledge.
Foucault, M. (1980). Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972–1977.
Brighton: Harvester Press.
——(1988a). ‘Truth, Power, Self: An Interview with Michel Foucault’, in L. Martin,
H. Gutman, and P. Hutton (eds.), Technologies of the Self: An Interview with Michel
Foucault. Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press, 9–15.
——(1988b). ‘What is Enlightenment?’, in P. Rabinow (ed.), The Foucault Reader. London:
Penguin, 32–50.
Garrity, E. (2001). ‘Synthesizing User Centered and Designer Centered IS Development
Approaches Using General Systems Theory’, Information Systems Frontiers, 3: 107–21.
Groff, R. (2000). ‘The Truth of the Matter: Roy Bhaskar’s Critical Realism and the Concept of
Alethic Truth’, Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 30: 407–35.
Habermas, J. (1974). Theory and Practice. London: Heinemann.
——(1978). Knowledge and Human Interests. London: Heinemann.
——(1979). Communication and the Evolution of Society. London: Heinemann.
——(1984). The Theory of Communicative Action, i: Reason and the Rationalization of Society.
London: Heinemann.
——(1987). The Theory of Communicative Action, ii: Lifeworld and System: A Critique of
Functionalist Reason. Oxford: Polity Press.
——(1993). ‘On the Pragmatic, the Ethical, and the Moral Employments of Practical Reason’,
in J. Habermas (ed.), Justiﬁcation and Application, Cambridge: Polity Press, 1–17.
——(2003). Truth and Justiﬁcation. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Heng, M., and de Moor, A. (2003). ‘From Habermas’s Communicative Theory to Practice on
the Internet’, Information Systems Journal, 13: 331–52.
THE TRUTH, THE WHOLE TRUTH, AND NOTHING BUT THE TRUTH
83

Hirschheim, R., Iivari, J., and Klein, H. (1997). ‘A Comparison of Five Alternative Approaches
to Information Systems Development’, Australasian Journal of Information Systems,
5: 3–29.
Howcroft, D., and Trauth, E. (eds.) (2005). Handbook of Critical Information Systems
Research: Theory and Application. London: Edward Elgar.
Hunt, S. (2005). ‘For Truth and Realism in Management Research’, Journal of Management
Inquiry, 14: 127–38.
Klein, H. (2004). ‘Seeking the New and the Critical in Critical Realism: Déjà Vu?’, Information
and Organization, 14: 123–44.
——and Huynh, M. (2004). ‘The Critical Social Theory of Jurgen Habermas and its Implica-
tions for IS Research’, in J. Mingers and L. Willcocks (eds.), Social Theory and Philosophy
for Information Systems. Chichester: Wiley, 157–237.
Kuhn, T. (1970). The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Lee, N., and Lings, I. (2008). Doing Business Research: A Guide to Theory and Practice.
London: Sage.
Longshore Smith, M. (2006). ‘Overcoming Theory-Practice Inconsistencies: Critical Realism
and Information Systems Research’, Information and Organization, 16: 191–211.
Lyytinen, K., and Hirschheim, R. (1988). ‘Information Systems as Rational Discourse: An
Application of Habermas’s Theory of Communicative Rationality’, Scandinavian Journal of
Management Studies, 4: 19–30.
McBride, N. (2005). ‘Chaos Theory as a Model for Interpreting Information Systems in
Organizations’, Information Systems Journal, 15: 233–54.
Mingers, J. (1980). ‘Towards an Appropriate Social Theory for Applied Systems Thinking:
Critical Theory and Soft Systems Methodology’, Journal Applied Systems Analysis, 7: 41–50.
——(1988). ‘Soft Systems Methodology and Information Systems: A Comparison of Concep-
tual Models and Data Flow Diagrams’, Computer Journal, 31: 376–79.
——(1997). ‘Towards Critical Pluralism’, in J. Mingers and A. Gill (eds.), Multimethodology:
Theory and Practice of Combining Management Science Methodologies. Chichester: Wiley,
407–40.
——(2000). ‘What is it to be Critical? Teaching a Critical Approach to Management Under-
graduates’, Management Learning, 31: 219–37.
——(2003a). ‘A Classiﬁcation of the Philosophical Assumptions of Management Science
Methods’, Journal of the Operational Research Society, 54: 559–70.
——(2003b). Information, Knowledge and Truth: A Polyvalent View. Report No. 77, Kent
Business School, Canterbury.
——(2004a). ‘Paradigm Wars: Ceaseﬁre Announced, Who Will Set up the New Administration?’,
Journal Information Technology, 19: 165–71.
——(2004b). ‘Re-establishing the Real: Critical Realism and Information Systems Research’,
in J. Mingers and L. Willcocks (eds.), Social Theory and Philosophy for Information Systems.
London: Wiley, 372–406.
——(2007). ‘Pluralism, Realism and Truth: The Keys to Knowledge in Information Systems
Research’, International Journal of Information Technologies and the Systems Approach,
1: 81–92.
——(2008). ‘Management Knowledge and Knowledge Management: Realism and Forms of
Truth’, Knowledge Management Research and Practice, 6: 62–76.
——and Gill, A. (eds.) (1997). Multimethodology: Theory and Practice of Combining Manage-
ment Science Methodologies. Chichester: Wiley.
84
JOHN MINGERS

Mitev, N., and Wilson, M. (2004). ‘What We May Learn from the Social Shaping of
Technology Approach’, in J. Mingers and L. Willcocks (eds.), Social Theory and Philosophy
for Information Systems. Chichester: Wiley, 329–71.
Mitroff, I., and Linstone, H. (1993). The Unbounded Mind: Breaking the Chains of Traditional
Business Thinking. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Monod, E. (2004). ‘Einstein, Heisenberg, Kant: Methodological Distinctions and Conditions
of Possibility’, Information and Organization, 14: 105–21.
Mora, M., Gelman, O., Forgionne, G., Petkov, D., and Cano, J. (2007). ‘Integrating the
Fragmented Pieces of IS Research Paradigms and Frameworks: A Systems Approach’,
Information Resources Management Journal, 20: 1–22.
Mumford, E., Hirschheim, R., Fitzgerald, G., and Wood-Harper, T. (eds.) (1985). Research
Methods in Information Systems. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Mutch, A. (1999). ‘Information: A Critical Realist Approach’, in T. Wilson and D. Allen (eds.),
Proceedings of the 2nd Information Seeking in Context. London: Taylor Graham, 535–51.
——(2005). ‘Critical Realism, Agency and Discourse: Moving the Debate Forward’, Organi-
zation, 12: 781–6.
Myers, M. (2004). ‘The Nature of Hermeneutics’, in J. Mingers and L. Willcocks (eds.), Social
Theory and Philosophy for Information Systems. Chichester: Wiley, 103–28.
Niiniluoto, I. (2002). Critical Scientiﬁc Realism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nonaka, I., and Takeuchi, H. (1995). The Knowledge-Creating Company: How Japanese
Companies Create the Dynamics of Innovation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pather, S., and Remenyi, D. (2004). ‘Some of the Philosophical Issues Underpinning Research
on Information Systems: From Positivism to Critical Realism’, in SAICSIT 2004. Prague:
SAICSIT.
Petkova, O., and Petkov, D. (2003). ‘A Holistic Approach towards the Validation and
Legitimisation of Information Systems’, Kybernetes, 32: 703–14.
Polanyi, M. (1958). Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy. London:
Routledge.
Popper, K. (1959). The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery. London: Hutchinson.
——(1969). Conjectures and Refutations. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Porra, J., Hirschheim, R., and Parks, M. (2005). ‘The History of Texaco’s Corporate Informa-
tion Function: A General Systems Theoretical Interpretation’, MIS Quarterly, 29: 721–46.
Probert, S. (2004). ‘Adorno: A Critical Theory for IS’, in J. Mingers and L. Willcocks (eds.),
Social Theory and Philosophy for Information Systems. Chichester: Wiley, 129–56.
Reed, M. (2001). ‘Organization, Trust and Control: A Realist Analysis’, Organization Studies,
22: 201–23.
——(2005). ‘Reﬂections on the “Realist Turn” in Organization and Management Studies’.
Journal of Management Studies, 42: 1621–44.
Reimers, K., and Johnson, R. (2008). ‘The Use of an Explicitly Theory-Driven Data Coding
Method for High-Level Theory Testing in IOS’, in International Conference on Information
Systems (ICIS2008). Paris: Association for Information Systems.
Richardson, S., Courtney, J., and Haynes, J. (2006). ‘Theoretical Principles for Knowledge
Management System Design: Application to Pediatric Bipolar Disorder’, Decision Support
Systems, 42: 1321–37.
Samoilenko, S. (2008). ‘Information Systems Fitness and Risk in IS Development: Insights and
Implications from Chaos and Complex Systems Theories’, Information Systems Frontiers,
10: 281–92.
THE TRUTH, THE WHOLE TRUTH, AND NOTHING BUT THE TRUTH
85

Senge, P. (1990). The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization.
London: Century Books.
Shefﬁeld, J. (2004). ‘The Design of GSS-Enabled Interventions: A Habermasian Perspective’,
Group Decision and Negotiation, 13: 415–35.
Stowell, F. (ed.) (1995). Information Systems Provision: The Contribution of Soft Systems
Methodology. London: McGraw Hill.
Tashakkori, A., and Teddlie, C. (1998). Mixed Methodology: Combining Qualitative and
Quantitative Approaches. London: SAGE Publications.
————(2003). Handbook of Mixed Methods in Social and Behavioural Research. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Vidal, P., and Lacroux, F. (1999). ‘Complexity and Management: New Representations for
Information Systems’, in W. Baets (ed.), A Collection of Essays on Complexity and Manage-
ment. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company.
Vo, H. V., Chae, B., and Olson, D. L. (2006). ‘Integrating Systems Thinking into IS Education’,
Systems Research and Behavioral Science, 23: 107–21.
Volkoff, O., Strong, D., and Elmes, M. (2007). ‘Technological Embeddedness and Organiza-
tional Change’, Organization Science, 18: 832–48.
Wainwright, D., and Waring, T. (2004). ‘Three Domains for Implementing Integrated
Information Systems: Redressing the Balance between Technology, Strategic and Organi-
sational Analysis’, International Journal of Information Management, 24: 329–46.
Walsham, G. (1997). ‘Actor-Network Theory and IS Research: Current Status and Future
Prospects’, in A. Lee, J. Liebenau and J. DeGross (eds.), Information Systems and Qualita-
tive Research. London: Chapman Hall, 466–80.
Wennberg, L., Brandt, P., and Revay, P. (2006). ‘Information Security: An Application of a
Systems Approach’, Kybernetes, 35: 786–96.
Wikgren, M. (2005). ‘Critical Realism as a Philosophy and Social Theory in Information
Science?’, Journal of Documentation, 61: 11–22.
Willcocks, L. (2004). ‘Foucault, Power/Knowledge and Information Systems: Reconstructing
the Present’, in J. Mingers and L. Willcocks (eds.), Social Theory and Philosophy for
Information Systems. Chichester: Wiley.
Willmott, H. (2005). ‘Theorising Contemporary Control: Some Post-structuralist Responses
to some Critical Realist Questions’, Organization, 12: 747–80.
Wood-Harper, T., Antill, L., and Avison, D. (1985). Information Systems Deﬁnition: The
Multiview Approach. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wynn, D., and Williams, C. (2008). ‘Critical Realism-Based Explanatory Case Study Research
in Information Systems’, in International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS2008).
Paris: Association for Information Systems.
Xu, L. (2000). ‘The Contribution of Systems Science to Information Systems Research’,
Systems Research and Behavioral Science, 17: 105–16.
Yeo, K. (2002). ‘Critical Failure Factors in Information Systems Projects’, International
Journal of Project Management, 20: 241–6.
Zhou, L., Burgoon, J., and Twitchell, D. (2004). ‘A Comparison of Classiﬁcation Methods for
Predicting Deception in Computer-Mediated Communication’, Journal of Management
Information Systems, 20: 139–65.
Zuboff, S. (1988). In the Age of the Smart Machine: The Future of Work and Power. New York:
Basic Books.
86
JOHN MINGERS

c h a p t e r 4
...............................................................................................
SYSTEMS THINKING AND
SOFT SYSTEMS
METHODOLOGY
...............................................................................................
PETER CHECKLAND
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
Every organized process carried out to achieve some desirable end (of which the
creation of an information system is an example) will take its form and content from
some framework of ideas which are taken as given, and make the process meaningful
for those who carry out the process or make use of its end product. This chapter
examines ideas which underpin work on information systems (IS) namely systems
ideas. It examines basic systems ideas and what it means to do ‘systems thinking’, and
marks the distinction between ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ systems thinking, both of which are
relevant to creating any real-world ‘information system’ in an organization. This is
done through an account of the development of the approach which led to recognition
of the ‘hard/soft’ distinction between these two linked but different ways of using
systems ideas, namely Soft Systems Methodology (SSM). Finally it summarizes the
implications of these ideas for illuminating and making sense of the ﬁeld of IS as a
whole.
Firstly, however, it may be useful to illustrate the degree of complexity of (human)
situations in which information systems are developed.
During the joint Anglo-French effort to design, make, and sell the world’s ﬁrst
supersonic passenger-carrying aircraft, Concorde, my group at Lancaster University
were invited by a director of what was then the British Aircraft Corporation to take a
‘systems engineering’ approach to the Anglo-French Concorde Project. Our aim was to
give advice on how the management of the project could be improved. This was at a
time when the two pre-production aircraft, one in Bristol, one in Toulouse, were
nearing completion, but had not yet ﬂown. The Concorde project was, at the time,

the subject of much public debate in the UK, since it was by then very apparent that it
was going to take years longer to develop than originally thought and would cost many
millions more than originally estimated. As we started the work, we took it as
completely obvious, not to be questioned, that this was clearly an engineering project;
and it seemed obvious too that this project was ‘a system to create a supersonic
passenger aircraft according to a deﬁned technical speciﬁcation, within a certain
time, at a certain cost, and under the constraints that it must gain the certiﬁcate
from the Civil Aviation Authority which will enable the public to ﬂy in it, and that it
must not unacceptably damage the environment’. We had the idea that we could model
this activity, and work out from the models the information systems which would be
required to support that activity. Then we could, in the light of the models, examine the
project’s real-world activity and information support, and work out how to improve
them.
In the event we were amazed when our models seemed to bear no relation at all to
real-world structures and activities and, most importantly, engendered little interest in
the engineers and managers working on ‘the Concorde project’. Our eventual hard-
won learning was that there was in fact no ‘project’ in the accepted sense of the way the
word is used in the management literature. Although the phrase ‘the Concorde project’
was on everyone’s lips, used many times each day, project management as such was not
at all in evidence; that is not how Concorde was created. It was created by a functional
structure in which all the hydraulic engineers were in one department, all the electrical
engineers in another, etc.
Realizing our mistake provided valuable learning for us. We were beginning to learn
that there are great difﬁculties in an ill-formed and conceptually confused ﬁeld like
management (of which IS is a part) which stem from the fact that there is no agreed
language available for serious discussion which is separate from everyday language.
Physical chemists know exactly what they mean by ‘entropy’, or ‘the Q-branch of an
infra-red spectrum’. Would-be scholars in the management ﬁeld, on the other hand,
have no shared precise meaning for many of their relevant concepts, for example ‘role’,
‘norm’, ‘culture’, or ‘information system’; all these terms are fuzzy as a result of their
unreﬂective use in everyday chat. Serious work in management and in IS needs always
to be aware of that.
In the Concorde work our initial mistake was due to the fact that we were thinking
that when people used the phrase ‘the Concorde project’ they were actually referring to
something in the British Aircraft Corporation which corresponded to an organized
project in the full sense of the word. We were too ready to accept the everyday language
phrase ‘the Concorde project’ as indicating that there actually was a project in
existence, and that we could model it as a system and hence work out its necessary
information support.
This example of the misleading use of the word ‘project’ in the British Aircraft
Corporation at that time is an example of the untrustworthiness of casual everyday
language in the management ﬁeld. Unfortunately the problem is very much worse in
that part of the broad ﬁeld of management which uses the language of ‘systems’.
88
PETER CHECKLAND

Casually, in everyday talk we speak of ‘the education system’, ‘the prison system’, the
‘transport system’, etc., as if these were integrated coordinated wholes with each part
contributing coherently to the performance of the whole. (To use the phrase ‘the
transport system’ is, in the UK at the present time, almost to make a joke. The UK
has no coherent system of transport, only an aggregate of structures and processes
which deliver transport services in an uncoordinated way.) The word ‘system’ has been
captured by everyday language to refer, without precision, to any large more-or-less
connected entity.
For serious intellectual and scholarly purposes we need to separate ‘system’ from
everyday language and use the word as a technical term; ‘system’ is, truly, the name of a
concept: that of a complex whole which can adapt or be adapted to a changing
environment and so remain viable through time.
With the proviso that the word ‘system’ be used in this serious sense, systems
thinking can help to provide understanding and clariﬁcation of the whole ﬁeld of IS.
It is in order to try to dispel some of the confusion which results from the casual use
of the word ‘system’ in everyday language, that this chapter will examine: the origins of
systems thinking and the core ideas behind the concept ‘system’; the development
of ‘soft’ systems thinking in Soft Systems Methodology; and the implications of this for
work in IS. It draws on earlier accounts including Checkland (1981, 1988, 1996),
Checkland and Scholes (1990), Checkland and Haynes (1994), Checkland and Poulter
(2006). (Checkland, 1996, an encyclopaedia article, includes an annotated bibliogra-
phy.)
SYSTEMS THINKING: ORIGINS
..................................................................................................................
Systems ideas emerged as a generalization of ideas about organisms which were
developed within biology in the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century. Where classical
physics developed its core conceptualizations in the Newtonian revolution of the
seventeenth century (to be modiﬁed by Einsteinian physics in the twentieth) and
chemistry developed its core concepts (‘elements’, ‘compounds’, etc.) in the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries, biology was later in emerging as a science with an accepted
conceptual framework. As the new science of biology was developed, its concern with
living things led to many controversies over the nature of the living, and hence over the
proper concerns of the new discipline. Much debate concerned the issue of vitalism: did
living things, which to many were, intuitively, clearly ‘more than the sum of their parts’,
possess some mysterious non-material component or directing spirit which character-
ized the living? (The spirit was even given a name, entelechy!) In the twentieth century
the elucidation of molecular genetic mechanisms based upon DNA replication has
ﬁnally resolved these debates. But within biology itself there was from the second half
of the nineteenth century a strand of holistic thinking within the subject which argued
SYSTEMS THINKING AND SOFT SYSTEMS METHODOLOGY
89

that the degree of organization was the crucial characteristic of living organisms, rather
than the presence of some metaphysical directing spirit.
The school of thought associated with these so-called ‘organismic biologists’, based
on such work as Woodger’s Biological Principles of 1929, focused upon the organism as
the unit of analysis in biology, and developed ideas about the processes which charac-
terize metabolism and self-reproduction in organisms. It was one of these organismic
biologists, the Austrian Ludwig von Bertalanffy, who founded the systems movement
by beginning to argue, in the late 1940s, that these ideas about organisms could be
extended to complex wholes of any kind: to ‘systems’ (von Bertalanffy 1968; Gray and
Rizzo 1973).
Since it was ideas about physically existing organisms which were generalized as
ideas about ‘systems’ in general, it is perhaps not surprising that most people, taking
their cue from everyday language, simply assume unquestioningly that systems exist in
the world. It is the later history of the systems movement which has painfully
established that system is, truly, the abstract concept of a whole which may or may
not turn out to be useful as a descriptive device for making sense of real-world wholes.
Unfortunately, from the very start of the work in the systems movement, Bertalanffy
himself used the word promiscuously both as an abstract idea (i.e. epistemologically)
and as a label-word (i.e. ontologically). (It may be remarked at this point that this
chapter’s title has the phrase ‘Systems Thinking’—i.e. the process of thinking using
systems ideas—rather than ‘Systems Theory’ precisely because the latter title would be
taken by many to mean ‘the theory of systems’, taking as given the status of systems as
‘things in the world’.)
But in spite of this confusion the concept system has been found to be useful as an
explanatory device in many subject areas: including for example ecology, engineering,
economics, anthropology, sociology, psychology, geography, as well as the natural
sciences. In fact systems thinking has emerged as a meta-discipline and as a meta-
language which can be used to talk about the subject matter of many different ﬁelds.
An example of the status of systems thinking as a meta-subject is shown by the
emergence of cybernetics, which occurred at about the same time that Bertalanffy was
advocating the development of general system(s) theory. The mathematician Norbert
Wiener worked on mechanical/electrical computing machines to aim and ﬁre anti-
aircraft guns, the work representing an attempt to automate what the hunter after a
moving quarry does intuitively. Wiener, with Bigelow, was developing feedback sys-
tems in which information about current performance modiﬁes future performance.
Excess feedback in such systems leads to oscillatory ‘hunting’ about the desired
performance, which cannot then be tightly controlled. Wiener also worked with a
Harvard medical scientist Rosenblueth, who was familiar with the pathological condi-
tion ‘purpose tremor’ in which the patient, in trying to pick up a simple object,
overshoots and goes into uncontrollable oscillation. The similarity between the
human and electro-mechanical cases suggests that these are two different manifesta-
tions of a notional control system which can be described as a general case applicable to
many different embodiments. Wiener (1948) launched cybernetics as the general
90
PETER CHECKLAND

(meta-level) science of ‘communication and control in man and machine’, though
Plato had already made the same point more than 2,000 years earlier in making an
analogy between a helmsman steering a ship and a statesman steering the ‘ship of state’
(Checkland 1981: 82–6). Nowadays cybernetics is a subset of the broad area covered by
systems thinking.
From its emergence in organismic biology, systems thinking has both developed core
systems ideas and itself been developed in a number of different ways in different areas.
The next sections summarize these developments.
SYSTEMS THINKING: CORE CONCEPTS
..................................................................................................................
In the journal Philosophy of Science in 1955 it was announced that ‘A Society for the
Advancement of General Systems Theory is in the process of organization’. Behind this
initiative were the biologist Bertalanffy, an economist (K. E. Boulding), a physiologist
(R. W. Gerard), and a mathematician (A. Rapoport). Their idea was that there could be
developed meta-level theory and models ‘applicable to more than one of the traditional
departments of knowledge’—just as, in the example given above, a single model of a
feedback control system might give an account which can describe both the behaviour
of electro-mechanical servo-mechanisms made by engineers and the behaviour called
‘purpose tremor’ in human patients. Surely the engineers and medical scientists would
ﬁnd this both intriguing and useful? The society referred to was the Society for General
Systems Research, and it still exists, with a small membership, as the International
Society for the Systems Sciences. But its original project, the development of a meta-
level systems theory into whose language problems within many disciplines could be
translated for solution—leading to an anticipated greater uniﬁcation of the sciences—
cannot be declared a success. The kind of meta-level problem solving envisaged by the
pioneers has not occurred.
Rather, systems ideas have made contributions within many different subject areas.
In this the original ideas of the protagonists of general system(s) theory have been
vindicated to some extent. There is now a set of systems ideas which ﬁnd application in
many ﬁelds.
At the core of systems thinking is a concept which clearly derives very directly from
our intuitive or casual knowledge of organisms: the concept of a whole entity which can
adapt and survive, within limits, in a changing environment. This notion of ‘the
adaptive whole’ is the central image in systems thinking, and the systems movement
can be regarded as the attempt to explore the usefulness of this particular concept in
many different ﬁelds. In order to understand and use this concept we need a handful
of further ideas which, together with the idea of the adaptive whole, constitute
the bedrock of systems thinking. (For more detailed discussion, see Checkland 1981:
chs. 3 and 4.)
SYSTEMS THINKING AND SOFT SYSTEMS METHODOLOGY
91

First, for an observer to choose to see some complex entity as a whole, separable
from its environment, it must have properties which (for that observer at least) are
properties of it as a single entity: so-called emergent properties. These are the properties
which make the whole entity ‘more than the sum of its parts’. This is not a mysterious
concept, except to those New Age mystics who are drawn to the systems movement by
a yearning for an elusive ill-deﬁned holism. The parts of a bicycle, in a sack, are simply
an aggregate. When assembled in the particular structure we call ‘a bicycle’, that entity
has vehicular potential, which is an emergent property of the whole. In the structure of
DNA, the laws of physical chemistry allow any sequence of the amino-acid residues
which join the double helix. In order to explain experimental ﬁndings we have to
invoke the idea that certain sequences constitute a ‘code’ which, in biological repro-
duction, results in our having red hair or a large nose. The ‘genetic code’ is an emergent
property of the amino-acid sequences. Another example: university degrees are
awarded not by departments or courses but by the university as a single entity. The
power to confer degrees is an emergent property of the institution as a whole, one
which the institution itself invents.
Secondly, wholes having emergent properties may well have smaller wholes with
their own emergent properties; for example, it is meaningful to think of a department
of a university as having autonomous emergent properties (the resources and authority
to put on a particular course, for example). Equally, the larger whole (the university)
may be only a part in a yet larger whole (the university sector of higher education) with
its own emergent properties . . . and so on. In other words systems thinking includes
the idea of layered structure.
Thirdly, if our entity is to survive in environments which change, it must have
available to it ways of ﬁnding out about its environments and ways of responding
internally to them; it must have processes of communication and control, which may be
automatic (control of core temperature in our bodies for example) or created by human
beings (rules within a university, for example), depending on the kind of entity being
considered.
These four ideas: emergent properties, layered structure, processes of communica-
tion, and control, are the ideas needed to describe the basic concept of an adaptive
whole. They are the core ideas of systems thinking, and have been used in different
ways in many different ﬁelds, from engineering to economics, from geography to
jurisprudence.
Broadly speaking, systems ideas have been used in three different areas: the study of
wholes which Nature creates (often called ‘natural systems’); the study of wholes
designed by human beings (‘designed systems’) such as watches, radios, suspension
bridges; and ﬁnally the study of human affairs, including such activities as governing,
managing, designing, educating, etc. Obviously the three areas show many links.
A landscape gardener, for example, enacts a human system of activity which interacts
with, to modify, a natural system.
In general, work involving ‘natural’ and ‘designed’ wholes, are ones in which there is
usually good mapping between the systems concepts and the observed real world. Not
92
PETER CHECKLAND

surprisingly these are areas in which the everyday use of the word ‘system’ does not
lead to too many intellectual difﬁculties. It is in these cases possible to forget that
systems are always, fundamentally, abstract concepts which may or may not map real
entities. Here there are reasonable grounds for equating an entity in the real world
(e.g. ‘the natural drainage system of the Rhine Valley’) with the systems description of
it. It is from this kind of work that the use of system as a mere label for something in the
real world derives.
But such easy mapping is much more problematical in the third broad area of
application, that of human affairs. In the 1960s the main development of systems
thinking in this area skirted round and managed to avoid this problem by focusing on
arrangements to meet goals or objectives declared in advance to be desirable. If a
carefully deﬁned objective could be taken as given then a ‘system’ to meet the objective
could be engineered. This adoption of the notion of goal seeking was the approach
which characterized the post-war developments arising from the success of operational
research in the Second World War. Bell Telephones formalized their approach to the
development of new technology in ‘systems engineering’ (Hall 1962); RAND Corpora-
tion developed ‘systems analysis’ (Optner 1973). As mainframe computers were devel-
oped the same thinking was adopted to provide an approach to designing and
establishing a computer system. (This was reasonable in the early days when computers
were used only to transfer to a machine the transaction processing previously done by
clerks; but the thinking behind early computer systems analysis became increasingly
inappropriate as the technology developed, as this book illustrates.)
This thinking about achieving a declared objective characterizes the ﬁrst major use of
systems thinking within human affairs. It is essentially systematic in character. The
approaches just referred to consist of examining and selecting one among a number of
alternative systems to achieve an objective which is deﬁned as desirable at the start and
is taken as given. It is thus limited to the subset of situations in which objectives are
undisputed, so that the problems are those of ‘how to do it?’ not problems of ‘what to
do?’ This is mainly the case in situations which relate to technology.
This idea of creating systems to meet a desirable objective, now thought of as ‘Hard’
Systems Thinking, has been very successful, and it is the characteristic core of most
post-Second World War ‘management science’. However, a great many managerial
problem situations cannot be reduced to goal-seeking. The reduction does work well in
technological situations, and Systems Engineering is now a well-developed ﬁeld with its
own journals, professional associations, methodology, and techniques. But for most
managers, at every level, most of the time, the managerial task is to cope with ill-
deﬁned, dynamic, multifaceted situations in which objectives are unclear, and many
different interests clamour for attention. Such situations entail problems often de-
scribed as ‘wicked’, in that just when you think you are on top of them they reveal new
aspects which demand attention and call for rethinking.
It was in seeking a way of coping with this type of situation that a different, broader
way of using systems ideas emerged, different, that is, from assuming that the world out
there contains systems whose objectives can be deﬁned, enabling the systems to be
SYSTEMS THINKING AND SOFT SYSTEMS METHODOLOGY
93

engineered to achieve them. The broader way of using the basic systems ideas (now
known as ‘Soft’ Systems Thinking) came out of a programme of action research in real-
world situations which was carried out over a period of thirty years at Lancaster
University. It broadened the scope of systems thinking and also led to useful ways of
thinking about the ﬁeld of information systems as a whole. These developments are
described in the next sections of this chapter.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF SOFT SYSTEMS THINKING
AND SOFT SYSTEMS METHODOLOGY
..................................................................................................................
The Research Context
The context which enabled the development of Soft Systems Thinking was the creation
of a postgraduate Department of Systems Engineering at Lancaster University in the
late 1960s. The Department was founded by Professor Gwilym Jenkins (the well-
known statistician), and the present writer joined him in 1969. After ﬁfteen years as
ﬁrst a technologist, then a manager of research in the new industry of making wholly
synthetic ﬁbres, I decided to start a new career when Jenkins explained to me that he
intended to interpret the word ‘engineering’ in the Department’s name in the broader
sense in which the word can be used. In the English language you can ‘engineer’ a
meeting with someone, or ‘engineer’ the release of hostages, as well as ‘engineer’ a
chemical plant. Also, after an interesting and illuminating time in a giant corporation
(ICI Ltd) I was intrigued by—and thoroughly agreed with—Jenkins’s idea that the way
to further develop systems engineering was to work in real-world problem situations
outside the University, in organizations large and small in both public and private
sectors. This strategy became possible because we found ourselves recruiting Masters
students of average age around 30, mature people who were at a point in their lives
when they were rethinking who they were and what future direction their careers might
take. Jenkins and I also agreed that just as whatever ideas we have in our head inﬂuence
the experience we acquire in the world, ultimately it is the experience of the world
which is the source of the ideas. In the relation between the two (as shown in Figure
4.1) what is most important is neither the ideas nor the experience but the arrows: the
cycle between the two, the mutual inﬂuence which leads to each creating the other.
Asked by Professor Jenkins to take over the lead in establishing the Department’s
research programme, I felt that, given mature students, we could use them in a
programme of action research in organizations in ways which would not be possible
with fresh graduates. After a few years we supplemented this effort by persuading the
University to allow us to establish a university-owned consultancy company, ISCOL
Ltd. This enabled us to undertake projects at any time and of any length, i.e. not
restricted by the timings of the one-year Masters degree. Some of our best students
94
PETER CHECKLAND

stayed on after the Masters course to work for a year or two as ISCOL consultants. The
Company structure was simple. Each year ISCOL Ltd. gave its surplus to a charity,
namely its owner Lancaster University! Over the twenty years in which the Company
existed the University received nearly £500,000 from ISCOL. The size of the surplus
was not crucially important from our point of view, as long as there was a surplus to
ensure continuity. What was most important was that we had here an overall mecha-
nism in which each and every research project—whether from the Masters course or
from ISCOL—was one unit within an overall coherent strategy. Also, in the action
research approach (Checkland and Holwell 1998a) researchers do not simply observe
or collect data from outside organizations, they take part in the work going on to solve
problems or to bring about improvements. This ensured that each of the 300+ projects
carried out during the life of the programme had the potential to make its own
contribution to the research learning as a whole, adding to the cumulative experience
and helping to develop the ideas.
The Research Process
The initial research idea was to take Systems Engineering (SE) as developed by Bell
Telephone Laboratories, and described in Arthur Hall’s classic book A Methodology for
Systems Engineering (1962), and try to apply it outside the area for which it had been
developed, namely situations in which desirable new technical systems were developed.
Our aim was to test it in messy general management situations, ones in which the
option of taking some deﬁned objective as given was not available. Whatever happened,
we would learn from the experience gained as we cycled many times round the cycle
shown in Figure 4.2. This shows a cycle of three elements: methodology; use; and
learning from use, which itself may then modify the declared methodology. We were
breaking into that cycle by taking SE as given.
We quickly found that classic SE was not rich enough to cope with the complexity
found in problematical management situations. Two early experiences illustrate this. In
Ideas
about the
world
Experience of
the world
lead to
leads to
FIGURE 4.1 Ideas about the world and experience of it steadily create each other
SYSTEMS THINKING AND SOFT SYSTEMS METHODOLOGY
95

the Anglo-French work on Concorde mentioned in the Introduction to this chapter, we
were initially thinking, like systems engineers, that we could work from a tightly
deﬁned objective related to the work going on in Bristol and Toulouse: creating the
world’s ﬁrst supersonic passenger-carrying jet aircraft. This was not wrong but it was
naive. As well as being an engineering project Concorde had a signiﬁcant political
aspect. Britain and France signed a treaty (no less) to do the joint work at a time when
the French President was vetoing British entry into the European Common Market.
From the British perspective this work constituted a political as well as an engineering
project, one which aimed to show what a good European partner the UK could be. To
engage richly with the situation it was necessary to embrace both the engineering and
the politics. This realization was seen eventually as a key experience in the development
of Soft Systems Methodology.
Also in the early years of the programme, on a very different scale, in a small carpet-
making company, the owner/managing director said at the start of the work ‘I know I
need to do more than live from day to day in this Company; I want you to make me
plan.’ Seeking to impress him quickly with our practicality, work began in an area
which we thought could rather easily be improved, namely production planning. But
no, he did not want that; nor did he want to take up other suggestions we made. This
was very frustrating. Eventually it was possible to make sense of this situation by
recognizing the managing director’s unstated fear: that his ﬁrm might become more
proﬁtable and begin to grow—which would change both it and his lifestyle. In saying
‘make me plan’ he really wanted to ensure that his ﬁrm remained viable but did not
change. He did not look for greater wealth; he wanted to make sure he preserved a
pleasant lifestyle which enabled him to play golf on two mid-week afternoons every
week. Such is the real complexity of human affairs, something which often surprises
graduates of MBA courses.
Learning from experiences of this kind brought the realization that SE methodology
would not survive unscathed in the cycle of Figure 4.2 when applied to typical
management, rather than technical situations. In the end the experiences led to a
methodology so enriched that it acquired its own name: Soft Systems Methodology
(SSM). As SSM emerged it was also realized that the modelling of activity systems,
Learning from use
Methodology use
Methodology
for real-world
engagement
FIGURE 4.2 The concept behind the development of Soft Systems Methodology
96
PETER CHECKLAND

which had become a feature of SSM, also led to a highly relevant approach to work on
information systems (IS), as indicated in Figure 4.3.
This arose from the fact that for each activity in an activity model you can ask: ‘What
information would be required to do this activity; and what information would be
generated by doing it?’ Thus activity models can be a coherent (arguable, discussable)
source of information models. This has led to much use of SSM in the IS ﬁeld, a
development which was not anticipated from the start of the research; it was a welcome
bonus from the action research experience.
THE NATURE OF SSM
..................................................................................................................
Doing research is always a confusing experience when you are in the middle of it, and
the research which established SSM and Soft Systems Thinking was no exception.
However, the Action Research process, in which the research object is the real-world
experience itself, requires reﬂection upon the experience, and this supplies a structure
through which the learning can emerge to be captured explicitly (Checkland and
Holwell 1988a).
Over a period of some years it became clear that the methodology emerging from
reﬂection on dealing with ‘wicked’ management problem situations took a more subtle
view of human affairs than the goal-seeking view which underlies classic SE and most
Management Science. This new view will be set out succinctly at this point rather than
being left to emerge later in this discussion. (This will better serve the present purpose,
which is to provide a clear account of the shape of SSM, explain the difference between
‘hard’ and ‘soft’ systems thinking, and, ﬁnally, argue the relevance of SSM to work in
the IS ﬁeld.)
Every human situation will always contain people who interpret the perceived real
world differently from each other. Every such situation will contain different world-
views, that is to say different mental structures which cause the world to be seen
Learninig
Use
Work on
Information
Systems
Soft Systems
Methodology
Methodology
Classic
Systems
Engineering
FIGURE 4.3 The outcome of the Action Research Programme
SYSTEMS THINKING AND SOFT SYSTEMS METHODOLOGY
97

differently by different people—one observer’s ‘terrorist’ being another’s ‘freedom
ﬁghter’. In the Concorde work the absence of organized project management stemmed
from a senior management world-view that world-class engineering was best ensured
by organizing professional engineers in peer groups: hydraulic engineers in one
department, electrical engineers in another, etc.; hence the functional organizational
structure.
However, world-views, though often hard to change, are never completely static;
they change over time, often remarkably quickly, as a result of changing experience or
sudden crisis. The ‘British Aircraft Corporation’ which developed Concorde is now
‘BAE Systems’, a company in which project management is currently the unquestioned
norm. Similarly, when we wished to set up ISCOL Ltd. in Lancaster University there
was much opposition to the idea. Had the decision been in the hands of Senate we
would not have been allowed to go ahead, since the idea of bringing in money for
services rendered was thought by some academics to be somehow improper. Luckily
the decision was in the hands of the University Council, which contains people from
outside the University, and that body allowed us to establish ISCOL Ltd. Nowadays,
although universities are not—by private sector standards—noticeably dynamic orga-
nizations, university Deans urge academics to think of anything they could do which
would bring in money, and encourage them to do it vigorously. World-views do
change!
Finally, human situations will always contain people trying to act purposefully—
deliberately, consciously, with intent—this being one of the core characteristics which
makes us human. Whether we work in giant corporations or in small ﬁrms, and
whether in the private or the public sector, it is always the case that people try to
take purposeful action, though the purpose might well be in dispute and the intentional
action may well be mixed with random thrashing about. There is never any shortage of
that in human affairs. These three characteristics: different world-views; changing
world-views; would-be purposeful action, provide an image of human situations
which underpins SSM. They lead to the shape of the approach.
In making sense of the emergence of SSM from the action research experience four
crucial points of learning can be identiﬁed. They established both the image of human
situations just described and the overall shape of SSM. First came the realization that
every research situation was characterized by would-be purposeful action. This led to
the idea of making models of purposeful activity, and a way of doing this was worked
out based on the basic systems ideas (emergent properties, a layered structure, and
processes of communication and control). Not much progress could be made with this,
however, until it was accepted that any such model could be built only on the basis of a
declared world-view, since a number of world-views will be relevant to any contem-
plated purposeful action. For example a number of different models relevant to
capturing the purposeful activity of a hospital could be built. Their content would
depend upon the world-view selected, which could range among those attributed to
doctors, nurses, managers, patients, government, the local community, etc.
98
PETER CHECKLAND

These thoughts in combination led to the basic shape of the SSM process, which is
shown in Figure 4.4. In this the concern is not with trying to deﬁne ‘a problem’, and
certainly not ‘a system’ but lies in expressing ‘a situation considered by some to be
problematical’. Models of purposeful activity considered relevant to exploring the
situation are built.
The models are used as a source of questions to ask of the situation addressed. This
provides structure to a debate focused on some possible change which is both desirable
and feasible—desirable, that is, given the models used, and feasible culturally for these
particular people in this particular situation with their particular history and perspec-
tives. The debate about change might be expected to ﬁnd consensus, but in our
experience that is the occasional special case. The norm in the human tribe is the
need to ﬁnd accommodations among world-views in conﬂict. This entails ﬁnding
versions of the situation which different people with different outlooks could never-
theless live with. The whole process is one of learning one’s way to useful practical
change; it needs to be constituted as a learning system. SSM provides many techniques
to help in traversing this learning cycle. They will be mentioned in outline below, but
ﬁrst it is important to make some general points about the cycle as a whole:
· the process, which is action-oriented, is in principle ongoing, although developed
in time-limited projects it can also be seen more generally as a way of going about
the task of managing;
· the models, unlike most models in management science do not purport to
describe anything in the real world, they are only intellectual devices which help
Seek accommodations
enabling desirable and
feasible change to be
defined
Use models
to question
the real
situation
Take
action to
improve
Perceived
real-world
problematical
situation
Relevant
Purposeful activity
Systems
(declared worldviews)
FIGURE 4.4 SSM’s inquiring/learning system
SYSTEMS THINKING AND SOFT SYSTEMS METHODOLOGY
99

bring structure to debate about change; they are models of ways of thinking about
the real situation each based on a particular world-view thought relevant to the
particular situation;
· traversing the cycle is not a step-by-step process; rather, experienced users will be
found doing work at many or all stages of the cycle during a use of the approach:
for example, doing more ﬁnding out, building new models, comparing models
with real-world activity, ﬁnding more relevant world-views; in general, reacting to
the debate engendered, letting it speak, rather than conﬁning it to any particular
template;
· since each model is built according to a declared world-view, the use of the
models to question the real situation raises the focus of debate from current
speciﬁcs to the meta level: What world-views are being taken as given here? What
alternatives are there? This is eye-opening in most situations; really sophisticated
users of SSM use Figure 4.4, once it is internalized, as itself a sense-making model
to bring clarity and understanding to the engagement with the situation; the best
uses usually reveal the approach to be in the hands of people in the situation
addressed, with facilitating help from someone with detailed knowledge of SSM.
As far as techniques are involved in SSM, they facilitate the activities surrounding
the learning cycle in Figure 4.4. They all emerged in research experience and have been
found to be consistently helpful. It is not relevant here to describe them in detail. (The
most accessible source of detail is Checkland and Poulter (2006), an account of SSM
written for people wishing to use the approach rather than agonize about its theory
or its history.)
Finding out about the problematical situation is helped by representing it pictorially
in ‘Rich Pictures’ and in three analyses. The rationale for drawing Rich Pictures is that
the complexity in real life is always a nexus of interacting relationships, and relation-
ships are better represented in pictures than in linear prose. The three analyses (One,
Two, and Three) supplement the pictures, covering: examination of the intervention in
the situation (One); the social ﬂavour of the situation in terms of roles, norms, and
values (Two); and the ‘commodities’ which embody power in the situation—how they
are acquired, used, defended, relinquished etc. (Three). This ﬁnding out is a source
both of ideas for models likely to be insightful and for an understanding of what kind of
change might be feasible in the situation. (In the Concorde work described above, the
introduction of a project management approach was culturally infeasible at that time in
the British Aircraft Corporation.)
The model building in SSM, since it entails forming only concepts of a deﬁned
purposeful activity (not descriptions of part of the real world), is a straightforward
application of logical thinking, once a well-formulated account of the activity (a ‘Root
Deﬁnition’ in SSM) has been made. The core of this kind of model building is the
realization that any purposeful activity can be expressed as a transformation process T
which converts an input into an output. (At one level: ‘unpainted garden fence’ into
‘painted garden fence’, at another: ‘health care needs of the citizens of Oslo’ into ‘those
100
PETER CHECKLAND

needs met’). Model building is then a matter of assembling the activities necessary to
obtain the input to T, the activities to transform it, and the activities to dispose of T’s
output. These activities, linked by arrows which express the dependency of one activity
upon another, represent the model’s operational activities. To this we add activities of
monitoring the operational activities in order to take control action if necessary. This
meets the requirements of a system as an adaptive whole and gives a structure like that
in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.6 shows an activity model built using the IKEA mission statement as if it
were a Root Deﬁnition.
It is not by chance that Figure 4.5 has seven activities in the operational part of the
model. It has been found very useful always to represent the transformation process
initially in around ‘72’ activities, this expression coming from George Miller’s well-
known 1968 paper in cognitive psychology (‘The Magical Number 72’). This sug-
gests, from laboratory experiments, that the human brain may have the capacity to
cope with this many concepts simultaneously. Any of that initial cluster of activities in
a model can always itself become the source of a Root Deﬁnition and a more detailed
model. (For example a single activity: ‘Obtain raw material X’ could itself be expanded
into a model in its own right whose activities would include such items as ‘Find
OPERATIONS
Activity 2
Activity 3
Activity 4
Activity 5
Activity 6
Activity 7
Take control
action
Monitor
1-7
Define measures
of performance
(efficacy
efficiency
effectiveness)
Activity 1
MONITORING
AND CONTROL
FIGURE 4.5 The form of an activity model as an adaptive whole entity (i.e. ‘a system’)
SYSTEMS THINKING AND SOFT SYSTEMS METHODOLOGY
101

suppliers’, ‘Ascertain their reliability’, ‘Compare prices’, etc. This stems from the
layered nature of the core systems concept of an adaptive whole.)
In order to help create purposeful models of this kind SSM provides several guide-
lines from experience. Having thought of a combination of world-view and purposeful
activity relevant to exploring the problem situation, express it in the PQR formula: do
P, by Q, in order to contribute to the higher-level aim R—for example ‘paint the garden
fence, by hand painting, in order to improve the appearance of the property’. This
answers the questions, What?, How?, and Why? (Note that in Figure 4.6 the Root
Deﬁnition used is of the kind: do P to help achieve R, missing out the ‘how’ and with
R only implied as ‘run a successful business’.) Then expand consideration of the
purposeful concept using the CATWOE mnemonic, where T and W are the
1
Define
potential
market
area
4
Appreciate
technology
of home
furnishing
- style
      - function
6
DO
costings
5
Decide
possible
product
range
8
Decide
prices
13
Take control
action
12
Monitor 1-10
2
Appreciate
patterns of
income and
expenditure
3
Appreciate
market
context
7
Decide
product
range
9
Obtain
product
range
10
Market
products
in chosen
area
11
Define criteria for
• efficacy
• efficiency
• effectiveness
FIGURE 4.6 An SSM-style activity model built from the concept in the IKEA mission statement:
marketing home furnishing items of good function and style at prices low enough to enable a
majority of people to buy them
102
PETER CHECKLAND

transformation process and world-view, and the other elements enrich this further. C
(for the metaphor ‘customer’) answers the question: who would be most affected by the
outcome of this transformation process? A (for ‘actor(s)’) addresses the question: who
would carry out these activities? O (for ‘owner(s)’) covers: who could stop this
transformation, and E (‘environmental constraints’ on T) asks: what does this process
have to take as ‘given’ from outside itself—for example, is there a ﬁnite budget or
timescale, or perhaps legal constraints which have to be met? Answering these ques-
tions ensures a rich Root Deﬁnition from which the operational part of the model can
be constructed. It also allows the other part of the model—the monitoring and control
activity—to be completed. (Note that the IKEA mission statement (Figure 4.6) could be
enriched by using CATWOE and PQR.)
Since no two human situations are ever identical, a particular model might have
some highly speciﬁc measure of performance, for example ethics or aesthetics. How-
ever there are three criteria which are always relevant, and deﬁning them for a
particular model always leads to insights. In asking what criteria enable performance
to be monitored, we are asking how might T fail, and we need criteria for each of three
kinds of failure. There might be failure to deliver the output from the input—we need a
criteria for efﬁcacy. Quite separately the process might be using too much resource,
even if it were efﬁcacious—we need a criteria for efﬁciency. Thirdly, even if efﬁcacious
and efﬁcient the process might not be contributing to some higher level or longer-term
aim, since it is possible to do well something which is actually not worth doing at all—it
might be ineffective. So we need to decide how efﬁcacy, efﬁciency, and effectiveness (the
‘3 Es’ in SSM) deﬁned in this way, would be judged for the particular purposeful
transformation in question.
Finally, it was realized in the course of the research that Root Deﬁnitions can be of
two types, now called ‘Primary Task’ or ‘Issue-based’ (IB). PT deﬁnitions are models in
which the purposeful activity model maps, in principle, some real-world structure—for
example in a company with a functional organization structure we might make a model
related to, say, production, in which case the model boundary would map onto the
organization boundary of the production department. An IB deﬁnition on the other
hand is a model of an activity which is relevant and important but is not itself captured
in an organizational entity. For example, when working in the Petrochemical Division
of ICI Ltd, it was found useful to make a model of ‘a system to innovate in the
petrochemical industry’. There was no ‘innovation department’ as such. Many of the
activities in the model did in fact exist in the real situation but were spread between
Research, Production, and Marketing Departments: the model boundary cut across the
organizational boundaries. The general rule is: do not use only PT or IB models, use
both. Not surprisingly, IB models stir up interest precisely because they cut across
organization boundaries and hence impinge upon political realities in the organization
in question. Figure 4.7 summarizes all of these guidelines which support the modelling
process in SSM.
When it comes to using models to structure debate, exactly how this is done will
depend very much on the norms and attitudes in the situation addressed, making
SYSTEMS THINKING AND SOFT SYSTEMS METHODOLOGY
103

generalization difﬁcult. In a project to rethink the role, structure, and information
systems of a 600-strong Head Ofﬁce department in the Shell Group, for example
(described in detail in Checkland and Scholes 1990) the work was carried out in a
sequence of two-day management workshops, making use of a standard way of tackling
issues within the Shell culture. Day One aimed to end up with some relevant models,
Day Two used the models to question the real world of the Head Ofﬁce department and
its ongoing interactions with its internal ‘clients’ in the Company.
Technically, comparing the models with the real situation is done by using the
models as a source of questions to ask of the real world. It is of course also possible to
ask, at a higher level, how the world-views associated with the models compare with the
(normally unexamined) assumptions about the perceived world which characterize the
situation being explored. The questioning can be informal—putting models on ﬂip
charts, for example, and having a discussion with reference to them—or can be carried
out systematically. In this latter case it is a matter of asking, for each activity and link in
The formula: Do P
By Q
To contribute to R
(a statement of the
purposeful activity
and worldview)
enriches
Mnemonic
‘Customers’
(victims or
beneficiares)
Actors
(do-ers)
Owners
(could stop T)
Environmental
Constraints
(taken as given
by this system)
Transformation
Process and
World view
Monitored by
criteria for
Efficacy (E1)
Efficiency (E2)
Effectiveness (E3)
C A T W O E
leads to
Purposeful Activity
Model
operations
monitoring
and
control
helps shape
a Root Definition
may be
Primary Task
or
Issue-based
FIGURE 4.7 Guidelines for building models of concepts of purposeful activity in Soft Systems
Methodology
104
PETER CHECKLAND

a model questions such as: Does this exist in the real situation?, How is it manifest?, Is it
regarded as satisfactory?, Is it essential?, By what criteria is it judged?, etc., etc.
As this kind of comparison proceeds the aim is always to think in terms of possible
desirable change which is also feasible in the culture in question—change which
different interests could live with and is acceptable within the local politics, or changes
them. The change itself may be structural, procedural, or attitudinal, or a mix of all
three. As ideas for a particular change emerge, it can be scrutinized in terms of what,
who, how, when, etc., not forgetting an always relevant question: what enabling activity
would be needed to bring about this change? In the UK’s National Health Service, for
example, it used to be the case that hospital consultants were very powerful indeed,
though that has changed in recent years. When work in the NHS using SSM started, no
change in a UK hospital could be made if powerful consultants did not support it. The
enabling activity was: gain consultant support.
The aim of this necessarily brief account of SSM is to show that it is a well-
established learning approach to real-world complexity. Based on the notions of
usually unexamined, but in principle changeable world-views, together with the ubiq-
uity in human affairs of an intention to act purposefully, it explores situations thought
to be problematical, and learns its way to ‘action to improve’. Its content was honed
over thirty years in several hundred projects which were thought of as both practical
interventions and as pieces of methodological research. A slow maturation led to a way
of engaging with real situations which was very far from the classic systems engineering
process of the 1960s with which it had started. It was only gradually recognized that a
very signiﬁcant intellectual step separated SSM from classic SE, a step which marks and
establishes the distinction between ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ systems thinking. This is explained
in the next section and leads to a ﬁnal section which applies these ideas to the ﬁeld of
information systems.
‘HARD’ AND ‘SOFT’ SYSTEMS THINKING
..................................................................................................................
Whenever you observe someone taking purposeful action in the everyday world it is
always interesting to ask yourself: what ideas must they be taking as given if they
assume that what they are doing is a sensible thing to do? Similarly, of any organized
process of intervention in real situations we can ask ourselves: what must be the
accepted assumptions behind this process? This question can be asked at two levels.
There will be an assumed philosophical position reﬂected in the form of the interven-
tion process, and there will be an assumed sociology reﬂecting a particular view of the
nature of human society.
As SSM developed into a mature process it was gradually realized that it assumed
both a different philosophy and a different sociology from those assumed at the start,
namely the assumptions behind the classic Bell Telephone systems engineering process
(Hall 1962) which had itself been taken as given at the start of the research. In common
SYSTEMS THINKING AND SOFT SYSTEMS METHODOLOGY
105

with most of the systems work done in the 1950s and 1960s, classic SE uses the word
‘system’ in the same way that it is used in everyday language. It is assumed to be a label-
word for reiﬁed ‘systems’ which exist out there in the real world. The world is taken to
contain multiple interacting systems which could be engineered to work better. (This is
the same assumption found in RAND Corporation systems analysis (Hitch 1955),
classic system dynamics (Forrester 1961), classic operational research (Rivett and
Ackoff 1963) and the viable systems model (Beer 1972).) All of this work thus assumes
a philosophy of positivism, the philosophy of natural science, and a process of goal-
seeking/optimizing. Along with this goes a sociology of functionalism, in which each
part of the system addressed plays its part in contributing to the achievement of system
objectives. The viable systems model, for example, consists of a set of linked functional
subsystems, each with an explicit role in the system as whole. This model is then
mapped onto real-world organizations as if functionalism is the only way to conceptu-
alize an organization. The world-view of this strand of thinking is thus that illustrated
in the upper half of Figure 4.8 in which the observer sees systems in the real world
which can be engineered to achieve their objectives.
Perceived
real world
Perceived
real world
SOFT SYSTEMS THINKING
HARD SYSTEMS THINKING
‘I spy systems in
the world which
I can engineer’
Philosophy: Positivism
Sociology: Functionalism
(Systemicity): In the world
Philosophy: Phenomenology
‘I spy chaos and
confusion but I
can create the
enquiry into the
world as a learning
system’
Sociology: Interpretive
(Systemicity): In the process of enquiry
S
S
S
S
Chaos,
confusion
FIGURE 4.8 Hard and Soft system thinking (the former being a special case of the latter)
106
PETER CHECKLAND

Once SSM had embraced the concept of alternative world-views—which can them-
selves change over time—together with the ubiquity in human settings of would-be
purposeful action, its concept of social reality was that this was in a process of
continuously being constructed and reconstructed in human talk and action (Check-
land 1981: ch. 8). Positivism and functionalism do not cover this perception. Rather it
is based on a Husserlian philosophy of phenomenology, in which what is prime is not
the external world itself but our mental activity which engages with that reality,
together with an interpretive sociology of the kind which Alfred Schutz derived from
Husserl’s philosophy (Schutz 1967, originally published in German in 1932). The lower
half of Figure 4.8 illustrates the intellectual stance in which SSM sits. The observer sees
in the world complexity and confusion, but can consciously organize the process of
engaging with the world as a learning system. The difference between the upper and
lower parts of Figure 4.8 lies in their attributions of systemicity (systemness). The
upper observer assumes the world to be systemic, a set of linked systems. The other
observer assumes that he or she can make the process of inquiry into the world
systemic. This different attribution of systemicity is the crucial distinction between
‘hard’ and ‘soft’ systems thinking. (For more detailed discussion, see Checkland and
Holwell 2004; and Checkland and Poulter 2006: Appendix A: SSM’s Theory.)
Expressed in a different way: hard systems thinking uses the word ‘system’ ontolog-
ically; soft systems thinking, as in SSM, uses the word epistemologically, SSM providing
an epistemology for making sense of experienced social reality. This deﬁnes the relation
between ‘hard’ and ‘soft’. The two are not necessarily separate. Within soft systems
thinking the user has the freedom to decide that the chosen action-to-improve might
be, in a particular case, to design and implement in the real situation a system to do
something or other, with all of the work from the 1950s and 1960s available to help
with this. Thus soft systems thinking does not throw away the earlier thinking: the hard
stance is an occasional special case within the soft.
IMPLICATIONS OF SOFT SYSTEMS THINKING
AND SOFT SYSTEMS
..................................................................................................................
Methodology for Information Systems
Basic ideas
The provision of information was rarely absent from the issues involved in the several
hundred projects of the SSM research programme. This is not surprising; information
has long been a compelling issue in human affairs. The ﬁrst printed book in Europe, the
Gutenberg Bible, appeared in 1455, and by 1501 the Pope was suggesting to bishops
that the control of printing should be considered in order to preserve the purity of the
faith (Roberts 1980). Information is always potentially subversive, and control of it is a
SYSTEMS THINKING AND SOFT SYSTEMS METHODOLOGY
107

very common way of exercising power in modern organizations. So it is to be expected
that the opening up of the mind entailed in soft systems thinking and SSM should be
relevant to work in the ﬁeld of information systems.
We can ignore the so-called ‘information theory’ developed from work done in the
1920s by communication engineers. Their concern as engineers was signal coding,
transmitting, receiving, and decoding. The context of the messages sent was not of
interest. To them ‘I have just changed my socks’ has the same status as ‘I have just
pressed the nuclear button.’ One of the pioneers of the theory, Warren Weaver (in
Shannon and Weaver 1949), describes as ‘disappointing and bizarre’ the fact that the
theory ‘has nothing to do with meaning’. But ‘having meaning’ is the usual connotation
of the admittedly ambiguous concept: ‘information’. Although there is no universally
agreed sharp deﬁnition of ‘information’, there is broad agreement in the literature that
‘information’ is what you get when human beings attribute meaning to data in a
particular context.
In fact we can make sense of the world of IS via a familiar but usually unremarked
sequence of mental processes (Checkland and Holwell 1998b). At the start of the
sequence are the uncountable millions of facts which we call data (from the Latin
‘dare’, to give). These are the world’s givens. In the ﬁrst process we pay attention to a
very small subset of all the items of data, the ones of interest to us in our contexts.
Unfortunately we do not have a word for this subset of items of data which we focus on,
have an interest in, or pay attention to. The word capta suggests itself—from the Latin
‘capere’, to take—and would be useful since the selection of capta from a mass of data is
a crucial process both for individuals and organizations. It shapes their creation of
meaning. For example a random item of data which could no doubt be obtained
quickly from the internet is: the temperature today in Tucson, Arizona. I have no
current interest in this. But if I were travelling to Tucson tomorrow and was packing
my bag, I might well promote this item to the category capta, and ﬁnd out the current
temperature in Tucson. This item of capta would immediately be processed into the
next category, information, since it would have acquired meaning in terms of the
context of my packing of clothes for the trip. Over time the next process operates.
Collections of structurally linked data or capta attain a more permanent status and can
survive for a period (possibly a long period) over time: they constitute structures of
knowledge; for example: plate tectonics, or the history of rock climbing in Colorado.
Finally we may add a process in which some knowledge can achieve the higher status
we call ‘wisdom’. This has no agreed deﬁnition but implies a combination of experi-
ence-based knowledge which can provide insightful judgements.
Understanding these processes is the business of the IS ﬁeld, and we may note that at
the heart of the sequence: data/capta/information/knowledge/wisdom is the creation of
what are usually called ‘information systems’. This is a rather loose everyday-language
expression. More precisely, in terms of the above discussion, information systems are
actually ‘capta-processing systems’ which—the designer intends—yield desired infor-
mation. Users of the system, of course, may attribute a meaning to the processed capta
different from that intended by the system designer. For example, a system tabulating
108
PETER CHECKLAND

student marks on a university degree course, intended to help classify degree grades at
an Examination Board meeting, may be seen by lecturers as revealing unequal and
unfair teaching loads. In this lies much of the complexity, and the interest, of work in
the IS ﬁeld. But the starting point at least is clear: deﬁne the capta which will yield the
desired information.
Creating information systems
When it comes to thinking about the process of designing and implementing informa-
tion systems some very basic systems thinking is helpful. Suppose that some purposeful
human action is conceptualized in an SSM-style activity model, model A. Suppose that
this action is served, supported, or helped by some other purposeful activity which
could be conceptualized in another model, model B. Now it is clear that model B could
not be built until model A is available. This is because what counts as the service,
support, or help provided by B would entirely depend upon how A has been described.
In general: if one system serves another then the system which serves can only be
conceptualized when an account of the system served is available. Now, no one creates
information systems for their own sake. They are service systems, created to serve
or support people taking purposeful action. Thus an information system can be
conceptualized properly only after prior careful conceptualization of the purposeful
activity served. Therefore well-thought-out work to create an information system has
to begin by deﬁning the real-world purposeful action which the information system
will support, not by considering data, capta, or information, and especially not by
considering IT.
Subtlety is then added to this process by the fact that a real-world purposeful action
can always be looked at according to various different world-views. For example, the
information systems needed to support a manufacturing operation will be very differ-
ent if that operation is conceptualized in terms of maximizing production efﬁciency,
rather than in terms of meeting a market need. Also, additional subtlety comes from
the fact that the sophistication of modern IT makes it possible to think of new
purposeful activities, ones not possible without the technology, and also new kinds of
information system which would not be possible without the capabilities of today’s
technology. The general situation is therefore that shown in Figure 4.9. Expression of
intended purposeful action makes it possible to deﬁne the needed IS support, which is
realizable through IT. The dotted feedback then acknowledges the role of modern IT in
extending the possibilities both of real-world action and its information support.
System design logically calls for iteration among the elements in Figure 4.9.
Back in the real world, every reader of this book will have experienced instances in
which organizations have purchased computers and/or off-the-shelf systems and only
then asked themselves what they are going to use them for. Once that is decided they
usually wish they had bought a rather different system. Sometimes major problems of
this kind become public knowledge, for example: the failure of the £75 million Taurus
project of the London Stock Exchange; the abandonment of the London ambulance
system after twenty-four hours of chaos; the criticism by the UK Audit Commission of
SYSTEMS THINKING AND SOFT SYSTEMS METHODOLOGY
109

the expenditure of £106 million on would-be integrated hospital support systems
which yielded identiﬁable beneﬁts of £3.3 million. Such failures emphasize the need
for clear basic thinking relevant to the provision of information systems.
The argument here is that systems thinking, especially soft systems thinking and
SSM can provide a way of conceptualizing the social processes in which, in a particular
organizational context, a particular group of people can conceptualise their world and
hence the purposeful action they wish to undertake. That provides the basis for
ascertaining what informational support is needed by those who undertake that action.
Then it becomes appropriate to ask how modern information technology can both
provide that support, and also enrich the thinking about possible action and possible
information systems. (For more extensive discussion of the relation between SSM and
IS see Checkland and Holwell 1998b.)
CONCLUSION
..................................................................................................................
One of the strongest impulses of human beings is to dispel uncertainty by attributing
meaning to what they perceive—even if this entails believing (temporarily) that the
earth is ﬂat. We are meaning-creating animals, which means that at the core of the IS
People
     taking
          purposeful
                action
Information
system
Serves,
    supports
Enables
Information
technology
Makes
possible
new
FIGURE 4.9 The concept of IT-based information support of purposeful action
110
PETER CHECKLAND

ﬁeld is the human process of attributing meaning to what we perceive, in our contexts.
We continuously create information in order to feel more comfortable, more in control
of our perceived world. Sometimes this process is captured in formal ‘information
systems’ involving, nowadays, sophisticated IT. But the technology can never take over
the human act of attributing meaning. This means that IS can never become a purely
technical ﬁeld. Work within it—whether practice or research—will always exhibit a
steady symbiotic interaction between human aspects and technical support.
This chapter argues that the human/social/technical interaction can be conceptua-
lized and helped by Soft Systems Thinking and Soft Systems Methodology. The latter
embodies a view of the nature of human groups: not only organizations, but also less
formal groups such as teams, task forces, or groups of friends. It sees them as
information-creating-and-exchanging groups who create an ongoing story or narrative
which makes sense of them and their unfolding history. This has been expressed, as
below, for a group of family doctors working in a medical practice, but it applies equally
to all organizations and reasonably stable human groups:
Oral history studies of general practice show that GPs have a very clear sense of the
narrative that underpins the development of their practice. The ebb and ﬂow of
partners, memorable employees and past signiﬁcant events blend together to build
a coherent narrative that engenders a sense of belonging within the participants.
(Checkland 2003)
Soft Systems Thinking and Soft Systems Methodology offer a means of uncovering the
narratives which sustain human groups, and hence enable us to grasp their (changing)
ideas about their relevant purposeful action and the information support it will require.
This makes both approaches highly relevant to the related human, social, and technical
issues which characterize, and will continue to characterize, the IS ﬁeld.
REFERENCES
Beer, S. (1972). Brain of the Firm. London: Allen Lane.
Checkland, K. (2003). ‘Changing the Lens: Widening the Approach to Primary Care
Research’, Journal of Health Services Research and Policy, 8(4): 248–50.
Checkland, P. (1981). Systems Thinking, Systems Practice. Chichester: Wiley.
——(1988). ‘OR and the Systems Movement’, Journal of the Operational Research Society, 34
(8): 661–75.
——(1996). ‘Systems and Systems Thinking’, in M. Warner (ed.), International Encyclopaedia
of Business and Management. London: International Thomson Business Press.
Checkland, P., and Haynes, M. (1994). ‘Varieties of Systems Thinking: The Case of Soft
Systems Methodology’, System Dynamics Review, 10(2–3): 189–97.
—— and Holwell, S. (1998a). ‘Action Research: Its Nature and Validity’, Systemic Practice and
Action Research, 11(1): 9–21.
————(1998b). Information, Systems, and Information Systems. Chichester: Wiley.
SYSTEMS THINKING AND SOFT SYSTEMS METHODOLOGY
111

Checkland, P., and Holwell, S. (2004). ‘Classic OR and Soft OR: An Asymmetric Comple-
mentarity’, in Pidd (2004).
—— and Poulter, J. (2006). Learning for Action: A Short Deﬁnitive Account of Soft Systems
Methodology and its Use for Practitioners, Teachers and Students. Chichester: Wiley.
—— and Scholes, J. (1990). Soft Systems Methodology in Action. Chichester: Wiley.
Forrester, J. (1961). Industrial Dynamics (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Gray, W., and Rizzo, N. D. (1973). Unity through Diversity: A Festschrift for Ludwig von
Bertalanffy. New York: Gordon & Breach.
Hall, A. D. (1962). A Methodology for Systems Engineering. Princeton: Van Nostrand.
Hitch, C. J. (1955). ‘An Appreciation of Systems Analysis’, in Optner (1973).
Miller, G. A. (1968). The Psychology of Communication. Harmondsworth: Pelican.
Optner, S. L. (ed.) (1973). Systems Analysis. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Pidd, M. (ed.) (2004). Systems Modelling: Theory and Practice. Chichester: Wiley.
Rivett, P., and Ackoff, R. L. (1963). A Manager’s Guide to Operational Research. Chichester:
Wiley.
Roberts, J. M. (1980). The Penguin History of the World. London: Penguin.
Schutz, A. (1967). The Phenomenology of the Social World. Evanston, IL: Northwestern
University Press.
Shannon, C. E., and Weaver, W. (1949). The Mathematical Theory of Communication.
Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Von Bertalanffy, L. (1968). General System Theory. New York: Braziller.
Wiener, N. (1948). Cybernetics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
112
PETER CHECKLAND

c h a p t e r 5
...............................................................................................
STRUCTURATION THEORY
...............................................................................................
MATTHEW JONES
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
Structuration theory emerged as a signiﬁcant development in European sociology in
the late 1970s. Urry (1982) traced its origins to Berger and Luckman’s (1979) concept
of the mutual constitution of society and individuals, and identiﬁed several different
strands of structurational analysis including the work of Bourdieu (1977), Bhaskar
(1979), and Giddens. In the IS context, however, it is only Giddens that has received
any signiﬁcant attention and his work will therefore be the focus of this chapter.
It should be emphasized at the outset that structuration is a general theory of social
organization rather than a theory speciﬁc to IS. To the extent, however, that IS are seen
as social systems, existing in social and organizational contexts that inﬂuence their
development and use, and are also implicated in sustaining and changing these
contexts, then structuration offers potentially signiﬁcant insights on IS phenomena
as this chapter will seek to illustrate.
This view would seem to be borne out by the claim of Poole and DeSanctis (2004:
207) that structuration had become the ‘theoretical lens of choice for most scholars’ in
the overlap of research on information systems and organizations in the preceding
decade. Whether this choice was always based on a close reading of Giddens’s work,
however, would seem less clear. Certainly, a number of the structurational studies in
the IS ﬁeld adopt perspectives that are signiﬁcantly at odds with the ideas Giddens has
presented. The purpose of this chapter will therefore be to present a summary of key
features of Giddens’s structuration theory and some criticisms that have been made of
these and to discuss its use in the IS ﬁeld in the light of these features.
It should also be acknowledged, however, that, in attempting to summarize struc-
turation and the debates it has engendered in a few pages, there is a risk of Giddens’s
ideas being distorted. This is exacerbated by the quantity of Giddens’s writing (he is the
author of more than forty books and many more articles), which has provided plenty of
opportunity for subtle restatement of the main tenets of his position, and by the wide

range of sources on which he draws in developing the theory (often, it must be said,
providing in the process a most concise and telling précis of others’ work). Combined
with his adoption of deliberately idiosyncratic deﬁnitions of certain key terms and a
ﬂuency of expression that can sometimes seem to cover up for a lack of precision in the
statement of his own position on particular issues, a concise exposition, even in
Giddens’s own words, is not easily arrived at. This has not escaped the notice of his
critics, for example (Bernstein 1989: 27) describes him as ‘foxlike’ and notes his
tendency, in the face of difﬁcult problems, to ‘introduce a plethora of distinctions
and schemas’ which, while illuminating, often fail to be sufﬁciently speciﬁc about the
criteria of their applicability. For this reason, the current chapter will make perhaps
more than usual use of quotations, both from Giddens and those who have drawn on
his work, to enable readers to reach their own conclusions, although of course this
cannot be an adequate substitute for a detailed consultation of the original sources.
STRUCTURATION THEORY
..................................................................................................................
A Brief Sketch of Giddens’s Theory
Giddens has described structuration theory as ‘an attempt to transcend, without
discarding altogether’ (Giddens 1981: 26) competing traditions in social theory and
philosophy between those who consider social phenomena as products of the action of
human ‘agents’ in the light of their subjective interpretation of the world, and others
who see them as caused by the inﬂuence of ‘objective’, exogenous social structures.
Giddens identiﬁes the ﬁrst of these traditions with interpretive sociologies, such as
Schutz’s phenomenology, Garﬁnkel’s ethnomethodology, and post-Wittgensteinian
language philosophy, which, he argues, are ‘strong on action, but weak on structure’
(Giddens 1993: 4), having little to say on issues of ‘constraint, power and large-scale
social organisation’ (ibid.). The other tradition he identiﬁes with ‘naturalistic’ sociology
(a term he prefers to the ‘more diffuse and ambiguous label “positivism”’ (Giddens
1993: 1)), in particular functionalism (especially as developed by Parsons), but also
structuralism and (in some accounts) post-structuralism. These approaches, particu-
larly functionalism, he argues, are ‘strong on structure, but weak on action’ (Giddens
1993: 4), underplaying the importance of human agency, and imputing purposes,
reasons, and needs to society rather than to individuals.
Giddens attempts to ‘square this circle’ by proposing that structure and agency be
viewed, not as independent and conﬂicting elements, but as a mutually interacting
duality. Thus social structure is seen as being drawn on by human agents in their
actions, while the actions of humans in social contexts serve to produce, and reproduce,
the social structure.
More speciﬁcally, Giddens identiﬁes three dimensions of structure, drawing from
earlier work of Durkheim, Marx, and Weber, which he describes as signiﬁcation,
114
MATTHEW JONES

domination, and legitimation. These are seen as interacting through modalities of,
respectively, interpretive schemes, resources, and norms, with human action of com-
munication, power, and sanctions as shown in Figure 5.1. The separation of these
dimensions is simply for analytical convenience, however, since they are, in practice,
intimately interlinked. For example the operation of norms depends upon power
relationships for their effectiveness and are deployed through symbolic and linguistic
devices.
An everyday example may help to illustrate these concepts, albeit at the cost of
presenting structuration in a rather more mechanistic way than might be desirable.
Thus, when buying an item at a shop we draw on structures of signiﬁcation which tell
us that items have prices and that we may expect these to be displayed on or near them
and that the pieces of paper or metal (money) in our pockets are valid forms of
exchange for these items. Our interpretive scheme allows us to translate the symbols
on the price tag into an idea of how much money we will need to buy them. Similarly
we draw on structures of domination that indicate that money gives you the right to
acquire the item and expect the shopkeeper to hand over the item in exchange for the
money. There are also structures of legitimation which deﬁne the appropriate norms of
exchange in the particular cultural context—in Britain we usually do not haggle over
the price and would expect to receive sanctions if we tried to take the item without
paying. In acting in the established way we reinforce these existing structures. For
example, in proffering the appropriate amount of money for the items we reproduce
the structure of signiﬁcation, in receiving the item in exchange for the money the
structure of domination is reproduced, in paying the ticket price for the goods we
reinforce the structure of legitimation. In each instance, however, there is the possibility
(since we are active agents) that we may fail to reproduce the structure. We could argue
with the shopkeeper over the meaning of the symbols on the price tag, arm-wrestle
with them to decide the right to acquire the item, or take the item without paying. If
Signification
Domination
Legitimation
Interpretive
Schemes
Facility
Norm
Communication
Power
Sanction
Structure
(Modality)
Interaction
FIGURE 5.1 The dimensions of the duality of structure (after Giddens 1984: 29)
STRUCTURATION THEORY
115

enough people behaved in that way then one might expect the existing structures to
change.
The Duality of Structure and its Status
For Giddens the duality of structure refers to the ‘essential recursiveness of social life, as
constituted in social practices: structure is both medium and outcome of the reproduc-
tion of practices’ (Giddens 1979: 69). His emphasis is therefore on structuration as an
ongoing process rather than structure as a static property of social systems. In order to
drive this home, Giddens adopts quite speciﬁc and non-standard meanings for certain
key terms (Giddens 1979: 66) (see Table 5.1).
The particular meaning of rules in this context is also the subject of extended
discussion (Giddens 1984: 17–23) in which Giddens distinguishes between the ‘rules
of social life [which are] techniques or generalisable procedures applied in the enact-
ment/reproduction of social practices’ and ‘formulated rules’, such as those of a game
or a bureaucracy, which are ‘codiﬁed interpretations of rules rather than rules as such’
(Giddens 1984: 21). As an illustration of the type of rules he is referring to Giddens cites
the mathematical formula an = n2 þ n – 1. As he stresses, this does not mean that
‘social life can be reduced to a set of mathematical principles’ (Giddens 1984: 20), but
that the formula provides a rule for how to carry on in any given situation (n) and that
an individual may be able to state the formula without understanding its meaning or
observe a sequence of numbers that obey it without being able to describe the principle
involved. Two types of resources are also distinguished: allocative, which involve
‘transformative capacity generating command over objects, goods or material phenom-
ena’ and authoritative, which involve ‘transformative capacity generating commands
over persons or actors’ (Giddens 1984: 33).
Giddens’s deﬁnition of structure leads him to describe it as a ‘virtual order’ of
transformative relations that only exists when instantiated in the practices of social
actors and in the memory traces of knowledgeable human agents (Giddens 1984: 17).
For Giddens, therefore, even apparently material allocative resources (such as land)
which ‘might seem to have a ‘real existence’ . . . become resources only when
incorporated within processes of structuration’ (Giddens 1984: 33).
Table 5.1 Giddens’s key terms
STRUCTURE
Rules and resources, organized as properties of systems. Structure only exists as
‘structural properties’.
SYSTEM
Reproduced relations between actors or collectivities, organized as regular social
practices.
STRUCTURATION
Conditions governing the continuity or transformation of structures, and
therefore the reproduction of systems.
116
MATTHEW JONES

This idea, that structure is virtual, has attracted particular controversy, leading some
critics to identify Giddens as an idealist (Porpora 1989; Sewell 1992). For Sewell (1992),
for example, Giddens’s conﬂation of rules and resources is ontologically inconsistent.
Although rules (or conceptual schemas as he prefers to call them) may be virtual, he
argues, resources always have a material basis. Layder (1987) also argues that Giddens’s
complete rejection of any objectivist element in his ontological position is both
unnecessary and theoretically problematic, while New (1994) argues that Giddens’s
view that structure is causally generative implies that it is real. Arguing that these
critiques have their own problems and are based on a misreading of Giddens, however,
Stones (2005) proposes a revised account of structuration, consistent with Giddens’s
writings, that he calls ‘strong structuration’. In particular he distinguishes, analytically,
between external and internal structures (the conditions of action and the dispositions
and conjuncturally speciﬁc knowledge of external structures) that, he suggests are
present, but under-elaborated and under-explained, in Giddens’s own account.
Clearly, it is not possible within this chapter to resolve these debates. For the present
purposes, however, it will sufﬁce to note the central position of Giddens’s distinctive
concept of structure to the claims of structuration theory and that a plausible defence of
Giddens’s treatment of structure is possible.
Knowledgeability, Agency, and Constraint
A further important corollary of Giddens’s account of structure is the knowledgeability
of social actors. This may include ‘unconscious sources of cognition’ (Giddens 1979: 5)
as well as those at level of practical consciousness embodied in what actors know ‘about
how to “go on” in the multiplicity of contexts of social life’ (Giddens 1983) and at the
discursive level, at which they are able to provide explanations for them (Giddens 1984:
7). Individuals are thus seen to be continuously engaged in reﬂexive monitoring of
conduct, rather than as the ‘cultural’ or ‘structural dopes . . . of stunning mediocrity’
(Giddens 1979: 52) suggested by traditional views of structure as constraint on action.
This has important implications for the understanding of social action, as ‘every
member of society must know . . . a great deal about the workings of that society by
virtue of his or her participation in it’ (Giddens 1979: 250). Giddens uses the term
‘discursive penetration’ to describe this awareness of social actors of their engagement
in social reproduction and production. This leads, he argues to a ‘double hermeneutic’
whereby the concepts that sociological observers describe are already constituted as
meaningful by social actors and can themselves become elements of the actors’
understanding of their own condition.
This knowledgeability of social actors might seem to suggest that they are always in
control of action. Giddens avoids this however by emphasizing the unacknowledged
conditions and unintended consequences of action. Thus ‘the production or constitu-
tion of society is a skilled accomplishment of its members, but one that does not take
STRUCTURATION THEORY
117

place under conditions that are either wholly intended or wholly comprehended by
them’ (Giddens 1993: 108).
For a number of critics (e.g. Callinicos 1985; Porpora 1989; Archer 1990), however,
Giddens’s treatment of agency is inappropriately voluntaristic (unacknowledged con-
ditions and unanticipated consequences notwithstanding). In particular they question
Giddens’s contention that structure is not simply constraining, but is also enabling, and
that, except in situations where they have been drugged and manhandled by others,
human agents always ‘have the possibility of doing otherwise’ (Giddens 1989: 258).
Thus ‘the seed of change is there in every act which contributes towards the reproduc-
tion of any “ordered” form of social life’ (Giddens 1993: 108). This is linked to a
relational model of power based on a dialectic of control whereby the operation of
power relationships relies upon the compliance of subordinates.
Giddens’s critics, however, suggest that it does not make sense to argue that
structural constraint simply places ‘limits upon the feasible range of options open to
an actor in a given circumstance’ (Giddens 1984: 177). Individuals, such as a landless
peasant at the start of the capitalist era, they argue, had effectively only one feasible
option if they wished to survive, to sell their labour-power. Archer (1995) therefore
proposes a morphogenetic approach in which constraint and action operate sequen-
tially, while Layder (1985: 146) argues for a notion of structural power which is ‘not
simply a negotiable outcome of routine and concrete interactions and relationships’ in
the speciﬁc context. Barbalet (1987), in particular, criticizes Giddens’s assumption that
material existents (which, as we shall see, are a potentially signiﬁcant issue in relation to
a structurational theory of information systems) cannot be social structural resources
in power relations. Similarly Storper (1985) argues that ‘the durée of the material,
although not imposing absolute constraints on system change, does mean that at any
moment not everything is possible’.
Critics of Giddens also question his view that social order is produced and repro-
duced entirely through individual action. Focusing on the dependency of social
structure on agency, some, such as Harré (1983), suggest that in well-ordered institu-
tions, such as monasteries, social rules may dominate social reproduction and that
individual structurational agency is thus insigniﬁcant or even absent. Others argue that
all aspects of structure may not be equally amenable to agency, suggesting that there
may be a ‘differentiated (and thus limited) topography for the exercise of agency rather
than an endlessly recursive plain’ (Storper 1985: 419), or that some structural con-
straints may be ‘relatively independent’ (Layder 1987).
Giddens, however, does not accept these views, suggesting that the alternative to his
conception of agency is a form of determinism. All sanctions, he argues, no matter how
oppressive and comprehensive, even the threat of death, carry no weight without the
acquiescence of those threatened with them, in this case the individual’s wish not to die
(Giddens 1984: 175). Again, this is not the place to resolve these debates, but it is
important to note that Giddens’s account of structuration leads him to adopt a
particularly strong view of the knowledgeability and agency of social actors, that has
118
MATTHEW JONES

potentially signiﬁcant methodological implications for researchers drawing on Gid-
dens’s work, as will be discussed further below.
Time, Routines, and Time/Space Distantiation
Time, for Giddens, is one of the central, but frequently neglected, topics of social
science and each of his major writings gives considerable attention to it. In particular,
he identiﬁes (Giddens 1994: 28) three intersecting planes of temporality involved in
every moment of structuration—durée (the temporality of daily experience), Heide-
gerrian dasein (the temporality of the life-cycle, being-unto-death), and Braudel’s
longue durée (the temporality of institutions). In this way, he argues, structuration
ties together the individual and institutional levels of social practice and points to the
recursive nature of social life.
The idea of structure being continuously produced and reproduced through action
also leads to another signiﬁcant aspect of structuration, that of routinization. Giddens
argues that routine is ‘integral to the continuity of the personality of the agent . . . and to
the institutions of society’ (Giddens 1984: 60). In particular, individuals acquire
ontological security through their engagement in predictable routines and encounters.
Because these encounters are also constitutive of social institutions they enable the
continuity of social life, the classic sociological ‘problem of order’. Giddens permits a
distinction between two levels of integration, or regularized relations of relative
autonomy and dependence, between social practices. The ﬁrst is deﬁned as ‘social
integration’ and refers to ‘systemness’, in terms of the deﬁnition given above, at the
level of face-to-face interaction, while the second, ‘system integration’, refers to system-
ness on the level of relations between social systems or collectivities (Giddens 1979: 76).
What this highlights, apart from the differentiation of micro and macro spheres of
sociological analysis, is the signiﬁcance of space and presence in social relations. This
forms an important strand of Giddens’s later analysis of modernity (see the section
below entitled ‘Other, Related Writing of Giddens’), drawing on the work of time-
geographers. From an IS standpoint this is particularly signiﬁcant in view of the role of
IT in the changing temporal and spatial character of modern organizations.
The Role of Theory and its Relationship
to Empirical Research
The ﬁnal aspect of structuration to be considered will be its relevance to empirical
research, where some critics, such as Gregson (1989) have suggested that it operates at
too high a level of generality to provide guidance in speciﬁc empirical settings. Giddens,
himself, also shows a certain ambivalence about the appropriate use of his ideas,
STRUCTURATION THEORY
119

presenting various statements of the principles and features of a ‘structurationist
programme of research’ in different works (Giddens 1984: 281–4; Giddens 1989: 300;
Giddens 1991b: 311) and in Giddens (1983), Giddens (1984: Chapter 6), and Giddens
(1991a: 213–18) he discusses various attempts by researchers to use structuration in
empirical research projects. At the same time he frequently states that structuration is
not intended as a concrete research programme (Giddens 1983: 77) and that his
principles ‘are essentially procedural and do not supply concepts useful for the actual
prosecution of research’ (Giddens 1990b: 311). He is also critical of those who ‘have
attempted to import structuration theory in toto into their given area of study’,
preferring those ‘in which concepts, either from the logical framework of structuration
theory, or other aspects of my writings, are used in a sparing and critical fashion’
(Giddens 1991b: 213). Another favoured description of the role of structuration in
empirical research is the use of principles derived from it as ‘sensitising devices’ or to
‘provide an explication of the logic of research into human social activities and cultural
products’ (Giddens 1991b: 213).
Craib (1992: 108) suggests that this is because the focus of structuration is primarily
ontological: ‘it tells us what sort of things are out there in the world, not what is
happening to or between them; it does not give us anything to test or to ﬁnd out’, or, as
Archer puts it, structuration is ‘fundamentally non-propositional’. This is effectively
acknowledged by Giddens (1989: 295) in his distinction between theory, as a generic
category, and theories, or explanatory generalization. Structuration, he argues, is clearly
of the ﬁrst type. A number of authors have therefore suggested that structuration is best
considered as a meta-theory, a way of thinking about the world rather than as an
empirically testable explanation of social behaviour, indeed Weaver and Gioia (1994)
propose it as the integrating meta-theory for organizational studies (although this is
contested by DeCock and Rickards (1995)).
Another signiﬁcant feature of structuration theory in relation to empirical research
is Giddens’s post-empiricist and anti-positivist methodological stance (Bryant and Jary
1991). Thus, in Giddens (1984: 344–5) he states that there are no universal laws of
human social conduct (equivalent to those in the natural sciences), and argues further
that ‘The idea that with further research such laws will eventually be uncovered is, at
best, markedly implausible’. Hence social generalizations can only ever be ‘historical’,
i.e. temporally and spatially circumscribed. He also rejects, as a form of determinism,
what he describes as ‘event causality’ (Giddens 1993: 91) that presupposes ‘laws’ of
invariant connection.
While for Giddens, this means that ‘all social science is irretrievably hermeneutic’
(Giddens 1993: 13), this does not imply that ‘technically-sophisticated, hard-edged’
methods can make no contribution to social research (Giddens 1991b: 219). Indeed
in Giddens (1994) he speciﬁcally states that ‘I do not try to wield a methodological
scalpel. . . there is [nothing] in the logic or the substance of structuration theory which
would somehow prohibit the use of some speciﬁc research technique, such as survey
methods, questionnaires or whatever’. Rather, he argues that ‘the intellectual claims of
sociology do not rest distinctively upon [hard-edged research]. All social research in
120
MATTHEW JONES

my view, no matter how mathematical or quantitative, presumes ethnography’
(Giddens 1991b: 219). This is not to say that ethnography is the only valid form of
structurational research, but that all social research depends on an underlying deep
understanding of the phenomena it seeks to study.
Other, Related Writings of Giddens
The breadth of application of structuration theory means that it has implications across
the entire range of social phenomena and Giddens has explored these in a number of
works that followed his initial exposition of structuration in the 1970s and 80s. Several
aspects of this research may be argued to deserve serious consideration in the IS ﬁeld,
especially as Giddens considers them to be a continuation of the structurational project
(Bryant and Jary 2001: 6)).
In The Consequences of Modernity (Giddens 1990a), for example, Giddens charac-
terizes the current era as one of ‘high’ modernity (rather than some form of postmo-
dernity) which acquires its dynamism through the separation of time and space, the
development of disembedding mechanisms, and the reﬂexive appropriation of knowl-
edge. As we have seen, time and space are signiﬁcant features of structuration, and
Giddens argues that the two are becoming increasingly separated. Whereas in pre-
modern societies time might have been measured by the movement of the sun relative
to the features of a speciﬁc locale, or even by a public clock, in modern society time
throughout the world follows a common, abstract, and standardized order. Space is
also dislocated from place as the common physical environment of interaction in pre-
modern societies gives way to interactions between individuals widely separated from
any situation of face-to-face interaction, whether communicating over a telephone or
corresponding with friends or customers in another country. In this, IT, not least the
Internet, may be seen to have a potentially signiﬁcant role.
The concept of disembedding refers to the ‘lifting out’ of social relations from
speciﬁc contexts and their ‘restructuring across indeﬁnite spans of time-space’
(Giddens 1990a: 21) and is viewed, with reﬂexivity, as a major source of the globalizing
character of modernity. Disembedding is seen as being achieved by two forms of
‘abstract systems’: symbolic tokens, pre-eminently money, and ‘expert systems’, here
seen as ‘systems of technical accomplishment or professional expertise’ (Giddens
1990a: 27) such as those involved in designing a software programme or in medical
diagnosis. Individuals, who cannot hope to acquire all the necessary technical expertise
to understand how these ‘expert systems’ work, nevertheless have to trust in their
enduring and generalized efﬁcacy. Thus, even if Giddens adopts a non-standard
deﬁnition of the term ‘expert system’, IS are likely to be implicated in many of these
disembedding mechanisms.
The reﬂexive appropriation of knowledge describes the way in which knowledge
about social practices comes to be drawn upon in their reproduction. For example,
STRUCTURATION THEORY
121

concepts of the information society, such as information poverty or the virtual organi-
zation, help us to make sense of and talk about the way that society is perceived to be
changing. This knowledge is not uniformly appropriated however and certain groups
may be better placed to draw on it in the pursuit of sectional interests.
These ideas are taken forward in Modernity and Self Identity (Giddens 1991b),
predominantly at the level of the individual. Here the focus is on how modernity
contributes to a reﬂexivity of the self which Giddens links with existential anxiety and
the problematization of identity. Electronic media are seen as an inseparable compo-
nent of modernity, contributing to a ‘collage effect’, whereby news about the world
becomes a patchwork of unconnected events not linked to any particular sense of place,
and to the increasing intrusion of distant events into everyday life. They are also
identiﬁed as contributing to the plurality of lifestyle choices that individuals face.
STRUCTURATION AND IS
..................................................................................................................
In their own review of structuration theory and IS research, which analysed more than
330 studies, Jones and Karsten (2008) identiﬁed nine earlier review papers. It would
therefore seem unnecessary to duplicate these efforts here. Rather the focus will be on
exploring the distinctive character of structurational research in the IS ﬁeld and on
some particular issues that structuration presents in the IS context.
In order to appreciate the particular ways in which IS researchers have used
structuration, however, some understanding of structurational research in the more
general management ﬁeld would seem to be required, as this may be considered the
context from which structurational IS studies emerged. Thus the use of structuration
theory by management researchers, while following that in sociology, pre-dated its
signiﬁcant uptake in the IS ﬁeld by almost a decade, with many of the early IS-related
papers employing structuration being published in management journals.
Structuration in Management Research
Ranson, Hinings, and Greenwood (1980) is widely identiﬁed as one of the ﬁrst attempts
to utilize structuration in the management literature. Their discussion of organizational
structure cites Bourdieu and Giddens and emphasizes the continual production and
reproduction of structure through the action of organizational members. They also
suggest, however, that structures, ‘embody and become constitutive of . . . provinces of
meaning’ which are mediated by contingent size, technology, and environment and
that ‘the inﬂuence of structural constraints upon organizational structuring can be
quite independent of an individual’s perception of them’ (p. 11). As Willmott (1981)
122
MATTHEW JONES

argued, such claims are inconsistent with Giddens and are based on a functionalist
model of organization that structuration had sought to transcend.
Another widely cited early study is Riley (1983), who employed structuration in an
analysis of organizational culture, with a focus on ‘organizational symbols and lan-
guage that embody political intentions or display the trappings of political power’
(p. 418). Issues of power were also taken up in another signiﬁcant stream of structura-
tional analysis by Knights, Willmott, and others (e.g. Knights and Willmott 1985;
Willmott 1987; and Knights and Willmott 1989). In the management ﬁeld, therefore,
structurational research had an important critical component.
While this early literature, although drawing on some empirical evidence, had a
primarily theoretical focus, structuration was also used in a few case studies such as that
of Smith (1983) on the pure-bred beef business. A similar mix of theoretical and
empirical papers is found in the accounting literature, with Roberts and Scapens
(1985) using structuration to propose a reorientation of accounting research, while
Macintosh and Scapens (1990) used it to analyse a longitudinal case study of account-
ing practice, arguing that management accounting systems constitute interpretive
schemes, communicate norms and values, and support management control. Boland
(1996), however, argued that, in basing their explanation on shared meanings and
values, Macintosh and Scapens had misinterpreted Giddens, ignoring the agency of
individual managers and the way in which they created meaning for themselves from
the accounting reports.
As Whittington (1992) argued, therefore, in reviewing forty-seven structurational
papers in leading management journals in the 1980s, management researchers’ early
use of Giddens’s work was characterized by selective use of his ideas and, in some cases,
by their misinterpretation. Some of these misinterpretations could be highly inﬂuential,
moreover, giving rise to a substantial secondary literature, the majority of which cited
only earlier management papers. Giddens, Whittington (1992: 707) concluded, there-
fore, had ‘still not been fully put into action’ in the management literature.
Subsequent reviews of structuration in management research suggest that this
picture may not have changed signiﬁcantly. Thus Pozzebon (2004) showed that in
the eighteen structurational papers published in the strategic management ﬁeld be-
tween 1995 and 2000, Giddens’s ideas were rarely the primary theoretical foundation.
Rather, structuration was used as a ‘broad framework’ to complement other theories,
especially institutionalism. The predominantly theoretical orientation of structura-
tional research in organization studies and the consequent paucity of empirical work
was also noted by Pozzebon and Pinsonneault (2005).
Structuration and IS Research
In contrast to other management ﬁelds, Pozzebon and Pinsonneault (2005) showed
that IS structurational research has had a much stronger emphasis on empirical studies.
Indeed they identify a cumulative tradition of empirical structurational studies in the
STRUCTURATION THEORY
123

IS ﬁeld that they suggest may provide lessons for other management researchers.
Although Jones and Karsten (2008) also reported more than 80 per cent of empirical
papers among those they reviewed, they remained more doubtful about whether these
constituted a cumulative tradition, noting the fragmentation and lack of co-citation of
different strands of this research (often reﬂecting their differing philosophical orienta-
tions). Nevertheless it would seem that IS structurational research has had a particular
emphasis on empirical studies.
Empirical Structurational IS Research
Nearly half of the 331 studies reviewed by Jones and Karsten (2008) involved the
straightforward empirical application of structuration theory, that is, they employed
structurational concepts to address IS-related phenomena, with about half of these
being general applications of the theory as a whole (typically characterized in terms of
the duality of structure and its dimensions). Such papers often seek to illustrate the
insights offered by structuration on particular IS processes such as strategy formation
(Walsham and Waema 1994), IS development (Sillince and Mouakket 1997), or IS
implementation (Montealegre 1997), or in particular application domains, such as
agro-informatics (Leeuwis 1993), real estate ﬁrms (Crowston, Sawyer, and Wigand
2001), or healthcare (Lehoux et al. 2002). Many of the early structurational IS studies
(e.g. Barley’s widely cited study of the implementation of computed tomography
scanners in two hospitals (Barley 1986)) were of this type and a steady stream of
such papers has continued to be published over the years. While initially valuable in
demonstrating the relevance of structuration theory in IS research and establishing the
empirical tradition in the ﬁeld, however, it is unclear how further studies ‘applying’
structuration theory in toto, which do not extend or challenge existing accounts,
necessarily advance our understanding of either structuration theory or IS.
More consistent with Giddens’s preference for ‘sparing and critical’ use of structur-
ation (Giddens 1991b: 213), there has also been a continuing stream of papers employ-
ing particular aspects of the theory, such as its treatment of agency and constraint (e.g.
Nandhakumar and Jones 1997) or time and temporality (Barrett and Scott 2004), to
address IS phenomena, as well as a smaller number of studies exploring the use of
concepts, such as self-identity (Thompson 1989) and disembedding (Ellingsen and
Monteiro 2003) from Giddens’s later writings. In both cases, however, the relatively
small number of studies and their selective treatment of Giddens’s ideas has meant that
IS researchers have addressed only a limited range of his concepts, leaving considerable
opportunities for further contributions. As was observed of management researchers’
use of structuration, therefore, it would also appear to have ‘exercised a substantial, if
rather peculiar, inﬂuence’ (Whittington 1992: 707) in the IS ﬁeld.
124
MATTHEW JONES

Theoretical Developments
If IS structurational research has been notable for its empirical orientation, this does
not mean that it has had nothing to say from a theoretical perspective. Indeed, the
structurational IS literature includes two signiﬁcant theoretical contributions, Poole
and DeSanctis’s ‘Adaptive Structuration Theory’ (AST) (Poole and DeSanctis 1990;
DeSanctis and Poole 1994) and Orlikowski’s ‘Duality of Technology’ (Orlikowski
1992), and later works that have sought to develop and apply an IS-speciﬁc version
of structuration that overcomes what are perceived to be its limitations in the IS
context. While there is not the space in this chapter to provide a detailed account of
these authors’ positions, some important features of their treatment of structuration
deserve attention.
Adaptive Structuration Theory
Responding to what they perceived to be IS researchers’ enduring concern with the
‘structuring properties of technology’, Poole and DeSanctis identiﬁed structuration
theory as providing a potentially valuable ‘focus on structure and on the processes by
which structures are used and modiﬁed over time’ (Poole and DeSanctis 2004: 208).
‘There are at least two aspects of structuration theory that are not developed by
Giddens but are essential to address in order for empirical study of structuration to
proceed for IS’, they argued however (Poole and DeSanctis 2004: 210). These were
identiﬁed as the role of technology (as ‘structuration theory does not include technol-
ogy’) and the application of ‘deterministic reasoning within the recursive logic of the
theoretical arguments’.
AST, therefore, considers technologies as social structures that can be described in
terms of their structural features (examples of which are cited, in the context of Group
Decision Support Systems, as anonymous recording of ideas and voting algorithms) and
their spirit (deﬁned as the ‘general intent with regards to values and goals underlying a
given set of structural features’) (DeSanctis and Poole 1994: 126). Structural features are
seen to correspond to Giddens’s structures of signiﬁcation and domination, while spirit
is associated with structures of legitimation. Using these extra constructs, it is argued,
AST can be used to establish propositions of the form: ‘Given advanced information
technology and other sources of social structure n1 to nk and ideal appropriation
processes, and decision processes that ﬁt the task at hand, then desired outcomes of
advanced information technology will result’ (DeSanctis and Poole 1994: 131).
Thus AST, Poole and DeSanctis (2004: 216) argue, can be used to advance a
programme of what they describe as ‘functional’ structurational research that develops
testable models which represent IS phenomena as a ‘network of causal, moderating,
and correlational relationships among abstract variables’. While many of the AST
studies of Poole, DeSanctis, and colleagues have adopted this approach, as has almost
all the substantial secondary AST literature (much of which does not cite Giddens),
Poole and DeSanctis (2004: 217) also identify a second type of structurational research
STRUCTURATION THEORY
125

that they term ‘constitutive’. ‘Underlying every variable and relationship in a causal
analysis is a process of social construction responsible for making it an active force in
the social system’, they argue, and constitutive analysis can be used to study ‘the
interpretive processes that ﬁgure in the operation of causal relationships’. For Poole
and DeSanctis, ‘Functional’ and ‘Constitutive’ analyses ‘complement and buttress one
another to provide a comprehensive picture of structuration processes’ (Poole and
DeSanctis 2004: 218).
As Poole and DeSanctis (2004) acknowledge, their conception of structuration is at
odds with Giddens in several respects: structure is considered to be separable from
action and potentially capable of being embedded in technology; causal logics that can
‘explain variance in behaviours and predict outcomes’ are introduced; and they advo-
cate an agenda for structurational IS research predominantly focused on quantiﬁcation,
constructs, and relationships and testable models. AST itself also interprets a number
of Giddens’s concepts, such as structure, dialectic of control, structures of signiﬁcation,
domination, and legitimation in idiosyncratic ways and introduces new concepts such
as ‘spirit’ and ‘faithfulness’ of ‘appropriation moves’ (DeSanctis and Poole 1994) that
are not evidently derived from Giddens’s work. While, therefore, AST has undoubtedly
been inﬂuential in IS structurational research (contributing to more than 20 per cent of
the papers reviewed by Jones and Karsten (2008)) it has not necessarily advanced this
research in ways that are well aligned with Giddens’s account of structuration. For
Poole and DeSanctis (2004: 218) this is unavoidable if structuration is to ﬁt with
‘mainstream views in the IS ﬁeld’. Jones and Karsten (2008), however, argue that
there is considerable scope for advancing structurational IS research in ways that do
not involve the a priori rejection of key tenets of Giddens’s position.
Orlikowski’s duality of technology and practice lens
The potential for such critical, but sympathetic use of Giddens’s work is perhaps
illustrated by the evolution of the structurational research of Wanda Orlikowski. Her
early papers in this area included a case study applying structuration theory to explore
the contradictory implications of the implementation of CASE tools for forms of
control in a software consulting ﬁrm (Orlikowski 1993b); the development and illus-
tration of structurationally informed frameworks for investigating the interaction of
human actors and social structure during IS development and use (Orlikowski and
Robey 1991) and, perhaps best known, her ‘duality of technology’ study (Orlikowski
1992). Presented by Bryant and Jary (2001: 48) as an exemplar of the use of structura-
tion, this set out a ‘structurational model of technology’ (Figure 5.2) that sought to
insert technology into Giddens’s structure/agency duality.
In Orlikowski (1992: 403) technology is deﬁned as ‘material artifact’ (although it is
claimed, paradoxically, that this does not imply an ‘exclusive focus on technology as a
physical object’), that is ‘created and changed by human action, yet it is also used by
humans to accomplish some action’. This is termed the ‘duality of technology’.
Technology is thus seen as ‘interpretively ﬂexible’, even if this is not always recognized
due to the ‘time-space discontinuity’ of design and use of IS which ‘typically’ occur in
126
MATTHEW JONES

different organizations (those of the vendor and customer). Interpretive ﬂexibility is
not considered to be inﬁnite, however, being constrained by the material characteristics
of the technology and the institutional contexts of its design and use, and the power,
knowledge, and interests of the relevant actors. In particular, technology is seen as
reinforcing or transforming the institutional properties of organizations (arrow ‘d’
in Figure 5.2). For example, ‘when users conform to the technology’s embedded rules
and resources’ (i.e. structures in Giddens’s terms) it is argued, ‘they unwittingly
sustain the institutional structures in which the technology is deployed’ (Orlikowski
1992: 411).
Compared to AST, Orlikowski’s model is much more evidently aligned with
Giddens’s account of structuration, and Orlikowski (1992) frequently shows a subtle
appreciation of Giddens’s work. In a number of respects, however, the duality of
technology also departs signiﬁcantly from Giddens. Thus, the deﬁnition of technology
as material artefact, existing outside the duality of structure and agency and acting
unilaterally on institutional properties, is ontologically inconsistent. Similarly, to sug-
gest that structure may be somehow embedded in technology is to separate it from
agency and hence to turn Giddens’s carefully constructed duality back into a dualism.
In subsequent papers analysing genres of organizational communication (Yates and
Orlikowski 1992) and cases of incremental and radical change in systems development
(Orlikowski 1993a) electronic mail and conferencing technology in a Japanese R&D
project group (Orlikowski, Okamura, and Fujimoto 1995), use of Lotus Notes in two
consultancies (Orlikowski et al. 1995), and organizational transformation in the cus-
tomer support function at a software company (Orlikowski 1996), the structurational
model of Orlikowski (1992) was not signiﬁcantly developed or applied, rather there was
greater emphasis on improvisation, enactment, and practices. This trend may be seen
as culminating in a signiﬁcant restatement of Orlikowski’s structurational approach in
her ‘Practice lens’ paper (Orlikowski 2000). Contrary to her earlier account, Orlikowski
(2000) argues that technologies do not become stabilized after development, but are
continuously open to modiﬁcation and new uses, and that structures, as Giddens
understands them, cannot be embodied in technology, but are enacted and emergent
Institutional
properties
Technology
Human agents
c
a
b
d
FIGURE 5.2 The structurational model of tech-
nology (Orlikowski 1992)
STRUCTURATION THEORY
127

through users’ situated practices. She thus proposes a distinction between technology
as artefact, ‘the bundle of material and symbol properties packaged in some socially-
recognisable form’, e.g. hardware, software, techniques, and technology-in-practice,
‘the speciﬁc structure routinely enacted as we use the speciﬁc machine, technique,
appliance, device, or gadget in recurrent ways in our everyday situated activities’
(Orlikowski 2000: 408). This practice perspective has subsequently been applied in
studies of temporal structuring (Orlikowski and Yates 2002), in a globally distributed
high-tech organization, and technology-mediated network relations (Schultze and
Orlikowski 2004).
Other theoretical contributions
Although the work of DeSanctis, Poole, and Orlikowski has been highly inﬂuential in
promoting structurational research in the IS ﬁeld (at least as indicated by the secondary
literature citing them) they have not been the only IS researchers to engage theoreti-
cally with structuration. Thus Jones and Karsten (2008) identify a group of IS papers
seeking to extend structuration through the use of other theories such as Actor
Network Theory (e.g. Braa and Hedberg 2002), Unger’s formative contexts (e.g.
Ciborra and Lanzara 1994) and Luhmann’s autopoiesis (e.g. Holmer-Nadesan 1997).
A number of authors have also offered critiques of structuration drawing on
approaches such as Actor Network Theory (e.g. Monteiro and Hanseth 1995) and
Critical Realism (e.g. Dobson 2001). The issues raised in these papers reﬂect a number
of the themes identiﬁed in the earlier discussion of the key features of stucturation. The
ﬁnal section of this chapter therefore draws these together to present a critical assess-
ment of structuration’s contribution and potential in the IS ﬁeld.
ISSUES IN THE USE OF STRUCTURATION
IN IS RESEARCH
..................................................................................................................
The Materiality of Technology
As was explained in the introduction to this chapter, Giddens makes almost no
reference in his extensive writings to technology or to IS phenomena. Indeed, when
pressed on this point he remarked ‘technology does nothing, except as implicated in the
actions of human beings’ (Giddens and Pierson 1998: 2). This has led some authors to
argue that Giddens and some structurational IS researchers neglect technology, treat-
ing it as a ‘mere occasion for structuring, without any activity or speciﬁcity of its own’
(Berg 1998: 466).
While it may be the case, as Monteiro and Hanseth (1995) have argued, that IS
researchers employing structuration theory have often failed to be sufﬁciently speciﬁc
about the technologies they are studying, it is not clear that this is necessarily because
128
MATTHEW JONES

more detailed and ﬁne-grained analysis would be inconsistent with Giddens (as
Monteiro and Hanseth acknowledge). Contrary to the claim of Poole and DeSanctis
(2004), Giddens does not deny the materiality of the physical world, nor does he deny
that physical contexts may be ‘strongly relevant to the possibilities and constraints
open to any individual or group’ (Giddens and Pierson 1998: 82). Rather his argument
is that this materiality is only socially consequential when drawn upon by human
agents in their practices. That Giddens has paid little attention to these consequences,
rather than indicating a failing of structuration may, as Jones and Karsten (2008) argue,
therefore represent a signiﬁcant opportunity for IS scholars to contribute to structura-
tional research by remedying this neglect. Recent work by Orlikowski, for example, has
begun, through the concept of sociomateriality, to seek to give a much more central
place to ‘the material forms and spaces through which humans act and interact’ in our
understanding of contemporary organizing. While not explicitly drawing on her
previous structurational research, it can be seen as extending ideas developed in
Orlikowski (2000).
Agency and Flexibility
Another criticism made of structurational IS research is that it shows a bias towards
ﬂexible forms of technology and to organizational settings in which actors have
considerable autonomy in their use of this technology. Thus, empirical studies employ-
ing structuration predominantly focus on cases such as consultants‘ use of collabora-
tive technologies or the use of software tools by IS developers rather than shopﬂoor
workers’ use of production planning systems or call centre agents’ use of automated call
distribution systems, giving a misleading impression of the scope of individual agency
in IS use.
While arguments, such as that of Orlikowski (2000: 405), linking the need for a
practice-based structurational approach with the increasing prevalence of ‘internet-
worked and reconﬁgurable technology (such as groupware and the Web)’ in contem-
porary organizations might seem to support this view, it is not clear, again, that this
association is a necessary corollary of structuration theory. Indeed, it might be argued
that it would be particularly valuable for structurational researchers to study the scope
of agency in apparently highly controlled settings.
Narrow Focus
The apparent bias in the systems and settings studied by IS researchers employing
structuration may be seen as symptomatic of a general narrowness of focus. Thus,
notwithstanding structuration’s argument for the interconnectedness of societal in-
stitutions and individual action, IS research using structuration has adopted a
STRUCTURATION THEORY
129

predominantly intra-organizational focus, with the inﬂuence of broader social forces
receiving less attention. Although, as Orlikowski and Barley (2001) argue, the neglect of
societal inﬂuences is widespread in IS research this would seem a particular failing in
structurational research, the remedying of which (as Whittington (2006) argues in
respect of practice research in the strategy ﬁeld) would bring it into closer alignment
with the work of Giddens on which it claims to be based.
The intra-organizational focus also means that much structurational research in the
IS ﬁeld excludes signiﬁcant aspects of Giddens’s writing that are arguably of consider-
able relevance to the IS researcher. These include Giddens’s later work on modernity,
self-identity, and the risk society as well as the broader implications of his work on, for
example, temporality and knowledgeability. To echo Whittington’s observation regard-
ing management researchers’ use of structuration, therefore, while Giddens’s may have
had a major inﬂuence on IS research, much of his directly relevant work has been
neglected and his ideas have been interpreted in what could be considered a ‘peculiarly
limited sort of way’ (Whittington 1992: 698).
Selective Use
It is not just that IS researchers have been selective in the aspects of Giddens’s work that
they have employed, but they have also been selective in their use of the concepts they
have taken from his work. While in some cases (e.g. Poole and DeSanctis 2004) this has
reﬂected a deliberate decision to reject what are perceived to be problematic features of
Giddens’s position in an IS context, such as his ‘virtual’ concept of structure or his
objections to positivism and determinism, in others it is not clear that such a conscious
choice has been made. Rather, superﬁcial correspondence of terminology is seen as
indicative of deeper conceptual equivalence without awareness of potentially signiﬁ-
cant differences in the underlying theoretical position. This would seem particularly
the case with the substantial secondary structurational literature, where the modiﬁed
version of structuration presented by IS authors often appears to be taken for the
original.
This is not to suggest that this ‘pick and mix’ approach to theory cannot, in the right
hands, lead to insightful analysis which remains true to Giddens’s principles (i.e.
retains the meta-theoretical assumptions of structuration whether explicated or not),
but that there is a risk that structurational concepts may be incorporated into frame-
works which may contradict key tenets of Giddens’s account, or which juxtapose them
with incompatible concepts from other writers. Contractor and Eisenberg (1990)
provide an example of this in which Giddens’s duality of structure is paired with an
approach based on Archer’s morphogenetic principles in the analysis of computer-
mediated communication. Unfortunately, as Archer and Giddens have both forcefully
argued in Clark, Modgil, and Modgil (1990), their positions are fundamentally
130
MATTHEW JONES

different; structure cannot be both a duality and a dualism, and the combination of the
two approaches would therefore suggest a lack of appreciation of the underlying
positions.
CONCLUSION
..................................................................................................................
Despite the breadth and complexity of Giddens’s writing, the absence of almost any
reference in his work to information systems (or to contemporary phenomena in which
they are seen to be implicated), and the arguably voluntarist and idealist stance that he
adopts (that is seen as making it difﬁcult to account for the materiality of technology),
IS researchers have shown a continuing interest in structuration theory, especially in
empirical studies, for more than twenty-ﬁve years. What is more, as Jones and Karsten
(2008) show, this interest has proved to be more than a passing fashion with an average
of more than twenty-seven structurational IS papers having been published each year
for the past decade, with numbers running at the highest levels in the most recent years
they reviewed. Indeed there is some evidence (e.g. Jones 2000; Poole and DeSanctis
2004) to suggest that Giddens may be the most frequently cited social theorist in the IS
ﬁeld. There would therefore seem good evidence that structuration has achieved a high
level of recognition, at least among organizational IS researchers (whether or not they
consider it their ‘theoretical lens of choice’ (Poole and DeSanctis 2004: 207)). What
these citations tell us about the inﬂuence of Giddens’s work on IS research is more
debatable, however.
Thus structuration has been widely seized upon to support non-dualist accounts of
IS phenomena and to legitimate attention to the inﬂuence of the social and the scope of
human agency in IS contexts. In this respect it may be considered to have exerted a
positive, if rather non-speciﬁc inﬂuence on the ﬁeld. What is much less clear, however,
is whether these accounts, especially those reliant on secondary sources, have fully
recognized the implications of Giddens’s particular position, such that they might be
considered to offer a speciﬁcally structurational analysis rather than one that just
employs structurational terminology toward ends that may be inconsistent with
Giddens’s objectives and approach in developing the theory. The narrow scope of
much IS structurational research, while arguably not atypical of IS research as a whole,
would also seem to suggest that signiﬁcant opportunities may have been missed in the
use of this rich and broad-ranging theory.
While this might seem a negative assessment of structuration’s contribution to the IS
ﬁeld, it can also be seen as an indication that, as Jones and Karsten (2008) argue, there
remains considerable potential for IS researchers to pursue work that engages positive-
ly, but not uncritically, with the distinctive character of structuration theory and that
explores the full range of Giddens’s oeuvre. A priority in this respect might be the
development of a clearer account of the position of materiality in structuration, as has
STRUCTURATION THEORY
131

already been noted, not least to counter claims, such as those of Poole and DeSanctis
(2004), that structuration is unable to address technology.
The opportunities for structurational IS research need not be restricted to enhancing
existing accounts, however, but may also support new directions. Thus, structuration
would seem well-aligned with the recent ‘practice turn’ in social and management
research (Schatzki, Knorr Cetina, and von Savigny 2001; Whittington 2006). While
Orlikowski (2000) illustrated some of structuration’s potential in this area, the im-
plications of practice theory, as Reckwitz (2002) argues, go considerably further in
developing aspects of structuration, such as practical consciousness and routinization,
that have typically been neglected in IS research. Other new avenues for IS research
may be supported by aspects of Giddens’s non-structurational writings that have been
similarly neglected in the IS literature to date. His concepts, such as disembedding,
expert systems, and the reﬂexivity of the self, for example, would seem particularly
pertinent in understanding the role of IS in contemporary problems in global ﬁnancial
markets.
This is not intended to suggest that structuration is uniquely placed among social
theories to address IS phenomena, or that the criticisms made of its use in the IS ﬁeld
are without foundation. Rather the claim is that, despite the substantial IS literature
drawing on structuration theory, its contribution to IS research may not have been
exhausted yet.
REFERENCES
Archer, M. (1990). ‘Human Agency and Social Structure: A Critique of Giddens’, in J. Clark,
C. Modgil, and J. Modgil (eds.), Anthony Giddens: Consensus and Controversy. Brighton:
Falmer Press, 73–84.
——(1995). Realist Social Theory: The Morphogenetic Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Barbalet, J. M. (1987). ‘Power, Structural Resources and Agency’, Current Perspectives in
Social Theory, 8: 1–24.
Barley, S. R. (1986). ‘Technology as an Occasion for Structuring: Evidence from Observation
of CT Scanners and the Social Order of Radiology Departments’, Administrative Science
Quarterly, 31: 78–108.
Barrett, M., and Scott, S. (2004). ‘Electronic Trading and the Process of Globalization in
Traditional Futures Exchanges: A Temporal Perspective’, European Journal of Information
Systems, 13(1): 65–79.
Berg, M. (1998). ‘The Politics of Technology: On Bringing Social Theory into Technological
Design’, Science, Technology and Human Values, 23(4): 456–91.
Berger, P. L., and Luckmann, T. (1979). The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the
Sociology of Knowledge. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
132
MATTHEW JONES

Bernstein, R. J. (1989). ‘Social Theory as Critique’, in D. Held and J. B. Thompson (eds.),
Social Theory of Modern Societies: Anthony Giddens and his Critics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 19–33.
Bhaskar, R. (1979). The Possibility of Naturalism. Brighton: Harvester.
Boland, R. J. (1996). ‘Why Shared Meanings Have No Place in Structuration Theory: A Reply
to Scapens and Macintosh’, Accounting, Organizations and Society, 21(7/8): 691–7.
Bourdieu, P. (1977). Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Braa, J., and Hedberg, C. (2002). ‘The Struggle for District-Based Health Information Systems
in South Africa’, The Information Society, 18(2): 113–27.
Bryant, C. G. A., and Jary, D. (1991). ‘Introduction: Coming to Terms with Anthony
Giddens’, in C. G. A. Bryant and D. Jary (eds.), Giddens’ Theory of Structuration: A Critical
Appreciation. London: Routledge.
————(2001) The Contemporary Giddens: Social Theory in a Globalizing Age. Basingstoke:
Palgrave.
Callinicos, A. (1985). ‘Anthony Giddens: A Contemporary Critique’, Theory and Society,
14(2): 133–66.
Ciborra, C. U., and Lanzara, G. F. (1994). ‘Formative Contexts and Information Technology:
Understanding the Dynamics of Innovation in Organizations’, Accounting, Management &
Information Technologies, 4(2): 61–86.
Clark, J., Modgil, C., and Modgil, J. (1990). Anthony Giddens: Consensus and Controversy.
Brighton: Falmer Press.
Cohen, I. (1989). Structuration Theory: Anthony Giddens and the Constitution of Social Life.
Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Contractor, N. S., and Eisenberg, E. M. (1990). ‘Communication Networks and New Media in
Organizations’, in J. Fulk and C. Steinfeld (eds.), Organizations and Communication
Technology. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage, 143–73.
Craib, I. (1992). Anthony Giddens. London: Routledge.
Crowston, K., Sawyer, S., and Wigand, R. (2001). ‘Investigating the Interplay between
Structure and Information and Communications Technology in the Real Estate Industry’,
Information Technology and People, 14(2): 163–83.
DeCock, C., and Rickards, T. (1995). ‘Of Giddens, Paradigms and Philosophical Garb’,
Organization Studies, 16(4): 699–704.
DeSanctis, G., and Poole, M. S. (1994). Capturing the Complexity in Advanced Technology
Use: Adaptive Structuration Theory’, Organization Science, 5(2): 121–47.
Dobson, P. J. (2001). ‘The Philosophy of Critical Realism: An Opportunity for Information
Systems Research’, Information Systems Frontiers, 3(2): 199–210.
Ellingsen, G., and Monteiro, E. (2003). ‘Mechanisms for Producing a Working Knowledge:
Enacting, Orchestrating and Organizing’, Information and Organization, 13(3): 203–29.
Giddens, A. (1979). Central Problems in Social Theory. Basingstoke: Macmillan.
——(1981). A Contemporary Critique of Historical Materialism: Power, Property and the
State. London: Macmillan.
——(1983). ‘Comments on the Theory of Structuration’, Journal for the Theory of Social
Behaviour, 13: 75–80.
——(1984). The Constitution of Society. Cambridge: Polity.
——(1989). ‘A Reply to my Critics’, in D. Held and J. B. Thompson (eds.), Social Theory of
Modern Societies: Anthony Giddens and his Critics. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 249–301.
STRUCTURATION THEORY
133

Giddens, A. (1990a). The Consequences of Modernity. Cambridge: Polity.
——(1990b). ‘Structuration Theory and Sociological Analysis’, in J. Clark, C. Modgil, and
J. Modgil (eds.), Anthony Giddens: Consensus and Controversy. Brighton: Falmer Press,
297–315.
——(1991a). Modernity and Self-Identity. Cambridge: Polity.
——(1991b). ‘Structuration Theory: Past, Present and Future’, in C. G. A. Bryant and D. Jary
(eds.), Giddens’ Theory of Structuration: A Critical Appreciation. London: Routledge,
201–21.
——(1993). New Rules of Sociological Method. 2nd edn., Cambridge: Polity.
——(1994). A Contemporary Critique of Historical Materialism. 2nd edn., Basingstoke:
Macmillan.
——and Pierson, C. (1998). Conversations with Anthony Giddens. Cambridge: Polity.
Gregson, N. (1989). ‘On the Ir(relevance) of Structuration Theory to Empirical Research’, in
D. Held and J. B. Thompson (eds.), Social Theory of Modern Societies: Anthony Giddens
and his Critics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 235–48.
Harré, R. (1983). ‘Commentary from an Ethogenic Standpoint’, Journal for the Theory of
Social Behaviour, 13: 69–73.
Held, D., and Thompson, J. B. (eds.), Social Theory of Modern Societies: Anthony Giddens and
his Critics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Holmer-Nadesan, M. (1997). ‘Essai: Dislocating (Instrumental) Organizational Time’, Orga-
nization Studies, 18(3): 481–510.
Jones, M. R. (2000). ‘The Moving Finger: The Use of Social Theory in WG8.2 Conference
Papers, 1975–1999’, in R. Baskerville, J. Stage, and J. I. DeGross (eds.), Organizational and
Social Perspectives on Information Technology. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers,
15–31.
——and Karsten, H. (2008). ‘Giddens’s Structuration Theory and Information Systems
Research’, MIS Quarterly, 32(1): 127–57.
Knights, D., and Willmott, H. (1985). ‘Power and Identity in Theory and Practice’, Sociologi-
cal Review, 33(1): 22–46.
————(1989). ‘Power and Subjectivity at Work: From Degradation to Subjugation in Social
Relations’, Sociology, 23(4): 535–58.
Layder, D. (1985). ‘Power, Structure and Agency’, Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour,
15: 131–49.
——(1987). ‘Key Issues in Structuration Theory: Some Critical Remarks’, Current Perspectives
in Social Theory, 8: 25–46.
Leeuwis, C. (1993). ‘Towards a Sociological Conceptualization of Communication in Exten-
sion Science: On Giddens, Habermas and Computer-Based Communication Technologies
in Dutch Agriculture’, Sociologia Ruralis, 33(2): 281–305.
Lehoux, P., Sicotte, C., Denis, J. L., Berg, M., and Lacroix, A. (2002). ‘The Theory of Use
behind Telemedicine: How Compatible with Physicians’ Clinical Routines?’, Social Science
& Medicine, 54(6): 889–904.
Macintosh, N. W., and Scapens, R. W. (1990). ‘Structuration Theory in Management
Accounting’, Accounting Organizations and Society, 15(5): 455–77.
Montealegre, R. (1997). ‘The Interplay of Information Technology and the Social Milieu’,
Information Technology and People, 10(2): 106–31.
Monteiro, E., and Hanseth, O. (1995). ‘Social Shaping of Information Infrastructure: On
Being Speciﬁc about the Technology’, in W. J. Orlikowski, G. Walsham, M. R. Jones, and
134
MATTHEW JONES

J. I. DeGross (eds.), Information Technology and Changes in Organizational Work. London:
Chapman & Hall, 325–43.
Nandhakumar, J., and Jones, M. R. (1997). ‘Designing in the Dark: The Changing User-
Developer Relationship in Information Systems Development’, Proceedings of ICIS,
Atlanta, GA, 75–86.
New, C. (1994). ‘Structure Agency and Social Transformation’, Journal for the Theory of Social
Behaviour, 24(3): 197–205.
Orlikowski, W. J. (1992). ‘The Duality of Technology: Rethinking the Concept of Technology
in Organizations’, Organization Science, 3(3): 398–427.
——(1993a). ‘Learning from Notes: Organizational Issues in Groupware Implementation’,
The Information Society, 9(3): 237–50.
——(1993b). ‘CASE Tools as Organizational Change: Investigating Increment’, MIS Quarter-
ly, 17(3): 309–40.
——(1996). ‘Improvising Organizational Transformation over Time: A Situated Change
Perspective’, Information Systems Research, 7(1): 63–92.
——(2000). ‘Using Technology and Constituting Structures: A Practice Lens for Studying
Technology in Organizations’, Organization Science, 11(4): 404–28.
——and Barley, S. R. (2001). ‘Technology and Institutions: What can Research on Informa-
tion Technology and Research on Organizations Learn from Each Other?’, MIS Quarterly,
25(2): 145–65.
——and Robey, D. (1991). ‘Information Technology and the Structuring of Organizations’,
Information Systems Research, 2(2): 143–69.
——and Yates, J. (2002). ‘It’s about Time: Temporal Structuring in Organizations’, Organiza-
tion Science, 13(6): 684–700.
————Okamura, K., and Fujimoto, M. (1995). ‘Shaping Electronic Communication: The
Metastructuring of Technology in the Context of Use’, Organization Science, 6(4): 423–44.
Poole, M. S., and DeSanctis, G. (1990). ‘Understanding the Use of Group Decision Support
Systems: The Theory of Adaptive Structuration’, in J. Fulk and C. Steinfeld (eds.), Organi-
zations and Communication Technology. Beverley Hills, CA: Sage Publications, 173–93.
————(2004). ‘Structuration Theory in Information Systems Research: Methods and Con-
troversies’, in M. E. Whitman and A. Woszcynski (eds.), Handbook of Information Systems
Research. Hershey, PA: Idea Group, 206–49.
Porpora, D. (1989). ‘Four Concepts of Social Structure’, Journal for the Theory of Social
Behaviour, 19(2): 195–211.
Pozzebon, M. (2004). ‘The Inﬂuence of a Structurationist View on Strategic Management
Research’, Journal of Management Studies, 41(2): 247–72.
——and Pinsonneault, A. (2005). ‘Challenges in Conducting Empirical Work Using Struc-
turation Theory: Learning from IT Research’, Organization Studies, 26(9): 1353–76.
Ranson, S., Hinings, B., and Greenwood, R. (1980). ‘The Structuring of Organizational
Structures’, Administrative Science Quarterly, 25: 1–17.
Reckwitz, A. (2002). ‘Toward a Theory of Social Practices: A Development in Culturalist
Theorizing’, European Journal of Social Theory, 5(2): 243–63.
Riley, P. (1983). ‘A Structurationist Account of Political Culture’, Administrative Science
Quarterly, 28: 414–37.
Roberts, J., and Scapens, R. (1985). ‘Accounting Systems and Systems of Accountability:
Understanding Accounting Practices in their Organisational Contexts’, Accounting, Orga-
nizations and Society, 10(4): 443–56.
STRUCTURATION THEORY
135

Schatzki, T., Knorr Cetina, K. D., and von Savigny, E. (2001). The Practice Turn in Contem-
porary Theory. London: Routledge.
Schultze, U., and Orlikowski, W. J. (2004). ‘A Practice Perspective on Technology-Mediated
Network Relations: The Use of Internet-Based Self-Serve Technologies’, Information
Systems Research, 15(1): 87–106.
Sewell, William H., Jr. (1992). ‘A Theory of Structure: Duality, Agency and Transformation’,
American Journal of Sociology, 98(1): 1–29.
Sillince, J. A. A., and Mouakket, S. (1997). ‘Varieties of Political Process during Systems
Development’, Information Systems Research, 8(4): 368–98.
Smith, C. W. (1983). ‘A Case Study of Structuration: The Pure-Bred Beef Business’, Journal for
the Theory of Social Behaviour, 13: 3–18.
Stones, R. (2005). Structuration Theory. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Storper, M. (1985). ‘The Spatial and Temporal Constitution of Social Action: A Critical
Reading of Giddens’, Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 3: 407–24.
Thompson, J. B. (1989). ‘The Theory of Structuration’, in D. Held and J. B. Thompson (eds.),
Social Theory of Modern Societies: Anthony Giddens and his Critics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 56–76.
Urry, J. (1982). ‘Duality of Structure: Some Critical Issues’, Theory, Culture and Society,
1(2): 100–6.
Walsham, G., and Waema, T. (1994). ‘Information Systems Strategy and Implementation:
A Case Study of a Building Society’, ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 12(2):
150–73.
Weaver, G. R., and Gioia, D. A. (1994). ‘Paradigms Lost: Incommensurability vs Structura-
tionist Inquiry’, Organization Studies, 15(4): 565–90.
Whittington, R. (1992). ‘Putting Giddens into Action: Social Systems and Managerial Agen-
cy’, Journal of Management Studies, 29(6): 693–712.
——(2006). ‘Completing the Practice Turn in Strategy Research’, Organization Studies,
27(5): 613–34.
Willmott, H. (1981). ‘The Structuring of Organizational Structure: A Note’, Administrative
Science Quarterly, 26: 470–4.
——(1987). ‘Studying Managerial Work: A Critique and a Proposal’, Journal of Management
Studies, 24(3): 249–70.
Yates, J., and Orlikowski, W. J. (1992). ‘Genres of Organizational Communication: A Struc-
turational Approach to Studying Communication and Media’, Academy of Management
Review, 17(2): 299–326.
136
MATTHEW JONES

c h a p t e r 6
...............................................................................................
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY
OF INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY
...............................................................................................
WENDY L. CURRIE
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
Institutional theory offers a rich and diverse conceptualization of information
technology (IT). In various expressions of the theory, a common theme is that the
activities of developing and using IT are subject to social pressures, sometimes from
external sources such as production and user organizations, professions, and govern-
ment agencies, other times from legitimated rules and logics embodied within the
technologies. These institutional pressures push individuals, groups, and organizations
to take intentional or unintentional actions such as conforming to technology
mandates, adopting popular innovations, and modifying business practices to ﬁt
technology, all possibly leading to increased opportunities for social approval or
legitimacy. Since institutional pressures operate conjointly or despite any particular
actor’s considerations of economic and technical utility, institutional theory draws
attention away from the economic-rationalistic perspective, now dominating the
research and practice in Information Systems, toward the social nature of IT. Actors
may make instrumentally rational choices among various options to develop and/or
use IT. Nonetheless, institutional theory holds that the boundary of such rationality is
socially constructed, and if legitimated and taken for granted as a social fact, operates
and persists even beneath the level of consciousness. Institutional analysis thus aims to
understand how legitimated social facts are socially constructed and what conse-
quences they bring about. Conducted frequently and naturally at supra-individual
levels, institutional analysis differs from atomistic economic analysis in that properties
of the social construction process cannot be reduced to aggregations of individual
actors’ characteristics, motives, and interests. As a result of its distinctive perspective,

institutional theory provides understanding of phenomena not so well explained by
economic-rationalist models, such as the wide adoption and acceptance of IT innova-
tions seemingly suboptimal in economic and technical terms.
While institutional theory is gaining increasing attention in IS research, it is still a
relatively novel theoretical perspective in IS. Most IS studies using the institutional
perspective focus on the organization as the unit of analysis, where institutional
concepts are operationalized as a lens to interpret and analyse data. Another approach
is to use the organizational ﬁeld as the level of analysis to extend our theoretical and
empirical understanding of institutional processes and effects across industries, sectors,
and organizations. Thus far applications of the theory by IS scholars demonstrate
both narrow and broad interpretations, perhaps because these scholars come from
diverse disciplinary and research traditions, or because institutional theorists have
tended to stress their differences more than agreements, or because institutional theory
is inherently difﬁcult to explicate as ‘it taps taken-for-granted assumptions at the core
of social action’ (Zucker 1987: 443).
Given the rich history and complexity of institutional theory and its current state
in IS research, this chapter has three objectives. First, it seeks to provide IS scholars,
regardless of their prior exposure to institutional theory, with an overview of the
theory, focusing on the most vibrant stream—the new or neo-institutionalism in
organizational analysis. We demonstrate the explicit and implicit points of disagree-
ment among institutional theorists and also articulate common themes, principles,
processes, and elements of the theory that they share. This effort helps IS researchers
stay up to date on the development of institutional theory as we theorize, operatio-
nalize, and reﬁne institutional concepts for IS research and the wider academic
community. Second, we present a review of the IS studies which have applied
institutional theory. We critically evaluate the theoretical and empirical strengths
and weaknesses of this body of work, and caution against a tendency to simplify
institutional concepts into one-dimensional constructs without appreciating the
ontological and epistemological antecedents of institutionalism. Finally, we offer a
research agenda for the IS ﬁeld to embrace the institutional perspective and develop
an institutional theory of IT.
FOUNDATIONS OF INSTITUTIONAL THEORY
..................................................................................................................
The publication of the New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis (Powell and
DiMaggio 1991) and Institutions and Organizations (Scott 1995) signiﬁed the renais-
sance in the study of institutions in social sciences (DiMaggio and Powell 1991). These
inﬂuential books show that institutionalism is a highly complex paradigm with con-
tributions delineated across disciplines (e.g. economics, sociology, political science,
history, and ecology) and time spans (e.g. ‘old’ and ‘new’ institutionalism). This chapter
is rooted in the new institutionalism in organizational studies (primarily in sociology)
138
WENDY L. CURRIE

because this is the most vibrant and established research stream of institutionalism.
Central concepts such as institution, institutionalization, deinstitutionalism, and rein-
stitutionalization add further complexity as they incorporate both macro- and micro-
dimensions.
Scott (2001: 49) gives ﬁve deﬁnitions of institution, stressing they are, ‘multi-faceted,
durable, social structures, made up of symbolic elements, social activities, and material
resources’. Jepperson (1991) gives sixteen examples of an institution, including, mar-
riage, formal organization, academic tenure, and the corporation. Institutionalization,
is thus the process by which an institution attains a stable and durable state or property.
Deinstitutionalization is a departure from institutionalization, which represents ‘the
process by which the legitimacy of an established or institutionalized organizational
practice erodes or discontinues’ (Oliver 1992: 564). A further concept, reinstitutionali-
zation, is an ‘exit from one institutionalization, and entry into another institutional
form, organized around different principles or rules’ (Jepperson 1991: 152).
As DiMaggio and Powell (1991: 1) point out, institutional analysis was used in the
work of Emile Durkheim in the nineteenth century where he studied ‘social facts as
things’. Later in the twentieth century, Selznick (1957: 16–17) provided a classic insight
that to ‘institutionalize is to infuse with value beyond the technical requirements of the
task at hand’. This suggested an impediment to effective task performance where
the goals of the organization were subverted, thus drawing a distinction between
institutional and task elements at the levels of the environment and organization.
This dichotomy of macro- and micro-phenomena identiﬁed in old institutionalism
continues in the new institutionalism, thus extending the breadth and depth of
institutional theory where conceptual and empirical challenges continue. A signiﬁcant
challenge is deﬁning institution as both a theoretical concept and construct for
empirical investigation. Associated with such complexity and diversity of institutional
forms, the notion of institution is more easily understood by reviewing institutionalists’
seminal work and trying the analytical tools institutionalists developed.
Three classic papers are among those that represent the essence of neo-
institutionalism. These papers introduce the central concepts within institutional
theory. The central argument of Meyer and Rowan’s (1977) paper was that formal
organizational structures emerge as reﬂections of rationalized myths and rules.
Using abstract language, they suggest,
Institutional rules function as myths which organizations incorporate, gaining
legitimacy, resources, stability, and enhanced survival prospects. Organizations
whose structures become isomorphic with the myths of the institutional environ-
ment, in contrast with those primarily structured by the demands of technical
production and exchange, decrease internal coordination and control in order to
maintain legitimacy. Structures are decoupled from each other and from ongoing
activities. (p. 340)
In the same year, Zucker (1977) examined institutionalization in the context of
cultural persistence. She was critical of traditional approaches to institutionalization
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
139

that overlooked this issue. Three levels of institutionalization on three aspects of
cultural persistence were identiﬁed. They were: generational uniformity of cultural
understanding, maintenance of these understandings, and resistance to change of these
understandings. Zucker found strong support for the prediction that, ‘the greater the
degree of institutionalization, the greater the generational uniformity, maintenance,
and resistance to change of cultural understandings’ (p. 276).
Further development of institutional concepts was found in DiMaggio and Powell’s
(1983) inﬂuential paper that examined the link between institutional isomorphism and
rationality. These authors posed the question: ‘What makes organizations so similar’
(DiMaggio and Powell 1983: 147)? They argued that ‘the engine’ of rationalization and
bureaucratization had shifted from the competitive marketplace to the state and the
professions. They were interested to examine the ‘startling homogeneity of organiza-
tional forms and practices’. Developing the concept of the organizational ﬁeld, which
they deﬁned as ‘those organizations that, in the aggregate, constitute a recognized
area of institutional life’ (DiMaggio and Powell 1983: 148) they contended that, once a
set of organizations becomes a ﬁeld, a paradox emerges in that ‘rational actors make
their organizations increasingly similar as they try to change them’ (p. 147). The
authors developed three distinctive isomorphic processes: coercive, mimetic, and
normative to explain institutional isomorphism. Coercive isomorphism results from
both formal and informal pressures exerted on organizations by powerful entities such
as the state and by cultural expectations in the organization’s environment. Mimetic
isomorphism derives from uncertainty. This occurs when organizational technologies
are poorly understood, goals are ambiguous, or when the environment creates symbol-
ic uncertainty. These factors encourage organizations to model themselves after other
organizations. Normative pressures stem largely from professionalization, which
means the collective struggle of members of an occupation to deﬁne the conditions
and methods of their work. This is to control ‘the production of producers’ and to
establish a cognitive base and legitimacy for their occupational autonomy.
In an early review paper on institutional theories of organization, Zucker (1987)
presented environment and organization as two distinct theoretical approaches to
institutionalization. The environment-as-institution perspective posits that institutions
exist in an organization’s environment as social facts. The basic institutional process is
the reproduction or copying of environmental social facts at the organizational level.
The organization-as-institution perspective contends that institutions arise within the
organization. The central institutional process is thus generation—the creation of
new institutional elements at the organization level. Reproduction is therefore a
consequence of institutionalization rather than a cause. Addressing the question,
‘What is the meaning of institutional?’ (p. 445), Zucker (1987) presented two deﬁning
elements shared by theoretical approaches to institutionalization in organizations.
They include, (a) a rule-like, social fact quality of an organized pattern of action
(exterior) and (b) an embedding in formal structures, such as formal aspects of
organizations that are not tied to particular actors or situations (nonpersonal/objective)’
(p. 444). As a departure from earlier contributions on institutional theory where
140
WENDY L. CURRIE

conceptions were ‘tautological’, ‘descriptive’, or ‘untestable’, Zucker (1987) contended
that neo-institutional theory viewed institutionalization as a variable that separated ‘its
causes from the major consequence’ (p. 444). Her review of institutional theory pro-
claimed that much of the empirical work examined the theory piecemeal, and seldom
tested the causal predictions and that research on causes of institutionalization had been
‘eclipsed by study of its consequences or outcomes’.
Since the publication of these seminal papers on institutional theory, further work
has greatly enhanced the theoretical and empirical development of the ﬁeld. In the
following four subsections, we organize scholarly work on institutional theory into four
broad areas, drawing from Scott’s (1995) study, which delineates the societal, sectoral,
organizational, and individual dimensions of institutionalism. In each area, we delin-
eate the key theoretical contributions and methodological challenges. We illustrate the
changing fashions within institutional theory, particularly as contributions for the past
three decades are depicted as ‘new institutionalism’ (DiMaggio and Powell 1991)
presenting an intellectual departure from the old institutionalism of Selznick (1949),
Perrow (1986), and colleagues. The criteria for classifying publications are (a) their
main title, and/or (b) their substantive content (see Appendix A). We recognize that
some contributions may span two or more categories or theoretical perspectives, but
our primary purpose for this exercise is to demonstrate the scale and scope of
institutionalist literature, rather than to provide a deﬁnitive classiﬁcation system.
Construction, Maintenance, and Diffusion
The construction, maintenance, and diffusion of institutional arrangements are ex-
empliﬁed by a number of studies that adopt either variance or process models. Zucker
(1977) observed that institutionalization is both a property and a process variable. As a
property variable, institution is observed as an entity. This may be a cultural, political,
or social system that exhibits one or more features or properties. Variance theories view
institutions as entities. They examine their characteristics, view them as abstract
independent or dependent variables, and endeavour to establish their causal relations
to other variables. Precursor (independent) variables determine the values of outcome
(dependent) variables (Scott 1995).
Process theories examine a series of occurrences of events rather than a set of closely
deﬁned variables (Mohr 1982). In process theories, time is important, particularly, the
time ordering of events that may be delineated into sequences that make up different
eras. For example, a conceptual model by Tolbert and Zucker (1996) delineates the
component processes of institutionalization into three distinct stages: habitualization,
objectiﬁcation, and sedimentation. This framework provides a conceptual tool for
understanding the different stages of the institutionalization process, where innovation
may become institutionalized (sedimentation) or fail to move through the various
stages, remaining at the habitualized stage. Theoretical models of this nature are useful
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
141

for conceptualizing innovation as a process, but the extent to which the various stages
are empirically distinct can only be veriﬁed through longitudinal research.
To a large extent, it is arbitrary to distinguish the properties and processes used to
create institutions from those that may change them. The literature, however, shows a
distinction in that some studies examine the conditions and processes which give rise
to new rules and practices (institutional creation), while others examine the beliefs,
norms, and practices which become threatened over time and lead to deinstitutionali-
zation. Studies concerned with institution building or creation are found in many
disciplines (e.g. ecology, economics, political science, sociology, and history) and focus
on different units of analysis (e.g. societal, sector, ﬁeld, population, organization, and
interpersonal) (Scott 1995). The topics of these studies have included: conditions that
give rise to new institutional arrangements (Suchman 1995), cultural-cognitive aspects
of institutionalism (DiMaggio 1991a), social construction of knowledge (Mizruchi and
Fein 1999), and institutionalization through discourse (Phillips, Lawrence, and Hardy
2004).
In conjunction with the work on institutional construction, institutional theorists
further examine how institutions are maintained and diffused. Zucker (1977) argued
that the traditional approaches to institutionalization do not provide an adequate
explanation of cultural persistence. Nearly two decades later, Scott (1995) similarly
observed that institutional theory has paid little attention to the issue of institutional
persistence, with many scholars disagreeing over the mechanisms that underlie stabili-
ty. According to Scott (1995), three broad conceptions of institution inﬂuence views on
maintenance. They include: regulatory view, which emphasizes rational and conscious
control efforts concerning interests, agency and power, and the deployment of sanc-
tions (DiMaggio 1988), normative view, which emphasizes the stabilizing inﬂuence of
shared norms, and cultural-cognitive view, which emphasizes the unconscious, taken-
for-granted assumptions about social reality.
These three institutional views also help explain the diffusion of innovations, an
ever-interesting phenomenon previously examined primarily from the communication
of information perspective (Rogers 2003). Regulative mandates demand compliances,
forcing more social actors to adopt innovations faster than without such mandates
(Tolbert and Zucker 1983). Normative pressures push innovations through formal or
informal ties among actors in social networks such as profession, community, industry
associations. However, normative pressures based on relational ties in social networks
can only explain a fraction of the diffusion process (Strang and Soule 1998). As Strang
and Meyer (1994) argued, ‘when the diffusion process is socially meaningless, as in the
spread of measles, physical contact may be all that is required for transmission to occur.
When adoptions are socially meaningful acts, it is common to think of actors as making
different choices cognitively available to each other, developing shared understandings
and exploring the consequences of innovation through each other’s experience’ (p.
101). According to this view, cultural-cognitive processes can ‘theorize’ an innovation
as an efﬁcient means to an end considered important by actors belonging to socially
constructed categories. It is this theorization that helps diffuse, legitimate, and
142
WENDY L. CURRIE

institutionalize innovations (Strang and Meyer 1994; Tolbert and Zucker 1996). Final-
ly, the regulative, normative, and cultural-cognitive processes are not mutually exclu-
sive. They may be interdependent. For example, recent institutional research has found
that regulatory activities often depend on normative and cognitive elements as actors
negotiate, interpret, and socially construct the meaning of laws and regulations based
on normative and cultural-cognitive considerations (Dobbin and Sutton 1998; Edel-
man, Ugger, and Erlanger 1999).
Organizational Fields and Institutional Logics
The concept of organizational ﬁeld is now well established in institutional theory and
extends beyond the notion of organization as a single entity. DiMaggio and Powell
(1983) asserted that, ‘By organizational ﬁeld, we mean those organizations that, in the
aggregate, constitute a recognized area of institutional life: key suppliers, resource and
product consumers, regulatory agencies, and other organizations that produce similar
services or products’ (p. 148). These authors suggested that the structure of the
organizational ﬁeld must be deﬁned on the basis of empirical investigation and cannot
be determined a priori. At a more abstract level, the authors claimed, ‘ﬁelds only exist
to the extent that they are institutionally deﬁned’. They identiﬁed four parts in the
process of institutional deﬁnition or structuration: (1) an increase in the extent of
interaction among organizations in the ﬁeld; (2) the emergence of sharply deﬁned
inter-organizational structures of domination and patterns of coalition; (3) an increase
in the information load with which organizations in the ﬁeld must contend; (4) and the
development of a mutual awareness among participants in a set of organizations that
they are involved in a common enterprise (DiMaggio and Powell 1983: 148). Similarly,
Scott (2001: 84) offered another abstract deﬁnition: ‘The notion of ﬁeld connotes the
existence of a community of organizations that partakes of a common meaning system
and whose participants interact more frequently and fatefully with one another than
with actors outside of the ﬁeld’.
The concept of organizational ﬁeld focuses upon a macro, interorganization analysis.
Within institutional theory, the concept of the organizational ﬁeld has continued to
gain ground and differs in its unit of analysis from sectoral or population approaches
since it includes ‘the totality of relevant actors’ (DiMaggio and Powell 1983: 148).
Research studies used the concept of organizational ﬁeld to examine ﬁeld structure
(DiMaggio 1986), task environment relationships (Oliver 1997), and institutional
entrepreneurship in emerging ﬁelds (Maguire, Hardy, and Lawrence 2004).
Closely aligned with the concept of organizational ﬁeld is institutional logics deﬁned
as ‘sets of ‘material’ practices and symbolic constructions which constitute a ﬁeld’s
organizing principles and which are available to organizations and individuals to
elaborate’ (Friedland and Alford 1991: 248). They ‘provide the formal and informal
rules of action, interaction, and interpretation that guide and constrain decision
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
143

makers in accomplishing the organization’s tasks and in obtaining social status, credits,
penalties and rewards in the process’ (Ocasio 1997) and the ‘cognitive maps or the
belief systems that are carried by individuals located in an organizational ﬁeld to embed
meaning to their activities’ (Scott et al. 2000: 20).
Many studies examine the relationship between traditional institutional logics and
emerging logics in ﬁelds such as the craft industry (Thornton 2002), healthcare (Scott
et al. 2000; Reay and Hinings 2005; Currie and Guah 2007), and higher education
publishing (Thornton and Ocasio 1999). Others examine how innovations at the
periphery of the radio broadcasting ﬁeld exerted inﬂuences that migrated to the core
of the ﬁeld once new practices were shown to be effective (Leblebici et al. 1991). This
study showed how the existing social structure of the ﬁeld shaped the efﬁcacy of non-
routine action.
Organizational Structure, Performance, and Choice
Neo-institutionalism views institutionalization as occurring at the societal, sectoral,
ﬁeld, and inter-organizational levels, where the primary focal lens is on how organiza-
tional forms, structural components, performance outcomes, and individual choices
become institutionalized. Many studies on institutional processes examine the effects
on speciﬁc organizations (Scott 2001). A distinction is made between formal and
informal structures of an organization; the former being the ‘blueprint’ for activities
that comprise the rationalized formal structure that is more likely to arise in highly
institutionalized contexts.
The classic paper by Meyer and Rowan (1977) argued that the formal structures of
many organizations reﬂect the myths of their institutional environments, rather than
the demands of their work activities. Formal organizational structures arise as reﬂec-
tions of rationalized institutional rules that contribute to the expansion and growing
complexity of these structures. Institutional rules serve as myths which organizations
incorporate into their formal structure to gain legitimacy, scarce resources, stability,
and enhanced prospects of long-term survival. Organizations where structures become
isomorphic with the myths of the institutional environment, rather than those
structured by the demands of technical production and exchange, act to decrease
internal coordination and control as a means of maintaining legitimacy. Such isomor-
phism results in formal structures becoming decoupled from technical/informal struc-
tures and from ongoing activities (Meyer and Rowan 1977).
From this inﬂuential paper, the concepts of isomorphism, legitimacy, and decoupling
became central in neo-institutionalist work. As the old institutionalism saw organizations
as organic wholes, the new institutionalism viewed organizations ‘loosely coupled arrays of
standardized elements’ (DiMaggio and Powell 1991: 14). Neo-institutionalism emphasizes
the ‘homogeneity of organizations’ and the ‘stability of institutionalized components’
(DiMaggio and Powell 1991: 14) and institutional isomorphism (DiMaggio and Powell
144
WENDY L. CURRIE

1983; Meyer and Rowan 1977). Institutionalization was seen as a phenomenological
process, where social relationships and actions exhibit a taken-for-granted quality, and
a state of affairs where ‘shared cognitions determine what actions are possible and what
has meaning’ (Zucker 1983: 2).
Neo-institutionalism examines rationality at the level of the formal structure, rather
than at the individual actor level. It attributes the ‘diffusion of departments and operating
procedures to inter-organizational inﬂuences, conformity, and the persuasiveness of
cultural accounts, rather than to the functions they are intended to perform’ (DiMaggio
and Powell 1991: 13). Conﬂicts arise between conformity to institutionalized rules and
efﬁciency criteria. Attempts to coordinate and control activity to promote efﬁciency will
undermine ceremonial conformity, which will, in turn, reduce the support and legitimacy
in the organization. To maintain conformity, organizations that reﬂect institutional rules
will seek to ‘buffer their formal structures from the uncertainties of technical activities by
becoming loosely coupled, building gaps between their formal structures and actual work
activities’ (Meyer and Rowan 1977: 340–1). Institutionalists who examine change across
organizational ﬁelds and within organizations have more recently used the concept of
decoupling. Greenwood and Hinings (1996) hypothesize that radical change in tightly
coupled institutional ﬁelds is likely to be revolutionary, unlike in loosely coupled ﬁelds
(which is more common) and likely to be evolutionary. We will examine institutional
change in the next section.
An important debate within institutional theory concerns the relationship between
institutional and rational choice arguments, which are often seen as diametrically
opposed (DiMaggio 1991b). Rational choice models have played a signiﬁcant role in
social science both in the understanding of designing institutions and the how they
serve the individual and collective interests of institutional actors. These models are
invariably used to empirically test the dysfunctional features of institutions, since this is
a prominent issue in understanding institutional outcomes. Rational choice theorists
are interested in individual and collective goal-orientated, purposive behaviour, and
also non-rational and even irrational choices, without which, the rational choice thesis
becomes a tautology.
A fundamental criticism of rational choice models embraces a wider criticism of
functionalist premisses in social science. This contends that we cannot claim to have
explained the origin of an institution simply by reference to the functionality of the
institution. A tension in rational choice theory is between individual rationality and
institutional inefﬁciency. Institutional actors (individual or collective) may exhibit non-
instrumental and non-rational behaviour that produces unintended consequences. They
may also consciously pursue institutional goals and outcomes that are not conducive to
efﬁcient task performance. Based on these observations, many institutionalists express
serious criticisms of rational choice perspectives since they exaggerate issues of choice
and agency, while overlooking important institutional inﬂuences emanating from the
societal, sectoral and ﬁeld levels (Greenwood and Hinings 2006).
As a ‘radical retreat from society’ rational choice theories are criticized for adopting
the premiss that the actions and behaviour of instrumental, rational individuals are the
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
145

primary cause of institutional arrangements. Public-choice theory, agency theory,
rational-actor models, and the new institutional economics all adopt this premiss.
Rational choice theorists perceive organizational arrangements, ‘whether party, state,
family or ﬁrm—from the rationality of individuals in exchange, each attempting to
maximise his or her utility by exchanging scarce, usually material resources’ (Friedland
and Alford 1991: 232).
On closer examination of the broader social science literature, however, the dichotomy
between institutional and rational actor accounts is oversimpliﬁed. While functional
institutionalism tends to overstate the role of institutional actors and undermine the
societal and ﬁeld inﬂuences on organizational outcomes, the two perspectives are not
necessarily diametrically opposed. Jepperson (1991: 158) points out that ‘self-proclaimed
rational-choice arguments often feature institutional constraints (in connection with
opportunity costs) as central causes and institutional arguments often invoke adaptive
responses to change in institutional conditions’. So rather than treating the perspectives
as competing paradigms, ‘they might represent competing ways to invoke institutional
effects, or reﬂect disagreements about proper micro-foundations or micro-effects, to
mention just two alternatives’.
The literature shows that institutional theorists from across the disciplines make
different assumptions about individual choice and what determines social action. In
the sociological theory of the twentiethth century, Max Weber deﬁned social action to
emphasize the importance of meanings individuals attach to their own and others’
behaviour. Weber distinguished between action and behaviour that was rational,
non-rational, or irrational. More recently, the new economic institutionalism, such as
the transaction cost economics (TCEs) of Williamson (1975) is grounded in rational
individual choice, where the deﬁning feature is the attempt to explain behaviour as a
result of the instrumental choices of individual or collective actors in pursuit of their
goals. New economic institutionalism is seen as being applicable for the study of
regulation. This activity is described as one, ‘carried on between and among actors
seeking to gain greater efﬁciency (or arbitrate differences across systems to avoid
friction) through cooperation . . . The search for solutions to common problems
that cannot be resolved unilaterally leads to the adoption of new structures that
reﬂect the assumptions of the ‘new economic’ institutionalism’ (Reich 2000: 503).
Game theorists similarly adopt an atomistic view that emphasizes how individual and
collective actors engaged in behaviour to maximize outcomes, having assimilated all
the relevant data and information to inform their decision making (Miller 2000).
They seek to explain how cooperation and efﬁciency results from the instrumental
behaviour of individuals (Axelrod 1981). Political scientists tend to pay more atten-
tion to the effects of institutions than to issues of institutional origins and change.
The consequence has been a marked tendency to ‘fall back on implicit or explicit
functional accounts, in which the effects of institutions explain the presence of those
institutions’ (Pierson 2000: 475).
While neo-institutional analysts in economics and political science embrace rational
choice theory, Simon’s (1997) bounded rationality thesis has been highly inﬂuential by
146
WENDY L. CURRIE

demonstrating that, despite the presumption that actors intend to be rational, they are
bounded by the limitations of the information they possess. Neo-institutional theorists
who embrace this and related models tend to view institutions primarily as regulative
frameworks. In this context, individual or collective actors design institutions to resolve
perceived or real problems of social dysfunction (e.g. ﬁnancial misconduct) where
regulation carries with it the reward of incentives or the threat of sanctions.
Neo-institutional theorists at the other end of the spectrum tend to emphasize the
cultural-cognitive inﬂuences on behaviour as opposed to regulative and normative
inﬂuences. Phenomenologists (Schütz 1967) and ethnomethodologists (Garﬁnkel
1967) reject rational actor accounts, even those which emphasize bounded rationality,
as they believe action and behaviour are inﬂuenced by power relations and political
structures where conﬂict is likely to produce unintended consequences. Phenomenol-
ogists and ethnomethodologists, like rational choice theorists, treat the individual as
the unit of analysis, yet reject the notion of an explicit theory of individual behaviour
when they examine institutional structure and performance outcomes. Sociological
perspectives in neo-institutional theory, particularly those from phenomenology and
ethnomethodology, perceive the limitation of embracing a narrow, functionalist ratio-
nal choice framework as an oversimpliﬁcation, where action and behaviour are exam-
ined as a means-ends relationship. As opposed to emphasizing the role of the
individual, many neo-institutional theorists sympathetic to phenomenology and eth-
nomethodology adopt an organicist rather than an atomistic view of institutions, where
‘the essential characteristics of any element are seen as outcomes of relations with other
entities. Actors in interaction constitute social structures, which, in turn, constitute
actors. The products of prior interactions—norms, rules, beliefs, resources—provide the
situational elements that enter into individual decision making’ (Scott 2001: 67).
Institutional Change
While much of the prior work by institutional theorists has viewed institutionalism as a
source of stability and order (Zucker 1977; Strang and Meyer 1993), recent work has
considered how institutions undergo change (Scott 2001; Greenwood and Hinings 2006).
Over thepasttwo decades, neo-institutionalists haveincreasinglyadoptedprocess-oriented
methods to examine institutional change in a diverse range of ﬁelds. The complexity of
political, regulatory, and technical changes at the societal, sectoral, ﬁeld, and organizational
levels have made institutional change and adaptation a central issue for institutionalists
(Greenwood and Hinings 1996). The literature exhibits a diverse range of studies from
across the social science disciplines using a number of institutionalist theories, with most
studies examining the processes of institutionalization, rather than deinstitutionalziation,
or reinstitutionalization (Greenwood, Suddaby, and Hinings 1996).
Observing how institutional forces exert changes in markets, Haveman (1993)
combined organizational ecology and neo-institutional theory to explain the process
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
147

of diversiﬁcation. She focused on how the structure of markets affects the rate of
market entry. Using the density-dependency model of competition and legitimization
to study organizational founding and failure, the study found legitimation of new
markets for loan associations by the presence of successful thrifts is balanced by
competitive or crowding effects. Neo-institutional arguments were found to be insufﬁ-
cient for explaining market entry. To counter this, the author recommended incorpor-
ating concepts of competition from organizational ecology to help explain why rates of
market entry do not continue to rise as successful ﬁrm market density rises.
Davis, Diekmann, and Tinsley (1994) examined the decline and fall of the conglom-
erate ﬁrm in the 1980s, which they conceptualized as the deinstitutionalization of an
organizational form. The conglomerate ﬁrm in the 1980s was composed of several
unrelated businesses and was the dominant corporate form in the United States.
A decade later, this form had become deinstitutionalized. Using comprehensive
time-series data from the 1980s on a population of the largest industrial ﬁrms in the
USA, the authors demonstrated that deinstitutionalization was the result of two
processes. First, diversiﬁed ﬁrms were taken over at a high rate and their unwanted
parts were typically sold off. Second, the less diversiﬁed ﬁrms that survived rejected the
strategy of conglomerate growth. These authors suggested the aggregate result was that
by 1990, the largest industrial ﬁrms in the USA had become much less diversiﬁed.
Another study by Sine and David (2003) examined environmental jolts and en-
trepreneurial opportunity in the US electric power industry over a forty-year period.
These authors found that environmental jolts mobilize actors to reformulate institu-
tions, resulting in increased entrepreneurial activity. Their study found that, when the
institutional environment was stable, incumbent organizational forms and embedded
logics present formidable obstacles to entrepreneurial activity. Environmental jolts,
however, catalyse search processes and motivate the evaluation of current institutional
logics. In the case of the electric power industry, environments of abundance and
regulation resulted in homogeneity of organizational structures and strategies, and few
entrepreneurial opportunities. Environments marked by scarcity and crisis, however,
witnessed heavy scrutiny of existing institutional arrangements that eroded their taken-
for-grantedness and symbolic value, resulting in opportunities for entrepreneurial
action.
At the ﬁeld level, many studies consider process-oriented change. Scott et al. (2000)
examined the transformation in healthcare systems in the San Francisco Bay Area over
a ﬁfty-year period. As one of the most comprehensive studies on an organizational
ﬁeld, the authors identiﬁed competing institutional logics, each of which illustrated a
speciﬁc time period. Recognizing that rapid change is not usually a characteristic
attributed to healthcare, as hospitals display highly institutionalized structures and
practices, the authors used a longitudinal case-based research method to examine
large-scale government supported innovation. They found that, despite strong pres-
sures for isomorphism, healthcare had become a more complex environment over the
past two decades, as new entrants in the form of external service providers, and
148
WENDY L. CURRIE

changing roles of healthcare consumers (including patients) all conspired to alter a
previously stable institutional setting.
Another study examined the role of professional associations in the highly institu-
tionalized organizational ﬁeld of accounting. The authors presented their work as a
case study of the profession to show how it underwent major change over a twenty-year
period. The setting was the professional business services ﬁeld in Alberta, Canada, that
plays a signiﬁcant role in legitimating change. A six-stage model of institutional change
was developed which commenced with social, technological, or regulatory jolts which
precipitate deinstitutionalization, possibly leading to the next stage of reinstitutionali-
zation. The authors extended the ideas of Strang and Mayer (1993) who suggested that
for practices to become widely adopted, they have to become ‘theorized’, which is ‘the
development and speciﬁcation of abstract categories and the elaboration of chains of
cause and effect’ (Greenwood, Suddaby, and Hinings 1996: 60). This study found that
professional associations that act as regulatory agencies played a signiﬁcant part in
theorizing change by endorsing local innovations and shaping their diffusion.
Since the concept of deinstitutionalization is central to institutional change, institu-
tionalists have called for more research that departs from the traditional focus on
institutional persistence and stability, to understand the processes of evolutionary
or revolutionary institutional change. Prior research suggests that government regula-
tions and policies are most likely to deinstitutionalize organizational practices due to
the threat of coercion that accompanies the legal enforcement of government mandates
(DiMaggio and Powell 1983; Scott 2001). Government imposed health and ﬁnancial
regulations are two examples.
One of the most comprehensive frameworks on deinstitutionalization processes is by
Oliver (1992). This study delineates three antecedents of deinstitutionalization that
may erode or discontinue an institutionalized organizational activity or practice. First,
political pressures show that institutionalized practices come under threat, erosion, or
displacement when the utility or legitimacy of such practices is seriously called into
question. Political conditions that delegitimate organizational practices may occur as a
result of a performance crisis. Second, functional pressures are those that arise from
perceived problems in performance levels associated with institutionalized practices.
The potential for innovative pressures and performance problems to deinstitutionalize
enduring organizational practices is related to technical or functional considerations
that tend to compromise or raise doubts about the instrumental value of an institutio-
nalized practice. Third, social pressures are associated with differentiation of groups
and the existence of heterogeneous divergent or discordant beliefs and practices. Social
pressures that precipitate deinstitutionalization explain many of the conditions under
which organizations are neither pro-active agents of deinstitutionalization nor central-
ly intent on abandoning or rejecting particular institutional traditions.
Oliver (1992) gives three reasons why an examination of the consequences and
causes of deinstitutionalization is important. First, deinstitutionalization explains a
broad range of changes in organizations that an institutional perspective has tradition-
ally neglected, including challenges to the institutional status quo, the abandonment of
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
149

habits and customs, and the deterioration of organizational consensus around the value
of institutionalized activity. Second, the causes of deinstitutionalization explain when
institutional pressures are least likely to exert an enduring inﬂuence on organizations.
Institutional theorists have tended to emphasize the cultural persistence of institutio-
nalized organizational forms and process (Zucker 1977; Scott 1987; Zucker 1987). The
potential for deinstitutionalization of organizational activities calls into question the
stability and longevity of institutional values and practices, suggesting instead that
under a variety of predictable conditions, institutionalized processes or practices will be
vulnerable to challenge, reassessment, or rejection. Third, deinstitutionalization de-
scribes the conditions under which institutional rules and expectations fail in their
predicted effects on organizations. Therefore, an examination of deinstitutionalizing
pressures may help to clarify the boundary conditions of institutional explanations and,
by so doing, shed light on the conditions or organizational contexts within which
institutional explanations might be most relevant or powerful. Finally, institutional
theory has been increasingly criticized for its lack of attention to political processes as
well as other non-institutional factors in shaping the responses of organizations to
institutional pressures.
In a similar vein to criticisms by institutional theorists about rational-choice theories,
the traditional focus on institutional creation, maintenance, and stability has under-
played important issues of human agency (DiMaggio 1988; Oliver 1991). Scott (2001)
addressed this issue by developing a framework that incorporated top-down and bottom-
up processes of institutional creation and diffusion. This multi-level framework incor-
porates societal institutions, ﬁelds, organizations, and actors. Change processes are more
fruitfully examined by research designs that incorporate multiple levels of analysis since
social action and structure occupies a duality that each serves to constrain and empower
the other. Scott (2001: 203) asserts that, ‘social structures themselves are nested, groups
within organizations or networks of organizations, organizations within ﬁelds, ﬁelds
within broader societal and trans-societal systems. Although every study can not attend
to all levels, analysts should be aware of them and craft designs to include critical actors
and structures engaged in maintaining and transforming institutions’.
One study that explicitly linked agency and institutional theory examined sales
compensation policies of ﬁfty-four retail speciality stores (Eisenhardt 1988). Using a
range of variables, including the programmability of a job, span of control, uncertainty,
type of merchandize, and the age of a store, the author found that both theoretical
perspectives were necessary for explaining retail compensation policies. The contribution
of agency theory was a more balanced view of performance contingency pay, which
suggested that ﬁrms prefer pay based on behaviours and use pay based on outcomes only
when behaviours are difﬁcult to measure. The contribution of institutional theory was
the recognition that founding conditions and simple industry traditions play an impor-
tant role in determining compensation policies. The author recommended that a combi-
nation of agency and institutional theory variables for future research would strengthen
both theoretical perspectives and increase understanding of phenomena.
150
WENDY L. CURRIE

The relationship between agency and institutions has been picked up by a more recent
stream of institutional research, which seeks to tackle the so-called ‘paradox of embedded
agency’ (DiMaggio and Powell 1991; Holm 1995; Seo and Creed 2002). Garud, Hardy,
and Maguire (2007: 961) describe the paradox as follows: ‘if actors are embedded in an
institutional ﬁeld and subject to regulative, normative and cognitive processes that
structure their cognitions, deﬁne their interests and produce their identities, how are
they able to envision new practices and then subsequently get others to adopt them?’
Among attempts to solve the theoretical puzzle, most notable is the ‘institutional
entrepreneurship’ perspective, drawing insights from institutional theory and entre-
preneurship research. Institutional entrepreneurship is deﬁned as the ‘activities of actors
who have an interest in particular institutional arrangements and who leverage resources
to create new institutions or to transform existing ones’ (Maguire, Hardy, and Lawrence
2004: 657). Institutional entrepreneurship enables us to concentrate on how interested
actors conspire to inﬂuence their institutional contexts by formulating strategies to
inﬂuence regulatory, market, or technical change (Lawrence and Suddaby 2006).
By reintroducing agency and interests into institutional analysis, research on insti-
tutional entrepreneurship has revealed mechanisms and strategies used by the institu-
tional entrepreneurs to create or transform institutions. For example, in a study of Sun
Microsystems’ efforts to establish its Java technology as an industry standard, Garud,
Jain, and Kumaraswamy (2002) ﬁnd that Sun mobilized a broad set of partners
including systems assemblers, software ﬁrms, and component manufacturers with an
open systems strategy. As Sun’s partners, their support of the Java platform does not
prevent them from competing with one another on the Java products they produce. To
legitimate Java’s write-once, run-everywhere platform, Sun coined the slogan, ‘The
network is the computer.’ This slogan justiﬁed programmers’ efforts to write software
for the Internet, rendering obsolete Microsoft’s desktop-centric view of computing.
The linking of multiple theoretical perspectives has further been explored between
structuration processes and institutional theory. Both theories contend that institutions
and actions are linked and that institutionalization is a dynamic and ongoing process
(Barley and Tolbert 1997). These authors assert that institutionalists have pursued an
empirical agenda that has largely ignored how institutions are created, altered and
reproduced because process models of institutionalization are immature. Conversely,
structuration theory remains a process theory of such abstraction that it has produced
few empirical studies (see Chapter 5). Presenting a discussion of their similarities, the
authors argue why a fusion of the two theories would enhance institutional theory by
developing a model of institutionalization as a structuration process.
LIMITATIONS OF NEO-INSTITUTIONALISM
..................................................................................................................
Here, we offer a brief critique of neo-institutionalism by discussing concerns about its
lack of theoretical clarity and the shortcomings of variance and process accounts. Often
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
151

in these accounts, researchers either oversimplify institutional constructs or fail to
explain the processes of institutional creation and change. Notwithstanding neo-
institutional concerns about the dominance of strategic choice (Goodrick and Salancik
1996) and rational-actor models (DiMaggio and Powell 1991), institutionalism invites
many criticisms about its theoretical and empirical shortcomings. These criticisms
relate to both variance and process approaches to institutionalization.
While new institutionalism has been inﬂuential in identifying the limitations of
rationalization, it is criticized for not adequately explaining how ‘the pool of social
ideas, instrumental orientations and schemes (i.e. the rationalized environment) is
translated into the speciﬁc administrative patterns encountered in particular organiza-
tions or populations of organizations’ (Hasselbladh and Kallinikos 2000: 699). Neo-
institutionalism underplays the ‘social construction of rationalization’, that it concep-
tualizes as structural isomorphism (Hasselbladh and Kallinikos 2000: 700). The end
state of institutionalization is not diffusion of rationalized beliefs and practices. Instead,
‘institutionalization is sustained and given meaning and direction through its capacity
to constitute distinctive forms of actor-hood’. This is contingent on cultural-cognitive
factors where ‘ideas are elaborated, and rendered solid and durable’ (Hasselbladh and
Kallinikos 2000: 700).
Others criticize neo-institutionalism for treating institutions as independent variables
and the primary unit of analysis. Many institutionalists examine the regulative, norma-
tive, and cultural-cognitive factors that inﬂuence institutions, but it is also imperative to
include the ‘properties of the supra-individual’. While institutionalists recognize that
institutional outcomes are not reducible to ‘aggregations or direct consequences of
individuals’ attributes or motives’ (DiMaggio and Powell 1991: 8), their lack of attention
to human agency has often produced an ‘over-socialised’ account of organizational
behaviour (DiMaggio 1988).
These criticisms suggest that theoretical concepts used by institutionalists are too
idealistic and broad to inform empirical enquiry. But, whereas researchers using
variance models attempt to resolve this problem by simplifying institutional concepts
or constructs to obtain rigour and clarity in their research design, others using a
process-oriented approach also simplify the complexities of institutionalization using
multi-stage models. A common problem identiﬁed in process models is a lack of
empirical veriﬁcation of how one stage in the institutionalization process gives way
to another. Also, theorists need to explain why some processes lead to institutionaliza-
tion while others do not. This is particularly relevant in the area of innovation studies.
Since variance and process studies may fail to adequately explain the effects or
processes of institutionalization, calls are made to broaden the institutionalist perspec-
tive still further (Greenwood et al. 2007). However, extending research designs through
developing more complex multi-level and multi-stage models presents even greater
challenges, both theoretically and empirically.
Given that many institutional accounts focus on the outcome of social construction
(e.g. by observing a particular institution such as education), researchers are encour-
aged to abandon the ‘bird’s eye view of the ﬁeld, and come closer to the social and
152
WENDY L. CURRIE

cognitive means and procedures underlying rationalized beliefs and schemes of action’
(Hasselbladh and Kallinikos 2000: 700). Some argue that institutional accounts have
become associated with notions that organizations are not concerned with task perfor-
mance, and are instead only concerned with issues of legitimacy. This form of ‘institu-
tionalization of the institutional perspective’ is dismissed by Powell (1991) who argues
that studies often highlight ‘speciﬁc ﬁndings at the expense of the basic argument that
institutional pressures stem from more general societal wide processes of rationaliza-
tion’ (p. 190). An important insight is that, ‘if organizations can manipulate the
symbols they present to the external environment, then they must also be adept at
producing and controlling the symbolic elements as well’ (ibid.). Much of this misun-
derstanding is caused by the lack of clarity in some of the original statements by neo-
institutionalists.
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY AND INFORMATION
SYSTEMS RESEARCH
..................................................................................................................
Our discussion of the broad literature of neo-institutionalism provides a critical
foundation for understanding and appreciating the diversity of scholarly contributions
from a range of disciplines and some of the limitations of this complex theory. Our
primary analytic focus is sociological perspectives on neo-institutionalism from the
sub-ﬁeld of organization studies (OS). Recognizing the complementary nature of OS
and IS, scholars have called for a closer intellectual relationship between the two ﬁelds
(Orlikowski and Barley 2001). King et al. (1994) suggest that new institutionalism
provides a strong base for understanding the role of institutions in IT innovation.
These ideas were embraced by other scholars who called for more ‘research that
embraces the importance of simultaneously understanding the role of human agency
as embedded in institutional contexts as well as the constraints and affordances of
technologies as material systems’ (Orlikowski and Barley 2001: 158). Recently, a special
issue of the Journal of Applied Behavioral Science was published to encourage more
active engagement between OS and IS, particularly as the former is explicitly interested
in technology-enabled change, while the latter examines the growing sophistication
and diversity of speciﬁc technical artefacts, and how they impact organizations and the
wider society (Barrett, Grant, and Wailes 2006).
In parallel, others call for closer synergies between IS and other theoretical perspectives
from OS, including structuration (Barley 1986; Orlikowski and Robey 1991; Orlikowski
1992; DeSanctis and Poole 1994; Barley and Tolbert 1997), agency theory (Orlikowski
1996; Weick 1998; Boudreau and Robey 2005), anthropological approaches (Wareham
2002), and discourse analysis (Doolin 2003). Extending the use of research methods is
further recommended to include interpretive approaches (Walsham 1993) and more
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
153

speciﬁcally, phenomenology (Mingers 2001) and ethnomethodology (Ross and Chiasson
2005).
We acknowledge that institutional theory in IS research is a relatively new phenome-
non and is gaining momentum. The IS literature reveals an eclectic approach by
researchers to using institutionalist perspectives. Yet most contributions treat neo-
institutionalism as a single theory and play down its multi-disciplinary and conceptually
ambiguous nature. In this regard, institutional theory is deployed as a ‘lens’ to examine
the relationships between constructs delineated from, for example, organizational ﬁelds,
isomorphism and institutional logics, using either variance or process approaches.
In the IS literature, researchers tend to study institution as a process (institutionali-
zation) and an entity (with institutional effects). Theoretical and empirical preferences
of IS researchers tend to determine the choice of environmental and organizational
variables in the research design. For example, we found fewer studies on IT as a process
of institutionalization. The majority of studies looked at the institutional effects on IT,
often using institutional concepts piecemeal (Mignerat and Rivard 2005). Many studies
on institutional effects on IT used the three mechanisms of institutional isomorphism:
coercive, mimetic, and normative developed by DiMaggio and Powell (1983).
The common unit of analysis was the level of the organization rather than the wider
environmental (societal, sectoral, ﬁeld) or individual (agency) levels. Paradoxically,
while many IS researchers use organization as the focal point in their research, many
variance and process studies examine the cause/effect relationships between IT-related
constructs (e.g. adoption intention, department size, assimilation) without relating
them to the higher environmental and interorganizational levels. This is problematic
both theoretically and empirically since institutional theory emphasizes the criticality
of using multi-level analysis in the research design.
We further identify seven broad categories where IS researchers have used institu-
tionalist perspectives. They include: technology and institutions, innovation, industrial
sectors, adoption and diffusion, strategy and outsourcing, applications development
and implementation, and knowledge-based work. We recognize that some of these
classiﬁcations reﬂect current fashion in the IS ﬁeld.
King et al. (1994) are among the ﬁrst to employ the new institutional approach in IS
research. They note three characteristics of neo-institutionalism that focus attention to
institutional factors for understanding innovation. First, they cautioned against treat-
ing institutions and technology as two separate categories of environmental inﬂuence.
Thus, the ‘technical/institutional divide classiﬁed as ‘technical’ for-proﬁt organizations
operating in a marketplace where production efﬁciency was the key goal, and as
‘institutional’ non-proﬁt and public organizations operating in a context of law and
procedure, where legitimacy of process is as important as the goal’ (p. 146). They
suggest the new institutional approach takes both efﬁciency and legitimacy as signiﬁ-
cant factors in all organizations. The second characteristic of neo-institutionalism,
according to King et al. (1994), is the shift of the subject of institutional analysis
from organizations with legal authority or geographic proximity to organizations
competing or trading with each other. Third, the authors point out that neo-
154
WENDY L. CURRIE

institutionalism does not assume institutions as monolithic and inﬂexible. To the
contrary, institutions can and do change.
We recognize that identifying and delineating the boundaries of institutionalist
perspectives within IS research from other disciplines poses challenges. One observa-
tion is that IS studies adopting institutional theory span many academic journals. The
aggregate body of work further incorporates multi-levels of analysis, with contributions
examining societal, market and sectoral level institutional forces (Cousins and Robey
2005; Hu and Quan 2006; Salmeron and Bueno 2006) and social and cultural-cognitive
forces (Kaye and Little 1996; Damsgaard and Scheepers 1999; Nicolaou 1999).
Orlikowski and Barley (2001) recommended IS researchers adopt institutional theory
to investigate how institutions inﬂuence the design, use, and consequences of technol-
ogies, either within or across organizations. Instead of focusing on lower level analysis
of development, use and management of IS, they suggested researchers study the
regulative processes, normative systems, and cultural frameworks that shape the design
and use of IS.
Regulatory and normative approaches have been used by King et al. (1994) to
integrate institutional theory with economic history to theoretically explain the role
of governmental institutions in IT innovation. They articulated dimensions related to
institutional interventions through inﬂuences and regulations that augment supply-
push and demand-pull for IT innovation. Building on this work, Montealegre (1999)
examined policy-related institutional actions in four developing countries to explain
the Internet adoption to provide technological services at the national level. Similarly,
Ang and Cummings (1997) examined factors that moderate the effects of institutional
inﬂuences on IS outsourcing decisions in the banking industry focusing on peer and
federal regulators.
Cultural-cognitive approaches place greater emphasis on individual agency. Swanson
and Ramiller (2004) adopted a cognitive perspective to introduce the concept of
mindful innovation with IT. They argued that a ﬁrm is ‘mindful in innovating with
IT when it attends to an innovation with reasoning grounded in its own organizational
facts and speciﬁcs’ (p. 559). They contrasted this with mindless innovation where a
ﬁrm’s actions ‘betray a lack of attention to organizational speciﬁcs’ (p. 563).
Variance models are developed by several IS researchers who use survey-based
methods to test theoretical constructs. Teo, Wei, and Benbasat (2003) used institutional
theory as a lens to understand the factors that enable the adoption of interorganiza-
tional systems. Their research model tested how mimetic, coercive and normative
pressures existing in an institutionalized environment, could inﬂuence organizational
predisposition toward an information technology-based interorganizational linkage.
Findings suggested that all three institutional pressures had a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on
organizational intention to adopt ﬁnancial electronic data interchange. The authors
claim their ﬁndings indicate that organizations are embedded in institutional networks
and call for more research into the institutional pressures on the adoption of IT
innovations. Employing similar methods, Liang et al. (2007) found signiﬁcant evidence
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
155

of institutional effects of coercive, mimetic, and normative pressures on the assimilation
of enterprise systems in organizations.
Another study using a variance approach considers the institutionalization of
IT budgeting in the ﬁnancial services sector. Hu and Quan (2006) examined the
inﬂuences of institutional pressures from a ﬁrm’s external environment on the corpo-
rate IT budgeting processes. Using ﬁrm-level IT and ﬁnancial data of publicly traded
companies in the ﬁnancial sector, the authors found one of the most signiﬁcant sources
of inﬂuence on an ﬁrm’s average IT budget was the IT spending level of the perceived
industry leaders. They concluded that IT budgeting processes have been at least
partially institutionalized.
Process models are increasingly used by IS researchers to examine institutional
change and deinstitutionalization. Swanson and Ramiller (1997) developed a theoreti-
cal model to understand the cultural-cognitive institutional processes that drive the
adoption and diffusion of IT innovations. The authors introduce the notion of ‘orga-
nizing vision’, which serves three important functions in the creation and promulga-
tion of IT innovations: interpretation of the innovations, legitimation of the need for
innovations, and mobilization of material resources to support the innovations. The
production and dissemination of organizing visions is an integral part of the institu-
tionalization process of IT innovations.
Currie (2004) used the organizing vision model to interpret data from a ﬁve-year
study on the adoption and diffusion of application service provider (ASP) technology.
Using a process-oriented analysis, she observed that over time, the initial hype sur-
rounding ASP was replaced by scepticism and distrust, as powerful institutional
interests in the form of technology ﬁrms, industry analysts, and IT consultancies
were ultimately unsuccessful in their attempts to disseminate ASP throughout
the wider business and not-for-proﬁt IS user communities. This study builds on
ideas where rhetoric and reality in large-scale innovation and change programmes
can be conceptualized as management fashions (Abrahamson 1996). Innovations that
are widely diffused and taken-for-granted within society are described as institutiona-
lized. Conversely, those that pose a disruptive threat or become distrusted, fail to gain
traction and become abandoned. To explain such success or failure, Wang and
Swanson (2007) employed institutional entrepreneurship to study how interested
organizational actors (institutional entrepreneurs) struggled to institutionalize profes-
sional services automation (PSA). They found that, for institutional entrepreneurs to
launch an IT innovation toward institutionalization, it is crucial to develop a relative
coherent organization vision for the innovation and mobilize a driver community to
create and maintain the industrial infrastructure for the innovation.
In summary, our review of institutional theory in IS research enables us to offer the
following insights. First, the dominant view among IS scholars is the recognition that
institutions reside in the environment and they shape the development and use of
IT. Exactly how this occurs is not well articulated, since most of the literature focuses
upon the institutional effects on IT, rather than how such institutions come into being
(e.g. the process of institutionalization) or disappear over time (deinstitutionalization).
156
WENDY L. CURRIE

Second, the IT-as-institution perspective is dominated by multivariate empirical stud-
ies that examine regulative, normative, and cultural-cognitive effects on IT adoption
and diffusion, yet restrict the unit of analysis to the level of the organization. This
approach rarely considers the larger dynamic where institutionalization processes
or effects may vary among organizations within and across ﬁelds, sectors, and markets
(Thatcher, Brower, and Mason 2006). Third, many studies adopt an atomistic or
reductionist approach where institutional concepts are simpliﬁed for the purposes of
empirical clarity and precision. While this is pursued for the purposes of methodologi-
cal rigour, we suggest that some concepts are not amenable to simple reductionism. For
example, the concept of isomorphism is widely used in the OS literature, albeit with
varying deﬁnitions (Greenwood et al. 2007). Imported by IS academics, we suggest that
caution needs to be applied in using isomorphism to measure cause and effect relation-
ships in either static or stage models. Fourth, IS researchers rarely discuss the theoreti-
cal and empirical antecedents of institutional theory which resides in reference
disciplines including sociology, economics, political science, and anthropology. Many
studies present institutional theory as new to the IS ﬁeld. While this is not problematic
in itself, the failure to convey the wider intellectual tradition of the theory may lead to
misinterpretation within the IS community and confusion about the relationship
between institutionalism and other theoretical perspectives.
AN INSTITUTIONAL AGENDA
FOR IS RESEARCH
..................................................................................................................
In proposing a research agenda for IS which embraces institutionalism, we reiterate prior
calls from King et al. (1994) who recognized that institutional factors are ‘ubiquitous and
essential components’ (p. 141) for understanding and explaining IT innovations, and
Orlikowski and Barley’s (2001) contention that institutionalism offers IT researchers
‘a vantage point for conceptualizing the digital economy as an emergent, evolving,
embedded, fragmented, and provisional social production that is shaped as much by
cultural and structural forces as by technical and economic ones’ (p. 154).
While institutionalism has gained momentum in the OS ﬁeld, IS has seen the
publication of a steady stream of research papers over the past decade, most of
which deploy institutional concepts as a lens to interpret data rather than offering
new theoretic insights. An explanation for the reluctance to adopt institutionalism as
a theoretical perspective for empirical investigation, we argue, may derive from the
shortcomings we have identiﬁed above. Also, the dominance in positivist research
methodology (e.g. surveys and experiments) compared with interpretivist methods
(case studies and ethnographies) may preclude some scholars from deploying institu-
tionalist concepts that are ill-deﬁned and amorphous. Another reason suggests that
IT research is predominantly concerned with the development, use, and management
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
157

of information systems where researchers focus on lower levels of analysis rather than
how ‘regulative processes, normative systems, and cultural frameworks shape the
design and use of technical systems’ (Orlikowski and Barley 2001: 153). This is less
common where researchers observe fewer demarcation boundaries between IS and OS,
for example.
The current trend in the IS ﬁeld to isolate the IT artefact within an organizational
setting reﬂects a wider trend in social science from the 1970s, which has seen a shift
from asking ‘big questions’ about society and organizations in favour of producing
‘narrowly orientated research in the idiom of normal science’. This is witnessed in
contingency theoretic formulations and much of the mainstream OS, where ‘organiza-
tions have become codiﬁed and packaged into standard research strategies rational-
functionalism and economic determinism’ (Lounsbury and Ventresca 2003: 462).
While the new institutionalism is explicitly anti-reductionist and rejects the causal
primacy of efﬁciency or narrow self interest, the use of institutional theory to inform
research enquiry needs to take into account how institutions inﬂuence IT within and
across organizations (Orlikowski and Barley 2001), and how IT itself may be an
institution. So given the pervasiveness and importance of IT and its relevance in
contemporary organizational change, it is noteworthy that OS scholars interested in
change have not addressed IT in a more explicit and systematic fashion (Barrett, Grant,
and Wailes 2006) and equally that IS researchers underplay the importance of politi-
cally and socially constructed realities in shaping the processes and effects of IT.
Calls to expand institutionalist research come from within and beyond the IS
community. However, a broadened institutional approach has some limitations
(Powell 1991), not least because multiple deﬁnitions of institution rarely offer convincing
accounts of the processes and effects of institutionalization (Greenwood et al. 2007).
Researchers therefore need to avoid becoming ‘thrown into a ﬁeld of research that has
almost no limits, and also few directions about what is more or less important or
relevant . . . (where) almost all aspects of social life become a possible research object’
(Hasselbladh and Kallinikos 2000: 702).
Recognizing the potential advantages and disadvantages in using institutionalism as
a mainstream theoretical perspective in IS, we identify ﬁve challenges for IS researchers
concerning theory development and empirical investigation. First, institutionalism
embodies powerful and complex concepts and ideas that provide a ﬁrm foundation
for designing variance and process models. Researchers need to fully engage with the
neo-institutional literature, not merely from OS, but also from sociology, economics,
and political science to gain a wide appreciation of the intellectual antecedents of this
complex theoretical approach. Institutional concepts are not axiomatic and need to be
carefully deﬁned in any research design. Since many IS researchers may not possess a
wide knowledge of institutionalism, they will not extend the theory by treating con-
cepts as axiomatic. IS research needs to discover the scope conditions under which
institutional explanations may or may not hold in the numerous complex and dynamic
contexts of IT development and use.
158
WENDY L. CURRIE

Second, earlier neo-institutionalism accounts have focused on stability and persis-
tence, and more recently on institutional change and deinstitutionalization (Greenwood
and Hinings 2006). IS researchers need to develop robust research designs which address
issues of how and why institutions emerge, transform, and vanish. Detailed ethnographic
studies that reveal how institutional practices come to be legitimated coupled with large-
scale, longitudinal studies that explore the staying power of institutional arrangements
will greatly contribute to the body of research on institutionalization (Powell 1991).
Archival data can also be collected, analysed, and measured to study paths of institution-
alization (Colyvas and Powell 2006) and monitor institutional stability and change.
Third, IS researchers should continue to focus on a range of core sectors of the economy,
such as government, health, manufacturing, and ﬁnance since many studies have
traditionally investigated institutionalism in the public, not-for-proﬁt, or highly regulated
sectors (Powell 1991). Although studies have emerged on speciﬁc sectors, we suggest that
differentiating between not-for-proﬁt and for-proﬁt sectors is becoming increasingly
outdated. We suggest that macro-institutional analysis shows that reality is infused
with shared values and interests between public (state) and private (capital) sectors,
particularly in the light of increased IT outsourcing where external ﬁrms engage with
highly institutionalized organizational settings, an example being the market initiatives in
healthcare (Scott et al. 2000).
Fourth, institutionalism needs to embrace a multi-level analysis to avoid criticisms
that it pays too much attention to institutional forces emanating from the societal and
interorganizational levels and not enough attention to the role of individuals in shaping
their institutional environment. Research needs to embrace ‘the importance of simul-
taneously understanding the role of human agency as embedded in institutional
contexts as well as the constraints and affordances of technologies as material systems’
(Orlikowski and Barley 2001: 158). Recent work on institutional entrepreneurship
addresses some of these limitations and demonstrates how individuals and groups
serve to both stabilize and change habitualized behaviours (Lawrence and Suddaby
2006). Research could examine the role of ‘technical champions’ as a type of institu-
tional entrepreneur, as many IS accounts pay scant attention to the institution-building
activities that shape individual and group behaviour within and across networks,
organizations, and ﬁelds.
Fifth, the shortcomings of institutionalism may be overcome by a multi-theory
approach to empirical investigation. Combining institutional theory with structuration
theory, agency theory, discourse analysis, and critical management perspectives, for
example, may provide a powerful foundation from which new and exciting insights
may arise. For example, Barley and Tolbert (1997) proposed that a fusion of institu-
tional theory and structuration theory makes it possible to theorize institutionalization
as a structuration process. While organization theorists routinely use a multi-theory
approach, we caution against a tendency in the IS literature to adopt a ‘pick n mix’
approach to theory, as key concepts and terms can become lost in translation.
Our review of institutional research in IS has also allowed us to identify two broad
questions speciﬁc to IT research. First, what unique challenges and opportunities do
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
159

IT innovations face in an institutional environment? The creation, diffusion, and
maintenance of institutions are primarily based on information that social actors
collect, process, and transfer (Zucker 1977). New information technologies, by deﬁni-
tion, bring new information, relationships, or processes in information management,
inevitably
disrupting
existing
institutions—taken-for-granted
incentive
systems
based on existing information, relationships, and processes. For this reason, IT
innovations naturally entail institutional changes and thus understanding IT phe-
nomena requires an institutional theory of IT. To develop an institutional theory of
IT, researchers must go beyond the organizational level analysis of institutional
effects to investigate multiple levels and sources of institutional change. We recog-
nize this is a serious challenge since research enquiry that isolates the management
of IT in an organizational setting is less complex and contentious than studies that
encapsulate a multi-level and multi-variate analysis linking policy, process, practice,
and people. Research output that conveys neutral and apolitical accounts of values
and interests has greater ‘facticity’, since ‘participants are able to tell researchers
much more succinctly how they interact with technological artifacts’, rather than
research on the management of information which takes into account ‘the social
constructions that constitute information’ (Thatcher, Brower, and Mason 2006:
449). But while studying IT as an artefact is less controversial, it is also ‘less
important in shaping behaviour than are structuration activities at higher levels of
analysis’ (ibid. 449). Extending research enquiry beyond the organization is there-
fore likely to generate richer and more analytical accounts of the interplay between
regulatory, normative, and cultural cognitive inﬂuences on IT development, imple-
mentation, and management.
The second broad question we raise is: how do institutional changes synchronize with
technological changes? Institutionalists characteristically portray the institutional/tech-
nical dichotomy and argue both the institutional and technical priorities ‘impinge on’ a
social actor at the same time (Zucker 1987). DiMaggio and Powell (1991) recognized
that environmental changes (including technological change) frequently outpace insti-
tutional changes and social actors’ adaptation and that suboptimal institutions can
persist for an extended period of time and rarely reﬂect current political, economic, and
technological forces. On the other hand, Brown and Duguid (2000: 84) warned against
the argument that ‘society falls behind while technology streaks ahead.’ As IT advances
at ‘exponential’ speed, it is worth asking whether and how institutions and technology
can remain or become in synch. While we caution against using a false dichotomy
between institution and IT, we recognize that IT-enabled change may disrupt existing
working practices leading to deinstitutionalization. In this regard, our IT-as-institution
perspective is therefore useful in that it recognizes that the adoption and assimilation of
new IT in use is essentially the institutionalization process, which culminates with the
new IT as a new or transformed institution.
160
WENDY L. CURRIE

CONCLUSION
..................................................................................................................
This chapter demonstrates that institutional theory is increasingly used by IS researchers,
although the relationship between the core theoretic concepts with other management
ﬁelds is not well articulated in the IS literature. Reviewing the seminal papers on neo-
institutional theory reveals that interorganizational and ﬁeld level units of analysis are
used in disciplines such as sociology and economics, for example, but the majority of IS
studies deploy the organization (business unit, site, department) to analyse institutional
concepts. Institutionalization, however, is both a multi-level process and an outcome.
The separation of institution and technology in some areas of the literature suggests a
false dichotomy, particularly as IT may also be conceptualized as an institution. We
therefore posit the concept of IT-as-institution to convey the complex relationship
between IT with higher-level institutional forces and inﬂuences. Indeed, studying IT in
isolation of macro-environmental and organizational factors and, more importantly,
ignoring the complex interrelationships between them, is unlikely to produce theoretic
insights of any real signiﬁcance or impact. This has serious implications for the future of
IS as a critical discipline in business and information schools.
IS researchers need to study how and why environmental and organizational
processes and effects inﬂuence IT adoption and diffusion, for example; and how core
ideas, such as legitimacy, taken-for-grantedness, isomorphism, and institutional logics
can explicate pathways to institutionalization and deinstitutionalization. This is im-
portant since institutionalization is driven by self-reinforcing feedback dynamics that
serve to create stability and persistence, yet may also be receptive to exogenous and
endogenous ‘jolts’ acting as a catalyst for institutional change. We recognize that using
a multi-level analysis to study IS practice using an institutional perspective is complex
particularly as institutions may be viewed as the ‘ongoing product of a series of
integrated and semi-autonomous social ﬁelds, each of which has a distinct history,
logic and structure’ (Lawrence and Suddaby 2006: 248–9).
In conclusion, we urge IS researchers to extend their theoretical repertoire, not
by attempting to generate ‘new theories for IS’, but to recognize that existing theories,
such as institutionalism, have rich and diverse intellectual antecedents which are not
amenable to simple reductionism. By broadening the level of analysis to include
interorganizations and ﬁelds, IS researchers will be able to recognize that IT adoption
and diffusion at the organizational level is inextricably linked to macro-environmental
factors, such as government policy, corporate strategy, market dynamics, and the like.
To understand IS outcomes in healthcare, for example, is not reducible to simple
survey or case study analysis on individual priorities and preferences at single sites,
since deeply engrained institutional behaviours play a key role in determining what is
either possible or not possible in practical terms. In sum, this chapter has covered a
wide range of neo-institutional literature to give a ﬂavour of the depth and breadth of
this complex theory. We hope that IS researchers will seek out this literature to enrich
our knowledge of how institutionalism can encourage deeper insights into the multi-
faceted phenomenon of information management and technology.
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
161

Appendix A Selected Studies in Institutional Research from Reference Disciplines, Especially Organizational Sociology
Category
Theoretical Perspective
Context
Reference
Institutional
Theory
Institutions
Institutionalism
Institutionalization
· New institutionalism: organizational factors in
political life
· Formal structure as myth and ceremony
· Role of institutionalization in cultural
persistence
· The iron cage revisited
· Organizations as institutions
· Organizational environments: ritual and
rationality
· Institutional theories of organizations
· Adolescence of Institutional Theory
· Institutional patterns and organizations
· Rediscovering institutions
· Three pillars of institutions
· Virtues of the old institutionalism
· New institutionalism in organizational analysis
March and Olsen 1976
Meyer and Rowan 1977
Zucker 1977
DiMaggio and Powell 1983
Zucker 1983
Meyer, Rowan, and Scott 1983
Zucker 1987
Scott 1987
Zucker 1988a
March and Olsen 1989
Scott 1995 (2nd edn. 2001)
Stinchcombe 1997
Powell and DiMaggio 1991
Construction,
Maintenance,
and Diffusion
Variance and process models
· Variance and process theories of
institutionalization
· Component processes of institutionalization
Mohr 1982
Tolbert and Zucker 1996
Creation, maintenance, and stability
· Culturalcognitive aspects of institutionalism
· Conditions for new institutional arrangements
· Narrative mode of knowing
· Social construction of organizational knowledge
· Temporal dynamics of institutionalization
· Multitheory approach to the cognitive under-
pinnings of institutional persistence and change
DiMaggio 1991b.
Suchman 1995
Czarniawska 1997
Mizruchi and Fein 1999
Lawrence, Winn, and Jennings 2001
George, Sitkin, and Barden 2006
Greenwood and Suddaby 2006
Philips, Lawrence, and Hardy 2004
162
WENDY L. CURRIE

· Institutional entrepreneurship in mature ﬁelds
· Discourse and institutions
Diffusion
· Diffusion in organizations and social movements
· Institutional conditions for diffusion
· Adoption of institutionally contested
organizational practices
Strang and Soule 1998
Strang and Meyer 1993
Sanders and Tuschke 2007
Organizational
Fields and
Institutional Logics
Organization Fields
· Structural analysis of organizational ﬁelds
· The institutional context of industry creation
· Institutional entrepreneurship in emerging ﬁelds
· Conceptualizing organizational ﬁelds
DiMaggio 1986
Aldrich and Fiol 1994
Fligstein 2002
Scott 1994
Industry creation, markets, sociocultural
and political explanations
· Politicalcultural approach to market institutions
· Institutional and task environment relationships
in the Canadian Construction Industry
· Institutional Change in the Healthcare System
· Institutionalist account of European Integration
· Differentiation of institutional space: organiza-
tional forms in the New York welfare sector
Fligstein 1996
Oliver 1997
Scott et al. 2000
Maguire, Hardy, and Lawrence
2004
Mohr and GuerraPearson 2006
Institutional Logics
· Cultural framing and institutional integration
· Symbols, practices, and institutional
contradictions
· Historical contingency of power in higher
educational publishing in the USA
· Conﬂict and conformity in institutional logics in
the craft industry
Hirsch 1986
Friedland and Alford 1991
Thornton and Ocasio 1999
Thornton 2002
Blatter 2003
Reay and Hinings 2005
Currie and Guah 2007
(continued)
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
163

Appendix A (Continued)
Category
Theoretical Perspective
Context
Reference
· Logics and change in transboundary spaces
· Competing logics in Healthcare in Alberta,
Canada
· Dominant logics in Healthcare in the UK,
National Health Service
Organizational
Structure,
Performance, and
Choice
Formal and informal structures,
governance, and strategic processes
· Social structure and organizations
· Institutional sources of change in the formal
structure of organizations
· Governance structures in large law ﬁrms
· Politics of bureaucratic structures
· Strategic responses to institutional processes
Stinchcombe 1965
Tolbert and Zucker 1983
Tolbert and Stern 1989
Moe 1990
Oliver 1992
Decoupling and Loose coupling
· Educational organizations as loosely coupled
systems
· Formal and informal organizations
· Institutional and technical sources of
organization structure
· Power and decoupling in the healthcare system
· Substance and symbolism in CEOs’ long-term
incentive plans
Weick 1976
March and Olsen 1976
Meyer, Scott, and Deal 1981
Covaleski, Dirsmith, and
Michelman 1993
Westphal and Zajac 1994
Isomorphism
· Resource dependence and institutional
environments
· Mimetic isomporphism and entry to new
markets
· Coercive, mimetic, and normative isomorphism
· Symbolic isomorphism and organizational
names
Tolbert 1985
Haveman 1983
Mizruchi and Fein 1999
Gynn and Abzug 2002
164
WENDY L. CURRIE

Legitimacy
· Organizational legitimacy: social values and
organizational behaviour
· Centralization and legitimacy problems in local
government
· Symbols and Organizations
· Strategic and institutional approaches to
managing legitimacy
· Causes and consequences of illegitimate
organizational change
· Multidimensional model in organizational
legitimacy
· Rhetorical strategies of legitimacy
· Social processes of organizational sense making
Dowling and Pfeffer 1975
Meyer and Scott 1983
Scott 1990
Suchman 1995b
Kraatz and Zajac 1996
Ruef and Scott 1998
Suddaby and Greenwood 2005
Maitless 2005
Strategic Choice and Rational Actor
· Organization structure, environment, and
performance
· Organizational discretion in responding to
institutional practices
Child 1972
Goodrick and Salancick 1996
Institutional
Change
Institutional Change
· Understanding strategic change: the
contribution of archetypes
· Interaction of organizational context and
organizational action
· Organizational responses to discontinuous
change
· Politics and institutionalism: explaining
durability and change
· Institutional evolution and change
Greenwood and Hinings 1993
Greenwood and Hinings 1996
Meyer, Brooks, and Goes 1990
Clemens and Cook 1999
Hoffman 1999
Lounsbury 2002
Greenwood, Suddaby, and Hinings
2002
DeHolan and Philips 2002
Sine and David 2003
(continued)
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
165

Appendix A (Continued)
Category
Theoretical Perspective
Context
Reference
· Institutional transformation and status
mobility
· Role of professional associations in the
transformation of institutionalized ﬁelds
· Institutional management and organizational
change
· Environmental jolts and entrepreneurial
opportunity in the US electric power industry
· Institutional change in Toque Ville Nouvelle
cuisine
· Institutional theory and institutional change
· Institutional contradictions, praxis, and
institutional change
· Institutional change in large law ﬁrms
Rao, Monin, and Durand 2003
Dacin, Goldstein, and Scott 2002
Seo and Creed 2002
Sherer and Lee 2002
Deinstitutionalization
· Decline and fall of the conglomerate ﬁrm in the
1980s
· Interest and agency in institutional theory
· Antecedents of Deinstitutionalization
Davis, Diekmann, and Tinsley 1994
DiMaggio 1988
Oliver 1992
Tolbert and Sine 1999
166
WENDY L. CURRIE

· Determinants of organizational compliance with
institutional pressures
Agency
· Agency and institutional theory perspectives to
explore the sales compensation policies in retail
· Interest and agency in institutional theory
Eisenhardt 1988
DiMaggio 1988
Rational Choice
· Theory of institutional change and economic
history of the Western World
· New economics of organization
· How institutions think
· Institutionalization of rational organization
North 1983
Moe 1984
Douglas 1986
Powell 1985
Structuration Processes
· Adaptive structuration theory
· Links between action and institution
· Action, structure, and contradiction in social
theory
· Bureaucratization without centralization
DeSanctis and Poole 1994
Barley and Tolbert 1997
Giddens 1979
Meyer et al. 1988
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
167

REFERENCES
Abrahamson, E. (1996). ‘Management Fashion, Academic Fashion, and Enduring Truths’,
Academy of Management Review, 21(3): 616–18.
Ang, S., and Cummings, L. L. (1997). ‘Strategic Response to Institutional Inﬂuences on
Information Systems Outsourcing’, Organization Science, 8(3): 235–56.
Axelrod, R. (1981). ‘The Emergence of Cooperation among Egoists’, American Political
Science Review, 75(2): 305–18.
Barley, S. R. (1986). ‘Technology as an Occasion for Structuring: Evidence from Observations
of CT Scanners and the Social Order of Radiology Departments’, Administrative Science
Quarterly, 31(1): 78–108.
—— and Tolbert, P. S. (1997). ‘Institutionalization and Structuration: Studying the Links
between Action and Institution’, Organization Studies, 18(1): 93–117.
Barrett, M., Grant, D., and Wailes, N. (2006). ‘ICT and Organizational Change: Introduction
to the Special Issue’, The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 42(1): 6–22.
Boudreau, M.-C., and Robey, D. (2005). ‘Enacting Integrated Information Technology:
A Human Agency Perspective’, Organization Science, 16(1): 3–18.
Brown, J. S., and Duguid, P. (2000). The Social Life of Information. Boston, MA: Harvard
Business School Press.
Colyvas, J. A., and Powell, W. W. (2006). ‘Roads to Institutionalization: The Remaking of
Boundaries between Public and Private Science’, in B. M. Staw (ed.), Research in Organiza-
tional Behaviour: An Annual Series of Analytical Essays 27. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Cousins, K. C., and Robey, D. (2005). ‘The Social Shaping of Electronic Metals Exchanges: An
Institutional Theory Perspective’, Information Technology & People, 18(3): 212–29.
Currie, W. L. (2004). ‘The Organizing Vision of Application Service Provision: A Process-
Oriented Analysis’, Information and Organization, 14(4): 237–67.
—— and Guah, M. W. (2007). ‘Conﬂicting Institutional Logics: A National Programme for
IT in the Organisational Field of Healthcare’, Journal of Information Technology, 22(3):
235–47.
Czarniawska, B. (1997). Narrating the Organization: Dramas of Institutional Identity. Chi-
cago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Damsgaard, J., and Scheepers, R. (1999). ‘Power, Inﬂuence and Intranet Implementation:
A Safari of South African Organizations’, Information Technology & People, 12(4): 333–58.
Davis, G. F., Diekmann, K. A., and Tinsley, C. H. (1994). ‘The Decline and Fall of the
Conglomerate Firm in the 1980s: The Deinstitutionalization of an Organizational Form’,
American Sociological Review, 59(4): 547–70.
DeSanctis, G., and Poole, M. S. (1994). ‘Capturing the Complexity in Advanced Technology
Use: Adaptive Structuration Theory’, Organization Science, 5(2): 121–47.
DiMaggio, P. (1986). ‘Structural Analysis of Organizational Fields: A Blockmodel Approach’,
in B. M. Staw and L. L. Cummings (eds.), Research in Organization Behaviour, 8. Greenwich,
CT: JAI Press, 355–70.
——(1988). ‘Interest and Agency in Institutional Theory’, in L. G. Zucker (ed.), Institutional
Patterns and Organizations: Culture and Environment. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, 3–21.
——(1991a). ‘Constructing an Organizational Field as a Professional Project: U.S. Art
Museums, 1920–1940’, in W. W. Powell and P. DiMaggio (eds.), The New Institutionalism
in Organizational Analysis. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 267–92.
168
WENDY L. CURRIE

——(1991b). ‘Social Structure, Institutions and Cultural Goods: The Case of the US’, in
P. Bourdieu and J. Coleman (eds.), Social Theory for a Changing Society. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press, 133–55.
——and Powell, W. W. (1983). ‘The Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional Isomorphism
and Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields’, American Sociological Review, 48(2):
147–60.
————(1991). ‘Introduction’, in W. W. Powell and P. DiMaggio (eds.), The New Institutional-
ism in Organizational Analysis. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1–38.
Dobbin, F. R., and Sutton, J. R. (1998). ‘The Strength of a Weak State: The Rights Revolution
and the Rise of Human Resources Management Divisions’, American Journal of Sociology,
104(2): 441–76.
Doolin, B. (2003). ‘Narrativesof Change:Discourse, Technologyand Organization’,Organization,
10(4): 751–70.
Edelman, L. B., Uggen, C., and Erlanger, H. S. (1999). ‘The Endogeneity of Legal Regulation:
Grievance Procedures as Rational Myth’, American Journal of Sociology, 105(2): 406–54.
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1988). ‘Agency- and Institutional-Theory Explanations: The Case of Retail
Sales Compensation’, Academy of Management Journal, 31(3): 488–511.
Friedland, R., and Alford, R. R. (1991). ‘Bringing Society Back In: Symbols, Practices, and
Institutional Contradictions’, in W. W. Powell and P. DiMaggio (eds.), The New Institu-
tionalism in Organizational Analysis. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 232–63.
Garﬁnkel, H. (1967). Studies in Ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Garud, R., Hardy, C., and Maguire, S. (2007). ‘Institutional Entrepreneurship as Embedded
Agency: An Introduction to the Special Issue’, Organization Studies, 28(7): 957–69.
——Jain, S., and Kumaraswamy, A. (2002). ‘Institutional Entrepreneurship in the Sponsor-
ship of Common Technological Standards: The Case of Sun Microsystems and Java’,
Academy of Management Journal, 45(1): 196–214.
George, E., Sitkin, S., and Barden, J. (2006). ‘Cognitive Underpinnings of Institutional
Persistence and Change: A Framing Perspective’, Academy of Management Review,
31: 347–65.
Goodrick, E., and Salancik, G. R. (1996). ‘Organizational Discretion in Responding to
Institutional Practices: Hospitals and Cesarean Births’, Administrative Science Quarterly,
41(1): 1–28.
Gosain, S. (2004). ‘Enterprise Information Systems as Objects and Carriers of Institutional
Forces: The New Iron Cage?’, Journal of the Association for Information Systems,
5(4): 151–82.
Greenwood, R., and Hinings, C. R. (1996). ‘Understanding Radical Organizational Change:
Bringing Together the Old and the New Institutionalism’, Academy of Management
Review, 21(4): 1022–54.
Greenwood, R., and Hinings, C. R. (2006). ‘Radical Organizational Change’, in S. R. Clegg,
C. Hardy, and W. R. Nord (eds.), The Sage Handbook of Organization Studies. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage, 814–42.
Greenwood, R., and Suddaby, R. (2006). ‘Institutional Entrepreneurship in Mature Fields:
The Big Five Accounting Firms’, Academy of Management Journal, 49: 27–48.
————and Hinings, C. R. (1996). ‘Theorizing Change: The Role of Professional Associations
in the Transformation of Institutionalized Fields’, Academy of Management Journal,
45(1): 58–80.
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
169

——Oliver, C., Sahlin, K., and Suddaby, R. (eds) (2007). Handbook of Organizational Institu-
tionalism. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hasselbladh, H., and Kallinikos J. (2000). ‘The Project of Rationalization: A Critique and
Reappraisal of Neo-institutionalism in Organization Studies’, Organization Studies, 21(4):
697–720.
Haveman, H. A. (1993). ‘Follow the Leader: Mimetic Isomorphism and Entry into New
Markets’, Administrative Science Quarterly, 38(4): 593–627.
Holm, P. (1995). ‘The Dynamics of Institutionalization: Transformation Processes in Norwe-
gian Fisheries’, Administrative Science Quarterly, 40(3): 398–422.
Hu, Q., and Quan, J. (2006). ‘The Institutionalization of IT Budgeting: Empirical Evidence
from the Financial Sector’, Information Resources Management Journal, 19(1): 84–97.
Jepperson, R. L. (1991). ‘Institutions, Institutional Effects, and Institutionalism’, in W. W.
Powell and P. DiMaggio (eds.), The New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis. Chi-
cago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 143–63.
Kaye, R., and Little, S. E. (1996). ‘Global Business and Cross-Cultural Information Systems
Technical and Institutional Dimensions of Diffusion’, Information Technology & People,
9(3): 30–54.
King, J. L., Gurbaxani, V., Kraemer, K. L., McFarlan, F. W., Raman, K. S., and Yap, C. S. (1994).
‘Institutional Factors in Information Technology Innovation’, Information Systems Research,
5(2): 139–69.
Lawrence, T. B., and Suddaby, R. (2006). ‘Institutions and Institutional Work’, in S. R. Clegg,
C. Hardy, T. B. Lawrence, and W. R. Nord (eds.), The Sage Handbook of Organizational
Studies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 215–54.
Lawrence, T., Winn, M. I., and Jennings, P. D. (2001). ‘The Temporal Dynamics of Institu-
tionalization’, Academy of Management Review, 25: 625–44.
Leblebici, H., Salancik, G. R., Copay, A., and King, A. (1991). ‘Institutional Change and the
Transformation of Interorganizational Fields: An Organizational History of the U.S. Radio
Broadcasting Industry’, Administrative Science Quarterly, 36(3): 333–63.
Liang, H., Saraf, N., Hu, Q., and Xue, Y. (2007). ‘Assimilation of Enterprise Systems:
The Effect of Institutional Pressures and the Mediating Role of Top Management’, MIS
Quarterly, 31(1): 59–87.
Lounsbury, M., and Ventresca, M. (2003). ‘The New Structuralism in Organizational Theory’,
Organization, 10(3): 457–80.
Maguire, S., Hardy, C., and Lawrence, T. B. (2004). ‘Institutional Entrepreneurship in
Emerging Fields: HIV/AIDS Treatment Advocacy in Canada’, Academy of Management
Journal, 47(5): 657–79.
March, J. G., and Olsen, J. P. (1976). Ambiguity and Choice in Organizations. Bergen:
Universitetsforlaget.
————(1989). Rediscovering Institutions: The Organizational Basis of Politics. New York:
Free Press.
Meyer, J. W., and Rowan, B. (1977). ‘Institutionalized Organizations: Formal Structure as
Myth and Ceremony’, American Journal of Sociology, 83(2): 340–63.
————and Scott, W. R. (1983). Organizational Environments: Ritual and Reality. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Mignerat, M., and Rivard, S. (2005). ‘Positioning the Institutional Perspective in Information
Technology Research’, HEC Montréal.
170
WENDY L. CURRIE

Miller, G. (2000). ‘Rational Choice and Dysfunctional Institutions’, Governance: An International
Journal of Policy and Administration, 13(4): 535–47.
Mingers, J. (2001). ‘Embodying Information Systems: The Contribution of Phenomenology’,
Information and Organization, 11(2): 103–28.
Mizruchi, M. S., and Fein, L. C. (1999). ‘The Social Construction of Organizational Knowledge:
A Study of the Uses of Coercive, Mimetic, and Normative Isomorphism’, Administrative
Science Quarterly, 44(4): 739–77.
Mohr, L. B. (1982). Explaining Organizational Behavior. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Montealegre, R. (1999). ‘A Temporal Model of Institutional Interventions for Information
Technology Adoption in Less-Developed Countries’, Journal of Management Information
Systems, 16(1): 207–32.
Nicolaou, A. I. (1999). ‘Social Control in Information Systems Development’, Information
Technology & People, 12(2): 130–47.
Ocasio, W. (1997). ‘Towards an Attention-Based View of the Firm’, Strategic Management
Journal, 18 (Special Issue SI): 187–206.
Oliver, C. (1991). ‘Strategic Responses to Institutional Processes’, Academy of Management
Review, 16(1): 145–79.
—— (1992). ‘The Antecedents of Deinstitutionalization’, Organization Studies, 13(4): 563–88.
——(1997). ‘The Inﬂuence of Institutional and Task Environment Relationships on Organiza-
tional Performance: The Canadian Construction Industry’, Journal of Management Studies,
34(1): 99–124.
Orlikowski, W. J. (1992). ‘The Duality of Technology: Rethinking the Concept of Technology
in Organizations’, Organization Science, 3(3): 398–427.
——(1996). ‘Improvising Organizational Transformation over Time: A Situated Change
Perspective’, Information Systems Research, 7(1): 63–92.
——and Barley, S. R. (2001). ‘Technology and Institutions: What Can Research on Informa-
tion Technology and Research on Organizations Learn from Each Other?’, MIS Quarterly,
25(2): 145–65.
——and Robey, D. (1991). ‘Information Technology and the Structuring of Organizations’,
Information Systems Research, 2(2): 143–69.
Perrow, C. (1986). Complex Organizations: A Critical Essay. 3rd edn., New York: Random
House.
Phillips, N., Lawrence, T. B., and Hardy, C. (2004). ‘Discourse and Institutions’, Academy of
Management Review, 29(4): 635–52.
Pierson, P. (2000). ‘The Limits of Design: Explaining Institutional Origins and Change’,
Governance: An International Journal of Policy and Administration, 13(4): 475–99.
Porter, K., Whittington, K. B., and Powell, W. W. (2005). ‘The Institutional Embeddedness
of High-Tech Regions: Relational Foundations of the Boston Biotechnology Community’,
in S. Breschi and F. Malerba (eds.), Clusters, Networks, and Innovation. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 261–96.
Powell, W. W. (1991). ‘Expanding the Scope of Institutional Analysis’, in W. W. Powell and
P. DiMaggio (eds.), The New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 183–203.
—— and DiMaggio, P. (1991). The New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis. Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press.
Reay, T., and Hinings, C. R. (2005). ‘The Recomposition of an Organizational Field: Health
Care in Alberta’, Organization Studies, 26: 351–84.
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
171

Reich, S. (2000). ‘The Four Faces of Institutionalism: Public Policy and a Pluralistic Perspective’,
Governance: An International Journal of Policy and Administration, 13(4): 501–22.
Rogers, E. M. (2003). Diffusion of Innovations. 5th edn., New York: Free Press.
Ross, A., and Chiasson, M. W. (2005). ‘A Call to (Dis)Order: An Ethnomethodological Study
of Information Technology “Disruptions” in the Courtroom’, Information and Organization,
15(3): 203–27.
Salmeron, J. L., and Bueno, S. (2006). ‘An Information Technologies and Information Systems
Industry-Based Classiﬁcation in Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises: An Institutional
View’, European Journal of Operational Research, 173(3): 1012–25.
Sanders, W. G., and Tuschke, A. (2007). ‘The Adoption of Institutionally Contested Organi-
zational Practices: The Emergence of Stock Option Pay in Germany’, Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, 50: 33–57.
Schütz, A. (1967). Phenomenology of the Social World, trans. F. Lehnert and G. Walsh.
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Scott, W. R. (1987). ‘The Adolescence of Institutional Theory’, Administrative Science Quarterly,
32(4): 493–511.
——(1995). Institutions and Organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
——(2001). Institutions and Organizations. 2nd edn., Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
——Ruef, M., Mendel, P. J., and Caronna, C. A. (2000). Institutional Change and Healthcare
Organizations: From Professional Dominance to Managed Care. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Selznick, P. (1949). TVA and the Grass Roots: A Study in the Sociology of Formal Organization.
New York: Harper & Row.
——(1957). Leadership in Administration. Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson.
Seo, M.-G., and Creed, W. E. D. (2002). ‘Institutional Contradictions, Praxis, and Institutional
Change: A Dialectical Perspective’, Academy of Management Review, 27(2): 222–47.
Simon, H. A. (1997). Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-Making Processes in
Administrative Organization. 4th edn., New York: Free Press.
Sine, W. D., and David, R. J. (2003). ‘Environmental Jolts, Institutional Change, and the
Creation of Entrepreneurial Opportunity in the US Electric Power Industry’, Research
Policy, 32(2): 185–207.
Stinchcombe, A. L. (1997). ‘On the Virtues of the Old Institutionalism’, Annual Review of
Sociology, 23: 1–18.
Strang, D., and Meyer, J. W. (1993). ‘Institutional Conditions for Diffusion’, Theory and
Society, 22(4): 487–511.
————(1994). ‘Institutional Condition for Diffusion’, in W. R. Scott and J. W. Meyer (eds.),
Institutional Environments and Organizations: Structural Complexity and Individualism.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 100–12.
—— and Soule, S. A. (1998). ‘Diffusion in Organizations and Social Movements: From Hybrid
Corn to Poison Pills’, in J. Hagan and K. S. Cook (eds.), Annual Review of Sociology, 24,
Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews, 265–90.
Suchman, M. C. (1995). ‘Localism and Globalism in Institutional Analysis: The Emergence
of Contractual Norms in Venture Finance’, in W. R. Scott and S. Christensen (eds.),
The Institutional Construction of Organizations: International and Longitudinal Studies.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 39–63.
Swanson, E. B., and Ramiller, N. C. (1997). ‘The Organizing Vision in Information Systems
Innovation’, Organization Science, 8(5): 458–74.
172
WENDY L. CURRIE

————(2004). ‘Innovating Mindfully with Information Technology’, MIS Quarterly, 28(4):
553–83.
Teo, H. H., Wei, K. K., and Benbasat, I. (2003). ‘Predicting Intention to Adopt Interorganiza-
tional Linkages: An Institutional Perspective’, MIS Quarterly, 27(1): 19–49.
Thatcher, J. B., Brower, R. S., and Mason, R. M. (2006). ‘Organizational Fields and the
Diffusion of Information Technologies within and across the Nonproﬁt and Public Sec-
tors’, The American Review of Public Administration, 36(4): 437–54.
Thornton, P. H. (2002). ‘The Rise of the Corporation in a Craft Industry: Conﬂict and
Conformity in Institutional Logics’, Academy of Management Journal, 45(1): 81–101.
—— and Ocasio, W. (1999). ‘Institutional Logics and the Historical Contingency of Power
in Organizations: Executive Succession in the Higher Education Publishing Industry,
1958–1990’, American Sociological Review, 105(3): 801–43.
Tolbert, P. S., and Zucker, L. G. (1983). ‘Institutional Sources of Change in the Formal
Structure of Organizations: The Diffusion of Civil Service Reform, 1880–1935’, Administra-
tive Science Quarterly, 28(1): 22–39.
————(1996). ‘The Institutionalization of Institutional Theory’, in S. R. Clegg, C. Hardy,
and W. Nord (eds.), Handbook of Organization Studies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publica-
tions, 175–90.
Walsham, G. (1993). Interpreting Information Systems in Organizations. New York: Wiley.
Wang, P., and Swanson, E. B. (2007). ‘Launching Professional Services Automation: Institutional
Entrepreneurship for Information Technology Innovations’, Information and Organization
17(2): 59–88.
Wareham, J. (2002). ‘Anthropologies of Information Costs: Expanding the Neo-Institutional
View’, Information and Organization, 12(4): 219–48.
Weick, K. E. (1998). ‘Improvisation as a Mindset for Organizational Analysis’, Organization
Science, 9(5): 543–55.
Williamson, O. E. (1975). Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications.
New York: Free Press.
Zucker, L. G. (1977). ‘The Role of Institutionalization in Cultural Persistence’, American
Sociological Review, 42(5): 726–43.
——(1983). ‘Organizations as Institutions’, in S. B. Bacharach (ed.), Advances in Organizational
Theory and Research. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
——(1987). ‘Institutional Theories of Organization’, Annual Review of Sociology, (13): 443–64.
Zucker, L. G. (1988). Institutional Patterns and Organizations: Culture and Environment.
Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
173

c h a p t e r 7
...............................................................................................
‘EVERYTHING IS
DANGEROUS’:
RETHINKING MICHEL
FOUCAULT AND THE
SOCIAL STUDY OF ICT
...............................................................................................
LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS AND ELENI A. LIOLIOU
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
Despite the considerable cross-disciplinary inﬂuence of Foucault’s work, he is, this
chapter argues, unjustly neglected in the study of information and communication
technologies (ICTs), especially in the Information Systems ﬁeld (IS). We argue for the
abiding relevance of Foucault’s oeuvre.1 His thinking on techne and technology is
reviewed, and a critique of his relative neglect in the IS ‘discipline’ provided. The
chapter then critically evaluates and illustrates how he can and has been used in
the study of ICTs in IS, organization, management, and surveillance studies, and
more recently by those studying governmentality, network society, techno-bodies,
and cyberspace. We conclude by pointing to the potential for utilizing Foucault in
deconstructing the growing interest in ICT-supported knowledge management and
related systems, and understanding control in liquid modernity.
Given Foucault’s massive inﬂuence across so many other diverse disciplines and
areas of intellectual endeavour, it is surprising to ﬁnd Foucauldian methods and
concepts discussed so little, let alone digested and used in the Information Systems
ﬁeld.2 However, there are also many academics who work on information and com-
munication technology (ICT) related issues from adjacent or associated perspectives,
and sometimes consciously connect with the IS community. These include researchers
in organization studies (e.g. Burrell 1998; Clegg 1998); sociology (e.g. Lyon 1993;

Bauman 1999); cultural studies (e.g. Haraway 1991; Hayles 1999); philosophy of
technology (e.g. Dreyfus and Rabinow 1983; Introna 1997; Feenberg 2002), innovation
studies (Grint and Willcocks 1995; Bloomﬁeld et al. 1997); strategic management
(Knights and Murray 1994; McKinley and Starkey 1998), and critical accounting (e.g.
Morgan and Willmott 1993; Miller and Rose 2008). Foucault has been much more
inﬂuential amongst these latter groupings.
Here we will assess Foucault’s views of techne and technology and why the relative
neglect of his work in the IS ﬁeld. We pinpoint this as ironic given that the celebrated
ICT study by Zuboff (1988) is so inﬂuenced by Foucault, but explain the neglect
through a brief genealogy of the IS ‘discipline’. We argue that IS attempts to discipline
itself could learn from a deeper Foucauldian genealogy, as attempted in part by Introna
(2001). The chapter then illustrates where Foucauldian perspectives, concepts, and
methods have been applied; and with what results. This section particularly illustrates
effective applications of Foucauldian perspectives on ICTs in IS, organization, man-
agement, and surveillance studies. The ﬁnal section argues against the view that
Foucault has become less relevant with moves to liquid modernity (Bauman 1999)
network society (Munro 2000), and new forms of technology and techno-bodies (Best
and Kellner 2001). Instead we argue that Foucault’s work has an abiding importance,
and can become even more relevant to the study of ICTs.
This chapter assumes a degree of familiarity with Foucault’s main work, but not with
its application to ICTs. A detailed account of the broader intellectual career and work
of Foucault can be found in Willcocks (2004). Before we begin, it is important to stress
the provisionality of Foucault’s ideas and the fact that Foucault himself was far from
being a systematic thinker. He quite deliberately described his practices as ‘analytical
work’ rather than theory, and his analysis of power relations as ‘not a theory, but rather
a way of theorizing practice’ (Kritzman 1988). Somewhere Foucault refers to Nietzche’s
observation that while thinkers are always shooting arrows into the air, the key thing is
for others to pick them up and shoot them in another direction.3 If the unﬁnished,
open-ended character of his work creates some difﬁculties for its reception and use,
then it also leaves open the possibility of creative applications of his ideas. (We
ourselves, for example, are developing an approach linking governmentality, power
relations, and constitution of the self as a way of studying organizations and their use of
external services). We must recognize throughout that Foucault himself would expect
from others a development, not mere replication of his work.
FOUCAULT: TECHNE AND TECHNOLOGY
..................................................................................................................
Foucault himself wrote little directly about information and communications technol-
ogies (ICT), and indeed little about technological artefacts and tools, though he
recognized that the technologies he was interested in were physical in part, for example
in the architecture of prisons, schools, the clinic. However, he did write much about
‘EVERYTHING IS DANGEROUS’
175

procedures, techniques, processes, and behavioural/disciplinary technologies, for
example the confession, the examination, prison rehabilitation regimes, and ‘technol-
ogies of the self’. This may well have led to his relative neglect amongst ICT researchers,
though a similar omission does not seem to have done any harm to the reception of the
work of Giddens and Habermas, for example (Mingers and Willcocks 2004). Part of
this may well be that Foucault comes less packaged, with fewer schemas that are easy to
adopt. That said, some of his work, especially the image of the Panopticon, has been
translated directly into, for example, studies of surveillance technologies (Lyon 1994,
2003), of the use of information and databases (Poster 1990), and of discipline,
information use, and technologies at work (Zuboff 1988; Webster 2005).
However, Foucault’s contribution can be much richer than this. For example,
Foucault was well aware, not least from his reading of Heidegger, of the long-term,
‘greatest danger’ (Heidegger’s phrase) from technology, as well as from Weberian
rationalization (though Foucault (1983) prefers to investigate ‘speciﬁc rationalities’),
and the disciplining and normalization inherent in bio-power. Had he lived into the so-
called ‘Information Age’ he might well have made the connections between these and
the key roles of media-, military-, and work-based information and communication
technologies forming this present danger, arising, in Heidegger’s ‘essence of technology’
(1977) and in Virilio’s (2002) view, as technocratic thinking and imagination become
social imagination itself. A Foucauldian perspective leads to a key question here:
We have been able to see what forms of power relation were conveyed by various
technologies (whether we are speaking of productions with economic aims, or
institutions whose goal is social regulation, or of techniques of communication) . . .
What is at stake, then, is this: How can the growth of capabilities be disconnected
from the intensiﬁcation of power relations? (M. Foucault: ‘What is Enlightenment’,
in Rabinow 1984)
From the early 1970s the word technology is increasingly to be found in Foucault’s
writings. The word is usually used in phrases such as ‘technologies of power’, ‘political
technology of the body’, ‘disciplinary technologies’, and ‘technologies of the self’.
Foucault often elides the word technology with those of techne and also technique,
but power always resides in his concept of technology whether referring to behavioural
technologies, or to technology as architectures, buildings, physical artefacts, and
how space is deﬁned and used. Foucault rarely seeks to deﬁne his use of the word
technology. In an interview called ‘Space, Knowledge, and Power’ (Rabinow 1984), while
discussing the study of architecture, Foucault offers, somewhat elliptically, the following:
What interests me more is to focus on what the Greeks called techne, that is to say, a
practical rationality governed by a conscious goal. . . . The disadvantage of this word
techne, I realize is its relation to the word ‘technology’ which has a very speciﬁc
meaning . . . one thinks of hard technology, the technology of wood, of ﬁre, of
electricity. Whereas government is also a function of technology: the government
of individuals, the government of souls, the government of the self by the self, the
government of families, the government of children and so on.
176
LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS AND ELENI A. LIOLIOU

An interesting contrast can be made with Heidegger who was interested in the products
and tools of the natural sciences, and focused on ‘the essence of technology’, or what
Dreyfus calls technicity, that is the new technocratic thinking and style of practices that
have emerged, distinguished from the technological devices these practices produce
and sustain. For Foucault, too, to judge technology by its tools and its production is to
miss the point. In his later work, however, he is looking at modern human sciences, the
practices and power relations by which they are founded, the knowledge and beha-
vioural technologies they produce, and how these operate, allied to structures, designed
space, and use of tools and artefacts. Moreover the operation of these new methods
(technologies?) of power ‘is not ensured by right but by technique, not by law but by
normalization, not by punishment but by control’ (Foucault 1978).
Furthermore, these technologies of power function anonymously—they are imple-
mented by everyone and no one—and autonomously—for, as Foucault once commen-
ted in an interview: ‘while people know what they do, and may know why they do what
they do, they do not know what what they do does.’ Given this distinctive, historically
recent blending of knowledges, disciplinary technologies and bio-power, power/knowl-
edge emerges as the key concept in Foucault’ philosophy of modern technology.
However this philosophy of technology is particularistic. Unlike Heidegger, he does
not attempt a general account of the ‘essence’ of modern technology, but rather reveals
speciﬁc histories of technological practices overlooked in other accounts of modern
forms of power.
Several points occur here. Firstly, it is important to stress that Foucault does not
deny that technologies of power/knowledge can have beneﬁcial features: ‘my point is
not that everything is bad, but everything is dangerous . . . if everything is dangerous,
then we always have something to do’ (Foucault 1983). Secondly, especially in his later
work, Foucault indicates that modern subjects can and do subvert the conditions of
their own subjectivity. In the later volumes of The History of Sexuality, for example the
individual is increasingly positioned as the personal space where both active and
passive, and regulated and resistant possibilities for human agency surface in the
context of material practices (Katz 2001). The self-subjectivation practices, or ‘tech-
nologies of the self’ as Foucault calls them, take on a more active, used dimension, less
geared to relations of power and discourse, more geared to bending force back on itself,
and so to self’s work on the self. One can begin to read Haraway’s (1991) cyborg
manifesto: ‘I would rather be a cyborg than a goddess’ into the direction Foucault’s
work was taking.
Thirdly, Deleuze (1995) stresses that Foucault was one of the ﬁrst to say that we have
been shifting from disciplinary societies to what Deleuze calls control societies. These
no longer operate by, for example, physically conﬁning people but through continuous
control and instant communication enabled by developments in material technology.
In this rendering what has been called ‘information society’ can also be read as control
society. If this is correct, then Foucault’s power/knowledge, discourse, bio-power, and
governmentality remain as thoroughly applicable concepts, as Foucault intended them
to. Moreover, Deleuze points out that if each kind of society corresponds to a particular
‘EVERYTHING IS DANGEROUS’
177

machine, e.g simple mechanical for sovereign societies, thermo-dynamic machines for
disciplinary societies, and cybernetic machines and computers for control societies,
then: ‘the machines don’t explain anything, you have to analyze the collective arrange-
ments of which the machines are just one component’. In other words, the machines do
not determine different kinds of society, but do express the social forms capable of
producing them and making use of them. And of course, as we argue later, the shift to
new forms of society can be exaggerated, as we have seen in the rhetorics of post-
modernism, and on the Internet, digital and knowledge economies.
FOUCAULT: ‘GHOST’ IN THE
AUTOMATE/INFORMATE DEBATE
..................................................................................................................
While Foucault never wrote explicitly about ICTs, one book he might have written on
the subject is, ironically, given the relative neglect of Foucault’s work in the area, the
most cited and celebrated in the whole of the IS ﬁeld, namely Zuboff’s 1988 book In the
Age of the Smart Machine. The most cited aspect of Zuboff (1988) is its major premiss.
ICTs can be designed and applied to automate or informate work. The former option
builds on ICT, potential for speed and consistency, but creates deskilled blue and white
collar jobs, minimizes job satisfaction, can displace physical labour, and increases the
decision-making, discretion, and remoteness of management. Informating, on the
other hand, derives from the enormous transparency given by ICT-assisted informa-
tion generated from an organization’s underlying production and administrative
processes. Informating enables much greater ICT potential to be exploited, and more
commercial advantage to be gained.
Undoubtedly, changes in technology greatly increase what is possible. But, Zuboff
argues, what subsequently happens depends on transformations, profound disconti-
nuities in fact, in how knowledge, authority, and technique are managed, and implies a
comprehensive conscious strategy. The dilemma is posed by Zuboff as a stark and
ultimately political question. Will managers move from drivers of largely bodily labour
to drivers of learning? Do and will managers utilize ICT to support, and even reinforce,
existing political, social, and organizational structures and processes, or transform
these and their own positions within them in order to gain the full pay-offs from
ICT investments?
In all this, though not heavily referenced, the inﬂuence of Foucault is quite striking.
Zuboff’s concept of power is not exactly that of Foucault’s but, for her, power is a key
concept, does circulate, and is intimately related to skills and types of knowledge. Like
Foucault, she downplays conspiracy, and instead stresses contingency and expediency
in how things turn out. Her approach in taking a long-run historical perspective on the
labouring body and skill in production and white-collar work, on managerial authority
(called by her ‘the spiritual dimension of power’), and in presenting ICT as a potential
178
LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS AND ELENI A. LIOLIOU

discontinuity—all these echo the shape of Foucault’s work in many places. In many
ways Zuboff maps a long-run, complex, Foucault-like discourse on management, work,
technology, and struggles, into which ICTs are ﬁnding their way. Foucault is also
inﬂuential in Zuboff’s concentration on technique, which she calls the material dimen-
sion of power. The debt then becomes explicit in the related two chapter headings,
namely ‘The Information Panopticon’ and ‘Panoptic Power and The Social Text’. Her
focus on bio-power and the microphysics of power—how power produces bodies and
mind—is also the Foucault of Discipline and Punish. Interestingly here, in her excellent
research methodology, she gives a central place to phenomenology—a move Foucault
would have needed to make if he had wanted to explore bio-power further at the
material level in institutional settings. The automate/informate dilemma is also one
that points, Foucauldian-like, to ‘the present danger’: will we reinforce present disci-
plinary, panoptic tendencies through ICT applications, or will we take up other options
the new boost in power and possibilities these technologies can offer. Ultimately the
pessimism in her ﬁndings, and to some extent her conclusions also remind one of
Foucault’s own dilemmas with disciplinary/bio-power.
But something interesting then happens to the direction which the informate/
automate debate takes. As Zuboff’s book becomes a bestseller, its Foucauldian inﬂu-
ences and themes fall away almost completely, and the automate/informate dilemma
comes to be posed as a choice for managers and, indeed capitalist societies to make.
Partly this is because of how the book is sold, with a simpliﬁed central message, an
‘informate’ challenge, indeed, that Zuboff asks managers to step up to in her last
chapter. But interestingly, there is some inconsistency between, on the one hand, the
rich historical discourse and constraints she describes, and, on the other, the levels of
active choice she then assumes for managers.
In practice, Zuboff’s work becomes adopted by the Harvard Business School where
she was, at the time, an associate professor. Harnessing the School’s reputational effects
and its powerful marketing and self-referencing capability, the book’s public messages
are pushed into certain directions rather than others. In fact, arguably, the book is used
to support Harvard’s own ‘can do’ ‘born again’ transformative philosophy of manage-
ment, in which a dichtomous before/after, from/to message is transmitted to trainee
managers and businesses alike. Simple, powerful messages are likely to be more
inﬂuential than the twists and turns of a long, rich, and complex book that most
have probably read about, rather than read all the way through. Power/knowledge
circulates, people, institutions, and documents are its relays—knowledge and power
produce each other indeed.
Ultimately the meaning of Zuboff’s book is diluted and rendered complementary to,
for example, Walton (1989), also a product of Harvard. Walton’s work goes on to ﬁgure
prominently in another book highly inﬂuential in IS, namely the Corporation of the
1990s (Scott Morton 1991). This proceeds to offer dichotomous thinking in contrasting
bad/good ‘control’ versus ‘commitment’ strategies in ICT use, and, in an un-Foucauldian
manner, fails to problematize commitment strategies and their political and control
implications. A more informed view here is provided by Townley (1993) and Deetz
‘EVERYTHING IS DANGEROUS’
179

(1998) who see the cultural or normative controls that operate as alternatives to
bureaucratic rules and direct supervision as new technologies of power developed
within knowledge-intensive organizations.
A related, inﬂuential development has been the neo-Zubofﬁan ‘don’t automate,
obliterate’ message of Hammer and Champy’s writings on re-engineering the corpora-
tion, with heavy use of ICTs. Grint and Willcocks (1995) point out that Hammer
and Champy work with a negative, unitary view of power, and while the objective of
re-engineering is ostensibly to render the corporation a-political, in fact successful
re-engineering, supported by labour ‘empowerment’ strategies, is designed to make
managerial power and control more complete. The inherently political agenda is
signalled by the marked violence in the language used, the dismissal of ‘resistance to
change’, the determination to banish social, cultural, and historical issues by starting
with a blank sheet of paper, the use of management-determined ICT designs to support
the shape and process of the transformed corporation. On this view ‘informate’ is too
small a step, and ‘transformate’ is necessary (see also Scott Morton 1991), but only a
more radical view of power relations would seek to fully problematize the intentions,
approaches, and outcomes. Those in IS studying such phenomena could more than
usefully adopt Foucauldian concepts and modes of analysis.
FOUCAULT AND DISCIPLINING
‘INFORMATION SYSTEMS’
..................................................................................................................
Ironically, again, the Foucauldian elements of Zuboff’s book have been remarkably
uninﬂuential in Information Systems, a relatively immature discipline crying out for
applicable theory. But Zuboff’s inﬂuence, taught as she has been on every conceivable
type of IS programme (certainly in the period between 1988 and 2000), has hardly
stretched to the founding of a Foucauldian school of IS. Despite her demonstration of
his applicability, why not Foucault now?
The operational word here may will be discipline. For decades a string of scholars and
articles have registered ‘discipline anxiety’ for IS. This comes from its relative newness as
an area of study and its hybridity, based as it is on an amalgamation of computer
science, operational research, management studies, economics, organization studies,
strategic management, to name a few. The deﬁnitional phrase that comes to mind is the
one Richard Whitley used for management studies: a fragmented adhocracy. How to
discipline, and gain intellectual respectability for a knowledge ﬁeld lacking discipline?
A natural tendency is to look to another accepted reference discipline for already
approved methods, procedures, standards, for deﬁnitions of what qualiﬁes as knowledge
and truth. One unfortunate outcome in IS is that methods and approaches have often
180
LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS AND ELENI A. LIOLIOU

been adopted uncritically (that is, failing to address the debates that surround them in
their own discipline, e.g transaction cost theory in economics), or may be inappropriate
for the speciﬁc research task. This can lead to unnecessary defensive polarities develop-
ing, and an over-expectation on what a particular approach can deliver.
For historical reasons—not least because of the hard, technology component of IS,
the general dominance of the procedures of the natural sciences inﬁltrating into the
social sciences, the large inﬂuence of North American academic practices in IS—the IS
tendency has been to focus on quantitative, statistics-based methods and procedures
derived from natural sciences. The rise of IS as a discipline has yet to be charted
satisfactorily, and may well beneﬁt from a Foucauldian analysis. IS awaits its genealo-
gist, though Introna (2001) makes a thought-provoking start in his paper on evolving
regimes of truth from 1977 to 2000 at one of the major IS journals, namely MIS
Quarterly. He shows the mechanisms used to produce truth, and how contingent they
were. Also how, through intentional and unintentional moves, these regimes of truth
were continually shifting, opening spaces for certain types of research to become
legitimate, and others not. It is a matter of some pertinence here that the widespread
acceptance of certain types of qualitative, interpretative, and case research into major IS
journals has been a relatively recent phenomenon. In such an unstable situation, given
their cross-disciplinarity, and provisional methods, Foucauldian-type studies, at best,
could only be marginal to how the IS discipline has been developing.
The debate on what would constitute IS as a discipline has been running for some
time. Post-2000, faced with the sheer rising diversity in research methods being
adopted in the ﬁeld, there has been renewed ‘discipline anxiety’ and fresh debates in
several major IS journals over establishing the rules, procedures for what counts as
knowledge, and how it can be legitimately produced. Introna (2003) makes an inter-
esting Foucauldian intervention in pointing out that what constitutes acceptable
research methods, processes for producing the truth, and a deﬁnable knowledge base
are not matters of what is right or rationally superior, but are inherently political
questions from the start. Moreover participants are not just disciplining others in the
process of creating ‘the IS discipline’, but also disciplining themselves. Introna (2003)
also points out that if IS proceeds to constitute itself as a regime of truth then it will
need to follow Foucault (in Gordon 1980) in establishing ﬁve things. These are:
· the types of discourse it accepts and makes function as true
· mechanisms and instances that enable one to distinguish true and false statements
· means by which each is sanctioned
· techniques and procedures accorded value in the acquisition of truth
· status of those charged with saying what counts as true.
On these counts, one would suggest that if IS is not yet externally or even self-regarded
as a discipline, it has been remarkably successful at disciplining itself, and that this
process deserves much more detailed, perhaps Foucauldian study.
‘EVERYTHING IS DANGEROUS’
181

ASSESSING FOUCAULT’S USE IN IS STUDIES
..................................................................................................................
Having said all this, some within IS have made a strong case for Foucault, and indeed
have used aspects of his work. Introna (1997) effectively utilizes Foucault’s power/
knowledge in harness with Clegg’s (1989) conceptualization of circuits of power, in
order to explicate several case studies of ICT implementation and use. Furthermore,
Cordoba and Robson (2003) used Foucault’s ideas on power/knowledge and ethics to
develop a more critical understanding of the information systems evaluation process.
The authors demonstrated that Foucault’s theorization provides an alternative under-
standing of information systems evaluation as a process of continuous tension between
power, discourses, and ethics.
A study that tried to analyse information technology and surveillance through
Foucault’s theorization was carried out by Humphreys (2006). The author identiﬁed
different marketing practices and Internet technologies employed by ‘Amazon.com’ as
sight-technologies of power aiming to surveillance and individuation. Against this
background, he argued that these technologies play an active role in constructing the
consumer as an ‘object of knowledge’ and shaping consumer agency. More recently,
Avgerou and McGrath (2007) in their study of a social security organization in Greece,
drew on Foucault’s work on power/knowledge and the aesthetics of existence to
challenge the technical rationality underpinning IS organizational change and innova-
tion. The authors went beyond the mere consideration of technical IS rationalities and
underlined the role of social processes in explaining IS organizational change and
innovation. Following this line, they argued that ‘the rational techniques of IS practice
and the power dynamics of an organization and its social context are closely inter-
twined, requiring each other to be sustained’ (Avgerou and McGrath 2007).
Brooke (2002a, 2002b), in discussing what it means to be ‘ critical’ in IS research (see
also Chapter 8), argues that Foucault can be used to move beyond the Habermasian
framework employed in earlier IS work. As a related point, initially Habermas was
presented somewhat uncritically in IS, but there has grown up a healthy critique of his
use which Foucault’s work can readily fuel (Klein and Huynh 2004). Indeed, Foucault
challenges an idea central to critical theory when he suggests that relations of power are
not something bad in themselves, nor something from which one can or must be
emancipated. Foucault also argues that any production of knowledge contains within
itself the potential for contradictory outcomes. If this is useful then, nevertheless, the
scientiﬁc and positivistic heritage of IS does tend to favour adoption of approaches that
are more easily ‘modelled’, and any line of research seeking to use a normatively
articulated framework will tend to favour a Habermasian approach rather than a
Foucauldian one. But when it comes to applying critical theory, who guards the guards?
From a Foucauldian perspective, it is not enough to apply particular methodological
frameworks, we also have to subject them to ongoing critique, and Foucault’s work
supplies means for doing this.
182
LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS AND ELENI A. LIOLIOU

Davies has also sought to apply Foucault in several pieces of empirical research. For
example, Davies and Mitchell (1994) adopted a research perspective that sought to
understand technology formation as a power-knowledge object used within a socio-
political context, but also looking at ‘how technological forms affect the predomination
of discourse of power, allowing for the “truth” of an object’s utility value to emerge as a
product of its own structural form and the value of the form according to the group
world-view adopting it’. The authors argue, with Burrell (1998), that Foucault’s
genealogical method, focus on history, and concept of power/knowledge are of high
relevance to studying organizational forms currently emerging, particularly in relation
to the control of information effects induced by the increasing reliance upon informa-
tion technologies within organizations.
While Davies and Mitchell do not adopt Foucault as comprehensively as they might,
they do demonstrate how his work on the regulatory nature of discourse within
contextual histories can be used productively in IS studies, in this case that of IT
manipulation in an Australian state government department. Following Foucault, they
point to the constraining regulations by which discourse are inevitably tied. They take
three interacting forms, shown in Figure 7.1.
The three principles of exclusion are immediately external to a discourse and deﬁne
and legitimize meaning and rationality within discourse. The three principles of
limitation operate to classify order and distribute the discourse to allow for and to
deal with irruption and unpredictability. Finally the three principles of communication
EXCLUSION
LIMITATION
COMMUNICATION
Prohibition
Division
Truth Power
Commentary
Rarefaction
Disciplines
Societies of
Discourse
Social
Appropriation
Systems of 
Regulation
and Control
Taboos
Legitimate participation
True vs false
Meaning rules 
maintained
Identity rules 
maintained
Belief rules 
maintained
Social group
Maintain or 
modify
Production and 
manipulation
FIGURE 7.1 Principles of Discourse Regulation (after Foucault)
‘EVERYTHING IS DANGEROUS’
183

create the ritual framework (akin to an ideology) of the context of any discourse, with
the ritual framework being more dominating than the merely external principles.
While these constructs may seem somewhat abstracted, the researchers do bring
them to life in applying them to a concrete case, namely the purchasing of ofﬁce
support systems. By applying all the concepts, the research shows how one system is
adopted in preference to another, predominantly through the prior regulations of
discourse supporting the continuance of the superior technical knowledge and power
of the IT function. The researchers successfully show how applying Foucauldian
principles to analysing the discursive context of IT use in an organization can provide
in-depth insight into the role of power and politics, and whether IT is used augmenta-
tively to reinforce the status quo, or transformatively.
A later Foucauldian study of an ICT needs analysis project was also carried out by
Davies, as Harvey (1998). The study usefully demonstrates how the history of power
relations in an IT decision context inﬂuenced discourses regarding the acceptability of
solutions. Historical dominance was demonstrated through how visibility was con-
trolled, how counter-discourses were silenced, and how surveillance was applied. What
is interesting in this study, that of Zuboff (1988) and of Davies and Mitchell (1994) is
how they all extend and enhance interpretive research methods through using
Foucault. Indeed, though interpretivism was never a direction in which Foucault
himself was heading, Doolin (1998) argues that this is a necessary move in order to
counter potential shortcomings in the treatment of technology in interpretive research
on information systems.
For our purposes, Doolin (1998) is more useful in illustrating this theme of infor-
mation systems as a calculative and disciplinary technology. He does so by reference to
his own Foucauldian study of power relations and effects involving the deployment of a
hospital ‘case-mix’ IS. A case-mix system is an IS which links detailed information on
individual patient clinical activity with associated costs, for use by managers and
service providers as a basis for contracting and for revealing the relative efﬁciency of
clinical resource usage. The intention is to place clinical activity under scrutiny, and to
persuade clinicians to conform to ‘ normal’ work practices. Potentially Doolin found
that the IS could increase hospital management control directly and indirectly. Direct
control was attempted by monitoring and making visible the ﬁnancial implications of
clinical decisions. Managers could then use the information to make stronger truth
claims in their attempts to contain clinical resource usage. Surveillance through the
system also had the potential to engender a degree of self-control in clinicians’
behaviour, leading to rational decision making and more efﬁcient usage of resources.
However, following Foucault, resistance by the clinicians was always possible.
Disciplinary technologies such as comparative surveillance IS are not exclusively
constraining, but instead open up a new discursive space for action. In practice
clinicians often appropriated and manipulated the information and rhetoric of the
system, diverting disciplinary practices to their own ends, principally in arguing for
more resources. Indeed some senior clinicians explored the possibilities offered by the
case-mix system in assuming new roles as clinician managers. However, the IS
184
LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS AND ELENI A. LIOLIOU

increased the transparency of professional knowledge, expertise, and work processes.
Its deployment provided management with the technology and the rational justiﬁca-
tion for increased intervention in medical practice. Moreover, case-mix information
became the currency of debate, the principal medium through which claims to legiti-
macy and control were processed. Taking a Foucauldian view, Doolin points out that in
reproducing the practices associated with the case-mix IS, clinicians internalized the
norms and values inherent in the particular discourse in which case-mix is grounded,
opening up the possibility of their self-control as self-disciplined subjects. Thus IS
utilization could have more subtle power effects than deliberate strategies to modify
clinical behaviour through strengthening general management in or imposing compu-
terized surveillance. In a similar vain, Ball and Wilson (2000) studied the computer-
based performance monitoring in two UK call centres and demonstrated how panoptic
technologies of power were enmeshed with discourses which produced and reproduced
relations of power and resistance in the work place.
More recently, Lioliou and Willcocks (2009) illustrate the relevance of Foucault’s
latter work on governance to the study of IT outsourcing arrangements. More speciﬁ-
cally the authors demonstrate how Foucault’s concept of ‘governmentality’ illuminates
on the interplay between contractual and relational forms of IT outsourcing governance
and its effects on the venture. With reference to the work of Rose and Miller (1992) as
well as Bulkeley, Watson, and Hudson (2007), the authors organized their results in
terms of ‘programs’ and ‘technologies of government’ and used key ideas from the
governmentality literature for analysis. Their preliminary ﬁndings illustrated: (1) how
the contract and the apparatus of governance it entails create visibility and transparency
that not only renders the outsourcing relationship amenable to government and
intervention, but also facilitates trust and collaboration among the outsourcing partners;
(2) the role of the contract in the retention and diffusion of the spirit of the venture;
(3) the role of governance mechanisms in the reduction for the need of authoritative
surveillance; and (4) the need for the standardization of governance processes.
These illustrative studies demonstrate how Foucault’s work can be utilized creatively
and productively in the IS ﬁeld. Indeed IS as a discipline may learn a great deal more on
the applicability of Foucault if it addresses more seriously the altogether more devel-
oped debate and application of his work to be found in Organization Studies and
associated areas (OS/MS).
FOUCAULT AND ICTS IN ORGANIZATION
AND MANAGEMENT STUDIES
..................................................................................................................
Foucault has had a long-standing presence in sociology and OS/MS because his
concepts and contribution have such clear applicability to researching work organiza-
tions. Moreover, from the early 1980s as ICTs became increasingly used in organizations,
‘EVERYTHING IS DANGEROUS’
185

it became a necessary move to embrace the analysis of how they are utilized and
embedded in the social bodies, practices, and institutional arrangements of organizations.
The same argument can be made from the perspective of Information Systems studies, of
course, but, one suspects, its engineering/computer science origins led to a greater focus
on the technology artefact. Discipline anxiety led to the adoption of more scientistic and
‘rigorous’ reference disciplines, while those rising to powerful positions in the IS ﬁeld
tended not to espouse approaches, especially unsystematic ones, they had not themselves
been trained in.
The maturity of OS/MS Foucauldian debate and use is well demonstrated in the
articles collected by McKinlay and Starkey (1998) and Carter, McKinlay, and Rowlin-
son (2000). These carry penetrating papers that seek to critique, develop, and utilize
Foucault’s work in for example human resource management (see also Townley 1993),
power and politics in organizations and production, managing managers, accounting,
reading organizational analysis into Foucault, developing a Foucauldian historical
dimension in the study of organizations, the relationships between discipline and
desire, the epistemic nature of management, and the need to deconstruct management
studies underpinned, like inﬂuencing disciplines, as they are by rationality, agency, and
causality.
Foucault has also done much to breathe new life into labour process theory, not least
in OS/MS researchers emphasizing how individual subjectivities and identities are
constructed and reconstructed through discourses operating in the workplace (Knights
1990; Knights and Vurdubakis 1994). There has also been an expansion of the concept
of power (Clegg 1989, 1998), with Hardy and O’Sullivan (1998) positioning Foucault as
providing the fourth dimension of power, extending the three deﬁned by Steven Lukes.
All this illustrates a strong Foucauldian pedigree in OS/MS, and one that is directly
applicable to any work in IS where ICTs are studied in organizational contexts.
Even more pertinent to our purposes is the OS/MS accumulated evidence gained
from applying Foucault to the study of information and communication technologies.
Many of these attempts focus on new managerial technologies aimed to broaden the
scope and deepen the intensity of the managerial gaze, but, Foucault-like, invariably
with complex, often unanticipated outcomes. Surveillance, control, and legitimation is
facilitated by giving complex, ambiguous phenomena ‘hard’ numerical values (Morgan
and Willmott 1993), for example in ICT use in activity-based costing systems where the
managerial gaze extends into supplier networks and market information. ICTs facili-
tate enumeration, which can underpin categorization, and thus what is made visible.
Such technologies privilege formal quantitative information, aiding in the construction
of calculative realities (Bloomﬁeld and Coombs 1992).
However, developments in ICTs to monitor and scrutinize can also facilitate
panopticon-like control, making individuals within an organization both calculable
and calculating with respect to their own actions. For example, Sewell and Wilkinson
(1992) investigate these propensities in the context of JIT manufacturing and Total
Quality Control regimes. They point to the development of what Webster and Robins
(1993) call ‘a panopticon without walls’, where responsibility can become delegated to
186
LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS AND ELENI A. LIOLIOU

groups, but individuals become enlisted in their own control through their belief that
they are subject to constant electronic surveillance through collected, retained, and
disseminated information. McKinley and Starkey (1998) also point to how the exten-
sion of JIT supplier relationships accelerates the concentration, widens the scope and
speed of corporate knowledge acquisition, and that this is knowledge combined with
economic power that is not reciprocal; ‘there is no parallel gaze by consumers or
supplier companies into the internal transaction costs of the organization’. Webster
and Robins (1993) suggest also that these developments are not restricted to the labour
process or the factory but are more societal, to the point where one can speak of a more
generalized ‘Social Taylorism’ made more possible through information and commu-
nication technologies.
Bloomﬁeld, Knights, Wilmott, and colleagues have done much important work in
developing Foucauldian studies of ICTs and organization. It is not possible to do justice
to the richness of their work but good examples can be found in Bloomﬁeld and
Coombs (1992), Bloomﬁeld et al. (1997), and Knights, Murray, and Willmott (1997).
A particularly representative work is that of Knights and Murray (1994). This book has
the great merit of providing a real in-depth theoretical and empirical examination of
the politics of systems development. In the theory sections it provides a Foucauldian-
informed critique of the major theoretical perspectives on ICT development and
implementation. From this, Knights and Murray then develop a political processual
model of organizational change. At its centre stands politics as Foucauldian power/
knowledge relations enacted in speciﬁc conditions of possibility, the social construction
of which is also part of an organization’s political processes.
Knights and Murray also supply the useful deﬁnition of ICT Foucault never
provided (see above), in order to inform their Foucauldian analysis. They see ICT as
a set of human and non-human artefacts, processes and practices ordinarily directed
towards modifying or transforming natural and social phenomena in pursuit of human
purposes. This involves:
· technological artefacts, such as computers, hardware
· technological knowledge, particularly systems development skills
· technological workers and managers engaged in particular systems development,
and IS specialists
· the culture of technology—signs, symbols and values brought to bear in discuss-
ing, using and developing technology.
In this analytical framework, the organization is likened to a pinball machine. While
recognizing the limitations of the analogy, the researchers suggest that the political
process stands in the middle of the machine and is bombarded by steel balls energized
in different parts of the organization. These bounce against the motor of political
process and are shot back to bounce against other conditions of the organization.
Though a little uncritical of Foucault, as opposed to every other theoretical approach,
Knights and Murray (1994) do provide, as they show in their case study, operationaliz-
able analytical tools that can be very useful to ICT researchers.
‘EVERYTHING IS DANGEROUS’
187

Foucault, ICTs, and Surveillance
Perhaps the most obvious and inﬂuential use of Foucault has been in surveillance
studies, not just in manufacturing and service work organizations, but across society at
large, including in all manner of institutional settings. There is a large literature on the
theme of ICT roles in surveillance, with Lyon (1988) and Dandeker (1990) being
representative of a number of writers in the late 1980s discussing the ‘electronic
panopticon’, the ‘carceral computer’ and ‘the electronic eye’. Poster (1984) is also
inﬂuenced enough by Foucault to posit an emerging ‘mode of information’ by whose
social conduits and databases members of developed economies are organized and
controlled.
Webster (2005) also links surveillance technologies with the nation state’s ‘govern-
mentality’ role over security needs, rights, and duties of its citizens. For him, the
panopticon is not an exact metaphor. Following Giddens, a lot of surveillance infor-
mation does feed back to people and allow them to reﬂexively monitor their own
position, prospects, and lifestyles. He is drawn instead to De Landa’s (1991) depiction
of the ‘machine vision’ of military surveillance where power and the accumulation of
information are intimately connected, manifested in things like telecommunications
interceptions, satellite observations, and automatic intelligence. De Landa sees the
military dream of machine vision as an extension of earlier panoptic techniques.
Now humans and their eyes do not have to physically operate in the surveillance
tower. Moreover surveillance has extended from the optical to the non-optical regions
of the electro-magnetic spectrum. Not just computing and telecommunications, but
the discovery of infrared and ultraviolet radiation, radar, radio, and microwave tech-
nology have opened new resources to be exploited as well as new zones to be policed.
De Landa offers the word ‘Panspectron’ to communicate the ambition of total survey-
ability vested in the ‘new non-optical intelligence-acquisition machine’. This is a highly
pertinent issue, not least for IS studies, if De Landa is correct in suggesting that,
historically, earlier technologies developed in the military have been transmitted
through a series of relays to the civilian worlds.
Lyon (1988) registers related concerns in his early work on the rise of information
society. He suggests that dreams of electronic democracy must be tempered with a
recognition of technological and political realities. He recognizes, even for the late
1980s, that the ‘carceral computer’ is ‘a present reality, both in direct state administra-
tion and control, and in the potential for linkage with private databases’. However, as
yet the dangers had not been sufﬁciently recognized or resisted by citizens, and some
predictions of total social control by computers may be ahistorical ‘in that past
technological dystopias have not come into being, and may also be based on inadequate
social theories’.
If Lyon (1988) points to the ‘present danger’, then the subsequent direction much of
his work takes suggests that in his estimation, with rising use of ICT, the danger has
become very real. Thus Lyon (1994) is entitled The Electronic Eye: The Rise of
188
LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS AND ELENI A. LIOLIOU

Surveillance Society. For him the most socially pervasive question raised by the new
technologies has become the garnering of personal information to be stored, matched,
retrieved, processed, marketed, and circulated using powerful computer databases and
related technologies. His position is that the electronic eye may well blink benignly, but
important questions must be asked about under what circumstances and by what
criteria the current computer-aided surveillance capability may also become undemo-
cratic, coercive, impersonal, even inhuman.
In later work and edited volumes, Lyon and colleagues provide rich detailed studies
of these and related questions (see for example Lyon and Zureik 1996; Lyon 2003). In
all this, it becomes difﬁcult not to read the inﬂuence and relevance of Foucault’s work,
amongst others. Thus, in these volumes some take the phenomenon of electronic
surveillance as contributing to a postmodern condition in which several ‘virtual selves’
circulate within networked databases, independent of their Cartesian counterparts who
use credit cards and are identiﬁed by social insurance numbers (Lyon and Zureik
1996). This raises questions of how identity and selves are constructed, sorted, and
controlled, privately and publicly. In the same volume Mowshowitz sees the wide-
spread use of databases promoting ‘endogenous’ forms of social control, where virtual
individuality, group conformity, and other-directedness will reside in the data them-
selves. For Poster, databases have become the new text in Foucault’s sense of discourse.
In all this, researchers point also to limitations in both Foucault’s work and in
applying it to surveillance studies. Thus Gandy, writing on ‘Coming to Terms with the
Panoptic Sort’ enlists also Giddens’s synthesis of Marxian, Weberian, and Foucauldian
theory to emphasize surveillance as a modern institution, and the role of the ‘dialectic
of control’ and knowledgeable human agents in all surveillance situations (Lyon and
Zureik 1996). Zureik (in Lyon 2003) concludes that surveillance in the work place is
ubiquitous and increasingly based on network control technologies. He suggests that
the concept of panoptic power is important, but that more than one theoretical
perspective is needed to analyse how in speciﬁc contexts empowerment and dis-
empowerment, skilling and deskilling, control and autonomy exist, and indeed can
coexist, depending on technological deployment, gender, and authority structures (but
see also Knights and Murray above).
Lyon (1993) asks: in what ways does electronic surveillance display panoptic fea-
tures? He ﬁnds plenty of evidence of ICT being used to accumulate coded information
for the internal paciﬁcation of nation states. Also for panoptic control within work
places, including what Zuboff calls ‘anticipatory conformity’, where standards of
management had been internalized by employees. He also cites evidence of the
spillover of panoptic surveillance into society at large in the establishment of, for
example, more ‘efﬁcient’ network marketplaces, something that Poster (1990) refers
to as a ‘Superpanopticon’, because the panoptic has few technical limitations.
But, partly following Giddens, Lyon also sees analysts of electronic surveillance
picking up from Foucault a relatively undifferentiated view of power and panopticism,
and therefore of panopticism’s ICT-facilitated spread across different types of institu-
tions. At the same time he concedes that the reality of contemporary electronic
‘EVERYTHING IS DANGEROUS’
189

surveillance is that, increasingly, disciplinary networks do, for example, connect
employment with civil status, or consumption with policing. But if Poster’s ‘Super-
panopticon’ is accurate, nevertheless does it impose Foucault-type norms, incorporate
bio-power, discipline subjects? Maybe, Lyon suggests, all it can do is provide a
structure, and one within which real choices are still made. Ultimately Lyon ﬁnds the
Panopticon wanting as an explanatory concept. Electronic surveillance does contribute
to social control via invisible inspection and categorization. But seeing the Panopticon
in a ‘totalizing’ way deﬂects attention from other modes of social ordering (Lyon 2003).
Lyon (1993) also comments that Foucault’s failure to admit any basis of ‘outrage’
against the Panopticon inhibits the development of a properly critical theory of
electronic surveillance.
Maybe one of the mistakes in contemporary surveillance theory, as in other dis-
ciplines, is to represent Foucault’s work too one-sidedly by the Panopticon and its
admittedly strong metaphorical power. As we have seen, Foucault is much richer than
this. For example, in summarizing his own work Foucault deﬁned four major types of
technologies, each a matrix of practical reason, each associated with a certain type of
domination (Deetz 1998). Foucault presents technologies of production, of sign sys-
tems, of power, and technologies of self. He also suggests that these may interplay in
particular sites. He also worked with a generic mode of discipline, of which the
panoptic represents merely one type. One way forward for electronic surveillance
studies may well be to readdress Foucault’s work more fully. In addition Dandeker
(1990) suggests that, given the uneasy relations in Foucault between an idealist history
of knowledge, class struggle, and the functional or technical imperatives of modern
societies, his insights may be used to complement those generated by other, especially
Weberian, strands of social theory.
From Mode of Information to Network Society
and Cyberstudies
In this ﬁnal section, we look brieﬂy at Foucault’s abiding relevance in the face of
developments of ICTs and their uses in the twenty-ﬁrst century. Poster (1984, 1990,
1995) was amongst the ﬁrst to suggest that Foucault provides key ideas (on signiﬁca-
tion, power/knowledge, subjectiﬁcation, discourse) for the development of a critical
theory of the newly emerging ‘mode of information’. Poster suggests that the reversal of
priorities Marx saw in the factory whereby the dead (machines) dominate the living
(workers) is being increasingly extended by the computer to the realm of knowledge.
He usefully posits three stages in the mode of information:
· Face-to-face, orally mediated exchange characterized by symbolic correspondences;
· Written exchanges mediated by print, characterized by the representation of signs;
· Electronically mediated exchange, characterized by informational simulations.
190
LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS AND ELENI A. LIOLIOU

Given the attributes and applications of ICT, an increasing, distinctive characteristic
in the latter electronic stage is that the self becomes decentred, dispersed, and multi-
plied in continuous instability. If Poster (1990) subsequently utilizes several postmod-
ernist thinkers to analyse the emerging mode of information, he ﬁnds how information
is structured and used through databases, and their relation to society best disclosed by
Foucault’s analysis of discourse: ‘the linguistic quality of the database, its implications
for politics, can best be captured by a theory, like Foucault’s, that problematizes the
interdependence of language and action.’ As we have seen, Poster sees electronic
circuits of communication and the databases they generate constituting a Superpanop-
ticon, a system of surveillance without walls, windows, towers, or guards.
New ICTs used in surveillance result in a qualitative change in the microphysics of
power. However, he observes, technological change, is only part of the process. The
populace, through social security cards, drivers’ licences, and in their consumerist
activites, for example, have been disciplined to surveillance and participating in the
process. For Poster (1990, 1995), when Foucauldian discourse analysis is applied to the
new mode of information, it yields the uncomfortable discovery that the populace
participates in its own self-constitution as subjects of the normalizing gaze of the
Superpanopticon. Moreover, databases are seen often not as a threat to a centred
individual or a threat to privacy, but as the multiplication of the individual, the
constitution of an additional self, one that may be acted upon to the detriment of the
‘real’ self without that ‘real’ self ever being aware of what is happening. For Poster, then,
while recognizing the deﬁciencies of Foucault’s work, the concepts and methods for
exploring discourse, subjectiﬁcation, disciplining, knowledge, and power relations
remain key to critical study of ICTs, and indeed the Internet (Poster 2001) in the
emerging mode of information they facilitate. While the genealogy of information
and communications technologies has yet to be written, Foucault, as Poster (1990)
recognizes, provides a considerable amount of the groundwork needed.
Munro (2000) also recognizes how Foucault has been drawn upon to analyse the
power relations involved in computer information systems. As a partial corrective, he
argues not that disciplinary modalities of power have disappeared, but that they are
subject to inﬁltration and mutation where ICTs are transforming social relationships
and allowing other forms of power to be brought to bear. The examples he includes are
how the Human Genome project is bringing to bear bio-technologies such as genetic
screening and cloning. He also cites Deleuze’s (1995) depiction of moves towards a
‘control’ society, e.g from schools to continuing education, from prisons to electronic
tagging. Also new forms of ‘resistance’ are possible, e.g computer piracy and viruses,
sabotage of information databases. Also new social divisions are developing, including
the information haves and have-nots. Also new institutions, consisting of series of
connected nodes or stations that work by circulating information ﬂows as much as
wealth and goods. He points to the power of networks and how these new institutions
do not rely on enclosure or visual surveillance. Instead power operates through the
regulation of ﬂows rather than the imposition of exercises (Deleuze 1995).
‘EVERYTHING IS DANGEROUS’
191

Munro posits the rise of network power in contrast to panoptic power. The differ-
entiation he makes is along the dimensions of techniques, space, time, and the body. At
the level of technique, power relations become more centred on access to and control
over information and the electronic text. Time-space constraints disappear, with real
time and connected nodes creating new circuits of power. Following Virilio, the body
becomes motile, that is more dependent on communications prosthetics e.g mobile
phone, portable computer. Whereas the docile body was the object of disciplinary
power, the prosthetic body is the object of network power.
Munro argues that sticking doggedly to Foucault’s original conceptualizations of
disciplinary power can lead to errors in analysis in these new conditions. Bauman
(1991, 1999) also recognizes Foucault as seminal in the study of disciplinary societies
and their technologies but posits less relevance for control technologies in the changed
conditions of liquid modernity. However, while Bauman argues that seduction tends to
replace panoptic forms of control, he does posit that large parts of the population still
require close control. Moreover Bauman and Munro probably underestimate the
extent to which the new ICTs themselves are conditioned in the ﬁrst place, and may
subsequently be inﬁltrated by disciplinary power (Finlay 1987a, 1987b). Munro’s is a
good formulation, but over-dichotomous in its presentation of developments. And as
with computer surveillance studies, his argument also relies on not granting to Fou-
cauldian analysis the full richness of Foucault’s ideas and formulations.
In contrast, in documenting what they call ‘changes in the technoscape’ Robins and
Webster (1999) argue that the information revolution does not represent a profound
break from the past, but a continuation of capitalism in many similar forms. Moreover,
the prevailing virtual culture ‘lacks critical edge with respect to the capitalist dynamics
of the network society’ (see also Feenberg 2002). If this is the case, then not only is
Foucault not outdated, as some have suggested, but means of critical questioning such
as he provides are vitally needed in the study of contemporary ICTs.
In looking at contemporary developments one can trace Foucault’s inﬂuence into
work on bio-power and technology. Best and Kellner (2001) argue otherwise and point
out that while Foucault (1970) heralded the ‘death of man’ and the coming of post-
humanism, he saw this as a merely conceptual transformation from one episteme to
another, whereas the shift to post-humanism is also a material matter of new technol-
ogies erasing the boundaries between biology and technology. They argue that Foucault
provides no analysis of information and communications technologies, and little
consideration of the hybrid landscape of techno-bodies. However, Best and Kellner
have to concede that Foucault considers both the enmeshment of the body in systems
of discipline and surveillance, and ethical technologies of the self that cultivate ‘new
passions and new pleasures’.
Hayles (1999) rightly points out that the absorption of embodiment into discourse
imparted interpretive power to Foucault, but also limited his analysis in signiﬁcant
ways. The universalization of the Foucauldian body is a direct result of concentrating
on discourse rather than embodiment. Building on Foucault’s work while going beyond
192
LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS AND ELENI A. LIOLIOU

it requires understanding how embodiment moves in conjunction with inscription,
technology, and ideology. But, as we have seen, this is something that Zuboff’s
work largely achieves, while Sofoulis (2002) rightly points out Foucault’s inﬂuence
on Haraway (1991) and her subsequent development of his notions of bio-power and
bio-politics in her post-Foucauldian notions of the ‘informatics of domination’ and
‘techno-biopower’. Quinby (1999) has also reorientated Foucault’s work on subject
formation. She uses it to develop how ‘technoppression’ can occur in the pursuit of
the programmed perfection enabled by digital and biotechnologies. A Foucauldian
perspective is useful in questioning the race to human bodily perfection through
technological means.
Finally, one can point to some interest in Foucault’s work amongst those studying
the Internet. The questioning here is whether the Internet, and ‘cyberspace’, is or will
become a form of more intensive control and power relations—precisely Foucault’s
concern registered at the head of this chapter. The literature so far tends to have
different interests and emphases. Three examples need sufﬁce. Thus Aycock (1997) is
interested in applying the later Foucault and his notions of technologies of the self to
examine how on-line identities can be fashioned. Winokur (2003) applies yet again the
concept of the panopticon, and concludes that the codes of cyberspace are not clearly a
disciplinary discourse. Boyle (1997) is interested in legal issues, surveillance, levels of
censorship, and the development of digital libertarianism. He argues that digital
libertarianism is often blind to the effects of private power, but also the state’s own
power in cyberspace. In practice he ﬁnds that the state can often use privatized
enforcement and state-backed technologies to evade some of the supposed practical
and constitutional restraints on the exercise of legal power over the Net. He also argues
that technical solutions to these dilemmas are neither as neutral nor as benign as they
are often perceived to be.
CONCLUSION
..................................................................................................................
In providing a critical review, this chapter has argued for the abiding relevance of
Foucault’s work and the usefulness of incorporating and developing further his think-
ing into contemporary studies of ICTs. This should be done as a critical act in three
senses. Firstly, Foucault should not be applied uncritically. Following Barratt (2003), he
should be worked with rather than copied. This chapter accepts the provisional,
unﬁnished nature of many of his concepts and formulations, but also demonstrates
how these can, and have been addressed in the study of ICTs, for example with the use
of ethnography (Zuboff 1988), and, we would argue, through social construction
approaches. Secondly, Foucault has been shown to be a critical weapon usable in an
IS ﬁeld not over-full of such tools (the same is not argued for OS/MS which have been
much more critically aware). Moreover, as in the case of the Foucault-Habermas
‘EVERYTHING IS DANGEROUS’
193

debates for example (Ashenden and Owen 1999), Foucault can be used to sharpen our
critique of other, explicit or implicit social theories and philosophies perhaps borrowed
from reputationally stronger reference disciplines, and used uncritically in a relatively
new IS ﬁeld. Finally, as we saw, Foucault can be employed in the ongoing debate over
the nature of, and what it is to construct, an IS, or any other discipline.
Fundamentally Foucault reminds us, uncomfortably, of our epistemological frailty
and ontological uncertainties, and from this can sensitize us to how much human use
of ICT is a will towards control, certainty, and ‘knowledge’ in the face of considerable
risk and ambivalence. If he does not deal explicitly with ICTs as hardware and software,
he does provide a useful corrective against narrow deﬁnitions of technology and
ICT applications. Instead of privileging material technology, he privileges the beha-
vioural and social technologies encoded and embedded in material technologies. This
provides an important corrective to recent ‘digital economy’ rhetorics about the
transformative power of ICTs in themselves. Furthermore, his work suggests that all
participate in the technologies that surround us, whether these are invisible or visible,
whether we know it or not. Despite how he is generally presented, Foucault also urges
us to acknowledge indeterminacy. There is, for example, nothing inevitable about
technology trajectories.
Finally, while Foucault’s work still awaits the further application it deserves in ICT
studies, it is strange that his theorizations of knowledge, power, and discourse have not
been utilized more productively in, for example, deconstructing knowledge manage-
ment and related systems. In the ICT context knowledge awaits its genealogist, and this
may be one of the richer veins yet to emerge from Foucault’s potentially important
contributions to the ongoing study of information and communication technologies
and their applications as part of organizations. However, this is only one way forward
and Foucault himself indicated how he would see his work being used ‘a kind of tool
box which others can rummage through to ﬁnd a tool which they can use however they
wish in their own area . . . I don’t write for an audience, I write for users not readers’
(quoted in Defert, Ewart, and Lagrange 1994).
Foucauldian studies on ICT will be more fundamentally distinguished by their
critical intent, realized through their historical dimension, pursuing Foucault’s concern
to problematize the inevitability of the present and question how things have turned
out to be as they are and not otherwise. He sought to create a history of the different
modes by which human beings are made subjects. More particularly his work is
concerned with studying classiﬁcation, dividing, and self-subjectiﬁcation practices
across three ﬁelds of subjectivity, namely the body, population, and the individual
(Foucault 1983). Since his death in 1984 we have seen an enormous growth in ICT
capabilities, and their rising incursion into all aspect of life in the developed economies.
Foucault’s remit remains abidingly important and he leaves us with a ‘toolbox’ to help
us confront a fundamental guiding question: how indeed can the growth of technolog-
ical capabilities be disconnected from the intensiﬁcation of power relations?
194
LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS AND ELENI A. LIOLIOU

NOTES
1. This chapter draws upon unpublished work by Eleni Lioliou and on a less developed,
earlier paper by L. Willcocks, ‘Michel Foucault in The Social Study of ICTs: Critique and
Reappraisal’, Social Science Computer Review, 24(3) (2006) Fall Special Issue.
2. ‘Information Systems’ here refers to those academics, researchers, teachers, students, and
indeed practitioners who gravitate around conferences such as ICIS, ECIS, HICSS, PACIS,
ACIS, tend to be members of the Association for Information Systems or related/similar
bodies, write research papers and books consciously within an IS ‘discipline’, and publish
in a self-deﬁned group of ‘IS’ journals that may be global, regional, or national in stretch.
3. The remark applies easily to Foucault’s own complex relationship to and usage of many
thinkers, but especially of Nietzche and Heidegger: ‘My whole philosophical development
was determined by my reading of Heidegger. But I recognise that Nietzche prevailed over
him’ (Foucault (1985) Final Interview, Raritan, 8). Reading Nietzche through Heidegger’s
account of Nietzche may have been particularly inﬂuential. See Babich (2009).
REFERENCES
Ashenden, S., and Owen, D. (eds.) (1999). Foucault Contra Habermas: Recasting the Dialogue
between Genealogy and Critical Theory. London: Sage.
Avgerou, C., and McGrath, K. (2007). ‘Power, Rationality, and the Art of Living through
Socio-Technical Change’, MIS Quarterly, 31(2): 295–315.
Aycock, A. (1997). Technologies of the Self ’: Foucault and Internet Discourse’, Journal of
Computer Mediated Communication, 1(2): 25–38.
Babich, B. (2009). ‘A Philosophical Shock: Foucault Reading Nietzsche, Reading Heidegger’,
in C. G. Prado (ed.), Foucault’s Legacy. New York: Continuum.
Ball, K., and Wilson, D. (2000). ‘Power, Control and Computer-Based Performance Monitor-
ing: Reportoires, Resistance and Subjectivities’, Organization Studies, 21(3): 539–65.
Barratt, E. (2003). ‘Foucault, HRM, and the Ethos of the Critical Management Scholar’,
Journal of Management Studies, 40(5): 1069–87.
Bauman, Z. (1991). Intimations of Postmodernity. London: Routledge.
——(1999). Globalization: The Human Consequences. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Best, S., and Kellner, D. (2001). The Postmodern Adventure: Science Technology and Cultural
Studies at the Third Millenium. London: Routledge.
Bloomﬁeld, B., and Coombs, R. (1992). ‘Information Technology, Control and Power:
The Centralization and Decentralization Debate Revisited’, Journal of Management Studies,
29(4): 459–84.
————Knights, D., and Littler, D. (eds.) (1997). Information Technology and Organizations.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Boyle, J. (1997). ‘Foucault in Cyberspace: Surveillance, Sovereignty and Hard-wired Censors’,
Cincinnati Law Review. Cited in <wcl.american.edu/pub/faculty/boyle>.
Brooke, C. (2002a). ‘What Does it Mean to Be “Critical”’ in IS Research? Journal of Informa-
tion Technology, 17(2): 49–58.
‘EVERYTHING IS DANGEROUS’
195

Brooke, C. (2002b). ‘Critical Perspectives on Information Systems: An Impression of the
Research Landscape’, Journal of Information Technology, 17(4): 271–85.
Bulkeley, H., Watson, M., and Hudson, R. (2007). ‘Modes of Governing Municipal Waste’,
Environment and Planning, 39: 2733–53.
Burrell, G. (1998). ‘Modernism, Postmodernism and Oganizational Analysis: The Contribu-
tion of Michel Foucault’, in A. McKinley and K. Starkey (eds.), Foucault, Management and
Organization Theory. London: Sage.
Carter, C., McKinlay, A., and Rowlinson, M. (eds.) (2000). ‘Special Issue and Introduction:
Foucault, Management and History’, Organization, Special Issue, 9(4): 515–26.
Clegg, S. (1989). Frameworks of Power. London: Sage.
——(1998). ‘Foucault, Power and Organizations’, in A. McKinley and K. Starkey (eds.),
Foucault, Management and Organization Theory. London: Sage.
Cordoba, J., and Robson, W. (2003). ‘Making the Evaluation of Information Systems Insight-
ful: Understanding the Role of Power-Ethics Strategies’, Electronic Journal of Information
Systems Evaluation, 6(2): 55–64.
Dandeker, C. (1990). Surveillance, Power and Modernity. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Davies, L., and Mitchell, G. (1994). ‘The Dual Nature of the Impact of IT on Organizational
Transformations’, in R. Baskerville, S. Smithson, O. Ngwenyama, and J. DeGross (eds.),
Transforming Organizations with Information Technology. North Holland: Elsevier
Science.
Deetz, S. (1998). ‘(Re)constructing the Modern Organization’, in A. McKinley and K. Starkey
(eds.), Foucault, Management and Organization Theory. London: Sage.
Defert, D., Ewald, F., and Lagrange, J. (eds.) (1994). Dits et Ecrits 1954–1988, vols. i–iv. Paris:
Gallimard.
De Landa, M. (1991). War in the Age of Intelligent Machines. New York: Swerve Editions.
Deleuze, G. (1995). Negotiations: 1972–1990. New York: Columbia University Press.
Doolin, B. (1998). ‘Information Technology as a Disciplinary Technology: Being Critical
in Interpretive Research in Information Systems’, Journal of Information Technology,
13(4): 301–12.
Dreyfus, H., and Rabinow, P. (1983). Michel Foucault: Beyond Structuralism and Hermeneu-
tics. 2nd edn., Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Feenberg, A. (2002). Transforming Technology: A Critical Theory Revisited. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Finlay, M. (1987a). ‘Technology as Practice: And (So) What about Emancipatory Interest’,
Canadian Journal of Political and Social Theory, 11(1–2): 198–214.
——(1987b). Powermatics: A Discursive Critique of New Communications Technology.
London: Routledge, Kegan & Paul.
Foucault, M. (1970). The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences. London:
Tavistock. Original French version 1966.
——(1978). The History of Sexuality, i: An Introduction. New York: Pantheon Books. Original
French version 1976.
——(1983). ‘The Subject and Power’, in H. Dreyfus. and P. Rabinow (eds.), Michel Foucault:
Beyond Structuralism and Hermeneutics. 2nd edn., Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
——(1996). Foucault Live: Collected Interviews 1961–84. New York: Semiotexte.
Gordon, C. (ed.) (1980). Foucault: Power/Knowledge. Selected Interviews and Other Writings
1972–7. Brighton: Harvester.
196
LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS AND ELENI A. LIOLIOU

Grint, K., and Willcocks, L. (1995). ‘Business Process Reengineering in Theory and Practice:
Paradise Regained?’, New Technology Work and Employment, 10(2): 99–109.
Haraway, D. (1991). Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature. New York: Routledge.
Hardy, C., and Leiba-O’Sullivan, S. (1998). ‘The Power behind Empowerment: Implications
for Research and Practice’, Human Relations, 51: 451–85.
Hayles, K. (1999). How We Became Posthuman. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Harvey, L. (1998). ‘Visibility, Silencing and Surveillance in an IT Needs Analysis Project’, in
T. Larsen, L. Levine, and DeGross, J. (eds.), Information Systems: Current Issues and Future
Challenges. North Holland: Elsevier Science.
Heidegger, M. (1977). The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays. New York:
Harper Row.
Humphreys, A. (2006). ‘The Consumer as Foucauldian Object of Knowledge’, Social Science
Computer Review, 24(3): 296–309.
Introna, L. (1997). Management, Information and Power. London: Palgrave.
——(2001). ‘Truth and its Politics: Evolving Regimes of Truth at the MISQ’, in D. Howcroft
and A. Adam (eds.), (Re)deﬁning Critical Research in Information Systems, Proceedings of
the CRIS Workshop, University of Salford (July), 45–55.
——(2003). ‘Disciplining Information Systems: Truth and its Regimes’, European Journal of
Information Systems, 12: 235–40.
Katz, S. (2001). ‘Michel Foucault’, in A. Elliott and B. Turner (eds.), Proﬁles in Social Theory.
London: Sage.
Knights, D. (1990). ‘Subjectivity, Power and the Labour Process’, in D. Knights and
H. Willmott (eds.), Labour Process Theory. London: Macmillan.
——and Murray, F. (1994). Managers Divided: Organizational Politics and Information
Technology Management. Chichester: Wiley.
————and Willmott, H. (1997). ‘Networking as Knowledge Work: A’, in B. Bloomﬁeld,
R. Coombs, D. Knights, and D. Littler (eds.), Information Technology and Organizations.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——and Vurdubakis, T. (1994). ‘Foucault, Power, Resistance and All That’, in J. Jermier,
D. Knights, and W. Nord (eds.), Resistance and Power in Organizations. London:
Routledge.
Klein, H., and Hunyh, M. (2004). ‘The Critical Theory of Jurgen Habermans and its
Implications for IS Research’, in J. Mingers and L. Willcocks (eds.), Social Theory and
Philosophy for Information Systems. Chichester: Wiley.
Kritzmann, L. (ed.) (1988). Foucault: Politics, Philosophy, Culture: Interviews and Other
Writings 1977–84. New York: Routledge.
Lioliou, E., and Willcocks, L. (2009). ‘IT Outsourcing Governance: How Contractual and
Relational Elements Shape the Outsourcing Venture’, Global Sourcing Workshop, Keystone,
CO, 21–5 March.
Lyon, D. (1988). The Information Society: Issues and Illusions. Cambridge: Polity Press.
——(1993). ‘An Electronic Panopticon? A Sociological Critique of Surveillance Society’,
Sociological Review, 41(4): 653–78.
——(1994). The Rise of Surveillance Society. Cambridge: Polity Press.
——(ed.) (2003). Surveillance as Social Sorting. London: Routledge.
——and Zureik, E. (eds.) (1996). Computers, Surveillance and Privacy. Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press.
‘EVERYTHING IS DANGEROUS’
197

McKinley, A., and Starkey, K. (eds.) (1998). Foucault, Management and Organization Theory.
London: Sage.
Miller, P., and Rose, N. (2008). Governing the Present: Administering Economic, Social and
Personal Life. Chichester: Wiley.
Mingers, J., and Willcocks, L. (eds.) (2004). Social Theory and Philosophy for Information
Systems. Chichester: Wiley.
Morgan, G., and Willmott, H. (1993). ‘The “New” Accounting Research: On Making Ac-
counting More Visible’, Accounting, Audibility and Accountability Journal, 6(4): 3–36.
Munro, I. (2000). ‘Non-Disciplinary Power and the Network Society’, Organization, 7(4): 679–95.
Poster, M. (1984). Foucault, Marxism and History: Mode of Production versus Mode of
Information. Cambridge: Polity Press.
——(1990). The Mode of Information: Poststructuralism and Social Context. Cambridge:
Polity Press.
——(1995). The Second Media Age. Cambridge: Polity Press.
——(2001). What’s The Matter with the Internet. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota
Press.
Quinby, L. (1999). Millenial Seduction. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Rabinow, P. (ed.) (1984). The Foucault Reader. London: Penguin.
Robins, K., and Webster, F. (1999). Times of the Technoculture: From the Information Society
to the Virtual Life. London: Routledge.
Rose, N., and Miller, P. (1992). ‘Political Power beyond the State: Problematics of Govern-
ment’, British Journal of Sociology, 43(2): 173–205.
Sakolosky, R. (1992). ‘Disciplinary Power and the Labour Process’, in A. Sturdy, D. Knights,
and H. Willmott (eds.), Skill and Consent: Contemporary Studies in the Labour Process.
London: Routledge.
Scott Morton, M. (ed.) (1991). The Corporation of the 90s. New York: Oxford University Press.
Scranton, P. (1995). ‘Determinism and Indeterminacy in the History of Technology’, in
M. Smith and L. Marx (eds.), Does Technology Drive History. London: MIT Press.
Sewell, G., and Wilkinson, B. (1992). ‘ “Someone to Watch over Me” Surveillance: Discipline
and the Just-In-Time Labour Process’, Sociology, 26(2): 271–89.
Sofoulis, Z. (2002). ‘Cyberquake: Haraway’s Manifesto’, in D. Tofts, A. Jonson, and A. Cavallaro
(eds.), Preﬁguring Cyberculture: An Intellectual History. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Townley, B. (1993). ‘Foucault, Power/Knowledge and its Relevance for Human Resource
Management’, Academy of Management Review, 18(3): 518–45.
——(2000). ‘Managing with Modernity’, Organization, 9(4): 549–73.
Virilio, P. (2002). Ground Zero. London: Verso.
Walton, R. (1989). Up and Running. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Webster, F. (2005). Theories of the Information Society. 2nd edn., London: Routledge.
——and Robins, K. (1993). ‘ “I’ll Be Watching over You”: Comment on Sewell and Wilk-
inson’, Sociology, 27(2): 243–52.
Willcocks, L. (2004). ‘Foucault, Power/Knowledge and Information Systems: Reconstructing
the Present’, in J. Mingers and L. Willcocks (eds.), Social Theory and Philosophy for
Information Systems. Chichester: Wiley.
Winokur, M. (2003). ‘The Ambiguous Panopticon: Foucault and the Codes of Cyberspace’,
CTheory.Net (March): 1–29.
Zuboff, S. (1988). In the Age of the Smart Machine: The Future of Work and Power. New York:
Basic Books.
198
LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS AND ELENI A. LIOLIOU

c h a p t e r 8
...............................................................................................
CRITICAL SOCIAL
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
RESEARCH
...............................................................................................
BERND STAHL
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
The term ‘critical’ has many different meanings. This chapter concentrates on a
particular tradition, which is sometimes called ‘critical theory’ or ‘critical research’.
Even critical theory in the sense of the word used here has a long history going back to
the ancient Greeks (Harvey 1990). This chapter gives an overview of the usage of the
term in current information systems (IS) research and practice. In order to avoid
ambiguities and to render it clear that this chapter addresses a particular research
tradition, the chapter follows Klein (2009) in using the term ‘critical social information
systems research’ (CSISR).
The chapter describes the main ideas of critical social research and its relevance in IS.
It reviews the literature on CSISR in order to provide the reader with an in-depth
understanding of the meaning and history of this tradition. At the same time it moves
beyond the literature in suggesting that CSISR is characterized by one main feature,
namely the intention to change social reality and promote emancipation, which sets it
apart from other research approaches and traditions. This central feature can explain
most if not all of the characteristics of CSISR which are discussed below. One notable
consequence arising from the emancipatory intention is the ethical implication of
CISIR. The overview of characteristics and deﬁnitions of CSISR is supplemented by a
discussion of dominant topics, questions of methodology, and theory. Despite the
wealth of theories that inform CSISR, one can identify some main lines of thought
and the present chapter concentrates on the work of Jürgen Habermas which has
inﬂuenced large parts of the CSISR discourse. The brief review of Habermas’s work
leads to a discussion of the ethical properties of CSISR. Habermas’s writings provides a

suitable ethical theory that can support CSISR. The chapter discusses problems of the
approach and ﬁnishes with a critical reﬂection CSISR in general and this present
narrative in particular.
DEFINITIONS AND CHARACTERISTICS
OF CSISR
..................................................................................................................
Due to its long history, changing scope and wide range of areas of application it is
difﬁcult to ﬁnd one speciﬁc deﬁnition of critical research that would satisfy all scholars
engaged in it (Brooke 2002a). One can argue that critical theory is not really a theory at
all but rather a collection of interlinked principles (Howcroft and Trauth 2004), which
renders it even more difﬁcult to deﬁne clearly. The typical approach is therefore to
collect a number of characteristics that in most cases apply to critical work (Basden
2002). This chapter will follow that established approach but, instead of simply listing
the different characteristics, it will argue that there is a hierarchy of importance and
that the core characteristic of critical research in general and of CSISR in particular is
linked to the emancipatory intent to change social reality. The other characteristics
discussed below are only relevant insofar as they provide theoretical support or
practical ways of implementing the emancipatory intention.
Critical Intention: Change Social Reality to Promote
Emancipation
Emancipation is an ongoing and central theme within critical research, which is
relatively independent of particular issues, topics, theories, or methodologies (How-
croft and Trauth 2004). This links directly to the intention to facilitate change. Critical
social theory aims to ‘bring about real change in the human condition’ (Lee 1991: 276).
This intention to change reality is based on the recognition of the problems caused or
perpetuated by the status quo, of structural contradictions and existing restrictions,
oppressions, and domination (Orlikowski and Baroudi 1991). The starting point of the
critical approach is thus not to gain an unbiased view of an external reality but the
perception that the reality we live in is not perfect and can be improved (Klein and
Myers 1999). There is thus an important aspect that refers directly to the researcher’s
motivation for doing research and his or her perception of the world. To put it
differently, ‘critical stance is focused on what is wrong with the world rather than
what is right’ (Walsham 2005b: 112).
What is wrong about the world from the critical perspective is that human beings are
not given the opportunity to live the best possible lives they could or to achieve their
200
BERND STAHL

potential (Klein and Huynh 2004: 163). The term ‘emancipation’ denotes the attempt
to give people this opportunity, to allow them to live up to their potential. CSISR tends
to focus on the speciﬁc way in which information systems can have alienating or
emancipating effects (Cecez-Kecmanovic 2005).
This aim of promoting emancipation raises a range of questions and issues. The
most obvious one is that of the deﬁnition of emancipation. The deﬁnition of emanci-
pation alluded to in the preceding paragraph is somewhat problematic because of its
open nature. There are many attempts to provide a more detailed deﬁnition. Hirsch-
heim, Klein, and Lyytinen (1995: 83), for example, deﬁne emancipation as ‘all con-
scious attempts of human reason to free us from pseudo-natural constraints’.
Hirschheim and Klein (1994: 98) suggest that emancipation has a psychological and
an organizational dimension. It is plausible to assume that alienating circumstances
can be found in the environment as well as the agent. Emancipation therefore needs to
address issues of ‘false or unwarranted beliefs, assumptions, and constraints’ (Ngwe-
nyama and Lee 1997: 151). Waring (2004) seems to suggest that emancipation is about
avoiding or overcoming conﬂict. In any event, it is difﬁcult to clearly describe what
constitutes emancipation. Attempts to deﬁne it substantively run the risk of turning
into a dictatorship of the intellectual (Stahl 2006), whereas more procedural ap-
proaches can lead to outcomes that the critical researcher can view as undesirable
(Broadbent and Laughlin 1997).
Given that the central aim of promoting emancipation may be practically problem-
atic and epistemologically impossible to ascertain, critical scholars tend to focus on
more modest goals which are nevertheless conducive to emancipation. In a ﬁrst step
they typically aim to lay the groundwork of social change by exposing the status quo
from an unorthodox position. CSISR therefore needs to come to a sound understand-
ing of social reality, often going beyond the perceptions of the individuals who are
involved in the situation. Restricting and alienating conditions need to be understood
in a ﬁrst step (Varey, Wood-Harper, and Wood 2002) in order to then be exposed as
such. An underlying assumption of this approach is that individuals, in many cases
members of organizations, fail to see that alternative social realities are conceivable.
Once these are pointed out, they are nevertheless capable of apprehending them and
using their newly found view of the world to develop to their own advantage (Cecez-
Kecmanovic 2005). Exposing alienation, domination, and oppression implies a chal-
lenge that contains the opportunity to overcome them (Howcroft and Trauth 2008).
Given the exposure of problems of the status quo, a range of possibilities of
addressing these and changing social reality are conceivable. Many of these (e.g.
political revolutions) raise problems in their own right and contain the seed to different
forms of alienation and oppression. Critical scholars therefore usually aim to bring
about change in a non-violent way that is sensitive to the perceptions and preferences
to the people affected, without necessarily accepting the extant world-views. In practice
this means that the aim of change is realized by contributing to ‘transformative
redeﬁnitions’ (Alvesson and Deetz 2000). Such transformative redeﬁnitions that
allow alternative views of social realities that are more emancipatory than the status
CRITICAL SOCIAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH
201

quo need to be co-created with the individuals and organizations in question (Cecez-
Kecmanovic, Klein, and Brooke 2008).
The critical intention to change social reality and promote emancipation is the core
deﬁning feature of most critical research. It sets it apart from other research which is
purely descriptive. Based on the belief that social reality can and should be improved,
the concept of emancipation provides the focal point of CSISR. This chapter argues
that all other characteristics of critical research require the critical intention to change
social reality in order to be coherent. At the same time, the emancipatory intention is
based on a number of assumptions and has consequences for a variety of important
aspects of research. These constitute the other characteristics of CSISR which are
elaborated below.
Ontological Assumptions of CSISR
The emancipatory intention is not logically or necessarily tied to a particular ontology.
It is arguably conceivable to promote emancipation in a world-view based on an
objective and observer-independent reality. However, in practical terms, critical scho-
lars in management and information systems tend to rely on non-objectivist views of
the world (Alvesson and Willmott 2003). This is one aspect in which they set them-
selves apart from most mainstream scholars in the same ﬁelds of study. One of the
reasons why CSISR scholars are sceptical of an objectivist ontology is that it can be used
to hide and remove from discussion the causes of alienation (Lee 1991). The dominant
ontological position adopted by critical scholars is that of social constructivism or
constructionism (Gergen 1999). The relevance of this ontological position is that it
gives a foundation for the process of transformative redeﬁnition. Only if reality is
socially constructed can there be a point in trying to develop alternative construction
(Saravanamuthu 2002a). At the same time, however, critical scholars realize that there
are limits to the ability to construct and reconstruct reality. Alternative realities are
possible but they are constrained by accepted views and perceptions which are often
difﬁcult to change (Myers and Avison 2002). The constructionist ontology thus raises
problems because it has to contend with the existence of an external reality, which may
be open to social intervention but which also has a prima facie objective existence. This
can raise signiﬁcant problems for critical research because it limits the possibility of
social change.
One area where CSISR scholars pay particular attention to ontology is the question
of the nature of technology. There has been some debate with the ﬁeld of information
systems in general what the role is of technological artefacts and how they can be
theorized appropriately (Orlikowski and Lacono 2001; Ives et al. 2004). This debate is
partly linked to the question of the ontological nature of technology and technological
artefacts. There is probably no simple version of the ontology of technology that all
critical scholars subscribe to. They are, however, united in their general rejection of a
202
BERND STAHL

simplistic technological determinism (Cecez-Kecmanovic 2005). This rejection is based
on the empirically well-supported view that identical technological artefacts can lead
to vastly different social and organizational consequences (Doherty, Coombs, and
Loan-Clarke 2006). While this raises complex questions whether the ontological nature
of technology is ﬂexible or only our interpretation of this nature (Cadili and Whitley
2005), the consequence remains that CSISR scholars are generally open to constructiv-
ist views of technology, such as those proposed by proponents of the social shaping of
technology (SST) or the social construction of technology (SCOT) (Howcroft, Mitev,
and Wilson 2004).
Epistemology of CSISR
There is a close relationship between ontology as the philosophical discipline
concerned with the nature of being and epistemology as its sister discipline concerned
with knowledge. It is thus not surprising that relevant epistemological positions in
CSISR correspond with the dominant non-objectivist ontology. Critical scholars view
knowledge as socially constructed, grounded in history, and strongly linked to theory
(Orlikowski and Baroudi 1991). Research cannot be an independent description of an
external reality but is a process of co-creation of relevant knowledge in which researcher
and respondents are engaged simultaneously (Trauth and Howcroft 2006).
Given these thoughts, it is not surprising that critical scholars are close in many
respects to phenomenological ideas. They consider the life-worlds of actors as impor-
tant and realize that issues of oppression or emancipation need to be understood from
the point of view of agents (Ngwenyama and Lee 1997). While the external world has a
certain amount of stability beyond individual perceptions (otherwise all alienation or
oppression could be overcome by appropriate redeﬁnitions of the individual’s world-
view), it can only be described appropriately with reference to the multitude of
perceptions that constitute it. The phenomenological approach has therefore been
described as particularly conducive to critical work (Moreno 2004).
As a consequence of these epistemological assumptions, critical theorists tend to
have a complex understanding of truth. A simple correspondence relationship between
statements and external facts that characterizes the commonsense understanding of
truth does not sufﬁce. Truth is temporal and context bound. It is always being
negotiated and dependent on viewpoints and theories (Chua 1986). These are positions
that raise a number of fundamental questions with regards to approaches and validity
of critical research, some of which are discussed below. Critical researchers typically
claim that openness and transparency with regards to such positions are an important
feature of the approach, which supports the claim to academic integrity. Moreover, as
critical research is interested in changing social reality and therefore can easily turn
into political practice, it is less important to follow general expectations of research and
more important to be open about strengths and weaknesses of the position.
CRITICAL SOCIAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH
203

Totality and Historicity
Totality is often described as another characteristic of critical work. The concept of
totality has a long and diverse philosophical tradition. In the context of CSISR it usually
means that things cannot be split up and treated as isolated elements but that all things
need to be understood in the context of all relationships they entertain (cf. Orlikowski
and Baroudi 1991). In research practice this means that the artiﬁcial limitation of
observations to particular aspects is always recognized as problematic. It may be neces-
sary for pragmatic reasons to focus on particular issues or variables but these are always
recognized to be parts of other contexts. The study of a speciﬁc information system in a
particular organization, usually done by investigation of a range of data sources, can
always be supplemented by an observation of the socio-economic context within which
this organization works but also by the cultural environment and many other aspects.
An important part of the context that is implied in the concept of totality is that of
the historical situation from which the research has developed. In order to understand
the role of IS in organizations and societies and to improve understanding of alienation
or emancipation, it is important to be aware of the historical roots of the current
situation. This has direct links to the question of the concept of technology and
interpretive ﬂexibility. If the researcher is to understand why a particular interpretation
of technology has become dominant, then historical knowledge of earlier systems, or
relationships between employees and management and other relevant issues is helpful.
Only such historical awareness can provide the breadth of understanding necessary to
facilitate a successful redeﬁnition of alienating circumstances.
The concept of totality can also serve as a link to phenomenological epistemology in
that it reminds us that there are other aspects that need to be considered when trying to
understand why a certain technology may alienate or emancipate individuals. An
important aspect here is the fact of the embodied nature of humans and human
understanding, a topic addressed by research inspired by existential phenomenology
in Heidegger’s tradition. Much mainstream research in computer sciences and infor-
mation systems neglects this crucial fact and therefore cannot provide suitable concepts
to understand alienation, for example when it occurs due to disabilities that are simply
not captured by abstract and objectivist accounts of reality (Adam and Kreps 2006).
Reﬂexivity
A ﬁnal characteristic of CSISR worth mentioning is that of reﬂexivity (Kvasny and
Richardson 2006; Richardson and Robinson 2007). The brief attempt to outline and
characterize CSISR so far has shown that in many cases the critical approach raises as
many or more problems than it resolves. It does not provide a simple and algorithmic
way forward. In fact, it often serves to create problems or at least raise awareness of
them and explicitly refuses to be used as a problem-solving tool. Critical research is
204
BERND STAHL

non-functional in that it often questions the very legitimacy of existing problem-
solving approaches.
The critical approach therefore requires scholars to be aware of the issues raised by
their approach and to consider ways of addressing them. Reﬂexivity is the term that is
often used to describe this awareness. It extends to the entire research, including
research question, motivation, assumptions, outcomes, and methods. Reﬂexivity means
that critical scholars intentionally and expressly question their own views, their beliefs,
and values and own up to their agendas and intentions (Cecez-Kecmanovic 2001).
Reﬂexivity is thus very much about the application of critical thoughts to themselves.
Where critical research is about questioning assumptions and beliefs and raising
awareness of problems, these activities are aimed at the critical research process itself
(Doolin and McLeod 2005).
CENTRAL CONCEPTS AND TOPICS OF CSISR
..................................................................................................................
The critical intention to change social reality and further emancipation explains the
characteristics of CSISR and at the same time gives rise to a set of important ﬁgures of
thought that pervade critical thinking. They also inspire research in certain topics,
notably those that have a direct bearing on the possibility of emancipation.
Ideology and Hegemony
Two central ideas worth exploring in more detail because of their relevance for critical
thinking are ideology and hegemony. Ideologies are particular and dominant world-
views that advantage some and disadvantage others (McLellan 1995; Freeden 2003;
Hawkes 2003). Ideologies are not simply falsehoods. Rather, they constitute central
parts of the shared world-view of a society or group (Stewart and Gosain 2006). As such
they can often even be supported by empirical evidence (Gouldner 1976). They are
accepted by that group or society as correct descriptions of reality. However, from a
critical perspective they can be seen as partial and alienating. Good examples of
ideologies are the stereotypes linked to race and gender. Such stereotypes, if generally
accepted, structure the actions available to members of a particular race or gender,
which can be oppressive. Not surprisingly, much CSISR work concentrates on such
ideologies (Kvasny and Trauth 2002; Wheeler 2005; Howcroft and Trauth 2008).
Critical scholars can provide alternative descriptions and conceptualizations that
allow different understandings, which allow for a higher degree of emancipation.
This should not be misunderstood as positing that there is an ideology-free way of
understanding the world and that criticalists have found the golden path to it. Ideol-
ogies are part of all collective constructions of reality and therefore a necessary
consequence of a social constructivist world-view. They may even have positive
CRITICAL SOCIAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH
205

consequences when they allow for the development of positive views of experiences
(McAulay, Doherty, and Keval 2002). What critical thinking has to offer to address
ideologies is reﬂexivity. Being open to question one’s own assumptions means that one
has the ability to recognize where these assumptions have ideological and alienating
qualities and thus prevent emancipation. It also means that alternative concepts and
views can be developed which overcome these problems. Addressing ideology is not a
simple solution but an ongoing process which pervades critical research.
Ideologies can only persist if they evade critical questioning and analysis. They must
blend into the background in order to remain stable. The mechanism by which this is
achieved is sometimes called hegemony. Hegemony renders ideology invisible, often by
rending it natural and beyond discussion. The concept of hegemony is closely linked to
Gramsci’s work whose main question was why people acquiesced to the oppression
they were subjected to (Kincheloe and McLaren 2005).
There are many ways in which technology and information systems can have
ideological qualities and hegemonic functions. Ideologies may be socially accepted
views such as the legitimacy of hierarchical management or of the imperative of proﬁt
maximization. Technology can then serve as hegemonic means by supporting and
rendering invisible such ideologies (Feenberg 1999; Saravanamuthu 2002a). At the
same time, technology itself can have an ideological status, for example when technol-
ogy is equated with progress and progress is assumed to be unquestionably desirable or
when technology embodies contested social regulations, for example through digital
rights management. Hegemonic means to uphold the ideological quality of technology
can then be drawn from the environment in the form of customs, agreements, or the
law (Thomson 1987).
Topics of CSISR
The emancipatory intention and the problem of achieving it in the light of ideology and
hegemony give rise to a set of topics that critical scholars tend to be interested in. Havey
(1990: 2) mentions the classics of class, gender, and race, which are central in CSISR as
well. However, this chapter will concentrate on power, rationality, capitalism and the IS
discipline itself, which are topics frequently addressed by current work in the area.
Power and control
Being subjected to oppressive power relationships is one of the main reasons for lack of
emancipation. At the same time information systems can represent power relation-
ships, arise from power struggles, and can effect changes in power structures. It is
therefore not surprising that issues of power form a central topic of CSISR. Power is
also one of the less visible aspects of IS, often hidden in technological features and not
explicitly reﬂected upon by those affected by it. The critical approach is therefore well
suited to research power issues (Doolin 1998).
206
BERND STAHL

Researching power in IS raises the question of a deﬁnition of the term. Critical
scholars are aware that such a deﬁnition is difﬁcult and may hide its own ideological
baggage. Criticalists therefore tend to use a broad deﬁnition, such as Giddens’s view
that power ‘is the capacity to achieve outcomes’ (Giddens 1984: 257). Such a wide view
captures most aspects of power and allows extending the lens of power to a range of
issues where no direct exertion of force is recognizable. Power pervades relationships,
organizations, knowledge structures, and is continually negotiated (Bloomﬁeld and
Coombs 1992).
A related concept is that of control. It has long been established that IS are
‘subsystems of control systems’ (Ackoff 1967: 150). Control may be a better term
than power because of its more positive connotation. At the same time, it is easy to
argue that IS are often designed to control people and processes. Control is a central
concept in the management literature and it has formal and informal aspects, both of
which are reﬂected in IS (Kohli and Kettinger 2004).
From the critical perspective control as well as power is not necessarily bad or
problematic. The question of interest to CSISR scholars is how existing power and
control structures are affected by technology. There is no simple equation between IS
and control but a complex interplay between them (Bloomﬁeld and Coombs 1992;
Feenberg 1993). One can also observe that traditional control mechanisms aimed at
behaviour are replaced by output-oriented control, which relies on the internalization
of control mechanisms, which can be supported by IS (Jackson, Gharavi, and Klobas
2006). This type of control is closely linked to surveillance and self-surveillance,
which lends itself to interpretations using a Foucauldian lens (see Chapter 7), which
is of theoretical interest to critical scholars (Zirkle and Staples 2005).
The interest in power furthermore means that critical scholars have an interest in the
political manifestations of power and their inﬂuence on technology. Given the eman-
cipatory intent, engaging in political activities can be viewed as an important and
sometimes necessary aspect of critical research (Saravanamuthu 2002b). This raises
issues of what counts as political activities and at what point research turns into
political activism (Richardson 2005).
The ongoing interest in power and control does not imply that critical scholars have
a simplistic view of power. They are aware that power is always contextual and
continually negotiated. The Foucauldian tradition of critical work has sharpened the
awareness of the fact that all power can lead to resistance and that power is always a
reciprocal relationship (Doolin 1998). Resistance and subsequent IS failure are recog-
nized topics in mainstream IS research (Sauer 1993). Whereas resistance is typically
described as a problem to be overcome in such research, the critical perspective tends
to be more interested in the legitimacy and processes of resistance (Wilson 2002).
Understanding the processes that lead to negative perceptions and eventually resis-
tance is helpful in describing where IS are oppressive or emancipatory and therefore of
high interest to critical scholars (Lapointe and Rivard 2005; Alvarez 2008).
CRITICAL SOCIAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH
207

Rationality
A central concern of critical research is to understand why oppressive and alienating
structures are upheld. One of the main hegemonic mechanisms that serve this purpose
in current western societies and particularly in commercial organizations is the pre-
vailing rationality. This problematic rationality, sometimes called ‘purposive rationali-
ty’ is the means-ends oriented view of rationality, which accepts given ends and
concentrates exclusively on the question which means are required to achieve these
ends. As a consequence of the adoption of purposive rationality organizational goals
are no longer questioned and are in a position to override all other concerns (Klein and
Lyytinen 1985). This is problematic because emancipatory concerns are pushed aside
but also because it portrays a view of reality that is not tenable (Kumar, van Dissel, and
Bielli 1998; Avgerou and McGrath 2007). Walsham (1992: 41) has called this the ‘myth
of rationality in contemporary business organizations’. This myth has the purpose of
legitimizing authority and thereby power and control. It serves the hegemonic purpose
of hiding the fact that managerial decisions are always involved, contested, negotiated,
and embodied (Introna 1997; Ciborra 2002; Avgerou 2005).
This purposive rationality is prevalent in both of the areas that much IS research is
built upon, namely business and technology (Probert 2004). Purposive rationality can
have ideological as well as hegemonic attributes. It serves as an ideology by projecting a
desirable description of social reality in which people are meant to be ‘rational’. Such a
rationality and social choices based on it leave some people better off than others,
which is one of the deﬁnitions of ideology. In addition purposive rationality is a strong
vehicle of hegemony. It can be used to deﬁne which questions can legitimately be asked
in an organizational context and thereby hide the fact that other questions may be just
as pertinent. It is thus an instrument of power that serves to hide power behind a veil of
accepted discursive practices (Paterson 2007). The critical perspective allows demon-
strating that apparently neutral purposive rationality has in fact a political nature and
that this political nature needs to be exposed.
Capitalism
A core issue that critical research has traditionally been interested in and that is of
ongoing concern for CSISR is that of the capitalist constitution of society. Critical
research has strong roots in Marxism which explains some of the traditional scepticism
of market mechanisms. It is important to note, however, that very few critical scholars in
IS today are Marxist in a strong sense and want to overthrow capitalism. Historical
experience indicates that this may lead to more than problematic consequences. More-
over, it has been remarked that there are aspects of capitalism which are emancipatory
and a fundamental change of the economic constitution of society may not be desirable
(Thrift 2005). The general drift of CSISR scholars is therefore to investigate how IS
support the pathologies of capitalism and how they can be used to overcome these.
A traditional topic of critique of capitalism is that it produces or at least is conducive
to class societies. The struggle between capital and labour is perceived as a serious issue
208
BERND STAHL

to be addressed. Saravanamuthu (2002a) points out that IS play a role in this struggle.
The struggle between capital and labour is seen to be problematic because it perpe-
tuates a conﬂict-oriented constitution of society that necessarily leads to winners and
losers, often to the exploitation of workers, and therefore limits emancipatory ideas
(Orlikowski and Baroudi 1991). One way of addressing such problems is to use IS to
support workers and help trades unions (Robinson 2006).
An ongoing concern is that of the role of managers in organizations. While critic-
alists don’t typically deny the need to coordinate work and activities, the dominance of
managers is often seen as problematic. The traditional depiction of managers as heroes
is problematic because it is based on the purposive rationality criticized earlier (Stahl
2005). Managerial power struggles can cause problems for those lower down in the
organizational hierarchy (McAulay, Doherty, and Keval 2002). But the problem goes
beyond these predictable issues. Managers themselves are oppressed by the unrealistic
expectations levelled at them, which they often ﬁnd impossible to fulﬁl (Introna 1997).
And the whole construct of the rational leader may not even be conducive to the
success of the organization and the optimal use it could make of technology (Zuboff
1988).
Capitalism furthermore leads to commodiﬁcation, which stands for the change of an
entity into a tradable commodity. Commodiﬁcation often is accompanied by reiﬁca-
tion whereby a contested and negotiated social issue becomes a thing. Commodiﬁca-
tion often serves as a means of hegemony because it removes issues or entities from
discourses. Commodiﬁcation is not necessarily bad but it can be problematic where it
renders entities subject to commercial contracts which are not universally accepted as
such. Brooke (2002a), for example, cites the example of the human genome, which,
partly through the use of ICT, has turned into a marketable commodity. Further
examples include classics such as work (Greenhill and Wilson 2006) but also complex
and abstract issues such as information itself (Attias 2004).
Digital divides
One area where the injustices of the current capitalist system are highly visible and
where IS have the potential to greatly improve or exacerbate the situation is that of
digital divides (Parayil 2005). Digital divides are often and misleadingly described as
technological problems. The contribution of critical scholars to digital divides debates
can be to show that it needs to be understood in the context of global capitalism. It is
worth pointing out that digital divides issues are often couched in ideological terms and
rely on a deterministic view of technology. Critical views can point out the problem of
deﬁning and measuring digital divides (McSorley 2003). Digital divides are further-
more directly linked to power differences (Keniston 2001).
Similar and related issues tend to arise from other uses of IS in development. Digital
divides are normally expressions of social divides, be they within or between countries,
and the IS use for development is in many cases based on the idea that this can
overcome divides (Walsham 2001). Critical theorists have applied relevant theories to
such problems, such as post-colonialism (Mayasandra, Pan, and Myers 2006). Due to
CRITICAL SOCIAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH
209

the oppressive nature of developmental differences and the potential of IS to address
these, it has been suggested that IS researchers in the area should adopt a broadly
critical approach to their work (Walsham 2005b).
Critical analysis of the IS discipline
There are many more topics that critical scholars work on and that would be worth
describing. For the sake of brevity, the last part of this section is concerned with the way
critical scholarship has made a contribution to the development of the IS discipline
itself. An ongoing theme of the application of critical theory to the IS discipline is its
emancipatory potential. Computers and information technology can easily be envi-
saged as reducing power differences and improving the transparency of business
processes (Lyytinen and Hirschheim 1988). This could lead to more liberated working
practices, which would allow employees to contribute to the design of their work and
help them reach their potential. In doing so, emancipatory IS would maximize the
knowledge and input of employees, thus strengthening the organization. The emanci-
patory potential would not only affect employees but also management (Argyris 1971).
However, the emancipatory potential of IS goes beyond commercial and organizational
applications. They could be used to support governance structures in politics and civil
society that would allow a more participatory regime and strengthen democratic forms
of governance in NGOs, governments, and even internationally (Heng and de Moor
2003; Janson and Cecez-Kecmanovic 2005).
Despite this emancipatory potential, the ambivalent nature of IS is such that the
oppressive uses of such technology often overshadow the emancipatory ones (Klein
and Huynh 2004). Moreover, the idea of emancipation and traditional views of
computer-based systems are often ‘at odds with each other’ (Dhillon and Backhouse
2001). The cause of a lack of emancipation is typically a lack of interest in emancipa-
tion, which leads to the choice of systems whose emancipatory potential has never even
been considered. In order to overcome this, IS will thus need to engage in larger
discourses that go beyond its traditional boundaries (Porra 1999).
The emancipatory potential of IS and its frequent lack of realization mean that
criticalists need to look at the discipline itself if they are to be successful in moving
emancipation onto the agenda. They do this by reinterpreting important phenomena
such as IS failure (Brooke and Maguire 1998; Wilson and Howcroft 2002) and by
offering alternative views and theories (Howcroft, Mitev, and Wilson 2004). They
engage in internal discourses and expose ideological assumptions and attempt to
contribute to new avenues for the discipline, for example by showing the managerialist
assumptions of IS (Richardson and Robinson 2007), pointing out the politics involved
in publishing (Introna 2003; Introna and Whittaker 2004), or analysing current debates
such as the debate about rigour versus relevance in IS (Lyttinen and King 2004). This
type of engagement with the IS discipline shows the reﬂexivity of IS research and can be
understood as an attempt to improve the chances of emancipation through IS by
engaging with other research traditions and underlining the implicit emancipatory
promises that IS holds.
210
BERND STAHL

METHODOLOGIES OF CSISR
..................................................................................................................
Research in IS as in most other social sciences needs to show (empirical) relevance and
ﬁndings, if it is to be accepted. This raises the question of how data should be collected
and analysed, a question that is represented by the discourse surrounding the notion of
methodology. The issue of methodology represents a central problem of CSISR, partly
because there is no such thing as a critical methodology (McGrath 2005). The problem
goes beyond this, however, because the very idea of methodology is problematical from
the critical perspective. This is caused by the ontological and epistemological stances
espoused by criticalists and by the emancipatory intention of CSISR (Brooke 2002b).
An important connotation of the term methodology is that it provides an objective
way of collecting data about the world, which will lead to an adequate description of the
phenomena in question. Critical scholars tend to reject the implicit distinction between
values and facts (Ngwenyama 1991). An even more substantial problem arises from the
emancipatory intention to change social reality. This intention itself implies a value
judgement about reality which is prior to empirical research. It is based on a particular
world-view and thus informs all empirical research. The characterization of extant
social relationships as problematic raises the question of the purpose of empirical
critical research. If reality is to be changed, then how can knowledge about its current
form inform us? Knowledge of perceptions of respondents using IS may be informative
in a variety of ways but they cannot tell critical scholars in what way to steer changes.
The very idea of empirical research is thus problematic in CSISR, which may explain
why no strong tradition of methodology has emerged. There are nevertheless widely
shared views of methodology in CSISR. The most prominent one is the opposition to
dominant positivism (Cecez-Kecmanovic 2001; Probert 2004). Criticalists object to the
apparent objectivity of positivist research, which often uses quantitative measures to
come to the appearance of exactness, which is rarely appropriate in social situations.
The objectivist belief that social reality is independent of the observer and naive truth
theories that are implied in positivism are rejected, and the ideological quality of
positivist research, which can marginalize other voices is underlined. Positivist research
adopts the purposive rationality rejected by critical research and thereby turns into a
hegemonic tool for upholding the status quo (Cecez-Kecmanovic 2001).
Given this rejection of the positivist tradition, it is no surprise that CSISR scholars
tend to be closer to the main alternative to positivism in IS, namely interpretivism.
Interpretivism shares the social constructivist view of critical research. Interpretive data
collection and analysis methods are therefore more suitable for critical research. This
has led to the situation where the dividing line between critical and interpretive
research has become fuzzy (Walsham 2005b) and a range of scholars have started
to use terms such as ‘critical interpretivism’ (Pozzebon 2004; Doolin and McLeod
2005: 244). Like interpretivists, criticalists rely on hermeneutics and phenomenology
to understand the meaning of social phenomena. There are, however, important
CRITICAL SOCIAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH
211

differences between critical and interpretivist approaches to research. Interpretivists
tend to concentrate on the individual or group perception of reality and are often not
concerned with the greater social context, including issues such as class or the eco-
nomic constitution of society. Hermeneutic analysis and theoretical critique can
develop a dynamic interplay (Myers 2004) but this is not guaranteed. Also, the
emancipatory agenda is not necessarily linked to the basics of interpretivism, which
explains why there can be non-critical interpretive research. In practice one can divide
two types of empirical critical social research in IS: language oriented and practice
oriented.
Language-Oriented Methodologies
Language-oriented data collection methods are based on the constructivist tenet that
reality is socially constructed using the medium of language. Critical research interest-
ed in obstacles to emancipation therefore needs to pay attention to the use of language
that can embody or obfuscate ideology and hegemony, which lead to alienation and
oppression. An important task of language-oriented empirical critical research is
therefore to engage in ideology critique. The aim of ideology critique is to expose
ideologies and show how they are produced and reproduced (Schultze and Leidner
2002). Ideology critique includes a critique of the ideologies of critical research
(Castells 2000).
One established way of exploring linguistic issues from a critical perspective is to
engage in critical discourse analysis (CDA). Critical IS scholars can draw on a rich body
of literature on CDA (Fairclough 1993, 1995, 2003; Chouliarki and Fairclough 1999).
There is signiﬁcant research employing different approaches to CDA in order to
critique aspects of IS. Thompson (2002), for example, exposes issues of power and
ﬁnancial interests in IS for development. Alvarez (2008) explores the role of power and
control in an enterprise system, whereas Stahl (2007a) demonstrates how terms such as
privacy and security can be used for ideological purposes.
A related stream of research investigates how linguistic constructs such as metaphors
are used to promote particular views and thereby strengthen ideological positions.
Examples include the use of the word ‘virus’ to denote self-replicating programs or
‘piracy’ for unauthorized copying of ﬁles. Both terms have normative connotations,
they contain assumptions and lead to practical consequences that can empower some
and disempower others (Klang 2003). While linguistic means can be used to disguise
ideology, they can equally well be used by critical scholars to expose ideologies.
Marcuse (2002: 194) pointed out that modern technology contains characteristics of
‘magic, witchcraft and ecstatic surrender’. This theme has been taken up by critical IS
scholars who have shown that unexpected reinterpretations of IS in terms of magic and
myth may offer better understanding than the apparent economically rational main-
stream view (Hirschheim and Newman 1991; Kaarst-Brown and Robey 1999). Other
212
BERND STAHL

metaphors used by IS scholars and meant to overcome current discursive closures
include biological ones (Porra 1999), as well as alternative descriptions of managerial
activities as tinkering and bricolage (Ciborra 2000) or even as a chimpanzee’s tea party
(Drummond and Hodgson 2003).
Practice-Oriented Methodologies
While such language-based research and deconstruction of current discourses has the
advantage of being able to expose ideological views and discursive closure (Watson and
Wood-Harper 1996), it is often not clear whether and how it leads to manifest changes
in the status quo. Critical scholars therefore also employ methods of research that allow
them to directly engage in the research environment with the aim to actively promote
emancipation. When engaging in practical activities to support emancipation using IS,
critical researchers are faced with the problem or the blurry boundary between
research, consulting, and political activism. In order to gain acceptance as researchers
it is thus advisable to employ methods that allow describing such work in terms of
research. The most prominent way of doing this is to use the label of action research.
Action research can be seen as a reaction to a perception of social science research as
being wedded to the status quo. In particular the Scandinavian tradition of action
research was positioned as an attempt to overcome this and introduce democracy in
the work place (Sandberg 1985). Action research is not the only conceivable research
method that would lend itself to practice-oriented critical research in IS but it is the one
with the most established links to critical theory. The interventionist nature to action
research dovetails with the emancipatory intent of CSISR (Trauth 2001). A basic tenet
of action research is that the respondents are co-constructors of knowledge and that the
research process should allow them to reﬂect on their situation and improve it (Jönsson
1991; Oates 2004). Action research can be used to leverage the research process to
ameliorate the lives of the people under investigation (Cushman and Klecun 2006) or,
to put it differently, to help them in their emancipatory aims.
A Theoretical Basis of CSISR: The Theory of Communicative
Action and Discourse Ethics
There is a range of theories that critical scholars in IS can draw on. Any theory that
allows identifying critical concerns and promoting emancipation can count as a
suitable one for critical research (Cecez-Kecmanovic, 2005). This includes theoretical
approaches such as postmodernism, post-colonialism, queer theory, and many others.
Critical theory can also be deﬁned in a more narrow sense in which it refers speciﬁcally
to theories developed following Marx and particularly in the Frankfurt School tradition
CRITICAL SOCIAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH
213

(Wiggershaus 1995; Falconer 2008). Despite the considerable number of theorists who
are linked to the different generations of the Franfkurt school, the application of this
narrower deﬁnition in CSISR refers mostly to one theoretical body, namely that
developed by Jürgen Habermas. Habermas’s work has dominated CSISR to the point
where this perspective ‘has become largely synonymous with the critical in IS’ (Marcon,
Chiasson, and Gopal 2004: 145). This chapter will concentrate on Habermas’s work
and its role in CSISR, mindful of the fact that there are other appropriate critical
theories that CSISR can draw upon, some of which are discussed elsewhere in this book
(cf. Wilcock and Lioliou’s discussion of Foucault, Chapter 7 in this volume).
Habermas’s Theory of Communicative Action
Habermas has developed an impressive body of work during his still ongoing research
career. It is not possible to do him justice in the short space available here. This chapter
will brieﬂy outline some of the notable features of his work that have inﬂuenced
research in IS. His main work developing much of his early writing and preparing
later work is the Theory of Communicative Action (TCA) (Habermas 2006a). The
central question that Habermas discusses is how human beings can and should
collaborate. The starting point is the anthropological observation that humans need
to collaborate to survive and prosper. Each human has his or her individual life-world,
a term Habermas borrows from phenomenology, but life-worlds overlap due to
socialization and communication. Communication is also required for collaboration.
Habermas distinguishes different types of action based on communication which can
serve different purposes. The most desirable type is that of communicative action.
Communicative action is characterized by the ability and willingness of the interlocu-
tors to listen to each other and accept each other as equally digniﬁed beings.
In the course of communicative action people raise validity claims. Each utterance
carries claims to truth, normative rightness, and authenticity. Such claims can be
disputed by interlocutors. This is the point where discourses begin. Discourses are
the forums in which contentious validity claims can be raised, attacked, and defended.
Discourses can cover all of the validity claims, which means that they have epistemo-
logical functions (i.e. related to the truth of an argument), ethical functions (i.e. related
to the normative acceptability of a statement), as well as performative ones (i.e. related
to the authenticity of the speaker). The aim of engaging in discourses is to achieve a
consensus on the contentious validity claim. This consensus is carried by the better
argument. In order for discourses to be successful, they need to be held in an environ-
ment where all participants are willing and able to listen to each other and rationally
argue about the problem in question. This is what Habermas calls the ideal speech
situation. This ideal speech situation is counterfactual because it is never really
achieved. Its function in the TCA is transcendental, which means that it is the
condition of the possibility of discourses. Only when interlocutors believe that the
214
BERND STAHL

other participants in discourses are willing and capable of reacting to their utterances in
a rational and meaningful way, will there be a point in engaging in the discourse.
Habermas has developed these central ideas of the TCA in a number of directions.
A direct result of the TCA is the crystallization of his views on ethics, which he calls
discourse ethics (Habermas 2006c, 1983). He has also taken these ideas to analyse other
aspects of social life such as the law (Habermas 2006d) and, most notably, political
theory. His TCA can be seen as a theoretical basis of a social and democratic society
and Habermas is a frequent participant of current political issues (Goode 2005;
Habermas 2006b).
Habermas’s inﬂuence on CSISR is hard to overestimate. His work offers a valid
theoretical foundation that allows identifying and addressing issues of emancipation
(Cecez-Kecmanovic, Janson, and Brown 2002). Discourses are the place where oppres-
sive issues can be raised and exposed. At the same time, conditions of extant discourses
can contribute to oppression. This can be pointed out using the TCA. Information
systems can be described as means of communication and there is thus an obvious link
between IS and the TCA. IS can be conducive to communication in that they increase
the reach and participation in discourses but they can also limit the content and
transmission of communication. The TCA has served as a guiding idea for the use
and development of IS in a number of ways. One important aspect of this is the
recognition that the experts’ view cannot claim legitimacy without being open to
scrutiny of other stakeholders. This has led to the emphasis of participation in IS
research and development, where the critical approach has been linked to other
existing participative work (Mumford and Henshall 1978; Lyytinen and Klein 1985;
Hirschheim and Klein 1994; Mumford 2003; Stahl 2007b). Due to its democratic
background, the TCA also lends itself to non-commercial IS application, particularly
those that promote democratic participation (Heng and de Moor 2003).
There are limitations to the use of TCA in general and more speciﬁcally in IS.
Habermas does not speciﬁcally analyse technology, much less information technology,
which renders the applicability of some of his terms and ideas (e.g. the life-world versus
system debate) problematic (Feenberg 2004). There are also more general questions,
for example about the relationship between real and ideal discourses or the status of the
ideal speech situation (Silva 2005). Some of these issues are discussed below.
DISCOURSES AND THE ETHICS OF CSISR
..................................................................................................................
One aspect of critical research that is rarely addressed in CSISR but that pervades all
critical work is that of ethics. The main feature of critical work, the attempt to improve
the status quo and to promote emancipation, requires an ethical premiss. The intention
to change is normative. It can be translated into a normative statement such as ‘one
CRITICAL SOCIAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH
215

should emancipate’. Such a normative premiss cannot be deduced from descriptive
research. Instead, it is embedded in the very idea of the critical approach and precedes
and inﬂuences all empirical work. Ethics is thus a fundamental building block of the
critical approach. CSISR scholars on occasion acknowledge the ethical quality of their
work. There are ethical issues related to the topics and objects of critical research, for
example in power, rationality, and others (Varey, Wood-Harper, and Wood 2002). In
addition, the relationship between researcher and respondent as co-creator of knowl-
edge contains ethical aspects (Trauth and Howcroft 2006). The characteristic of
reﬂexivity requires openness about moral stances (Cecez-Kecmanovic 2005).
Despite this ethical relevance of CSISR, there is little explicit recognition of the
problems arising in conjunction with it. Stahl (2008a, 2008b) argues that there are
several aspects of ethics in CSISR that deserve closer attention. These include the
question of the shared ‘good life’ that criticalists aim for, the issue of norms and
rules they deem supportive of emancipation, but also issues of theoretical identiﬁcation
of ethical issues and justiﬁcation of norms. These are important issues that critical
scholars need to take into account if they want to avoid inconsistencies developing in
their approach. At the same time they require a familiarity with philosophical ethics
that not all CSISR scholars have.
Habermas’s work offers a suitable ethical approach that can give answers to these
questions, which may be a further explanation of his ongoing popularity among
criticalists. While most of the reception of his work centres on the TCA and his
sociological work, discourse ethics is deeply interlinked with this and should thus be
easy to import into IS (Adam 2005). Discourse ethics offers a range of advantages that
render it useful for CSISR. It is based on Kantian ethics but overcomes its reliance on
individual rationality. Discourse ethics is procedural, which means that it does not
make substantive prescriptions on the nature of moral rules or ways of achieving
emancipation. It is participative and offers guidelines on how participation can be
structured. Its reliance on discourses means that the communicative features of IS can
be used to their potential. Despite these advantages, there is currently very little work
that incorporates discourse ethics into IS but interest seems to be developing (Mingers
and Walsham 2008).
Questions and Reﬂections
Having introduced and discussed the aims, characteristics, and approach of CSISR, this
chapter now reﬂects on problems and critique of the approach. Reﬂexivity has been
shown to be a deﬁning feature of critical research. This chapter does not represent a
critical piece of research, rather a review article on the topic. As a paper in the critical
tradition, it should nevertheless be open to question about the critical approach in
general and the speciﬁc assumptions of this text in particular.
216
BERND STAHL

Intrinsic Problems in the Critical Approach
There are a number of intrinsic problems related to critical research and its application
in IS. Research in the critical traidition is better characterized by its diversity and
tensions than by commonalities (Cecez-Kecmanovic, Klein, and Brooke 2008). Many
of the central terms are hard to deﬁne. For example, this chapter has argued that
emancipation is at the heart of critical work but it has to concede that this is difﬁcult
and theoretically complex, hard to assess in practice and empirical research. Despite
the central nature of emancipation, it is unlikely that criticalists would easily agree on
what counts as emancipation and how researchers can contribute to it. A related
ongoing issue is the question whether and how practical change is achievable. Many
of the substantial social changes that critical theorists are interested in are furthermore
beyond the reach of individuals or limited groups and require fundamental change in
social relationships. In order to change labour relationships to become more demo-
cratic and participative, for example, external pressure may have to be brought to bear
on the economic system (Mumford 2006). An added problem is that emancipatory
progress can be reversed (Beekman and Mumford 1994; Mumford 2003). Criticalists
have also been accused of ignoring their own advice by relying on traditional ﬁgures of
thought (e.g. one-dimensional views of managers (Orlikowski and Baroudi 1991)) or
trying to decree emancipation in a top-down manner (Brigham and Introna 2007).
In addition, there are a number of problems of the Habermasian stream of critical
research that cause considerable debate within the CSISR community. The TCA is
often perceived as an attempt to safeguard ideas of enlightenment that are no longer
tenable. The idea that there is a privileged kind of rationality, namely communicative
rationality, which overcomes the limits of purposive rationality has been doubted.
Members of the critical community with afﬁnity to ‘postmodern’ views which doubt
the possibility of grand narrative have strongly questioned the possibility of an
alternative conception of rationality. The application of the Habermasian conception
of critical research has as a consequence been harshly criticized as totalizing and just
another oppressive ideology (Wilson 1997). This problem goes to the heart of some of
the internal debate among critical scholars, such as the one between Habermas and
Foucault (Kelly 1994; Ashenden and Owen 1999). While such critique is understand-
able and there is a danger of emancipatory work turning into oppression (Stahl 2006),
this view overlooks the necessity of taking a normative stance if change is to be
achieved. Giving up the hope that there is a positive conception of rationality that
overcomes current oppression renders the critical intention to promote emancipation
impotent. Also, critics need to understand that Habermas’s views are not substantively
prescriptive, i.e. they do not tell us what to do. What Habermas aims to do is provide a
framework that would allow us to come to an acceptable shared understanding of how
we want to live our individual and collective lives. The procedural nature of the
Habermasian approach ensures that all totalizing aspects it may contain can be opened
to discourses and consequently addressed.
CRITICAL SOCIAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH
217

THE ROLE OF CSISR IN IS
..................................................................................................................
Another open question of CSISR concerns its relationship with other approaches
recognized in IS. As indicated earlier, much critical research arose from an opposition
to the established approaches, notably to positivism. This opens a link to the paradigm
debate in IS. Depending on one’s deﬁnition of paradigms, one can argue that critical
research and positivist research are compatible or incommensurable. While the episte-
mological and ontological assumptions of critical research are probably incommensu-
rable with positivist assumptions (Stahl 2007c), the deﬁnition of CSISR in this chapter
does not necessarily lead to this conclusion. If critical research is about emancipation,
then there is no reason why a positivist approach could not be used to achieve this.
Indeed, given the apparent scientiﬁc legitimacy of critical research, one can argue that
critical scholars should employ positivist methods and arguments in order to be heard.
Another debate within the ﬁeld of IS, one with more relevance to critical research, is
that on rigour versus relevance, which is a core debate surrounding the nature and
self-deﬁnition of the ﬁeld (Benbasat and Weber 1996; Benbasat and Zmud 1999, 2003;
Lyytinen and King 2004; Klein and Rowe 2008). While this debate revolves mostly
about the question what relevance means and whether IS research is useful for managers,
the issue of relevance has a particular undertone for critical research. Given its interven-
tionist intention, critical research arguably requires practical consequences. This raises
the difﬁcult question of what counts as impact and how to measure it. Whatever the
deﬁnition, there seems to be a perception of a lack of impact of CSISR (Lyytinen 1992;
McGrath 2005; Frank 2006). A particular concern here is the apparent lack of empirical
research which is seen as an obstacle to practical impact (Cecez-Kecmanovic, Klein, and
Brooke 2008; Howcroft and Trauth 2008), even though Richardson and Robinson (2007)
shed doubt on the extent of the problem. The problem may thus not be a lack of
relevance and impact but a lack of visibility of the critical tradition in IS.
To some degree this discussion of relevance and impact of CSISR may be less
important than it appears at ﬁrst sight. Focusing on relevance in terms of measurable
and direct impact on current practices runs the risk of implicitly accepting the positivist
and linear view of the role of research. As Giddens (1984: 257) points out, the
‘formulation of critical theory is not an option; theories and ﬁndings in the social
sciences are likely to have practical (and political) consequences regardless of whether
or not the sociological observer or policy-maker decides that they can be “applied” to a
given practical issue.’ A look at the IS research landscape also shows that this view
is convincing. While the dominance of positivist, functionalist, and managerialist
research in IS is hard to doubt, one also needs to acknowledge that alternative views
have gained legitimacy. It is now possible to publish work in highly regarded IS
journals that doubts the beneﬁcial nature of technology, that questions the rationality
of managers, and that emphasizes the lack of emancipation resulting from the use of IS.
Furthermore, there is a signiﬁcant body of work that points to the weaknesses of
218
BERND STAHL

prevailing orthodoxy and recommends critical work as a way of overcoming its short-
comings (Siponen 2005). Using the Habermasian lens outlined in this chapter, one can
view CSISR as one type of contribution to the ongoing discourse in IS. As a discursive
contribution, the critical perspective has to show that its validity claims can be
supported by good arguments. It then stands to reason that it will prevail over less
convincing arguments. The way that such discourses work is difﬁcult, maybe impossi-
ble to predict. One important mechanism in which academic discourses gain relevance
is via their inﬂuence on students during teaching. Criticalists should not forget the
importance of this often under-valued role of academic activity. At the same time,
criticalists need to be sufﬁciently savvy to the ways of the world and use their
conceptual apparatus to understand how their own discipline works and use this
understanding to their advantage. One cannot overestimate the importance of academic
institutions such as conference journals, etc. and critical scholars need to follow
Walsham’s (2005a) advice and actively engage in contributing to such institutions to
ensure that the critical view continues to gain legitimacy.
The Self-Application of Critical Research
This last point leads to the role of the present chapter and a reﬂection of the identity and
status of CSISR. This chapter can be read as a contribution to the ongoing struggle
for legitimacy in IS. Its inclusion in the Oxford Handbook bestows legitimacy to the
critical approach. At the same time such legitimacy raises problems of its own. By
being recognized as legitimate, critical research can turn into a different type of
orthodoxy and thus into the very thing it aims to overcome. To use a different
terminology, one could argue that a chapter such as the present one shows that critical
scholars have been successful in building a new regime of truth, that they are now
holders of power. This is a position that many critical scholars may ﬁnd unpalatable but
that, given the analysis of social structures that criticalists engage in, may be recognized
as unavoidable.
So what is the difference between the critical and the alternative regimes of truth?
The main difference is in the focal attention to emancipation. Emancipation is not
limited to the respondents in empirical research but also extends to the researchers
themselves. Critical academics need to realize the rules of the academic games they
engage in but they do not have to take them for granted and are encouraged to change
them where they become oppressive. This may require gaining power ﬁrst, but with the
aim of using power to improve the status quo. While this noble goal may be forgotten
on an individual level, the reﬂective nature of the critical approach means that asking
for it will remain a constant feature. Critical research can thus not turn into the new
orthodoxy, at least not without substantially changing its nature. This does not mean
that all questions are answered. Quite to the contrary, substantial conceptual and
empirical issues remain open. However, this should be seen as a motivator for more
CRITICAL SOCIAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH
219

members of the IS community to engage in critical research, explore questions of
emancipation, debate the ethical question where IS should be heading, question
prevailing orthodoxy and conventional wisdom, and thereby contribute to a lively
community which views beyond the immediate and the obvious and aims to contribute
to a better life in modern technology-oriented societies.
REFERENCES
Ackoff, R. L. (1967). ‘Management Misinformation Systems’, Management Science, 14(4):
147–56.
Adam, A. (2005). ‘Against Rules: The Ethical Turn in Information Systems’, in D. Howcroft
and E. Trauth (eds.), Handbook of Critical Information Systems Research: Theory and
Application. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 123–31.
——and Kreps, D. (2006). ‘Enabling or Disabling Technologies? A Critical Approach to Web
Accessibility’, Information Technology and People, 19(3): 203.
Alvarez, R. (2008). ‘Examining Technology, Structure and Identity during an Enterprise
System Implementation’, Information Systems Journal, 18(2): 203–24. doi: 10.1111/
j.1365-2575.2007.00286.x.
Alvesson, M., and Deetz, S. A. (2000). Doing Critical Management Research. London: Sage
Publications Ltd.
——and Willmott, H. (2003). Studying Management Critically. London: Sage Publications
Ltd.
Argyris, C. (1971). ‘Management Information Systems: The Challenge to Rationality and
Emotionality’, Management Science, 17(6): 275–92.
Ashenden, S., and Owen, D. (1999). Foucault Contra Habermas: Recasting the Dialogue
between Genealogy and Critical Theory. London: Sage Publications Ltd.
Attias, B. A. (2004). ‘Technology and the Great Refusal: The Information Age and Critical
Social Theory’, in D. Tabachnick and T. Koivukoski (eds.), Globalization, Technology, and
Philosophy. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 43–56.
Avgerou, C. (2005). ‘Doing Critical Research in Information Systems: Some Further
Thoughts’, Information Systems Journal, 15(2): 103–9.
——and McGrath, K. (2007). ‘Power, Rationality, and the Art of Living through Socio-
Technical Change’, MIS Quarterly, 31(2): 295–315.
Basden, A. (2002). ‘The Critical Theory of Herman Dooyeweerd?’, Journal of Information
Technology, 17: 257–69. doi: 10.1080/0268396022000017770.
Beekman, G. J., and Mumford, E. (1994). Tools for Change and Progress: A Socio-Technical
Approach to Business Process Re-engineering. Leiden: CSG Publications.
Benbasat, I., and Weber, R. (1996). ‘Research Commentary: Rethinking Diversity in Informa-
tion Systems Research’, Information Systems Research, 7(4): 389.
——and Zmud, R. W. (2003). ‘The Identity Crisis within the IS Discipline: Deﬁning and
Communicating the Discipline’s Core Properties’, MIS Quarterly, 183–94.
————(1999). ‘Empirical Research in Information Systems: The Practice of Relevance’, MIS
Quarterly, 23(1): 3–16.
220
BERND STAHL

Bloomﬁeld, B. P., and Coombs, R. (1992). ‘Information Technology, Control and Power: The
Centralization and Decentralization Debate Revisited’, Journal of Management Studies, 29
(4): 459–84.
Brigham, M., and Introna, L. D. (2007). ‘Invoking Politics and Ethics in the Design of
Information Technology: Undesigning the Design’, Ethics and Information Technology, 9
(1): 1–10.
Broadbent, J., and Laughlin, R. (1997). ‘Developing Empirical Research: An Example In-
formed by a Habermasian Approach’, Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal, 10
(5): 622–48. doi: 10.1108/09513579710194027.
Brooke, C. (2002a). ‘Critical Perspectives on Information Systems: An Impression of the
Research Landscape’, Journal of Information Technology, 17(4): 271–83.
——(2002b). ‘What Does it Mean to be ‘Critical’ in IS Research?’ Journal of Information
Technology, 17: 49–57.
——and Maguire, S. (1998). ‘Systems Development: A Restrictive Practice?’, International
Journal of Information Management, 18(3): 165–80.
Cadili, S., and Whitley, E. A. (2005). ‘On the Interpretative Flexibility of Hosted ERP Systems’,
Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 14(2): 167–95.
Castells, M. (2000). End of Millennium, iii: The Information Age–Economy, Society and
Culture. 2nd edn., Oxford: WileyBlackwell.
Cecez-Kecmanovic, D. (2001). ‘Doing Critical IS Research: The Question of Methodology’, in
E. M. Trauth (ed.), Qualitative Research in IS: Issues and Trends. Illustrated edn., Hershey,
PA: IGI Publishing, 141–62.
——(2005). ‘Basic Assumptions of the Critical Research Perspectives in Information Systems’,
in D. Howcroft and E. Trauth (eds.), Handbook of Critical Information Systems Research:
Theory and Application. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd., 19–46.
——Janson, M., and Brown, A. (2002). ‘The Rationality Framework for a Critical Study of
Information Systems’, Journal of Information Technology, 17(4): 215–27. doi: 10.1080/
0268396022000017752.
——Klein, H. K., and Brooke, C. (2008). ‘Exploring the Critical Agenda in Information
Systems Research’, Information Systems Journal, 18(2): 123–35. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
2575.2008.00295.x.
Chouliarki, L., and Fairclough, N. (1999). Discourse in Late Modernity: Rethinking Critical
Discourse Analysis. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Chua, W. F. (1986). ‘Radical Developments in Accounting Thought’, The Accounting Review,
61(4): 601–32.
Ciborra, C. (2002). The Labyrinths of Information: Challenging the Wisdom of Systems.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2000). From Control to Drift: The Dynamics of Corporate Information Infrastructures.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cushman, M., and Klecun, E. (2006). ‘How (Can) Nonusers Engage with Technology:
Bringing in the Digitally Excluded’, in E. Trauth, D. Howcroft, T. Butler, B. Fitzgerald,
and J. DeGross (eds.), Social Inclusion, Societal and Organizational Implications for Infor-
mation Systems: IFiP TC8 WG 8.2 International Working Conference, July 12–15, 2006,
International Federation for Information Processing. New York: Springer, 347–64.
Dhillon, G., and Backhouse, J. (2001). ‘Current Directions in IS Security Research: Towards
Socio-organizational Perspectives’, Information Systems Journal, 11(2): 127–53.
CRITICAL SOCIAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH
221

Doherty, N. F., Coombs, C. R., and Loan-Clarke, J. (2006). ‘A Re-conceptualization of the
Interpretive Flexibility of Information Technologies: Redressing the Balance between the
Social and the Technical’, European Journal of Information Systems, 15(6): 569–82.
Doolin, B. (1998). ‘Information Technology as Disciplinary Technology: Being Critical
in Interpretive Research on Information Systems’, Journal of Information Technology,
13(4): 301–11.
——and McLeod, L. (2005). ‘Towards Critical Interpretivism in IS Research’, in D. Howcroft
and E. Trauth (eds.), Handbook of Critical Information Systems Research: Theory and
Application. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd., 244–71.
Drummond, H., and Hodgson, J. (2003). ‘The Chimpanzees’ Tea Party: A New Metaphor for
Project Managers’, Journal of Information Technology, 18(3): 151–8.
Fairclough, N. (1993). ‘Critical Discourse Analysis and the Marketization of Public Discourse:
The Universities’, Discourse and Society, 4(2): 133–68.
——(1995). Critical Discourse Analysis: The Critical Study of Language. London: Longman.
——(2003). Analysing Discourse: Textual Analysis for Social Research. 1st edn., London:
Routledge.
Falconer, D. (2008). ‘A Demographic and Content Survey of Critical Research in Information
Systems for the Period 2001–2005’, Communications of the AIS, 2008, 22: 547–68.
Feenberg, A. (1993). Critical Theory of Technology. New York: Oxford University Press.
——(1999). Questioning Technology. 1st edn., London: Routledge.
——(2004). ‘Looking Backward, Looking Forward’, in D. Tabachnick and T. Koivukoski
(eds.), Globalization, Technology, and Philosophy. Albany, NY: State University of New
York Press, 93–105.
Frank, U. (2006). Towards a Pluralistic Conception of Research Methods in Information
Systems Research. Duisburg: ICB.
Freeden, M. (2003). Ideology: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gergen, K. (1999). An Invitation to Social Construction. 1st edn., London: Sage Publications
Ltd.
Giddens, A. (1984). The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration.
Cambridge: Polity.
Goode, L. (2005). Jurgen Habermas: Democracy and the Public Sphere. London: Pluto Press.
Gouldner, A. W. (1976). The Dialectic of Ideology and Technology: The Origins, Grammar and
Future of Ideology. London: Macmillan.
Greenhill, A., and Wilson, M. (2006). ‘Haven or Hell? Telework, Flexibility and Family in the
e-Society: A Marxist Analysis’, European Journal of Information Systems, 15(4): 379–88.
Habermas, J. (1983). Moralbewußtsein und kommunikatives Handeln. Frankfurt a.M.:
Suhrkamp.
——(2006a). Theorie des kommunikativen Handelns, 6th edn. Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp.
——(2006b). Die Neue Unübersichtlichkeit: Kleine Politische Schriften V. Frankfurt a.M.:
Suhrkamp.
——(2006c). Erläuterungen zur Diskursethik. 4th edn., Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp.
——(2006d). Faktizität und Geltung: Beiträge zur Diskurstheorie des Rechts und des
demokratischen Rechtsstaates. 3rd edn., Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp.
Harvey, L. (1990). Critical Social Research. London: Unwin Hyman.
Hawkes, D. (2003). Ideology. 2nd edn., London: Routledge.
Heng, M. S. H., and de Moor, A. (2003). ‘From Habermas’s Communicative Theory to
Practice on the Internet’, Information Systems Journal, 13(4): 331–52.
222
BERND STAHL

Hirschheim, R., and Klein, H. K. (1994). ‘Realizing Emancipatory Principles in Information
Systems Development: The Case for ETHICS’, Management Information Systems Quarterly,
18(1): 83–109.
——and Lyytinen, K. (1995). Information Systems Development and Data Modeling: Concep-
tual and Philosophical Foundations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——and Newman, M. (1991). ‘Symbolism and Information Systems Development: Myth,
Metaphor and Magic’, Information Systems Research, 2(1): 29–62.
Howcroft, D., Mitev, N., and Wilson, M. (2004). ‘What We May Learn from the Social
Shaping of Technology Approach’, in J. Mingers and L. P. Willcocks (eds.), Social Theory
and Philosophy for Information Systems. Chichester: Wiley, 329–71.
——and Trauth, E. M. (2004). ‘The Choice of Critical Information Systems Research’, in
B. Kaplan, D. Truex, D. Wastell, A. Wood-Harper, and J. DeGross (eds.), Information
Systems Research: Relevant Theory and Informed Practice. Boston, MA: Springer, 196–211;
retrieved 21 January 2009 from <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/b115738>.
——(2008). ‘The Implications of a Critical Agenda in Gender and IS Research’, Information
Systems Journal, 18(2): 185–202. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2575.2008.00294.x.
Introna, L. D. (1997). Management, Information and Power: A Narrative of the Involved
Manager. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
——(2003). ‘Disciplining Information Systems: Truth and its Regimes’, European Journal of
Information Systems, 12(3): 235–40.
——and Whittaker, L. (2004). ‘Truth, Journals, and Politics: The Case of the MIS Quarterly’,
in B. Kaplan, D. Truex, D. Wastell, A. Wood-Harper, and J. DeGross (eds.), Information
Systems Research: Relevant Theory and Informed Practice. Boston, MA: Springer, 103–20;
retrieved 21 January 2009 from <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/b115738>.
Ives, B., Parks, M. S., Porra, J., and Silva, L. (2004). ‘Phylogeny and Power in the IS Domain: A
Response to Benbasat and Zmud’s Call for Returning to the IT Artifact’, Journal of the
Association for Information Systems, 5(3), 108–24.
Jackson, P., Gharavi, H., and Klobas, J. (2006). ‘Technologies of the Self: Virtual Work and the
Inner Panopticon’, Information Technology and People, 19(3): 219–43. doi: 10.1108/
09593840610689831.
Janson, M., and Cecez-Kecmanovic, D. (2005). ‘Making Sense of e-Commerce as Social
Action’, Information Technology and People, 18(4), 311–42.
Jönsson, S. (1991). ‘Action Research’, in H. Nissen, H. K. Klein, and R. Hirschheim (eds.),
Information Systems Research: Contemporary Approaches and Emergent Traditions.
Amsterdam: North Holland, 371–96.
Kaarst-Brown, M. L., and Robey, D. (1999). ‘More on Myth, Magic and Metaphor’, Informa-
tion Technology and People, 12(2): 192–217.
Kelly, M. (1994). Critique and Power: Recasting the Foucault/Habermas Debate. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Keniston, K. (2001). ‘Language, Power, and Software’, in C. Ess and F. Sudweeks (eds.),
Culture Technology Communication: Towards an Intercultural Global Village, SUNY series
in computer-mediated communication. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press,
283–306.
Kincheloe, J. L., and McLaren, P. (2005). ‘Rethinking Critical Theory and Qualitative Re-
search’, in N. K. Denzin and Y. S. Lincoln (eds.), The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative
Research. 3rd edn., Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 305–42.
CRITICAL SOCIAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH
223

Klang, M. (2003). ‘A Critical Look at the Regulation of Computer Viruses’, International
Journal of Law and Information Technology, 11(2): 162–83.
Klein, H. K. (2009). ‘Critical Social IS Research Today: A Reﬂection of Past Accomplishments
and Current Challenges’, in C. Brooke (ed.), Critical Management Perspectives on Informa-
tion Systems. Oxford: Butterworth Heinemann.
——and Huynh, M. Q. (2004). ‘The Critical Social Theory of Jürgen Habermas and its
Implications for IS Research’, in J. Mingers and L. P. Willcocks (eds.), Social Theory and
Philosophy for Information Systems. Chichester: Wiley, 157–237.
——and Lyytinen, K. (1985). ‘The Poverty of Scientism in Information Systems’, in
E. Mumford, R. Hirschheim, G. Fitzgerald, and T. Wood-Harper (eds.), Research Methods
in Information Systems: IFIP Colloquium Proceedings. Amsterdam: North-Holland
Publishing Co., 131–61.
——and Myers, M. D. (1999). ‘A Set of Principles for Conducting and Evaluating Interpretive
Field Studies in Information Systems’, MIS Quarterly, 23(1): 67–93.
——and Rowe, F. (2008). ‘Marshaling the Professional Experience of Doctoral Students:
A Contribution to the Practical Relevance Debate’, MIS Quarterly, 32(4): 675–86.
Kohli, R., and Kettinger, W. J. (2004). ‘Informating the Clan: Controlling Physicians’ Costs
and Outcome’, MIS Quarterly, 28(3): 363–94.
Kumar, K., van Dissel, H. G., and Bielli, P. (1998). ‘The Merchant of Prato—Revisited: Toward
a Third Rationality of Information Systems’, MIS Quarterly, 22: 199–226.
Kvasny, L., and Richardson, H. (2006). ‘Critical Research in Information Systems: Looking
Forward, Looking Back’, Information Technology and People, 19(3): 196.
——and Trauth, E. M. (2002). ‘The Digital Divide at Work and Home: The Discourse about
Power and Underrepresented Groups in the Information Society’, in E. H. Wynn,
E. A. Whitley, M. D. Myers, and J. I. DeGross (eds.), Global and Organizational Discourse
about Information Technology (International Federation for Information Processing).
New York: Springer, 273–91.
Lapointe, L., and Rivard, S. (2005). ‘A Multilevel Model of Resistance to Information
Technology Implementation’, MIS Quarterly, 29(3): 461–91.
Lee, A. S. (1991). ‘Architecture as a Reference Discipline for MIS’, in H. Nissen, H. K. Klein,
and R. Hirschheim (eds.), Information Systems Research: Contemporary Approaches and
Emergent Traditions. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 573–92.
Lyytinen, K. (1992). ‘Information Systems and Critical Theory’, in M. Alvesson and
H. Willmott (eds.), Critical Management Studies. London: Sage Publications Ltd., 159–80.
——and Hirschheim, R. (1988). ‘Information Systems as Rational Discourse: An Application
of Habermas’ Theory of Communicative Action’, Scandinavian Journal of Management,
4(1/2): 19–30.
——and King, J. L. (2004). ‘Nothing at the Center? Academic Legitimacy in the Information
Systems Field’, Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 5(6): 220–46.
——and Klein, H. K. (1985). ‘The Critical Theory of Jürgen Habermas as a Basis for a
Theory of Information Systems’, in E. Mumford, R. Hirschheim, G. Fitzgerald, and
T. Wood-Harper (eds.), Research Methods in Information Systems: IFIP Colloquium Pro-
ceedings. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 219–36.
McAulay, L., Doherty, N., and Keval, N. (2002). ‘The Stakeholder Dimension in Information
Systems Evaluation’, Journal of Information Technology, 17(4): 241–55.
McGrath, K. (2005). ‘Doing Critical Research in Information Systems: A Case of Theory and
Practice not Informing each other’, Information Systems Journal, 15(2): 85–101.
224
BERND STAHL

McLellan, D. (1995). Ideology. 2nd edn., Buckingham: Open University Press.
McSorley, K. (2003). ‘The Secular Salvation Story of the Digital Divide’, Ethics and Informa-
tion Technology, 5(2): 75–87.
Marcon, T., Chiasson, M., and Gopal, A. (2004). ‘The Crisis of Relevance and the Relevance of
Crisis: Renegotiating Critique in Information Systems Scholarship’, in B. Kaplan, D. Truex,
D. Wastell, A. Wood-Harper, and J. DeGross (eds.), Information Systems Research: Rele-
vant Theory and Informed Practice. Boston, MA: Springer, 143–59; retrieved 21 January
2009, from <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/b115738>.
Marcuse, H. (2002). One-Dimensional Man: Studies in the Ideology of Advanced Industrial
Society. 1st edn., London: Routledge.
Mayasandra, R., Pan, S. L., and Myers, M. D. (2006). ‘Viewing Information Technology
Outsourcing Organizations through a Postcolonial Lens’, in E. Trauth, D. Howcroft,
T. Butler, B. Fitzgerald, and J. DeGross (eds.), Social Inclusion, Societal and Organizational
Implications for Information Systems: IFiP TC8 WG 8.2 International Working Conference,
July 12–15, 2006, International Federation for Information Processing. New York: Springer,
381–96.
Mingers, J., and Walsham, G. (2008). ‘Towards Ethical Information Systems: The Contribution
of Discourse Ethics’, in ICIS 2008 Proceedings. Paris: AIS; retrieved from <http://aisel.aisnet.
org/icis2008/176/>.
Moreno, V. (2004). ‘Realizing Emancipatory Ideals in Phenomenological IS Research’, in
Proceedings of the Tenth Americas Conference on Information Systems. New York: AIS,
4361–7.
Mumford, E. (2003). Redesigning Human Systems. Hershey, PA: IGI Publishing.
——(2006). ‘The Story of Socio-technical Design: Reﬂections on its Successes, Failures and
Potential’, Information Systems Journal, 16(4): 317–42.
——and Henshall, D. (1978). Participative Approach to Computer Systems Design. London:
Associated Business Press.
Myers, M. D. (2004). ‘Hermeneutics in Information Systems Research’, in J. Mingers and
L. P. Willcocks (eds.), Social Theory and Philosophy for Information Systems. Chichester:
Wiley, 103–28.
——and Avison, D. (2002). ‘An Introduction to Qualitative Research in Information Systems’,
in M. D. Myers and D. E. Avison (eds.), Qualitative Research in Information Systems:
A Reader. London: Sage Publications Ltd.
Ngwenyama, O. K. (1991). ‘The Critical Social Theory Approach to Information Systems:
Problems and Challenges’, in H. Nissen, H. K. Klein, and R. Hirschheim (eds.), Information
Systems Research: Contemporary Approaches and Emergent Traditions. Amsterdam: North-
Holland, 267–80.
——and Lee, A. S. (1997). ‘Communication Richness in Electronic Mail: Critical Social
Theory and the Contextuality of Meaning’, MIS Quarterly, 21(2): 145–67.
Oates, B. J. (2004). ‘Action Research: Time to Take a Turn?’, in B. Kaplan, D. Truex,
D. Wastell, A. Wood-Harper, and J. DeGross (eds.), Information Systems Research:
Relevant Theory and Informed Practice. Boston: Springer, 315–33; retrieved 21 January
2009, from <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/b115738>.
Orlikowski, W. J., and Baroudi, J. J. (1991). ‘Studying Information Technology in Organizations:
Research Approaches and Assumptions’, Information Systems Research, 2(1): 1–28.
——and Lacono, C. S. (2001). ‘Research Commentary: Desperately Seeking the “IT” in IT
Research—A Call to Theorizing the IT Artifact’, Information Systems Research, 12(2): 121.
CRITICAL SOCIAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH
225

Parayil, G. (2005). ‘The Digital Divide and Increasing Returns: Contradictions of Informa-
tional Capitalism’, The Information Society, 21(1): 41–51.
Paterson, B. (2007). ‘We Cannot Eat Data: The Need for Computer Ethics to Address the
Cultural and Ecological Impacts of Computing’, in S. Hongladarom and C. Ess (eds.),
Information Technology Ethics: Cultural Perspectives. Hershey, PA: Idea Group Reference,
153–68.
Porra, J. (1999). ‘Colonial Systems’, Information Systems Research, 10(1): 38–69.
Pozzebon, M. (2004). ‘Conducting and Evaluating Critical Interpretive Research: Examining
Criteria as a Key Component in Building a Reserarch Tradition’, in B. Kaplan, D. Truex,
D. Wastell, A. Wood-Harper, and J. DeGross (eds.), Information Systems Research:
Relevant Theory and Informed Practice. Boston, MA: Springer, 275–92; retrieved 21
January 2009 from <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/b115738>.
Probert, S. K. (2004). ‘Adorno: A Critical Theory for IS Research’, in J. Mingers and
L. P. Willcocks (eds.), Social Theory and Philosophy for Information Systems. Chichester:
Wiley, 129–56.
Richardson, H. (2005). ‘Consuming Passion in the “Global Knowledge Economy” ’, in
D. Howcroft and E. Trauth (eds.), Handbook of Critical Information Systems Research:
Theory and Application. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd., 272–98.
——and Robinson, B. (2007). ‘The Mysterious Case of the Missing Paradigm: A Review of
Critical Information Systems Research 1991–2001’, Information Systems Journal, 17(3):
251–70.
Robinson, B. (2006). ‘CYBERSOLIDARITY: Internet-Based Campaigning and Trade Union
Internationalism’, in E. Trauth, D. Howcroft, T. Butler, B. Fitzgerald, and J. DeGross (eds.),
Social Inclusion, Societal and Organizational Implications for Information Systems: IFiP
TC8 WG 8.2 International Working Conference, July 12-15, 2006, International Federation
for Information Processing). New York: Springer, 123–35.
Sandberg, A. (1985). ‘Socio-Technical Design, Trade Union Strategies and Action Research’,
in E. Mumford, R. Hirschheim, G. Fitzgerald, and T. Wood-Harper (eds.), Research
Methods in Information Systems: IFIP Colloquium Proceedings. Amsterdam: North-
Holland, 79–92.
Saravanamuthu, K. (2002a). ‘Information Technology and Ideology’, Journal of Information
Technology, 17: 79–87.
——(2002b). ‘The Political Lacuna in Participatory Systems Design’, Journal of Information
Technology, 17: 185–98.
Sauer, C. (1993). Why Information Systems Fail: A Case Study Approach. Henley-on-Thames:
Alfred Waller Ltd.
Schultze, U., and Leidner, D. E. (2002). ‘Studying Knowledge Management in Information
Systems Research: Discourses and Theoretical Assumptions’, MIS Quarterly, 26(3): 213–42.
Silva, L. O. (2005). ‘Theoretical Approaches for Researching Power and Information Systems:
The Beneﬁt of a Machiavellian View’, in D. Howcroft and E. Trauth (eds.), Handbook of
Critical Information Systems Research: Theory and Application. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar
Publishing Ltd., 47–69.
Siponen, M. T. (2005). ‘Analysis of Modern IS Security Development Approaches: Towards
the Next Generation of Social and Adaptable ISS Methods’, Information and Organization,
15(4): 339–75.
226
BERND STAHL

Stahl, B. C. (2005). ‘The Obituary as Bricolage: The Mann Gulch Disaster and the Problem of
Heroic Rationality’, European Journal of Information Systems, 14(5): 487–91. doi: DOI
10.1057/palgrave.ejis.3000560.
——(2006). ‘Emancipation in Cross-cultural IS Research: The Fine Line between Relativism
and Dictatorship of the Intellectual’, Ethics and Information Technology, 8(3): 97–108.
——(2007a). ‘Privacy and Security as Ideology’, IEEE Technology and Society Magazine,
26(1): 35.
——(2007b). ‘ETHICS, Morality and Critique: An Essay on Enid Mumford’s Socio-technical
Approach’, Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 8(9), 479–90.
——(2007c). ‘Positivism or Non-Positivism—Tertium Non Datur: A Critique of Philosophical
Syncretism in IS Research’, in R. Sharman, R. Kishore, and R. Ramesh (eds.), Ontologies:
A Handbook of Principles, Concepts and Applications in Information Systems. New York:
Springer, 115–42.
——(2008a). Information Systems: Critical Perspectives. Routledge Studies in Organization
and Systems. London: Routledge.
——(2008b). ‘The Ethical Nature of Critical Research in Information Systems’, Information
Systems Journal, 18(2): 137–63.
Stewart, K. J., and Gosain, S. (2006). ‘The Impact of Ideology on Effectiveness in Open Source
Software Development Teams’, MIS Quarterly, 30(2): 291–314.
Thompson, M. (2002). ‘ICT, Power, and Developmental Discourse: A Critical Analysis’, The
Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries, 20: 347.
Thomson, A. (1987). ‘Critical Legal Education in Britain’, in P. Fitzpatrick and A. Hunt (eds.),
Critical Legal Studies. Oxford: Blackwell, 183–97.
Thrift, N. J. (2005). Knowing Capitalism. London: Sage Publications.
Trauth, E. M. (2001). ‘Choosing Qualitative Methods in IS Research: Lessons Learned’, in
E. M. Trauth (ed.), Qualitative Research in IS: Issues and Trends. Hershey, PA: IGI
Publishing, 271–87.
——and Howcroft, D. (2006). ‘Critical Empirical Research in IS: An Example of Gender and
the IT Workforce’, Information Technology and People, 19(3): 272.
Varey, R. J., Wood-Harper, T., and Wood, B. (2002). ‘A Theoretical Review of Management
and Information Systems Using a Critical Communications Theory’, Journal of Information
Technology, 17: 229–39.
Walsham, G. (1992). Interpreting Information Systems in Organizations. Chichester: John
Wiley and Sons.
——(2001). Making a World of Difference: IT in a Global Context. Chichester: John Wiley and
Sons.
——(2005a). ‘Development, Global Futures and IS Research: A Polemic’, Journal of Strategic
Information Systems, 14(1): 5–15.
——(2005b). ‘Learning about Being Critical’, Information Systems Journal, 15(2) : 111–17. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2575.2004.00189.x.
Waring, T. (2004). ‘From Critical Theory into Information Systems Practice: A Case Study of
a Payroll-Personnel System’, in B. Kaplan, D. Truex, D. Wastell, A. Wood-Harper, and
J. DeGross (eds.), Information Systems Research: Relevant Theory and Informed Practice.
Boston: Springer, 555–75; retrieved 21 January 2009 from <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/1-
4020-8095-6_30>.
Watson, H., and Wood-Harper, T. (1996). ‘Deconstruction Contexts in Interpreting Method-
ology’, Journal of Information Technology, 11(1): 59–70. doi: 10.1080/026839696345432.
CRITICAL SOCIAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH
227

Wheeler, D. L. (2005). ‘Gender Matters in the Internet Ages Voices from the Middle East’, in
M. Torseth and C. Ess (eds.), Technology in a Multicultural and Global Society. Trondheim:
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 27–42.
Wiggershaus, R. (1995). The Frankfurt School: Its History, Theory and Political Signiﬁcance.
New York: Polity Press.
Wilson, F. A. (1997). ‘The Truth is Out There: The Search for Emancipatory Principles in
Information Systems Design’, Information Technology and People, 10(3): 187–204. doi:
10.1108/09593849710178207.
Wilson, M. (2002). ‘Rhetoric of Enrollment and Acts of Resistance: Information Technology
as Text’, in E. H. Wynn, E. A. Whitley, M. D. Myers, and J. I. DeGross (eds.), Global and
Organizational Discourse about Information Technology (International Federation for
Information Processing). Dordrecht: Springer, 225–48.
——and Howcroft, D. (2002). ‘Re-conceptualising Failure: Social Shaping Meets IS Research’,
European Journal of Information Systems, 11(4): 236–50.
Zirkle, B., and Staples, W. G. (2005). ‘Electronic Monitoring in the Workplace: Controversies
and Solutions’, in J. Weckert (ed.). Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishing, 79–100.
Zuboff, S. (1988). In the Age of the Smart Machine: The Future of Work and Power. New York:
Basic Books.
228
BERND STAHL

c h a p t e r 9
...............................................................................................
HERMENEUTICS AND
MEANING-MAKING IN
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
...............................................................................................
LUCAS D. INTRONA
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
It is rather surprising that hermeneutics only came to the attention of the Information
Systems (IS) community in the 1980s and early 1990s, mostly through the work of
Richard Boland (1985, 1987, 1991, and 1993). Why is this surprising? It is surprising
because hermeneutics is about the rendering meaningful of a text (object or phenome-
non), which has become obscured or ‘distanced’ in some way, thereby making it no
longer immediately obvious. One would imagine that the transformation of large
amounts of data into measures, reports, etc., by information technology in organiza-
tions, would have constituted such a process of ‘distancing’ and hence call for, or at
least point to, the need for hermeneutics. Moreover, since IS research (in contrast to
computing research) is essentially a social science, in which researchers are always in
some sense ‘distanced’ from the social phenomena they are studying, one would have
imagined that hermeneutics would also have emerged earlier as relevant for IS
researchers.
How can one explain this late arrival, as it were, of hermeneutics? One answer to this
question is the fact that computers were early on rather narrowly framed, or conceived
of, as large calculating machines that were merely automating calculations (transform-
ing one set of numbers into another set of numbers) in a more or less innocent or
obvious way. The use of these numbers for decision making, etc., was not seen as
properly in the domain of the computer experts. As such we see an emphasis on the
design of transformation rules or computer programs (and information deﬁned in
terms of these algorithmic transformations). This separation became increasingly
untenable as the importance of the user and the use-context impinged on the attempt

to objectively deﬁne the ‘right’ set of transformations. In terms of research methodolo-
gy one can also explain the late arrival of hermeneutics by reference to the total
dominance of positivism in the ﬁeld until at least the late 1980s (indeed, which in
some form or another still dominates the ﬁeld). These explanations are undeniably
helpful but they do not yet help us understand why it is that the understanding of
information systems, and research phenomena, in this algorithmic and positivistic
sense was so obviously correct for the early IS research community. How is it that they
did not sense or problematize this ‘distance’ that would have made hermeneutics
emerge as a possible answer? This is where we need to look to understand why
hermeneutics is relevant—one might even suggest unavoidable—for the discipline.
For these early researchers and system developers the numbers on the screen (or in
the computer-generated report) and the numbers on the Likert scale of the research
questionnaire were direct expressions of the world as such. Hence, there was, for them,
never a ‘distance’ to be breached, in some way or another. For them these numbers
were immediately obvious as ‘mirrors of the reality’ (Rorty 1979) they were supposed to
stand for or represent. Differently stated one might say that for them these numbers
were basic ‘facts’ that did not need further elaboration as such—the facts ‘spoke for
themselves’, as it were. Obviously, the way these facts became incorporated into the
organizational decision-making and use context was an issue but this was not seen as
the sort of problem with which these early researchers and the developers ought to
concern themselves as such. This was a matter of politics, a problem for managers and
society more generally. For them the facts were the facts, and how they were valued and
used were located in a different domain, a domain that ought to be clearly separated
form the objective world of facts. In other words for them the fact/value divide was
obvious and they were squarely on the side of facts.
Studies in the use of information by managers as well as an ongoing critique of
positivism by qualitative researchers made this divide or dualism less and less tenable
(Mintzberg 1973; Boland 1985, 1987, 1991, and 1993). For example Boland in his 1993
paper ‘Accounting and the Interpretive Act’ demonstrated that managers use all sorts
of contextual cues and prejudices (or prejudgements) to make sense, and come to
particular understandings, about supposedly objective accounting facts—i.e. that the
facts did not in the end speak for themselves. He showed that the managers made the
facts speak through a creative and subtle process of ongoing ‘meaning making’. In
other words they found themselves indeed in some way ‘distanced’ from the reality
those accounting facts were supposed to mirror or represent; as such they had to
somehow make these facts contemporaneous to their own concerns, situation, and so
forth. More speciﬁcally stated, those facts (by the very virtue of their existence)
implicated a world or context, yet, the implicated world or context, to which the
facts refer, is not given in the facts as such—hence the need for some process of
recontextualization or reorientation. Given these results it was obvious to Boland and
others in the IS research community (such as Winograd and Flores 1986; Lee 1994;
Myers 1995; Introna 1997; and others) that there was a need for an explanation (or
230
LUCAS D. INTRONA

theory) that would account for this recontextualization or ‘meaningful making’ pro-
cess—i.e. it was obvious to them that there was a need for hermeneutics.
Besides the pioneering work of Richard Boland there have been a number of papers
in the IS literature which were more or less located within the hermeneutic tradition.
For example, there is the early work by Winograd and Flores (1986) that made use of a
Heideggerian hermeneutics to study interpretation and how this is situated in mana-
gerial work (especially with regard to speech acts). Myers (1994, 1995) also showed
how hermeneutics can be used to make sense of failed IT implementations as well as
suggesting it as a basis for a more general theory of implementation. Lee (1994) used
hermeneutics to demonstrate the richness and social complexity of e-mail communi-
cation. Introna (1997) showed how managers draw on hermeneutics as an ongoing
meaning making process in dealing with organizational texts. Others, such as Butler
(1998) and Klein and Myers (1999) have made arguments for hermeneutics as an
important part of the interpretive research tradition. Although all of this work is
encouraging, it is still rather disappointing (and surprising) that hermeneutics have
essentially remained on the periphery of the information systems qualitative research
community. Our suggestion would be that this is due to the fact that there is still not a
sufﬁcient understanding and appreciation of the important contribution that herme-
neutics can make, both methodologically and theoretically.
The purpose of this chapter is to introduce IS researchers to the ﬁeld of hermeneu-
tics. Given the scope of this chapter, this must be seen as merely a rough outline sketch,
a useful starting point (or orientation). For a more in-depth treatment of the subject
refer to Palmer (1969), Bleicher (1980), or Schmidt (2006).
This chapter is structured as follows. We start by sketching out a brief history of
hermeneutics. We highlight and acknowledge that hermeneutics, as the art or practice
of interpretation, is an intellectual tradition that goes back to early Greek philosophy—
indeed it has a long and illustrious history. We proceed to indicate that the question of
hermeneutics emerges in moments of ‘breakdown’ or distanciation where the text is
rendered strange or obscure and seemingly in need of interpretation. Next we suggest
that there are different views as to what it is that is being ‘recovered’ in the process of
interpretation. There are those who argue that a text has an objective meaning (the
original author’s intentions) and those that argue that the meaning is situated and
relative. We proceed to propose that the development of hermeneutics can be char-
acterized as a gradual expansion of the nature of the ‘text’ to be interpreted: from the
notion of obscure (often religious) texts through to seemingly obscure texts (such as art
and music) through to everyday life and the self/other as a text; or from a methodology
for interpreting obscure texts to an ontology of social life as fundamentally hermeneu-
tic. In this movement of hermeneutics we put forward the work of three particular
authors: Gadamer, Heidegger, and Ricoeur. We show how they, in their own particular
but related way, understood the signiﬁcance of hermeneutics, its constitutive nature, as
well as what it was supposed to achieve. We close the chapter with some conclusions
and implications for IS researchers—both for their research practice and their objects of
study.
HERMENEUTICS AND MEANING-MAKING IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
231

A VERY BRIEF EARLY HISTORY
OF HERMENEUTICS
..................................................................................................................
Most simply put, hermeneutics is the art or practice of interpretation. The origin of the
word hermeneutics lies in the Greek verb hermeneuein, generally translated as ‘to
interpret’. Palmer (1969: 13) explains that the verb hermeneuein and the noun herme-
neia are derived from the name of the wing-footed messenger-god Hermes, which was
supposed to take the language of gods and make it accessible to mere mortals. Thus,
Hermes is associated with the function of transmuting what is beyond human under-
standing into a form that humans could grasp. The various forms of the word suggest
the process of bringing a text, a thing, a situation, or a concept from unintelligibility to
intelligibility.
The history of the use of the word ‘hermeneutics’ goes back a long way. Indeed, it can
be traced back to the Socratic philosophers. In the course of the Middle Ages and the
Renaissance, hermeneutics emerges in the theological tradition as a branch of biblical
studies. Within this tradition hermeneutics referred to a set of principles/rules used to
interpret the Bible and other sacred texts. Later, the use of the word broadened to refer
to non-biblical texts where the meaning was seen as ‘hidden’ or obscure and therefore
not apparently obvious. To be sure the history of hermeneutics can be characterized, or
understood, by this gradual expansion of the phenomena deemed somehow ‘obscure’
and in need of interpretation as well as the nature of the outcome of such a process of
interpretation. Let us brieﬂy review a few of the ‘early’ fathers of hermeneutics before
we consider some of the more recent work relevant to our purpose.
Schleiermacher (1799–1834) was a philosopher who conceived hermeneutics as
being the science or art of understanding. Schleiermacher contended that the principles
of understanding remain the same, whether the aim is to understand a legal document,
religious scriptures, or a work of literature. As Palmer (1969: 86) points out, for
Schleiermacher understanding as an art has the intention of re-experiencing the mental
processes of the author of the text—the recovery of the authorial intentions. One might
say that it is, in a sense, the reverse of composition, for it starts with the ﬁxed and
ﬁnished expression and goes back to the mental life from which such expressions arose.
The interpretation is the result of two interacting processes of interpretation; the one is
a grammatical (or philological) interpretation of the text and its structure, the other is
in a sense a psychological interpretation of the author and authorial intentions. For
Schleiermacher the psychological interpretation is a reconstruction of the thinking
processes of the author within his or her total life-context.
The philosopher and literary historian Wilhelm Dilthey (1833–1911) saw in herme-
neutics the foundation for the Geisteswissenschaften (humanities and social sciences).
Dilthey believed that the use of the techniques of the natural sciences, or ‘positivistic’
techniques, to study the human sphere was invalid. In opposition to these approaches,
he sought a way to use concrete, historical, and lived experience as the basis for
232
LUCAS D. INTRONA

understanding the Geisteswissenschaften. Although he rejected positivistic techniques,
he still believed the requirement of objectivity to be of paramount importance. In
hermeneutics he saw the methodological basis for understanding the phenomenon of
humankind. As Palmer (1969: 101) explains:
The problem of understanding man [human kind] was for Dilthey one of
recovering a consciousness of the ‘historicity’ of our own existence which is lost
in the static categories of science. We experience life not in the mechanical
ahistorical categories of science but in complex, individual moments of ‘meaning,’
of direct experience of life as a totality and in loving grasp of the particular. These
units of meaning require the context of the past and the horizon of the future
expectations; they are intrinsically temporal and ﬁnite, and they are to be under-
stood in terms of these dimensions that is, historically.
Dilthey believed the key word for human studies was understanding, as opposed to
explaining. Natural sciences, he suggested, must explain nature, human studies on the
other hand must understand humanity in its expression of life, in its creation of
meaning, and in the complete experience of life within a comprehensive historical
context. Human experience, and the understanding thereof, is for Dilthey the basic unit
of meaning in the methodology of human studies. When referring to the concept
‘experience’, Dilthey uses the German word Erlebnis which can be more accurately
translated as ‘immediately lived experience’. Palmer (1969: 107) explains it in the
following manner: ‘In other words, a meaningful experience of a painting, for instance,
may involve many encounters separated by time and still be called an “experience”
(Erlebnis).’ Erlebnis should not be seen as the ‘content’ of a reﬂexive act of conscious-
ness, for then it would be something of which one is conscious. Erlebnis is rather the
ongoing act of experiencing as such; it is the direct contact with life which we call ‘lived
experience’. It is clear from the above that Dilthey saw the ‘text’ to be interpreted as the
Erlebnis or ongoing ‘lived experience’ of human beings as the most concrete connection
with life itself. If one is to succeed in understanding this text, one could make sense of,
or understand, human beings in their human way of being, which is for him the task of
human studies or Geisteswissenschaften. Dilthey’s contribution, focusing on life (via
Erlebnis) as the ‘text’ to be interpreted, prepared the way for Heidegger and Gadamer,
whose views will be discussed in the sections below. However, before we do this it
might be useful to pause and reﬂect on the emergence of the need for interpretation
and the possible outcome (and the status of the outcome) of such an interpretive
process.
On the Need for Meaning Making/Interpretation
Interpretation and ‘breakdown’
Why is interpretation necessary? Maybe, as a ﬁrst step, one could start with a tradi-
tional functionalist model of communication. Put simply, a sender (author) encodes a
HERMENEUTICS AND MEANING-MAKING IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
233

message in symbols, words, or signs to communicate to the receiver something which
the sender feels the receiver ought to know. On receiving this text the receiver must
somehow ‘unlock’ or interpret the symbols, words, or signs so as to understand or
attribute the ‘correct’ meaning to the communicated symbols, words, or signs. If the
message is correctly interpreted we say the message was understood; the concept of
‘meaning’ and ‘correctness’ is purposefully left open at this stage of the discussion. Now
it is obvious to many that this communication process is subject to many sources of
‘disturbance’ that may undermine its success. Some of the sources—which in itself can
be debated—of disturbances could be: a limited set of symbols to communicate an
unlimited set of intentions or meanings. There may not be a word, symbol, or sign
available to which both the sender and receiver would attach the same meaning to
encode a meaning that they wish to communicate; a time lapse between sending and
receiving—the elapsed time may be seconds or even centuries (as is the case in the Bible
or the Koran); a changing (evolving) set of relationships between words, symbols, or
signs and the meanings they refer to; different frames of reference or contexts used by
sender and receiver in the communication process; and so forth.
These disturbances can cause the communication process to ‘break down’ or fail. It is
in such instances that one could argue for the need of some sort of ‘interpretation’
process to correct the ‘failed’ communication process. This seems sensible, yet, it could
also be argued that all communication is inherently ‘failed’ communication and thus in
need of interpretation—i.e. that all communication is disturbed in some way or
another. It is possible to suggest that all these forms of disturbances (listed above)
are more or less present in all forms of communication and signiﬁcation. This is
perhaps why Gadamer (1989: 350) claims that ‘all understanding is [already] interpre-
tation’—we will take up this suggestion below.
How does this interpretation in moments of distancing or breakdown happen? What
is it that is understood? Is understanding always, in some way, the ‘recovery’ of
meaning, or the author’s intentions? In the discussion to follow, the symbols, words,
signs involved in the process will be referred to as the ‘text’ that is in need of
interpretation. The ‘text’ could be a spoken text, a written text, or even an enacted
‘text’ (i.e. actions)—indeed, as was suggested above, the development of hermeneutics
can be seen as a progressive expansion of what is considered ‘text’ in the process of
interpretation. It is obviously true that there are deﬁnite differences involved in the
interpretation of these different types of ‘texts’ (or text analogues as they are often
referred to), yet it is also true, or so argues Gadamer, that there is always a common set
of principles involved, namely hermeneutics.
On the ‘what’ of the ‘recovery’ process
Before thinking through the interpretation ‘process’ it may be useful to step back and
highlight a more fundamental, and often implicit issue. What is the intention, aim, or
object of the interpretive process? Or differently stated: what is it that is recovered?
These questions can be located in a broader context of the ongoing debate between
objectivism and relativism. Objectivism is the basic conviction that there is some more
234
LUCAS D. INTRONA

or less permanent, ahistorical matrix or framework to which one can ultimately appeal
in order to determine the correctness or truth of any claim (to reality). Relativism is the
basic conviction that the determination of the correctness or truth of a claim to reality
is always relative to some conceptual scheme, theoretical framework, paradigm, society,
or culture.
Based on these deﬁnitions, the objectivist would say that when a text is interpreted,
the text will have an intrinsically constant, and to large degree ahistorical meaning—
often described as the original author’s intentions. Thus, when two different persons
from different historical periods attempt to understand the same text, they should both
strive to unlock the objective, inherently there, meaning of the text. An objectivist
would therefore argue that if they understand the text differently, then one or both of
them were unsuccessful in retrieving the objective meaning of the text. Furthermore,
the objectivist would say that an interpretation is correct or true if, and only if, the
meaning that the interpreter attributes to the text is indeed the same, or corresponds to
the meaning, that the author of the text intended in the creation of the text (the
question whether it is possible for the author to ‘know’ what he or she intended will be
discussed again below).
The relativist would contend that the meaning of a text evolves or changes as the
historical, social, political, or moral context in which it is interpreted adapts and
changes. Thus, in different historical contexts, different interpretations can legitimately
be made. For example, Ricoeur (1981), whom we will discuss below, describes inter-
pretation as a process of appropriation (rather than a re-enactment):
The term ‘appropriation’ underlines two additional features [of interpretation]. One
of the aims of all hermeneutics is to struggle against cultural [or any other contextual]
distance. This struggle can be understood in purely temporal terms as a struggle
against secular [linguistic] estrangement, or in more genuinely hermeneutical terms
as a struggle against the estrangement of meaning itself, that is, from the system of
values upon which the text is based. In this sense, interpretation ‘brings together’,
‘equalises’, renders ‘contemporary and similar’, thus genuinely making one’s own
what was initially alien. Above all, the characterisation of interpretation as appropri-
ation is meant to underline the ‘present’ character of interpretation. (p. 159)
Through appropriation the interpreter renders the text relevant to the local, here and
now—i.e. their own life-world. Indeed, the relativist would suggest that this is all that
the interpreter can achieve—i.e. that we are always to a greater or lesser extent
entrapped in our own context (prejudices, beliefs, values, etc.). It must however be
noted that the relativist position does not mean that ‘anything goes’. It merely states
that the meaning is relative to a given context. The interpreter cannot remain ignorant
or naive of this given context. The interpreter always has an obligation to show and
make explicit (account for) how the meaning relates to, and derives from, the given
context in a more or less compelling way.
In the section to follow this objectivist/relativist debate will always be implicitly or
explicitly present in the discussion. Nevertheless, it can be argued that the work of
HERMENEUTICS AND MEANING-MAKING IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
235

Heidegger (1962) and Wittgenstein (1967), which will emerge in the discussion, does
offer some indication on how to overcome this Cartesian-based dualism by showing
that we are always in a relational position with respect to text (object) and context in
which they are each other’s constitutive condition. There is no need (or point) to
privileging the one or the other; they need and deﬁne each other.
From the discussion of the communication process above it seems that interpreta-
tion comes into play in moments of breakdown when the involved actor gets distanced
from the involvement whole–the world shifts from being simply available and self-
evident (ready-to-hand in Heidegger’s (1962) terminology) to being unavailable (present-
at-hand in Heidegger’s (1962)terminology).Insuchmomentsof ‘breakdown’ weareoften
‘startled’ as the world leaps forth in its unavailableness. For example a sign indicates
something unexpected, or a person does something that does not make sense in a given
context. How do we deal with this breakdown? We engage (often implicitly) in an
interpretive process to restore the availability (or sense) of the world.
Interpretation and the ‘Loss’ of Meaning?
Interpreting obscure texts: art and music
In order to think through this notion of the ‘recovery of sense or meaning’ it may
be helpful to start by examining some obvious examples of interpretive situations.
A simple, and seemingly obvious, example is the interpretation of a work of art. When
a painter paints a canvas, she is expressing meaning through the lines, texture, and
colours (or signs) that she uses. If a person is confronted with this work of art, should
one only strive to interpret or decode the meaning that the painter intended? How can
we know what that is? It is such an ambiguous text. Clearly, it would seem limiting to
most to suggest that the only possible meaning that can be construed from the work of
art is that which the creator ‘intended’ at the time of creation. That is, if it is at all
possible for the creator to determine for certain what she ‘intended’ as such. In
interacting with the work the artist must also interpret or ‘discover’ what she intended,
as she is also, in a sense, ‘alienated’ from the work as she completes it.
Is it not possible that the artist merely creates a medium from which many meanings
can evolve or jump to life as each individual interprets the work of art ‘for themselves’?
It seems that even the creator can, at different times, interpret different meanings
emanating from the work of art, and can in doing so, possibly discover more of herself,
or of the subject of the work of art. Often one hears artists say of another’s interpreta-
tion of their work, ‘after hearing this interpretation I think I now have another, or even
a better understanding of what I meant when I created the work of art’, implying that
the artists are in fact discovering more of themselves (or their subjects) through the
interpretations of others. This reaction seems quite intelligible since most of the skills
involved in creating the work of art, as well as the knowledge of the subject matter, are
obviously quite tacit by nature.
236
LUCAS D. INTRONA

Now one may say that this could be true for paintings, since painting is a unique type
of expression where the signs (colour, texture, and lines) are very ambiguous and open
to many different interpretations. However, if one looks at a music score, where the
signs (notes, tempo, and rhythm) are much less ambiguous, there is still talk of
different interpretations of the same piece of music, even talk of a ‘good’ or ‘better’
interpretation of a piece of music. This does not mean that one makes judgements
based on private ‘subjective’ liking but that one does acknowledge that there can be
different, sometimes conﬂicting judgements about the meaning of a piece of music. Did
the composer in creating the music not merely create a spectrum of possibilities, some
of which he may have been consciously aware of and some of which he may not have
been consciously aware of? If this is true, then it is indeed possible that there may not be
one ‘correct’ or ‘right’ interpretation. From this brief discussion of art and music we
might conclude that the interpretation of art and music may not simply be a ‘recovery’
of lost meaning (due to breakdown). Rather, the interpretation of art or music is the
‘making alive’ of the text (art or music) in which the interpreter seems actively involved.
It may however be argued that art and music are obviously tacit or inconspicuous by
nature and therefore requires interpretation, but what about ordinary language? Surely,
everyday language is much more clear-cut than art and music?
Interpretation and everyday language
In language, it seems, that we have a relatively clear-cut relation between the signiﬁer
(sign) and that signiﬁed, the word and that which it ‘stands’ for. Hence, one may want
to argue that interpretation in situations of everyday language should pose much less of
an interpretation problem than would art and music. Wittgenstein (1967) argues that
this view of language is correct yet only for a very primitive language-game. If language
were to function merely as clear and unambiguous pointers to objects (things, situa-
tions) in the world it will almost certainly break down in everyday use. Everyday
language is not primitive–it is rich and subtle. It is ‘constructed’ intrinsically as part of
what we do. Language is a game in which the ‘language and the actions into which it is
woven’ are fused together. To speak a language is not to only to construct and utter
grammatically good sentences. We always speak in a situation as part of doing
whatever we are doing; speaking like doing is always already immersed in the situated
practices in which it functions. We have ‘lawyer-speak’,‘nurse-speak’,‘shopping-speak’,
‘ﬁshing-speak’, and so forth. These are many different ‘forms of life’ each with its own
language-game. There is a way (words and rules for using these words) that the theatre
nurse may use to say ‘prepare this patient for the operating theatre’ in the form of life
called ‘nursing’. It may be something like ‘prep her!’ Everyday language is a bricolage
of the various language games we participate in as part of our everyday going about
in the world.
In speaking, as part of doing in the world, we do not stop to decide the words and
rules for their application. As socialized beings we always already know what to say/do
because we participate in practices (including discursive practice) of the forms of life as
part of our ongoing being-in-the-world. As Wittgenstein (1967) explains: ‘So you are
HERMENEUTICS AND MEANING-MAKING IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
237

saying that human agreements decide what is true and what is false? [when speaking
about something] It is what human beings say that is true and false; and they agree
in the language they use. [But] that is not agreement in opinions but in form of life’.
When, as part of the doing—within a form of life—the language-game breaks down,
language will ‘jump out’ and require clariﬁcation or interpretation. However, it mostly
does not, it mostly simply makes sense and is simply the way we speak inherently
as part of ongoing practice. In situations of breakdown, however, language becomes a
‘text’ in need of interpretation. The important point is that the interpretive act cannot
be severed from the form of life within which the language-game is constituted as a
meaningful way of speaking and doing.
Gadamer (1989: 145), using different terminology, argues the same point:
The difference between a literary work of art and any other text is not so funda-
mental. It is true that there is a difference between the language of poetry and the
language of prose, and again between the language of poetic prose and of ‘scientiﬁc’
prose. These differences can certainly also be considered from the point of view of
literary form. But the essential difference of these various ‘languages’ obviously lies
elsewhere: namely, in the distinction between the claims of truth that each makes.
All literary works have a profound community [forms of life] in that the linguistic
form makes effective the signiﬁcance of the contents to be expressed. In this light,
the understanding of texts by, say, a historian is not so very different from the
experience of art [or a paper in the language of mathematics]. And it is not mere
chance that the concept of literature embraces not only works of literary art, but
everything that has been transmitted in writing.
Taking what is said above and reﬂection on the aim of this chapter it becomes clear
that the individual’s engagement with an information system (as a particular type of
text) is also an instance that requires interpretation. For example, the manager,
considering a production report, is also to a greater or lesser extent ‘distanced’ from
the form of life where the ‘text’ originates (the ‘shop ﬂoor’ as it is commonly referred
to). The ‘facts’ in the report are constructed through the application of processing rules.
As such it becomes disembedded from the form-of-life of the shop ﬂoor and needs to
be re-embedded in the form-of-life of management. The manager must attempt to
recontextualize it from ‘shop ﬂoor-speak’ into ‘management-speak’. This might be
more or less difﬁcult to do. This problem of incommensurability of language-games,
due to their rootedness in particular forms of life, will be a theme that will permeate all
the discussions in some way or another as we proceed. In my opinion it is at the heart
of the problem faced by all information systems in organizations—indeed it is at the
heart of the virtualization process more generally. It is also at the heart of all social
science research, including IS research.
To sum up: we mostly understand our actions and we understand our language
because we already ‘share’ a world, we are always already in it. Interpretation becomes
necessary in moments of breakdown, when as part of speaking and doing this tacit
understanding breaks down. Interpretation is part of ongoing action as much as
speaking is part of ongoing action. They are all rooted in forms of life, in our ongoing
238
LUCAS D. INTRONA

manner of being-in-the-world—we will return to this issue again below. To understand
how this ongoing interpretive process happens we will now turn to three different
authors: Gadamer, Heidegger, and Ricoeur. Each of these authors will take us on a
slightly different path, which would lead to a different understanding of hermeneutics.
Gadamer will emphasize the importance of our rootedness in tradition (our fore-
understanding); Heidegger emphasizes the importance of our emersion in the world
as being that we already understand the world in a particular way; and Ricoeur
emphasizes the need to be critical of exactly that tradition and rootedness in which
we already ﬁnd ourselves when we interpret.
GADAMER AND HERMENEUTIC UNDERSTANDING
..................................................................................................................
In the discussion above, on the interpretive situation, it was argued that interpretation
comes into play when a certain ‘distancing’, ‘ﬁssure’, or ‘breakdown’ occurs. It was
suggested that in interpretive situations such as trying to understand art or music this
distancing seems to be relatively self-evident. It was also argued, with reference to the
work of Wittgenstein on language, that even the meaning of everyday language is not as
self-evident as it seems. Indeed its self-evidence originates in its embeddedness in
everyday forms of life, for those immersed in it, that is. However, when we encounter
the form of life from the outside (as an outsider) then the meaning of the language is
not self-evident at all and might require signiﬁcant amount of interpretation. Now that
we have a sense of the interpretive situation we can turn more speciﬁcally to the idea of
interpretation, and the ‘process’ of interpretation, as articulated by Gadamer (1989)—
see also Wranke (1987) for a good introduction to Gadamer.
Interpretation as the Appropriation of Meaning
For Gadamer a text is a text only to a reader; one is a reader only if a text is being read.
For him there is an I/Other relationship in the act of understanding. In the confronta-
tion of the I and Other there always occurs, to some degree, a fusion of worlds or
horizons. In interpreting a ‘text’ the interpreter (the I) must ‘reroot’ it in the horizon or
world of the author (the Other), yet do this exactly from within the world in which the
interpreter (the I) is already fully immersed in. Since the text is just a series of move-
ments, sounds, or letters of ink on paper it has no intrinsic ‘already there’ context
attached to it. The meaning of a text is therefore, in principle, always incomplete.
Simply put: the text does not ‘speak for itself’. The meaning of the text rather comes
into being or is constituted by the very act of interpretation or understanding itself; by
the different interpreters as they bring to bear their own horizons, points of view, or
forms of life on the text. Gadamer (1989: 146) explains it as follows:
HERMENEUTICS AND MEANING-MAKING IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
239

As we were able to show that the being of the work of art is play which needs to be
perceived by the spectator in order to be completed, so it is universally true of texts
that only in the process of understanding is the dead trace of meaning transformed
back into living meaning. . . . Is this true also of the understanding of any text? Is the
meaning of all texts realised only when they are understood? In other words, does
understanding belong to the meaning of a text just as being heard belongs to the
meaning of music? Understanding must be conceived as part of the process of
coming into being of meaning, in which the signiﬁcance of all statements—those of
art and those of everything else that has been transmitted—is formed and made
complete.
But if every interpreter completes the meaning of the text then the result will be a
very partial and prejudiced understanding of the text. For Gadamer it is important that
we make explicit the role of our fore-understanding and ‘prejudices’ (or prejudgments)
in the interpretive process. The word prejudice here must not be seen in the normally
held negative sense. Gadamer uses it merely to describe the ‘ﬁrst stab’ or initial
understanding or interpretation that the interpreter must necessarily make because
we are always already immersed in our prejudices. This ‘ﬁrst stab’ understanding or
prejudice will, however, become negative if the interpreter does not continually open
herself to the potentiality of new understanding that may emerge. Does this mean that
Gadamer is proclaiming a sort of subjectivism or a relativist approach to understand-
ing? As Bernstein (1983: 125) concludes: ‘For it would seem that if the meaning of a
work of art or text is affected by, or conditioned by, the understanding of its meaning,
then there does not seem to be any meaning that has “objective” integrity, that is
“there” in the work of art or text to be understood.’
This is, however, not the case. What Gadamer is saying is that one can simply not
escape from one’s prejudices (a better translation of the German word Vorurteil that
Gadamer uses would be ‘prejudgment’, i.e. the anticipation of meaning which may or
may not be substantiated by further experience). Gadamer’s point would seem to be
that anything new can only be understood in terms of what one already ‘knows’. The
ﬁrst ‘default’ understanding is based on that which we, as beings already immersed in a
particular world, would tend to imagine—or what one already knows or the tradition
within which one ﬁnds oneself. If the process of understanding stops after the ﬁrst step
then, yes, it is purely subjective. But if one continually opens oneself to the text and
continually re-evaluates one’s understanding against the text, and other interpretations
of the text, then one will be able to render its meaning more ‘complete’. How then will
one know that one is not ‘misunderstanding’ the text? Gadamer (1989) uses the
example of using a word in everyday language. He suggests that one cannot continually
misunderstand the use of a word ‘without its affecting the meaning of the whole, so we
cannot hold blindly to our own fore-meanings [and prejudgements] of the thing if we
would understand the meaning of another.’ In other words the interpretive process is
always situated in a referential whole in which a limited range of meanings will make
sense. What we ought to do, according to Gadamer (1989: 238), is to ‘remain open to
the meaning of the other person or text. But this openness always includes our placing
240
LUCAS D. INTRONA

the other meaning in a relation with the whole of our own meanings or ourselves in
relation to it. . . . Thus there is a criterion here also. The hermeneutical task becomes
automatically a questioning of things and is always in part determined by this.’ The
hermeneutical task therefore is a delicate process of using one’s own bias (fore-
meanings) yet staying open for the possibility that the text may challenge these very
same fore-meanings that were the stepping stone for entering it in the ﬁrst place. That is
why ‘the hermeneutically trained mind must be sensitive to the text’s quality and
newness. But this kind of sensitivity involves neither “neutrality” in the matter of the
object, nor the extinction of one’s self, but rather the conscious assimilation of one’s own
fore-meanings and prejudices—an ongoing fusion of horizons. The important thing is
to be aware of one’s own bias, so that the text may present itself in all its newness and
thus be able to assert its own truth against one’s own fore-meanings [prejudices].’
The above description by Gadamer suggests that there is some sort of iterative process
involved in understanding. When one is confronted with a text, the ﬁrst iteration starts
with our ‘fore-meanings’ and prejudices. These ‘fore-meanings’ are continually re-
evaluated in terms of the meanings that come to the fore in the text. In these iterations,
the meaning of the text becomes more and more ‘complete’ through the iterative process
of understanding. This iterative process is known as the hermeneutic circle.
The Hermeneutic Circle
The hermeneutic circle is one of the most important conceptual contributions of
hermeneutics. The hermeneutic circle expresses the principle that understanding is
situated in the relation between the part and the whole; that one must understand the
parts from the whole and the whole from the parts. Differently stated, there is an
ongoing co-constitutive relation between the parts and the whole. Gadamer (1989: 259)
explains it as follows: ‘The anticipation of meaning in which the whole is envisaged
becomes explicit understanding in that the parts, that are determined by the whole,
themselves also determine this whole.’ The hermeneutic circle is not a ‘vicious’ or a
subjective circle. It is neither formal nor necessarily ‘methodological’; it is rather a
necessary condition for anything to make sense at all. We always ﬁnd ourselves already
in the hermeneutic circle where the whole (horizon of signiﬁcance) is already ‘pro-
jected’ onto the text (part), based on the form of life within which one is situated—i.e.
the ‘living context’ from which one seeks to understand. In the hermeneutic circle, one
continually adjusts one’s point of view, perspective, or horizon, always within one’s
own tradition and situation, in an effort to fuse these points of view, perspectives, or
horizons in order to achieve, or rather, maintain understanding. Through the ongoing
fusion of horizons the meaning of the text, and the form of life, is maintained and kept
alive. The hermeneutic circle is acknowledged by many diverse authors such as Kuhn
(1977: p. xii) in his effort to understand the physics of Aristotle and Feyerabend (1993:
251) in describing what he called the ‘anthropological method’.
HERMENEUTICS AND MEANING-MAKING IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
241

The hermeneutic circle is, in a sense, an evolutionary process of understanding. It
starts with something known and evolves to something new, or previously unknown.
In the movement to and fro the ‘harmony of all the details with the whole is the
criterion of correct understanding. The failure to achieve this harmony means the
understanding has failed’ (Gadamer 1989: 259). Using the notion of the hermeneutic
circle one can understand the importance of multiple perspectives—or the ongoing
fusion of horizons as Gadamer would say. The ﬁrst perspective (or horizon) is based on
one’s current understanding or prejudices. The interpretation process will try and
render it coherent with the whole within which the interpretive process is situated. If
this is not possible the perspective (or horizon) must be ‘relocated’ for a different
understanding to emerge. The new horizon/perspective is again projected onto the text
from which emerges a new meaning and thus an expansion of the possible under-
standing of the text. This process of repeated and reiterated projection of perspectives/
horizons onto the text (and their ongoing fusion) will expand the interpreter’s under-
standing of the text. However, this process, as explained above, requires an ongoing
openness to the possibilities thrown up by the text and the context. The more the
process is reiterated (the fusion of horizons achieved), the more comprehensible the
text becomes and the ‘greater’ the interpreter’s understanding of the text becomes.
However, if the process is prematurely terminated (the interpreter closes herself to the
possibilities of the text), then the interpretation and thus the understanding of the text
is incomplete and to a degree subjective (one might say prejudged or prejudiced, or even
dogmatic). It is clear thatsubjectivity itself is not a choice. It is in reality always a given. The
degree of subjectivity is a choice. Subjectivity is an essential ingredient in the interpretive
process. It is the interpreter’s task to use it but also to struggle against and beyond it, to
the never-ending horizon of alternative interpretations (understanding). One might
describe this process as an ongoing dialogue between the interpreter and the text.
If the notion of the hermeneutic circle (and the fusion of horizons) is applied to the
dialogical situation, the power of dialogue clearly emerges. In the above description, the
responsibility of projecting the new perspective onto the text lies with the interpreter.
In a dialogue, each partner in the dialogue injects a new perspective/horizon which
locates both participants in a hermeneutical circle. Dialogue essentially ensues when
two interlocutors from different perspectives engage to understand (or create) a
common text by means of the hermeneutical circle. If successful, the conclusion of
the dialogue should take the participants beyond their original points of view in the
sense that these are either transformed, consolidated, or questioned by the encounter
with the Other (or alternative perspectives) put forward by the interlocutor.
Interpretation and Erlebnis
Erlebnis (lived experience) is a very important concept for Gadamer. Hegel (in Gadamer
1989: 318) describes lived experience as follows: ‘The principle of experience contains
242
LUCAS D. INTRONA

the inﬁnitely important element that in order to accept a content as true, the man himself
must be present or, more precisely, he must ﬁnd the content in unity and combined with
the certainty of himself.’ Thus, lived experience is what grounds and in a sense guaran-
tees the interpretive process.
Erlebnis is not merely an experience such as knowing or remembering that ‘some-
thing has happened to me sometime and somewhere’—a sort of cluster of facts ordered
in time and space that I am able to recall. Erlebnis has a ‘condensing, intensifying
meaning. If something is called or considered an Erlebnis, that means it is rounded into
the unity of a signiﬁcant whole . . . Every experience is taken out of the continuity of life
and at the same time related to the whole of one’s life. . . . Because it is itself within the
whole of life, the whole of life is present in it too’ (Gadamer: 1989, 66–9, emphasis
added). Erlebnis is in a sense the whole in which the part, being interpreted, is already
signiﬁcant.
Very important to Erlebnis is the ongoing openness of the interpreter to other
possibilities. To truly live experience, the interpreter cannot be dogmatic. Dogmatism
forecloses the ongoing possibility of experience to be experienced as such. Thus, central
to lived experience is a deﬁnite ‘not-ness’ character. One can only experience some-
thing if it is not as one assumed it would be. This ‘not-ness’ opens one to the possibility
of experiencing. Experience can be unsettling, as an element of disillusionment is
always to a lesser or greater degree involved. As Aeschylus, a Greek tragedian says,
‘through suffering [we] learn’. Experience puts one face to face with the reality of the
ﬁniteness of human existence for it is in experience that the limits of expectation are
shown up.
Ongoing lived experience (Erlebnis) is the signiﬁcant whole—the form of life, the
involvement whole—that provides the ongoing horizon for interpretation to be possi-
ble at all. Hence, for Gadamer, every hermeneutic interpretation is always rooted in an
already signiﬁcant situated whole, life as given in ongoing lived experience.
HEIDEGGER, UNDERSTANDING,
AND BEING-IN-THE-WORLD
..................................................................................................................
In discussing Gadamer’s notion of hermeneutic understanding above it was clear that
interpretation is seen as a process of appropriation (not recovery) of meaning in the
situation as part of ongoing lived experience. The appropriation becomes necessary in
moments of breakdown when the interpreter is somehow distanced or alienated from
the world (text). Interpretation is the ‘way’ to dissolve this distance and render the text
‘alive’ or meaningful again—i.e. makes it available in the ongoing world of situated
practice. To put it simply: for Gadamer (1989: 389) understanding occurs as an integral
part of the ongoing interpretive process or practice. For Gadamer this understanding is
never complete, i.e. the interpreter can never leave the hermeneutic circle. Heidegger
HERMENEUTICS AND MEANING-MAKING IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
243

(1962) revolutionized the concept of ‘understanding’ by moving it from the end of the
hermeneutic process to the beginning. According to him we do not understand because
we have made an interpretation, rather understanding is a necessary condition for
interpretation to happen at all. The aim of the interpretive process is, for Heidegger, to
bring to light the interpreter’s already understood prior understanding.
From Heidegger’s perspective the notion of ‘distance’—as present in Gadamer’s
work—has the potential to reinstate the Cartesian dualism, of the ‘removed’ observer.
For Heidegger understanding is a primordial existential condition of the human being
immersed in the world (the human way of being which he refers to as Dasein—which
literally means the ‘there’ or place of being). Understanding is not something we come
to by dissolving the distance. To be in the world means to always already understand
such a world. Our involvement in the world always already assumes such a prior
understanding. As Kockelmans (1972: 16) explains: ‘Man’s interpretation does not
throw a meaning over some “naked” thing that is present-at-hand, nor does it place a
value on it. The intramundane thing that is encountered as such in the original
understanding, which is characteristic of man’s concernful dealing with things, already
possesses a reference that is implicitly contained in man’s co-understanding of the
world and thus can be articulated by interpretation.’ If interpretation does not lead to
or restore understanding, what is the function of interpretation then? Before trying to
answer this question we need to articulate more precisely Heidegger’s notion of
understanding.
Understanding as Already Being Projected
For Heidegger, as stated above, understanding is a primordial existential structural
feature of human (or Dasein’s) existence; ‘to exist is essentially, even if not only, to
understand’ (Heidegger 1982: 276). Differently stated: understanding is a necessary (or
transcendental) condition for a human being to be ‘a human being’. This primordial
understanding does not imply some cognitive content (picture or idea in our heads)
about something or some situation, or to grasp it thematically, but rather, it refers to
the necessary mode of being which is characteristic of humans as beings-in-the-world.
In this original understanding Dasein manifests itself as ‘being able to’, as a being that
always already has a range of possibilities to be. To understand a situation is to already
have a particular comportment towards the possibilities present within this situated
involvement whole. Hence, understanding has the existential structure of ‘projection’
(Heidegger 1962: 184–5). As projection, understanding makes the possibilities within
the referential whole ‘stand out’ as simply meaningfully available, simply present to be
enacted. In coping in the world Dasein continually presses forth into these possibilities
and in so doing creates leeway for movement (or room for manoeuvring as Dreyfus
(1991) puts it). This leeway for movement is the space of possibilities, the clearing that
both opens up, and limits, what obviously makes sense to do. Let us consider an
244
LUCAS D. INTRONA

example. When I walk into the lecture theatre (as a lecturer) I do not encounter the
room as strange (i.e. in need of interpretation). The room is mostly familiar and the
sort of activities that it makes sense to do is immediately obvious and self-evident for
me as a lecturer. Thus I, as a lecturer, am already familiar with (i.e. understand)
lecturing, lecture theatres, and the sort of meaningful things that it makes sense to
do there. Indeed, I am already comported to, and in, this evolvement whole in a
particular way since I am not simply randomly entering the room, I am entering in
order to give a lecture. In this comportment the computer and the projector already
make sense because I already have my PowerPoint presentation on a memory stick, and
so forth. I, as a lecturer, entering the room am already projected into the possibilities
that are suggested there. They already make sense to me. I already understand them; as
such I simply go about doing what lecturers do when they enter a lecture theatre in
order to teach. However, being thrown into-the-world means that Dasein is also always
limited to a space of sensible possibilities which it already understands or is projected
onto, and is necessarily tied into the involvement whole that it is already involved in.
This space of possibilities, this room for manoeuvre, Dasein ‘knows’ without reﬂection
for it is the commonsense background of concerned or engaged circumspection
implied in being involved in the world (of lecturing for example). What then is the
meaning of interpretation in this context?
Understanding and Interpretation
In interpretation understanding ‘does not become something different. It becomes
itself’ (Heidegger 1962: 188). We can only interpret that which we already understand.
In interpretation we do not acquire additional information about what is already
understood, rather interpretation is the ‘working-out of possibilities [already] projected
in understanding’ (Heidegger 1962: 189). In understanding we already have a primor-
dial sense or reference in our already situated form of life—an already there network of
‘for-the-sake-of-which’s’ or an already there network of ‘in-order-to’s’ about ourselves,
and our ‘tools’, in the referential whole. However, this primordial understanding can be
further interpreted in such a way that the simply available ready-at-hand world comes
explicitly into that sight which understands it. This is accomplished by the ‘taking
apart’, as it were, of the ‘in-order-to’s’ that is already circumspectively understood, and
concern ourselves with that which becomes visible through this process. This ‘in-order-
to’ that is now explicitly understood has the structure of something as something—as a
thing for doing this or that. For example, as a projector for projecting images, in-order-
to explain something. Interpretation, therefore, is the laying out, the making explicit, as
this or that, of something already understood in its ‘in-order-to’ as this or that. The ‘as’
structure constitutes the interpretation; it makes up the structure of the explicitness of
something that is understood (Heidegger 1962: 189). If asked ‘what is this?’, we can
answer (explain or interpret), it is something that functions as this or that—we ‘see’ it as
HERMENEUTICS AND MEANING-MAKING IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
245

an X (as a chair or as a table or as a pointer) in-order-to do something, or be in a certain
way within that involvement whole. This is why Heidegger argues that in interpretation
understanding does not become something else; it becomes itself; it makes explicit its
own possibilities to be as this or that.
Let me try and illustrate these notions through a very simple example of a computer
‘mouse’. I understand the ‘mouse’ in using it to point at various places on the screen in-
order-to open ﬁles, open applications, select menu options, print, select text, etc.; in-
order-to write letters, maintain my disk space, do Internet searches, etc.; for-the-sake-
of getting my work done; for-the-sake-of being a good academic. In understanding the
‘mouse’ I already ‘know’ the space of possibilities that it makes sense to use it for, since
I am involved in the referential whole (doing things on my computer) of which it is an
‘in-order-to’. I know that I am ‘able-to’ use it to point and execute. Yet, I may not have
made this explicit, although it is in principle always possible. If someone were to point
at the mouse on my table and say, ‘What is this?’, I might explain (interpret) by
responding, ‘It is a something normally used as a pointing thing; to point at menus,
icons, etc. to activate them in order to get things done, like opening ﬁles, or selecting
text.’ In this explanation I have made explicit what I already knew, not as an idea in my
head, but as an ‘in-order-to’ that is always already embedded in an involvement whole
that makes it signiﬁcant, and which I may call ‘working on my computer’.
Meaning and Meaningful
According to the objectivist model of communication words, symbols, signs, texts, etc.
‘have’ a meaning as such. In the communication process this meaning may ‘get lost’.
The purpose of the interpretation process is to ‘recover’ this meaning. When this
recovery has happened, we say that we now understand. Thus, in this way of thinking
understanding is merely a matter of linking the signiﬁers (words or pointers) to the
signiﬁed (things or ideas of things) in a way commensurate to that of the speaker or
sender (the author). Interpretation in this context would be to correct any muddled
signiﬁer/signiﬁed relationships. This notion of understanding is also implied when we
say the computer ‘understands’ my input—i.e. the computer performed the action
I intended it to perform when I issued the command. The computer established the
same relationship between the signiﬁer (the command) and the signiﬁed (the action to
be performed) that I, the sender, had in mind when I ‘talked’ to it through the medium
of the keyboard. Wittgenstein (1967), as was suggested above, argues that this view of
understanding may be correct in a limited sense. For him, however, it is an example of a
very primitive language-game; one that is not very useful for thinking about the
complexities of everyday language. The idea that words or signs have stable and
persisting associations linked to them is simply too static a view of everyday language.
The meaning of a sign is not a ‘meaning-body, an entity which determines its use.
A sign becomes meaningful not through being associated with an object, but rather
246
LUCAS D. INTRONA

through having a rule-governed use’ (Wittgenstein 1967: 432). The sign does not have
an intrinsic meaning, the sign by itself is ‘dead’: ‘What gives it life?—In use it is alive’
(Wittgenstein 1967: 431–2). One might suggest that his argument is that we do not use
language to convey meaning as such. We do not have an idea and then convey it by
carefully selecting the words that best represent it. We use language as part of doing.
Using language and doing things is like using a tool and doing things. It does not make
much sense to talk about using a tool without thinking about doing something. What
I ‘mean’ by an utterance is linked to a language-game (a set of signs and rules for
applying them), which is linked to a form of life (a practical everyday doing of
something). Therefore, ‘a sign is meaningful depends on whether there is an established
use [in a language-game], whether it can be employed to perform meaningful linguistic
acts [in a form of life]; what meaning it has depends on how it can be used. The
meaning of a word is its use in the language’ (Wittgenstein 1967: 43). I understand the
meaning of a word, sign, text because I can use it appropriately as part of some doing.
Heidegger would agree with Wittgenstein’s analysis but he would go one step
further. He argues that the primordial origin of our ‘seeing’ anything as meaningful
is our presence in the world. Meaningfulness ‘is ﬁrst of all a mode of presence in virtue
of which every entity of the world is discovered’. Meaning is not something we ‘inject’
into a meaningless world. Since our existential structure is that of being-in, the
referential whole (the worldhood of world) is always already meaningful. We uncover
this meaning as an implicit part of our ongoing engagement, or skilful coping, in the
world as beings that are always already projected in the world we are already in. Thus
words, signs do not ‘have’ meaning. They are only meaningful as part of ongoing
activity in the referential whole that is my world.
This notion of meaning may best be made explicit through the computer mouse
example. The words ‘mouse’ and ‘point’ do not ‘have’ meanings. If you were to say
‘point the mouse to the “open ﬁle” icon’ then this statement will only mean something
as part of ‘working on my computer’ in-order-to get something done. The meaning is
not that I can assign an object to the word ‘mouse’ and an action to the word ‘point’,
etc. The meaning is that there is signiﬁcance in the request to ‘point the mouse and
click on that ﬁle’ in this form of life called working together on a computer in order to
get something done. In this involvement whole the meaning of the request is already
‘present’. It is already understood as that which it is for those engaged in the world of
working together on a computer.
A criticism that can be levelled at both Gadamer and Heidegger is that they have an
uncritical hermeneutics. Gadamer puts a lot of emphasis in the importance of preju-
dice, tradition, and the fusion of horizons without making it clear that those traditions
may indeed be normatively problematic. Heidegger likewise provides a fascinating
account of how our being-in-the-world grounds our understanding and interpretation
without making it clear that the self-evidentness of such immersion in the world might
be problematic in as much as it might limit our ability to reﬂect and be critical of it. For
a critical hermeneutics we need to turn to the work of Ricoeur (and indeed further on
to the work of Michel Foucault).
HERMENEUTICS AND MEANING-MAKING IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
247

RICOEUR AND THE HERMENEUTICS
OF SUSPICION
..................................................................................................................
For Ricoeur (1970, 1976) the recovery or appropriation of the meaning of the text is not
an end point it is rather just the beginning. Ricoeur argues that in the text there is
always a surplus of meaning that refers (mostly unintentionally) not only to what the
author intended to say (the task of the hermeneutics of the faith) but also to the
prejudices, traditions, and world-views that are drawn upon and assumed by the author
in constructing the text (the task of the hermeneutics of suspicion). Thus, he argues
that if meaning is grounded in a world then that world is also communicated as an
implicit part of the coming into being of the text.
Ricoeur gives an account of this ‘double meaning’ by drawing on the notion of the
metaphor. Ricoeur (1976) believes that intrinsic to metaphor is both an ‘is like’ element
and an ‘is not’ element. The ‘is like’ element is used to convey the obvious meaning of
the metaphor, while the ‘is not’ element indicates that the referent of the metaphor is
not to be found in its literal expression. This tension between the ‘is’ and ‘is not’
implicates or projects ‘a world in front of the text’ which is the true metaphorical
referent. It is therefore as important to understand the world the text assumes or
projects for its meaning as it is to understand the text as such. Indeed, according to him,
these two levels of interpretation cannot be separated. Thus, a hermeneutics of
suspicion refers to the method of interpreting texts cautiously, aware that the sur-
face-level meaning of a text may be an unconscious effort to conceal the political
interests which beneﬁt some at the expense of others. The task of the hermeneutics of
suspicion is to strip off the surface to expose those interests.
According to Ricoeur interpretation therefore always involves at least a double
reading. We must ﬁrst read the text in the hermeneutics of faith which calls for the
suspension of disbelief by the reader in which the text becomes the world which we
inhabit when reading it. As such the reading tries to understand the text in its own
terms. The hermeneutics of faith must then be followed by a hermeneutics of suspicion
where the world assumed by the text is made explicit in order to reveal or explain the
relationships of power, conﬂicts, and interests implicated in it. As Ricoeur (1970: 27)
explains: ‘Hermeneutics seems to me to be animated by this double motivation:
willingness to suspect, willingness to listen; vow of rigor, vow of obedience.’ Thus,
for Ricoeur understanding and explaining are two essential dialectical moves in the
process of interpretation. Understanding without explanation is blind and explanation
without understanding is empty. Like Ricoeur, Habermas (1970) argues that texts are
derived from social relations of power and domination, and these oppressive aspects
are implicitly concealed in texts. He proposes dialogical engagement or a discourse
ethics to ‘surface’ these implicit or explicit attempts to enforce a particular world onto
the reader.
248
LUCAS D. INTRONA

MEANING AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS:
SOME CONCLUSIONS
..................................................................................................................
The very brief introduction to hermeneutics we have outlined above provides us with
plenty of intellectual resources to take into account when thinking about information
systems in organizations, as well as the researching of these phenomena in practice. We
will outline some of these potential lines of thought as indicative and suggestive of the
possibilities that hermeneutics might have for IS. We hope this will be enough to
motivate the reader to take a serious interest in hermeneutics.
Let us take as an example the claim of Gadamer that there is an essential I/Other
relationship in the act of interpretation and understanding. One can quickly gloss over
this somewhat abstract claim without appreciating the profound implications of it.
What Gadamer is claiming is that we are always in a position of essential strangeness
(or otherness) when confronted with a text (or a text analogue—i.e. spoken words or
actions). According to him there is always a level of ‘otherness’ in the text/text analogue
that simply cannot be overcome, irrespective of how many times we go through the
hermeneutic circle. In other words there is ultimately no frame of reference, context,
concept, idea, or theory that will render this otherness comprehensible—interpretation
meets its limit in the otherness of the other. This of course is not a weakness this is
exactly the vital strength that sustains the ongoing dialogical movement of interpre-
tation.
This essential strangeness/otherness is particularly important when one thinks of
Giddens’s (1984: 284) notion of the double hermeneutic—that is to say his claim that
social scientists construct interpretations of subjects’ texts (or text analogues) who have
already constructed interpretations of themselves as they try to account for, or make
sense of, their own practices. In other words it is not only the social scientists that are in
some sense ‘distanced’ from the social practices that they are studying, the subjects
themselves (and their practices) are not obviously transparent to themselves either. As
subjects in the world we are continually trying to interpret and make sense of
ourselves—we are also strangers or ‘other’ to ourselves, forever struggling against
ongoing estrangement. Thus, the assumption that the actors involved in the practices
self-evidently ‘know the facts’ can be questioned. Clearly, as competent actors they are
able to produce an interpretation of themselves and the world as they encounter it. But
in this interpretation or ‘meaning making’ process they are also struggling against an
essential estrangement which they ultimately cannot overcome. Moreover, as with any
act of interpretation, they will tend to draw upon their own prejudices (or prejudge-
ments) in constructing these texts (or text analogues). As such the dialogical movement
of the hermeneutic circle is essential in making these prejudices visible so that the
actors may also potentially move beyond their own interpretations of themselves. In
addition, in struggling to make sense of themselves the social actors also often adopt
the interpretations of social scientist, of their practices, in accounting for those
HERMENEUTICS AND MEANING-MAKING IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
249

practices (just recall all the use of management-speak by social actors in organizations
such as resistance to change, strategizing, leadership, innovating, and so forth). In this
dialogical movement the question of whose (or which) text/account ought to be
privileged is not a trivial question at all. This is not to say that every interpretation is
equally legitimate (a subjectivist claim). It is rather to say that the validity of an account
must be subject to an ongoing dialogical hermeneutic which continually evaluates it
against the referential whole within which it is claimed to be valid.
For Heidegger human existence is fundamentally hermeneutic. Skilled and compe-
tent social actors know and understand the world in which they are involved. As
already projected beings-in-the-world their possibilities for action (for being what they
are as businessmen, teachers, carpenters, etc.) are immediately available to them in
their world. For them the world mostly makes sense and is obvious and available, or
ready-to-hand as Heidegger will say. Thus, as they go about their daily lives this
available world tends not to show up as problematic or needing explaining. Indeed if
asked to explain this world they would also need to enter into an interpretive herme-
neutic process. In making sense of their own actions they also battle against a certain
level of estrangement. In constructing their accounts, explanations, and the like, their
own actions, behaviours, or practices are not simply an ‘open book’ that they can
merely read out aloud. Accounting for their actions requires a different comportment
to doing it. It is often only in ‘breakdowns’ when the actions or practices are suspended,
and the actor can ‘step back’ (when the world becomes present-at-hand in Heidegger’s
terms) that such accounts or explanations can be produced as a hermeneutic achieve-
ment. In this hermeneutic process the social actor may attempt to offer alternative
formulations or expressions of what (and why) things are the way they are. In these
efforts of ‘trying out’ different expression or formulations the actor will inevitably feel
more or less satisﬁed with the degree to which the expressions (accounts or explana-
tions) capture the actuality of their way of being. In other words there always tends to
be a sense in which there is an otherness (even to themselves) that they can never quite
capture; something left out that always seems to require further elaboration and
explanation—something extraordinary that is never quite graspable. It seems that
there are always elements of our experience that defy our accounts and explanations
of them. In trying to deal with this otherness they face the same conditions that any
interpretive process has to deal with. They would tend to make use of their taken-for-
granted assumptions, prejudices, and the like. They would have to go through multiple
iterations, continually evaluating their expressions against the coherency of their own
lived experience (Erlebnis). Thus, they require an ongoing hermeneutic dialogue
grounded in lived experience, but which always acknowledges its own situatedness
and incompleteness. This is true for researchers as well as organizational actors. The
subjects of our research are struggling with their own otherness as much as we are
struggling to make sense of them and their practices. Such an ongoing hermeneutic
dialogue is fundamental to ongoing human existence. It is not only something that we
are engaged in for time to time, it is the way we are—that is why Heidegger claims that
we are fundamentally hermeneutic beings (it is an ontological claim). It is worth
250
LUCAS D. INTRONA

remembering that all accounting systems (including computerized information sys-
tems, reports, Ph.D. theses, etc.) embody an essential otherness that deﬁes explication
and explanation. In ongoing everyday activity organizational actors, through ongoing
hermeneutic dialogue, continually struggle to account for themselves (to themselves
and to others).
Ricoeur reminds us that in the interpretation of texts (or text analogues) there is
always the obligation to do a ‘double reading’. We must ﬁrst read the text (or text
analogue) in the hermeneutics of faith (or one might also say hermeneutics of ﬁdelity).
We must attempt to take the text (or text analogue) in its own terms, from its own
perspective or point of view. We must suspend, to the degree that it is possible, our own
prejudices and try and imagine why the text is the way it is. What are the conditions of
possibility for a text to express what it expresses in the way that it expresses it? We must
however, also immediately, engage in the hermeneutics of suspicion where the taken-
for-granted world assumed by the text for its meaning is made explicit in order to
reveal the assumptions, prejudices, relationships of power, conﬂicts, and interests
implicated in it. Without the hermeneutics of suspicion the interpretation will be
naive and without the hermeneutics of faith the interpretation will be cynical. Naivety
and cynicism are short cuts that try to avoid the hard and truly difﬁcult labour of
double reading required for a vital hermeneutics. We can easily see the implications for
researchers and organizational actors of this requirement for an ongoing double
reading. Maintaining the simultaneity of faith/ﬁdelity and suspicion is an ongoing
struggle in the dialogical movement of interpretation.
We have now outlined a few conclusions and implications of hermeneutics for
Information Systems researchers and organizational practices that they study. These
are merely indicative and tentative. Nevertheless, it is hoped that they will inspire
researchers in the ﬁeld to make the effort to engage with hermeneutics as an important
and valuable intellectual tradition.
REFERENCES
Bernstein, R. J. (1983). Beyond Objectivism and Relativism: Science, Hermeneutics and Praxis.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Bleicher, J. (1980). Contemporary Hermeneutics: Hermeneutics as Method, Philosophy and
Critique. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Boland, R. J. (1985). ‘Phenomenology: A Preferred Approach to Research on Information
Systems’, in E. Mumford, R. Hirschheim, G. Fitzgerald, and A. T. Wood-Harper (eds.),
Research Methods in Information Systems. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 193–201.
—— (1987). ‘The In-formation of Information Systems’, in R. J. Boland and R. A. Hirschheim
(eds.), Critical Issues in Information Systems Research. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 363–94.
——(1991). ‘Information System Use as a Hermeneutic Process’, in H.-E. Nissen, H. K. Klein,
and R. A. Hirschheim (eds.), Information Systems Research: Contemporary Approaches and
Emergent Traditions. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 439–64.
HERMENEUTICS AND MEANING-MAKING IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
251

Boland, R. J. (1993). ‘Accounting and the Interpretive Act’, Accounting, Organisations and
Society, 18(2/3): 125–46.
Butler, T. (1998). ‘Towards a Hermeneutic Method for Interpretive Research in Information
Systems’, Journal of Information Technology, 13: 285–300.
Dreyfus, H. (1991). Being-in-the-World: A Commentary on Heidegger’s Being and Time,
Division I. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Feyerabend, P. (1993). Against Method. 3rd edn., London: Verso.
Gadamer, H.-G. (1989). Truth and Method. 2nd rev. edn. trans. and rev. J. Weinsheimer and
D. G. Marshall. London: Sheed & Ward.
Giddens, A. (1984). The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration.
Cambridge: Polity.
Habermas, J. (1985 [1970]). ‘Hermeneutics and the Social Sciences’, in K. Mueller-Vollmer
(ed.), The Hermeneutics Reader. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 293–319.
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and Time. Oxford: Blackwell.
—— (1982). The Basic Problems of Phenomenology. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Introna, L. D. (1997). Management, Information and Power. London: Macmillan.
Klein, H. K., and Myers, M. D. (1999). ‘A Set of Principles for Conducting and Evaluating
Interpretive Field Studies in Information Systems’, MIS Quarterly, 23(1): 67–94.
Kockelmans, J. J. (1972). On Heidegger and Language. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University
Press.
Kuhn, T. S. (1977). The Essential Tension: Selected Studies in Scientiﬁc Tradition and Change.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Lee, A. S. (1994). ‘Electronic Mail as a Medium for Rich Communication: An Empirical
Investigation Using Hermeneutic Interpretation’, MIS Quarterly, 18(2): 143–57.
Mintzberg, H. (1973). The Nature of Managerial Work. New York: Harper & Row.
Myers, M. D. (1994). ‘A Disaster for Everyone to See: An Interpretive Analysis of a Failed IS
Project’, Accounting, Management and Information Technologies, 4(4): 185–201.
—— (1995). ‘Dialectical Hermeneutics: A Theoretical Framework for the Implementation of
Information Systems’, Information Systems Journal, 5(1): 51–70.
Palmer, R. E. (1969). Hermeneutics: Interpretation Theory in Schleiermacher, Dilthey, Heideg-
ger and Gadamer. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Ricoeur, P. (1970). Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on Interpretation. Trans. D. Savage,
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
—— (1976). Interpretation Theory: Discourse and the Surplus of Meaning. Fort Worth,
TX: Texas Christian University Press.
—— (1981). Hermeneutics and the Human Sciences. Trans. J. B. Thompson. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Rorty, R. (1979). Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Schmidt, L. K. (2006). Understanding Hermeneutics. Stocksﬁeld: Acumen Publishing.
Winograd, T., and Flores, F. (1986). Understanding Computers and Cognition: A New Founda-
tion for Design. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley.
Wittgenstein, L. (1967). Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wranke, G. (1987). Gadamer: Hermeneutics, Tradition and Reason. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
252
LUCAS D. INTRONA

c h a p t e r 1 0
...............................................................................................
PHENOMENOLOGY,
SCREENS, AND
SCREENNESS: RETURNING
TO THE WORLD ITSELF
...............................................................................................
LUCAS D. INTRONA AND
FERNANDO M. ILHARCO
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
Phenomenology, as a philosophical underpinning, as well as a method of investiga-
tion, is currently used in a wide range of ﬁelds, such as organization studies, manage-
ment, anthropology, sociology, history, design, media studies and communication
sciences, psychology, psychiatry, biology, mathematics, philosophy, education, and so
forth. It has also been used in Information Systems (IS) research.1 The authors have
also, for several years now, been using a phenomenological approach to account for the
phenomenon of the ‘screen’ (Introna and Ilharco 2000, 2004a, 2004b, 2006; Ilharco
2008; Introna, Ilharco, and Fäy 2008). As with many other methodological approaches
the phenomenological method has a number of core central traits, which have been
used in all phenomenological investigations. In this chapter we attempt to follow the
traditional phenomenological approach as synthesized in Spiegelberg (1994). In our
discussion and analysis we tend to draw only on the literature of the phenomenological
movement. We hope that our exclusively phenomenological approach will provide a
signiﬁcant theoretical and methodological contribution to the IS ﬁeld. This is timely as
the phenomenological movement is currently experiencing a new growth period as is
clear from the recent publication of a number of introductory works in the ﬁeld (e.g.
Moran 2000; Sokolowski 2000; Cerbone 2006; Glendinning 2007).

Phenomenology, as an approach, belongs to the most primary human need—that is,
to return to a world already known, a world where phenomena have their meaning as
such. As such we would claim that phenomenology can be seen as a radical answer to
the ongoing ideological standoff between a sort of positive naturalism—which argues
for general objective accounts of the world as directly given through our observations—
and an interpretive approach—which argues for the importance of ongoing socially
shared, subjective meaning. In this standoff phenomenology aims, rather, at returning
to the world as it is, before analysis, science, theories, and interpretations are applied to
its a posteriori understanding. Phenomenology provides a radical answer by showing
that meaning is not an idiosyncratic subjectively constructed ‘inner’ domain, but rather
an ongoing, objective public domain of necessary relations or references. More formally
put, for phenomenology, meaning is not ‘in’ the thing (word, object, action, event,
subject, etc.). Rather, it is ‘in’ the nexus of necessary relations or references for the thing
(word, object, action, event, subject, etc.) to be what it is already taken as, when taken
up in our ongoing activity in everyday life. More succinctly put: the meaning is in the
world itself and it is to this world that we must ‘return’ (prior to any conceptualizing,
theorizing, etc.). It is this radical insight that we hope to make clear through this
chapter. It is also this radical insight that a widely cited commentator such as Leedy
(1997: 161) seems to miss when he deﬁnes phenomenology, incorrectly, within the
subjectivist paradigm—as ‘a research method that attempts to understand participants’
perspectives and views of social realities’ (emphasis added).
To the things, themselves!, phenomenology’s motto, introduced by Edmund Husserl
(1859–1938), the founder of phenomenology, grounds phenomenology’s meaning in
the self-evident primacy of the world (Heidegger 1962; Husserl 1970a). This funda-
mental insight reminds us that whatever is already is within a nexus of relationships,
the world itself. This is precisely what enables it to become manifest to us as this or that
particular being. This phenomenal being—in accordance with Heidegger’s (1962)
phenomenology of humanness—is its meaning. What something is, as this or that
being, is not a substance but is rather the totality of references implied in its being
(Heidegger 1962). Thus, the referential context provides, or grounds, its meaning—
only within a referential context can something come forth as something. This ‘as
something’ (Heidegger 1962) is the meaning that opens up, for each of us, a world as a
world, our own being as human, an organization as an organization, a screen as a
screen, and so forth. This necessary and grounding account of our way of being human
is primary to all theories and methods; it is nothing other than the pointing out of the
world itself.
‘Objective’ features of things, their present-at-hand characteristics (Heidegger 1962),
that is, their observed, decontextualized, analysed, and fragmented presence, reveal
themselves to us only within a larger, meaningful context, which cannot itself be
explained in terms of its present-at-handness. ‘The astronomer determines that a
certain star is millions of kilometres away from the sun. That is correct, but it means
something to the astronomer and to the rest of us only if we can relate it back to the
lifeworld in which three kilometres are a gentle afternoon stroll, and thirty kilometres
254
LUCAS D. INTRONA AND FERNANDO M. ILHARCO

are a good day’s hike’ (Polt 1999: 59). A computer technician measures the surface of a
screen to be 27 centimetres wide and 21 centimetres high, or the resolution as a certain
number of pixels. So what? What do these facts mean? What is their relevance? These
measurements would be meaningless, and the technician would never have bothered
ﬁnding them out, if they were not already meaningful in the world in which she exists,
lives, and works as a technician—life comes ﬁrst, the world is already there. As beings-
in-the-world (Heidegger 1962), we have always and already understood things and
events on the basis of their already established places in the referential whole, that is
our immediate involvement with that world (Heidegger 1962). ‘Objective’, present-at-
hand distances are understood, interpreted, and assumed on the basis of my having
been (Heidegger 1962). An ‘objective’ distance per se has no meaning. Its meaning only
appears on the basis of my life as a having been.
This ‘world that is’, that which is most evident to us, is the referential context within
which we intend to account for the phenomenon screen. Kant (1985) considered it a
scandal that a proof of existence of the external world had not yet been produced.
Heidegger (1962) regarded it as a scandal that such a proof was searched for at all. For
who we ourselves are—and the world we seek to understand—cannot be stripped out of
that very world. We—and the world we seek to understand—are revealed only as
‘beings-in-the-world’ (Heidegger 1962). Our phenomenological analysis of the phe-
nomenon ‘screen’ below is grounded in this approach. It calls for nothing more than a
return to what phenomena already are in-the-world, that is, to return to the world
itself. As Glendinning (2007: 16) summarizes so well:
What the phenomenologist aims at, then, is not a theory of this or that phenome-
non—a theory which would be characterised by its distinctive positions and ex-
tractable theses—but an effort to come reﬂectively to terms with something that is,
in some way, already ‘evident’. It is in this sense a work of explication, elucidation,
explication or description of something we, in some way, already understand or
with which we are already, in some way familiar, but which, for some reason we
cannot get into clear focus for ourselves without more ado.
Before proceeding we must note that there are many different ways in which one
could ‘do’ phenomenology. One could, for example, explicitly follow the phenomeno-
logical method, as we will in the analysis of the screen below. Nevertheless, one could
also ‘do’ it in other ways, such as applying the results of previous phenomenological
analysis, or using phenomenological assumptions and insights as grounding principles
for one’s work; there is simply not just ‘one way’ to use phenomenology.
This chapter endeavours to provide a coherent straightforward account of phenom-
enology, discussing its central concerns and concepts, making some contrasts within
the phenomenology movement, and providing a brief discussion of the phenomeno-
logical method. We will also show the value of the phenomenological approach and
method by doing a phenomenological analysis of the phenomenon ‘screen’ and pre-
senting a critical assessment of it. We will conclude the chapter by pointing to some
existing work in phenomenology that may serve as examples of how phenomenology
PHENOMENOLOGY, SCREENS, AND SCREENNESS
255

may be used to inform future research. This is an ambitious task for one chapter and as
such many important issues may have to be left unaccounted. Nevertheless, we hope
the chapter will serve as a basis from which those interested can engage the literature of
the phenomenology movement.
PHENOMENOLOGY: MOVEMENT
AND APPROACH
..................................................................................................................
There is no simple answer to the question of what phenomenology is. We can say, as
Husserl did, that phenomenology is ‘a return to the things themselves’. But such a cryptic
saying only means something if we understand that the meaning of ‘return’, ‘things’, and
‘themselves’ here has some very speciﬁc meanings for the phenomenologist. How then
will we proceed? One could, for example, give a historical answer by starting with a
discussion of Husserl’s (1964, 1969, 1970a, 1970b, 1995) main works, including his
indebtedness to Brentano, and then show how this work was transformed by Heidegger
and reinterpreted by Merleau-Ponty, Sartre, and Levinas amongst others. This was done
in the massive, now classic, work by Spiegelberg (1994 [1959]) and more recently in the
excellent, very readable, account by Dermot Moran (2000) and Glendinning (2007). We
could also give an exposition of the ‘key concepts’ and ‘method’ of phenomenology, as
was done so well by Sokolowski (2000). We will not take either of these routes. We will
rather present the distinctiveness of phenomenology by developing an account of the
claim that phenomenology is a transcendental approach to our understanding of the
world. In the ongoing evolution of phenomenology the meaning and source of the
‘transcendental’ becomes transformed, redeﬁned, and reinterpreted by the various
proponents. Nevertheless, through the notion of ‘transcendental’ we can relate phenom-
enology to other approaches and explain why we believe it to be valuable and necessary
for the IS community. We hope to present this discussion in a simple manner with
minimal recourse to the technicality of the phenomenological lexicon. To do this in a
manner that will show the distinctiveness of phenomenology, without becoming sim-
plistic, will certainly not be an easy task. We must also emphasize that this is a very brief
account andthat any serious engagement withphenomenologyrequires amore in-depth
study for which the references provided at the end of the chapter are a good guide.
PHENOMENOLOGY’S CENTRAL IDEA
..................................................................................................................
Phenomenology is a transcendental approach to our understanding of the world as
given and taken in ongoing experience. To understand what this might mean let us turn
to a very mundane situation of experiencing something in the course of our everyday
256
LUCAS D. INTRONA AND FERNANDO M. ILHARCO

life. Let us take as our example our experience with a typical chair, standing in front of
our table in our ofﬁce. What makes it possible for us to experience it—take it to be, see
it, refer to it, etc.—as a chair rather than as a something else? This may sound like a
strange question. However, we must be careful to note that the chair—or any other
object for that matter—is always only given to our senses as unordered sensations2 and
only in its aspect, or one-sidedness. When we stand in ‘front’ of it the ‘back’ is not given
to our senses as such. When we stand at the back the front is hidden from our senses.
As far as our direct sensory encounter is concerned we are always only given the
unordered ﬂux of perturbations of ‘one side’ of the chair at any particular time—i.e. our
senses operate in an unordered ﬂux of one-dimensionality. Yet when we approach the
chair we do not take it as a confusing ﬂux of sensation, or as one side of a chair, rather,
we take it in its fullness of being, as that which it already is, a chair to sit on, stand on,
and so forth. Thus, we can ask: what is it that allows us to take it in its fullness, as a
chair, even though we are only always, at any particular point in time, sensually given
an unordered ﬂux of an aspect of it?
Phenomenology will answer that it is the ‘already there’ sense that I have of chairs
that allows me to take it as a chair, rather than as something else. This ‘sense’ emerged
through my many situated experiences with a multiplicity of ‘chair’ objects—some
made of wood, some of plastic, some of steel—in many different situations—in the
bedroom, in the kitchen, outside on the patio, etc. Thus, through all these various
situated and ongoing experiences some ‘sense’ of what the object chair is—how to take
it, see it, refer to it, and use it—remained sufﬁciently stable in order for me to have
ongoing situated experiences of chairs ‘as chairs’, rather than as some unordered ﬂux of
an aspect of something. This ongoing sense we have of the world means that every
experience we have of things, as the thing that they are, can never be wholly unprece-
dented, as if from scratch. If this was the case then our ongoing experience of the world
will be deeply perplexing and confusing. However, this is in fact not our normal
experience; rather we experience the world as mostly meaningful and familiar. Thus,
in and through all our previous experiences with extended objects and chairs some
sense ‘remained’, became sedimented in some way, which now provides the ongoing
horizon or minimal condition of possibility for our ongoing ‘taking’ of this chair that
we are now approaching to sit on ‘as a chair’ rather as something else. Let us suspend
for the moment what this ‘remainder’ is and how it came about.
In phenomenology we refer to this ongoing persisting sense or ‘remainder’, that
which constitutes the ongoing possibility for the taken extended object to be experi-
enced ‘as a chair’, as the transcendental domain. More formally expressed we could say,
‘the transcendental is that which constitutes, and thereby renders the empirical possi-
ble’ (Mohanty 1970: 52). For the more philosophically minded it is important to make
a distinction between Kant’s (1787 [1965]) and Husserl’s (1964, 1970a, 1970b) use of
the notion of the ‘transcendental’. For Kant—the originator of the notion—the tran-
scendental is the a priori categories of mind—such as sensation and judgement—that
makes cognition possible as such. For Husserl the transcendental is the active, directed,
PHENOMENOLOGY, SCREENS, AND SCREENNESS
257

ongoing life of consciousness that is the necessary condition for our ongoing experience of
the world to be meaningful as such.3
It is now possible to say that phenomenology, as a transcendental critique, was
developed to question the assumptions of naturalism or empiricism that starts with a
world of ‘alreadythere’ objectswithoutaskingthe question:howis itpossible toexperience
the object (a chair) as the object that it is, ‘as a chair’, in the ﬁrst instance (Mohanty 1970,
1997). Thus, an empirically based science—such as positivism—does not start with that
which is given—as the world is only given as an unordered ﬂux and in its aspect or one-
sidedness—but rather with that which is always and already constituted—the world of
objectsalreadytaken assuch byus. Positiveempiricists thenpose the question ‘howcan we
know these objects’ without realizing that the very possibility of experiencing the objects,
as such and such an object, already implies a meaningful epistemic encounter that has its
source elsewhere. This ‘elsewhere’ is the already active, already directed, ongoing life of
consciousness. It is this active ongoing structural correlation—one can almost say ongoing
structuration in Giddens’s (1984) terms—of conscious life and the world that is the
‘remainder’ which we have suspended above and to which we will now turn to in our
discussion of Husserl’s work.
HUSSERLIAN PHENOMENOLOGY
..................................................................................................................
For Husserl consciousness—note we are referring here to embodied consciousness
rather than a disembodied ‘mind’—is not some pre-existing blank slate, space, or
memory capacity ‘in our heads’ (an internal subject dimension) that somehow ‘records’
or captures a stream of sensations or representations of the world out there (an external
object dimension), which it then somehow makes sense of. Rather, embodied conscious-
ness, to be conscious at all, is already an active meaning giving directedness towards, and
in, the world. To be conscious is always and already4 to be conscious of something as this
or that something. Consciousness is always and already an act—an already active taking
of the given world—which implies, as necessary, some already available sense or
meaning that renders such an act possible and meaningful. As conscious beings our
relationship with the world is not some passive disinterested simply ‘standing before’ the
world, being bombarded by an ongoing stream of confusing and unordered sensations.
On the contrary, as we go about daily life (even if we sit passively in a chair) we ﬁnd
ourselves as always already experiencing the world in its fullness and the objects
surrounding us as something in particular—as boring, interesting, hard, soft, a tree, a
chair, a knife, useful, red, blue, cold, round, far, near, etc. However, such experiencing of
the world ‘as something’ already suggests some simultaneously present sense (unity, or
meaning, or in Husserl’s language a noema) of that which is being experienced—as
interesting, hard, tree, chair, soft, useful, cold, far, and near—that is the necessary
condition or transcendental possibility for such an experience to be possible in the
258
LUCAS D. INTRONA AND FERNANDO M. ILHARCO

ﬁrst place. Husserl (1969: 233–4) formulates this fundamental ongoing unity of con-
sciousness and the world in ongoing experience as follows:
But experience is not an opening through which a world, existing prior to all
experience, shines into a room of consciousness; it is not a mere taking of some-
thing alien to consciousness into consciousness. . . . Experience is the performance
in which for me, the experiencer, the experienced being ‘is there’, and is [already]
there as what it is, with the whole content and the mode of being that experience
itself, by the performance going on in its intentionality, attributes to it.
To make this discussion a bit more speciﬁc let us consider the experience of listening
to music—as opposed to encountering objects discussed above. First, we have to note
that music is never given to us as music. It is given to our senses as a ﬂux of unordered5
sounds. However, when we hear sounds we never take them—in ongoing experience—
simply as a stream of unrelated sounds, rather we ﬁnd ourselves already listening to
them as something—music, a cry for help, a car braking, some construction noise, etc.
‘[W]e do not [ever] hear pure meaningless sounds’ (Dreyfus 1991: 218). ‘We hear the
door shut in the house and never hear acoustical sensations or even mere sounds’
(Heidegger 1971: 26). As Heidegger argues: ‘What we “ﬁrst” hear is never noises or
complexes sounds, but the creaking wagon, the motorcycle . . . It requires a very
artiﬁcial and complicated frame of mind to “hear” a “pure noise”’ (Heidegger 1962:
207). The things themselves, in their meaningfulness, are much closer to us than all
sensations (Heidegger 1971: 26). Thus, listening, the taking of sound as music, or a cry
for help, or an accident, etc., implies an already there sense of what ‘music’, ‘a cry for
help’ or ‘an accident’ is, that makes it possible for me to take these sounds as this or
that, rather than as a mere ﬂux of unordered sounds.
Furthermore, in order to listen to music, as music, I do not only listen, but this
listening to music is also already informed by an ongoing sense (unity or noema) of
movement, rhythm, tone, scale, style, and so forth. This ongoing active unity or noema
provides an ongoing temporal horizon that enables me, in the experience of listening
(the now), to simultaneously ‘retain’ the sounds I no longer hear (the past), and in
anticipation ‘ﬁll in’ the sounds I am not yet hearing, yet anticipate (the future). Thus, as
a phenomenological being I ﬁnd myself listening to music, not merely hearing sounds.
To sum up: our ongoing, always already directed experience (noesis in Husserl’s
terms) of the world as meaningful (as this or that), which was previously given as a ﬂux
of unordered sensation in its one-dimensionality, has as its necessary condition an
ongoing transcendental structural correlation or unity (noema) which is immediately
and wholly implicated in the ongoing experience but distinct from it. In all the situated
experiences of chairs the given aspects of particular chairs varied (and could vary
inﬁnitely) but the persisting noematic sense remained identical.6 The immediate and
simultaneous presence of the identical (noema) in the ongoing act of experiencing
(noesis) the chair through its aspects, possibilities, and past experiences is what Husserl
refers to as the intentionality of consciousness. The always already intentful directed-
ness of consciousness (noesis) has as a necessary condition an already present direction
PHENOMENOLOGY, SCREENS, AND SCREENNESS
259

or structural orientation (noema), for its directedness to be meaningful rather than
random and confused. As mentioned, this state of affairs is itself evident, as we tend to
experience our ongoing engagement with the world as mostly meaningful rather than
confused and meaningless. The ongoing noematic structure of consciousness is both
medium and outcome of the intentional activity of consciousness, simultaneously
directing and synthesizing. As such it is active and temporal rather than static and
atemporal—it is not a Platonic ideal form. Thus, contrary to the view of the positivists,
intentional consciousness is not a subjectively constructed inner and private domain
that must be ‘eliminated’ but rather it is an always already public mind that exists as a
completely immanent—wholly present, never absent—ongoing and necessary structur-
al correlation with the world (Sokolowski 2000: 14).
So far we have tended to concentrate only on the experience of a particular object or
event in our discussion—the chair and listening to music—however, these objects and
events already exist in a referential whole in which things refer to each other in such a
manneras toconstitute a meaningfulwhole.For example, our experienceofthe pen on the
table already refers to some sort of writing surface like paper, and the pen and paper refers
to the possibility of writing or drawing, which refer to the possibility of communicating,
which refers to the need for communication, etc. In this referential whole, where things
refer to each other or imply each other, the meaning of something emerges as the nexus of
necessary relationships that constitute something as that which it is, a pen in this case.
Husserl refers to this as the external horizon (or in his later work as the ‘life world’). We
always experience the world within this unfolding horizon of references—its meaning.
Thus, for phenomenology the meaning or sense of something—the phenomena as
such—is not the outcome of subjective choices (likes, dislikes, values, beliefs, etc.) but
rather the outcome of the ongoing nexus of necessary relationships that serve as the
transcendental condition of the active ongoing already meaning-giving consciousness.
As such the intentionality of consciousness implies an immediate relationship between
consciousness (the subject) and the world (the object)—an ongoing structural unity—
that renders the experience of the world possible in the ﬁrst place. The theory of the
intentionality of consciousness—and human existence—is phenomenology’s funda-
mental contribution.7 All phenomenologists take some version of this doctrine or
theory as self-evident and central to any phenomenological approach. Before we
move on we must note that, although we have concentrated on perception—of a
chair and music—in our discussion, the intentional nature of the active meaning-giving
consciousness is implied in all forms of cognition such as judging, representing,
planning, deciding, remembering, imagining, and so forth.
For Husserl the fundamental task of phenomenology is to describe and give an
account of the necessary noematic structural unity of intentional consciousness—to
describe the phenomena as such. For example, if we want to understand the phenome-
nological meaning of chairs as such—evident in all our experiences of it—we cannot
answer this question by looking at this or that particular empirical chair. To our senses
the chair can only be known in its ‘one-sidedness,’ or in its ‘many-sidedness’ in a
sequence of observations, but never simultaneously in its ‘all-sidedness’. Yet
260
LUCAS D. INTRONA AND FERNANDO M. ILHARCO

phenomenologically the ‘essential’ meaning of the chair—its ‘sit-upon-ability’—is not
known perspectivally. As Merleau-Ponty (1962: 67) explains: ‘I see the next-door house
from a certain angle, but it would be seen differently from the right bank of the Seine,
or from the inside, or again from an aeroplane: the house itself is none of these
appearances: it is, as Leibniz said, the geometrized projection of these perspectives
and of all possible perspectives, that is, the perspectiveless position from which all can
be derived, the house seen from nowhere.’ The house, as phenomenon, is the disclosure
of that which, lying hidden, is always implicit as horizons, that is, as the totality of
perspectives. ‘[T]he house itself is not the house seen from nowhere, but the house seen
from everywhere. The completed object is translucent, being shot through from all
sides by an inﬁnite number of present scrutinies which intersect in its depths leaving
nothing hidden’ (Merleau-Ponty 1962: 69).
To give an account of its essential meaning, as a ‘sit-upon-able’, we need to give an
account of the ongoing noematic structural unity of consciousness and the world that
makes such an experience possible through all our diverse ‘chair experiences’—hence
Husserl’s famous saying we must ‘return to the things [structural unity] themselves’.
How do we ‘return to the things themselves’, i.e. gain access to the ongoing noematic
structural correlation of consciousness and the world? How do we turn consciousness
back upon itself? Obviously, this is very difﬁcult to do—and Husserl claims that we will
always be perpetual beginners.
According to Husserl we can achieve it by a cumulative process of suspension,
referred to as the epoché (‘suspension of judgement’ in ancient Greek philosophy). In
every suspension (epochç) there is a simultaneous event of reduction—from the Latin
reducere, ‘to lead back’—taking place. In Husserl’s (1964, 1970b) work there are a
number of suspensions and reductions described, however, we will only distinguish
two different levels of reduction here. The ﬁrst is the phenomenological reduction,
which is the suspension of the natural attitude and all its suppositions. The second is
what is referred to as the eidetic reduction (from the Latin root eidos, ‘essence’), which
is the suspension of the empirical world in grasping the essential structural unity of
consciousness as such. We will not discuss these reductions here in detail. For a very
accessible discussion the reader is referred to the excellent introduction by Sokolowski
(2000). Nevertheless, it is worth stating clearly that through the phenomenological
and eidetic reduction ‘we look at what we normally look through’ (Sokolowski 2000:
50) and as such we ‘reach an understanding of the [ongoing] performance of
subjectivity. The world is not something that simply exists. The world appears, and
the structure of this appearance is conditioned and made possible by subjectivity [the
ongoing intentional correlation of self and world]’ (Zahavi 2003: 52). When we do the
phenomenological analysis of the screen below this form of phenomenological and
essential reﬂection will become clearer. Let us now turn to Heidegger (incidentally a
student of Husserl).
PHENOMENOLOGY, SCREENS, AND SCREENNESS
261

HEIDEGGER AND INTENTIONALITY
AS BEING-IN-THE-WORLD
..................................................................................................................
The eidetic reduction as the possibility of a ‘direct’ access to a domain of pure or absolute
transcendental consciousness is the most controversial aspect of Husserl’s phenomenolo-
gy. Most phenomenologists after Husserl rejected it. It should also be noted that he also
started to turn away from it in his ﬁnal work The Crisis of the European Sciences (1970).
Indeed, one can take the work of Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, and Sartre as a direct
existential critique of Husserl’s transcendental enquiry (Kockelmans 1967). This enquiry
towards the ideal structures of consciousness is often referred to as transcendental
idealism. In contrast to this Heidegger (1962) insisted that the transcendental is always
and already grounded in the ongoing practical activity in the world of everyday life.8 For
him ‘all consciousness, all knowledge, all human undertakings, are drawn on an ever
present substratum: the world, a world that is always already-there, radically primary’
(Thevenaz 1962: 84). Likewise, for Merleau-Ponty (1962) the mind is not a pure inten-
tional structure of consciousness but rather an embodied and always already situated
mind.9 He would argue that our scientiﬁc systems of orientation in time and space have
their condition of possibility in our being a body—a lived body that is the ongoing horizon
of orientation and meaning. For example, for him language already has its source, horizon
of meaning, in the gesture.
Heidegger argued that early Husserl did not really break with the Cartesian dualism
in as much as he still located the source of meaning in the structure of consciousness, in
the mind as it were; in today’s terms we might say that Heidegger criticized Husserl for
his cognitivist tendencies, i.e. reducing meaning to some content in the mind. In
contrast to this Heidegger argued that we cannot ‘bracket out’ the world of everyday
practical activity, the referential whole, as this is exactly the ongoing source of all
meaning—the ongoing being10 of beings. One could argue that Heidegger abandoned
Husserl’s project—as Dreyfus (1991) does—or one could argue that Heidegger extend-
ed the work of Husserl, as Moran (2000) and Zahavi (2003) do—a position we would
tend to take.
Heidegger’s brilliant insight, articulated in division one of Being and Time, is that
our intentional relationship with the world is not epistemic—as Husserl assumed—but
rather practical and ontological. By this he means that we do not tend to encounter
chairs ‘as chairs’ in the way Husserl describes but we rather tend to encounter them as
‘possibilities for’, such as ‘a possibility for sitting down’ or ‘for standing on to reach
higher’ or ‘for facing somebody’, and so forth. Furthermore, the chair is a ‘possibility
for’ (what Heidegger called an ‘in-order-to’) only within an already present referential
whole where other things refer to it, as a ‘possibility for’, and it refers to them. Thus, for
Heidegger the transcendental domain is not ‘puriﬁed’ consciousness but rather the
ongoing, unfolding referential whole in which every thing is what it is—has its being.
To describe this radically extended transcendental domain Heidegger uses the notion
262
LUCAS D. INTRONA AND FERNANDO M. ILHARCO

of being-in-the-world.11 Heidegger argues that we humans (which he calls Dasein) exist
in an ongoing structural openness towards the world in which the self and the world is
always already a unity, a being-in-the-world (Heidegger 1982: 297). Thus, we human
beings (Dasein) are this unity, we are always and already beings-in-the-world—we have
this unity as our ongoing being.
Let us consider an example. Whenever we ﬁnd ourselves or take note of ourselves,
we ﬁnd ourselves already engaged in practical everyday activity in which things show
up as ‘possibilities for’ our practical intentions. We should ﬁrst take note of the fact that
our human nature is always one in which the things we encounter already matter in
some way or another—even if it matters only as useless, boring, or irrelevant. This is
what Heidegger means when he claims that our way of being is that we always
and already care. It is impossible for us—as always already immersed or ‘thrown-
into’ the world humans—to take a wholly disinterested stance in and towards the world
(Heidegger 1962: 176). Thus, Heidegger transforms Husserl’s notion of intentionality
by insisting that ‘intentionality must be understood in terms of the structural features
of Dasein, specially Dasein’s transcendence, that is, the fact that Dasein is already
somehow beyond itself, already dwelling in the world, among things, and not locked up
in the privacy of its own consciousness as the representationalist, Cartesian picture
assumes’ (Moran 2000: 42).
When we encounter tools they already matter in some way or another. However,
these tools are tools for this or that purpose only in as much as they already refer to
other tools, which also already refer to them as their transcendental condition for being
this or that tool. Note that when using the notion ‘refer’ here, it is used in the sense of a
necessary relation or reference for the tool to be what it already is taken to be when
taken up in practical activity. The laptop we are working on, to be a laptop, rather than
a piece of assembled plastic and silicone, refers to application programs, which refer to
operating systems, which refer to hardware, which refer to a power supply—all of
which refer to suppliers, which refer to maintenance services, and so forth. Dreyfus
(1991: 62) calls this recursively deﬁning, necessary nexus of relations, the tool or
equipment whole.
When we take up these tools, as tools, we do not take them up for their own sake, we
take them up with an already present reference to our projects.12 We do not simply
bang on keys, we use the laptop to type, in-order-to write this chapter, to do e-mail, to
surf the web, etc. Moreover, the writing of this chapter refers to the possibility of a
book, of which it would be a part. This book refers to editors, which refers to potential
publishers, which refer to a potential audience, which refer to research, which refer to
further possibilities, etc. Furthermore, the writing of this chapter also refers to the
publication of our work, which refers to a publication record, which refers to academic
status, which refers to the possibility for promotion, and so forth. Heidegger (1962:
118) calls this recursively deﬁning and necessary nexus of projects, or for-the-sake-of
relations, the involvement whole. The equipment whole and the involvement whole
refer to each other and sustain each other as an ongoing referential whole, horizon of
meaning, Heidegger calls ‘the world’.13 We humans (Dasein) dwell in the world in
PHENOMENOLOGY, SCREENS, AND SCREENNESS
263

which the world is mostly familiar (it is simply already evidently there, ‘ready-to-hand’
in Heidegger’s terminology). The phenomenological meaning of the world—in the case
of our analysis below, the screen—can only be understood within the always already
deﬁning referential whole, the world itself.
Now sometimes the world ‘breaks down’ and then we tend to encounter it as objects
or events as such—it becomes occurrent or present-to-hand in Heidegger’s (1962)
terminology. When we type and the key gets stuck then we notice it ‘as a key’, otherwise
we merely type. If it remains stuck the computer becomes occurrent ‘as a broken
laptop’. However, as we start to take it apart, in an attempt to ﬁx it, it recedes back into
the background as something I am ﬁxing. The point of Heidegger’s account is ‘that
things show up for us or are encountered as what they are only against a background of
familiarity, competence, and concern that carves out a system of related roles [recur-
sively deﬁning references] into which things ﬁt. Equipmental things are the roles
[recursively deﬁning references] into which they are cast by skilled users of them,
and skilled users are the practical roles [recursively deﬁning references] into which
they [become] cast themselves’ (Hall 1993: 132). Thus, our relation with the world is
ontological in as much as the world already shows up, or reveals itself to us, as it already
is, in and through our ongoing project-edness, or comportments. However, to see this
we need to suspend our natural attitude and take up a phenomenological attitude in
which we can ‘trace’ and ‘retrace’ the referential whole that is the transcendental
condition for the world to reveal itself as that which it already is.
This transformation of the transcendental by Heidegger, as wells as the work of
Merleau-Ponty and Sartre, amongst others, has become described as existential
phenomenology as opposed to the transcendental phenomenology of Husserl. Although
we tend to follow the major steps of the Husserlian phenomenological method our
detailed analysis within these steps is based more on Heideggerian existential phenom-
enology. We will give a brief outline of this method in the section below.
THE PHENOMENOLOGICAL METHOD
..................................................................................................................
Like any other method the phenomenological method of investigation is realized
through a methodological circle, however phenomenology strives to accept and to
proceed only within the primacy of human experience as experienced, i.e. our ongoing
intentional structural correlation with the world. As mentioned, our investigation into
the phenomenological meaning of the screen below follows the traditional phenome-
nological method as developed and applied by Husserl and Heidegger, and synthesized
by Spiegelberg (1975, 1994). Nevertheless, minor changes were needed to incorporate
some of the existential critique developed by Heidegger and others. The main adapta-
tion we introduce to Spiegelberg’s synthesis of the method is the role of the traditional
etymological critique. We consider the phenomenological account of the etymology of
the words not merely as a step in the ﬁrst phase of the method, but rather as a whole
264
LUCAS D. INTRONA AND FERNANDO M. ILHARCO

second phase in its own right. Such an adaptation, which to some extent is only
recognition of an important and recurrent phenomenological practice, is clearly
supported by the phenomenological investigations of Heidegger (1962, 1977, 1978).
The phenomenological method we apply in the phenomenological analysis of the
screen below is therefore structured in the following four14 phases:
1. Describing the phenomenon
2. Analysing the etymology
3. Performing the reduction
4. Investigating the essence
It is important to stress the implicit unity when considering these four sequential
phases. The phases are united in the basic purpose of ‘giving us a fuller and deeper
grasp’ of the phenomenon (Spiegelberg 1975: 57), which can only be achieved if all four
phases are applied fully. It ought to be clear how the essential concepts of phenome-
nology, discussed above, relate to the method as we proceed. Nevertheless, this
relationship will be explained further as we apply the method to our analysis below.
Let us very brieﬂy characterize each of the four phases of the method with reference to
our analysis of the phenomenon of the screen to be presented below.15
Phase 1—Describing the Phenomenon Screen. This phase aims at returning to the
screen as primarily and directly experienced. The purpose is to describe the external
horizon of the phenomenon as intuitively and as free as possible from our presupposi-
tions. We are not looking for data in order to explain some preliminary hypothesis, nor
are we trying to make sense of some previous intellectual construction about screens.
Our central aim is not to explain but to describe the screen, as it is, in our ongoing
activity in the world.
Phase 2—Analysing the Etymology of Screen. We shall trace back the origins of the
word ‘screen’. This analysis is not designed to bring back the meaning of the word per
se, but rather to bring forth the meaning of the ‘thing’ itself, i.e. of screen, in the ante-
predicative life of consciousness. In our analysis we will also provide an account of the
etymology of the word ‘display’ as closely related to screen.
Phase 3—Performing the Phenomenological Reduction upon Screen. In this phase we
perform the phenomenological reduction upon the consolidated ﬁndings of the ﬁrst
two phases. The reduction will aim to bracket out the incidental aspects of particular
examples of screens in order to reach some essential description of the phenomenon
‘screen’. This bracketing process will be guided by our intentional experience of the
screening of screens in our everyday encounters with screens.
Phase 4—Investigating the Essence of Screen. This phase aims at reaching the
elements strictly necessary for the phenomenon screen to be what it is. This phase
proceeds from the reduced phenomenon of screen presented in the previous phase. It
proceeds by stripping it of those elements that in spite of being common to all
appearances of screen are not strictly necessary. In the analysis the technique of free
variation will be used as well as relating and contrasting the phenomenon of screen
with closely related phenomena.
PHENOMENOLOGY, SCREENS, AND SCREENNESS
265

The analysis of the phenomenon of the screen, presented below, will proceed by
carefully following the phases outlined above. Because the ﬂow of the analysis is a way
into the phenomenon of the screen, and a method of argumentation (Merleau-Ponty
1962; Heidegger 1977; Husserl 1995), we will, as we proceed phase by phase, add some
further discussion of the method where appropriate. In this manner we aim to limit
repetition, and improve the effectiveness of the discussion. Nevertheless, it must be
pointed out that the always-provisional nature of the phenomenological method is
such that it tends to lead to some repetition of formulations as well as the reconsidera-
tion of statements and positions previously taken. We also want to reiterate that
following the explicit phenomenological method—outlined above and applied
below—is just one way to do phenomenology.
A PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE SCREEN:
AN EXAMPLE
..................................................................................................................
In a strict phenomenological manner, following Husserl’s counsel (Husserl 1964,
1970a, 1995), this phenomenological analysis will initially set aside important research
that addresses directly or indirectly the phenomenon screen (e.g. McLuhan 1962, 1964,
1967; Idhe 1990, 2002; Sobchack 1991, 1994, 1999; Heim 1993, 1999; Manovich 1995,
2001).
The odds are that when reading this chapter you will have nearby, not one, but maybe
even several screens. Whether at the workplace, at home relaxing with the family,
travelling, or engaged in entertainment, a growing majority of people ﬁnd themselves
increasingly in front of screens—television (TV) screens, personal computer (PC)
screens, mobile phone screens, palmtop computer displays, and so forth. It is unlikely
that the pervasiveness of screens in contemporary life will be disputed. However, as an
example of this fact it is worth noting that the funeral of Princess Diana in August 1997
was followed by an estimated TV audience of 2,500 million (ABC 1999), which repre-
sents more than 40 per cent of the world’s population. What is the meaning of our
increasing interactions with screens? In this section we want to demonstrate the impor-
tance of phenomenology as an approach and method for enabling us to answer the
question of the meaning of screens, in its ongoing screening of our world. We will aim to
showthat this seemingly‘innocent’ technology has powerful ontologicalimplications for
our understanding of its pervasive presence in organizations and everyday life.
Describing the Phenomenon Screen (Phase 1)
Let us start our analysis by exploring a description of the screen, qua screen. As a
phenomenological analysis, we do not intend to direct our reﬂection to the content
266
LUCAS D. INTRONA AND FERNANDO M. ILHARCO

displayed on any particular screen as such, but rather to the meaning of the screen in its
ongoing screening. The screen as we encounter it when we look at it as a screen when
watching a movie, or the news or search for a place on Google maps, and so forth.
Thus, the focus of our investigation is the screen as a nexus of relationships that
provides a concrete way of relating ourselves to and in the world when we ﬁnd
ourselves before a screen.
It is rather surprising what we encounter from the start. When trying to describe a
screen, a computer screen or a television screen, we immediately note that we never
seem to look at a screen as a ‘screen’. We rather tend to look at screens by attending to
that which appears on them. What seems evident when looking at a screen is the
content presented on that screen—the text, images, colours, graphics, and so on—not
the screening of the screen. To try and look at a screen, and see it as a screen, not taking
into account the particular content it presents, and all the references with which that
same content already appears to us, is apparently not an easy task. We are not familiar
with this type of encounter with a screen. Rather in our familiarity with screens or
displays they tend to reveal themselves as things—perhaps surfaces—which function in
particular contexts and for particular purposes. That is to say, we simply use screens as
we act and relate ourselves to and in the world, mainly within a familiar organizational
or institutional context. In the natural attitude screens are familiar ‘places’, simply there
for our use. This familiarity may even lead us to think that the question of the meaning
of the screen is odd and perhaps an ‘intellectualization’ of something quite ordinary.
We note this strangeness as we proceed—that is, that although we are intimately
familiar with screens we tend not to see screens in their screening, i.e. qua screens.
As we move towards suspending the natural attitude and take up the phenomenologi-
cal attitude—looking at the screen in its screening—what do we note?
Screens in screening present, show, exhibit, what is supposed to be relevant ‘data’ in
each context, be it a spreadsheet while working at ofﬁce, or a schedule while walking in
the airport, or a movie while watching TV. The screen, in screening, ﬁnds itself at the
centre of the activity. In showing it attracts our attention, often also our physical
presence, as it locates our activity. It is often the focus of our concerns in that environ-
ment, be it at ofﬁce working, or be it at home watching the news. Apparently the screen
enters our ongoing activity and engagement in the world—as a screen—when we attend
to it by turning it on. When we push the ‘on’ button the screen locates our attention, we
sit down, quit—physically or cognitively—other activities we may have been performing
to watch the screen, as it is the place, the location, where what is relevant or supposedly
relevant for us at that particular time is happening. Indeed we rely on it as a transparent
simply there ready-to-hand thing that is simply available to shape, affect, and mediate
our own ongoing activity and engagement in the world (Heidegger 1962).
However, we must note that this screening of the screen—as involving, shaping, and
mediating our activities—does not sometimes happen, and sometimes not. It is not
only when we turn it ‘on’ that the screening of the screen is present. On the contrary,
that we push the ‘on’ button means precisely that the screening of the screen—its
pervasive transparent possibilities—are already suggested and present there in our
PHENOMENOLOGY, SCREENS, AND SCREENNESS
267

ongoing activity, our world.16 In the horizon of our ongoing everyday life—in its
dynamic nexus of relationships—other activities and things already refer to it, already
suggesting its meaningfulness. For example we organize our desk around our computer
and our living room around our TV. We locate screens where they are visible. We have
for example barcodes, text messages, notices at airports, and URLs that continually
direct us towards the screen. Thus, even if this or that particular screen is off, we are
already relying and basing ourselves, and our possibilities—the references in which we
dwell—on the already present screenhood of screens. We will return to this point below.
From our initial attempt at ‘seeing’ the screen, as it screens (or looking at what we
normally look through) we note that a screen gathers the attention of the people that
surround it. The actions of those people are already directly shaped by the presence of
the turned on screens, by the kind of content presented, and by the understanding people
surrounding them implicitly assume of that content. The phenomenological description
above of a screen points to the notions of showing relevant data for and about each
particular situation, of calling for attention, of suggesting relevance, of acting as mediation
between ourselves andthe world, and of gathering and locating what is appropriate in each
particular context. We now have a ﬁrst phenomenological description of some of the
central meanings of the screening of the screen. It is worth noting at this point that the
description of the screen above is also valid for what we know as displays—for example as
we ﬁnd in palmtop displays. In the analysis we will aim to show that there is no
fundamental phenomenological difference between a screen and what we refer to as a
display17—they both have their meaning in-the-world in ongoing screening.
In the next section we will expand our investigation by doing a phenomenological
analysis of the etymology of the word ‘screen’ and the word ‘display’. In this phase we
will attempt to trace and ‘uncover’ the paths of meaning of these words by juxtaposing
them with the description already given above.
Analysing the Etymology of ‘Screen’ (Phase 2)
When doing an etymology of the word ‘screen’ it is not the intention of phenomenolo-
gy to argue that a particular meaning of the word screen has a deﬁnitive superiority, or
is the ‘real’ meaning. What is decisive is that the tracing back of the evolution of the
meaning of the word ‘screen’ enables us somehow to make more evident the realm of
necessary relations/references in which the word ‘speaks’ and maintains its meaning. As
Heidegger (1977: 159) states:
What counts, rather, is for us, in reliance on the early meaning of a word and its
changes, to catch sight of the realm pertaining to the matter in question into which
the word speaks. What counts is to ponder that essential realm as the one in which
the matter named through the word moves.
268
LUCAS D. INTRONA AND FERNANDO M. ILHARCO

Thus, although our phenomenological analysis does share some concerns with
linguistic analysis, it goes beyond it. This analysis is not destined to ‘bring back’ the
historical original meaning of the words screen and display, but rather to bring forth
‘the [phenomenological] meaning of the thing itself, around which the acts of naming
and expression took shape’ (Merleau-Ponty 1962: p. xv).
Screens: calling for attention
‘Screen’ looks like a rather simple word. It is both a noun and a verb and its contemporary
plurality of meanings can be brought together along three main themes: projecting/
showing (e.g. TV screen), hiding/protecting (e.g. ﬁreplace screen), and testing/selecting
(e.g. screening the candidates) (OPDT 1997: 681–2). What are the meanings that bind this
plurality together?
The origins of the word ‘screen’ can be traced back to the fourteenth century.
According to the Merriam Webster Dictionary (MW) the contemporary English
word ‘screen’ evolved from the Middle English word screne, from the Middle French
escren, and from the Middle Dutch scherm. It is a word akin to the Old High German
(eighth century) words skirm, which meant shield, and skrank, which meant a barrier
of some kind. The word screen also suggests another interesting signiﬁcation, further
away from us in history. It is a word ‘probably akin’ (MW) to the Sanskrit (1000 BC)18
words carman, which meant ‘skin’, and kränti, which signiﬁes ‘he injures’ (MW). These
are possible meanings from which the Middle Age words evolved. The Sanskrit clue
suggests that the notions of protection, shield, barrier, separation arose, possibly within
the older Proto-Indo-European language, as metaphors of the concept of skin—possi-
bly that of human (or animal) skin.
Let us now suggest a very brief sketch of the chronological etymological relations
these words seem to have. A barrier or a protection is something raised over and
against another something. This ‘other’ something faces the barrier, as the wind faces
the windscreen of a car, which means that the screen protects against something, to be
excluded, that moves towards it. That which is moving towards the screen could have
been understood as a projection (from the Latin word projectare, which meant ‘to
throw forward’) over a surface—just like the arrows and bullets were projected over the
shields, or like the heat is projected onto the ﬁreplace screen. The screen protects and
shelters (just as a skin . . . ) because it receives and holds the projection of that which is
not to be received ‘inside’ the cover that the screen provides. But what happens when
something stopped by the screen is allowed to pass through? The answer is that it was
screened. This means that it was permitted to pass through that barrier, or that it
simply passed through it. The screen as a barrier is now understood as a ‘system for
detecting [for example] disease, ability, attribute’ (OPDT 1997: 681–2). This interpre-
tation links, or so we hope, the three central themes of meaning attached to the word
screen: hiding/protecting, projecting/showing, and testing/selecting (ibid.). Is there a
central intent, distinction, or feature, common to all these speciﬁc meanings of the
word screen? We would suggest that the central intent is ‘demands for our attention’19
as summarized in Table 10.1.
PHENOMENOLOGY, SCREENS, AND SCREENNESS
269

From Table 10.1 it seems reasonable to propose that the central intent of the
multiple meanings of ‘screen’ is the presumed necessary attention implied in ongoing
screening, for screening to make sense. We summarize this meaning as ‘calling for
attention’. We now turn our attention to the etymology of the word ‘display’, which is
often used as a synonym for screen with regard to information technology devices, and
which we will claim to have the same intentional meaning as screen.
Displaying: clear agreement
The word ‘display’ entered the English language as a verb in the fourteenth century,
and as a noun in the seventeenth century (MW). As a verb display means ‘to put or
spread before the view’ (e.g. display the ﬂag), ‘to make evident’ (e.g. displayed great
skill), ‘to exhibit ostentatiously’ (e.g. he liked to display his erudition) (MW). As a noun
it means ‘a setting or presentation of something in open view’ (e.g. a ﬁreworks display),
‘a clear sign or evidence’, an exhibition (e.g. a display of courage), an ‘ostentatious
show’, ‘an eye-catching arrangement by which something is exhibited’ (MW). These
notions of showing, in open view, and making evident are central to the word display.
What are the necessary conditions for making sense of these diverse meanings? It
seems that the central intent is some sense of apparentness, immediately clear to all.
Such apparentness has as its condition of possibility the idea of already there agree-
ment. For example we say ‘it is evident to all present here’ meaning it is impossible for
anyone present to disagree with what is taken to be apparent. They in turn are linked to
the idea of ‘unfolding’ and of some sort of agreement.
The work done in this step leads to an idea that is in an important way quite close to
the one we had at the end of the previous step. This is the idea of screen as the bringing
forth of (or calling forth for) attention and thereby implying evident relevance, since
‘calling for attention’ always implies the supposition, correctly or incorrectly, of some
evident relevance. This ‘evidence’ ‘relevance’, and ‘attention’—emerging from the
etymological analysis above—points towards the idea of some already operating agree-
ment (implicit or explicit) as its constitutive condition. If the ‘attention’ mentioned is
Table 10.1 The central intent of the multiple meanings of ‘screen’
Projecting/showing
(e.g. TV screen)
Projecting and showing assumes a target or
audience whose attention is to be captured.
Without such audience (target) showing
(projecting) will not make sense.
Calls for the
attention of
audience/to target
Hiding/protecting
(e.g. ﬁreplace screen)
Hiding and protecting assumes something to be
excluded from attention. Without exclusion
from attention hiding would not make sense.
Calls for the
exclusion from
attention
Testing/selecting
(e.g. screening the
candidates)
Testing and selecting assumes the attention of
those that ‘select and test’. Without such
attention selecting cannot be said to ‘select’.
Calls for the
attention of those
selecting
270
LUCAS D. INTRONA AND FERNANDO M. ILHARCO

our attention, as those before the screen, to what does ‘evidence’, ‘relevance’, and
‘agreement’ refer? Is the issue of evidence, relevance, and agreement a matter of the
content of that which is on the screen or does screen in its fundamental meaning (or
screening) already presume them?
Performing the Phenomenological Reduction
on Screen (Phase 3)
At this point we must recall that to recover in some way the essential meaning of the
screen, as revealed in screening, we must turn our reﬂection to the phenomenon as it
reveals itself from the ongoing structural correlation of self and world. It is now
important that we suspend—as a methodological condition of our analysis—the neces-
sity of any particular empirical examples of this or that screen. Performing the
phenomenological reduction does this. This means reducing the phenomenon screen
to its ongoing appearance in the horizon of the already situated intentionality, dis-
regarding characteristics that we value in it as a particular empirically ‘existent’ thing,
while attempting to preserve its meaning as fully as possible.
As we perform the phenomenological reduction it is important to note that this
intentional ‘object’, the screen in our already situated consciousness, in its ‘screening’,
is not some pure isolated and abstract thing that has meaning in itself as such. For us to
grasp the meaning of the screen as screening, we need to have already presumed its
world—i.e. nexus of relationships without which it would not have any meaning as
such. Thus, the screen, in its essential meaning, always already refers to its functioning
in a world in which it makes sense, because it, and the other things and activities in the
world mutually refer to each other as meaningful. The reduction is a return exactly to
this horizon of meaning.
Having suspended the supposition of the necessary existence in any particular
empirical screen we note that any screen, to make sense as a screen, still seems to
require as necessary ‘a calling for attention’. Without this ‘calling for our attention’,
screens would no longer be screens, merely surfaces or objects. Thus screens, in
their screening, seem to be promises of bringing to make evident what is relevant,
while simultaneously hiding their claimed physical being behind that same rele-
vance. We see that screens, in screening, function in the ﬂow of our ongoing
activity in the world, that is, transparently as simply there ready-to-hand beings
(Heidegger 1962). Because the content displayed always ‘shows up’ within our
ongoing activity whole it is already presumed relevant data—that is, data deserving
our attention. The reduced phenomenon of screen appears as something devised to
attract—or rather that already has—our attention and situate our action in the
ongoing activity of our world of work, entertainment, travel, etc. This reﬂection can
be made clearer by realizing the kind of difﬁculty one has to go through in order to
imagine a situation in which screens do not present relevant data at all. For
PHENOMENOLOGY, SCREENS, AND SCREENNESS
271

example experiencing a PC monitor at the NY Stock Exchange showing the
ongoing schedule of the trains of some Asian city; or the display of the cash
registers of a supermarket showing air trafﬁc control data. These ‘screens’ may
have an initial curiosity value but will quickly become ornaments in the back-
ground—they simply do not screen. These cases demonstrate the difﬁculty to
imagine these surfaces as screens because in order to do so we would need to
abandon the essential meaning of the screen, yet still force ourselves to use that
same essence to understand an object that looks as if it has lost its meaning as a
screen.
Screens display relevant data for us within the involvement whole in which we
relate ourselves to the world. The data on screens grab our attention within our
particular involvement whole (Heidegger 1962) in which it refers to our activities
and our activities refer to it—within a particular ‘form of life’.20 For example, we
can imagine what a man from the ﬁfteenth century might think when confronted
with a screen of an Automatic Teller Machine (ATM). That surface which we refer
to as a ‘screen’ would merely be a potentially curious object for him. It would not
be a ‘screen’ because he does not already dwell in a world—referential whole—that
would render it meaningful as such. The screen would not be a ‘screen’ for him as
it would not call for his attention, it and the content displayed ‘on’ it would not
seem relevant as it is not already a screen for him; he would simply not recognize it
in its essential meaning. However, for us, who already dwell in the world of bank
accounts, the screen in screening is already calling for our attention as a possibility
to see my ‘bank balance’, or to withdraw cash from my account, for example. The
data on the screen refer to me, refer to my residence, my transactions, my ﬁnancial
status, my overdraft facility, and so forth; these in turn refer to other aspects of my
ongoing activity in the world and they refer to it—Can I afford to buy something or
not? Has my salary been deposited? etc.
Thus, screens in screening claim an ongoing meaning in-the-world as focal inter-
pretive surfaces, presenting, making evident, relevant data for our involvement and
action in the world. Screens promise to make evident our ongoing activity in-the-
world, because they present an already interpreted and selected ‘screened’ world to us.
This screened world is already consistent with our ongoing involvement in that world,
within our form-of-life. Thus, foremost and primarily screens do not ‘show’ the data
that appear ‘on’ the screen, but rather a form of life as such.
This phenomenological reduced description of screen shows how closely inter-
twined the ideas of ‘attention’, ‘relevance’, and ‘world’ are in the essential meaning
of the screen—as such it also suggests references to notions of some necessary
agreement. However, this is not enough for a fully phenomenological characteri-
zation of the phenomenon screen. In order to reach the essential meaning of
the screening of screens we must now try to reach beyond this common ground
to identify the strictly necessary references for the phenomenon screen to be what
it is.
272
LUCAS D. INTRONA AND FERNANDO M. ILHARCO

Investigating the Essential Meaning of the Screen (Phase 4)
To gain access to the essential meaning of the screen is not to generalize. As mentioned
above generalization, as a process, already presupposes the existence of some essential
meaning for its operation. Moreover, as is evident from our analysis thus far, the notion
of ‘essence’ we use accounts for some grounded and historical way of unfolding that
evolves and changes in-the-world (Heidegger 1962, 1977). As such, it does not point to
some supposed static concept, object, or Platonic idea. Rather we take the investigation
of the essence of the screen, in recognition of the work of Heidegger, to be an attempt to
uncover the fundamental meanings, the grounding references, and the main and
decisive contours as it were, of the growing and pervading presence of screens in our
contemporary world.
The way in which screens are screens in-the-world of ongoing activity is of course
common to all screens. Nevertheless, it is common not only to the examples analysed
but to all potential examples of that phenomenon, because the essence is such that
without it there is no phenomenon. Imagination, ‘by discovering what one can and
what one cannot imagine’ (Hammond, Howarth, and Keat 1991: 76), is the key to the
continuation of our analysis. This analysis aims to strip out of our preliminary
phenomenon of screening those elements that in spite of being common are not
necessary for a screen to be screening. Since we have a pervasive and ongoing experi-
ence with screens we now no longer need empirical observation for discovering the
answers we need. Rather, in every new variation in imagination we know the object we
describe is an object of that same kind, a screen, if we recognize it as such, as a screen.
Thus, the implicit criterion of recognition—my ability to recognize the object as the
object it is—is the decisive way of this essential eidetic reduction (Spiegelberg 1975,
1994; Husserl 1995, 1970a).
Firstly, we note that the same surface can be considered a screen and not considered a
screen even if it displays the same data, as is clear from our example of the ATM above. If
we have a mirror, with the size and shape of a screen, it displays data—the images it
reﬂects—but we do not consider it to be a screen but a mirror. Nonetheless, we can
equally have a screen displaying exactly the same image as the mirror and consider it a
screen and not a mirror. So, what is the criterion that is implicit in this imagined
experience? Mirrors reﬂect, screens present. This means the kind of data displayed by
these different objects have diverse origins. In the case of mirrors it is merely reﬂecting
back what it receives. However, in presentation there operates a fundamental process of
ordering. Presentation always assumes a theme, in the way that a jigsaw puzzle, to be a
jigsaw puzzle, assumes a whole that will be its ordering criterion.
Furthermore, the presumed theme of the presentation derives its meaning from an
ongoing horizon of activity that already renders it meaningful as a relevant presenta-
tion. As Wittgenstein (1967: 88) argued, words do not refer to something because we
agreed it, rather they already have meaning because we share a form of life—a
meaningful ongoing activity whole. Conversely, the screen has meaning, not because
PHENOMENOLOGY, SCREENS, AND SCREENNESS
273

we have agreed its content, but because in screening it necessarily assumes an already
understood meaningful activity whole as its condition of possibility—one could say its
already present organizing theme. Thus, we can say that the meaningfulness of the data
presented on screens does not depend on the perceiving subject’s perspective as such—
i.e. it is not a matter of an interpretation as such—but rather on the form of life in which
it already functions as meaningful. Screens present meaningful data, that is, data that
were previously already selected in accordance with an already implied meaningful
whole and therefore they gather and locate the attention of the people surrounding
them. In watching, one could of course disagree with the relevance of this or that
particular data being presented on the screen, but that evaluation itself already suggests
a horizon of meaning in which such judgements would make sense.
Screens are not mirrors in that they do not reﬂect whatever they face. They are a
presentation of what is already relevant within the ﬂow of our purposeful action.
However, we must also note that in selecting for presentation, in displaying—thus in
making relevant or evident—other possibilities are necessarily always implicitly exclud-
ed. Thus, the screen, as screen, conceals and ﬁlters in its revealing. For this to be the
case, there is the logical necessity of a previously agreed grounding on the basis of which
something can be ﬁltered, can be screened, at all. To reveal implies to conceal; they both
mean to ﬁlter, that is, to screen. The revealing and concealing of screening implies an
already there, implicitly and fundamentally shared and agreed form of life, on the basis
of which the things on the screen become constituted as meaningful and the way the
world is (Heidegger 1962). We must emphasize that our discussion refers to screens,
qua screens, which collect and attract attention. The agreement, implied in them, refers
to some shared ontological understanding about the ‘make-up’ of the world, which is
the basis on which our own actions with respect to screens gain their references and
signiﬁcance. Obviously, it does not mean that one has to agree with the terms,
conditions, analysis, or format of what is displayed. The agreement is only with regard
to the referential whole within which the screen is a screen—i.e. attracts our attention
and directs our ongoing activity in that form of life. Thus, by the term ‘ontological’ here
we are referring to the idea that the agreement implied by relevance and attention
already suggest that we have agreed to take the world to be in the terms it is being
presented. For example we see the news on television as the ‘news’ and take it to be
referring to actual events, or we see the arrival time of the train on the monitor and take
it to refer to the actual possibility of a train arriving at that time, or we see the numbers
on the ATM screen to be the actual amount of money we have to spend, etc.
It is worthwhile to note that the screen as such is ﬁrst and primordially seeing,
watching, perceiving with the eyes. We, as human beings, have a structural tendency to
assume the primacy of seeing. Seeing, according to Heidegger (1962: 214), is ‘a peculiar
way of letting the world be encountered by us in perception’. In everyday practical
activity the human sense of sight performs a central role in our involvement in-the-
world (Heidegger 1962). What is at stake in this supremacy of seeing, so to speak, is not
a characteristic or feature of humans, but an ontological conception of being human in
which cognition is conceived as seeing. This fundamental conception, the ontological
274
LUCAS D. INTRONA AND FERNANDO M. ILHARCO

primacy of seeing, grounds the way in which screens gain ontological importance as
screens—rather than as mere dynamic surfaces.
This priority of seeing, in which cognition is understood as seeing, and thus seeing as
the access to truth, can be traced back to the early Greek thought of Parmenides
(Heidegger 1962: 215) and especially in the work of Aristotle (1998) as presented in his
treatise Metaphysics. Saint Augustine also noted this priority of ‘seeing’—this corre-
spondence between seeing and cognition. In this regard Heidegger (1962: 215) refers to
Saint Augustine’s work from The Confessions:
We even use this word ‘seeing’ for the other senses when we devote them to
cognizing ( . . . ) We not only say ‘See how that shines’ ( . . . ), but we even say ‘See
how that sounds’, ‘See how that is scented’, ‘See how that tastes’, ‘See how hard that
is’ ( . . . ) Therefore the experience of the senses in general is designated as the ‘lust
of the eyes’; for when the issue is one of knowing something, the other senses, by a
certain resemblance, take to themselves the function of seeing—a function in which
the eyes have priority. (Saint Augustine quoted in Heidegger 1962: 215–16)
The power of the ontological suggestions ‘on’ screens is evident when we realize that
we live in a tradition in which to see is to believe and what is believed is what is true.
This priority of seeing, the primacy of the human sense of vision over the other senses,
is a thesis defended by McLuhan (1962, 1964). He claimed that the phonetic alphabet,
invented more than 4,000 years ago, was the technology that brought about that
primacy, introducing us into a world dominated by vision-based patterns, modes,
and equilibriums. This priority of seeing, in which cognition is understood as seeing,
and thus seeing as the access to truth, gets revealed in a particular way in screens. In the
phenomenon screen, seeing is not merely being aware of a surface. The very watching
of the screen as screen implies an already present ontological agreement about the
nature of the world; a world that is relevant (and true) to us that share it, in and
through the screening of the screen. This is an important hint if we are to understand
the power of screens in contemporary organizations and society.
In the phenomenon screen, seeing is not merely being aware of a surface. The very
watching of the screen as it screens implies an already there ontological agreement
about the nature of the world—as a world that is relevant (and true) to us that share
it, in and through the screens we face. Screens, in their screening, already have
the attention of those surrounding them because they are focal points of already
agreement, because what is displayed already relies on a context of a fundamental
already present agreement. It is exactly this already agreement that we depend on as
managers, users, train drivers, and so forth, when we turn to the screen to reveal our
world to us.
To conclude, the phenomenological meaning (Heidegger 1962, 1977) of screen qua
screen reveals itself as already ontological agreement. It is this already agreement that
calls for our attention, attracts us, makes us look at the screen in its screen-ness, and
simultaneously condemns to forgetfulness that which was already agreed upon, precisely
because it is not an agreement but an already agreement. This already agreement is a
PHENOMENOLOGY, SCREENS, AND SCREENNESS
275

form of life in which the screens can be said to be, in a very profound way, its skin. As
already agreement, the thinking, the bargaining, the transacting, the negotiating, that
typically precede an agreeing emerge as pre-emptively excluded. It is because this
concealed meaning of ‘already agreement’ is the essential background of ‘relevance’
and ‘calling for attention’ that the screen does not show itself, but rather hides itself, as
it pursues its way in the world. This is where we started. We noted that we do not tend
to look at screens in its screening but rather at what appears on their surface. As such
screens ‘screen’ our world: concealing and spreading this already agreement. Indeed it
is important to underscore the ongoing concealing and spreading of meaning in
screening, made possible by the necessary already agreement of ongoing screening.
We must emphasize that this analysis of ours only provides the preliminary outlines
of a full phenomenology of screens. It still requires further critical consideration to
expose suppositions yet to be scrutinized. It also needs more imaginative variation to
extend the analysis to other realms of screens, and so forth. Nevertheless we hope that it
does serve as a useful illustration of the potential of phenomenology to move us beyond
this or that screen, or the way this or that person interprets screens, to the essential
meaning of screens as they function in the world of everyday meaningful activity.
Some Empirical Conclusions on the Screening of Screens
Unfortunately space will not allow us to explore all the possible empirical consequences
and implications of our analysis. Nevertheless, we will offer here, for illustrative
purposes, some brief comments to point out the empirical relevance of our phenome-
nological ﬁndings.
The power of already agreement can, for example, be seen with regard to our general
view of television in everyday life. We often refer to people without television as ‘living
in another world’. As Fry (1993: 13) puts it, the ‘television has arrived as the context’
and those people without one seem to be out of that context. The power of television to
reinforce what is presented just by the presentation itself has important consequences
in our daily lives: ‘all that is important is revealed on television while all that is so
revealed on television acquires some authority’ (Adams 1993: 59). But this power does
not belong to the essence of television but rather to the essence of screens. This is also
evident from the fact that the kind of data about us that appear on a screen, at the
bank, at the ofﬁce, at the medical doctor, at a public department, are often taken as
more valid and trustworthy than ourselves—as many of us may have found out to our
dismay. Indeed from our understanding of the screening of screens it is clear that this
primacy of that which is on the screen over that which is not on the screen seems to be
an issue that needs to be taken into account while designing new systems. Seemingly
trivial decisions about entities and attributes to be included/excluded in the database
have important ontological consequences for how we will understand our world.
Indeed, these decisions will function as ontological references as they become
276
LUCAS D. INTRONA AND FERNANDO M. ILHARCO

presented on screens, and will as such mediate the manner in which we relate to and in
that world.
It is possible to imagine all sorts of implications of our analysis for the importance of
screening: for example, the importance of the form of life in establishing screens when
managing change. And, for example, the power of screened information in creating
‘facts’ through screening as such. Due to space constraints we will not pursue these
here. Let us turn now to some critical comments and limitations of phenomenology.
SOME CRITICAL COMMENTS AND LIMITATIONS
OF PHENOMENOLOGY
..................................................................................................................
Phenomenology, like all other approaches, has been criticized from various quarters.
We will review some of these criticisms and indicate how other approaches emerged or
are related to these criticisms.
Phenomenology is often criticized for scholasticism and obscurantism. Critics argue
that authors in phenomenology have an excessive tendency to refer back to ancient
Greek masters for authority as well as using strange formulations and technical
terminology that serves only to hide, obscure, or circumvent the debate about its limits
and possibilities. There is no doubt that the texts that form the canon of phenomenol-
ogy are very difﬁcult to access. This may be because it is often read in English as a
translation from German or French, which does not always translate well. But more
than this, the authors often use ordinary language in a unique and technical manner.
This becomes necessary because our normal way of speaking is in the idiom of the
‘natural attitude’—which is by its very nature dualistic. For example in our use of
nouns, verbs, and adjectives we construct sentences that make us ‘see’ the world as
populated with bounded objects (nouns) that do certain things (verbs) and ‘have’
certain characteristics or attributes (adjectives). So when Heidegger claims that humans
are beings-in-the-world we would normally tend to think of humans as having ‘being-
in-the-world-ness’ as an attribute. However, Heidegger, means precisely to say that
being-in-the-world is what we are, as such; we are never not beings-in-the-world—self
and world is a unity from the start, never not a unity. The difference between these two
interpretations is profound. Thus, quite paradoxically, phenomenology needs a ‘for-
mal’ language to talk about something we all informally already experience, in the
background, as it were. However, because this background is in the background we do
not talk about; it ‘is not what we usually deal with and have words for, so to talk of it
requires a special vocabulary’ (Dreyfus 1991: 7).
Phenomenology in general, and Husserl’s transcendental phenomenology in partic-
ular, is often criticized as being solipsistic. By this they mean that phenomenology
reduces the reality of the world to some content in consciousness (the mind), i.e. that
the account of phenomenology implies that we are ultimately ‘locked up’ in our own
PHENOMENOLOGY, SCREENS, AND SCREENNESS
277

consciousness. This is a partial reading and understanding of phenomenology as
argued by Sokolowski (2000) and Zahavi (2003). Because phenomenology takes sub-
jectivity seriously and describes the world ‘as experienced’ does not mean that reality is
the product of the inescapable mind. Nor did Husserl’s transcendental reduction—the
return to the things themselves—imply that the ‘source’ of reality is somehow ‘locked
up’ in puriﬁed consciousness. Both of these views misses the radical innovation of
phenomenology, namely the immediate, always already there, unity of the self and the
world. For Husserl, as noted above, consciousness is not a subjectively constructed,
inner and private domain, that must be ‘eliminated’ but rather it is an always already
public mind that exists as a completely immanent—wholly present, never absent—
ongoing structural correlation with the world (Sokolowski 2000: 14). As Zahavi (2003:
46) argues: ‘To perform the epochç and the reduction is not to abstain from an
investigation of the real world in order to focus on mental content and representa-
tion . . . The epochç and the reduction do not involve an exclusive turn toward inward-
ness, and they do not imply any loss’ (emphasis added). One could, perhaps, argue that
Husserl is solipsistic in his descriptive methodology, in as much as he does want to give
an account of the things themselves through a reduction to the noematic structure of
consciousness (Moran 2000: 178). Equally, Heidegger argued that the essence of being
human is that we are beings that are always and already in-the-world—when we
become aware of the world we are already there, committed to things, doing things,
expecting things, and so forth. This already ‘thereness’ is the structural unity of world
and self, which is the horizon—referential whole—within which things stand out as
meaningful. This unity means that it does not make sense to talk about some meaning
‘in the mind’. In this same vein we can see that the debate about idealism and realism
does not appeal to phenomenology as it draws on a distinction phenomenology sees as
meaningless or at least not very helpful. Having said this, it must be acknowledged that
the fact that phenomenology operates from the ﬁrst person perspective, the world ‘as
experienced’, does make it weak with respect to its account of intersubjectivity.
Heidegger’s account of the intersubjective dimension as ‘being-with’ is acknowledged
to be less innovative than his other work. Also the work of Schutz and Luckmann
(1973) on intersubjectivity has not had the impact one might have expected. Neverthe-
less, the inﬂuence of phenomenology in the work of social theorists such as Giddens
(1984) is widely acknowledged.
Phenomenology is often criticized as being ahistorical, or of not taking history
seriously enough. This comment is often made together with the claim that phenome-
nology is an essentialist approach to understanding the world. We will discuss these
two claims together. There is no doubt that phenomenology is essentialist, this is
exactly its enormous potential. However, what phenomenology sees as ‘essential’ is
different from the general interpretation of the notion.21 Most often essentialism is seen
within the context of Platonic essences or ideal forms, which are really existing timeless
abstract entities of which physical objects are imperfect copies—or less starkly put,
some timeless entity that is the real remainder once we remove the incidental and
idiosyncratic. The Platonic need for transcending the speciﬁc and the incidental strips
278
LUCAS D. INTRONA AND FERNANDO M. ILHARCO

the object of its historicity. More signiﬁcant for phenomenology is the Aristotelian
notion of essence, namely, those properties that are essential or necessary without
which things could not exist or be the things that they are. The phenomenological
notion of essence is closer to the Aristotelian notion, in placing the emphasis on the
‘necessary conditions (not properties!) for a being to be what it is’—however, it is also
radically different, especially in the existential phenomenology of Heidegger. For
Heidegger the essence is not ‘in’ the object but rather already in-the-world—i.e. in
the ongoing referential whole that provided the ongoing necessary references for the
thing to be what it is already taken to be. The chair is ‘a chair’ because of all
the references, the referential whole or world, that refers to it as such and to which it
refers as such. Furthermore, this referential whole is the whole that it is because it exists
within the horizon of ﬁnite temporal human existence, of memory, activity, and
anticipation. The unity of self and world is a unity only within ﬁnite human temporali-
ty. That is why Heidegger’s major work is called Being and Time, being (essence) does
not exist outside human time. Indeed it would be extremely difﬁcult, we would argue
impossible, to give an account of everyday life without recourse to some form of
phenomenological essentialism. A response to the perceived essentialism, as well as
the inadequate intersubjective account in phenomenology, which nevertheless emerged
from phenomenology, is ethnomethodology (Garﬁnkel 1967). For ethnomethodology
the world is as it appears in the natural attitude. They argue that we, as phenomenol-
ogists, should not assume to have some privileged access to a world ‘more real’ than it
appears to normal everyday persons doing everyday things—for them there is nothing
to be gained through the phenomenological attitude. With this in mind they proceed to
examine the everyday practices by which actors make the ongoing ordinary life
possible. We would argue that this response may be valid if directed towards early
Husserlian phenomenology, but is certainly not valid with respect to existential
phenomenology. We cannot peruse this debate here—refer to Rogers (1983) for a
detailed discussion of the debate between phenomenology and ethnomethodology.
The most severe critique of phenomenology, in particular Husserlian phenomenol-
ogy, comes from the deconstructivist movement, in particular from Derrida (1973).
Derrida argues that phenomenology still mostly operates within the ‘metaphysics of
presence’ that characterizes the Western philosophical tradition. By this he means the
metaphysical assumption that that which is present to me now as such and such a thing
is the same as when that same thing was present to me earlier on. Or, differently stated,
that there is an ongoing self-evident presence that guarantees every re-presentation of
every previous present thing as such. For example: if I look at the cup in front of me,
look away, and then back at the cup, how will I know that it is indeed the same cup?
What provides the ongoing temporal horizon for me to take the cup to be the same cup
as some moments before? Derrida argues that ‘this supposed self-presence is actually
the result of a repeated substitution. As such, its ground is a nonpresence. Its basis is the
absence that allows the substitute to take the place of what it substitutes for’ (Mensch
2001: 5, emphasis added). Thus, the supposedly self-evident presence operates on the
ongoing recalling of what is not present (absence) to guarantee itself here and now.
PHENOMENOLOGY, SCREENS, AND SCREENNESS
279

Heidegger realized this, and his later work is indeed a response to this and also the
starting point for Derrida’s project of deconstruction. It must also be said that the
deconstruction project also eventually ﬁnds itself in a sort of ‘metaphysics of absence or
otherness’, always deferring to a beyond that will never be a presence as such; this is
evident in the work of Derrida (1973) and, in particular, the work of Levinas (1991).
We will not explore this debate further here—refer to Mensch (2001) and Lawlor
(2002) for a detailed discussion of the relationship between deconstruction and phe-
nomenology.
We will note that this lack of self-presence, and the need for repeated substitution,
identiﬁed by Derrida, is also the key to the hermeneutics project. The hermeneutics
project, which started with the problem of interpreting ancient texts, moved progres-
sively towards this idea of a fundamental always already distanciation at the heart of all
ongoing experience, i.e. the need to continually ‘bring back to the present’ what has
always already ‘slipped away’ into the past (Ricoeur 1981). Thus, we ﬁnd that we are
not at all transparent to ourselves, and as such we are continuously interpreting and
making sense of our own ongoing presence in the world—in a sense we, and all other
human beings, are always an obscure text in need of ongoing interpretation and self-
interpretation.
Now that we have outlined some of the critiques against phenomenology and
indicated some of the approaches that emanated from this critique we will turn to a
brief discussion of some work in phenomenology that may be relevant to the IS
community.
REFLECTIONS ON EXISTING WORK
IN PHENOMENOLOGY
..................................................................................................................
Albert Borgmann (1984) uses Heidegger’s (1977) critique of modern technology—as
presented in his famous essay ‘The Question Concerning Technology’—to argue that
we need to ﬁnd a ‘free’ relation to technology. In his essay Heidegger argues that the
essence of modern technology is Gestell (often translated as ‘enframing’). By this he
means that modern technology always already frames our relation to the world in a
particular way. He argues that this particular way is one in which everything (even
humans) are framed, or rather revealed, as ‘resources-for’ this or that project. Borg-
mann agrees with Heidegger’s analysis of modern technology in arguing that modern
technology reveals the world for us as ‘devices’. By this he means that modern
technology as devices hides the referentiality of the world—the worldhood of the
world—upon which they depend. They do not disclose the multiplicity of necessary
conditions for them to be what they are taken to be. In fact just the opposite, they try
and hide the necessary effort for them to be available for use. Thus, a thermostat on the
wall that we simply set at a comfortable temperature now replaces the process of
280
LUCAS D. INTRONA AND FERNANDO M. ILHARCO

chopping wood, building the ﬁre, and maintaining it. Our relationship with the
environment is now reduced to, and disclosed to us as a control that we simply set to
our liking. In this way devices de-world our relationship with things, in Heidegger’s
terminology. By relieving us of the burden of making and maintaining ﬁres our
relationship with the world becomes disclosed in a new way—as one of disengagement.
The world of things is not something to be engaged in, it is rather simply available
for consumption. Against such a disengaging relationship with things in the world
Borgmann argues for the importance of focal practices based on focal things. Focal
things solicit our full and engaging presence. We can think of the focal practice of
preparing and enjoying a meal with friends or family as opposed to a solitary con-
sumption of a fast food meal. If one takes Borgmann’s analysis seriously we might
conclude that we, as contemporary humans surrounded by devices, are doomed to
increasingly relate to the world in a disengaged manner. This might be so Borgmann
argues, however, it is also possible to have a free relation with technology—also modern
technology—if we imbed it in focal practices rather than use it, or accept it, as devices.
Otherwise we will, as Heidegger (1977) argued, become the devices of our devices.
Phenomenology’s critical contribution with respect to technology is not just at the
general level as developed by Borgmann. Hurbert Dreyfus (1993) used it to develop a
devastating critique of the artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). His work resulted in a complete
reorientation of AI, of which the most prominent is perhaps the current ‘embodied’
paradigm (Steels and Brooks 1995). Dreyfus, using Heidegger’s work, argued against a
representationalist approach to cognition and action. He argued that we do not have
representations in our mind that guide or direct our actions in the world. Rather, as
skilled actors in-the-world we draw upon tools ‘as possibilities for’ without having ﬁrst
to conceptualize the tool, the task, and the relationship between them—as assumed in
a representationalist account. To put it rather bluntly: skilled action is mindless.
Suchman (1987), an ethnomethodologist, also uses this type of Heideggarian argument
to show that we do not make plans and then execute it. Rather the plan only becomes
relevant as resources that can be drawn upon in situated action when things start to
break down.
The work of Dreyfus and Suchman has important implications for IS design and use.
For example, organizational actors do not have plans, strategies, or goals in their heads
that they then implement in action. Rather, as skilled actors they draw on events,
reports, and communications as ‘possibilities for’, without having to conceptualize
explicitly the strategy, the information, and relationship between them. This was also
demonstrated clearly in the work of Ciborra (2000). It is also clear to see that if we take
the work of Heidegger seriously, we would tend to think very differently about the role
methodology plays in the design process (Winograd and Flores 1986; Rathswohl 1991;
Introna and Whitley 1997).
Phenomenology may also help us to think very differently about the way in which
organizational actors use information in decision making, as argued by Winograd and
Flores (1986) and Introna (1996). For example, Introna (1996) argues that managers in
the world already understand what they need to do and most often use information
PHENOMENOLOGY, SCREENS, AND SCREENNESS
281

systems to ﬁnd ways to articulate and make sense of what they already know. He argues
with Heidegger that interpretation can only be based on an already present sense or
understanding and not the other way around, as assumed. This claim makes sense if we
see that interpretation is the ‘unravelling’ of the referential whole already present as the
necessary condition of meaningful ongoing skilful action. Interpretation, and the
information to support that, often becomes necessary in moments of breakdown
when managers are asked to explain themselves. Likewise, Winograd and Flores
(1986) argue that managers ﬁnd themselves in networks of commitments—Heidegger’s
notion of thrownness—within which the question is not ‘what should we do’ but rather
‘what is possible’ given my already there network of commitments—the already there
network of commitments that constitute the manager as ‘a manager’. Managers in the
world ﬁnd themselves ‘always already oriented to a certain direction of possibilities’
in which ‘relevance always comes from a pre-orientation within a background’
(pp. 147–9). For the manager-in-the-world the information system is just one of the
references in a dense, ongoing, referential whole that continuously locates and dis-
locates possibilities for action.
More generally, phenomenology has also interrogated phenomena such as cyber-
space and its relation to embodiment. In his thoughtful book Designing Information
Technology in the Postmodern Age Coyne (1995) argues that cyberspace is not an
ontological world—mere ‘information does not make worlds or space’ (p. 177). It is the
concerns of everyday life, the people we talk to, the community we are part of and the
things that occupy our attention that makes a world. In a similar vein Dreyfus (2001:
90) argues that:
Our body, including our emotions, plays a crucial role in our being able to make
sense of things so as to see what is relevant, our ability to let things matter to us and
to acquire skills, our sense of the reality of things, our trust in other people, and
ﬁnally, our capacity for making unconditional commitments that gives meaning to
our lives. It would be a serious mistake to think we could do without these
embodied capacities [and practices]—to rejoice that the World Wide Web offers
us a chance to become more and more disembodied, detached ubiquitous minds
leaving our situated, vulnerable bodies behind.
Don Idhe (2002: 15) also concludes that virtual bodies ‘are thin and never attain the
thickness of ﬂesh’. In the end when we switch the computer off we are still enmeshed in
our daily entanglements, our thrownness, in which we have to make the mundane
things work. The ‘shortcutting’ of the ordinary embodied and situated world through
the virtual—the fantasy of the virtual organization, will always eventually have to be
made ‘real’, or grounded, in the thick reality of everyday embodied practices—the
world as such. We need to accept that the representation is not the world, the map is
not the territory.
Ihde (1990) suggests through his phenomenological analysis of human/technology
relationships that we embody technology such as screens. He uses the example of
wearing eyeglasses. In wearing my eyeglasses I do not only see through them, they also
282
LUCAS D. INTRONA AND FERNANDO M. ILHARCO

become ‘see through’. In being that which they are, they already withdraw into my own
bodily sense as part of the ordinary way I experience my surrounding. Our phenome-
nology of screens suggests that screens are not just embodied they are also in a sense
already enworlded. By this we mean they are not simply a way we look at the world (as
representation of the world for example) but they already imply and draw upon a way
of living. Hence, like the eyeglasses, they withdraw into our sense of what is relevant, or
is not relevant, as part of our ongoing way of being. In this sense screens are embodied
but also simultaneously hermeneutic (in Ihde’s terminology). Although I might ﬁx my
focus on the text or images on the screen, what I actually see is not the screen itself but
rather immediately and simultaneously the world it already refers to, the activities,
people, or things already implied in the text and images on the screen. As we
increasingly draw on screens they withdraw to become for us immediately and already
the world itself. However, these hermeneutic possibilities and withdrawal will only take
place if the screen is already a screen for us. It is this prior screenness that our analysis
brings to the fore.
It is our argument that phenomenology offers a rich and subtle range of possibilities
for IS researchers. However, phenomenology itself requires a commitment to scholar-
ship and thoughtful thinking, which is always difﬁcult in a world often requiring ready-
made solutions rather than thoughtful interpretations.
FINAL COMMENTS
..................................................................................................................
Returning to our opening argument. In concluding that the phenomenological mean-
ing (Heidegger 1962, 1977) of screen, qua screen, is an ontological agreement, which
we express as already agreement, we stress that our approach is entirely phenomeno-
logical. We did not try to take into account any other possible perspectives or
approaches in presenting our phenomenology of the screen. That being said, our
analysis presented above only provides a rather preliminary outline of a full phenome-
nology of screens. It still requires further critical consideration to expose suppositions
yet to be scrutinized. Indeed the work of others such as Sobchack (1991, 1994, 1999)
might be taken up fruitfully in extending our analysis to include, for example, the
experience of watching screens. In addition our present analysis tends to privilege
information technology based screens. Some additional analysis is necessary to extend
it even further. Furthermore, the Heideggerian ontology as well as the methodological
approach of the investigation has set its boundaries—clearly other orientations are
possible, especially in non-Western terms. Even within phenomenology we might have
chosen other paths such as the pragmatic phenomenology of Ihde (1990, 1993, 2002) or
the ontological phenomenology of Ingarden (1989). Given the path we have taken we
believe we have shown that the screen is an important phenomenon in contemporary
life that merits further elaboration and analysis. We believe as well to have shown the
PHENOMENOLOGY, SCREENS, AND SCREENNESS
283

potential and possibilities of phenomenology in research in the social sciences in
general and in the area of information systems in particular.
As we indicated in the introduction, phenomenology is a response to all forms of
empirical and psychological reductionism as well as idealistic theoretical reductionism.
Empiricism is based on highly inappropriate suppositions, according to phenomenol-
ogy. For the empiricists the facts of the world ‘speak for themselves’, they are given to
us as that which they are, for example, a chair as a ‘chair’ and an attitude as an ‘attitude’.
In other words the objects, events, states, etc. that we observe are simply given to our
senses as that which they are rather than being constituted through our consciousness
of them. Their meaning is already inscribed on their very surfaces, as it were. The world
is simply as revealed through our natural attitude. With this supposition in hand they
then proceed to describe, measure, and account for the ongoing world in these ‘given’
terms. These evident given facts are captured through observation and then con-
structed into various explanations and theories of the world. Through this process of
‘theory-making’—which is the ‘stuff’ of positivism—they proceed to cloak the world
with all sorts of theoretical meanings divorced of any sense of actuality—leading many
to describe the theory of IS as irrelevant and meaningless, divorced of practice. Against
this view phenomenology argues that the world is always already meaningful. That we
already observe this or that thing in the world requires as a necessary condition an
already present horizon of meaning in which ‘this’ or ‘that’ show up as such. The task of
phenomenology is to give an account of this necessary horizon of meaning. Through
phenomenology we can give an account of the nexus of relationships (in consciousness
and in the world) that constitute these meanings as such. Such an account can provide
an entirely new foundation from which to direct empirical investigations of the world.
Since phenomenology is guided by experience, as experienced, and nothing besides, it
will maintain its actuality. Phenomenology is not against empirical investigation. Nor is
phenomenology denying that the world exists separate from our experience of it—i.e.
phenomenology is not anti-realist. It argues rather that such empirical investigation
will only make sense if grounded in the world, in the nexus of relationships or horizon
of meaning, that make such an investigation meaningful in the ﬁrst place. The ‘real
world’ of relevance is not merely speaking to more managers if such speaking is not
grounded in the world of ongoing and active meaning.
A second supposition of the empirical reductionism—in a sense required by the ﬁrst
supposition—is that things have meaning in themselves. As said above their meaning is
already inscribed on their very surfaces as such. This supposition leads to a decontex-
tualization of meaning and a reconstruction of meaning through theory making as
mentioned above. This leads to a theoretical world which is the form of life of
scientists—which is a legitimate location of study in its own right. For existential
phenomenology the meaning of the thing is always and already in the nexus of
relationships of the world. We can only understand managers, ‘as managers’, by
understanding and analysing the nexus of relationships that constitute the manager,
and which the manager continues to draw upon in order to be ‘a manager’. The
manager is what she is only in the ongoing involvement whole of ‘being a manager
284
LUCAS D. INTRONA AND FERNANDO M. ILHARCO

in the organization’. Thus, meaning-making of active consciousness is always and
already ‘grounded’ in the world of ongoing activity. Interpretation of phenomena is
not arbitrary or idiosyncratic. Every phenomenological attempt to give an interpreta-
tion of something can only be grounded in the world where it has its being, its meaning.
Thus, in phenomenology, contrary to the criticism often levelled at interpretivism, not
anything goes. Phenomenological interpretation is not the uncovering of the subject’s
private mind (this is psychological reductionism). It is not just another interpretation,
or the endless proliferation of interpretations. Interpretivism that is not grounded in
phenomenology can indeed be seen as psychologism—and there are quite a bit of so-
called interpretive studies in IS that are of this nature.
The challenge of this chapter to the IS community is to take phenomenology
seriously as a path towards meaningful analysis, theory, and research. With phenome-
nology we may be able to face our ‘crisis’ of rigorous and relevant (Keen 1991; Benbasat
and Zmud 1999); rigorous, as we ground ourselves only in the things themselves—
ongoing being-in-the-world as the completely immanent—wholly present, never
absent—ongoing structural correlation with the world; relevant, as our ultimate au-
thority is the ever-present horizon of meaning, which is the world itself.
NOTES
1. See e.g. Dreyfus 1982, 1993; Boland 1983, 1985, 1991, 1993; Winograd and Flores 1986;
Zuboff 1988; Boland and Day 1989; Introna 1993, 1997; Kjaer and Madsen 1995; Ciborra
1997, 1998, 2000; Haynes 1997; Introna and Whitley 1997; Porra 1999; Introna and
Ilharco 2000, 2004a, 2004b, 2006; Mingers 2001; Whittaker 2001; Ilharco 2002; Introna
and Whittaker 2002; Brigham and Introna 2006; Croon Fors 2006.
2. We must note that it is not given to us as an extended object. To take it as an object we
need to already have separated it from its immediate surroundings and background.
Furthermore, to take it as extended we need to already have assumed spatiality. Thus, any
taking of an object, even in its aspect, already requires, as necessary, a familiarity with the
world as its condition of possibility.
3. It is important to state that Husserl’s work is characterized by an earlier period and a later
period. In the earlier period Husserl was more interested in the formal structures of
consciousness (this work is often referred to as transcendental phenomenology). However
in his later work especially The Crisis of the European Sciences Husserl (1970) shifts
towards a more genetic phenomenology where he emphasizes the active, historical con-
sciousness rooted in the life world. In our discussion and analysis we will tend to focus on
this later Husserl rather than the earlier Husserl. It is also the later Husserl that creates the
bridge to Heidegger, which is important in our use of phenomenology as an existential
phenomenology when we analyse the phenomenon ‘screen’ below.
4. The term ‘always and already’ will be used frequently and is used in a very speciﬁc
manner. By this term we mean ‘always already’ in the sense that it is impossible to ﬁnd a
starting point as such—some point where it all started as it were. At any point in the past
that we may ﬁnd it is already active and busy. Furthermore, the ‘always already’ refers to
PHENOMENOLOGY, SCREENS, AND SCREENNESS
285

the fact that it is not sometimes active and sometimes not. Rather it is ‘always already’
active, engaged, and directed. Refer to Heidegger’s (1962) introduction of the term in
Being and Time.
5. As mentioned above, even the possibility of experiencing sound ‘as sound’ implies a
horizon of temporality that can hold together in the ‘now’ what has gone before and
anticipate what is yet to come.
6. We must note that the noemata are not simply generalizations. The process of generali-
zation itself already presupposes the existence of a noema since, for example ‘the
abstraction of the general idea “red” [or chair] is arrived at by leaving out of account
all those respects in which several red [chair] objects differ in order to hold on to that
respect in which they are similar. But the concept of similarity (or even respect) which is
in question here itself presupposes the very comprehension (of the essence of “red”
[chair]) which it is supposed to account for’ (Macann 1993: 9).
7. For an excellent in-depth discussion of Husserl’s theory of intentionally refer to Gurwitsch
(1967, 1982).
8. For excellent introductions to Heiddegger’s thought refer to Polt (1999) and King (2001).
9. Refer to Monika Langer’s (1989) and John Mingers’ (2001) commentary for a good
introduction to Merleau-Ponty’s work.
10. For Heidegger ‘being’ is not a substance but the ongoing unfolding of the referential
whole that reveals something as what it is, its ongoing phenomenological meaning. Thus,
for him being is a process not a substance. It would be better to write it as be-ing but this
becomes awkward.
11. Heidegger uses the hyphens in being-in-the-world to indicate the ongoing structural
unity of self and world so that we would not slip back into a natural language in which we
speak of the self without immediately implying also an already there meaningful world.
This is a bit awkward but it is important to signal.
12. We must note that we as humans do not take up projects in a similar way that we do not
take up things as objects. Our projects are always already part of our being-in-the-world.
We are always ahead of ourselves. When we get up in the morning we already anticipate
the day ahead. When we get into our cars we already anticipate the journey. To put it
rather abstractly, we are always and already project-ed as a necessary condition of what
we already are—as academics, managers, etc. We did not decide to take up the project to
write this chapter so much as we found ourselves writing this chapter as that which
already made sense for us as academics to do.
13. Refer to Polt (1999: ch. 3) for a very accessible account of Heidegger’s notion of world.
14. Elsewhere we have discussed the method as having ﬁve seven phases (Introna and Ilharco
2000). This is more in line with Spiegelberg’s discussion. However, due to space constraints
and considerations of pragmatic use of the method we will limit ourselves here to only four
fundamental phases. These will serve as a consistent way to apply phenomenology.
15. Unfortunately, due to space limitations we cannot provide a detailed discussion here. We
hope that the analysis of the screen will make the method clear. Also, refer to Spiegelberg’s
(1994: 677–719) account for more detail.
16. Take careful note again that when we use the term ‘world’ or ‘in-the-world’ in our
analysis we are using it in the phenomenological sense, i.e. the nexus or referential
whole in which things refer to each other as already meaningful—as explained above
(Heidegger 1962).
286
LUCAS D. INTRONA AND FERNANDO M. ILHARCO

17. Indeed other words we use to refer to screens, such as output device, dumb terminal,
cathode ray tube, liquid crystal display, ﬂat panel display, and so forth, are multiple
modes of showing particular aspects, functionalities, or perspectives of screens. They are
all phenomenologically related to the phenomenon ‘screen’.
18. Sanskrit—the language in which ‘The Vedas’, the oldest sacred texts, are written—was an
early form of an Indo-Aryan language, dating from around 1000 bc. The Indo-Aryan
languages are supposed to derive from the hypothetical Proto-Indo-European language
(before 3000 bc) from which also could have evolved Slavic, Baltic, Classical Greek, Latin,
Germanic, and other families of languages. Old High German, Middle English, and
Middle Dutch, belong to the West branch of the Germanic family. Middle French belongs
to the Italic (Latin) family (Crystal 1987).
19. Elsewhere we have demonstrated this central intent through sound analysis. Due to space
limitations we will not pursue such an analysis here (Introna and Ilharco 2000).
20. The notion of ‘form of life’ that we use here refers to a familiar and meaningful ongoing
activity whole in which things already appears as meaningful and therefore does
not require elaboration by those participating in the form of life—somewhat akin to
Wittgenstein’s (1967) notion of form of life.
21. For an excellent discussion on the phenomenological notion of essence refer to the work
of Mohanty (1997, 1970).
REFERENCES
ABC
(1999).
ABC
News
<http://archive.abcnews.go.com/sections/world/1997/97diana.
html>, accessed 29 December 1999.
Adams, P. (1993). ‘In TV: On “Nearness”, on Heidegger and on television’, in T. Fry (ed.),
RUA TV? Heidegger and the Televisual. Sydney: Power Institute of Fine Arts.
Aristotle (1998). The Metaphysics, trans. Hugh Lawson-Tancred. London: Penguin Books.
Baudrillard, J. (2002). Screened Out. London: Verso.
Benbasat, I. and Zmud, R. (1999). ‘Empirical Research in Information Systems: The Practice
of Relevance’, Management Information Systems Quarterly, 23(1): 3–16.
Boland, R. J. (1983). ‘The In-formation of Information Systems’, in R. J. Boland and
R. A. Hirschheim (eds.), Critical Issues in Information Systems Research. New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 363–94.
—— (1985). ‘Phenomenology: a Preferred Approach to Research on Information Systems’, in
E. Mumford et al. (eds.), Research Methods in Information Systems. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Science Publishers B.V., 193–201.
—— (1991). ‘Information System Use as a Hermeneutic Process’, in H.-E. Nissen, H. K. Klein,
and R. A. Hirschheim (eds.), Information Systems Research: Contemporary Approaches and
Emergent Traditions. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 439–64.
—— (1993). ‘Accounting and the Interpretive Act’, Accounting, Organisations and Society,
18(2/3): 125–46.
—— and Day, W. F. (1989). ‘The Experience of System Design: A Hermeneutic of Organiza-
tional Action’, Scandinavian Journal of Management, 5(2): 87–104.
PHENOMENOLOGY, SCREENS, AND SCREENNESS
287

Brigham, M., and Introna, L. D. (2006). ‘Hospitality, Improvisation and Gestell: A Phenome-
nology of Mobile Information’, Journal of Information Technology, 21(3): 140–53.
Borgmann, A. (1984). Technology and the Character of Contemporary Life. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Cerbone, D. R. (2006). Understanding Phenomenology. Chesham: Acumen Publishing.
Ciborra C. (1997). ‘De Profundis? Deconstructing the Concept of Strategic Alignment’,
Working paper, Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
—— (1998). ‘From tool to Gestell’, Information Technology and People, 11(4): 305–27.
—— (2000). From Control to Drift: The Dynamics of Corporate Information Infrastructure.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Coyne, R. (1995). Designing Information Technology in the Post-modern Age: From Method to
Metaphor. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Croon Fors, A. (2006). Being-with Information Technology: Critical Explorations beyond Use
and Design. Ph.D. thesis, Department of Informatics, Umeå University, Sweden.
Derrida, J. (1973). ‘Speech and Phenomena’, in Speech and Phenomena and Other Essays on
Husserl’s Theory of Signs, trans. David Allison. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University
Press.
Dreyfus, H. (1982). What Computers Can’t Do: The Limits of Artiﬁcial Reason. New York:
Harper & Row.
—— (1991). Being-in-the-World: A Commentary on Heidegger’s Being and Time, Division
I. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— (1993). What Computers Still Can’t Do: A Critique of Artiﬁcial Reason. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
—— (2001). On the Internet. New York: Routledge.
Fry, T. (1993). RUA TV? Heidegger and the Televisual. Sydney: Power Publications.
Garﬁnkel, H. (1967). Studies in Ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Giddens, A. (1984). The Constitution of Society. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Glendinning, S. (2007). In the Name of Phenomenology. London: Routledge.
Gurwitsch, A. (1967). ‘Intentionality, Constitution, and Intentional Analysis’, in J. Kockel-
mans (ed.), Phenomenology. New York: Anchor Books, Doubleday and Co, 118–37.
—— (1982). ‘Husserl’s Theory of the Intentionality of Consciousness’, in H. Dreyfus (ed.),
Husserl’s Intentionality and Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 59–71.
Hall, H. (1993). ‘Intentionality and World: Division I of Being and Time’, in Charles Guignon
(ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Heidegger. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hammond, M., Howarth, J., and Keat, R. (1991). Understanding Phenomenology. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Haynes, J. D. (1997). ‘Meaning as Perspective: A Phenomenology of Information Systems’.
Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Bond University, Queensland.
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and Time. Oxford: Blackwell.
—— (1971). Poetry, Language, and Thought, trans. Peter D. Hertz. New York: Harper.
—— (1977). The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays. New York: Harper
Torchbooks.
—— (1978). ‘On the Essence of Truth’, Basic Writings. London: Routledge
—— (1982). The Basic Problems of Phenomenology. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Heim, M. (1993). The Metaphysics of Virtual Reality. New York: Oxford University Press.
—— (1999). Electric Language. New York: Yale Universtity Press.
Husserl, E. (1964). The Idea of Phenomenology. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
288
LUCAS D. INTRONA AND FERNANDO M. ILHARCO

—— (1969). Formal and Transcendental Logic. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
—— (1970a). The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology: An Intro-
duction to Phenomenological Philosophy. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
—— (1970b). Logical Investigations. New York: Humanities Press.
—— (1995). Cartesian Meditations: An Introduction to Phenomenology. Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Ihde, D. (2002). Bodies in Technology. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
—— (1990). Technology and the Lifeworld: From Garden to Earth. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
—— (1993). Philosophy of Technology—An Introduction. New York: Paragon House.
Ilharco, F. M. (2002). ‘Information Technology as Ontology’. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis,
London School of Economics.
—— (2008). ‘A catarse do fogo: a simbologia do fogo nos ecrãs da televisão’, Comunicação &
cultura, 5. Lisbon: FCH UCP.
Ingarden, R. (1989). The Ontology of the Work of Art, trans. R. Meyer with J. T. Goldthwait.
Ohio, OH: Ohio University Press.
Introna, L. D. (1993). ‘Information: A Hermeneutic Perspective’, in Proceedings of the First
European Conference of Information Systems. Henley-on-Thames, 171–9.
—— (1997). Management, Information and Power. London: Macmillan.
—— and Ilharco, F. M. (2000). ‘The Screen and the World: A Phenomenological Investigation
into Screens and our Engagement in the World’, in R. Baskerville et al. (eds.), Organiza-
tional and Social Perspectives on Information Technology. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 295–319.
————(2004a). ‘Phenomenology, Screens and the World: A Journey through Phenomenol-
ogy with Husserl and Heidegger’, in J. Mingers and L. Willcocks (eds.), Social Theory and
Philosophy for Information Systems. London: Wiley & Sons.
————(2004b). ‘The Ontological Screening of Contemporary Life: A Phenomenological
Analysis of Screens’, European Journal of Information Systems, 13(3): 221–34.
————(2006). ‘On the Meaning of Screens: Towards a Phenomenological Account of
Screenness’, Human Studies, 29(1).
———— and Fäy, E. (eds.) (2008). Phenomenology, Organisation and Technology. Lisbon:
Universidade Católica Editora.
—— and Whitley, E. A. (1997). ‘Against Method-ism’, Information Technology and People,
10(1): 31–45.
—— and Whittaker, L. (2002). ‘The Phenomenology of Information Systems Evaluation:
Overcoming the Subject Object Dualism’, in E. H. Wynn et al. (eds.), Global Organisational
Discourse about Information Technology. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 155–75.
Kant, I. (1965). Critique of Pure Reason, trans. Norman Kemp Smith. New York: St Martin’s
Press.
Keen, P. (1991). ‘Relevance and Rigor in Information Systems Research: Improving Quality,
Conﬁdence Cohesion and Impact’, in H.-E. Nissen, H. Klein, and R. Hirschheim (eds.),
Information Systems Research: Contemporary Approaches & Emergent Traditions. Amsterdam:
North-Holland, 27–49.
King, M. (2001). A Guide to Heidegger’s Being and Time, ed. John Llewelyn. Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press.
Kjaer, A., and Madsen, K. H. (1995). ‘Participatory Analysis of Flexibility’, Communications of
the ACM, 38(5): 53–60.
PHENOMENOLOGY, SCREENS, AND SCREENNESS
289

Kockelmans, J. (1967). Phenomenology. New York: Anchor Books, Doubleday and Co.
Langer, M. (1989). Merleau-Ponty’s Phenomenology of Perception: A Guide and Commentary.
Basingstoke: Macmillan Press.
Lawlor, L. (2002). Derrida and Husserl: The Basic Problem of Phenomenology. Bloomington,
IN: Indiana University Press.
Leedy, P. D. (1997). Practical Research: Planning and Design. 6th edn., Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Levinas, E. (1991[1974]). Other than Being or Beyond Essence. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publisher.
Macann, C. (1993). Four Phenomenological Philosophers: Husserl, Heidegger, Sartre, Merleau-
Ponty. London: Routledge.
McLuhan, M. (1962). The Gutenberg Galaxy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
—— (1994) [1964]. Understanding Media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— (2001) [1967]. The Medium is the Massage. Corte Madera, CA: Gingko Press.
Manovich, L. (1995). ‘An Archaeology of a Computer Screen’, NewMediaTopia, Soros Center
for the Contemporary Arts, Moscow.
—— (2001). The Language of New Media. Chicago, IL: MIT Press.
Mensch, J. R. (2001). ‘Derrida-Husserl: Towards a Phenomenology of Language’, Archai: New
Journal for Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 1–66.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of Perception. London: Routledge.
Mingers, J. (2001). ‘Embodying Information Systems: The Contribution of Phenomenology’,
Information and Organization, 11(2): 103–28.
Mohanty, J. (1970). Phenomenology and Ontology. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
—— (1997). Phenomenology: Between Essentialism and Transcendental Philosophy. Evanston,
IL: Northwestern University Press.
Moran, D. (2000). Introduction to Phenomenology. London: Routledge.
MW (1999, 2000). Merriam Webster Dictionary <http://www.m-w.com>.
OPDT (1997). Oxford Paperback Dictionary & Thesaurus, ed. Julia Elliot. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Polt, R. (1999). Heidegger: An Introduction. London: UCL Press.
Porra, J. (1999).‘Colonial Systems’, Information Systems Research, 10(1): 38–69.
Rathswohl, E. J. (1991). ‘Applying Don Idhe’s Phenomenology of Instrumentation as a
Framework for Designing Research in Information Science’, in H.-E. Nissen, H. K. Klein,
and R. A. Hirschheim (eds.), Information Systems Research: Contemporary Approaches and
Emergent Traditions. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 421–38.
Ricoeur, P. (1981). Hermeneutics and the Human Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Rogers, M. F. (1983). Sociology, Ethnomethodology, and Experience: A Phenomenological
Critique. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schutz, A., and Luckmann, T. (1973).The Structures of the LifeWorld. Evanston, IL: North-
western University Press.
Sobchack, V. (1991). The Address of the Eye: A Phenomenology of Film Experience. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
——(1994). ‘The Scene of the Screen: Envisioning Cinematic and Electronic “Presence”’, in
H. U. Gumbrecht and K. L. Pfeiffer (eds.), Materialities of Communication. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press, 83–106.
290
LUCAS D. INTRONA AND FERNANDO M. ILHARCO

——(1999). ‘Toward a Phenomenology of Nonﬁctional Film Experience’, in J. M. Gaines and
M. Renov (eds.), Collecting Visible Evidence. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota
Press, 243–54.
Sokolowski, R. (2000). Introduction to Phenomenology. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Spiegelberg, H. (1975). Doing Phenomenology. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
——(1994). The Phenomenological Movement—A Historical Introduction. 3rd rev. edn.,
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Steels, L., and Brooks, R. (eds.) (1995). Building Situated Embodied Agents: The Alife Route to
AI. New Haven, CT: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Suchman, L. (1987). Plans and Situated Action: The Problem of Human-Machine Communi-
cation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Thevenaz, P. (1962). What is Phenomenology and Other Essays, ed. and trans. J. M. Edie.
London: Merlin Press.
Whittaker, L. (2001). ‘Information Systems Evaluation: A Post Dualist Interpretation’.
Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of Pretoria.
Winograd, T., and Flores, F. (1986). Understanding Computers and Cognition: A New Founda-
tion for Design. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley.
Wittgenstein, L. (1967). Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell.
Zahavi, D. (2003). Husserl’s Phenomenology. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Zuboff, S. (1988). In the Age of the Smart Machine. New York: Basic Books.
PHENOMENOLOGY, SCREENS, AND SCREENNESS
291

c h a p t e r 1 1
...............................................................................................
POST-STRUCTURALISM,
SOCIAL SHAPING OF
TECHNOLOGY, AND
ACTOR-NETWORK
THEORY: WHAT CAN THEY
BRING TO IS RESEARCH?
...............................................................................................
NATHALIE MITEV AND DEBRA HOWCROFT
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
Many social theories have been used to analyse information systems, for instance:
Foucault’s postmodernist concept of power/knowledge (Knights and Murray 1997;
Willcocks 2004); institutionalization (Silva and Backhouse 1997); structuration theory
(Orlikowski 1992; Walsham 1993; Jones, Orlikowski, and Munir 2004); social shaping
of technology (SST, Wilson and Howcroft 2003) and social construction of technology
(SCOT) (Howcroft, Mitev, and Wilson 2004); critical realism (Mingers 2004); gender
theories (Adam, Howcroft, and Richardson 2001); ir/rationality (Drummond 1996);
Bourdieu’s notion of habitus (Richardson 2003; Kvasny 2006), and actor-network
theory (ANT) (Monteiro and Hanseth 1996). Nevertheless, there is overall limited
reference in IS research to one of the most fundamental debates that has taken place in
the social sciences over the last thirty years: that of postmodernism/post-structuralism.
In this chapter we aim to address this omission by outlining this debate and high-
lighting relevant discussions and disputes. We do so in order to provide a clear
understanding of ANT as it originates from post-structuralist debates in the ﬁeld of
science and technology studies (STS).

We begin by summarizing some of the key debates that are of relevance within post-
structuralism and constructivism more speciﬁcally in management and organizational
studies, which have addressed these debates more fully than IS research. Next, we
outline STS, pointing out the debates between weak and strong constructivism and the
relationship between SST, SCOT, and ANT. Then, some important ANT concepts are
introduced before considering the use of ANT within IS research. The difﬁculties in
using ANT are outlined and we argue that these are due to a lack of exposure to post-
structuralism in IS research, as compared with other related disciplines such as
organization theory and critical management studies. The next section asks whether
it is possible for ANT to be critical on its own and suggests that consideration of efforts
by scholars in related ﬁelds to combine ANT with critical social analysis may be a
worthwhile pursuit for scholars of information systems. Finally, we warn that using
ANT without a sound understanding of its post-structuralist roots can reduce it to a
technicist and/or managerialist agenda and overlook its radical potential.
POST-STRUCTURALISM AND CONSTRUCTIVISM
..................................................................................................................
In the 1980s, some organization theorists rejected positivism and started using post-
structuralist approaches to carry out a critical study of topics such as power (Clegg
1989) or management as disciplinary control of the subject, using Foucauldian theory
(see Chapter 7 in this volume). Rejection of positivism is not automatically a move
towards social critique, just as to be a positivist is not automatically to be devoid of
critical concern, but there is some linkage. At the very least, a recognition of the socially
constructed nature of social arrangements points to their contingency and the possi-
bility of their reconstruction along different lines. This is an important critical element
of post-structuralism of which ANT is an example.
In their classic paper on critical theory and postmodernism in management studies,
Alvesson and Deetz (1996) consider that a sophisticated critique comes from post-
structuralism/postmodernism, which points to the agent-subject as crucial to critical
analysis. Post-structuralism comes in different versions, some of which are argued to be
reactionary as they undermine progress and emancipation. One of the most important
tenets is the centrality of discourse where the constitutive powers of language are
emphasized and ‘natural’ objects are viewed as discursively produced. This idea grew
out of the linguistic turn in French structuralist philosophy. This ﬁghts the objectivists
on the one hand with their science aimed at predicting/controlling nature and people,
and humanists (or interpretivists) on the other for privileging the individual’s reported
experience and a naive version of human freedom. Through language, constructionism
denies both the objectivist claim of objective truth, and the humanists’ essentialist
claims which miss the social/linguistic politics of experience. The Foucauldian version
views discourses as systems of thought which are contingent upon, as well as inform-
ing, material practices. For example, ‘corporate strategy’ discourses have power effects,
POST-STRUCTURALISM, SOCIAL SHAPING OF TECHNOLOGY
293

including the sustaining and enhancement of the prerogatives of management, the
generation of a sense of personal security for managers, the expression of a gendered
masculinity (see Chapter 21 in this volume), and the facilitation and legitimization
of the exercise of power. These practices linguistically and practically produce forms of
subjectivity through particular power techniques. Unlike the humanist essentialist
understanding of humans, the person in postmodernism is always social ﬁrst.
Subjectivity is a process where the discursive production of the individual replaces
the conventional essentialist understanding of people. The notion of the autonomous,
self-determining individual is rejected as ethnocentric and privileging rationality,
masculinity, vision, and control, and participating in the reproduction of domination
through discourses. The postmodernist understanding of objects and subjects is non-
dualistic. It is concerned with the apparent stability of objects and the difﬁculty of
unpacking the full range of activities that produce particular objects and sustain them.
The presence of objects is not unproblematic and they only become an object in a
speciﬁc relation to a being from whom it can be such an object. The point of view
creates the object. For instance, workers do not have objective properties but are
constructed by sets of relational systems which are not simply in the world but are a
human understanding of the world, are discursive or textual.
One aspect of post-structuralism that is of relevance concerns its critique of grand
narratives and its emphasis on multiple voices and local politics over large-scale
political projects. Examples of grand narratives can be the external world in empiri-
cism, human nature in humanism, Marxism’s class struggle, technical progress, or the
market economy in management. Stories in organizations connect to grand narratives
but different ones have a local situational character.
Other focal points in post-structuralism are the power/knowledge connection,
simulation, and resistance. It is impossible to separate power from knowledge and as
a result knowledge loses neutrality. For example, the discourse that produces a ‘man-
ager’ both empowers and disempowers the group of individuals formed as that object.
Power resides in the demarcations and the systems of discourse that sustain them,
including material arrangements. The demarcations provide forms of normative be-
haviour supported by claims of knowledge. Simulation takes precedence over the ‘real
world’ in contemporary social order, and signs (for instance information systems) have
‘model’ responses to a ‘model’ world. Much postmodernist research highlights resis-
tance and indeterminacy rather than rationality, predictability, and order. The primary
methods are deconstruction and resistance reading, and genealogy. Instead of getting it
‘right’, the point is to challenge guiding assumptions, ﬁxed meanings and relations, and
expose the search for unity and harmony that suppresses division and conﬂict.
Social constructivist approaches such as post-structuralism are based on the under-
standing that the search for grand narratives and universal foundations has failed
because the traditional social science ontology that there is a real world ‘out there’ that
can be known epistemologically is not valid. Structural functionalists assume that
world conditions exist separately from people’s interpretations of them; interpretivism
aims to counteract this. Additionally, the social constructivist perspective aims to
294
NATHALIE MITEV AND DEBRA HOWCROFT

subvert claims to objective knowledge about problems and expert status. The construc-
tionist position emphasizes that the activities through which problems are constructed
are rhetorical and analyses them as a social process, that is, as located within their social
context (Holstein and Miller 1993; Gergen 2001).
Social constructivist research has included the construction of theories and accounts
of institutions and of technical artefacts. Social constructivism has spread to science
and technology studies which reject both technological and social determinism (or
essentialism). Major advocates such as Latour and Woolgar (1979), Bijker and Law
(1992), and Collins and Pinch (1993) argue that there is no such thing as a social
problem that does not have technological components; nor can there be a technological
problem that does not have social components. Any attempt to make such a division is
bound to fail.
Constructivism: Beyond Interpretivist Research
Interpretivism has been used for many years in IS research (Walsham 1993; Walsham
1995; Orlikowski et al. 1996). In contrast to positivist interpretations of organizational
processes, interpretive methods aim at producing an ‘understanding of the context of
the information system, and the process whereby the information system inﬂuences
and is inﬂuenced by its context’ (Walsham 1993: 5). Within the interpretive tradition,
the study of the interaction between information systems and organizations has led to
the development of many theoretical models (e.g. Markus 1983; Markus and Robey
1988) and is associated with the emergent perspective (indeterminate interactions
between technology and human actors) and process theory. This enables the explora-
tion of the dynamic interplay among individuals, technology, and larger social struc-
tures. A form of constructivism is present in interpretivist IS research (see Orlikowski
and Baroudi 1991; Walsham 1993; Myers 1994; Orlikowski et al. 1996) in which two
pivotal notions are process and context. For instance, in Walsham’s view of interpre-
tivism, processes of change should be studied as interconnected or embedded levels of
analysis and broader contexts (such as economic, social, political, sectoral, structural,
and cultural).
There is also a strong link between interpretivism and the use of structuration theory
(see Chapter 5 in this volume). For example, Orlikowski (1992) uses Giddens’s
structuration theory and proposes a structurational model of technology, which under-
scores its dual nature as objective reality and as a socially constructed product. The
interaction of technology and organizations is ‘a function of the different actors and
socio-historical contexts implicated in its development and use’ (Orlikowski 1992:
405). Giddens’s structuration theory offers models of social action and structure
from individual to global levels: structure constrains actions, but at the same time,
human action serves to establish structure; modalities link action and structure.
POST-STRUCTURALISM, SOCIAL SHAPING OF TECHNOLOGY
295

However, Monteiro and Hanseth (1996) argue that conceptualizations of informa-
tion systems based on Giddens’s structuration theory, despite being very convincing,
‘lack in precision regarding the speciﬁcs of the IS’ (p. 326) and ‘are not ﬁne-grained
enough with respect to the technology to form an appropriate basis for understanding’
(p. 328). Instead, they claim that ANT is more effective for describing how minute,
technical design decisions are interwoven with organizational issues and for being
‘speciﬁc about the technology’ (p. 330). In their study of information infrastructure
standards, ANT proved useful in ‘accounting for how standards acquire stability, how
they become increasingly “irreversible”’ (p. 327).
More broadly, constructivism goes a step further than interpretivism in exploring and
blurring the boundaries between levels of analysis and distinctions between agency and
structure. This is because of its post-structuralism. When applied to technology it not
only emphasizes that the same technology has several meanings for different groups and
that there is a variety of interests in the process of developing and using a technology,
but it also underlines how information systems are intertwined with their social mean-
ings, and are not independent entities to which the social is merely added. There has
been growing interest in social constructivism in general on the part of IS researchers
(Askenas and Westelius 2000; McAdam and McCreedy 2000; Sarker 2000; Huysman
2002), as well as in ANT speciﬁcally (Bloomﬁeld and Vurdubakis 1994; Vidgen and
McMaster 1996; Holmström and Stalder 2001; Nandhakumar and Vidgen 2001).
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
..................................................................................................................
In order to understand how the constructivist approach has developed with ANT, it is
important to ﬁrst summarize the larger ﬁeld of STS in which the take-up of the
constructivist paradigm, particularly by the sociology of scientiﬁc knowledge, has
been very inﬂuential on ANT. One important proviso is to begin by stating that STS
scholars are deeply divided on themes such as relativism or constructivism and that
there are continuous debates on these issues. However, it is difﬁcult to appreciate or
participate in these debates without understanding how STS has changed with post-
structuralism. A useful overview of this can be found in Bucchi (2004).
Historians of science have, for a long time, analysed the growing disciplinary
specialization of science, particularly in the nineteenth century. Sociologists, notably
Robert Merton in the 1930–40s, who in effect created the discipline of the sociology
of science, started linking the institutionalization of science with other processes, e.g.
industrialization, capitalism, or religion (Merton 1938). This work concentrated initi-
ally on the professionalization and institutionalization of scientiﬁc work, social codiﬁ-
cation of the scientist’s role, values, and norms, and science as a social subsystem. It was
groundbreaking in that science came to be seen as a social institution, not a protected
activity with a sacred aura, but an object to be studied like any other social phenome-
non. The ‘normative structure of science’ (Merton 1942) had as its primary concerns
296
NATHALIE MITEV AND DEBRA HOWCROFT

the organizational and functional aspects of science as an institution capable of self-
regulation, understanding which values and norms guarantee the functioning of
science (Merton 1973).
The next wave of sociologists of science (Mitroff 1974; Mulkay 1974) criticized the
‘normative structure of science’ view as an idealization that was more prescriptive than
descriptive in its intent, of science as ‘it should be’. They developed counter-norms
which they claimed can also play a positive role in scientiﬁc inquiry: particularism
(individual characteristics are factors which inﬂuence how work will be judged); inter-
estedness (individual seeks to serve her/his own interests); individualism (property
rights); and organized dogmatism (scientist believes in her/his own ﬁndings while
doubting those of others). These were deemed to be more realistic in taking into account
behaviours around secrecy, survival, misconduct, competition, inequality, and away
from the initial idealized naive vision of science. Some of the concepts which originate
from this are now in common use, such as ‘gatekeepers’ and ‘invisible colleges’.
The contribution of these early authors was that they went beyond descriptive
detailed histories and effected a conceptual leap to analyse science as a social institu-
tion. From then on, the bulk of the sociological literature on science has developed in
opposition to the institutional approach.
The Sociology of Scientiﬁc Knowledge (SSK) is interdisciplinary (not just sociology)
and in particular, it draws on the philosophy of science and post-structuralism. One
major inﬂuence was Kuhn’s structure of scientiﬁc revolutions (1962) which looks at
the resistance raised by ideas, the possibility of seeing—or not seeing—the same objects
in an entirely different manner by observing them with other conceptual and interpre-
tive apparatuses or paradigmatic dimensions. Conﬁrmation and credence to data which
ﬁt, judgement of objectivity, discarding of observations from theory, and of theory from
observations are central themes. Science does not advance smoothly along a linear path
but by abrupt leaps and discontinuities. The emergence of a paradigm signals that a
research sector has consolidated itself into a scientiﬁc discipline. It is part of a paradigm’s
nature as a ‘perceptive ﬁlter’ to emphasize those features of reality that accord with it.
In the 1970s–80s Edinburgh SSK scholars (Bloor 1976; Barnes 1985; Shapin and
Schaffer 1985; Pickering 1992) applied these post-structuralist principles in their
studies of scientiﬁc work to highlight mechanisms of conﬁrmation bias, i.e. the
tendency to give greater importance to data which concur with one’s theoretical
model. Observation does discipline theory, but theory disciplines observation also.
Observation reports may be discarded on theoretical grounds, just as theories may be
discarded on observational grounds. Knowledge is the paramount social creation. SSK
argues that science is not just empirically grounded, but that the social inﬂuences
scientiﬁc beliefs. It opposes the institutional sociology of science approach and opens
the black box of science which the institutional approach had left largely intact.
Scientists produce knowledge against the background of their culture’s inherited
knowledge, their collectively situated purposes, and the information they receive from
natural reality. An important principle in SSK is the principle of symmetry, or how the
social does not just explain failures but also successes, scientiﬁc controversies, and
POST-STRUCTURALISM, SOCIAL SHAPING OF TECHNOLOGY
297

disputes. SSK explores causality (the conditions which bring about beliefs or states of
knowledge) and is impartial about truth/falsity, rationality/irrationality, success/failure,
in that both sides of these dichotomies require explanation. It is symmetrical in its
explanation as the same types of cause explain true and false belief. This is a clear vision
of science and technology as not exempt from social inﬂuences. Social factors like
interests, political ideologies, and cultural features should not be brought to bear solely
when knowledge jumps the rails of rationality or lapses into error. It is not that
observation or data from experience are valueless, but that they do not sufﬁce in
themselves to bring about changes in beliefs.
This followed with the emergence of ANT in the 1980s–90s which probed even
further inside scientiﬁc laboratory work (Latour and Woolgar 1979; Knorr-Cetina
1995) and adopted a more microsociological (Law 1986; Woolgar 1988; Callon 1991)
and anthropological stance (Bruno Latour is an anthropologist of science). It no longer
takes a scientiﬁc theory and sets it in relation to a speciﬁc historical and social context.
Rather it delves into the process itself that leads to the formation of the theory, isolating
its components and placing them under a magnifying glass. In order to carry out
microsociological empirical studies, it drew heavily on other currents of sociological
inquiry, in particular ethnomethodology (Garﬁnkel 1967). As a result it ﬂanks the
macrosociological and causal analysis with detailed inquiry into contingent processes,
producing case studies with minute reconstruction. The scientiﬁc fact is no longer seen
as the point of departure; it is now the point of arrival. Scientiﬁc knowledge is not only
socially conditioned, instead it is—from the very beginning—constructed and consti-
tuted through microsocial phenomena. Some of the ﬁndings proposed that a negotia-
tion occurs across transepistemic networks (e.g. ﬁnanciers, suppliers, policy makers)
thereby criss-crossing scientiﬁc and ‘non-scientiﬁc’ considerations. Also playing a
signiﬁcant part in the construction of a scientiﬁc fact is the rhetorical dimension:
discourse strategies, representation techniques, forms of data presentation, inscrip-
tions, and devices.
Weak and Strong Constructivism: SST, SCOT, and ANT
Debates have raged regarding weak and strong constructivism. ANT is said to be a
‘strong’ form of constructivism. For instance, Callon, a major advocate of ANT, refuses
to categorize the elements in a system or network ‘when these elements are permanently
interacting, being associated, and being tested by the actors who innovate’ (Callon 1986:
11). Callon (1986, 1991) uses a higher abstraction, ‘actors’, that subsumes science,
technology, economics, politics. ‘Human’ and ‘non-human’ actors are the heteroge-
neous entities that constitute a network. By contrast, Bijker, Hughes, and Pinch (1987),
advocates of SCOT (Social Construction of Technology) are ‘weak’ constructivists who
preserve the social environment and argue that the social groups that constitute the
social environment play a critical role in deﬁning and solving the problems that arise
298
NATHALIE MITEV AND DEBRA HOWCROFT

during the development of an artefact. Problems are deﬁned within the context of the
meaning assigned by a social group or a combination of social groups. Because social
groups deﬁne the problems of technological development, ‘there is ﬂexibility in the way
things are designed, not one best way’ (Bijker, Hughes, and Pinch 1987: 14). SCOT is
criticized by ANT for its ‘externalism’, the view that the context is able to determine the
content of scientiﬁc research (e.g. theoretical predispositions guide observation, not the
other way round). SCOT’s response is that the social component is always present and
always constitutive of knowledge; but that is not the only component, there may be other
natural causes.
It is important to understand these debates to grasp the strong form of constructiv-
ism embodied in ANT. It is not arguing the absence of material reality from scientiﬁc
activities, rather it asks that ‘reality’ and ‘nature’ be considered as entities continually
retranscribed from within scientiﬁc activities. The focus of interest is ‘the process of
transcription’ (Knorr Cetina 1995: 149). Further, facts are seen as consequences rather
than causes of scientiﬁc descriptions. In rejecting the structural approach to the
relationship between science and society, the ethnographers of scientiﬁc knowledge
render the social dimension more pervasive, but at the same time more difﬁcult to
identify: an ‘invisible gas’.
ANT is fundamentally non-essentialist. It attempts to expand the explanatory
capacity of the microsociological approaches to science and takes the argument further
by looking at science ‘in the making’ and the construction of a scientiﬁc fact, which
relies on a series of allies within and without the lab. ‘A scientiﬁc statement can only
acquire the status of fact or artefact if a complex network of actors pass it from hand to
hand’ (Bucchi 2004: 71). The fate of what we say and make is in later users’ hands. ANT
depicts support networks and disputes as a series of distinctions (society vs science,
human vs non-human). Since the settlement of a controversy is the cause of Nature’s
representation not the consequence, we can never use the outcome—Nature—to
explain how and why a controversy has been settled. If we cannot use Nature as the
reason for solution of a controversy, symmetrically, neither can we use Society, because
the stabilization of alliances and of social interests is the result of the controversy, not
its starting point. It is not the regularity of the world that imposes itself on our senses
but the regularity of our institutionalized beliefs that imposes itself on the world. The
aim of ANT is to study present-day controversies, ‘science in the making’, not ‘ready-
made science’ or closed controversies.
Other ‘weaker’ constructivist (or constructionist) approaches to science and tech-
nology studies, represented by SCOT and by SST (the Social Shaping of Technology,
MacKenzie and Wajcman 1985, 1999) concentrate on the interpretive ﬂexibility of
experimental results, which may lend themselves to more than one interpretation.
They focus on the mechanisms by which closure is achieved and they attempt to
connect closure mechanisms with wider social structures. SCOT, which also borrows
from SSK, seeks to reveal key points of ambiguity or controversies between competing
scientiﬁc claims and how one interpretation prevails over others. One of its principles is
that all knowledge claims must be treated ‘symmetrically’ and that the explanation for
POST-STRUCTURALISM, SOCIAL SHAPING OF TECHNOLOGY
299

their creation and acceptance rests on social factors, not the natural world. They are not
interested in abstract discussions of the causal relationship between the social dimen-
sion and scientiﬁc practice, instead, they aim to embed the former in the latter,
inserting it through the breach opened up by interpretive ﬂexibility (Collins 1983)
which is a more modest aim.
SST, like organizational sociology, points to the socially contingent form of technol-
ogy itself. It seeks to identify factors that inﬂuence the form or content of technology
and the direction of technological innovation and argues that this should be interpreted
within an analysis of the struggles and growth of ‘systems’ or ‘networks’ (Hughes 1999).
But the more constructivist approach moves away from making distinctions among
technical, social, economic, and political aspects of technological development and uses
the ‘seamless web’, ‘system’, or ‘actor-network’ metaphors, which stress the importance
of paying attention to the different but interlocking elements of physical artefacts,
institutions, and their environments.
It is clear that STS research has developed alternatives to technologically determin-
istic explanations and to the essentialist perspectives which see technical capacity as
inherent to the technology. SST and SCOT share the view that ‘antecedent circum-
stances, i.e. design, manufacture and production, are said to be “built into” and/or
“embodied” in the ﬁnal product; the resulting technology is “congealed social rela-
tions”’ (Willcocks and Grint 1997: 103). However, debates within STS regarding
constructivism have raged for two decades (for instance between Latour and Collins,
or between Grint and Woolgar (1997) and Kling, see McLoughlin (1997)). The extreme
relativist approach is criticized for relegating the inﬂuence of broader social structure
and the roles of competing stakeholder interests as ‘superﬂuous to the analysis of
technology’ (McLoughlin and Harris 1997: 17). ‘Strong’ constructivism believes that
sociologists of technology should not adjudicate between different claims and con-
structs of technical capacity. In strong constructivism, the process of technological
change and its outcomes is seen as almost entirely locally constructed, negotiable, and
contingent. Technical capacities are not ﬁxed but indeterminate and open to interpre-
tive ﬂexibility, not only during conception, design, and development but also in use.
The problem revolves around how technical capacities are perceived. The late Rob
Kling deems technical capacities (of information systems speciﬁcally) inﬂuence how
technology is used. Woolgar and Grint judge this as technicist and unacceptable and
suggest that, ironically, it becomes technological determinism in that the ‘artefact has a
deﬁnitive character and effect’ (Woolgar and Grint, quoted in McLoughlin 1997: 214).
On the other hand, constructivists are criticized for denying a ‘critical dimension’ to
social analysis and for their inability to challenge ‘traditionally held views about the
political neutrality of technologies and the links between social advantage and techno-
logical innovation’ (Kling 1992: 351), and for their scepticism towards broader social
and economic structures of power and interest. As expressed:
These ‘material’ or ‘structural’ phenomena, just as with technological artefacts and
systems, are it is insisted created anew by social actors within the context in which
300
NATHALIE MITEV AND DEBRA HOWCROFT

they act . . . [It is suggested] that factors such as class, power and politics should be
seen as ‘effects’ and not ‘causes’ of social action. (McLoughlin 1997: 216)
Sociologists are blamed for over-stressing social choice at the expense of technological
inﬂuences. At the other end of the spectrum, constructivists are accused of seeking to
eliminate any distinction between the social and the technical. It is not our intention to
address the in/commensurability of paradigms and different theoretical approaches in
this chapter; however, this debate highlights some important issues. Truex and Basker-
ville (1998: 110) warn that ‘in so borrowing concepts . . . that are not taken for granted,
[one also] borrows the controversy’.
SOME IMPORTANT ANT CONCEPTS
..................................................................................................................
The Technical and the Social
ANT provides a way of looking at phenomena that does not see the technical and the
social as separate and stable entities. Technical and social choices are constantly
negotiated and constructed:
The sociology of technology has borrowed from the sociology of science its
programme—the analysis of the production of artefacts, as that of scientiﬁc
facts—and some of its methods, whether in following scientists at work to describe
the mechanisms by which they mobilise various entities, or in studying controver-
sial cases to show how the social and the technical are allocated and constituted.
(Akrich 1993: 35)
Technological innovation is viewed by Callon (1986, 1991) and Latour (1989, 1991) as
an attempt to build and stabilize a diffuse system of networks of alliances composed of
both human (social) and non-human (technical) entities. This corresponds to a
breakdown of the clear divide between science and society. No project is purely
technical, nor is it purely social. This enables the circumvention of technological
determinism in which technical projects and innovations are seen as proceeding
naturally unless they are actively stopped. This is replaced with the idea that things
do not happen unless human and non-human actors make them happen. Callon
(1991) contends that networks can rarely be cut up into simple descriptive frameworks
and he suggests that when the clouds from Chernobyl spread over Europe and
contaminated the Lapp reindeer, then the plant as actor gained the upper hand over
the plant as intermediary. According to Callon (1991), this explains how the discourse
presenting technology as an uncontrolled and autonomous force (Ellul 1965; Winner
1977) gained ground over discourse that had reduced it to being a mere instrument that
people in society used for better or for worse.
One of the strengths of ANT is the systematic avoidance of what can be called
‘methodological dualism’: ‘the making of a priori distinctions between what is
POST-STRUCTURALISM, SOCIAL SHAPING OF TECHNOLOGY
301

“technical” and what is not’ and is therefore by implication ‘social’ (Bloomﬁeld and
Vurdubakis 1997: 85). ‘Rather than assuming that we are dealing with two separate, but
related, ontological domains—technology and organisations—we propose to regard
them as but phases of the same essential action’ (Latour 1991: 129). The presumed
separation between technology and organization is a sense-making device and acts as a
means by which we orient ourselves in the world (Bloomﬁeld and Vurdubakis 1994).
Identities are negotiated through the deployment of various human and non-human
intermediaries which thereby mediate the relationships between actors. Intermediaries
are passed between actors. This can imply a distinction between actors who have
agency and intermediaries who are seen as essentially passive. However, it should be
noted that ‘attributions of agency versus passivity are context-dependent and made for
particular purposes’ (Bloomﬁeld and Vurdubakis 1997: 106). For instance, in their
study of the use of IT in the NHS, Bloomﬁeld and Vurdubakis (1997: 89) highlight the
intermediation between the domain of technology and the (social) world of the
organization, which is interlinked with the intermediation between the professional
groups of management and clinicians, and their respective rationalities (medical/
administrative). In addition to constituting/negotiating the boundary between the
‘technical’ and the ‘social’, the IT-review at the NHS is an ‘intermediary device which
effects translations between the worlds of management and medicine, the commercial
ethos of management consultancy and the public service orientation of the NHS, and
how each delineates what is technical and what is social’ (Bloomﬁeld and Vurdubakis
1997: 89).
Sociology of Translation
Latour’s (1991) alternative to technological determinism is that things do not happen
unless other actors make them happen. This implies that each actor who takes the
project further may take it in a different direction than that intended by the previous
actor. As the study of science has shown (Knorr-Cetina and Cicourel 1981: 37), to
construe a certain representation of the world is in principle always at the same time ‘a
matter of truth and a matter of political strategy, that is imposing one’s say and of
instituting certain consequences with or against others’ (original emphasis). Latour
uses the term ‘translation’ to describe this effect, playing on both of its meanings. The
innovation is translated or carried from one position to another in the sense of a
mathematical manipulation; the innovation is also interpreted or transposed from one
position to another in the linguistic sense of the word translation. Translation operates
between actors: an actor gives a deﬁnition to another actor, imputes him/her/it/them
with interests, projects, desires, strategies, reﬂexes, afterthoughts (Callon 1991). An
actor might be the company that has conceived, produced, and distributed a machine,
while another actor might be its users. The translation is regulated by conventions that
are more or less local, and they are always revisable (Callon 1991). The ﬁnal shape and
302
NATHALIE MITEV AND DEBRA HOWCROFT

position of the innovation is unlikely to be that of the original developers. In each stage
of its life, the project is taken and adapted by the actors that become involved in it. Only
in the rare case when the future users can be persuaded to follow the initial goals does
the innovation proceed as originally planned. All too often, however, the issue becomes
sidetracked and unintended effects occur.
In one stratagem to achieve a translation, the actor may suggest that it shares a
‘common’ problem with putative allies, that is, it may draw equivalence between its
problem and the problems which preoccupy others. This is known as ‘problématisa-
tion’ (Callon 1991). If the actor can convince the allies that it has the necessary skills,
knowledge, or other resources to devise a solution to their ‘common’ problem, then it
may come to be seen as indispensable. It will have translated both the allies and their
problem. The original problem is renegotiated while the allies become actors with a
network deﬁned by their common ownership of the translated problem. The negotia-
tion of the identities of the various actors inside and outside an actor-network (‘intér-
essement’) is an intrinsic part of network building. Intéressement is: ‘the group of
actions by which an entity . . . attempts to impose and stabilise the identity of the other
actors it deﬁnes through its problématisation’ (Callon 1986: 207–8). In order for an
actor to secure or win the support of others (potential allies) it must in some way make
itself indispensable to them by translating their interests and enrol them; it must
become an ‘obligatory passage point’ (Callon 1986) in their ‘enrolment’. A successful
negotiation/ translation of an obligatory passage point is a condition of network
stabilization (Latour 1989). The process which ‘folds up’ or stabilizes an entire network
so as to transform it into a point in another network (which at the same time becomes
more general and more encompassing) is the basis of the progressive passage from the
micro-level to the macro-level.
Of particular interest are the related concepts of stability and irreversibility. Network
building is a search for stability which is enabled to the extent that changes set in train
during network construction become irreversible (Callon 1991), either because it
would be too costly to reverse them or because to do so becomes unthinkable.
According to Callon (1991), convergence and irreversibility of techno-economic net-
works are both involved in the acts of translation and the networks that they sometimes
succeed in forming. Convergence is the degree of accord (alignment and coordination)
engendered by a series of translations. Controversies are translation as betrayal. The
network is constructed according to the translations’ own logic. The more aligned and
coordinated a network is, the more the actors work together without being under
constant challenge (Callon 1991). A translation is irreversible in that it is impossible to
return to a previous situation. Convergence can increase or decrease and the same
holds for irreversibility. The impossibility for other (past or future) translations to
develop and impose themselves is a battle, a ﬁght that is never deﬁnitely won.
Irreversibilization, taken as the predetermination of translations and as the impossibil-
ity of a return to competing translations, is synonymous with normalization. A
network which irreversibilizes itself is a network that has become heavy with durable,
POST-STRUCTURALISM, SOCIAL SHAPING OF TECHNOLOGY
303

immutable devices (frozen elements or ‘black boxes’) and inscriptions, norms of all
sorts, and which as a result slips into a codiﬁed metrology and information system.
In ANT, technological innovation is viewed as an attempt to build and stabilize a
diffuse system of allies composed of both human and non-human entities. It enables
the circumvention of technological determinism in which technical projects and
innovations proceed naturally unless they are actively stopped and replaces it with
the idea that things do not happen unless human and non-human actors make them
happen. Symmetry and translation are two fundamental constructivist notions which
can bring insights into the critical analysis of IS.
IS AND ANT
..................................................................................................................
ANT has grown in popularity in many disciplines over the last ten years. Attempts to
apply it in other disciplines can also be found, in for example (Law and Hassard 1999):
sociology (Barry and Elam 1997), health ethics and policy (Berg 1997), ecology (Cussins
1997), history (Harris 1997), cultural studies (Hatt 1997), medical technology (Lehoux
1997), urban planning (Murdoch 1997), linguistics (G. Myers 1997), and geography
(Soderstrom 1997). Applications of ANT to IS empirical research (Orlikowski et al.
1996) range from: the inscription of work in a classiﬁcation scheme for nursing work
(Bowker, Timmermans, and Star 1996); the process of translation in activity-based
costing and accounting technology (Boland and Schultze 1996); the processes of
inscription and translation in the role of standards in EDI systems in the Norwegian
health sector (Monteiro and Hanseth 1996); the attempted translation of interests in a
car parking system (Vidgen and McMaster 1996); how and why the attempts at
translation and alignment of interests around the development and use of administra-
tive geographic information systems in India were a relative failure (Walsham and Sahay
1999).
It is not sufﬁcient to explain information systems by recourse to mere technical
factors, nor by reference to the ‘supposed effects of some powerful social forces which
were always there but somehow mysteriously overlooked’ (Bloomﬁeld et al. 1997: 130).
Instead, we can draw upon ANT to consider several of the processes inherent in the
building of heterogeneous actor-networks. The sociology of translation can be used to
describe actors involved at many different levels of analysis, their interpretations of the
social and the technical, and how IS projects are carried forward or not by various
agencies, rather than following a predetermined trajectory.
As a constructivist theory, ANT can be effective for describing how technical design
solutions are interwoven with social issues (Monteiro and Hanseth 1996). Software
devices can be seen as network elements which display strong properties of irreversi-
bility and are immutable inscriptions across time and space (Walsham 1997). Also the
notion of symmetry makes it possible to analyse how success and failure are socially
constructed at local level:
304
NATHALIE MITEV AND DEBRA HOWCROFT

[it prevents the assumptions] that the world can be understood as a set of distinct
compartments, such as the technical, the managerial or the psychological . . . This
locates responsibility in a speciﬁc compartment, and it builds a barrier between one
compartment and the next . . . However, causes and responsibilities don’t stop for
very long in compartments and tend to move on . . . We need to be speciﬁc, modest,
located in particular contexts and situations. (Law 2001: 3, 5, 6, 14)
It also prevents envisaging technology as neutral and seeing the problem as social, for
instance, in terms of resistance by (usually other) actors to an unproblematic technol-
ogy. The technology addresses and creates social problems, and social problems have
technological elements and representations. This also avoids a social or political
essentialism. We do not have to lapse into a simplistic determinism to acknowledge
that a phenomenon is part of wider technological, economic, cultural, and policy
environments. These contexts and their interpretation are socially constructed by
actors, and are an important inﬂuence on techno-organizational change. External
‘factors’ are merely ‘conditions of possibility’ that ‘make certain courses of action
feasible while constraining or ruling out others’ (Knights and Murray 1994: 39).
While ‘conditions of possibility’ such as ‘the market’ frame organizational behaviour,
actors construct at the local level the ‘external forces’ that they then respond to.
‘A market exists only in as much as people believe that it exists and act accordingly.
Similarly, a technological opportunity or constraint exists only in so much as people
believe it to exist’ (Knights and Murray 1994: 41). Accordingly, macro-structures do
not determine micro-events (Knorr-Cetina 1981) and social processes exhibit chains of
intended and unintended outcomes. Some human perspectives win over others in the
construction of technologies and truths, some human actors go along with the will of
other actors, and some humans resist being enrolled.
In a discussion of ANT and IS research, Walsham (1997) comments that some of
this research either explains the technology at the expense of social interactions, or
conversely portrays social interactions without giving detailed descriptions of the
technological inscriptions. In addition he also outlines some of the existing criticisms
and limitations of ANT and classiﬁes them into four broad strands: limited analysis of
social structures; amoral stance; the problem of generalized symmetry; and the problem
of description. The next section will expand on the criticisms levelled by Walsham and
draw on other authors’ critiques of ANT, since these are relevant to information
systems research in general.
DIFFICULTIES WITH ANT
..................................................................................................................
Methodologically speaking, ANT is a valuable analytical device, offers a strong contri-
bution to building a serious empirical base and ‘ANT is both a theory and methodology
combined’ (Walsham 1997: 469). Yet ANT studies—like many STS studies—produce a
POST-STRUCTURALISM, SOCIAL SHAPING OF TECHNOLOGY
305

veritable mass of detail which often lead to book-length outputs (Walsham 1997), such
as Latour’s (1992/1996) monograph on Aramis. IS research is often lacking in research-
based books such as this, and studies based on constructivism could offer a contribu-
tion to interpretive IS research.
One area of interest is how to minimize treating innovations as single events or
projects which separate from their antecedents, thereby not limiting ourselves to
snapshot data, as with many ‘business case studies’. However, such detailed studies
are extremely labour intensive and time consuming. There are a number of methodo-
logical difﬁculties (Mitev 2009): determining what ‘all’ actors are; how to treat small
(e.g. software) and large actors (e.g. the State) and their differences; knowing where one
network starts and another begins, where they overlap and where to stop—ANT
advocates claim that ‘everything is a network’ which sounds universalist and is rather
vague and difﬁcult to apply; how to relate the micro-local and the macro-global; and
how to include social constructions in the analysis. In practice, one builds an account
that selects and prioritizes actors and ranks their importance according to categories
and constructs. Yet analytic purity comes at a high price. Social constructivists aim to
be aware of the rhetorical devices that they—as well as other actors—use to construct
textual realities, and that they offer understandings that are partisan and potentially
contestable by others. Constructivism is a step further than interpretivism: it is not just
gathering people’s interpretations, but is also about being aware of the process of social
construction of reality in order to probe tendencies to relate ‘facts’ as how things are
(Holstein and Miller 1993) and question their ‘naturalness’, therefore adding criticality.
But this is difﬁcult to carry out and case study research routinely ‘fails to attain a
constructivist ideal of standards for evaluating research, standards which are challeng-
ing and possibly not even desirable’ (Best 1993: 135).
‘Tracing the actors’ is a methodological shortcut which points to Latour’s ethno-
methodological tradition as an anthropologist of science (Latour 1993a). It consists of
following scientists’ traces in their everyday work and paying attention to the materi-
ality of their activities, rather than starting from grand narratives about science and
society. It also explains the conceptualization of actor-networks as assemblages of
socio-material entities, such as scientists gathering soil samples in the Amazon jungle,
transporting them back to their labs and transforming them into models and scientiﬁc
articles, which then become actors in debates about the erosion of the Amazon forest
(Latour 1999).
Ethnomethodological work is demanding and time consuming, requiring considerable
resources or skills. In IS research there is limited evidence that ethnomethodology has
been used to its full extent, aside from some ethnographic work by Harvey and Myers
(1995; M. D. Myers 1997) and by Ngwenyama and colleagues (Ngwenyama et al. 1997).
There are some difﬁculties with constructivist approaches that have also been
identiﬁed by other IS researchers (Stalder 1997; Nandhakumar and Vidgen 2001).
Only relying on the conﬁguration of the actor-networks for an explanation may not
be enough. As Stalder (1997) comments: ‘ANT’s a priori that society is ontologically
ﬂat is an excellent starting point but a weak ending of the analysis’. In particular,
306
NATHALIE MITEV AND DEBRA HOWCROFT

treating actors equally is problematic. The ANT notion of the ‘seamless web’ supports
an open-ended and inclusive approach to actors in the largest possible sense, more so
than is usually the case in IS research. The notion of actor in ANT is difﬁcult to handle
since not all actors are equal. Critics have noted the lack of political and moral analysis
which Walsham also raises as he asks: ‘where do the moral judgments come from if not
from ideas that transcend the situation?’ He adds that political and ethical theories
cannot come from the basis of the network alone (Walsham 1997: 475), although he is
unclear as to where they should come from.
ANT has been criticized for concentrating on how things get done to the detriment
of how broader social structures shape socio-material practices, for giving interesting
accounts of local contingencies and material arrangements without taking into account
macro-social structures. In response to these criticisms, Latour (1991) has replied
that the actor-network methodology can be used to move between levels of analysis,
that the macro-structure is made of the same ‘stuff’ as the micro-structure, and that
macro-structures can be investigated with the same methodological tools as micro-
structures.
The symmetry between human and non-human actors, which is related to the
symmetry between the social and the technical, society and nature, politics and science,
values and facts, has been criticized for having gone too far in erasing all distinctions
and reducing people to the status of things, thereby removing intentionality. There are
political implications of levelling human and non-human differences. The disregard for
macro-structures has led to criticisms of ANT in particular and of strong social
constructivism and relativism in general, for being amoral and apolitical in that it
leads to the ignoring of political biases that can underlie the spectrum of choices for
relevant actors (Winner 1993). Star (1991) refers to the ‘networks of the powerful’ and
to how irreversible networks are only stable for some and discriminate against those
who do not belong to the community of practice who form, use, and maintain the
network. Latour responded to criticisms of apoliticism and moral relativism thus:
Refusing to explain the closure of a controversy by its consequences does not mean
that we are indifferent to the possibility of judgements that transcend the situation.
For network analysis does not prevent judgement any more than it prevents
differentiation. Efﬁciency, truth, proﬁtability, and interest are simply properties of
networks, not of statements. Domination is an effect not a cause. In order to make a
diagnosis or a decision about the absurdity, the danger, the amorality, or the
unrealism of an innovation, one must ﬁrst describe the network. (Latour 1991: 130)
The argument put forward by Latour is that social constructivism is not in itself amoral
and that describing the network is not only a prerequisite but the only way to get at
explanations:
The explanation emerges once the description is saturated; if we display a socio-
technical network—deﬁning trajectories by actants’ association and substitution,
deﬁning actants by all the trajectories in which they enter, by following translations
and, ﬁnally, by varying the observer’s point of view—we have no need to look for
POST-STRUCTURALISM, SOCIAL SHAPING OF TECHNOLOGY
307

additional causes. Explanation is the stabilisation of a network. If one is capable of
explaining effects of causes, it is because a stabilised network is already in place.
(Latour 1991: 129)
This is related to the criticism that ANT is a method for describing, but not for
explaining (Collins and Yearley 1992). Callon’s answer (1991) is that explanations
are only offered by networks which increase their convergence and irreversibility (an
agreement getting ﬁrmer), and that the descriptions delivered by intermediaries turn
into explanations (and even predictions). This leaves the question of how to explain the
failure to converge in the case of divergent, reversible, and unstable networks, which
consequently cannot offer an explanation, but maybe a series of conﬂicting explana-
tions? If all explanations are the result of a stabilized network already in place, one
assumes that one (and actors too?) could use explanations of other (previous?) stable
overlapping and neighbouring networks, but then the problem is transposed to where
does one stop?
Another difﬁcult area is the macro-micro question. Its reformulation is one of the
underpinnings of ANT in its adoption of a ‘birds eye perspective to reconstruct the
network of interrelated affairs’ (Knorr-Cetina 1981: 33) and in its rejection of the macro
as an explanation. ‘The macro appears no longer as a particular layer of social reality on
top of micro-episodes composed of their interrelation, their aggregation or their unfore-
seen effects. Rather, it is seen to reside within these micro-episodes where it results from
the structuring practices of agents’ (Knorr Cetina 1981: 34, original emphasis). Callon
and Latour (1981: 277) also conceive of the macro as actively construed and pursued
within micro-social action. They comment that micro-actors ‘blow themselves up to a
macro-size by making themselves the spokesmen of many others whose following they
enlist, through their summary representations’ (which Knorr-Cetina refers to as the
representation hypothesis, p. 40). They go on to point out that the macro-order consists
of micro-actors who have successfully translated other actors’ wills into a single will for
which they speak, and because of the forces on which it can rely.
Furthermore, structures do not simply reside in the actions of people, they exist in a
network of heterogeneous material arrangements. Latour (1991: 129) urges us to
abandon the divide between material infrastructure and social superstructure and claims
that, when actors and points of view are aligned, we enter a stable deﬁnition of society
that looks like domination (‘society made durable’). However, Knorr-Cetina (1981: 41,
original emphasis) remarks that, pushed to its extreme, this ‘denies the existence of a
macro-order apart from the macro-representations which are accomplished in micro-
social action’. In this perspective, macro-structures are created by routine inferences,
interpretation and summary procedures, and do not control micro-events (p. 51). In
other words, the degree to which macro-structures control micro-events is a continual
matter of controversy and struggle in social life (Knorr-Cetina 1981: 39).
Avoiding taking the macro-order at face value is a strong motivation and a sound
basis for wanting to study its production in micro-social environments instead. Knorr-
Cetina (1981: 40) argues that this does not ‘neglect the issue of power which hides
308
NATHALIE MITEV AND DEBRA HOWCROFT

beneath everyday differentiations between “big” and “small” actors’ and that, instead, it
‘relocates and redresses questions of power’. On the other hand, she warns that a
microscopic recording of face-to-face interaction may not allow us to grasp whatever is
the whole of the matter, even if she contends that ‘it may be enough to begin with [in
order] to hear the macro-order tick’ (Knorr-Cetina 1981: 42).
Other authors have suggested that transformations of social reality occur between
levels. Duster (1981) studied income tax regulation and community-based pro-
grammes dedicated to the enactment of this regulation, according to different levels
of abstraction of social reality and enquiry, so as to ‘challenge the microscopic nature of
all events’ (Duster 1981: 109). In his analytical framework, macro-phenomena consist
of the effects of the unintended consequences of micro- or middle-range action. For
Harré (1981: 139) it is the ‘macro-order composed of such effects which acts as a
selection environment for social action’, for example by determining which of the
‘micro-mutations of social life will take off and persist as a component of social change’
(Harré 1981: 139). Harré proposes a theory of social change in which the notion of
‘diffuse social inﬂuence from unknown structural properties of a macro-order’ plays a
part (Harré 1981: 158). Similarly, in Giddens’s duality of structure, based on the
tension between action theory and institutional analysis, rules and resources instan-
tiated in social systems structure actors’ actions; structural qualities generate social
action and are reproduced through these actions. But knowledgeability and capability
of social actors are ‘bounded by unintended consequences of (previous) social actions
which condition social reproduction’ (Giddens 1981: 161).
Callon and Latour (1981), on the other hand, do not believe in a micro-macro
distinction. They do not think that we draw closer to social reality by descending to
micro-negotiations or by rising towards the macro-actors. Macro-actors are not more
complex than micro-actors and are just micro-actors ‘seated on black boxes’ (Callon
and Latour 1981: 299). They also, symmetrically, oppose the view that micro-negotia-
tions are truer and more real than the abstract, distant structures of the macro-actors
(Callon and Latour 1981: 300). Furthermore, ‘by taking for granted differences in level
and size between actors, [one] ratiﬁes past, present and future winners . . . ﬁnding
favour with the powerful’ (ibid.).
The macro-micro question is obviously unresolved. ANT is complex and difﬁcult to
use, since describing actors and networks runs the risk of producing asocial, apolitical,
ahistorical, and decontextualized accounts. There are examples of IS research (Sarker,
Sarker, and Sidorova 2006) which apply ANT instrumentally, as a way of controlling
and managing the formation of the actor-network. They understand and apply ‘trans-
lation’ as an actual business process of change, to be undertaken, managed, and
controlled in the ‘right’ direction. It can all too easily turn into a linear, graphical
representation (e.g. with nodes and arrows between actors), especially when used by
researchers with a systems background. As noted by Brooke (2002: 55): ‘The positivist
heritage of IS research will tend to favour the adoption of approaches that are more
easily “modelled” or normatively articulated’.
POST-STRUCTURALISM, SOCIAL SHAPING OF TECHNOLOGY
309

CAN ANT PROVIDE A SOCIAL
CRITIQUE ON ITS OWN?
..................................................................................................................
When using ANT, it is difﬁcult not to use pre-existing concepts and categories. Latour
(1991) argues that macro-explanations can be drawn without them because they rely
on other stabilized networks which are already in place, but these already constitute
pre-existing concepts and categories. Studying microsociological phenomena leads to
social orders which are irreversible, pre-existing, powerful networks. To avoid social
determinism it is important to do this critically in order to ‘de-naturalize’ assumed
orders but it is challenging and there is limited experience of doing this in IS research.
Perhaps a useful constructivist idea for IS research is that the negotiation between the
social and the technical is political and relates to bigger ‘social orders’. This can centre
on treatments of the social and the technical and their links with social orders and
political intentionality (Willmott 1994; Wilson 2000). A typical example of a dominant
social order is the technical orientation towards the world (Feenberg 2000) and how
‘technological choices are guided by social interests and codes established by cultural
and political struggles’ (Feenberg 1995: 12).
These issues are continuously debated in social constructivism debates (e.g. Howard
2002; Woodhouse, Hess, and Breyman 2002; Sorensen 2004; Lynch and Cole 2005).
The focus for strong constructivism remains on claims-making, but on the rhetorics
rather than the socially and historically grounded actions of claimants. Weak construc-
tivism acknowledges assumptions about objective conditions and treats the evaluation
of problems claims as an important part of the analysis; it studies claims-making within
its context of culture and social structure (Best 1993; Gubrium 1993). MacKenzie
(1988) also asserts that, although the micro/macro distinction is a false dichotomy,
traditional macro-sociology is more relevant politically than micro-sociology.
ANT has been combined with other social theories in IS research, for example
technology drift theory (Holmström and Stalder 2001), autopoiesis (Stadler 1997),
politics and power (Silva 1997; Mitev 2005, 2009). Hanseth and Monteiro (1998) in
their study of health information systems have complemented ANT with: (a) new
institutionalism, after Powell and DiMaggio, to understand how institutions become
stable and reproduce themselves; and (b) with Bourdieu’s theory of practice and his
notion of ‘habitus’ to account for the stability of action. Other authors have combined
Heidegger with ANT (Ciborra and Hanseth 1998), or drawn on Foucault to study
computer networks in the ﬁnancial services industry (Knights, Murray, and Willmott
1997). Doolin and Lowe (2002) also argue that ANT can contribute to critical IS
research and critical IS research has, more broadly, explored several theoretical avenues
(Howcroft and Trauth 2004; Howcroft and Trauth 2005).
To be critical, it is insufﬁcient to study the succession of events only as either
negotiated outcomes of power struggles or as a series of translations between local
actors resulting in a set of networks. Political issues are often seen by management as
310
NATHALIE MITEV AND DEBRA HOWCROFT

‘amenable to a technical solution’ (Fournier and Grey 2000: 11). A critical analysis
therefore involves examining ‘what is being done in the name of managerial perfor-
mativity’ (Fournier and Grey 2000: 17) and ‘probing socially divisive forms of manage-
ment theory and practices’ (Alvesson and Willmott 1992). A critical analysis should
emphasize the link that exists between the social production of knowledge and collec-
tive political action, particularly with regards to the technology.
The speciﬁc symbolic power to impose the principles of construction of reality, in
particular social reality, is a major dimension of political power . . . [A critical
analysis] must show how the orientation toward reality characteristic of technology
is combined with the realization of technology in the social world . . . [and combine]
insights into the technical orientation toward the world, with constructivist insights
into the social nature of technology. (Feenberg 2000: 233)
Post-structuralism as Social Critique
When comparing IS research with organization studies and critical management studies
(Alvesson and Willmott 1992; Alvesson and Deetz 2000; Grey and Willmott 2005), we
can see that hermeneutics and Habermassian theories have been dominant in IS
research and have remained largely untouched by a post-structuralist critique. For
example, hermeneutic and interpretive IS approaches have focused on ‘hidden agendas’
(Ngwenyama and Lee 1997), ‘underlying sense’ (Myers 1994), or ‘deep structures’
(Heracleous and Barrett 2001); they entail probing the ‘depth model’ underneath
narratives. However, from a postmodernist perspective, notions of the text and the
world behind it and ‘the reader bound into the socially constructed world standing
behind the text’ (Lee 1994: 150) show a misunderstanding about social construction.
Post-structuralists and constructivists (Dreyfus and Rabinow 1982) deny the existence
of an ‘underneath’. The assumption of a ‘hidden’ meaning of discourse and the
hermeneutic reclamation of lost, ‘real’, or even ‘true’ meaning deny a radical form of
social constructivism. And social constructivism is corrosive of depth assumptions of
hermeneutics. (But see also Chapter 9 in this volume.)
A critical analysis does not mean that the researcher should ‘seek to evaluate
critically . . . the totality of understandings by analysing the participants’ under-
standings in terms of changing social structures’ (Myers 1994: 57). Dividing the
phenomenon into interpretations on the one hand, and structures on the other, is
problematic. By attributing (a) the subjective, the interpretive, the ‘socially con-
structed’, and meaning to hermeneutics on the one hand, and (b) the objective, the
historical and social reality to the ‘critical’ on the other hand, Myers overlooks the
postmodernist conception of the subjective. This separation reﬂects respectively a
modernist individualistic epistemology and an objectivist realist ontology. By
contrast, constructivism is epistemologically about the intersubjective social con-
struction of meaning and ontologically about the construction of social reality. It
combines a social theory of knowledge with a postmodern intersubjective, not a
POST-STRUCTURALISM, SOCIAL SHAPING OF TECHNOLOGY
311

modernist individualistic, theory of action. Constructionism is a more ‘local sort
of unmasking’ (Hacking 1999: 54), which is concerned with questions of power
and control and showing how ‘categories of knowledge are used in power relation-
ships. (Hacking 1999: 58)
After Lyotard (1984), a performative intent in managerialist discourses develops
knowledge that contributes to the production of maximum output for minimum input
and means-ends calculation. It subordinates knowledge to the production of efﬁciency
and contributes to the effectiveness of managerial practice by building ‘better’ models or
understandings. Information systems feature prominently in these models or under-
standings. In non-critical study, ‘performativity is taken as an imperative towards which
all knowledge and practice must be geared and which does not require questioning. . . [on
the other hand critical study] questions the alignment between knowledge, truth and
efﬁciency and is concerned with performativity . . . in that it seeks to uncover what is being
done in its name’ (Fournier and Grey 2000: 17). For instance, critical IS research could
instead question the discourse of empowerment and ﬂexibility through the use of mobile
ICTs (see Chapter 18 in this volume); point out that workers’ commuting time is being
translated into a ‘wasted’ resource; that the notion of workers’ time is being redeﬁned
through the term ‘ﬂexibility’ itself, for instance with boundaries between home and work
getting blurred; that workers’ knowledge is being instrumentalized into a constantly
available repository; and it would explore the ways in which organizational practices
and intersubjective rules are implicated in the construction of meaning and reproduction
of ﬂexible workers’ new identities. One method for doing this is ‘denaturalization’.
A social constructivist stance supports criticality in that the present is not deter-
mined by the nature or truth of things; it seeks to ‘denaturalize’ the apparent natural
order of things; thereby questioning the inevitability of the social status quo, and
positing as a preliminary the contingency of social orders. Intersubjective rules, and
not some unchangeable truths or realities, give meaning to practices. Social construc-
tion is not a kind of idiosyncratic, individual, or subjective will to knowledge. Our
interpretations are based on a shared system of codes and symbols, of languages, life-
worlds, and social practices. Socially constructed knowledge is a ‘constitutive factor of
social power and the concept of power provides a central link between the construction
of knowledge and social order’ (Guzzini 2000: 172).
Without considering postmodernist themes, research can become unreﬂective about
elitism and conditions of power. Yet without incorporating some political thought post-
modernism becomes esoteric. The postmodernist view of the human subject creates
difﬁculties in developing political action. For instance, to challenge gender and race
discrimination, people have to organize and reveal these inequities across social situations.
But making that essentialist difference denies social constructionism. If one rejects an
essentialist foundation and believes that more thanlocalresistance is needed, some kindof
combination between postmodernism and critical theory may well provide the best
remaining option. There are ways to think about them both at once, though not necessari-
ly through some new synthesis. One option is to conduct multiple interpretations of the
312
NATHALIE MITEV AND DEBRA HOWCROFT

same phenomenon from both critical theory and postmodern positions; or see both as
useful for reﬂexivity rather than as theories directly relevant for guiding and interpreting
studies of substantive matters. Further, many management theorists have deployed a
number of ‘postmodern’ theoretical lenses in the same text, for instance, labour process
theory and social constructivism (e.g. Lilley, Lightfoot, and Paulo Amaral 2004), des-
pite their apparent incommensurability. Alvesson and Deetz (1996, see also Mitev 2006)
argue that various paths are possible that address the middle ground between more
traditional critical realist and hermeneutic epistemologies on the one hand and a post-
modern philosophy on the other hand.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
..................................................................................................................
Post-structuralism and ANT offer an essential starting point for a critical analysis of
how things are not ﬁxed, how boundaries move, and how distinctions are negotiated.
Post-structuralist approaches are well suited to the task of critique, for instance in
probing themes such as performativity and managerialism, two under-critiqued mod-
ernist concepts that are dominant in IS. Still, ANT is difﬁcult to handle well and prone
to being used mechanistically and instrumentalized. ANT’s radical thinking, non-
dualism, and symmetry about the social and the technical are very useful, but like
many others concerned with ascribing intentionality to objects, the symmetry between
human and non-human can be dangerous (McLean and Hassard 2004). It seems to
have taken precedence in IS research over other more useful ANT concepts, such as
‘inscription’ or ‘action at a distance’, some having been used to good effect by IS
researchers (e.g. Wilson 2002). The theoretical lens of ANT is useful in moving beyond
the notion of ‘context’, overcoming the divide between the ‘social’ and the ‘technical’
and exploring how this boundary is socially and politically constructed. ANT is a useful
methodological tracing device providing a powerful vocabulary and conceptual prin-
ciples that help to include a wide range of actors and formulate corresponding
translations. Only concentrating on translations across local actors runs the danger
of remaining quite narrow, and analysis should broaden the scope to avoid either
technologically or sociologically deterministic explanations.
The micro-macro question and the scope of investigation remain contentious issues.
Getting at these core ‘macro’ issues is not facilitated by the tendency in some current
applications of ANT in IS research to limit actors within the organizational sphere and
include only ‘key’ powerful managerial actors, thereby missing the point of following as
many actors as possible. Critical analyses should include the social and political aspects
of the external context to the organization. It should not neglect the way in which
organizations both reﬂect and reproduce broader social inequalities and hence the
essentially contestable nature of organizational relations. IS research has a limited
record in doing this, and, as a result, the radical potential of ANT due to its post-
structuralism, becomes reduced to a more managerialist agenda (Hassard, Law, and
POST-STRUCTURALISM, SOCIAL SHAPING OF TECHNOLOGY
313

Lee 1999). For instance, identifying ‘errors’ and ‘omissions’ during enrolment or
problematization; instrumentalizing ANT concepts into ‘managing’ or ‘aligning’ trans-
lation processes, like a re-engineering exercise, as if translations could (or should!) be
controlled. The ANT emphasis on non-human actors is also picked up by IS research-
ers who are primarily concerned with putting IT in the centre, thus often bordering on
technological determinism, which is far from ANT premisses.
Bringing a critical perspective to IS research has been mainly carried out using
Habermas over the last two decades or so (e.g. by Hirschheim and Klein (1994)).
Doolin (1998) emphasizes the importance of developing a critical IS research agenda
that goes beyond using Habermas. He suggests exploring the relationship of ANT,
qualitative empirical work, and a critical approach. A political dimension can be added
combining, for instance, Foucault or Clegg with ANT concepts (obligatory passage
points, problematization, enrolment, intéressement). The mechanism by which local
events and networks become ‘macro’ or global structures is key: ANT declares that they
are the same thing, but it is not a simple additive or combinatorial process.
In a critique of Latour’s (1993b) We Have Never Been Modern, Cohen (1997: 351)
argues that: ‘anthropological totality [as represented by ANT] may be said to replace
historical totality . . . [and is] a functional universal [which] is an absorptive cultural
“logic” . . . and negates modern time-differences’; and that: ‘conditions of possibility are
not made explicable if the network-model is transcendental’ (p. 357). Other theoretical
traditions within STS may be more historically oriented and could help solve these
problems. Biagioli’s Science Studies Reader (1999) includes, for instance, a range of
papers on: the social construction of technology, sociology of science and technology,
anthropology of science, social shaping of technology, ANT, history of technical
innovation, cultural studies of science, and also ‘large technological systems’ which
could be particularly relevant to the study of large information systems. Many of these
theoretical themes preceded ANT and in fact were partly responsible for its initial
conceptualization. The current interest with ANT in the IS research community runs
the danger of applying it as a simplifying universal tool; and IS researchers may beneﬁt
from drawing on some of its predecessors. Harry Collins in particular (Collins and
Evans 2002), an eminent sociologist of science, has suggested a ‘third wave’ in STS to
reawaken a critical sociological position in order to reinject social analysis into science
and technology studies, but without shattering the theoretical insights brought by post-
structuralist and constructivist approaches (the second wave) such as ANT. This is an
issue that should concern all IS researchers, whether they employ ANT or not.
REFERENCES
Adam, A., Howcroft, D. A., and Richardson, H. (2001). ‘Absent Friends? The Gender
Dimension in IS Research’, in N. L. Russo, B. Fitzgerald, and J. I. DeGross (eds.), Realigning
Research and Practice in Information Systems Development: The Social and Organizational
314
NATHALIE MITEV AND DEBRA HOWCROFT

Perspective, Proceedings of the IFIP Working Group 8.2 Conference, Boise, Idaho, ID,
27–29 July 2001. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Akrich, M. (1993). ‘Les Objets techniques et leurs utilisateurs’, in Les Objets dans l’action,
Raisons pratiques, vol. iv. Paris: Éditions de l’École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales.
Alvesson, M., and Deetz, S. (1996). ‘Critical Theory and Postmodernism Approaches to
Organizational Studies’, in S. R. Clegg, C. Hardy, and W. R. Nord (eds.), Handbook of
Organization Studies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 191–217. [Reprinted in
C. Grey and H. Willmott (2005), Critical Management Studies: A Reader. Oxford: Oxford
University Press (Oxford Management Readers), 60–106.]
————(2000). Doing Critical Management Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publica-
tions.
——and Willmott, H. (eds.) (1992). Critical Management Studies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
Askenas, L., and Westelius, A. (2000). ‘Five Roles of an Information System: A Social
Constructionist Approach to Analyzing the Use of ERP Systems’, in W. J. Orlikowski,
S. Ang, P. Weill, H. C. Krcmar, and J. I. DeGross (eds.), 21st International Conference on
Information Systems. Brisbane: ICIS.
Barnes, B. (1985). About Science. Oxford: Blackwell.
Barry, A., and Elam, M. (1997). ‘Actor Networks and the Problem of Empire’, Actor-Network
Theory and After Workshop. Centre for Social Theory and Technology, Keele University,
10–11 July.
Berg, M. (1997). ‘Of(f) the Record: Technology, Politics, Theory’, Actor-Network Theory and
After Workshop. Centre for Social Theory and Technology, Keele University, 10–11 July.
Best, J. (1993). ‘But Seriously Folks: The Limitations of the Strict Constructionist Interpreta-
tion of Social Problems’, in J. A. Holstein and G. Miller (eds.), Reconsidering Social
Constructionism: Debates in Social Problems Theory. New York: Aldine de Gruyter, 129–50.
Biagioli, M. (ed.) (1999). The Science Studies Reader. New York: Routledge.
Bijker, W. E., Hughes, T. P., and Pinch, T. (eds.) (1987). The Social Construction of Techno-
logical Systems: New Directions in the Sociology and History of Technology. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
——and Law, J. (eds.) (1992). Shaping Technology/Building Society: Studies in Socio-technical
Change. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bloomﬁeld, B. B., and Vurdubakis, T. (1994). ‘Boundary Disputes: Negotiating the Boundary
between the Technical and the Social in the Development of IT Systems’, Information
Technology and People, 7(1): 9–24.
————(1997). ‘Paper Traces: Inscribing Organisations and Information Technology’, in
B. P. Bloomﬁeld, R. Coombs, D. Knights, and D. Littler (eds.), Information Technology
and Organizations: Strategies, Networks and Integration. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
85–111.
——Coombs, R., Owen J., and Taylor, P. (1997). ‘Doctors as Managers: Constructing Systems
and Users in the National Health Service’, in B. P. Bloomﬁeld, R. Coombs, D. Knights, and
D. Littler (eds.), Information Technology and Organizations: Strategies, Networks and
Integration. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 112–34.
Bloor, D. (1976). Knowledge and Social Imagery. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul (2nd
edn., Chicago University Press, 1991).
Boland, R. J., and Schultze, U. (1996). ‘From Work to Activity: Technology and the Narrative
of Progress’, in W. J. Orlikowksi, G. Walsham, M. R. Jones, and J. DeGross (eds.),
POST-STRUCTURALISM, SOCIAL SHAPING OF TECHNOLOGY
315

Information Technology and Changes in Organizational Work, proceedings of the IFIP
WG8.2 working conference, Cambridge University, 7–9 December 1995. London: Chap-
man and Hall, 308–24.
Bowker, G. C., Timmermans, S., and Star, S. L. (1996). ‘Infrastructure and Organizational
Transformation: Classifying Nurses’ Work’, in W. J. Orlikowksi, G. Walsham, M. R. Jones,
and J. DeGross (eds.), Information Technology and Changes in Organizational Work,
proceedings of the IFIP WG8.2 working conference, Cambridge University, 7–9 December
1995, London: Chapman and Hall, 344–70.
Brooke, C. (2002). ‘What does it Mean to be ‘Critical’ in IS Research?’ Journal of Information
Technology, 17(2): 49–57 (Special Issue on Critical Research in Information Systems).
Bucchi, M. (2004). Science in Society: An Introduction to Social Studies of Science. London:
Routledge.
Callon, M. (1986). ‘Some Elements of a Sociology of Translation: Domestication of the
Scallops and the Fishermen of St Brieuc Bay’, in J. Law (ed.), Power, Action and Belief.
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 196–233.
—— (1991). ‘Techno-economic Networks and Irreversibility’, in J. Law, A Sociology of
Monsters: Essays on Power, Technology and Domination. London: Routledge, 132–64.
—— and Latour, B. (1981). ‘Unscrewing the Big Leviathan: How Actors Macro-structure
Reality and how Sociologists Help them to do it’, in K. Knorr-Cetina and A. V. Cicourel
(eds.), Advances in Social Theory and Methodology: Towards an Integration of Micro- and
Macro-sociologies. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 277–303.
Ciborra, C., and Hanseth, O. (1998). ‘From Tool to Gestell: Agendas for Managing the
Information Infrastructure’, Information Technology and People, 11(4): 305–27.
Clegg, S. R. (1989). Frameworks of Power. London: Sage.
Cohen, S. (1997). ‘Science Studies and Language Suppression: A Critique of Bruno Latour’s
We Have Never Been Modern’, Studies of History and Philosophy of Science, 28(2): 339–61.
Collins, H. (1983). ‘An Empirical Relativist Programme in the Sociology of Scientiﬁc Knowl-
edge’, in K. Knorr-Cetina and M. Mulkay (eds.), Science Observed. London: Sage, 85–113.
—— and Evans, R. (2002). ‘The Third Wave of Science Studies’, Social Studies of Science,
32(2): 235–96.
—— and Pinch, T. (1993). The Golem: What Everyone Should Know about Science. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
—— and Yearley, S. (1992). ‘Journey into Space’, in A. Pickering (ed.), Science as Practice and
Culture. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 369–89.
Cussins, C. (1997). ‘Local and Global Challenges from Biodiversity Conservation to the Idea
of Centres of Calculation (Translation?)’, Actor-Network Theory and After Workshop,
Centre for Social Theory and Technology, Keele University, 10–11 July.
Doolin, B. (1998). ‘Information Technology as Disciplinary Technology: Being Critical
in Interpretive Research on Information Systems’, Journal of Information Technology,
13: 301–11.
——and Lowe, A. (2002). ‘To Reveal is to Critique: Actor-Network Theory and Critical
Information Systems Research’, Journal of Information Technology, 17(2): 69–78 (Special
Issue on Critical Research in Information Systems).
Dreyfus, H., and Rabinow, P. (1982). Michel Foucault: Beyond Structuralism and Hermeneu-
tics. Brighton: Harvester Press.
Drummond, H. (1996). Escalation in Decision-Making: The Tragedy of Taurus. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
316
NATHALIE MITEV AND DEBRA HOWCROFT

Duster, T. (1981). ‘Intermediate Steps between Micro- and Macro-integration: The Case of
Screening for Inherited Disorders’, in K. D. Knorr-Cetina and A. V. Cicourel (eds.),
Advances in Social Theory and Methodology: Towards an Integration of Micro- and
Macro-sociologies. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 109–37.
Ellul, J. (1965). The Technological Society. London: Jonathan Cape.
Feenberg, A. (1995). ‘Subversive Rationalization: Technology, Power and Democracy’, in
A. Feenberg and A. Hannay (eds.), Technology and the Politics of Knowledge. Bloomington
and Indianopolis, IN: Indiana University Press, 3–22.
——(2000). ‘Constructivism and Technology Critique: Replies to Critics’, Inquiry, 43: 225–38.
Fournier, V., and Grey, C. (2000). ‘At the Critical Moment: Conditions and Prospects for
Critical Management Studies’, Human Relations, 53(1): 7–32.
Garﬁnkel, H. (1967). Studies in Ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Gergen, K. J. (2001). Social Construction in Context. London: Sage.
Giddens, A. (1981). ‘Agency, Institution, and Time-Space Analysis’, in K. D. Knorr-Cetina
and A. V. Cicourel (eds.), Advances in Social Theory and Methodology: Towards an
Integration of Micro- and Macro-sociologies. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 161–74.
Grey, C., and Willmott, H. (2005). Critical Management Studies: A Reader. Oxford Manage-
ment Readers. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Grint K., and Woolgar S. (1997). The Machine at Work: Technology, Work and Organization.
Cambridge: Polity Press and Oxford: Blackwell.
Gubrium, J. F. (1993). ‘For a Cautious Naturalism’, in J. A. Holstein and A. Miller (eds.),
Reconsidering Social Constructionism: Debates in Social Problems Theory. New York:
Aldine de Gruyter, 89–102.
Guzzini, S. (2000). ‘A Reconstruction of Constructivism in International Relations’, European
Journal of International Relations, 6(2): 147–82.
Hacking, I. (1999). The Social Construction of What? Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Hanseth, O., and Monteiro, E. (1998). ‘Changing Irreversible Networks’, in W. R. J. Baets
(ed.), Sixth European Conference on Information Systems, 4–6 June 1998, Aix-en-Provence,
1123–39.
Harré, R. (1981). ‘Philosophical Aspects of the Micro-macro Problem’, in K. D. Knorr-Cetina
and A. V. Cicourel (eds.), Advances in Social Theory and Methodology: Towards an
Integration of Micro- and Macro-sociologies. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 139–60.
Harris, S. (1997). ‘Long-Distance Corporations and the Role of Organized Travel in the Making
of Early Modern Science: The Case of the Society of Jesus’, Actor-Network Theory and After
Workshop, Centre for Social Theory and Technology, Keele University, 10–11 July.
Harvey, L. J., and Myers, M. D. (1995). ‘Scholarship and Practice: The Contribution of
Ethnographic Research Methods to Bridging the Gap’, Information Technology and People,
8(3): 13–27.
Hassard, J., Law, J., and Lee, N. (1999). ‘Themed Section: Actor-Network Theory and
Managerialism. Preface’, Organization, 6(3): 385–90.
Hatt, G. (1997). ‘Re-materialising the Body: Networks and Embodied Nodes’, Actor-Network
Theory and AfterWorkshop, Centre for Social Theory and Technology, Keele University,
10–11 July.
Heracleous, L., and Barrett, M. (2001). ‘Organizational Change as Discourse: Communicative
Actions and Deep Structures in the Context of Information Technology Implementation’,
Academy of Management Journal, 44(4): 755–78.
POST-STRUCTURALISM, SOCIAL SHAPING OF TECHNOLOGY
317

Hirschheim, R., and Klein, H. K. (1994). ‘Realizing Emancipatory Principles in Information
Systems Development: The Case of ETHICS’, MIS Quarterly, 18(1): 83–109.
Holmström, J., and Stalder, F. (2001). ‘Drifting Technologies and Multi-purpose Networks:
The Case of the Swedish Cashcard’, Information and Organization, 11: 187–206.
Holstein, J. A., and Miller, G. (1993). Reconsidering Social Constructionism: Debates in Social
Problems Theory. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Howard, J. (2002). ‘Toward a Reconstructivist Stance in Technology Studies’, Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York, August.
Howcroft, D. A., Mitev, N. N., and Wilson, M. (2004). ‘What We May Learn from the Social
Shaping of Technology Approach’, in J. Mingers and L. Willcocks (eds.), Social Theory and
Philosophy for Information Systems. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 329–71.
——and Trauth, E. M. (2004). ‘The Choice of Critical Information Systems Research’, in
B. Kaplan, D. P. Truex III, D. Wastell, A. T. Wood-Harper, and J. I. DeGross (eds.),
Information Systems Research: Relevant Theory and Informed Practice. Boston, MA: Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 195–212.
————(2005). ‘Choosing Critical IS Research’, in Handbook of Information Systems Re-
search: Critical Perspectives on Information Systems Design, Implementation and Use.
London: Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd.
Hughes, T. P. (1999). ‘The Evolution of Large Technological Systems’, in M. Biagioli (eds.),
The Science Studies Reader. New York: Routledge, 202–23.
Huysman, M. (2002). ‘Organizational Learning through Communities of Practice: A Social
Constructivist Approach’, in H. Tsoukas, and N. Mylonopoulos (eds.), Organizational
Knowledge, Learning and Capabilities, 3rd European Conference. Athens: Athens Labora-
tory of Business Administration, Athens University of Economics.
Jones, M., Orlikowski, W. J., and Munir, K. (2004). ‘Structuration Theory and Information
Systems: A Critical Reappraisal’, in J. Mingers and L. Willcocks (eds.), Social Theory and
Philosophy for Information System. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 297–328.
Kling, R. (1992). ‘Audiences, Narratives and Human Values in Social Studies of Technology’,
Science, Technology and Human Values, 17(3): 349–65.
Knights, D., and Murray, F. (1994). Managers Divided: Organisation Politics and Information
Technology Management. Chichester: J. Wiley & Sons.
———— (1997). ‘Markets, Managers and Messages: Managing Information Systems in Financial
Services’, in B. B. Bloomﬁeld, R. Coombs, D. Knights, and D. Littler (eds.), Information
Technology and Organizations: Strategies, Networks and Integration. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 36–56.
————and Willmott, H. (1997). ‘Networking as Knowledge Work: A Study of Strategic
Inter-organizational Development in the Financial Services Industry’, in B. P. Bloomﬁeld,
R. Coombs, D. Knights, and D. Littler (eds.), Information Technology and Organizations:
Strategies, Networks and Integration. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 137–80.
Knorr-Cetina, K. (1981). ‘The Micro-sociological Challenge of Macro-sociology: Towards
a Reconstruction of Social Theory and Methodology’, in K. D. Knorr-Cetina and
A. V. Cicourel (eds.), Advances in Social Theory and Methodology: Towards an Integration
of Micro- and Macro-sociologies. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul 1–47.
—— (1995). ‘Laboratory Studies: The Cultural Approach to the Study of Science’, in S. Janasoff,
G. E. Markle, J. C. Petersen, and T. Pinch (eds.), Handbook of Science and Technology Studies.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 140–65.
318
NATHALIE MITEV AND DEBRA HOWCROFT

—— and Cicourel, A. V. (eds.) (1981). Advances in Social Theory and Methodology: Towards
an Integration of Micro- and Macro-sociologies. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Kvasny, L. (2006). ‘The Cultural (Re)production of Digital Inequality’, Information, Commu-
nication and Society 9(2): 160–81.
Latour, B. (1989). La Science en action: introduction à la sociologie des sciences. Paris:
Gallimard, Folio Essais. In English: Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and
Engineers through Society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
——(1991). ‘Technology is Society Made Durable’, in J. Law (ed.), A Sociology of Monsters:
Essays on Power, Technology and Domination. London: Routledge, 103–31.
——(1992). Aramis ou l’amour des techniques. Série Textes à l’Appui, Anthropologie des
Sciences et des Techniques. Paris: Éditions La Découverte. In English: Aramis, or the Love
of Technology, trans. C. Porter. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996.
——(1993a). ‘Ethnography of a ‘High-Tech’ Case: About Aramis’, in P. Lemonnier, Techno-
logical Choices: Transformations in Material Culture since the Neolithic. London: Routledge
& Kegan Paul, 372–98.
——(1993b). We Have Never Been Modern. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
——(1999). Pandora’s Hope: Essays on the Reality of Science Studies. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
——and Woolgar, S. (1979). Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientiﬁc Facts. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press (1986 revised edition with a new postcript and index).
Law, J. (ed.) (1986). Power, Action and Belief. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
——(2001). Ladbroke Grove or How to Think about Failing Systems. Lancaster: Centre for
Science Studies, Department of Sociology, University of Lancaster.
——and Hassard, J. (eds.) (1999). Actor Network Theory: And After. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lee, A. S. (1994). ‘Electronic Mail as a Medium for Rich Communication: An Empirical
Investigation Using Hermeneutic Interpretation’, MIS Quarterly, 18(2): 143–57.
Lehoux, P. (1997). ‘Screeching Normativity, or can Actor-Network Theory Be Relevantly
(Mis)used in Evaluation of Medical Technology’, Actor-Network Theory and After Work-
shop, Centre for Social Theory and Technology, Keele University, 10–11 July.
Lilley, S., Lightfoot, G., and Paulo Amaral, M. N. (2004). Representing Organization: Knowl-
edge, Management and the Information Age. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lynch, M., and Cole, S. (2005). ‘Science and Technology Studies on Trial: Dilemmas of
Expertise’, Social Studies of Science, 35(2): 269–311.
Lyotard, J.-F. (1984). The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge. Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press.
McAdam, R., and McCreedy, A. (2000). ‘A Critique of Knowledge Management Using a
Social Constructionist Model’, New Technology, Work and Employment, 15: 155–68.
MacKenzie, D. (1988). ‘Micro’ Versus ‘Macro’ Sociologies of Science and Technology. Edin-
burgh PICT (Programme on Information and Communication Technologies) Working
Paper No. 2, Research Centre for Social Sciences. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University.
——and Wajcman, J. (eds.) (1985). The Social Shaping of Technology. Milton Keynes: Open
University Press.
————(eds.) (1999). The Social Shaping of Technology. 2nd edn., Buckingham: Open
University Press.
McLean, C., and Hassard, J. (2004). ‘Symmetrical Absence/Symmetrical Absurdity: Critical
Notes on the Production of Actor-Network Accounts’, Journal of Management Studies, 41
(3): 493–519.
POST-STRUCTURALISM, SOCIAL SHAPING OF TECHNOLOGY
319

McLoughin, I. (1997). ‘Babies, Bathwater, Guns and Roses’, in I. McLoughin and M. Harris
(eds.), Innovation, Organizational Change and Technology. London: International Thom-
son Business Press, 207–21.
——and Harris, M. (eds.) (1997). Innovation, Organizational Change and Technology.
London: International Thomson Business Press.
Markus, M. L. (1983). ‘Power, Politics and MIS Implementation’, Communications of the
ACM, 26(6): 430–44.
——and Robey, D. (1988). ‘Information Technology and Organizational Change: Causal
Structure in Theory and Research’, Management Science, 34(5): 583–97.
Merton, R. (1938). Science, Technology and Society in Seventeenth Century England. Bruges:
St Catherine Press (4th edn., New York: Howard Fertig, 2001).
——(1942). ‘The Normative Structure of Science’, reproduced in Merton 1973.
——(1973). The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigations. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Mingers, J. (2004). ‘Re-establishing the Real: Critical Realism and Information Systems’,
in J. Mingers and L. Willcocks (eds.), Social Theory and Philosophy for Information Systems.
Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 372–406.
Mitev, N. N. (2005). ‘Are Social Constructivist Approaches Critical? The Case of IS Failure’,
in D. A. Howcroft and E. Trauth (eds.), Handbook of Information Systems Research: Critical
Perspectives on Information Systems Design, Implementation and Use. London: Edward
Elgar Publishing Ltd.
——(2006). ‘Postmodernism and Criticality in Information Systems Research: What Critical
Management Studies Can Contribute’, Social Science Computer Review, 24(3): 310–25
(Special Issue on ‘Applying Critical Theory to the Study of ICTs’).
——(2009). ‘In and out of Actor-Network Theory: An Incomplete Journey’, Information
Technology and People (Special Issue on ‘Using Social Theory to Make Sense of Informa-
tion Systems: Reﬂexive Essays’).
Mitroff, I. (1974). ‘Norms and Counter Norms in a Select Group of the Apollo Moon
Scientists: A Case Study of the Ambivalence of Scientists’, American Sociological Review,
39: 579–95.
Monteiro, E., and Hanseth, O.. (1996). ‘Social Shaping of Information Infrastructure:
On Being Speciﬁc about the Technology’, in W. J. Orlikowski, G. Walsham, M. R. Jones,
and J. DeGross (eds.), Information Technology and Changes in Organizational Work,
Proceedings of the IFIP WG8.2 working conference, Cambridge University, 7–9 December
1995. London: Chapman & Hall, 325–43.
Mulkay, M. (1974). ‘Conceptual Displacement and Migration in Science’, Science Studies,
4: 205–34.
Murdoch, J. (1997). ‘Asymmetrical Translations: Conﬁgurements and Disﬁgurements within
the Geometries of Power’, Actor-Network Theory and After Workshop, Centre for Social
Theory and Technology, Keele University, 10–11 July.
Myers, G. (1997). ‘Texts, Time and Action: Unfolding Leaﬂets’, Actor-Network Theory and
After Workshop, Centre for Social Theory and Technology, Keele University, 10–11 July.
Myers, M. D. (1994). ‘Dialectical Hermeneutics: A Theoretical Framework for the Implemen-
tation of Information Systems’, Information Systems Journal, 5: 51–70.
——(1997). ‘Critical Ethnography in Information Systems’, in A. S. Lee, J. Liebenau, and
J. I. DeGross (eds.), Information Systems and Qualitative Research. London: Chapman
and Hall, 276–300.
320
NATHALIE MITEV AND DEBRA HOWCROFT

Nandhakumar, J., and Vidgen, R. (2001). ‘Due Process and the Introduction of New Tech-
nology: The Institution of Video Teleconferencing’, in N. L. Russo, B. Fitzgerald, and
J. I. DeGross (eds.), Realigning Research and Practice in Information Systems Development:
The Social and Organizational Perspective. Proceedings of the IFIP Working Group 8.2
Conference, Boise, Idaho, 27–9 July 2001. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Ngwenyama, O. K., and Lee, A. S. (1997). ‘Communicative Richness in Electronic Mail:
Critical Social Theory and the Contextuality of Meaning’, MIS Quarterly, 21(2): 145–67.
——Harvey, L., Myers, M. D., and Wynn, E. (1997). ‘Ethnographic Research in Information
Systems: An Exploration of Three Alternative Approaches to Ethnography’, 18th Interna-
tional Conference on Information Systems, Panel 17, Association of Information Systems,
Atlanta, 533–4.
Orlikowski, W. J. (1992). ‘The Duality of Technology: Rethinking the Concept of Technology
in Organizations’, Organization Science, 3(3): 398–427.
——and Baroudi, J. J. (1991). ‘Studying Information Technology in Organizations: Research
Approaches and Assumptions’, Information Systems Research, 2(1): 1–28.
——Walsham, G., Jones, M. R., and DeGross, J. (eds.) (1996). Information Technology and
Changes in Organizational Work. Proceedings of the IFIP WG8.2 Working Conference,
Cambridge University, 7–9 December 1995. London: Chapman & Hall.
Pickering, A. (1992). Science as Practice and Culture. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Richardson, H. (2003). ‘CRM in Call Centres: The Logic of Practice’, in M. Korpela,
R. Montealegre, and A. Poulymenakou (eds.), Organizational Information Systems in the
Context of Globalization, IFIP WG8.2 and WG9.4 Conference on Information Systems
Perspectives and Challenges in the Context of Globalization, 15–17 June, Athens. Boston,
MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 69–84.
Sarker, S. (2000). ‘Toward a Methodology for Managing Information Systems Implementa-
tion: A Social Constructivist Perspective’, Informing Science 3: 195–205.
——Sarker, S., and Sidorova, A. (2006). ‘Understanding Business Process Change Failure: An
Actor-Network Perspective’, Journal of Management Information Systems, 23(1): 51–86.
Shapin, S., and Schaffer, S. (1985). Leviathan and the Air Pump: Hobbes, Boyle and the
Experimental Life. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Silva, L. (1997). ‘Power and Politics in the Adoption of Information Systems in Organisations:
The Case of a Research Centre in Latin America’, Ph.D. thesis, Department of Information
Systems. London: London School of Economics.
——and Backhouse, J. (1997). ‘Becoming Part of the Furniture: The Institutionalisation of
Information Systems’, in A. S. Lee, J. Liebenau, and J. I. DeGross (eds.), Information
Systems and Qualitative Research. London: Chapman & Hall, 389–416.
Soderstrom, O. (1997). ‘Geographers and the Visual: From Iconophilia to Expertise’, Actor-
Network Theory and After Workshop, Centre for Social Theory and Technology, Keele
University, 10–11 July.
Sorensen, K. (2004). ‘Cultural Politics of Technology: Combining Critical and Constructive
Interventions?’, Science, Technology and Human Values, 29(2): 184–90.
Stalder, F. (1999). ‘Fluid Objects: Reconﬁguring Money and the Limits of Actor-Network
Theory’, paper given at the Sociality/Materiality conference, Brunel University, 9–11 Sept.
Star, S. L. (1991). ‘Power, Technologies and the Phenomenology of Conventions: On Being
Allergic to Onions’, in J. Law (ed.), A Sociology of Monsters: Essays on Power, Technology
and Domination. London: Routledge.
POST-STRUCTURALISM, SOCIAL SHAPING OF TECHNOLOGY
321

Truex, D. P., and Baskerville, R. (1998). ‘Deep Structure or Emergence Theory: Contrasting
Theoretical Foundations for Information Systems Development’, Information Systems
Journal, 8: 99–118.
Vidgen, R., and McMaster, T. (1996). ‘Black Boxes, Non-human Stakeholders and the
Translation of IT’, in W. J. Orlikowski, G. Walsham, M. R. Jones, and J. DeGross (eds.),
Information Technology and Changes in Organizational Work. Proceedings of the IFIP
WG8.2 Working Conference, Cambridge University, 7–9 December 1995. London:
Chapman & Hall, 250–71.
Walsham, G. (1993). Interpreting Information Systems in Organisations. Chichester: John
Wiley & Sons.
——(1995). ‘The Emergence of Interpretivism in IS Research’, Information Systems Research,
6(4): 376–94.
——(1997). ‘Actor-Network Theory and IS Research: Current Status and Future Prospects’, in
A. S. Lee, J. Liebenau, and J. I. DeGross, Information Systems and Qualitative Research.
London: Chapman & Hall, 466–80.
——and Sahay, S. (1999). ‘GIS for District-Level Administration in India: Problems and
Opportunities. MIS Quarterly, 23(1): 39–65 (Special Issue on Intensive Research in Infor-
mation Systems).
Willcocks, L. P. (2004). ‘Foucault, Power/Knowledge and Information Systems: Reconstruct-
ing the Present’, in J. Mingers and L. Willcocks (eds.), Social Theory and Philosophy for
Information Systems. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 238–96.
——and Grint, K. (1997). ‘Re-inventing the Organization? Towards a Critique of Business
Process Re-engineering’, in I. McLoughlin and M. Harris (eds.), Innovation, Organizational
Change and Technology. London: International Thomson Business Press, 87–110.
Willmott, H. (1994). ‘Bringing Agency (back) into Organizational Analysis: Responding to
the Crisis of (Post)modernity’, in J. Hassard and M. Parker (eds.), Towards a New Theory of
Organizations. London: Routledge, 87–130.
Wilson, M. (2000). ‘Discussant’s Comments Delivered on “Machine Agency as Perceived
Autonomy: An Action Perspective”, by J. Rose and D. Truex’, in R. Baskerville, J. Stage, and
J. I. DeGross (eds.), Organizational and Social Perspectives on Information Technology. IFIP
TC8 WG8.2 International Working Conference, 9–11 June, Aalborg, Denmark. Boston,
MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 371–88.
——(2002). ‘Making Nursing Visible? Gender, Technology and the Care Plan as Script’,
Information Technology and People, 15(2): 139–58.
——and Howcroft, D. A. (2003). ‘Re-conceptualising Failure: Social Shaping Meets IS
Research’, European Journal of Information Systems, 11: 236–50.
Winner, L. (1977). Autonomous Technology. Technics out-of-control as a Theme in Political
Thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——(1993). ‘Upon Opening the Black Box and Finding it Empty: Social Constructivism and
the Philosophy of Technology’, Science, Technology and Human Values, 18(3): 362–78.
Woodhouse, E., Hess, D., and Breyman, S. (2002). ‘Science Studies and Activism’, Social
Studies of Science, 32(2): 297–319.
Woolgar, S. (1988). Knowledge and Reﬂexivity: New Frontiers in the Sociology of Knowledge.
London: Sage.
322
NATHALIE MITEV AND DEBRA HOWCROFT

P A R T I I I
...............................................................................................
RETHINKING
THEORY IN MIS
PRACTICE
...............................................................................................
Building on the conceptual treatment of the ﬁeld of Information Systems that is the
focus of Part II, Part III of the book turns its attention to some of the key issues
associated with managing information systems in practice. Where possible, we refer-
ence relevant related material that appears in other chapters, both in this section of the
book and elsewhere. In addition, relevant research—from cognate ﬁelds in addition to
Information Systems—is cited, in line with the transdisciplinary approach adopted by
the editors and many of the other contributors.
Part III begins with a chapter by Bob Galliers on the subject of IS strategy. He adopts
the term IS strategizing with a view to giving emphasis to the process of strategy
making. He views IS strategizing as an integral aspect of business strategy rather
than adopting the more common view that the IS strategy should be aligned with the
business strategy. The sometimes vexed topic of alignment is dealt with in detail in
Chapter 13 that follows. Galliers draws on such concepts as a socio-technical infra-
structure, exploration alongside exploitation—ambidexterity, to use Tushman’s termi-
nology (Tushman and O’Reilly 1996)—and knowledge sharing and creating (see also
Chapter 20) to provide a rationale for the development of a framework that may be
used by organizations in considering how to go about the strategizing process. Issues
associated with sourcing considerations—the focus of Chapter 19—are incorporated,

as are issues associated with IT governance more generally (see Chapter 16) and with
improved organizational performance (cf. competitive advantage—the subject matter
of Chapter 14). The chapter builds on, in part, his chapter (Galliers 2007) in the Oxford
Handbook of Information and Communication Technology (Mansell et al. 2007).
As indicated above, Chapter 13 deals with the thorny issue of alignment. Written by
Yolande Chan and Blaize Horner Reich, the chapter provides a comprehensive review
of the IT alignment literature, noting that the topic is one of the major concerns of
senior executives and IT practitioners alike. The authors build on their recent Journal
of Information Technology article (Chan and Reich 2007) and present divergent views
and new perspectives on alignment, ﬁrst discussing the motivation for alignment
research and moving on to provide a deﬁnition of alignment, given the range of
perspectives to be found in the literature. They address such questions as: what creates
alignment and what beneﬁts can reasonably be expected as a result? In concluding, they
highlight key implications for researchers and practitioners.
Chapter 14 considers sustainable competitive advantage on the back of IT. Written
by Michael Wade, Gabe Piccoli, and Blake Ives, the chapter builds on and extends the
comprehensive review provided by the authors in a recent MISQ article (Piccoli and
Ives 2005). The authors ﬁrst note that the term sustainability has two meanings in the
IS literature: (1) ‘the ability of a ﬁrm to use IT to maintain a competitive advantage over
a period of time’, and (2) the ‘ethics and long lasting socio-environmental beneﬁts’ of
IT. We deal with questions of ethics and ‘green IT’ elsewhere in the book (e.g. in
Chapters 16 and 23, and 22, respectively). Here, the authors focus on the ﬁrst meaning
of the term. They make the key point that the factors that may assist in gaining an
advantage are not necessarily those required to sustain that advantage. While much of
the literature focuses on the former, relatively less has considered the means by which
‘ﬁrms can hold on to a competitive advantage based on, or enabled by, IT’. Reasons for
this include the need for longitudinal research, which is all too often missing from our
major journals. In addition, they note the signiﬁcant challenge in isolating the speciﬁc
role played by IT in sustaining advantage as against other competing explanations.
‘Unfortunately, the resultant scarcity of rigorous investigation and evidence is a con-
tributing cause of the recurrence of attacks on the role of IT as a competitive resource’
(Carr 2003). The chapter aims to redress the balance somewhat.
The next chapter—Chapter 15—is written by Erica Wagner and Sue Newell and
turns our attention to enterprise systems. Building on the previous chapter’s treatment
of ﬁrms gaining competitive advantage on the back of IT, the authors make the point
that this competitiveness is thought to be gained through enabling leaner production as
a result of streamlining work ﬂow with a view to increasing productivity, reducing
costs, and improving decision quality and resource control. They note that this
perceived ability to streamline and integrate business operations across an organiza-
tion’s value chain (Shanks and Seddon 2000) lead to enterprise systems becoming the
most popular business software of the twentieth century (Robey, Ross, and Boudreau
2002). The central tenet of enterprise systems is that this integration will help to leverage
organizational competitiveness through improving the way in which information is
324
RETHINKING THEORY IN MIS PRACTICE

produced, shared, and managed across functions and locations, providing the adminis-
trative backbone that an organization needs (Davenport 1998), thereby avoiding the
issues of incompatibility associated with so-called ‘legacy’ systems that focused on
discrete functions in prior times. So much, then, for the received wisdom: the authors
go on to point out that, while enterprise systems hold the promise of business integra-
tion across an organization, ‘accomplishing this promise requires changes that affect an
unprecedented amount of people across the enterprise’. Referring to the work of
Aladwani (2002) and Scott and Wagner (2003), for example, they argue that the
‘standardization of work practices across functional areas of the business is often
difﬁcult to achieve, with resistance from stakeholder groups being common’ with
organizational change being more problematic than ﬁrst thought (Scott and Vessey
2002) and high levels of project failure being common (Robbins-Gioia 2001). Noting
that, while 20 per cent of IT projects are abandoned prior to implementation (Cooke,
Gelman, and Peterson 2001), this means that 80 per cent of enterprise system projects
do at least go ahead. This leads them to suggest that the chapter might usefully refocus
its attention away from looking at the short-term problems and opportunities asso-
ciated with implementation towards understanding how organizations learn to exploit
the functionality of these potentially powerful systems over the long term. Citing the
work of Robey and Boudreau (1999), this perspective requires rethinking many of the
assumptions about IT implementation and use—moving away from such simplistic
notions as ‘IT “drives”, “forces” or even merely “enables” change’ to exploring ‘the
complex relationship of reciprocal causality between IT and organization with the
outcomes emergent and difﬁcult to predict in advance’ (e.g. Walsham 1993; Orlikowski
2000). This reorientation of our thinking leads to questions being raised concerning
notions of ‘best practice’, consensus, user participation, and implementation. In so
doing, the authors provide considerable food for thought in relation to some of the
more taken-for-granted assumptions underpinning much of the mainstream literature
on information systems more broadly.
This treatment of enterprise systems leads nicely into Chapter 16—a chapter that
deals with IT governance issues more broadly. In it, Sue Newell and Cynthia Williams
consider how decisions are made in organizations about IT. They note that how these
decisions ‘are made, who makes these decisions and what rules and norms guide
decisions is a fundamental ﬁrst step as this will likely inﬂuence whether the necessary
organizational structures are put in place to support the strategic adoption and use of
IT’. Calling on the more general corporate governance literature, they broaden the
notion of IT governance commonly found in the mainstream literature on the subject
by looking at the ‘rights and responsibilities associated with the use, storage, retrieval
and collection of data’. Corporate governance concerns itself ‘with ensuring that there
is correspondence between the interests of managers, as decision makers, and the
interests of shareholders, as owners’ (cf. Eisenhardt 1989). In other words, the authors
take a broader stakeholder perspective in their treatment of the subject matter, and
consider that IT governance is ‘about ensuring that IT decisions are made in the
interests of the long-term sustainability of the organization’. There is thus an ethical
RETHINKING THEORY IN MIS PRACTICE
325

dimension (see also Chapter 22), to their treatment of the subject matter. They draw on
work by the likes of Brundtland (1987) to incorporate sustainability criteria in measur-
ing organizational success, referring to the ‘triple-bottom line’ concept coined by John
Elkington (1994) to indicate that organizational performance should be measured
according to three key criteria—social and environmental as well as ﬁnancial. Thus,
they argue that the decisions related to IT governance need to be aligned with these
social, ﬁnancial, and environmental considerations.
A key aspect of the ‘rights and responsibilities associated with the use, storage,
retrieval and collection of data’ is the question of security, and this topic is the focus
of Chapter 17 written by Amy Ray. Noting that notwithstanding the fact that while
spending on security is increasing, so are security breaches, the author argues that it is
high time to rethink current approaches to information security management. In light
of this, the chapter considers ‘how the growing sophistication of newer technologies
demands new security management thinking beyond addressing individual vulnerabil-
ities’. The chapter goes on to present ideas for improving IT security management
efforts, including ‘suggestions for more proactively identifying risks resulting from
emergent use of these systems’. In doing so, this chapter bridges ‘the gap between high
level policy-based security management and low level technology-based security man-
agement to consider how more attention to technological and business processes may
lead to improvements in information security management efforts’.
One of the newer technologies that have had major impacts on the way we need to
think about the topic ‘MIS’ is the emergence in recent years of mobile information
technology, and this is the focus of Chapter 18. Written by Carsten Srensen, this
chapter notes that mobile IT concerns the shrinking of computers, ‘making them
mobile or embedded into the environment, and establishing wireless connections to
local—or global—information infrastructures’. Srensen notes the amazing growth of
one form of this technology, that of the mobile phone. There were approximately four
billion such devices in the world in 2009 and that number is estimated to reach six
billion by 2013. ‘Such a phenomenon’, he argues, ‘clearly deserves to be studied and a
growing body of research is exactly doing so.’ But much of the debate on the topic
‘tends to emphasize the technical opportunities or affordances at the cost of a more
comprehensive analysis of how the social and the technical is co-constructed’ and
much of the research on the topic focuses on a single mobile technology—the mobile
phone. This chapter aims to counter the fact that there is relatively little research that
broadens the focus to include the range of mobile information technologies. Such
arrangements may comprise ‘more than one mobile phone, dedicated mobile email
client, notebook computer with wireless Internet access, and perhaps peripheral equip-
ment interacting with the devices in Personal Area Networks (PANs) such as Bluetooth
headsets, cameras, photo printers, and speakers’. The chapter considers ‘enterprise
mobility’ as an outcome of the use of mobile IT in and between organizations, and
raises ‘critical issues in our understanding the intersection between the individual
experience with mobile IT at work and the organizational concern for efﬁciency’.
326
RETHINKING THEORY IN MIS PRACTICE

The increasing complexity associated with MIS in this day and age is also reﬂected in
the subject matter that is the focus of Chapter 19: outsourcing. Written by two
internationally renowned authorities on the topic—Mary Lacity and Leslie Willcocks,
together with a colleague, Shaji Khan—this chapter, originally published in the Journal
of Strategic Information Systems (Lacity, Khan, and Willcocks 2009), provides an
overview of the many contributions that MIS research has made to practice. Ten
aspects of IT outsourcing (ITO) are covered, namely: (1) determinants of IT out-
sourcing; (2) IT outsourcing strategy; (3) determinants of ITO success; (4) client
capabilities; (5) supplier capabilities and perspectives; (6) relationship management;
(7) global IT workforce issues; (8) offshore outsourcing; (9) application service provi-
sion; and (10) the future of global sourcing. The authors go on to note, however, that
there remain ‘ﬁve persistent, prickly issues that continue to plague ITO practice that
still need our attention’. In dealing with the many contributions that have arisen from
the mutual constituted nature of theory in and of practice, this chapter—and the others
that make up Part III—serves as something of a metaphor for the Handbook as a
whole, given our intention to provide both critical perspectives on and new directions
for this important ﬁeld of study. Paraphrasing Lacity and Willcocks: ‘It is our hope that
[the book] will serve to acknowledge the contributions of [MIS] researchers, to inform
interested readers in the main ﬁndings of [MIS] research that assist practice, and to
inspire future researchers to tackle unresolved challenges.’
REFERENCES
Aladwani, A. (2002). ‘IT Project Uncertainty, Planning and Success: An Empirical Investigation
from Kuwait’, Information Technology & People, 15: 210–26.
Brundtland, G. H. (1987). Our Common Future: Report of the World Commission on Environ-
ment and Development. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carr, N. (2003). ‘IT Doesn’t Matter’, Harvard Business Review, 81(5): 41–9.
Chan, Y. E., and Reich, B. H. (2007). ‘IT Alignment: What Have We Learned?’, Journal of
Information Technology, 22: 297–315.
Cooke, D., Gelman, L., and Peterson, W. J. (2001). ERP Trends (Report No. R-1292-01-RR).
New York: The Conference Board.
Davenport, T. (1998). ‘Putting the Enterprise into the Enterprise System’, Harvard Business
Review, 76(4): 121–31.
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). ‘Agency Theory: An Assessment and Review’, Academy of Management
Review, 14: 57–74.
Elkington, J. (1994). ‘Towards the Sustainable Corporation: Win-Win-Win Business Strategies
for Sustainable Development’, California Management Review, 36(2): 90–100.
Galliers, R. D. (2007). ‘On Confronting some of the Common Myths of Information Systems
Strategy Discourse’, in Mansell et al. 2007: 225–43.
Lacity, M. C., Khan, S. A., and Willcocks, L. P. (2009). ‘A Review of the IT Sourcing Literature:
Insights for Practice’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 18(3): 130–46.
RETHINKING THEORY IN MIS PRACTICE
327

Mansell, R., Avgerou, C., Quah, D., and Silverstone, R. (eds.) (2007). The Oxford Handbook of
Information and Communication Technology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Orlikowski, W. (2000). ‘Using Technology and Constituting Structures: A Practice Lens for
Studying Technology in Organizations’, Organization Science, 11: 404–28.
Piccoli, G., and Ives, B. (2005). ‘IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives and Sustained Competitive
Advantage: A Review and Synthesis of the Literature’, MIS Quarterly, 29(4): 747–76.
Robbins-Gioia (2001). The Robbins-Gioia Survey at <http://www.robbinsgioia.com/>.
Robey, D., and Boudreau, M. (1999). ‘Accounting for the Contradictory Organizational
Consequences of Information Technology’, Information Systems Research, 10: 167–85.
——Ross, J. W., and Boudreau, M. C. (2002). ‘Learning to Implement Enterprise Systems:
An Exploratory Study of the Dialectics of Change’, Journal of Management Information
Systems, 19: 17–46.
Scott, J., and Vessey, I. (2002). ‘Managing Risks in Enterprise Systems Implementations’,
Communications of the ACM, 45(4): 74–81.
Scott, S. V., and Wagner, E. L. (2003). ‘Networks, Negotiations, and New Times: The
Implementation of Enterprise Resource Planning into an Academic Administration’,
Information & Organization, 13(4): 285–313.
Shanks, G., and Seddon, P. (2000). Editorial, Journal of Information Technology, 15: 243–4.
Tushman, M. L., and O’Reilly, C. (1996). ‘Ambidextrous Organizations: Managing Evolu-
tionary and Revolutionary Change’, California Management Review, 38(1): 8–30.
Walsham, G. (1993). Interpreting Information Systems in Organizations. London: John Wiley
& Sons.
328
RETHINKING THEORY IN MIS PRACTICE

c h a p t e r 1 2
...............................................................................................
FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS
IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
STRATEGIZING:
UNPACKING THE CONCEPT
...............................................................................................
ROBERT D. GALLIERS
PROLOGUE: TOWARDS A REVISED FRAMEWORK FOR
INFORMATION SYSTEMS STRATEGIZING
..................................................................................................................
In previous work (in particular, Galliers 2004, 2007a), an attempt was made to collect
together aspects of recent thinking in organizational and information systems (IS)
strategic thinking to develop a framework that would aid the process of IS strategizing.
The problematic nature of key tenets of much of the mainstream IS strategy literature
(i.e. issues of alignment, competitive advantage, and so-called knowledge management
systems or ‘best practice’ solutions) was considered in the context of the development
and strategic impact and use of information and communication technology (ICT)
systems in and between organizations. Inter alia, it was noted that there are vexed
issues associated with aligning dynamic information needs with a relatively static
technology (see also Desouza 2006), and harnessing an increasingly commoditized
technology to provide competitive advantage. This is at the heart of Carr’s (2003, 2005)
argument that ‘IT Doesn’t Matter’. But Carr misses the point. Crucially, it is the use to
which ICT is put by organizations, and their capability and competencies in this regard,
that are crucial, as is the key role that information can play in questioning, supporting,
and informing the strategizing process. In relation to knowledge management and
knowledge management systems in particular, questions were raised as to whether ICT
systems could in fact capture and transfer knowledge, with the process of knowing and
knowledge creation (e.g. Boland and Tenkasi 1995; Nonaka and Takeuchi 1995; Cook

and Brown 1999; von Krogh, Ichijo, and Nonaka 2000) being highlighted. This
orientation was set against the capture and transfer knowledge that is the focus of
much of the mainstream literature on the topic, and the knowledge-based theory of the
ﬁrm (Grant 1996; Spender 1996).
In attempting to synthesize these arguments with a view to developing a more
holistic framework for IS strategizing, the socio-technical concept of an information
architecture or infrastructure (e.g. Star and Ruhleder 1996; Monteiro 1998; Ciborra
2000; Hanseth 2004) provided a useful building block. In addition, it was argued that
organizations should be ‘ambidextrous’ (Tushman and O’Reilly 1996) in that they
should combine an ability to explore new opportunities as well as exploit current
capabilities and technology. I argued that this ambidexterity can be facilitated by an
environment—an information infrastructure or architecture—that provides a support-
ive context for learning and interaction. I introduced each of these components in the
context of a framework that is meant to be used as a sense-making (cf. Weick 1995)
device, rather than a prescriptive tool.
Before proceeding to unpack the framework in greater detail than previously,
I should ﬁrst clarify how the term information systems (IS) is used here. As I have
argued elsewhere (see e.g. Galliers 2003, 2006b), I view IS as neither being focused on
the IT artefact (a technological perspective common in much of the literature) at one
pole nor on knowledge sharing and creation at the other. I view IS as incorporating
both aspects—as a socio-technical construct in other words, mutually constituted.
There are two primary reasons for this. The ﬁrst relates to the nature of data,
information, and knowledge (Galliers and Newell 2003a, 2003b). The socio-technical
infrastructure (e.g. Star and Ruhleder 1996; Ciborra 2000) depicted in Figure 12.1
comprises human beings who can make sense of data provided by both formal and
informal systems via the application of their (situated) knowledge. In doing so, they
turn data into purposeful information (see also Chapter 20). The second reason is to
provide an otherwise missing link between the literatures on IS/IT strategy, on knowl-
edge management, and on organizational strategies for change. Too often viewed as
discrete, an underlying argument in this chapter is that the concepts emerging from
these literatures should be viewed as complimentary and synergistic, as argued by
Porter (2001), for example (see also Galliers et al. 1997). I shall refer to these other
literatures in the course of this chapter in addition to providing a critical treatment of
much of the IS strategy and planning literature.
I should also note that aspects of the IS, IT, and information management (IM)
strategies ﬁrst articulated by Michael Earl (1989), and developed further in Galliers
(1991, 1999) as information, IT, and information services strategies—the combination
forming the IS strategy as a whole—are incorporated into both the exploration and
exploitation strategies of Figure 12.1. The exploration strategy takes more of an
informal approach—Ciborra (1992, 1994, after Lévi-Strauss 1966) would call this
tinkering or bricolage—as against the formal approaches of the kind identiﬁed by
Earl (1993). These include what Earl terms business-led, method-driven, administra-
tive (i.e. resource-focused) and technological approaches. His study led to the
330
ROBERT D. GALLIERS

conclusion that an organizational approach held most promise given its emphasis on
process, integration, and, crucially, stakeholder involvement (see also Códoba 2009).
The exploration strategy also takes into account the learning—or knowledge—that can
emerge from communities of practice, boundary spanning individuals and ﬂexible
project teams (e.g. Tushman and Scanlan 1981; Lave and Wenger 1991; Wenger 1998;
Hansen, Nohria, and Tierney 1999; Scheepers, Venkitachalam, and Gibbs 2004; Erden,
von Krogh, and Nonaka 2008), including learning across projects (e.g. Newell and
Edelman 2008). The exploitation strategy, as noted, is more formal in its approach and
focuses more on codiﬁed ‘solutions’, standardized procedures, and standards. It also
incorporates issues of how the information services function should be organized,
including key sourcing issues (e.g. Lacity and Willcocks 2000).
In this chapter, then, I shall attempt to unpack the concept of the IS strategizing
framework still further, by articulating, in greater depth, the literature that has in-
formed its development. The aim is to ground the framework in the extant literature,
Collaborative and 
competitive
environment
Exploitation
strategy
(Deliberate)
- Codified ‘solutions’
   e.g. Enterprise systems,
   ‘Knowledge management’
   systems
- Standardized 
  procedures and rules
- Information services
  (sourcing)
Exploration
strategy
(Emergent)
- Communities of
   practice
- Flexible project teams
- Knowledge brokers,
   ‘boundary spanners’
- Cross-project learning
- Bricolage/tinkering
Change management 
and implementation
strategy
Incorporating ongoing 
learning and review
Socio-political,
regulatory
environment
Knowledge creating
and sharing
infrastructure
(Human and technical 
capabilities; trust, 
socialization and 
communication)
FIGURE 12.1 A revised information systems strategizing framework
FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS STRATEGIZING
331

provide a rationale for the whole and the component parts, and articulate what is
meant by each aspect of the framework. The framework, slightly revised from the 2007
version, is illustrated in Figure 12.1. Each aspect will be considered in turn, commenc-
ing with the environment—internal and external—in which the strategizing process is
taking place. The chapter ends with a consideration as to how the framework may be
put to good use in organizations.
THE STRATEGIZING ENVIRONMENT
..................................................................................................................
As indicated above, my treatment of the strategizing environment considers this aspect
of IS strategizing from two perspectives: internal as well as external. From the internal
perspective the focus is on a balance between the formal and the informal; the
technological and the organizational; codiﬁed and tacit knowledge; the deliberate and
the emergent, and implementation and innovation, all with the aim of exploiting
resources while exploring new opportunities. Information transfer and sharing is at
its core, very much in line with the arguments of Michael Tushman and colleagues (e.g.
Tushman and Nadler 1978; Tushman and Scanlan 1981; Tushman and O’Reilly 1996).
In addition, and as argued by Newkirk, Lederer, and Srinavasan (2003), a balance has
also to be struck between too much planning and too little. Too much planning may
lead to delay and may impede implementation, while too little may lead to implemen-
tation plans with insufﬁcient detail (see also Earl 1993; Ward and Grifﬁths 1996; Ward
and Peppard 2002). Room has to made for innovation and improvisation (Vera and
Crossan 2005; Crossan and Sorrenti 2007), as well as building the necessary capacity
and capability for change (Teece, Pisano, and Shuen 1997; Peppard and Ward 2004)—
organizational characteristics that ‘enable an organization to conceive, choose and
implement strategies’ (Barney 1997). This, too, is where the knowledge creating and
sharing infrastructure plays a signiﬁcant role, as detailed below.
The external environment should take account of the institutional context (see
Chapter 6) in which the organisation operates—including the socio-political and
regulatory environment, and cultural nuances in different parts of the organization,
especially in multinational arrangements, for example (Finnegan and Longaigh 2002;
Mohdzain and Ward 2007; David et al. 2008). In relation to the latter, there has been
increasing focus in the literature on subsidiaries (e.g. Gupta and Govindarajan 2000;
O’Donnell 2000), for example, given growing globalization (e.g. Walsham 2001; Sheth
and Sisodia 2007; Galliers 2007b; Oshri, van Fenema, and Kotlarsky 2008), with
Finnegan and colleagues (2003) noting the impact of different cultures and power
relationships of external stakeholders, and Ives and colleagues (1993) highlighting the
potential of resistance from foreign subsidiaries and the disparity in the IT infrastruc-
ture and available products in different parts of the world. The effects of trust in virtual
communities may also be signiﬁcant (Jarvenpaa and Leidner 1999; Ridings, Gelen,
and Arinze 2002). Depending on particular circumstances, these are the kind of
332
ROBERT D. GALLIERS

considerations that need to be taken into account. Also of potential relevance is the
work on issues associated with integrating IS after mergers and acquisitions (McKier-
nan and Merali 1993, 1995; Brown and Renwick 1996; Giacomazzi et al. 1997), with
Wijnhoven and colleagues (2006) developing a variant of Henderson and Venkatra-
man’s (1999) alignment model to take account of the extent of integration: from
complete integration to mere coexistence. All this is in addition to the analysis of the
competitive forces (e.g. Porter 2001) and the cooperative—or conﬂictual—arrange-
ments (e.g. Webster 1995) at play.
One ﬁnal point: in earlier work (Galliers 1991, 1993, 1999 in particular), and as noted
above, I proposed an IS strategizing framework that was closely linked to a business
strategy. The business strategy was considered to exist outside the boundary of the IS
strategy—that is, in its internal environment. The link, it was argued, should be a strong
one, with the information strategy feeding off, and feeding into, the business strategy.
The information strategy, in my terms, was concerned with the information needed not
only to support but also to question the business strategy. For example, are assumptions
that underpin the strategy being borne out? It should be noted that the business strategy
is absent from Figure 12.1, however. This is not an oversight. In line with Porter’s (2001:
78) argument, the revised IS strategy is a signiﬁcant aspect of the overall business
strategy, it is integrated into it. In an earlier reﬂection on the subject (Galliers 2007a:
238, emphasis added), I reinterpreted a passage from Porter’s article, as follows:
The next stage of strategy evolution will involve a shift in thinking from business
strategy and knowledge strategy, to Information Systems strategising. By integrat-
ing Information Systems considerations into the discourse on business and knowl-
edge strategy, the resultant thinking and practice will become mutually constituted
and signiﬁcantly more robust.
It is with this in mind that the IS strategizing framework is presented without explicit
mention of the business strategy, and with which the knowledge creating and sharing
infrastructure is introduced to provide the oxygen needed for what should be seen as a
dynamic, ongoing, and iterative process.
THE KNOWLEDGE CREATING AND
SHARING INFRASTRUCTURE
..................................................................................................................
In a previous work, I described the knowledge creating and sharing infrastructure in
terms of an information architecture (Galliers 2004: 255–6). This was meant to connote
an enabling socio-technical environment for both the exploitation of knowledge
(efﬁciency) and the exploration of knowledge (innovation) in line with Tushman’s
concept of ambidexterity (Tushman and O’Reilly 1996). There are elements here, too,
of what Boland and Tenkasi (1995) term communities of knowing. I shall unpack the
FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS STRATEGIZING
333

exploitation and exploration strategies that play an important role in the IS strategizing
concept in the sections that follow, but it is important to note at this stage that this
socio-technical environment is meant to enable and facilitate the strategizing process
by ensuring that the necessary human and technical capabilities are in place (cf.
Peppard and Ward 2004), not only within the organization but with key partners,
such as in sourcing arrangements (Beulen, van Fenema, and Currie 2005).
As noted previously (Galliers 2004), the concept of an information infrastructure has
developed over time. In the 1980s and 1990s, the term information infrastructure
usually connoted the standardization of corporate ICT, systems, and data, with a view
to reconciling centralized processing and distributed applications. So, the question
would need to be asked whether the necessary technologies are in place to support the
enterprise moving forward. Increasingly, however, the concept has come to relate to the
human infrastructure in addition. For example, what roles and skills are required, not
just in terms of developing and delivering information systems—increasingly in a
distributed environment (Kotlarsky and Oshri 2005)—but also in their management
(Galliers and Leidner 2009)? Weill and Ross (2004) talk in terms of IT governance in
commenting on some of these issues. As already noted, trust plays an important role
here too (Kanawattanachai and Yoo 2002; Sambamurthy and Jarvenpaa 2002), with a
team atmosphere needing to be in place (Zárraga and Bonache 2005). Additionally, the
means by which alternative stakeholder concerns are taken into account (Códoba
2009) is an important consideration, bearing in mind that implicit in many of the
more formal approaches to strategizing is the assumption that individuals can make
stated organizational objectives their own (Willmott 1993), with questions of power
(Foucault 1984) often being left unconsidered. As noted earlier, Star and Ruhleder
(1996) talk of infrastructures in terms of their embeddedness, transparency, reach,
links with conventions of practice, and installed base. An information infrastructure
should thus be viewed as heterogeneous in nature.
The concept is further reﬁned here by introducing ideas related to knowledge creating
and sharing, building on earlier work by Nonaka, von Krogh, and colleagues (e.g.
Nonaka 1991, 1994; Nonaka et al. 1994; von Krogh, Ichijo, and Nonaka 2000; Nonaka
and Toyama 2003; Nonaka, von Krogh, and Voepel 2006; Nonaka and von Krogh 2007;
Erden, von Krogh, and Nonaka 2008), and to project learning (Kotnour 1999; Salas,
Burke, and Cannon-Bowers 2000; Schindler and Epplerm 2003; Scarbrough et al. 2004)
and cross-project learning capability (Newell and Edelman 2008), bearing in mind the
‘stickiness’ of knowledge (von Hippel 1994; Szulanski 1996; Szulanski and Jensen 2004),
and the resultant need for boundary spanning activity (Tushman and Scanlan 1981).
The creation of a dynamic capability (Zollo and Winter 2002; Winter 2003) in this
regard is key. According to Zollo and Winter (2002: 340), dynamic capabilities are ‘a
learned and stable pattern of collective activity through which the organization system-
atically generates and modiﬁes its operating routines in pursuit of effectiveness’.
Previously, issues of exploration and exploitation have tended to be considered as being
in opposition to each other (March 1991). Increasingly, however, we see different ICT
initiatives such as ERP and KM systems being implemented in tandem in an attempt to
334
ROBERT D. GALLIERS

foster the simultaneous development of organizational efﬁciency and ﬂexibility (Newell
et al. 2003)—hence the need to view the exploration and exploitation strategies as being
mutually constituted and reinforcing (cf. Cook and Brown 1999). Formal ‘organisation
memory’ IS (Nevo and Wand 2005) will certainly have their place, but so will means by
which knowing is facilitated and by which knowledge can ﬂow, even in distributed teams
(Carmel 1999; Desouza and Evaristo 2004) or in multinational locations (Gupta and
Govindarajan 2000; Oshri, van Fenema, and Kotlarsky 2008).
THE EXPLOITATION STRATEGY
..................................................................................................................
The process of exploitation bears many of the hallmarks of mainstream and earlier
thinking on IS strategy. For example, much of earlier and even recent practice follows
what might be termed a deterministic path of technology exploitation (cf. Earl 1993).
Thus, Lederer and Sethi (1988), for example, speak of strategic information systems
planning as ‘the process whereby an organization determines a portfolio of computer-
based applications to help it achieve its business objectives’. In a later work, Lederer
and colleagues (Newkirk, Lederer, and Srinavasan 2003) detail such planning phases as
strategic awareness; situation analysis; strategy conception; strategy formulation, and
strategy implementation. This is the deliberate—as compared to the emergent—strate-
gy of which Mintzberg speaks (Mintzberg and Waters 1985). A deliberate attempt is
made to identify and develop ICT applications that both support and question the
organization’s strategic vision, and current need for information and expertise (Segars
and Grover 1999). Here, we ﬁnd both the IS and IT strategies that Earl (1989) proposes.
It is likely that Enterprise Systems (e.g. Howcroft, Newell, and Wagner 2004, 2005) and
so-called KMS (e.g. Leidner 2000), and standardized procedures for adopting ICT
products, hiring ICT personnel, and developing customized applications will each
contribute to this exploitation strategy. Indeed, organizational routines can be a source
of connections and improved understandings according to Feldman and Rafaeli
(2002). And in line with the models introduced in Galliers (1991, 1999), an aspect of
this strategy will relate to the organizational arrangements for IS/IT services, including
sourcing considerations (cf. Lacity and Willcocks 2000; Carmel and Agarwal 2002, for
example). Policies on such issues as risk, security, and conﬁdentiality will also need to
be considered in this context (e.g. Backhouse et al. 2005).
THE EXPLORATION STRATEGY
..................................................................................................................
With respect to the exploration aspects of IS strategizing, here the emphasis is much
more on issues associated with situated learning (Lave and Wenger 1991), commu-
nities of practice (Wenger 1998) and of knowing (Boland and Tenkasi 1995), and
FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS STRATEGIZING
335

cross-project learning (Newell and Edelman 2008), as noted in the above discussion on
infrastructure. Ciborra and colleagues (Ciborra 2000) talk of drift in this context—as
against control—but there is nonetheless a sense of direction and purpose associated
with this activity. I therefore prefer the term emergence in this regard, but there is
certainly a sense of bricolage (cf. Lévi-Strauss 1966) and tinkering at play here, to
return to terms favoured by Ciborra (1992). Elements of what Lindblom (1959) termed
‘muddling through’ and of improvisation (Crossan and Sorrenti 1997; Vera and
Crossan 2005) and innovation (Van der Gerben, van Beers, and Kleinknecht 2002)
play an important part in addition. As noted, organizations are increasingly reliant on
project teams whose membership may well be in ﬂux and distributed. Considerations
of trust (Sambamurphy and Jarvenpaa 2002), socialization (Ahuja and Galvin 2003),
and learning from one project to another (e.g. Scarbrough et al. 2004) are key features
at play here. The role of communities of practice (e.g. Wenger 1998) is crucial in
knowledge creation as we have seen, as is the role of boundary spanning individuals
(Tushman and Scanlan 1981), or what we might term knowledge brokers—(see also
Lave and Wenger 1991; Hansen, Nohria, and Tierney 1999).
While the concept of the ambidextrous organization has been postulated (Tushman
and O’Reilly 1996), and some empirical research has been conducted to test the thesis
(e.g. He and Wong 2004), there remains little in the literature that might be of
assistance to organizations in providing an enabling, supportive environment that
might foster this sought-after ‘ambidexterity’. Relating concepts of infrastructure in-
troduced earlier in this chapter to the concept of ambidexterity would appear to hold
some promise in this regard. Thus, the kind of socio-technical environment proposed
by Star and Ruhleder (1996), Ciborra (2000), and Hanseth (2004), among others,
would combine information and knowledge sharing services—both electronic and
human—that would facilitate both exploitation and exploration of knowledge, together
with the kind of ﬂexibility necessary to enable appropriate responses to changing
business imperatives. The development of different scenarios can be helpful in explor-
ing alternative futures in this context (Galliers 1993, 2006a).
THE CHANGE MANAGEMENT STRATEGY
..................................................................................................................
As previously (Galliers 2007a: 236–7), I have attempted to stress the importance of
ongoing learning and review in the strategizing process. Improved understanding can
lead to informed judgements being taken, with a view to further developments taking
place—in terms of improved systems and processes (formal as well as informal) that
may assist individual and collective activity and decision making, and organizational
performance. Ongoing learning and review are central to the processual view of IS
strategizing adopted here, given the unintended—as well as the intended—conse-
quences arising from ICT implementations (Robey and Boudreau 1999); the dynamic
nature of alignment (Sabherwal, Hirschheim, and Goles 2001)—the need for agility
336
ROBERT D. GALLIERS

therefore (Desouza 2006), and the emergent nature of strategizing (Mintzberg and
Waters 1985). Thus, the process of strategizing is one of visioning, planning, taking
action, and assessing outcomes, all with an eye to changing circumstance and impera-
tives, and the actions of individuals and groups outside of, or irrespective of, any formal
strategy process. Some means of measuring the impact on ﬁrm performance is key in
this regard (Rivard, Raymond, and Verreault 2006).
I noted in the earlier work (Galliers 2007a) that there are a number of popular books
on breakthrough change management focusing on the role of ICT (e.g. Lientz and Rea
2004) and on so-called transformational leaders (e.g. Anderson and Anderson 2001).
The major features of this genre include prescriptive, deliberate approaches that
suggest guaranteed, order-of-magnitude gains. Organizational realities suggest an
alternative, incremental approach more akin to ‘muddling through’ (Lindblom 1959),
however, as has been argued here. The incremental exploration of possibilities—the
tinkering (Ciborra 1992) and bricolage (Lévi-Strauss 1966)—along with the more
deliberate, analytical approaches that incorporate oversight of implementations and
review of outcomes (e.g. Willcocks 2009) are what is envisaged here, with improve-
ments in organizational performance in mind (Rivard, Raymond, and Verreault 2006).
Exploration and exploitation (March 1991; Tushman and O’Reilly 1996) are therefore
the name of the game, as is providing the appropriate organizational architecture for
change (Nadler, Gerstein, and Shaw 1992) to revert to terminology introduced earlier
in this chapter.
There is not an insigniﬁcant literature on the reviewprocess. For example, Venkatraman
and Ramanujam (1987), Segars and Grover (1998), and Doherty, Marples, and Suhaimi
(1999) are among those who have considered means by which IS strategy success may
be measured. Venkatraman and Ramanujam, for example, stress the need for success
measures in ongoing evaluation as a means to improve planning capability. Seddon,
Graeser, and Willcocks (2002) consider this in terms of organizational effectiveness,
while Kearns (2004) proposes a multi-objective, multi-criteria approach. Others, such as
Kumar(1990)andNorris(1996),focustheirattentiononsystemevaluation,andothersstill
call for emancipation as a key design principle (Wilson 1997). Whatever the focus, it should
not be assumed that evaluation is an entirely objective issue. For example, Gwillim, Dovey,
and Wieder (2005) consider the politics of post-implementation reviews, noting that few
organizations undertake ex-post evaluation. As Walsham (1997) notes, without a formal
evaluation policy, IT and business executives alike will act—perfectly rationally—in their
own interests. The pre-eminence of individual interests in organizations is a point made
clear by the likes of Handy (1995) and Schein (1997). Thus, Wagner and Newell (2007)
emphasize the importance of participation in making further reﬁnements (in this case with
respect to enterprise systems) during the post-implementation period. Indeed, Matta and
Ashkenas (2003) remind us that even good projects fail, particularly with respect to cross-
functional projects. There is a danger in organizations failing to learn from different project
experiences and reinventing the wheel (Lyttinen and Robey 1999; Kearns 2004). This, in
part, stems from formal project reviews that are documented for others to consider at some
future point in time (Schindler and Epplerm 2003), or at predetermined milestones
FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS STRATEGIZING
337

(Kotnour 1999). Drawing on this, Scarbrough and Swan (2001) make the point that the
emphasis has tended to be on the supply rather than the demand for knowledge, and this is
why Newell and Edelman (2008) emphasize the need to encourage teams to reﬂect and tell
stories about their learning experiences (cf. Boland and Tenkasi 1995) in a way that comes
alive and helps nurture a learning capability by providing context.
APPLYING THE FRAMEWORK
..................................................................................................................
As I hope has been made abundantly clear, the framework presented in Figure 12.1 is
not meant to be a prescriptive tool: it does not—and is not meant to—provide some
kind of solution. It is presented as a sense-making (cf. Weick 1995) device, meant more
as an aide-memoire, to be used to raise questions and facilitate discussion concerning
the strategizing elements and connections that may or may not be in place in any
particular organization. As already mentioned, the IS strategizing process envisaged
here is a dynamic and iterative one based on learning and questioning. Assumptions
need to be tested and a range of viewpoints sought—both from within and outside the
organization. The framework can be used to help in this process of enquiry.
Thus, questions can be posed that may surface the presence—or absence—of key
features that make up the framework. For example, is a knowledge creating and sharing
infrastructure in place? How supportive is it in terms of both the human as well as the
technical capabilities required to implement the strategy? Is there a greater emphasis on
exploitation as against exploration? And if so, what impact does this appear to have on
organizational performance? Do sourcing considerations form an integral part of the
exploitation strategy process? Similarly, does cross-project learning form an integral
part of the exploration aspects of strategizing? How does communication and under-
standing materialize in and between virtual teams? To what extent does ongoing
learning and review take place as part of the change management and implementation
strategy? Are performance measures in place?
All these questions are merely illustrative of how the framework may be used in
organizations. Certain of them, and certain aspects of the framework itself, may be
more or less relevant and/or important depending on the differing circumstances in
which different organizations in different locations in the world, at different stages of
growth (Penrose 1959; Galliers and Sutherland 1991), and different sectors of the
economy ﬁnd themselves. An aspect of the framework’s application that should be
consistent, no matter what the circumstances, is its ongoing deployment as a learning
tool. As already noted, the process of strategizing is an iterative one. While there may
be a deﬁned planning horizon, with particular targets being set for that particular time
period, the questioning based on the framework and its various components should
continue, at least periodically. The framework itself, and its component parts, may be
adapted and developed in line with the particular and changing nature of the context in
which it is being applied, but its use as a sense-making device should continue with a
338
ROBERT D. GALLIERS

view to improving organizational performance, exploiting organizational and techno-
logical capabilities, exploring new opportunities, with a view to continuous innovation.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This chapter builds on earlier work by the author—in particular: Galliers (1991, 1993, 1999,
2004, 2006, 2007); Galliers and Newell (2003); Newell et al. (2003).
REFERENCES
Ahuja, M. K., and Galvin, J. E. (2003). ‘Socialization in Virtual Groups’, Journal of Manage-
ment, 29: 161–85.
Anderson, D., and Anderson, L. A. (2001). Beyond Change Management: Advanced Strategies
for Today’s Transformational Leaders. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass/Pﬁeffer.
Backhouse, J., Bener, A., Chauvidul, N., Wamala, F., and Willison, R. (2005). ‘Risk Manage-
ment in Cyberspace’, in R. Mansell and B. Collins (eds.), Trust and Crime in Information
Societies. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 349–79.
Barney, J. B. (1991). ‘Firm Resources and Sustained Competitive Advantage’, Journal of
Management, 17(1): 99–120.
Beulen, E., van Fenema, P. C., and Currie, W. (2005). ‘From Application Outsourcing to
Infrastructure Management: Extending the Offshore Outsourcing Portfolio’, European
Management Journal, 25: 133–44.
Boland, R. J., and Tenkasi, R. (1995). ‘Perspective Making and Perspective Taking in Com-
munities of Knowing’, Organization Science, 13: 442–55.
Brown, C., and Renwick, J. (1996). ‘Alignment of the IS Organization: The Special Case
of Corporate Acquisitions’, The DATABASE for Advances in Information Systems, 27(4):
25–33.
Carmel, E. (1999). Global Software Teams: Collaborating across Borders and Time Zones.
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall PTR.
—— and Agarwal, R. (2002). ‘The Maturation of Off-Shore Sourcing of Information Tech-
nology Work’, MISQE 1: 65–77.
Carr, N. G. (2003). ‘IT Doesn’t Matter’, Harvard Business Review, 81(5): 41–9.
——(2005). ‘The End of Corporate Computing’, MIT Sloan Management Review, 46(3):
67–73.
Ciborra, C. U. (1992). ‘From Thinking to Tinkering: The Grassroots of IT and Strategy’,
Information Society, 8: 297–309.
——(1994). ‘The Grassroots of IT and Strategy’, in C. Ciborra and T. Jelassi (eds.), Strategic
Information Systems: A European Perspective. Chichester: Wiley, 3–24.
——(ed.) (2000). From Control to Drift: The Dynamics of Corporate Information Infrastruc-
tures. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Códoba, J.-R. (2009). ‘Critical Reﬂection in Planning Information Systems: A Contribution
from Critical Thinking’, Information Systems Journal, 19(2): 123–47.
FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS STRATEGIZING
339

Cook, S. D. N., and Brown, J. S. (1999). ‘Bridging Epistemologies: The Generative Dance
between Organizational Knowledge and Organizational Knowing’, Organization Science,
10(4): 381–400.
Crossan, M. and Sorrenti, M. (1997). ‘Making Sense of Improvisation’, Advances in Strategic
Management, 14: 155–80.
David, G., Chand, D., Newell, S., and Resende-Santos, J. (2008). ‘Integrated Collaboration
across Distributed Sites: The Perils of Process and the Promise of Practice’, Journal of
Information Technology, 23: 44–54.
Desouza, K. C. (ed.) (2006). Agile Information Systems: Conceptualization, Construction, and
Management. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann.
——and Evaristo, J. R. (2004). ‘Managing Knowledge in Distributed Projects’, Communica-
tions of the ACM, 47: 87–91.
Doherty, N. F., Marples, C. G., and Suhaimi, A. (1999). ‘The Relative Success of Alternative
Approaches to Strategic Information Systems Planning: An Empirical Analysis, Journal of
Strategic Information Systems, 8(3): 263–83.
Earl, M. J. (1989). Management Strategies for Information Technology. London: Prentice Hall.
——(1993). ‘Experiences in Strategic Information Systems Planning’, MIS Quarterly,
17(1): 1–24.
Erden, Z., von Krogh, G., and Nonaka, I. (2008). ‘The Quality of Group Tacit Knowledge’,
Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 17(1): 4–18.
Feldman, M. S., and Rafaeli, A. (2002). ‘Organizational Routines as Sources of Connections
and Understandings’, Journal of Management Studies, 39(3).
Finnegan, P., Galliers, R. D., and Powell, P. (2003). ‘Applying Triple Loop Learning to
Planning Electronic Trading Systems’, Information Technology and People, 16(4): 461–83.
——and Longaigh, S. N. (2002). ‘Examining the Effects of Information Technology on
Control and Coordination Relationships: An Exploratory Study in Subsidiaries of Pan-
national Companies’, Journal of Information Technology, 17(3): 149–63.
Foucault, M. (1984). ‘The Ethics of the Concern of Self as a Practice of Freedom’, in
P. Rabinow (ed.), Michel Foucault: Ethics, Subjectivity and Truth: Essential Works of
Foucault 1954–1984. London: Penguin, 281–301.
Galliers, R. D. (1991). ‘Strategic Information Systems Planning: Myths, Reality and Guidelines
for Successful Implementation’, European Journal of Information Systems, 1(1): 55–64.
——(1993). ‘Towards a Flexible Information Architecture: Integrating Business Strategies,
Information Systems Strategies and Business Process Redesign’, Journal of Information
Systems, 3(3): 199–213.
——(1999). ‘Towards the Integration of e-Business, Knowledge Management and Policy
Considerations within an Information Systems Strategy Framework’, Journal of Strategic
Information Systems, 8(3): 229–34.
——(2003). ‘Change as Crisis or Growth? Toward a Trans-disciplinary View of Information
Systems as a Field of Study—A Response to Benbasat and Zmud’s Call for Returning to the
IT Artifact’, Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 4(6): 337–51.
——(2004). ‘Reﬂections on Information Systems Strategizing’, in C. Avgerou, C. Ciborra, and
F. Land (eds.), The Social Study of Information and Communication Technology: Innova-
tion, Actors, and Contexts. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 231–62.
——(2006a). ‘Strategizing for Agility: Confronting Information Systems Inﬂexibility in
Dynamic Environments’, in K. De Souza (ed.), Agile Information Systems. Oxford: Butter-
worth Heinemann, 1–15.
340
ROBERT D. GALLIERS

——(2006b). ‘“Don’t Worry, Be Happy . . . ” A Post-modernist Perspective on the Informa-
tion Systems Domain’, in J. King and K. Lyytinen (eds.), Information Systems: The State of
the Field. Chichester: Wiley, 324–31.
——(2007a). ‘On Confronting some of the Common Myths of Information Systems Strategy
Discourse’, in R. Mansell, C. Avgerou, D. Quah, and R. Silverstone (eds.), The Oxford
Handbook of Information and Communication Technology. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 225–43.
——(2007b). ‘IT and Globalization: Knowledge Creation and Sharing across Frontiers’, in
S. Dayal and M. Murphy (eds.), Global Babel: Questions of Discourse and Communication
in a Time of Globalization. Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
——Jackson, M. C., and Mingers, J. (1997). ‘Organization Theory and Systems Thinking: The
Beneﬁts of Partnership’, Organization, 4(2): 269–78.
——and Leidner, D. E. (2009). Strategic Information Management: Challenges and Strategies
in Managing Information Systems. 4th edn., New York: Routledge.
——and Newell, S. (2003a). ‘Strategy as Data Plus Sense-Making’, in S. Cummings and
D. C. Wilson (eds.), Images of Strategy. Oxford: Blackwell, 164–96.
————(2003b). ‘Back to the Future: From Knowledge Management to the Management of
Information and Data’, Information Systems and e-Business Management, 1(1): 5–13.
——and Sutherland, A. R. (1991). ‘Information Systems Management and Strategy Formula-
tion: The “Stages of Growth” Model Revisited’, Journal of Information Systems, 1(2): 89–114.
Giacomazzi, F., Panella, C., Pernicci, B., and Sansomi, M. (1997). ‘Information Systems
Integration in Mergers and Acquisitions: A Normative Model’, Information and Manage-
ment, 32(6): 289–302.
Grant, R. M. (1996). ‘Toward a Knowledge-Based Theory of the Firm’, Strategic Management
Journal, 17: 109–22.
Gupta, A. K., and Govindarajan, V. (2000). ‘Knowledge Flows within Multinational Corpora-
tions’, Strategic Management Journal, 21(4): 473–496.
Gwillim, D., Dovey, K., and Wieder, B. (2005). ‘The Politics of Post-implementation Reviews’,
Information Systems Journal, 15(4): 307–19.
Handy, C. (1995). Gods of Management. 2nd edn., London: Arrow Books.
Hansen, M. T., Nohria, N., and Tierney, T. (1999). ‘What’s your Strategy for Managing
Knowledge? Harvard Business Review, 77(2): 106–16.
Hanseth, O. (2004). ‘Knowledge as Architecture’, in C. Avgerou, C. Ciborra, and F. Land
(eds.), The Social Study of Information and Communication Technology: Innovation,
Actors, and Contexts. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 103–18.
Haspeslagh, P., and Jemison, D. (1991). Managing Acquisitions: Creating Value through
Corporate Renewal. New York: The Free Press.
He, Z.-L., and Wong, P.-K. (2004). ‘Exploration vs. Exploitation: An Empirical Test of the
Ambidexterity Hypothesis’, Organization Science, 15(4): 481–94.
Henderson, J. C., and Venkatraman, N. (1999). ‘Strategic Alignment: Leveraging Information
Technology for Transforming Organizations’, IBM Systems Journal, 38(2/3): 472–84.
Hippel, E. von (1994). ‘Sticky Information and the Locus of Problem Solving’, Implications for
Innovation Science, 40: 429–39.
Howcroft, D., Newell, S., and Wagner, E. (eds.) (2004). ‘Special Issue: Understanding the
Contextual Inﬂuences on Enterprise System Design, Implementation, Use and Evaluation’,
Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 13(4): 271–419.
FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS STRATEGIZING
341

Howcroft, D., Newell, S., and Wagner, E. (eds.) (2005). ‘Special Issue: Understanding the
Contextual Inﬂuences on Enterprise System Design, Implementation, Use and Evaluation,
Part II’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 14(2): 91–242.
Ives, B., Jarvenpaa, S. L., and Mason, R. O. (1993). ‘Global Business Drivers: Aligning
Information Technology to Global Business Strategy’, IBM Systems Journal, 32(1): 143–61.
Jarvenpaa, S. L., and Leidner, D. E. (1999). ‘Communication and Trust in Global Virtual
Teams’, Organization Science, 10: 791–815.
Kanawattanachai, P., and Yoo, Y. (2002). ‘Dynamic Nature of Trust in Virtual Teams’,
Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 11: 187–213.
Kearns, G. S. (2004). ‘A Multi-objective, Multi Criteria Approach for Evaluating IT Invest-
ments: Results from Two Case Studies’, Information Resources Management Journal,
17(1): 37–62.
Kotlarsky, J., and Oshri, I. (2005). ‘Social Ties, Knowledge Sharing and Successful Collabora-
tion in Globally Distributed System Development Projects’, European Journal of Informa-
tion Systems, 14: 37–48.
Kotnour, T. (1999). ‘A Learning Framework for Project Management’, Project Management
Journal, 30(1): 32–8.
Krogh, G. von, Ichijo, K., and Nonaka, I. (2000). Enabling Knowledge Creation: How to Unlock
the Mystery of Tacit Knowledge and Release the Power of Innovation. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Kumar, K. (1990). ‘Post Implementation Evaluation of Computer Based Information Systems:
Current Practices’, Communications of the ACM, 33: 203–12.
Lacity, M. C., and Willcocks, L. (2000). Global Information Technology Outsourcing: In Search
of Business Advantage. Chichester: Wiley.
Lave, J., and Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lederer, A. L., and Sethi, V. (1988). ‘The Implementation of Strategic Information Systems
Planning Methodologies’, MIS Quarterly, 12(3): 445–61.
Leidner, D. (ed.) (2000). ‘Special Issue: Knowledge Management and Knowledge Manage-
ment Systems’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 9(2–3): 101–261.
Lévi-Strauss, C. (1966). The Savage Mind. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
Lientz, B. P., and Rea, K. P. (2004). Breakthrough IT Change Management: How to Get
Enduring Change Results. Oxford: Elsevier Butterworth Heinemann.
Lindblom, C. (1959). ‘The Science of Muddling Through’, Public Administration Review,
19(2): 79–88.
Luhmann, N. (1996). Social Systems. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Lyttinen, K., and Robey, D. (1999). ‘Learning Failure in Information Systems Development’,
Information Systems Journal, 9(2): 85–101.
McKiernan, P., and Merali, Y. (1993). ‘The Strategic Positioning of Information Systems in
Post-acquisition Management’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 2(2): 105–24.
————(1995). ‘Integrating Information Systems after a Merger’, Long Range Planning,
28(4): 54–62.
March, J. (1991). ‘Exploration and Exploitation in Organizational Learning’, Organization
Science, 2(1): 71–86.
Matta, N., and Ashkenas, R. (2003). ‘Why Good Projects Fail Anyway’, Harvard Business
Review, 81: 109–15.
342
ROBERT D. GALLIERS

Mintzberg, H., and Waters, J. A. (1985). ‘Of Strategies, Deliberate and Emergent’, Strategic
Management Journal, 6(3): 257–72.
Mohdzain, M. B., and Ward, J. M. (2007). ‘A Study of Subsidiaries’ Views of Information
Systems Planning in Multinational Organizations’, Journal of Strategic Information Sys-
tems, 16(4): 324–52.
Monteiro, E. (1998). ‘Scaling Information Infrastructure: The Case of the Next Generation IP
in Internet’, The Information Society, 14(3): 229–45.
Nadler, D., Gerstein, M., and Shaw, R. (1992). Organizational Architectures: Designs for
Changing Organizations. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Nevo, D., and Wand, Y. (2005). ‘Organizational Memory Information Systems: A Transactive
Memory Approach’, DSS 39: 549–62.
Newell, S., and Edelman, L. F. (2008). ‘Developing a Dynamic Project-Learning and Cross-
Project Learning Capability: Synthesizing Two Perspectives’, Information Systems Journal,
18(6): 567–90.
——Huang, J. C., Galliers, R. D., and Pan, S. L. (2003). ‘Implementing Enterprise Resource
Planning and Knowledge Management Systems in Tandem: Fostering Efﬁciency and
Innovation Complementarity’, Information and Organization, 13(1): 25–52.
Newkirk, H. E., Lederer, A. L., and Srinavasan, C. (2003). ‘Strategic Information Systems
Planning: Too Little or too Much?’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 12(3): 201–28.
Nonaka, I. (1991). ‘The Knowledge-Creating Company’, Harvard Business Review, 69(6):
96–104.
——(1994). ‘A Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation’, Organization Sci-
ence, 5(1): 14–37.
——and von Krogh, G. (2007). ‘Tacit Knowledge, Knowledge Conversations, and Leadership:
From Critique to Advancement of Organizational Knowledge Theory’. Working paper,
ETH Zurich, Switzerland.
————and Voepel, S. (2006). ‘Organizational Knowledge Creation Theory: Evolutionary
Paths and Future Advances’, Organization Studies, 27(8): 1179–208.
——and Takeuchi, H. (1995). The Knowledge-Creating Company: How Japanese Companies
Create the Dynamics of Innovation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——and Toyama, R. (2003). ‘The Knowledge Creating Theory Revisited: Knowledge Creation
as a Synthesizing Process’, Knowledge Management Research and Practice, 1(1): 2–10.
——Byosiere, P., Borucki, C. C., and Konno, N. (1994). ‘Organizational Knowledge Creation
Theory: A First Comprehensive Test’, International Business Review, 3: 337–51.
Norris, G. (1996). ‘Post-investment Appraisal’, in L. Willcocks (ed.), Investing in Information
Systems. London: Chapman & Hall, 193–223.
O’Donnell, S. W. (2000). ‘Managing Foreign Subsidiaries: Agents of Headquarters, or an
Interdependent Network?’, Strategic Management Journal, 21(5): 525–48.
Oshri, I., van Fenema, P., and Kotlarsky, J. (2008). ‘Knowledge Transfer in Globally
Distributed Teams: The Role of Transactive Memory’, Information Systems Journal,
18(6): 567–90.
Penrose, E. T. (1959). The Theory of the Growth of the Firm. New York: Wiley.
Peppard, J., and Ward, J. (2004). ‘Beyond Strategic Information Systems: Towards an IS
Capability’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 13(2): 167–94.
Porter, M. E. (2001). ‘Strategy and the Internet’, Harvard Business Review, 79(3): 63–78.
Ridings, C., Gelen, D., and Arinze, B. (2002). ‘Some Antecedents and Effects of Trust in
Virtual Communities’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 11: 271–95.
FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS STRATEGIZING
343

Rivard, S., Raymond, L., and Verreault, D. (2006). ‘Resource-Based View and Competitive
Strategy: An Integrated Model of the Contribution of Information Technology to Firm
Performance’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 15(1): 29–50.
Robey, D., and Boudreau, M. C. (1999). ‘Accounting for the Contradictory Organizational
Consequences of Information Technology: Theoretical Directions and Methodological
Implications’, Information Systems Research, 10(2): 167–85.
Sabherwal, R., Hirschheim, R., and Goles, T. (2001). ‘The Dynamics of Alignment: Insights
from a Punctuated Equilibrium Model’, Organization Science, 12(2): 179–97.
Salas, E., Burke, C. S., and Cannon-Bowers, J. A. (2000). ‘Teamwork: Emerging Principles’,
International Journal of Management Review, 2: 339–56.
Sambamurthy, V., and Jarvenpaa, S. (eds.) (2002). Special Issue of Journal of Strategic
Information Systems on Trust in the Digital Economy, 11(3–4): 183–346.
Scarbrough, H., and Swan, J. (2001). ‘Explaining the Diffusion of Knowledge Management:
The Role of Fashion’, British Journal of Management, 12(1): 3–12.
——Bresnen, M., Edelman, L. F., Laurent, S., Newell, S., and Swan, J. (2004). ‘The Processes of
Project-Based Learning: An Exploratory Study’, Management Learning, 35(4): 491–506.
Scheepers, R., Venkitachalam, K., and Gibbs, M. R. (2004). ‘Knowledge Strategy in Organiza-
tions: Reﬁning the Model of Hansen, Nohria and Tierney’, Journal of Strategic Information
Systems, 13(3): 201–22.
Schein, E. (1997). Organizational Culture and Leadership. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Schindler, M., and Epplerm M. (2003). ‘Harvesting Project Knowledge: A Review of Project
Learning Methods and Success Factors’, International Journal of Project Management, 21:
219–29.
Seddon, P., Graeser, V., and Willcocks, L. (2002). ‘Measuring Organizational Effectiveness:
An Overview and Opdate of Senior Management Perspectives’, Data Base for Advances in
Information Systems, 33: 11–27.
Segars, A. H., and Grover, V. (1998). ‘Strategic Information Planning Success: An Investiga-
tion of the Construct and its Measurements’, MIS Quarterly, 22(2), 139–63.
————(1999). ‘Proﬁles of Strategic Information Planning’, Information Systems Research,
10(1): 87–97.
Sheth, J. N., and Sisodia, R. S. (2007). ‘The Regional Face of Globalization’, in S. Dayal and
M. Murphy (eds.), Global Babel: Questions of Discourse and Communication in a Time of
Globalization. Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Spender, J. C. (1996). ‘Making Knowledge the Basis of a Dynamic Theory of the Firm’,
Strategic Management Journal, 17: 45–62.
Star, S. L., and Ruhleder, K. (1996). ‘Steps towards an Ecology of Infrastructure: Design and
Access to Large Information Spaces’, Information Systems Research, 7(1): 111–34.
Stehr, N. (1992). Practical Knowledge: Applying the Social Sciences. London: Sage Publications.
Szulanski, G. (1996). ‘Exploring Internal Stickiness: Impediments to the Transfer of Best
Practice within the Firm’, Strategic Management Journal, 17(1): 27–43.
Teece, D. J., Pisano, G., and Shuen, A. (1997). ‘Dynamic Capabilities and Strategic Manage-
ment’, Strategic Management Journal, 18(7): 509–33.
Tushman, M. L., and Nadler, D. A. (1978). ‘Information Processing as an Integrating Concept
in Organizational Design’, Academy of Management Review, 3(3): 613–24.
——and O’Reilly, C. (1996). ‘Ambidextrous Organizations: Managing Evolutionary and
Revolutionary Change’, California Management Review, 38(1): 8–30.
344
ROBERT D. GALLIERS

——and Scanlan, T. (1981). ‘Boundary Spanning Individuals: Their Role in Information
Transfer and their Antecedents’, Academy of Management Journal, 24(2): 289–305.
Van der Gerben, P., van Beers, C., and Kleinknecht, A (2002). ‘Success and Failure of
Innovation: A Literature Review’, International Journal of Innovation Management,
7: 309–38.
Venkatraman, N., and Ramanujam, V. (1987). ‘Planning System Success: A Conceptualiza-
tion and Operational Model’, Management Science, 33(6): 687–705.
Vera, D., and Crossan, M. (2005). ‘Improvisation and Innovative Performance in Teams’,
Organization Science, 16(3): 203–24.
Wagner, E., and Newell, S. (2007). ‘Exploring the Importance of Participation in the Post-
implementation Period of an Enterprise System Project: A Neglected Area’, Journal of the
Association for Information Systems, 8(10): article 32.
Walsham, G. (1997). Interpreting Information Systems in Organizations. Chichester: Wiley.
——(2001). Making a World of Difference: IT in a Global Context. Chichester: Wiley.
Ward, J., and Grifﬁths, P. (1996). Strategic Planning for Information Systems. 2nd edn.,
Chichester: Wiley.
——and Peppard, J (2002). Strategic Planning for Information Systems. 3rd edn., Chichester:
Wiley.
Webster, J (1995). ‘Networks of Collaboration or Conﬂict? Electronic Data Interchange and
Power in the Supply Chain’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 4(1): 31–42.
Weick, K. E. (1995). Sensemaking in Organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
——and Roberts, K. H. (1993). ‘Collective Mind in Organizations: Heedful Interrelating on
Flight Decks’, Administrative Science Quarterly, 38: 357–81.
Weill, P., and Ross, J. (2004). IT Governance: How Top Performers Manage IT Decision Rights
for Superior Results. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Wijnhoven, T., Spil, T., Stegwee, R., and Fa, R. T. A. (2006). ‘Post-merger IT Integration
Strategies: An IT Alignment Perspective’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 15(1):
5–28.
Willcocks, L. (2009). ‘Evaluating the Outcomes of Information Systems Plans: Managing
Information Technology Evaluation. Techniques and Processes’, in R. D. Galliers and
D. E. Leidner (eds.), Strategic Information Management: Challenges and Strategies in
Managing Information Systems. 4th edn., New York: Routledge, 209–26.
Willmott, H. (1993). ‘Strength is Ignorance; Slavery is Freedom: Managing Culture in Modern
Organizations’, Journal of Management Studies, 30: 515–62.
Wilson, F. (1997). ‘The Truth is out there: The Search for Emancipator Principles in
Information Systems Design’, Information Technology and People, 10: 187–204.
Winter, S (2003). ‘Understanding Dynamic Capabilities’, Strategic Management Journal,
24: 991–5.
Zárraga, C., and Bonache, J (2005). ‘The Impact of Team Atmosphere on Knowledge
Outcomes in Self-Managed Teams’, Organization Studies, 26(5): 661–81.
Zollo, M., and Winter, S (2002). ‘Deliberate Learning and the Evolution of Dynamic
Capabilties’, Organization Science, 13: 339–51.
FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS STRATEGIZING
345

c h a p t e r 1 3
...............................................................................................
RETHINKING BUSINESS–IT
ALIGNMENT
...............................................................................................
YOLANDE E. CHAN AND BLAIZE HORNER REICH
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
For decades, Business–IS/IT1 alignment has appeared as a top concern for IT practi-
tioners and company executives (Luftman, Kempaiah, and Nash 2006; Hiner 2008). In
this chapter, we review the IT alignment literature, and suggest where future contribu-
tions might be made. Challenges to the value of alignment research, divergent views,
and new perspectives on alignment are presented. Our goal is to be as inclusive of
major alignment perspectives as possible. We ﬁrst discuss the motivation for alignment
research. Then we deﬁne alignment and present key aspects of the alignment construct.
Next, we discuss alignment factors and processes. We address the questions: What
creates alignment? What beneﬁts can reasonably be expected? We close by providing
reﬂections on the IT alignment research stream to date, suggesting new ways of
thinking about IT alignment, and highlighting key implications for research and
practice.
TO ALIGN OR NOT TO ALIGN:
THAT IS THE QUESTION
..................................................................................................................
For many years, researchers have drawn attention to the importance of alignment
between business and IT (e.g. McLean and Soden 1977; Henderson and Sifonis 1988).
Early motivation for alignment emerged from a focus on strategic business planning
and long-range IT planning (e.g. IBM 1981; King 1988). From a business perspective,
planning was characterized as a top-down and a bottom-up process and departmental

(e.g. IT) plans were created in support of corporate strategies. From an IT perspective,
decisions on hardware and software had such signiﬁcant cost and time implications
that bureaucratic planning approaches were necessary. These conceptualizations have
been enlarged over time and now research recognizes many points of alignment
between business and IT.
The performance implications of alignment have been demonstrated repeatedly
through surveys and case studies (e.g. Chan et al. 1997; Irani 2002; Leede, de Looise,
and Alders 2002; Kearns and Lederer 2003). Simply put, most studies have supported
the hypothesis that those organizations that successfully align their business strategy
with their IT strategy will outperform those that do not. Alignment leads to more
focused and strategic use of IT which, in turn, leads to increased performance (Chan,
Sabherwal, and Thatcher 2006).
Some scholars have argued that the alignment literature fails to capture important
phenomena and that in fact, alignment is not always desirable. The arguments have
had several themes, including:
1) Alignment literature is mechanistic and fails to capture real life,
2) Alignment is not desirable if the business environment is rapidly changing, and
3) IT should often challenge the business, not follow it.
These arguments are described more fully below.
Ciborra2 (1997) suggested that the alignment literature is too theoretical; that it is
generated by the scientiﬁc method applied to the design of human affairs and computer
systems. He recommended a Mintzberg-like approach, where researchers go to the ﬁeld
for insights (Mintzberg 1973). Other critics of IT alignment research argue that strategy
is not a clear concept due to turbulent, unpredictable circumstances that leave man-
agers muddling through, betting, and tinkering with their corporate strategies (Vitale,
Ives, and Beath 1986).
Tightly coupled arrangements can have negative outcomes. That is, if the business
environment suddenly changes and internal alignment is too tight, businesses may not
be able to respond adequately and can stagnate. Furthermore, the use of technology
itself is characterized by improvisations of various sorts (Ciborra 1996; Orlikowski
1996) and by unexpected outcomes. Working toward pre-speciﬁed or ﬁxed outcomes
may be unrealistic. Ciborra (1997) calls for an enlarged notion of alignment within a
network of semi-autonomous (vs. harmonized and synchronized) actions.
One can also argue that it is necessary for IT to challenge the business, not simply
implement its vision. Disagreement, friction, and conﬂict can be more desirable than
reactive IT operations in order to achieve high business performance. This view
suggests that researchers who believe that IT should simply support what the business
is doing may be wasting their and others’ time. Kearns and Lederer (2000) balance this
view by arguing that while effective alignment of the IT plan with the business plan can
provide competitive advantage, the opposite—aligning the business plan with the IT
strategy in a ‘tail wagging the dog’ mode—is more likely to result in potential losses.
RETHINKING BUSINESS–IT ALIGNMENT
347

Levy (2000), using a resource-based perspective, reminds us that IT—even aligned
IT—in and of itself is not strategic. In order for IT to be strategic, it must be valuable,
unique, and difﬁcult for competitors to imitate. Sauer and Burn (1997) warn that
alignment can give rise to pathologies that require careful management if undesired
business and IT costs are to be avoided. One example of pathology is when a company
tries to align IT with business strategies that are not internally consistent.
Finally, Shpilberg et al. (2007) argue that a narrow focus on alignment under-
estimates the complexity of systems, application, and infrastructure which address
different business needs. They suggest that the focus should be on IT-powered growth,
high IT project effectiveness and IT delivery, and only secondarily on IT alignment.
So should we abandon the study of alignment? The authors think not. Although
there are theoretical and empirically based arguments suggesting that alignment may
not always be a suitable goal, the practitioner community consistently ranks it as a top
priority. The Society for Information Management conducts surveys to gauge the
importance of various IT issues. In 2005 and in 2008, the number one management
concern of all groups of respondents was alignment (Luftman, Kempaiah, and Nash
2006; Hiner 2008). Alignment was also ranked as the top management concern in 2004
and 2003, whereas it was ranked 9th in 1994; 7th in 1990; 5th in 1986; and 7th in 1983.
It is clear that the issue of IT alignment has remained a high business priority for
almost three decades.
From the authors’ perspective, the issues noted above are challenges to the attain-
ment of alignment, rather than reasons alignment should not be pursued or studied. In
this chapter, we take the position that alignment is of value and contributes to
organizational success. What we do not accept is that alignment is a static, single-
dimensional construct or process, or that it is easy to attain. Our goal is to explore the
many perspectives taken on alignment and to suggest ways in which academics and
practitioners can integrate, build on, and apply what has been learned.
WHAT IS ALIGNMENT?
..................................................................................................................
When asking focus group participants to deﬁne alignment, Campbell (2005) was given
the following answer: ‘Alignment is business and IT working together to reach a
common goal.’ Similarly, Abraham (2006) described alignment using a rowing analogy:
‘Strategic alignment, is everyone rowing in the same direction.’ The meaning in these
practitioner-based perspectives is clear but imprecise. Researchers have developed a
multiplicity of perspectives in their quest to create constructs that have face validity but
at the same time can be measured and modelled. In the next section, we discuss the
history, equivalent terms, dimensions, and levels of analysis that have been developed
in the IT alignment research literature.
348
YOLANDE E. CHAN AND BLAIZE HORNER REICH

Alignment Deﬁnitions
Research conducted in the 1980s at MIT (Scott Morton 1991) served as an initial
attempt to harness the strategic power of IT. The MIT model argues that revolutionary
change involving IT investment can bring about substantial rewards as long as the key
elements of strategy, technology, structure, management processes, and individuals
and roles are kept in alignment. Baets (1992) and Henderson and Venkatraman (1992)
reﬁned these ideas, and developed models which deﬁned alignment as the degree of ﬁt
and integration among business strategy, IT strategy, business infrastructure, and IT
infrastructure. Other researchers have stressed the importance of matching business
and IT capabilities (McKeen and Smith 2003) and appropriate and timely use of
technology (King 1988; Luftman and Brier 1999).
Equivalent terms
In the literature, alignment also has been called ﬁt (Chan 1992; Henderson and
Venkatraman 1993), linkage (Reich 1993), and integration (Henderson and Venkatra-
man 1993). These terms and others (e.g. bridge (Ciborra 1997), harmony (Luftman,
Papp, and Brier 1999), and fusion (Smaczny 2001)) are sometimes used interchange-
ably with alignment, although subtle differences exist (Avison et al. 2004).
The term ‘ﬁt’ has an extensive research stream in the mathematical and strategic
management literatures (e.g. see Edwards 1992). In the MIS literature, it has often
been used to refer to the measurement of alignment (e.g. Bergeron, Raymond, and
Rivard 2001). Although it may be argued that ‘alignment’ is now the dominant term in
the IT literature, this cannot be said for the strategy literature where we also ﬁnd
extensive use of terms such as ﬁt, congruence, and covariation.
Alignment dimensions
In the IT literature, several dimensions of alignment are clearly apparent: strategic,
intellectual, structural, social, and cultural. In much of the literature, there is agreement
that alignment between IT and business involves strategic and structural aspects that
are interrelated (Chan 2001). Although signiﬁcantly more attention is given to strategic
IT alignment, both strategic alignment and structural alignment inﬂuence perfor-
mance. In addition, alignment is contingent on many of the social and cultural aspects
of an organization (Chan 2001).
Strategic and intellectual dimensions
Strategic alignment refers to the degree to which the business strategy and plans, and
the IT strategy and plans, complement each other. Reich and Benbasat (2000) deﬁne
intellectual alignment in terms of ‘the state in which a high-quality set of interrelated IT
and business plans exist.’ With this perspective, it is difﬁcult for alignment to occur if
the business lacks a formal, documented plan (Vitale, Ives, and Beath 1986; Lederer
and Mendelow 1989; Wang and Tai 2003).
RETHINKING BUSINESS–IT ALIGNMENT
349

Structural dimensions
Structural alignment refers to the degree of structural ﬁt between IT and the business.
Structural alignment is inﬂuenced by the location of IT decision-making rights,
reporting relationships, (de)centralization of IT, and the deployment of IT personnel
(Chan 2002). Pyburn (1983) found that IT is much more likely to be perceived as
supporting the critical needs of the business when there are few levels between senior
management and IT management.
Earl (1989) outlined ﬁve ideal IT arrangements: centralized, business unit, business
venture, decentralized, and federal. Brown and Magill (1994) suggested a simpler
structural typology involving IT structures that are centralized, decentralized, or
hybrid. They provided evidence that each structure can be effective, given the right
circumstances. Bergeron, Raymond, and Rivard (2001) found that increasing structural
complexity alone has no impact on performance. That is, more complex IT structures
are not necessarily superior. However, increasing structural complexity in conjunction
with stronger IT management can increase growth and proﬁtability.
Although the formal structure is most often researched, Chan (2001) found the
informal structure (deﬁned as ‘relationship-based structures that transcend the formal
division of labor and coordination of tasks’) to be of great importance in improving IT
alignment and performance. Chan’s study suggested that scarce management time and
resources are better spent on improving the informal organization than on aligning
formal structures. At any point in time, formal organization and IT structures are
unlikely to sufﬁce. The complementary informal organization provides overlapped,
reinforcing connections. Although less visible than the formal structure, it can be more
malleable and paradoxically more enduring.
Social dimension
Reich and Benbasat (2000) deﬁne the social dimension of strategic alignment in terms
of ‘the state in which business and IT executives within an organizational unit
understand and are committed to the business and IT mission, objectives, and plans.’
They argue that researchers should study social and intellectual dimensions of align-
ment together to reveal the complexity and challenges of IT alignment.
There are many barriers to achieving both intellectual and social dimensions of
alignment including the need for strong CEO–CIO relationships (Feeny, Edwards, and
Simpson 1992). IT personnel and business staff must collaborate together at all levels of
an organization. This is a prerequisite for high alignment. Yet this may be hindered by
many issues such as the invisibility of the IT staff; communication barriers; history of
IT/business relationships; attitudes of organization members to IT; shared domain
knowledge; and leadership (Earl 1989; Campbell 2005).
Communication is often associated with understanding, which in turn increases the
locus of comprehension. The argument exists that the typical IT person lacks good
communication skills. Campbell (2005) suggested this might be a myth and pointed
out that even if some IT personnel wanted to communicate they would not be allowed
350
YOLANDE E. CHAN AND BLAIZE HORNER REICH

to. Sledgianowski and Luftman (2006) noted that for alignment business-IT commu-
nication should regularly occur and be pervasive throughout the organization. They
argued that it should also be informal and should use appropriate methods such as
email, videoconferencing, and face-to-face communications.
Cultural dimension
Pyburn (1983), in an early study on strategic IT issues, pointed out the importance of
cultural ﬁt between business and IT as a precondition for successful IS planning.
Alignment needs to be culturally supported; otherwise, it is a never-ending quest.
Tallon (2003) also emphasized culture, arguing that there needs to be a mind-set that
encourages shared networks and common IT procurement policies, and an across-
the-board willingness to give up best-of-breed systems that could be incompatible. He
stated that the ‘alignment paradox’ cannot be avoided just by picking certain technologies
and avoiding others. Flexibility and alignment take vigilance and smart management
approaches.
Alignment is then fundamentally about cultural change and behaviour change (CIO
Insight 2004). There has to be commitment from top management for alignment to
work. People are not going to listen to what the CIO says as much as they are going to
watch what the CIO does, and what the CIO’s business partners do. IT personnel need
to be skilled in the softer side of business which often does not go hand-in-hand with
the engineering focus that IT professionals tend to have. Top management buy-in,
proactive CIOs, and socially adept IT professionals are vital for making alignment a
cultural phenomenon.
Levels of Analysis
Although the preceding deﬁnitions of alignment focus primarily on the organizational
level, alignment should be present at many other levels, including the system level
(Floyd and Woolridge 1990; Campbell 2005), project level (Jenkin and Chan 2006), and
the individual/cognitive level (Tan and Gallupe 2006).
According to Floyd and Woolridge (1990), misalignment can often explain system
implementation difﬁculties. Formal strategies are often only implemented at the upper
levels of the organizations, yet strategy is carried out on the front line. Recognizing this
problem, Bleistein, Cox, and Verner (2006) use requirements engineering to link
higher-level strategic goals to lower-level, explicit organizational processes. Their
model depicts alignment as the explicit connections to requirements made at adjacent
levels between superordinate goals and subordinate goals.
Jenkin and Chan (2006) examine alignment at the project level. They deﬁne IT
project alignment as the degree to which an IT project’s deliverables are congruent with
the organization’s IT strategy and the project’s objectives. Critical to project alignment
is the project’s response to change triggers. These triggers can be both internal (e.g. a
RETHINKING BUSINESS–IT ALIGNMENT
351

mid-term project evaluation) and external (e.g. a change in the environment). Failure
to respond to change triggers effectively leads to project misalignment which can
trickle upwards, leading to overall IT strategic misalignment.
Tan and Gallupe (2006) operationalize alignment, at its most micro-level, as shared
cognition between the business and IT executives. That is, the higher the level of
cognitive commonality between business and IT executives, the higher the levels of
IT-business alignment. This perspective has strong parallels with social alignment and
shared knowledge discussed earlier (Reich and Benbasat 1996). Similarly Campbell
(2005) suggests that the focus of alignment at the lower levels of an organization
involves translating business unit goals into personal goals.
If one considers alignment to be a socially constructed concept, then users’ satisfac-
tion with IT service may be another aspect of alignment. Jia, Reich, and Pearson (2008),
in a study of IT work groups and their corresponding users, found that a strong
‘climate for service’ within the IT groups was a better predictor of user satisfaction
than was the level of competence of the IT group. Therefore, another level of alignment
to consider is the work-group level.
It can be argued that both internal and external coherence must be examined
(Henderson and Venkatraman 1993). Earl (1989) proposed an internal view of align-
ment in that IT strategy and infrastructure should be aligned with the applications and
information within an organization. Externally, organizations must align their business
and IT strategies with industry and technology forces. Denford (2009) demonstrated
that internal alignment without external alignment often results in poor business
performance.
Sledgianowski and Luftman (2006) recommended as an alignment best practice that
organizations should leverage IT assets on an enterprise-wide basis to extend the reach
(the IT extrastructure) of the organization into supply chains of customers and
suppliers. Similarly, Galliers (2004) suggested that alignment is not just related to
internal challenges, but also inﬂuences and is inﬂuenced by relationships with crucial
partner organizations such as customers and suppliers.
ANTECEDENTS AND OUTCOMES
OF ALIGNMENT
..................................................................................................................
In the academic literature, alignment has been seen both as a construct to be measured
at a single point in time (e.g. in a cross-sectional study using a variance or factor model)
and as a process to be understood over time. In this section, we focus on factor models,
highlighting antecedents of alignment over which managers have some control, and
then turning our attention to outcomes that can be expected when alignment is
achieved. In the section that follows, process models are described.
352
YOLANDE E. CHAN AND BLAIZE HORNER REICH

Antecedents to Alignment
We discuss antecedents to alignment in two groups. Background antecedents include
shared knowledge, prior successful experience with IT, corporate culture, and locus of
control. Visible foreground or behavioural antecedents include leadership approaches,
planning, and communication styles. We acknowledge that these antecedents overlap
and are interdependent.
Background antecedents
Reich and Benbasat (2000) found that two background factors—shared domain knowl-
edge and IT implementation success—inﬂuenced foreground behaviours such as com-
munication between IT and business executives and connections between IT and
business planning. For example, when shared domain knowledge was high, communi-
cation between the two groups was strategic and frequent, and the result was a high level
of alignment. These four factors were antecedents to short-term alignment but only
shared domain knowledge was an antecedent to long-term alignment.
Other studies have also found that shared domain knowledge between IT and
business people inﬂuence alignment (Teo and Ang 1999; Chan, Sabherwal, and
Thatcher 2006). Van Der Zee and de Jong (1999) and CIO Insight (2004) raised the
issue of the lack of a common ‘language’ between business and IT executives. They
cited the need to build bridges so that both IT and business personnel are using the
same terms, talking about the same topic, to assist with alignment in thought and
action. Hunt (1993) found that in well-aligned ﬁrms, top management welcomes what
can be done through IT, using their understanding of the particular business issues in
their company and their imagination when conceiving IT-enabled business strategies.
Brown and Magill (1994) also found that a successful history of IT implementation,
expressed as satisfaction with the management of technology and satisfaction with the
use of technology, inﬂuenced the attainment of alignment.
In a study of organizational assumptions about IT, Kaarst-Brown and Robey (1999)
found ﬁve separate cultural archetypes. In several of these archetypes, notably the
‘fearful’ and the ‘controlled’, managers felt that IT was not a benign force within the
organization. Therefore, although managers cognitively knew what was needed to
achieve IT alignment, practically they were reluctant to pursue it.
Campbell, Kay, and Avison (2005) suggested that when managers are confronted
with a business challenge, they make decisions based on their locus of comprehension
(understanding) and their locus of control (authority). Strategic alignment can be seen
as an array of bounded choices made in order to resolve strategic ambiguity (Campbell
2005).
Foreground/leadership behaviours
Baker (2004) studied alignment as a function of leadership style and asked executives to
indicate whether their company’s management style was autocratic, collaborative, or
RETHINKING BUSINESS–IT ALIGNMENT
353

indecisive. Most ﬁrms led by collaborative managers indicated that their company’s IT
was well aligned with the business strategy. On the other hand, managers in ﬁrms with
autocratic or indecisive leadership reported a lower level of alignment.
Feeny, Edwards, and Simpson (1992) established the importance of the relationship
between the CEO and the CIO. In the ﬁrms they examined with successful CEO–CIO
relationships, the CEO perceived that IT was critical and had positioned IT as an agent
of business transformation. The CIO promoted IT as an agent of business transforma-
tion and contributed well beyond the IT function. Although the speciﬁc attributes of
CEOs and CIOs that foster alignment may have changed in recent years, their
relationship is still a critical antecedent.
Another issue revolves around the existence and knowledge of the corporate strate-
gy. Corporate strategy may be unknown by IT or undeveloped (Vitale, Ives, and Beath
1986; Lederer and Mendelow 1989; Reich and Benbasat 2000; Wang and Tai 2003). If
known, strategies can be unclear and/or difﬁcult to support (Baets 1992). In addition,
formal business strategies are often ambiguous (Campbell 2005). Managers must
understand the difference between espoused strategies, strategies in use, and manage-
rial actions, many of which may be in conﬂict. These issues pose a signiﬁcant challenge
because most models of alignment presuppose an existing, clearly understandable
business strategy to which an IT organization can align itself.
In a study of small manufacturers, Cragg, King, and Hussein (2002) found that many
of the manufacturers had achieved a high degree of alignment between their business
strategy and IT. While two-thirds of the sample had written a business plan, only a
quarter had formalized their IT strategy. So while IT planning existed in small ﬁrms,
much of it was carried out informally (Lefebvre and Lefebvre 1988).
Lederer and Mendelow (1989) found that coordination of the IT plan and the
business plan were achieved in three dimensions (Shank, Niblock, and Sandals
1973): plan content, timing, and personnel. Chan, Sabherwal, and Thatcher (2006)
found that planning sophistication and comprehensiveness led to an increase in shared
knowledge which in turn affected alignment. The more sophisticated the planning
process, the greater the likelihood of involvement of personnel from different areas of
expertise. This in turn led to improved shared knowledge and ultimately alignment.
Luftman, Papp, and Brier (1999) examined the enablers and inhibitors of alignment.
Their research highlighted that IT executives can directly impact project priority
setting, IT knowledge of the business, and IT leadership. Factors under control of
business leaders include IT involvement in strategy development and senior executive
support for IT. Both business and IT leaders have to foster a close working relationship.
Outcomes of Alignment
Henderson and Venkatraman (1992) argued that strategic alignment can inﬂuence
organizational transformation in a descriptive sense (i.e. by illustrating the value of
354
YOLANDE E. CHAN AND BLAIZE HORNER REICH

emerging IT), prescriptive sense (i.e. by grounding cases in a theoretical framework and
suggesting possible courses of action), and in a dynamic sense (i.e. by conceptualizing
major relationships and interactions to be addressed over time). Technology inﬂuences
the power and reach of organizations. High-performing organizations often have
developed superior capabilities to harness and align IT (Scott Morton 1991). IT
alignment is a management concern primarily because of its potential impact on
ﬁrm performance. In this section, we focus on organization level outcomes.
Strategic IT alignment leads to increased proﬁts for an organization, above and
beyond what would be expected to be produced using only industry and strategy
variables (Floyd and Woolridge 1990; Powell 1992; Cragg, Kind, and Hussin 2002).
Yetton (1994) concluded that if the separation of business and IT was substantial,
company performance suffered. This separation contributed to organization’s failing to
learn how to manage IT investments and extract value from them. Similarly, Sauer and
Burn (1997) argued that when business decisions were made without consideration of
IT, there was a risk of pathological or damaging outcomes.
However, not all empirical evidence concludes that alignment has direct or positive
performance implications. Tallon (2003) found that while 70 per cent of companies
reduced costs or improved sales and customer service after increasing strategic align-
ment, 30 per cent saw no improvement or even a decline. This was attributed to the
failure of alignment to be achieved with some degree of ﬂexibility. That is, companies
locked themselves into an alignment plan (via investing in various technologies) that
hindered their ability to react to change. Similarly, Palmer and Markus (2000) did not
ﬁnd a relationship between alignment and performance when examining the use of
Quick Response technology in the retailing sector.
It has been argued that these negative or unclear results are due in part to a lack
of control variables in the analyses. Chan, Sabherwal, and Thatcher (2006) and
Denford (2009) found that factors such as industry, organizational size, and type of
strategy all had an impact on the performance implications of alignment. Byrd, Lewis,
and Bryan (2006) found that strategic alignment had a direct impact on performance as
a moderator between IT investment and business performance. The real value in
alignment was in leveraging the ﬁrm’s IT investment, not simply just investing
more in IT.
Contingencies
We have discussed antecedents and outcomes of IT alignment documented in the
literature. However, contingency theory posits that there is no universally superior
strategy or way to organize in a given context or environment (Venkatraman 1989);
rather, the context and structure must ﬁt together if an organization is to perform well
(Drazin and Van den Ven 1985). Applied to IT alignment, contingency theory tells us
that certain contextual and organizational factors ﬁt together to facilitate alignment
RETHINKING BUSINESS–IT ALIGNMENT
355

more so than others. Thus, certain business and IT factors, when combined in certain
contexts, produce superior performance. We present several contingency perspectives
in this section.
Industry
Alignment can be more difﬁcult in industries with quick clock speeds, when there are
economic downturns and scarce resources, with certain organizational strategies, and
at certain points in the organizational life cycle. Peak, Guynes, and Kroon (2005, 2006)
found that deregulation can serve as a powerful motivator for companies, in those
industries, to align their IT with their business strategies. In their study, the increased
competition that came with deregulation highlighted the importance of alignment. Tan
(1995) found that IT is more responsive to business strategy in those organizations
which emphasize innovation in their product and market strategies, as opposed to
organizations operating in a relatively stable product/market area.
Organizational size
While very small ﬁrms may be well aligned because communication is high and
individuals play multiple roles, medium-sized institutions frequently show less evi-
dence of alignment. As organizations continue to grow in size and complexity, more
formal planning processes are enacted to help ensure an integrated vision for IT. In
larger organizations, managers more commonly introduce formal processes and struc-
tures to ensure alignment (Hale and Cragg 1996). Also, larger ﬁrms tend to have more
slack which can be devoted for alignment purposes. Chan, Sabherwal, and Thatcher
(2006) found that alignment increased as organization size increased, but only in
business (as opposed to academic institutions). This result was explained by institu-
tional theory as academic institutions tend to function similarly regardless of size.
Raymond, Pare, and Bergeron (1995) found that greater sophistication in the use of
IT was signiﬁcantly associated with better performance. However the results revealed
the importance of size and environmental uncertainty as crucial contingency factors.
Firms with larger sizes that perceived their environment to be more uncertain tended
to have greater IT sophistication, which in turn allowed these ﬁrms to respond better to
complexity or growth.
Strategic orientation
The Miles and Snow (1978) typology of business strategy, commonly used in the
alignment literature, classiﬁes businesses as either taking on a Prospector, Analyser,
Defender, or Reactor strategy. Tan (1995) found that prospectors and defenders differ
in the extent to which IT is explicitly considered in shaping business strategy. The more
aggressive the business strategy, the more IT is explicitly viewed as a strategic tool.
Sabherwal and Chan (2001) found no signiﬁcant relationship between alignment
and performance in Defenders, whereas the alignment-performance relationship was
observed for Prospectors and Analysers.
356
YOLANDE E. CHAN AND BLAIZE HORNER REICH

Croteau and Bergeron’s (2001) study indicated the existence of a link between
strategic activities, technological deployment, and organizational performance. This
relationship, however, took different shapes depending on the type of business
strategy. The study indicated that IT could enhance performance in companies
using prospector or analyser strategies. Organizations with analyser strategies could
make effective use of IT by encouraging personnel to read journals speciﬁc to IT,
participating in professional associations, and being educated regarding the applica-
tion of new technologies. Organizations with prospector strategies generally did not
use technology as their primary driver and did not regularly scan the IT environment,
but did recognize the importance of having the IT department participate in strategic
meetings. Defender and reactor organizations, however, did not experience this
relationship in the ﬁrst place, and thus technology was less helpful for them. Similar-
ly, Chan, Sabherwal, and Thatcher (2006) found that the type of business strategy had
an impact on the importance of alignment. In their study, prospectors generally had
lower levels of alignment than analysers, and were less affected by environmental
uncertainty.
Turbulence
Environmental uncertainty, or the degree of change and instability in the ﬁrm’s
operating context, has an impact on alignment (Tallon and Pinsonneault 2005). In
times of high environmental uncertainty, organizations have a higher need for infor-
mation processing and information systems. It is expected that organizations will
invest heavily in IT alignment during times of environmental uncertainty (Johnston
and Carrico 1988; Gupta, Karimi, and Somers 1997) and organizations operating in
uncertain environments may be able to derive greater beneﬁts from IT (Sabherwal and
Kirs 1994). So environmental turbulence affects the importance of IT alignment, the
ease with which it is achieved, and the mechanisms for achieving it.
Vitale, Ives, and Beath (1986) found that turbulence associated with frequent
changes in products, suppliers, customers, production processes, or competitive envi-
ronment made top-down planning more difﬁcult. Moreover, such turbulence de-
creased the utility of the top-down planning process as an instrument for identifying
competitive applications of information technology. The authors suggested an adaptive
planning approach, which is less concerned with higher-level, predetermined goals and
more concerned with subtle incremental change and evolution.
Choe (2003) found that perceived environmental uncertainty had an indirect effect
on IT strategic applications. In an uncertain environment, a high level of strategic
applications and well-arranged facilitators of alignment could contribute more to the
improvement of performance than in a stable environment.
In summary, this literature suggests that turbulence creates opportunities for IT to
make a difference, but that a prepared and competent IT group and sophisticated
management approaches are needed to capitalize on them.
RETHINKING BUSINESS–IT ALIGNMENT
357

PROCESS MODELS OF ALIGNMENT
..................................................................................................................
Many studies of alignment have emphasized that alignment is a process rather than
an end state (Parker, Benson, and Trainor 1988; MacDonald 1991; Niederman, Bran-
cheau, and Wetherbe 1991; Baets 1992, 1996; Powell 1992; Broadbent and Weill 1993;
Henderson and Venkatraman 1993; Norden 1993; Papp 1999; Rondinelli, Rosen, and
Drory 2001). Van Der Zee and De Jong (1999) highlight a main challenge of relying on
plans to guide alignment. Given that the business environment and technology change
so quickly, once any large-scale IT plan has been enacted, there is a high probability
that the plan and the technology are already obsolete. As Galliers (2004) noted, ‘an
issue that has remained relatively unchallenged and unquestioned is how to align ICT
that is relatively ﬁxed, once implemented in an organization, with a business strategy
and associated information requirements that are constantly in need of adjustment’.
In this section, we review various process approaches to the study of alignment. We
begin with the work that makes the general case that alignment is a process or journey
that can never be completely achieved (ICEX 2004). We then turn to the research that
outlines the factors that must be continually adjusted to keep the organization moving
towards alignment. The ﬁnal section discusses the research which proposes patterns of
alignment that emerge over time in organizations. However, before addressing these
three perspectives on the process of alignment, we review two schools of thought about
alignment—the classic and the processual (Whittington 1993).
Classic vs. Processual Schools of Thought
Two perspectives on the relationship between strategy and technology emerge: the
classical school and the processual approach (Whittington 1993). The classical school
is based on a model of rational adaptation. The tenets of this approach are that
(i) organizations are market-driven and constantly adapt to the changes and contin-
gencies of the external environment, (ii) IT is a resource to be deployed according to
the needs and pressures of that environment, and (iii) the relationship between
strategy and IT has to do with recognizing the contingencies of the technology and
its potential for application to business objectives (McFarlan 1984 referenced in
Scarbrough 1998).
The processual school advocates a focus on internal and power issues. Strategy
cannot be equated with the business plan as both can become meaningless and
ineffective when implemented. The processual approach (i) rejects formal plans and
methodologies as simply the tip of the organizational iceberg, (ii) exposes hidden social
values, political interests, and structural inertia, and (iii) perceives the role of IT as a
resource and an instrument for gaining power—not achieving adaptation.
358
YOLANDE E. CHAN AND BLAIZE HORNER REICH

Drawing on Burt’s work on structural holes (1992), people gain power when they are
part of relationships that span the holes in a network. Power is gained since network
spanners broker the ﬂow of information between people and control projects that bring
people together. To the extent that IT spans holes in the organizational network, it can
command power.
Alignment as Continuous Management of Speciﬁc
Organizational Components
Much of the research on the process view of alignment suggests that certain structures,
processes, and relationships need continual calibration. Many scholars have suggested
this approach, differing only in the set of variables that need aligning.
Baets (1996) concluded that IT strategy alignment is a process, including business
strategy, business organization, IT infrastructure, and IT strategy elements. Alignment
is a collaborative process between all actors and divisions. Thus it is not enough to
simply understand the factors involved in alignment; one must understand the inter-
relationships among the factors.
Rondinelli, Rosen, and Drori (2001) studied multinational corporations and sug-
gested that they should continuously readjust and realign four sets of strategic compo-
nents—business strategy, market penetration decisions, management processes, and
organizational structures.
ICEX (2004) identiﬁed the CIO as critical in achieving strategic alignment. Four
critical responsibilities to be carried out by the CIO are building shared vision, building
relationships, enhancing the CEO relationship, and proactive planning.
Sledgianowski and Luftman (2006) suggested monitoring alignment through the
mechanism of service level agreements. They recommended having periodic formal
assessments and reviews of service level agreements with both IT and business repre-
sentation, and a formal process in place to make changes based on the results of the
assessments.
Tallon (2007–8) advocated a ‘value disciplines’ perspective in which alignment is
tight in critical processes but less tight in lower priority processes. He argued that the
right type of alignment examines the particular mix of business processes, and has an
individual process focus versus an overall business strategy-level focus.
In studying the actions that managers take, Hirschheim and Sabherwal (2001)
demonstrated three trajectories that can occur in the process of alignment: paradoxical
decisions, excessive transformations, and uncertain turnarounds. Pursuing alignment
is complex and frequently chaotic (Rondinelli, Rosen, and Drori 2001).
Street (2006) developed measures for seven alignment capabilities: IS service match-
ing, environmental IT scanning, assessing alignment, building stakeholder commit-
ment, IT ﬁltering, prioritizing IT resources, and strategic IT experiments.
RETHINKING BUSINESS–IT ALIGNMENT
359

Modelling Alignment over Time
There are several models of how alignment changes over time. These include stages of
growth, lead–lag, and punctuated equilibrium models.
Stages of growth
Burn (1993) found that organizations change IT planning styles as they progress
through stages of growth of IT usage. Further, different approaches to strategy are
favoured by different organizational conﬁgurations. She suggested that transitions
through this alignment model are characterized by periods of dynamic change which
can be predicted at certain stages of growth. Organizations with strong correlations
between IT planning styles and organizational strategies are perceived by the user
groups to have the most satisfactory IT support.
Street (2006) provided a preliminary explanation of how the development of IT
capabilities is associated with different IT alignment change patterns. In case studies, it
was found that organizations go through four phases in alignment: punctuation,
change, settling-in, and stability.
The lead–lag model
Burn suggested that there is an internal (functional) level of alignment, whereby
internal processes and strategies are aligned and an external (strategic) level of align-
ment, in which industry, technology, and organizational strategies are aligned. These
different levels of alignment suggest the need for a lead–lag model of IT strategy (Burn
1996, 1997).
This lead–lag model posits that organizations will alternate between IT leading
change and IT catching up with change. The model is cyclical, at least for highly
competitive industries characterized by rapid technological innovation, and cycles tend
to be speciﬁc to particular organizational types and particular industries. According to
Burn, most organizations follow a highly conservative and traditional approach to the
alignment process and ﬁnd difﬁculty in sustaining alignment. Not all organizations can
follow the same path for organizational transformation through IT. As alignment is not
a one-time process, knowing the cycles of change and the organizational position in
relation to them will facilitate management of the alignment process.
Punctuated equilibrium
Sabherwal, Hirschheim, and Goles (2001) concluded that the punctuated equilibrium
model can explain some aspects of IT alignment. According to this model, IT align-
ment goes through long periods of relative stability, or evolutionary change, inter-
rupted by short periods of quick and extensive, or revolutionary, change. Their
research differs from traditional evolutionary perspectives, however, by suggesting
that during stable times, IT may not be properly aligned.
360
YOLANDE E. CHAN AND BLAIZE HORNER REICH

Sabherwal et al. suggested that changes in alignment are, for the most part, small and
evolutionary. These changes may prevent catastrophes by controlling misalignments,
but they inhibit moving to an altogether different pattern of alignment.
NEW DIRECTIONS
..................................................................................................................
What will IT alignment look like in 2020? By examining business and technology
trends and trying to peer into the future, the following alignment challenges can be
predicted.
Alignment in a Complex, Chaotic World
Ten years from now, what will business look like? Although this seems impossible
to judge, it is likely to be even more complex than it is today. Certainly, there will be a
greater need for agility, speed, and ﬂexibility. Today’s cloud computing, end-to-end-
virtualized infrastructures, and service-oriented network platforms provide increased
ﬂexibility. Business–IT alignment will certainly involve responsiveness—the provision
of IT capacity on demand, with IT resources being acquired and released as the
business grows and shrinks in real time.
Dynamic IT capabilities (Chen, Sun, and Helms 2008) will be critical. Also critical
will be IT people who have business backgrounds and can interpret the business chaos.
Shared business–IT domain knowledge is likely to be even more important than it is
today, as business and IT models keep changing and ‘common ground’ is hard to ﬁnd.
Thinking in terms of business–IT interactions and holistic business–IT systems may be
increasingly important for timely responses to either business or IT paradigm shifts.
Alignment in Troubled Economic Times
The 2009 global economic downturn has affected business priorities and strategies.
Executives are focused on the bottom line and commonly defer non-core opportu-
nities. While this is likely to reduce misalignment because frivolous expenditures are
unlikely to be made, it may also limit full alignment as opportunities are missed.
IT alignment in a global recession will likely focus on the use of IT for survival versus
IT for expansion and growth. We anticipate that we will see a renewed emphasis on IT
as a driver of efﬁciency (‘doing more with less’). This will renew the focus on IT-
enabled processes and restructuring. IT will be an integral part of the business strategy.
In fact, IT is likely to be an integral part of the survival strategies of entire industries as
supply chains are merged and made more competitive. As budgets are cut (including
RETHINKING BUSINESS–IT ALIGNMENT
361

those allocated to the IT department and IT investments), organizations and industries
may ﬁnd IT-based economic solutions. Instead of IT being viewed as ‘the plumbing’
(Carr 2003), there will be no question that aligned IT matters.
Aligned IT will be smart IT. We anticipate that instead of ﬁnancing large software
purchases, organizations will be more likely to use ‘pay as you go’ approaches available
in cloud computing service and software-as-a-service models. IT investments will have
strategic signiﬁcance. For instance, business intelligence (BI) systems will support
better decision making at every level of the organization. Aligned IT will not be
wasteful or ﬂamboyant but disciplined and lean.
End-to-End Alignment
Other issues that are likely to emerge in the years to come involve seamless alignment
across multinational ﬁrms and across industries. The challenges of obtaining maxi-
mum IT performance in the face of multiple partnerships, cultures, human resource
policies, and preferred platforms will receive increased attention. Solid IT governance
and standardized infrastructures will rise in importance.
As non-essential services are outsourced, and global enterprise-wide systems are
streamlined, alignment issues will rear their heads. Managers will need to address
alignment in a ‘ﬂat world’ where IT levels opportunities, brings organizations together
virtually as though they coexisted physically, and increases visibility and transparency
of operations. Boundaryless, networked business environments will facilitate collabo-
ration but increase challenges associated with social and technical alignment. Knowl-
edge management systems and social networking tools may be critical tools to manage
shared understanding.
One-to-one alignment will be demanded as IT is used to increase accountability,
standardize and deliver services, and address environmental (‘green’) issues. IT will be
aligned with a variety of stakeholder concerns—including those of shareholders,
customers, and employers. As difﬁcult business tradeoffs are made under intense
IT-enabled scrutiny, stakeholder management systems that go beyond CRM systems
will enable organizations to balance multiple, conﬂicting stakeholder demands. For
instance, green IT will enable more efﬁcient production and reduced energy footprints.
Alignment in an Information Overloaded World
We cannot close our 2020 discussions without addressing the increasing importance of
knowledge strategies and management as business generates more data than indivi-
duals and organizations can process. For IT to remain aligned, knowledge engineering
(organizing knowledge to produce desired results) must receive increased attention. In
this information overloaded business world, data that are needed cannot be buried.
362
YOLANDE E. CHAN AND BLAIZE HORNER REICH

Information sourcing, integration, analysis, and selective reporting will be critical to
organizations struggling with insufﬁcient information absorptive capacities. Decipher-
ing key trends, that is making sense of the data, will be critical for ﬁrms that seek to
shape, as opposed to being victims of, their industries. Aligned IT will provide ‘just in
time’ real time data at the speed of business.
CONCLUSION
..................................................................................................................
Although we have already learned a great deal about alignment, the increasing com-
plexity of our business and technology environments suggests that research will have to
continuously innovate to be relevant. As the underlying organizations change their
shape, size, and strategy, business–IT alignment will also change.
One issue of importance may stand in the way of research into alignment—and that
is the lack of consensus about its essential nature and therefore the measures which
should be used. For example, there are at least two distinct conceptualizations of
alignment. The ﬁrst conceptualizes alignment as an ongoing process, requiring certain
IT management capabilities, encompassing speciﬁc actions and reactions and having
discernible patterns over time. The second conceptualization is alignment as an end
state, focusing on the antecedents, measures, and outcomes of alignment. These views
are equally necessary—we need to be able to measure the state of alignment if we are to
track it over time. And we must be able to describe and model alignment as a process in
order to understand its true complexity. Therefore, research which links these two
perspectives is likely to be the most difﬁcult but the most beneﬁcial.
Examining the Process of Alignment
In general, the process view of alignment has been under-represented in research to
date, notwithstanding the widespread acknowledgement that alignment is an ongoing
activity.
Ciborra (1997) concluded that we need a different style of research, a style that
questions the core activity of management research and practice. To some extent, the
work of Campbell (2005) has begun again ‘at the beginning’, employing grounded
research techniques with the participants in alignment. This work questions the
possibility of alignment, and sheds light on the ways that actors struggle with it.
More grounded research like this is needed—work that questions the very possibility
of alignment and allows the voices of the participants to be heard.
Similarly, Taxén (2005) has also broken away from the dichotomy between process
and factor approaches to alignment, by taking a socio-technical lens to the subject. He
deﬁnes alignment as coordination between work practices, with the goal being to
achieve a common understanding among actors.
RETHINKING BUSINESS–IT ALIGNMENT
363

Information systems strategizing has both a location and temporal dimension
(Adam 1990, cited in Galliers 2004)—the latter, in particular, being as yet under-
researched. Galliers (2004) reminds us of the essential difﬁculty in trying to match a
relatively ﬁxed set of IT assets to a fast-moving business strategy. Researchers have
insufﬁciently investigated the processes and nuances of alignment. Longitudinal re-
search is needed to enrich and extend models such as lead-lag and punctuated
equilibrium.
It may be time to take stock of our contingency theory-based alignment research. Is
it leading us towards more understanding or merely to less generalizable theory, thus
hindering the maturity of the ﬁeld? More focused (vs. broad brush) investigations of
alignment may be needed to go beyond ‘motherhood/alignment is good’ statements,
and to explore subtleties concerning how, when, and where IT alignment really
matters.
Alignment processes in entrepreneur-led ﬁrms are different from those found in
larger bureaucracies (Street 2006) and small to medium-sized ﬁrms (Hale and Cragg
1996). Researchers are encouraged to focus on speciﬁc ﬁrm sizes and types to reveal the
nature of alignment within ﬁrm types.
Examining Antecedents
We encourage researchers to explore the interrelationships among antecedents, to
create archetypes and patterns that inﬂuence alignment. An example would be Van
Der Zee and De Jong’s (1999) challenge to understand the prerequisites for integrated
IT and management in terms of culture, skills, and responsibilities.
Novel and extreme contexts should be explored as they evolve in the workplace—for
example, what does alignment look like when IT development is all offshored? When
there are no proprietary applications? When all computing power is rented?
New Theoretical Underpinnings
It has been argued by many a reviewer that current alignment research is largely a-
theoretic. Because of its heavy reliance on the strategic management reference disci-
pline and contingency theory (which some do not consider theory), it is not rich in the
use of theories such as institutional theory, the resource-based view of the ﬁrm, and
stakeholder theory. While we acknowledge that this is already changing, greater use of
well-established theories in alignment research is needed. Use of theory may be the
only way to anchor research in a changing world.
364
YOLANDE E. CHAN AND BLAIZE HORNER REICH

New Research Approaches
Chung, Rainer, and Lewis (2003) recommend that new research examine the recursive
relationship between alignment and the extent of applications implementation and IT
infrastructure ﬂexibility. Street (2006) has begun this work, examining ‘service gaps’ as
a measure of alignment.
More complex research tools and frameworks can be utilized. Even though there is
some agreement that alignment is the congruence of business and IT strategy (and/or
plans, understanding, or commitment), there has been little examination of the different
loci of alignment. In a complex organization, there is alignment between corporate IT
and corporate management, between corporate IT and business units, and within the
business unit, between the IT group and the business unit management (Henderson and
Venkatraman 1993; Reich 1993). Each locus of alignment is likely to have its own
unique requirements, depending on alignment at the other loci. To understand align-
ment in a complex ﬁrm is a multi-level task requiring comprehensive analyses.
Implications for Practitioners
What have academics learned that could be useful to business managers and IT
practitioners? Below we summarize the ﬁndings from IT research.
Shared governance
Alignment is one aspect of the governance of IT and, as such, should be a joint
responsibility between IT and business executives as well as between executives and
their board of directors. A clear understanding of the accountability shared between the
board, CEO, CIO, and line business units should be established and reviewed periodi-
cally. Setting strategy, prioritizing projects, monitoring performance, and managing
risk are four key alignment issues that need to be considered by the governance team.
Shared knowledge
Research points to the conclusion that shared governance rests on the existence of
shared knowledge between business and IT people. There are many ways to achieve
shared domain knowledge (e.g. cross-training IT people, rotating business leaders
through IT roles) but this is an investment that it is critical to make in the long-term
interests of successful, appropriate deployment of information technology within an
organization. IT managers and their peers in the business need a clear plan to build and
maintain shared knowledge between their domains.
A culture of success
At a deep level, organizations see themselves as either able to manage and use IT or not.
Therefore, creating alignment between business and IT objectives is not just a matter of
RETHINKING BUSINESS–IT ALIGNMENT
365

changing the CIO or implementing an IT steering committee. Over the long term, the
culture and stories within the organization must move from those of failure and defeat
to those of mastery and success. If IT is important to an organization’s success, then
everyone needs to take an active leadership role in making a collaborative environment
work. Alignment is everyone’s responsibility.
Focus
Several researchers have suggested that CIOs focus their alignment efforts on a subset
of their portfolio—the areas that are likely to make the most impact on the ﬁrm. In light
of current economic challenges, this seems to be good advice. IT is pervasive but this
does not mean that it needs to be excellent throughout—only where it matters. Business
and IT can use Pareto’s principle to identify and then manage these key areas.
Organizational Value Chain
Performance research concludes that technology only inﬂuences organizational per-
formance when it enables change in business processes. Therefore, the focus on
strategy needs to be augmented with a focus on process and project—projects to enable
change, and process as the medium through which value is realized. This may mean
that the CIO is given responsibility for organizational transformation as well as the
project ofﬁce, but whatever the structural solution is, there needs to be alignment
between these key pieces of the organizational value chain.
In closing, we observe that IT alignment remains an important but elusive goal, and
is likely to become even more elusive in the decades to come. Much is well understood
but there is much more to learn. We hope that this chapter has provided thought-
provoking and helpful information for future alignment explorers and managers.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors are grateful to Dr Chris Sauer and the Journal of Information Technology for
permitting the reuse of information published in the article, ‘IT Alignment: What Have We
Learned?’, Journal of Information Technology, 22 (2007), 297–315. The authors thank re-
search assistants Catherine Shea, Zorana Svedic, and Darius Tadaniewicz for their contribu-
tions to the original article, and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of
Canada for funding received.
NOTES
1. The terms IS and IT are used interchangeably.
2. We acknowledge with sadness the passing of Dr Claudio Ciborra in 2005. His contribu-
tions to the IT ﬁeld were signiﬁcant.
366
YOLANDE E. CHAN AND BLAIZE HORNER REICH

REFERENCES
Abraham, G. A. (2006). ‘Successful Organizational Leadership: Effective Execution through
Strategic Management’, CEO Refresher, 12(10.5).
Avison, D., Jones, J., Powell, P., and Wilson, D. (2004). ‘Using and Validating the Strategic
Alignment Model’, Strategic Information Systems, 13: 223–46.
Baets, W. (1992). ‘Aligning Information Systems with Business Strategy’, IS and Business
Strategy Alignment, 1(4): 205–13.
—— (1996). ‘Some Empirical Evidence on IS Strategy Alignment in Banking’, Information
and Management, 30: 155–77.
Baker, E. H. (2004). ‘Leading Alignment’, CIO Insight, 1(45): 19–20.
Bergeron, F., Raymond, L., and Rivard, S. (2001). ‘Fit in Strategic Information Technology
Management Research: An Empirical Comparison of Perspectives’, International Journal of
Management Science, 29(2): 125–42.
Bleistein, S. J., Cox, K., and Verner, J. (2006). ‘Validating Strategic Alignment of Organiza-
tional IT Requirements Using Goal Modeling and Problem Diagrams’, Journal of Systems
and Software, 79(3): 362–78.
Broadbent, M., and Weill, P. (1993). ‘Improving Business and Information Strategy Align-
ment: Learning from the Banking Industry’, IBM Systems Journal, 32(1): 162–79.
Brown, C. V., and Magill, S. L. (1994). ‘Alignment of the IS Functions with the Enterprise:
Toward a Model of Antecedents’, MIS Quarterly, 18(4): 371–403.
Burn, J. M. (1993). ‘Information Systems Strategies and the Management of Organizational
Change: A Strategic Alignment Model’, Journal of Information Technology, 8(4): 205–16.
—— (1996). ‘IS Innovation and Organizational Alignment: A Professional Juggling Act’,
Journal of Information Technology, 11(1): 3–12.
——(1997). ‘A Professional Balancing Act: Walking the Tightrope of Strategic Alignment’, in
C. Sauer and P. W. Yetton (eds.), Steps to the Future: Fresh Thinking on the Management of
IT-Based Organizational Transformation. 1st edn., San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publish-
ers, 55–88.
Burt, R. S. (ed.) (1992). Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Competition. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Byrd, A., Lewis, B. R., and Bryan, R. W. (2006). ‘The Leveraging Inﬂuence of Strategic
Alignment on IT Investment: An Empirical Examination’, Information and Management,
43(3): 308–21.
Campbell, B. (2005). ‘Alignment: Resolving Ambiguity within Bounded Choices’, Paper
presented at the Paciﬁc Asia Conference on Information Systems, Bangkok, Thailand.
—— Kay, R., and Avison, D. (2005). ‘Strategic Alignment: A Practitioner’s Perspective’,
Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 18(5/6): 653–64.
Carr, N. G. (2003). ‘IT Doesn’t Matter’, Harvard Business Review, 81(5): 41–9.
Chan, Y. E. (1992). ‘Business Strategy, Information Systems Strategy, and Strategic Fit:
Measurement and Performance Impacts’. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of Western
Ontario.
——(2001). ‘Information Systems Strategy, Structure and Alignment’, in R. Papp (ed.), Strategic
Information Technology: Opportunities for Competitive Advantage. 1st edn., Hershey, PA: Idea
Group Publishing, 56–81.
—— (2002). ‘Why Haven’t We Mastered Alignment? The Importance of the Informal
Organization Structure’, MIS Quarterly Executive, 1(2): 97–112.
RETHINKING BUSINESS–IT ALIGNMENT
367

Chan, Y. E. and Reich, B. H. (2007). ‘IT Alignment: What Have we Learned?’, Journal of
Information Technology, 22: 297–315.
—— Sabherwal, R., and Thatcher, J. B. (2006). ‘Antecedents and Outcomes of Strategic IS
Alignment: An Empirical Investigation’, IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management,
51(3): 27–47.
—— Huff, S. L., Barclay, D. W., and Copeland, D. G. (1997). ‘Business Strategic Orientation,
Information Systems Strategic Orientation, and Strategic Alignment’, Information Systems
Research, 8(2): 125–50.
Chen, R.-S., Sun, C.-M., and Helms, M. (2008). ‘Aligning Information Technology and
Business Strategy with a Dynamic Capabilities Perspective: A Longitudinal Study of a
Taiwanese Semiconductor Company’, International Journal of Information Management,
28(5): 366–78.
Choe, J. (2003). ‘The Effect of Environmental Uncertainty and Strategic Applications of IS on
a Firm’s Performance’, Information and Management, 40(4): 257–68.
Chung, S. H., Rainer, R. K., Jr., and Lewis, B. R. (2003). ‘The Impact of Information
Technology Infrastructure Flexibility on Strategic Alignment and Applications Implemen-
tations’, Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 11: 191–206.
Ciborra, C. U. (1996). Groupware and Teamwork. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
—— (1997). ‘De Profundis? Deconstructing the Concept of Strategic Alignment’, Scandina-
vian Journal of Information Systems, 9(1): 57–82.
CIO Insight Staff (2004). ‘Is your Culture Hindering Alignment?’, CIO Insight, 45(1): 65–75.
Cragg, P., King, M., and Hussin, H. (2002). ‘IT Alignment and Firm Performance in Small
Manufacturing Firms’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 11(2): 109–32.
Croteau, A., and Bergeron, F. (2001). ‘An Information Technology Trilogy: Business Strategy,
Technological Deployment and Organizational Performance’, Journal of Strategic Informa-
tion Systems, 10(2): 77–99.
Denford, J. S. (2009). ‘The Alignment of Knowledge Strategies’. Ph.D. thesis, Queen’s School
of Business, Queen’s University.
Drazin, R., and van de Ven, A. H. (1985). ‘Alternative Forms of Fit in Contingency Theory’,
Administrative Science Quarterly, 30(4): 514–39.
Earl, M. J. (1989). Management Strategies for Information Technology. London: Prentice Hall.
Edwards, J. R. (1992). ‘The Study of Congruence in Organizational Behavior Research:
Critique and a Proposed Alternative’, Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes.
Feeny, D. F., Edwards, B. R., and Simpson, K. M. (1992). ‘Understanding the CEO/CIO
Relationship’, MIS Quarterly, 16(4): 435–48.
Floyd, S. W., and Woolridge, B. (1990). ‘Path Analysis of the Relationship between Competi-
tive Strategy, Information Technology, and Financial Performance’, Journal of Manage-
ment Information Systems, 7(1): 47–64.
Galliers, R. D. (2004). ‘Reﬂections on Information Systems Strategizing’, in C. Avgerou,
C. Ciborra, and F. Land (eds.), The Social Study of Information and Communication
Technology. 1st edn., London: Oxford University Press, 231–62.
Gupta, Y. P., Karimi, J., and Somers, T. M. (1997). ‘Alignment of a Firm’s Competitive
Strategy and Information Technology Management Sophistication: The Missing Link’,
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 44: 399–413.
Hale, A., and Cragg, P. (1996). ‘Business Process Reengineering in the Small Firm: A Case
Study’, Journal of INFOR, 34(1): 15–27.
368
YOLANDE E. CHAN AND BLAIZE HORNER REICH

Henderson, J. C., and Sifonis, J. G. (1988). ‘The Value of Strategic IS Planning: Understanding
Consistency, Validity, and IS Markets’, MIS Quarterly, 12(2): 187–200.
—— and Venkatraman, N. (1992). ‘Strategic Alignment: A Model for Organizational Trans-
formation through Information Technology’, in T. A. Kocham and M. Useem (eds.),
Transforming Organizations. New York: Oxford University Press.
—— ——(1993). ‘Strategic Alignment: Leveraging Information Technology for Transforming
Organizations’, IBM Systems Journal, 32(1): 4–16.
Hiner, J. (2008). ‘SIM Survey 2008: Top 10 IT Management Concerns’, <http://blogs.zdnet.
com/BTL/?p=10844>, accessed 18 March 2009.
Hirschheim, R., and Sabherwal, R. (2001). ‘Detours in the Path toward Strategic Information
Systems Alignment’, California Management Review, 44(1): 87–108.
Hunt, G. E. (1993). ‘Management Challenges for Survival in the 1990s’, Journal of Information
Technology, 8(1): 43–9.
IBM (1981). Business Systems Planning: Information Systems Planning Guide. 3rd edn, EE
20–0527–3.
ICEX Inc. (2004). ICEX Knowledge Kit for IT Strategic Alignment. Boston: ICEX Inc. <http://
www.itproductivity.org/ICEXitstrategicalignment.htm>.
Irani, Z. (2002). ‘Information Systems Evaluation: Navigating through the Problem Domain’,
Information & Management, 40(1): 11–24.
Jenkin, T. A., and Chan, Y. E. (2006). ‘Exploring the IS Project Alignment Construct’, Queen’s
School of Business working paper.
Jia, R. Q., Reich, B. H., and Pearson, J. M. (2008). ‘IT Service Climate: An Extension to
IT Service Quality Research’, Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 29(5):
294–320.
Johnston, H. R., and Carrico, S. R. (1988). ‘Developing Capabilities to Use Information
Strategically’, MIS Quarterly, 12(1): 37–48.
Kaarst-Brown, M. L., and Robey, D. (1999). ‘More on Myth, Magic and Metaphor: Cultural
Insights into the Management of Information Technology in Organizations’, Information
Technology and People, 12(2): 192–218.
Kearns, G. S., and Lederer, A. L. (2000). ‘The Effect of Strategic Alignment on the Use of
IS-Based Resources for Competitive Advantage’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems,
9(4): 265–93.
————(2003). ‘A Resource-Based View of Strategic IT Alignment: How Knowledge Sharing
Creates Competitive Advantage’, Decision Sciences, 34(1): 1–29.
King, W. R. (1988). ‘How Effective is your Information Systems Planning?’ Long Range
Planning, 21(5): 103–12.
Lederer, A. L., and Mendelow, A. L. (1989). ‘Coordination of Information Systems Plans with
Business Plans’, Journal of Management Information Systems, 6(2): 5–19.
Leede, J., de Looise, J. C., and Alders, B. (2002). ‘Innovation, Improvement and Operations:
An Exploration of the Management of Alignment’, International Journal of Technology
Management, 23(4): 353–68.
Lefebvre, L. A., and Lefebvre, E. (1988). ‘Computerization of Small Firms: A Study of the
Perceptions and Expectations of Managers’, Journal of Small Business and Entrepreneurship,
1(3): 1–17.
Levy, D. L. (2000). ‘Applications and Limitations of Complexity Theory in Organization
Theory and Strategy’, in J. Rabin, G. J. Miller, and W. B. Hildreth (eds.), Handbook of
Strategic Management. 2nd edn., New York: Marcel.
RETHINKING BUSINESS–IT ALIGNMENT
369

Luftman, J., and Brier, T. (1999). ‘Achieving and Sustaining Business–IT Alignment’, Cali-
fornia Management Review, 42(1): 109–22.
—— Kempaiah, R., and Nash, E. (2006). ‘Key Issues for IT Executives 2005’, MIS Quarterly
Executive, 5(2): 81–101.
—— Papp, R., and Brier, T. (1999). ‘Enablers and Inhibitors of Business–IT Alignment’,
Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 1: Article 11.
MacDonald, H. (1991). ‘The Strategic Alignment Process’, in M. S. Scott Morton (ed.), The
Corporation of the 1990s: Information Technology and Organizational Transformation.
London: Oxford University Press.
McFarlan, W. E. (1984). ‘Information Technology Changes the Way You Compete’, Harvard
Business Review, 62(3): 98–103.
McKeen, J. D., and Smith, H. (2003). Making IT Happen: Critical Issues in IT Management.
Chichester: Wiley.
McLean, E. R., and Soden, J. V. (1977). Strategic Planning for MIS. New York: Wiley.
Miles, R. E., and Snow, C. C. (1978). Organizational Strategy, Structure, and Process.
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co.
Mintzberg, H. (1973). The Nature of Managerial Work. New York: Harper & Row.
Niederman, F., Brancheau, J. C., and Wetherbe, J. C. (1991). ‘Information Systems Issues for
the 1990s’, MIS Quarterly, 15(4): 475–500.
Norden, P. V. (1993). ‘Qualitative Techniques in Strategic Alignment’, IBM Systems Journal,
32(1): 180–97.
Orlikowski, W. (1996). ‘Improvising Organisational Transformation over Time: A Situated
Change Perspective’, Information Systems Research, 7(1): 63–92.
Palmer, J. W., and Markus, M. L. (2000). ‘The Performance Impacts of Quick Response and
Strategic Alignment in Specialty Retailing’, Information Systems Research, 11(3): 241–59.
Papp, R. (1999). ‘Business–IT Alignment: Productivity Paradox Payoff?’, Industrial Management
þ Data Systems, 99(8): 367–73.
Parker, M. M., Benson, R. J., and Trainor, H. E. (1988). Information Economics: Linking
Business Performance to Information Technology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Peak, D., Guynes, C. S., and Kroon, V. (2005). ‘Information Technology Alignment
Planning—A Case Study’, Information and Management, 42(5): 635–49.
Powell, T. C. (1992). ‘Organizational Alignment as Competitive Advantage’, Strategic Man-
agement Journal, 13(2): 119–34.
Pyburn, P. J. (1983). ‘Linking the MIS Plan with Corporate Strategy: An Exploratory Study’,
MIS Quarterly, 7(2): 1–14.
Raymond, L., Pare, G., and Bergeron, F. (1995). ‘Matching Information Technology and
Organizational Structure: An Empirical Study with Implications for Performance’, Europe-
an Journal of Information Systems, 4(1): 3–16.
Reich, B. H. (1993). ‘Investigating the Linkage between Business and Information Technology
Objectives: A Multiple Case Study in the Insurance Industry’. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis,
University of British Columbia.
—— and Benbasat, I. (1996). ‘Measuring the Linkage between Business and Information
Technology Objectives’, MIS Quarterly, 20(1): 55–81.
————(2000). ‘Factors that Inﬂuence the Social Dimension of Alignment between Business
and Information Technology Objectives’, MIS Quarterly, 24(1): 81–113.
370
YOLANDE E. CHAN AND BLAIZE HORNER REICH

Rondinelli, D., Rosen, B., and Drori, I. (2001). ‘The Struggle for Strategic Alignment in
Multinational Corporations: Managing Readjustment during Global Expansion’, European
Management Journal, 19(4): 404–16.
Sabherwal, R., and Chan, Y. E. (2001). ‘Alignment between Business and IS Strategies: A Study
of Prospectors, Analyzers, and Defenders’, Information Systems Research, 12(1): 11–33.
—— Hirschheim, R., and Goles, T. (2001). ‘The Dynamics of Alignment: Insights from a
Punctuated Equilibrium Model’, Organization Science, 12(2): 179–97.
—— and Kirs, P. (1994). ‘The Alignment between Organizational Critical Success Factors and
Information Technology Capability in Academic Institutions’, Decision Sciences, 25(2):
301–30.
Sauer, C., and Burn, J. M. (1997). ‘The Pathology of Strategic Management’, in C. Sauer and
P. W. Yetton (eds.), Steps to the Future. 1st edn., San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Scarbrough, H. (1998). ‘Linking Strategy and IT-Based Innovation: The Importance of the
‘Management of Expertise’, in R. D. Galliers and W. R. J. Baets (eds.), Information
Technology and Organizational Transformation: Innovation for the 21st Century Organiza-
tion. 2nd edn., Toronto: John Wiley & Sons, 19–36.
Scott Morton, M. S. (ed.) (1991). The Corporation of the 1990s: Information Technology and
Organizational Transformation. London: Oxford University Press.
Shank, J. K., Niblock, E. G., and Sandalls, W. T., Jr. (1973). ‘Balance Creativity and Practicality
in Formal Planning’, Harvard Business Review, 51(1): 87–95.
Shpilberg, D., Berez, S., Puryear, R., and Shah, S. (2007) ‘Avoiding the Alignment Trap in
Information Technology’, MIT Sloan Management Review, 49(1): 51–8.
Sledgianowski, D., and Luftman, J. (2006). ‘IT-Business Strategic Alignment Maturity: A Case
Study’, Journal of Cases on Information Technology, 7(2): 102–20.
Smaczny, T. (2001). ‘Is an Alignment between Business and Information Technology the
Appropriate Paradigm to Manage IT in Today’s Organisations?’, Management Decision, 39
(10): 797–802.
Street, C. T. (2006). ‘Evolution in IS Alignment and IS Alignment Capabilities over Time:
A Test of Punctuated Equilibrium Theory’. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Queen’s University.
Tallon, P. P. (2003). ‘Paul Tallon: The Alignment Paradox’, CIO Insight, 1(47).
——(2007–8). ‘A Process-Oriented Perspective on the Alignment of Information Technology
and Business Strategy’, Journal of Management Information Systems, 24(3): 227–68.
—— and A. Pinsonneault, A. (2005). ‘In Pursuit of Value: Reconceptualizing the Form and
Function of Strategic IT Alignment under Environmental Dynamism’. Article under review
at Organization Science, 2005.
Tan, F. B. (1995). ‘The Responsiveness of Information Technology to Business Strategy
Formulation: An Empirical Study’, Journal of Information Technology, 10(3): 171–8.
—— and Gallupe, B. (2006). ‘Aligning Business and Information Systems Thinking:
A Cognitive Approach’, Engineering Management, IEEE Transactions, 53(2): 223–37.
Taxén, L. A. (2005). ‘Sociotechnical Approach towards Alignment’, Software Process Improve-
ment and Practice, 10: 427–39.
Teo, T. S. H., and Ang, J. S. K. (1999). ‘Critical Success Factors in the Alignment of IS Plans
with Business Plans’, International Journal of Information Management, 19(1): 173–85.
Van Der Zee, J. T. M., and De Jong, B. (1999). ‘Alignment is not Enough: Integrating Business
and Information Technology Management with the Balanced Business Scorebard’, Journal
of Management Information Systems, 16(2): 137–56.
RETHINKING BUSINESS–IT ALIGNMENT
371

Venkatraman, N. (1989). ‘The Concept of Fit in Strategy Research: Toward Verbal and
Statistical Correspondence’, Academy of Management Review, 14(3): 423–44.
Vitale, M. R., Ives, B., and Beath, C. M. (1986). ‘Linking Information Technology and
Corporate Strategy: An Organizational View’, Proceedings of the 7th International Confer-
ence on Information Systems, San Diego, CA, 265–26.
Wang, E. T. G., and Tai, J. C. F. (2003). ‘Factors Affecting Information Systems Planning
Effectiveness: Organizational Contexts and Planning Systems Dimensions’, Information &
Management, 40(4): 287–303.
Whittington, R. (ed.) (1993). What is Strategy—And Does it Matter? Routledge Series in
Analytical Management. London: Routledge.
Yetton, P. W. (1994). ‘False Prophecies, Successful Practice and Future Directions in IT
Management’, Proceedings of the IFIP TC8 Open Conference: Business Process Re-Engineer-
ing: Information Systems Opportunities and Challenges, Queensland Gold Coast, Australia.
372
YOLANDE E. CHAN AND BLAIZE HORNER REICH

c h a p t e r 1 4
...............................................................................................
IT-DEPENDENT STRATEGIC
INITIATIVES AND
SUSTAINED COMPETITIVE
ADVANTAGE: A REVIEW,
SYNTHESIS, AND AN
EXTENSION OF THE
LITERATURE
...............................................................................................
MICHAEL WADE, GABRIELE PICCOLI,
AND BLAKE IVES
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
It’s one thing to reach the top, another thing entirely to stay there. Behind this familiar
axiom is the understanding that the factors necessary to gain an advantage are not
necessarily those required to sustain that advantage. A great deal of research has been
conducted on how ﬁrms gain strategic advantage through the use of IT. By contrast,
relatively little work has been done to study how ﬁrms can hold on to a competitive
advantage based on, or enabled by, IT (Piccoli and Ives 2005). There are two reasons
for this. First, since creating an advantage is temporally precedent to sustaining one,
researchers have tended to focus on the prior condition. After all, why bother to worry
about what to do once you achieve success if you never get there in the ﬁrst place? The
second reason is more pragmatic. Academic research seeks to be rigorous and general-
izable and work on the sustainability of competitive advantage necessarily requires
longitudinal approaches; such studies are typically expensive and time consuming to

conduct. There is also a signiﬁcant challenge in isolating the role of the IT-enabled
resource in order to rule out competing explanations. These reasons make this type of
research risky and costly. Unfortunately, the resultant scarcity of rigorous investigation
and evidence is a contributing cause of the recurrence of attacks on the role of IT as a
competitive resource (Carr 2003).
In our MISQ Review articles, we examined the issue of sustainability1 from a concep-
tual point of view (Wade and Hulland 2004; Piccoli and Ives 2005). Our conclusions were
similar in that we challenged the commonly held view that sustaining a competitive
advantage based on IT was infeasible. We agreed that forward looking ﬁrms (and
researchers) needed to start seriously thinking about IT strategies for maintaining posi-
tions of competitive advantage. In this chapter, we argue that strategic thinking about IT
is more important than ever. The competitive landscape has shifted so that, in some
respects, achieving and sustaining an advantage based on IT has become much more
difﬁcult—we will outline some of these challenges below. However, rather than regarding
these challenges as the ﬁnal death knell of IT’s strategic value—an approach we have seen
some companies and authors adopt—we argue that ﬁrms can achieve and sustain
substantial IT-enabled beneﬁts as long as they pay close attention to the strategic value
of information systems throughout the planning process. Consideration of the strategic
value of the IT value proposition needs to happen from the time the IT initiative is ﬁrst
conceived, through the implementation and acceptance processes, and continue once the
advantage has been attained. In other words, it is during the design phase of any IT-
dependent strategic initiative that the ﬁrm must ﬁrst lay the groundwork for sustainability
and it is the execution phase that presents the opportunity to continue to extend that
sustainability. In both instances, understanding the role of IT in fostering sustainability is
essential. In this update, we brieﬂy discuss the theoretical framework for our work,
including the resource-based view of the ﬁrm (RBV), the dynamic capabilities perspec-
tive, agility, and the notion of the IT-dependent strategic initiative. We then comment on
the value of these approaches in light of current structural, economic, political, legal, and
cultural conditions. We offer an evaluation of work to date, challenge some of the
received wisdom, and propose a number of possible avenues for pushing forward our
understanding of the conditions for sustainable IT-enabled competitive advantage.
THE RESOURCE-BASED VIEW AND
THE SUSTAINABILITY OF IT-ENABLED
COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE
..................................................................................................................
The resource-based view has found a great deal of traction within the IS ﬁeld as a
theory of competitive advantage. The RBV looks at the ﬁrm as a collection of resources.
These resources, in turn, exhibit the following attributes to different degrees: value,
374
MICHAEL WADE, GABRIELE PICCOLI, AND BLAKE IVES

rarity, imitability, and non-substitutability (see Figure 14.1). Competitive advantage
can be created or sustained depending on the nature of these attributes (Penrose 1959;
Barney 1991; Grant 1991). In general, empirical studies using RBV theory have
displayed strong support for its tenets and conclusions (e.g. McGrath, MacMillan,
and Venkataram 1995; Miller and Shamsie 1996; Zaheer and Zaheer 1997).
Resources that are valuable and rare can provide a temporary advantage (the
competitive advantage creation phase in Figure 14.1). These attributes are ex-ante
limits to competition. This advantage can be sustained over time to the extent that the
resource resists imitation or substitution (the competitive advantage sustainability
phase in Figure 14.1). These attributes are ex-post limits to competition. Three factors
contribute to low imitability: unique ﬁrm history, causal ambiguity, and social com-
plexity (Barney 1991). The role of history recognizes the importance of a ﬁrm’s unique
past, a past that other ﬁrms are unable to duplicate. For example, a ﬁrm might purchase
a piece of land at one point in time that subsequently becomes very valuable (Ricardo
1966; Hirshleifer 1980). Causal ambiguity exists when the link between a resource and
the competitive advantage it confers is poorly understood. This ambiguity may lie in
uncertainty about how a resource leads to sustainable competitive advantage, or it may
lie in lack of clarity about which resource (or combination of resources) leads to the
advantage. Such ambiguity makes it extremely hard for competing ﬁrms to duplicate a
resource or copy the way in which it is deployed (Lippman and Rumelt 1982; Dierickx
and Cool 1989).
Competitive Advantage 
Creation Phase
Competitive Advantage 
Sustainability Phase
Productive
use of firm 
resources
that are…
- valuable
- rare
leads to
Short term
competitive
advantage
which
Is sustained over 
time due to
resource…
- inimitability
- non-substitutability
rarity
Low substitutability
Low imitability
…sustains…
…sustains…
time
Ex-ante limits to competition
value
Ex-post limits to competition
FIGURE 14.1 Sustainability and the resource-based view (modiﬁed from Wade and Hulland
2004)
IT-DEPENDENT STRATEGIC INITIATIVES AND SUSTAINED COMPETITIVE
375

Finally, social complexity refers to the multifarious relationships within the ﬁrm and
between the ﬁrm and key stakeholders such as shareholders, suppliers, and customers
(Hambrick 1987). The complexity of these relationships makes them difﬁcult to
manage, and even more difﬁcult to imitate. An example of this is Walmart’s logistics
management system. Even if all the individual elements are in place, the relationships
between the elements, and thus its complexity, would likely result in an imperfect
substitute (Dierickx and Cool 1989). A resource has low substitutability if there are
few, if any, strategically equivalent resources that are, themselves, rare and inimitable
(Amit and Schoemaker 1993; Black and Boal 1994; Collis and Montgomery 1995).
Firms may ﬁnd, for example, that excellence in IT development, systems integration, or
environmental scanning may be achieved through a number of equiﬁnal paths. We will
return to the question of substitutability in the later sections.
Imitability and rarity are logically linked to one another. As a resource is imitated, it
becomes less rare. Similarly, as more substitutes are developed, a resource becomes less
valuable. The RBV is a valuable enhancement to the Information Systems literature
where it has long been argued that IS resources are valuable, but not rare, that they
rarely resist imitation, and have multiple substitutes (Mata, Furst, and Barney 1995).
Technological assets, for example, such as computer hardware and software, are often
considered to be relatively easy to acquire and copy (Mata, Furst, and Barney 1995;
Powell and Dent-Micallef 1997)—even though empirical validation of this seeming
received wisdom awaits. Although various studies have examined how IS resources can
potentially create competitive advantage for ﬁrms, very little of this work has looked at
sustaining that advantage over time.
Dynamic Capabilities and the Sustainability
of IT-Enabled Competitive Advantage
Another stream of research that has inﬂuenced IT strategic thinking revolves around
dynamic capabilities. Dynamic capabilities address a commonly articulated weakness
of the RBV—its fundamentally static nature. The resource-based view has been criti-
cized for ignoring factors surrounding resources, instead assuming that they simply
‘exist’ (Stinchcombe 2000). Eisenhardt and Martin (2000: 1107) deﬁned dynamic
capabilities as ‘Firm’s processes that use resources—speciﬁcally the processes to inte-
grate, reconﬁgure, gain and release resources—to match and even create market
change. Dynamic capabilities thus are the organizational and strategic routines by
which ﬁrms achieve new resource conﬁgurations as markets emerge, collide, split,
evolve, and die.’
By acting as a buffer between core resources and a changing business environ-
ment, dynamic capabilities allow a ﬁrm to adjust its resource mix and thereby
maintain the sustainability of the ﬁrm’s competitive advantage that otherwise might
be quickly eroded (Volberda 1996; Teece, Pisano, and Shuen 1997; Eisenhardt and
376
MICHAEL WADE, GABRIELE PICCOLI, AND BLAKE IVES

Martin 2000; Wade and Hulland 2004). Indeed, some research has suggested that
IS resources may take on many of the attributes of dynamic resources, and thus
may be particularly useful to ﬁrms operating in rapidly changing environments
(Jarvenpaa and Leidner 1998). Thus, even when IS resources do not directly lead
the ﬁrm to a position of competitive advantage, they may nonetheless be critical
to the ﬁrm’s longer-term competitiveness in unstable environments; particularly
(or maybe ‘but only’) if they help it to develop, add, integrate, and release other key
resources over time.
Agility and the Sustainability of IT-Enabled
Competitive Advantage
A third literature stream closely related to dynamic capabilities is the research on
agility. Agility is deﬁned as the ability to detect opportunities for innovation and
seize those competitive market opportunities by assembling requisite assets, knowl-
edge, and relationships with speed and surprise (D’Aveni 1994; Goldman, Nagel,
and Preiss 1995; Sambamurthy, Bharadwaj, and Grover 2003). Further, agility
encompasses a ﬁrm’s capabilities related to interactions with customers, orchestra-
tion of internal operations, and utilization of its ecosystem of external business
partners (Sambamurthy, Bharadwaj, and Grover 2003). Firms that are agile have
the ability to rapidly and effectively alter their strategies and approaches in the face
of changing market conditions. IT can both aid and hinder agility depending on its
structural conditions (Sambamurthy, Bharadwaj, and Grover 2003). For example, a
rigid legacy system may impede a ﬁrm’s ability to adapt to new market conditions.
Further, when IT is deeply embedded within organizational systems and routines, it
may become an impediment to change when those systems and routines need to be
renewed. On the other hand, IT can be a strong facilitator of organizational agility.
It can reduce switching and coordination costs, and quickly and cheaply combine
with other resources to form new, better positioned resources (Evans and Wurster
2000). Agility is related to the concept of real options. In the context of IT, options
confer the right, but not the obligation to obtain beneﬁts from future IT initiatives
(Fichman 2004). The holder of an option typically makes a small initial investment,
holds it open until an opportunity arrives, and then exercises a choice to strike the
option and capture the value inherent in that opportunity (Sambamurthy, Bhar-
adwaj, and Grover 2003). Alternatively, if the option is shown to have no value, it
is left to expire with little residual cost. IS resources can be used by ﬁrms to
generate sets of options and strategies that can be pursued depending on the future
nature of the competitive environment. These strategies would otherwise be very
expensive and/or time consuming to develop from scratch.
IT-DEPENDENT STRATEGIC INITIATIVES AND SUSTAINED COMPETITIVE
377

IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives
Complementing previous work on the RBV, dynamic capabilities, and agility is the
stream of research that focuses on the individual initiative level. This complementary
approach is important because, as an applied discipline, the Information Systems
literature must be able to inform the design of technology-enabled initiatives and
provide managerial guidance not only for aggregate IT investments, but also for the
deployment of speciﬁc projects. To this end, the IT-dependent strategic initiative
perspective provides a complete approach to evaluating the competitive potential of
new technologies because it places them in the organizational context in which they are
introduced and deployed. IT-dependent strategic initiatives represent ‘identiﬁable
competitive moves that depend on the use of IT to be enacted, and are designed to
lead to sustained improvements in a ﬁrm’s competitive position’ (Piccoli and Ives 2005:
748). Moreover, the IT-dependent strategic initiative perspective complements the
signiﬁcant work to date on business value of IT and the complementary role of
resources (Melville, Kraemer, and Gurbaxani 2004) to explain how IT ‘does not
contribute to ﬁrm performance in isolation, but instead contributes as part of an
activity system that fosters the creation and appropriation of economic value’ (Piccoli
and Ives 2005: 766).
Central to the framework is the notion that ﬁrms compete on the basis of value
propositions that they offer to their customers2 and that competitive replication, in
order to be successful, must enable competitors to produce a comparable value
proposition. Producing a comparable value proposition is not equivalent to creating
a comparable ‘IT system’ because the IT-dependent strategic initiatives underlying
Response-
Lag Drivers
IT assets
IT capabilities
Complementary resources
Technology characteristics
Implementation process
Switching costs
Value system characteristics
Barriers to
Erosion
IT resource barrier
Complementary
resource barrier
IT project barrier
Preemption barrier
Sustained
Competitive
Advantage
Competitive
Environment
FIGURE 14.2 Response lag drivers (Piccoli and Ives 2005)
378
MICHAEL WADE, GABRIELE PICCOLI, AND BLAKE IVES

such value proposition depends on the characteristics of the technology itself as well as
the characteristics of the implementing organization and the value network in which
the ﬁrm operates (Piccoli and Ives 2005). These other components are organized in
response lag drivers and, in turn, categorized in four barriers to erosion. Each of the
barriers is brieﬂy described below with some discussion of how they have evolved over
time.
Barrier No. 1: IT resource barrier
An IT resource barrier is based on the fact that ‘At any point in time, competing ﬁrms
have a different endowment of IT resources at their disposal to identify, assemble,
deploy, and use information technologies.’ (Piccoli and Ives 2005: 752). Firms therefore
can take advantage of IT resource heterogeneity to create value propositions that
leverage their idiosyncrasies and thus may not be readily available to competing
ﬁrms. IT resources can either be classiﬁed as IT assets—things the ﬁrm has—or IT
capabilities—things the ﬁrms is able to do (Wade and Hulland 2004). By successfully
erecting a strong IT resource barrier, a ﬁrm can foster resource inimitability (in RBV
parlance) and, to the extent that the underlying resources create signiﬁcant value, can
generate a sustainable competitive advantage.
The true potential offered by the IT resource barrier for sustainable advantage has
been the subject of considerable debate in the literature due to the commonly held
assumption that IT resources are undifferentiated, fungible commodities, and, as such,
cannot form the basis of differentiated strategic initiatives (Mata, Fuerst, and Barney
1995; Powell and Dent-Micalleff 1997; Carr 2003). While quite appealing at a theoreti-
cal level, this argument breaks down in the context of IT-dependent strategic initia-
tives. Supporting evidence for that position mostly comes in the form of archival
research studies using highly aggregate deﬁnitions of IT investments (see Melville,
Kraemer, and Gurbaxani 2004 for a review); this is countered by work demonstrating
the signiﬁcant response lag (Feeny and Ives 1990) associated with IT assets, such as IT
infrastructure and data repositories (Pemberton, Stonehouse, and Barber 2001), as well
as IT capabilities (Barton and Peters 1992; Bharadwaj 2000; Santhanam and Hartono
2003). Recent work contributes to the debate on the role of IT resources, as well as on
the methodological implications of using aggregate measures for IT investments, by
demonstrating that different classes of IT investments produce different impacts on
organizations and, more importantly, that the manner in which such performance
accrues varies signiﬁcantly between different classes of IT investments (Aral and Weill
2007).
Looking at general trends that either reinforce or weaken the IT resources barrier, we
suggest that a growing awareness for the competitive value of data and information
(Piccoli and Watson 2008) and an increasing feasibility of urban sensing and pervasive
computing (Cuff, Hansen, and Kang 2008) create an enhanced opportunity for orga-
nizations to strengthen their IT resource positions (e.g. IT infrastructure, IT reposi-
tories). Conversely, weakening the potential of this barrier to erosion is the growing
incidence of IT outsourcing. Outsourcing has always been a part of business, yet the
IT-DEPENDENT STRATEGIC INITIATIVES AND SUSTAINED COMPETITIVE
379

prevalence of IT outsourcing has increased substantially in recent years (Lacity, Will-
cocks, and Rottman 2008). While IT outsourcing promises a number of efﬁciency and
effectiveness beneﬁts, it may also reduce the ability of organizations to foster strong
internal IT capabilities. Moreover, if outsourcing becomes prevalent within an indus-
try, the relevance of technical skills, and to some extent IT management skills, will
likely decrease. For example, when an IT product or service is outsourced, the control
over its use and management is reduced, and in some cases lost. This is particularly
evident with software-as-a-service and some kinds of cloud computing arrangements
where control over alignment and integration of the IT resource with current and
future strategy is weakened.
Furthermore, in most outsourcing relationships, the ﬁrm has less control over the
customization or the evolution of the IT resource. For sound business reasons, many
outsourcing contracts are based on standard tools, platforms, and methodologies.
Standardization can simplify data transfer, supply-chain integration, and ongoing
system management, as well as providing a level of skill base consistency between the
focal ﬁrm and the outsourcing partner. Standardization, however, prevents the ﬁrm
from controlling the development of the IT resource. Finally, hiring external talent for
either systems development or systems integration—talent that typically specializes in
the ﬁrm’s own industry and has likely worked on implementation projects for multiple
ﬁrms within that industry—all but negates the development of internal IT capabilities
other than relationship assets (Ross, Beath, and Goodhue 1996). Such relationship
assets would remain quite relevant in the presence of outsourcing contracts, but would
need to extend beyond the boundaries of the ﬁrm (Feeny and Willcocks 1998;
Ranganathan and Balaji 2007). IT management skills, while remaining a relevant
source of differentiation, would also need to evolve in the management of outsourcing
relationships.
Barrier No. 2: Complementary resource barrier
Complementarity is central to the notion of the IT-dependent strategic initiative.
A value proposition is created not by IT resources in isolation, but through the
combination of IT and non-IT resources to form a composite IT-dependent strategic
initiative. These prerequisite resources can form powerful barriers to the erosion of the
ﬁrm’s competitive advantage. That is,
When a ﬁrm has access to co-specialized complementary assets that underpin the
IT dependent strategic initiative, signiﬁcant response lag can be created because
imitation of the initiative is predicated on the ability to obtain the same (or
equivalent) complementary resources. A compelling example was Dell’s early
exploitation of the World Wide Web via Dell Online. It strategically leveraged
Dell’s direct order business model, a distribution model that most PC
manufacturers at the time did not have in place and would have a difﬁcult time
putting in place. To the extent that the technology is co-specialized to, and
ampliﬁes the value of, unique complementary resources, its mere imitation by
competitors is not sufﬁcient. (Piccoli and Ives 2005: 757)
380
MICHAEL WADE, GABRIELE PICCOLI, AND BLAKE IVES

Identifying and categorizing complementary resources is beyond the scope of this
work. However, there is substantial research supporting the notion that IT investment
can amplify the value of complementary resources (Wade and Hulland 2004) and we
believe that complementary resources continue to hold signiﬁcant potential for gen-
erating response lag and to make it difﬁcult to overcome the leader’s advantage.
Through customization of the IT core, a ﬁrm can leverage its unique assets to form
the basis of a sustainable advantage. However, in many industries, ﬁrms in search of
efﬁciencies have reduced the contribution of idiosyncratic complementary resources
and instead have utilized standardized commercial packages. These packages have
made it more difﬁcult for ﬁrms to pursue strategies of strategic differentiation. Con-
sider the example of enterprise systems. Most contemporary enterprise systems are
built on a ‘best practices’ model. The idea of software being organized around best
practices is appealing to implementing ﬁrms. A vendor surveys a particular industry to
identify the top performing ﬁrms and ‘embeds superior practices’ into its enterprise
system design for the customer (i.e. the implementing ﬁrm) to deploy once the software
is installed and conﬁgured. While the viability of this model is questioned (Wagner
and Newell 2004; Wagner, Scott, and Galliers 2006), it is problematic even when
successfully implemented as it tends to homogenize business practices within an
industry. This homogenization becomes particularly dangerous in industries that
have widely adopted software suites from a small number of vendors, such as pharma-
ceuticals and heavy manufacturing. From a competitive standpoint, it becomes more
difﬁcult for a ﬁrm to competitively differentiate when its business processes are based
on the same underlying factors as its rivals (Davenport 1998). With organizational
information systems, such as enterprise systems, this means that ﬁrms not only start to
look similar in terms of technical infrastructure, but also on a business process level. As
a consequence, ﬁrms ﬁnd it more difﬁcult to compete on the basis of their information
systems, impeding their ability to gain, and in particular sustain any IT-based advan-
tage. As we mentioned in the introduction, the value of a preliminary analysis of
sustainability during initiative design can uncover opportunities to leverage idiosyn-
cratic and valuable complementary resources.
Barrier No. 3: IT project barrier
The IT project barrier is the instantiation of the project at the core of the initiative.
According to the IT-enabled strategic initiative perspective: ‘Since IT-dependent stra-
tegic initiatives rely on an essential enabling IT core, they cannot be implemented until
the necessary technology and associated information systems have been successfully
deployed—the more time consuming and costly the process, the more resilient the IT
project barrier’ (Piccoli and Ives 2005: 759). However, many critics of the strategic
value of IT mistakenly confuse the IT project for the IT-dependent strategic initiative.
Consider a simple example. Multinational lodging companies, such as Marriott Inter-
national, Accor Group, and Hyatt Hotels, compete ﬁercely on the dimension of
customer service. In the pursuit of superior customer service and customer choice,
they have introduced a number of IT-enabled service channels. A recent trend has been
IT-DEPENDENT STRATEGIC INITIATIVES AND SUSTAINED COMPETITIVE
381

the introduction of brand-wide standard self-service kiosks across their afﬁliated
properties to facilitate the check-in and check-out processes. An IT investment or IT
project mentality, as assumed by critics of the strategic potential of IT (e.g. Carr 2003),
suggests that this initiative will be easily imitated by competitors who have ready access
to the kiosk technology. As that reasoning goes, the kiosks are fairly standardized
hardware/software bundles that can be easily replicated and deployed by competitors.
Conversely, an IT-dependent strategic initiative calls observers to take a broader look
considering the impact of all four barriers to erosion. For example, the kiosk is an
incremental interface to the chain’s customer service system and, as such, it leverages
the ﬁrm’s own IT infrastructure and data repositories. These prerequisite IT resources
are neither easily deployed nor fungible, making replication by competitors less than
straightforward. Moreover, as demonstrated by the literature, the kiosk technology
must ﬁt with the brand’s positioning and with customer characteristics (Parasuraman
2000). As a customer-facing service initiative, the implementing ﬁrm must recognize
that the customer is also the technology user (Cenfetelli, Benbasat, and Al-Natour
2008) and, as a consequence, the potential to deliver the value proposition depends
heavily on customer ﬁt. For example, beyond general technology readiness and IT
savvy of the intended customer-user, the degree of customer loyalty the brand enjoys
will likely determine the success of the initiative. That is, hotels with a high percentage
of returning customers will likely enjoy higher adoption rates, lower implementation
costs per using customer, and a higher percentage of successful use by customers who
have had more experience and therefore have become better users of the speciﬁc
technology kiosk (see the pre-emption barrier for an explanation of the process by
which co-specialized investments accrue).
The example of check-in kiosks is useful in showing how, even when a rather simple
IT project represents the core of the IT-dependent strategic initiative, the question of
sustainability is not straightforward. The example however can be misleading in that it
appears to reinforce the ‘IT is easily imitable’ argument. But, not all IT is created equal
and the IT project barrier charts the many response lag drivers that characterize the
wide variety of IT projects that a ﬁrm can undertake. Discussion of these response lag
drivers is beyond the scope of the present discussion. However, simply on intuitive
grounds, we challenge the notion that IT projects cannot engender response lag and
play a role in the sustainability of a competitive advantage. The information systems
literature has played witness to countless project failures and it is hard to argue that an
IT system is ‘easily imitable’ as much as it is not ‘easily implementable’. That is, both
custom development projects and off-the-shelf implementations still today are char-
acterized by high failure rates (Light and Wagner 2006). Moreover, as we argued above,
the contention that a ﬁrm can ‘import’ best practices and standard processes when it
implements standardized software—thereby reducing the strategic differences with
competitions—has also been questioned by information systems researchers (Wagner
and Newell 2004; Wagner, Scott, and Galliers 2006). Thus, despite the prevalent
rhetoric, the process of implementing large-scale organizational information systems
remains an extremely complex endeavour. (See also Chapter 15 in this volume.)
382
MICHAEL WADE, GABRIELE PICCOLI, AND BLAKE IVES

We do recognize that the cycle of innovation and change in information technology
has been speeding up over the last two decades and that this trend toward faster cycle
technology development has increased competition in IT intensive industries (McAfee
and Brynjolfsson 2008). A number of trends underlie this evolution. First, the increas-
ing size and prominence of the software industry has accelerated the shift toward a ‘buy
and make’ approach to systems development that eschews custom development in
favour of conﬁguration and customization of standard off-the-shelf software packages
(Markus 2000). To the extent that the uniqueness and complexity of the technology
core of an IT-dependent strategic initiative decreases, so does the strength of the IT
project barrier in staving off erosion of competitive advantage. Second, the increasing
trend toward software modularity and the use of web services allows for software to be
organized into discrete elements that can be separated from surrounding code thus
enabling software reuse. Modularity leads to more efﬁcient reuse, as modules can be
discretely stored and utilized as required. Large libraries of software modules exist,
saving ﬁrms substantial amounts of development time and cost. While these software
development approaches enhance efﬁciency and speed of software delivery, they may
also make it harder for ﬁrms to build truly differentiated systems. Modular software
design, reuse, open programming environments, standardized development tools and
methodologies, all make it harder for ﬁrms to develop systems that resist replication,
and thus reduce the ability of ﬁrms to gain or sustain advantages based on software
applications.
While limited academic research has formally tested the impact of these trends on
the strength of the IT project barrier, there is mounting evidence to suggest that in
absolute terms the build and implementation phase of an IT project has been shrinking
in size and risk over the years. Competitors still need to become aware of the speciﬁc
characteristics of the IT core of the leader’s IT-dependent strategic initiative. However,
once aware and once they have taken a decision to react, competitors can move more
quickly than before through the process of implementing the necessary IT core. From
the perspective of the resource-based view, IT resources remain valuable, but we believe
the ‘window of scarcity and rareness’ has shrunk signiﬁcantly.
At this point we caution against misunderstanding the implication of the argument
developed above, what we call the ‘fallacy of relative terms’. In absolute terms, the speed
of delivery of IT projects has increased over time. However, at a theoretical level, the
process by which the IT project barrier operates to limit erosion of competitive
advantage has not changed, despite faster IT project development cycles. In other
words, IT projects that deliver functionalities that were cutting edge decades ago (e.g.
American Airlines SABRE), can be designed and deployed today at a fraction of the
cost, with lower risk and greater speed. Today’s equivalent of SABRE, a system of
unprecedented size and complexity in its time, is not an inventory and reservation
system. A more theoretically accurate parallel may be Google’s search engine, an
application that is highly unique, complex, and innovative and despite signiﬁcant
scrutiny remains quite difﬁcult to replicate. In other words, what constitutes a large,
complex, risky project that is hard to replicate can only be expressed in relative terms.
IT-DEPENDENT STRATEGIC INITIATIVES AND SUSTAINED COMPETITIVE
383

In conclusion, we acknowledge that the relentless evolution of information technol-
ogy has made it more and more viable for organizations of all kinds to purchase and
deploy the IT core of IT-enabled strategic initiatives with increasing speed and
accuracy. Standard solutions, such as ERP or CRM systems, at the same time, can
limit, but not eliminate, the scope of opportunities to create inimitable IT enabled
projects. However, we caution theorists and practitioners alike against dismissing the
potential contribution of the IT project barrier to protect a ﬁrm’s leadership position
and the uniqueness of a value proposition rooted in an IT-enabled strategic initiative.
The process by which the IT project barrier contributes to sustainability and the
contribution of its response lag drivers remain viable. Moreover, the IT core of the
IT-dependent strategic initiative may play a crucial developmental role that has, to
date, remained largely unexplored.
Barrier No. 4: Pre-emption barrier
The ﬁrst three barriers to erosion could be termed barriers to imitation, as they explain
what prevents competitors from replicating a leader’s initiative. The fourth barrier to
erosion is concerned with whether, ‘even after successful imitation has occurred, the
leader’s position of competitive advantage can be threatened’ (Piccoli and Ives 2005).
In other words, the pre-emption barrier seeks to understand under what circumstances
successful replication of the IT project and its prerequisite resources still prevents the
followers from being able to produce the same value proposition and erode the leader’s
advantage. Central to the discussion of the pre-emption barrier is the notion of
switching costs. Historically, information systems research has focused on IT-based
switching costs (Feeny and Ives 1990). Such switching cost may be rooted in specialized
user interfaces, proprietary codes and scripts, or proprietary software interfaces for
interoperability.
The same trends toward software modularity and open standards discussed above
create pressure that is depressing the traditional barrier to erosion and the role of IT
switching costs. For example, software management and delivery platforms, such as
web services, tend to lower the role of co-specialized technology investments, thus
making it simpler to swap functionalities and foster interoperability of diverse software
programs. Moreover, as users have become increasingly comfortable with computer-
based interfaces and generally more technology ready (Parasuraman 2000), we foresee
the value of switching costs associated with interface design to mitigate over time—
albeit much more slowly than many predict due to the powerful inﬂuence of human
inertia and resistance to change. Finally, governmental institutions are seemingly more
aware of the potential power position that control of technology platforms yield and,
as a consequence, have enacted legislation that promotes open standards and bans or
restricts the use of proprietary networks—as the mounting European pressure on
Microsoft to open up Windows and Apple to open up its iTunes service attest (Keizer
2007).
Notwithstanding the above arguments we note that, as with the IT project barrier,
critics of the role of IT as a strategic resource tend to focus on the IT project rather than
384
MICHAEL WADE, GABRIELE PICCOLI, AND BLAKE IVES

the IT-enabled strategic initiative. This seemingly semantic difference is extremely
powerful since, once we broaden our view of what constitutes a co-specialized invest-
ment, we ﬁnd that signiﬁcant potential for erecting barriers to erosion through
prevention remain. First, it points to the continued viability of the development of
switching costs associated with the value proposition enabled by the initiative rather
than the technology itself. This condition is particularly evident in cases where the
technology is the catalyst for the development of strong network effects characterized
by exclusivity. In such a scenario, as the example of eBay Inc. shows, switching costs
can become daunting and extremely powerful as a means for preventing erosion of
competitive advantage.
As with the IT project barrier, we draw attention to the ‘fallacy of relative terms’. The
role of co-specialized investments and switching costs as a response lag driver can only
be evaluated with respect to the speciﬁc IT-dependent strategic initiative with which
they are associated. As such, even IT switching costs may have the ability to contribute
to erosion of competitive advantage, even though their magnitude is generally decreas-
ing. Take the example of business casual custom-made apparel, such as that offered by
Lands’ End with its Lands’ End Custom IT-dependent strategic initiative (Piccoli, Bass,
and Ives 2003). Customers who want to take advantage of the superior comfort of
mass-customized garments spend the time to provide their measurements to Lands’
End, investing a small amount of time to understand the Lands’ End web interface,
measuring themselves following the speciﬁc requirements of the Lands’ End customi-
zation engine, and selecting speciﬁc options for their custom chinos or shirts. Having
invested time, they have made a co-specialized investment—at least in part—to the
Lands’ End Custom initiative. While they will not encounter insurmountable barriers
to repeating a similar procedure on the LL Bean website if LL Bean launched a
comparable initiative, the key question is how much of an incentive would customers
need in order to do so? Would they spend the time to understand the LL Bean interface
and enter their data for a discount of $50? $25? $5? If the average cost of a pair of
custom chinos is $70, then $5 represents a premium over 7 per cent. This simple
thought experiment demonstrates how, even when switching costs are ‘small’ in the
abstract, they are in fact substantial in relative terms. As such, if we extend our thought
experiment, they offer signiﬁcant opportunity to limit the erosion of a competitive
advantage and a ﬁrst mover advantage.
The Net Effect
In the previous pages we have discussed the state of the art in the research streams focused
on the question of the role of information technology in the search for sustainable
competitive advantage, with particular attention to the IT-enabled strategic initiative
perspective. We have outlined a number of trends that we argue have affected, and
continue to affect, the ability of ﬁrms to build and sustain competitive advantages based
IT-DEPENDENT STRATEGIC INITIATIVES AND SUSTAINED COMPETITIVE
385

on IT-dependent strategic initiatives. Some of these trends weaken the power of IT-
dependent strategic initiatives to sustain advantages while others strengthen it. However,
what emerges clearly from our analysis is that, while the prevalent rhetoric indicates that
IT is losing its strategic potential, i.e. by becoming more fungible and easily imitable, a
broader perspective shows that the dynamics are more complex and—for academic
research—far more interesting. We believe that by closely analysing the value propositions
that are enabled by IT-dependent strategic initiatives, we see a deceptively high potential
for IT to contribute to sustainable advantage and for information systems researchers to
play a part in explaining how and why this process takes place.
RESEARCH AND MANAGERIAL IMPLICATIONS
..................................................................................................................
Our analysis of the literature to date, within the framework presented above, conﬁrms
the value of a project level perspective and opens a series of avenues for future research
attention. Focusing on research at the initiative level has a number of theoretical and
practical advantages. First, it more accurately reﬂects organizational evaluation pro-
cesses. Returning to the earlier example of lodging kiosks, we note how the major
lodging ﬁrms, after evaluating the need to improve customer service, identiﬁed and
evaluated a number of different possible options. Each of these options can be
conceptualized as a strategic initiative and, to the extent that it requires IT at its core,
as an IT-dependent strategic initiative. Before implementation, the ﬁrm assesses the
viability of the kiosk-enabled solution to customer service improvement, and evaluates
the potential return (i.e. value creation and appropriation) as well as the potential for
defending it from competitors’ imitation (i.e. the question of sustainability) in order to
reap beneﬁts over time. Thus, the analysis at the level of the IT-dependent strategic
initiative has signiﬁcant potential to inform practice as it enables management to
evaluate the potential for the value proposition stemming from the initiative to resist
imitation and substitution.
From a research standpoint, the IT-enabled strategic initiative perspective helps
resolve one of the critical concerns associated with research on sustainability: namely,
the parallelism between cause and effect. In other words, much of the business value of
IT and sustainability literature has used highly aggregated measures for both the
independent and dependent variables—respectively IT investments and ﬁnancial per-
formance (Ray, Barney, and Muhanna 2004). While this perspective is extremely
valuable, it suffers from two main problems. On the one hand it does not allow
researchers to identify the process by which the speciﬁc characteristics of individual
IT investments contribute to performance (Aral and Weill 2007). On the other it may
lead to conﬂicting ﬁndings as the outcome variables (i.e. ﬁnancial performance) are far
removed from the determinants (i.e. IT investments and complementary resources).
An IT-dependent strategic initiative perspective simultaneously appeases both of
these concerns. By focusing on speciﬁc initiatives, it enables researchers to directly
386
MICHAEL WADE, GABRIELE PICCOLI, AND BLAKE IVES

account for their nature and characteristics. Moreover, by using the initiative as the
unit of analysis, researchers can identify the speciﬁc process-level outcome variables of
interest and more precisely map the chain of causality to competitive effects. Finally, an
IT-enabled strategic initiative perspective enables an analysis of the complementarities
and interactions between speciﬁc components of a given initiative.
The main limitation of this approach stems from its very focus on a single initiative.
Thus, it is not applicable to investigations of widely shared services and assets, such as
IT infrastructure. Moreover, to the extent that some IT resources underpin multiple
and widely different initiatives, the IT-dependent strategic initiative perspective might
not be applicable. Thus, we note how this perspective is complementary to the
resource-based view and the research stream on agility, with each best suited to a
different set of research questions pertaining to the sustainability of IT-enabled com-
petitive advantage. In the remainder of this section we draw a number of implications
for research and practice.
Combinatorial Effects in IT-Enabled Strategic Initiatives
Despite theoretical arguments and case evidence that supports the IT-dependent
strategic initiative perspective (Piccoli and Ives 2005; Aral and Weill 2007), the ‘IT as
a commodity’ argument persists both in the popular press and in academic circles
(Clemons and Row 1991; Mata, Fuerst, and Barney 1995; Powell and Dent-Micallef
1997; Carr 2003). For example, consider the notion that ‘of all resources in the IT
equation, human resources are probably the most neglected and difﬁcult to master’
(Powell and Dent-Micallef 1997: 395). While appealing on the surface, these arguments
are misleading in that they fail to recognize the critical theoretical issue of relevance:
explaining how IT and other resources interact to create superior IT-enabled strategic
initiatives. Trying to isolate the single component that makes an initiative difﬁcult to
counter as in the argument that IT is an ‘easy to master’ commoditized technology, fails
to recognize the value of combinatorial complexity and ﬁt of the various components of
an IT-enabled strategic initiative. Such a combinatiorial approach seeks to explain how
(not just whether) the IT resource ‘combines’ with other resources in order to leverage
and amplify their effect, or to diminish it (Jeffers, Muhanna, and Nault 2008). Thus, it
is the interaction between the technology and other resources that enables the forma-
tion of the ﬁrm’s unique value proposition. Viewed as an interlocking set of activities
and components (Rivkin 2000), IT-dependent strategic initiatives are more difﬁcult to
replicate than IT investments (Piccoli, Bass, and Ives 2003). It follows that the very
same technology will have different effects in different organizations, even head-to-
head competitors, not only with respect to implementation success (Orlikowski and
Iacono 2001), but also with regard to competitive performance. Under these circum-
stances, the notion that IT is easily imitable loses applicability and appeal.
IT-DEPENDENT STRATEGIC INITIATIVES AND SUSTAINED COMPETITIVE
387

The combinatorial perspective is coherent with the IT-enabled strategic initiative
perspective, but it has yet to be applied to the question of sustainability. We believe that
there is great potential for research that takes a holistic approach and focuses on
examining the interplay of the components of IT-dependent strategic initiatives, rather
than seeking to isolate their effect on sustained advantage.
Effect Timing
Another question that remains unexplored in the literature pertains to the role of
information technology and IT-enabled strategic initiatives in fostering the develop-
ment of other assets and capabilities. Largely inﬂuenced by the emergence of the
resource-based view, the strategic information systems literature appears to have
assumed that the IT resource can be considered a strategic resource to the extent
that it contributes to making it hard for competitors to replicate or substitute, or, as
suggested by the IT-dependent strategic initiative perspective, the value proposition it
underpins. However, the strategic role of information technology may need to be re-
conceptualized taking into account the timing of its effects. In other words, we may
need to split the role that IT can play as a resource in a given initiative—the current
deﬁnition of strategic—and its role in fostering the development of other resources and
future strategic initiatives.
The literature is silent about this latter point. However, previous work has identiﬁed
organizational learning and asset stock accumulation processes as critical in reinforcing
and rejuvenating barriers to erosion (Piccoli and Ives 2005). For example, an IT
resource is a prerequisite condition for the ability to collect valuable customer infor-
mation and to build information repositories (Piccoli and Watson 2008). Extending
this line of reasoning, beyond the notion of IT-dependent strategic initiatives, infor-
mation technology may be conceptualized as the prerequisite resource for the devel-
opment of strategic options (Fichman 2004) through the development of strategic
assets. While little work to date has been done in this area, IT may indeed itself be a
source of innovation as it fosters the ﬁrm’s ability to experiment faster and at lower cost
than ever before.
The Threat of Substitution
Perhaps the main limitation of the IT-dependent strategic initiative is that it focuses on
the threat of imitation, rather than the threat of substitution. That is, the framework
addresses the process by which an IT-enabled strategic initiative can resist erosion in
the face of replication by competitors (Eisenhardt and Martin 2000). It is silent with
respect to the process by which competitors can leapfrog a ﬁrm with a superior IT-
enabled strategic initiative by substituting the leader’s value proposition with a
388
MICHAEL WADE, GABRIELE PICCOLI, AND BLAKE IVES

different initiative that better fulﬁls the same customer need or that evolves from ﬁrst
fulﬁlling another customer’s need and then grows into, and beyond, the service
provided by the original leader (Christensen 1997). An early investment in a relatively
inﬂexible IT infrastructure can seriously hamper responsiveness and, therefore,
subsequent extensions of the sustainable advantage. The resource-based view provides
conceptual support for the importance of non-substitutability as a barrier to erosion.
Yet, there is very little empirical evidence that seeks to test the properties of substitu-
tion. Part of the problem is that substitutability is inherently exogenous to the IT
resource. One can examine whether or not an IT resource can be imitated by examin-
ing its component properties. However, it is much more difﬁcult to assess the compar-
ative level of non-substitutability. Yet, IT resources have strong substitutability
properties. Consider how video conferencing has become a substitute for air travel,
how the Internet and video games have become substitutes for television, and how the
iPhone and its applications have impacted on so many products and services. More
research on the notion of substitutability and its relationship to IT resources and
IT-dependent strategic initiatives is clearly warranted.
CONCLUSION
..................................................................................................................
Research questions regarding the strategic role of IT resources and IT projects in the
ﬁrm’s search for sustainable competitive advantage still remain largely unanswered.
The lack of research is a surprising realization, given the centrality of the issue for
academic research and the implications, both positive and negative, for information
systems practice. Nonetheless, such a paucity of research attention has created fertile,
though challenging, ground for Information Systems scholars to explore. Such research,
at least in the initial stages, is likely to be case based and longitudinal, with researchers
exploring IT-enabled moves, and countermoves, over a series of years. One lesson to
emerge from our review for practitioners is to take great care in how ‘strategic’ systems
are designed and used. Opportunities to create competitive advantages based on IT-
dependent strategic initiatives are increasingly hard to come by, and as such, should be
actively sought and exploited. Creating a sustainable competitive advantage should be a
consideration from the moment a strategic initiative is proposed.
We acknowledge that changing economic conditions have strengthened the widely
held view that IT is a commodity, and as such, has no place in the creation or sustaining
of competitive advantage. In this chapter, we have outlined some of the trends that
have led to this view. However, while we accept that IT assets may be undifferentiated,
we reject the suggestion that IT-dependent strategic initiatives have no strategic value.
In fact, we argue that these initiatives, when formed in projects with complementary
organizational resources, can lead to powerful business beneﬁts, and can further form
strong barriers to advantage erosion. The key to success is to maintain a sustainability
mindset throughout the IT strategic planning process.
IT-DEPENDENT STRATEGIC INITIATIVES AND SUSTAINED COMPETITIVE
389

NOTES
1. The term ‘sustainability’ has two meanings in the academic literature on information
systems. One meaning refers to the ability of a ﬁrm to use IT to maintain a competitive
advantage over a period of time. The second, more recent meaning refers to research
associated with ethics and long-lasting socio-environmental beneﬁts. Our use of the term
‘sustainability’ is consistent with the ﬁrst meaning.
2. The framework encompasses both customer facing and internal initiatives. Given the focus
of this chapter we discuss exclusively the former.
REFERENCES
Amit, R., and Schoemaker, P. J. H. (1993). ‘Strategic Assets and Organizational Rent’, Strategic
Management Journal (14), 33–46.
Aral, S., and Weill, P. (2007). ‘IT Assets, Organizational Capabilities & Firm Performance:
How Resource Allocations and Organizational Differences Explain Performance Varia-
tion’, Organization Science, 18(5): 1–18.
Barney, J. (1991). ‘Firm Resources and Sustained Competitive Advantage’, Journal of Man-
agement, 17(1): 99–120.
Barton, P. S., and Peters, D. H. (1992). ‘The ASB Bank: An IT Case Study in Sustained
Competitive Advantage’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 1(3): 165–70.
Bharadwaj, A. S. (2000). ‘A Resource-Based Perspective on Information Technology Capabil-
ity and Firm Performance: An Empirical Investigation’, MIS Quarterly, 24(1): 169–96.
Black, J. A. and Boal, K. B. (1994). ‘Strategic Resources: Traits, Conﬁgurations and Paths to
Sustainable Competitive Advantage’, Strategic Management Journal, 15: 131–48.
Carr, N. (2003). ‘IT Doesn’t Matter’, Harvard Business Review, 81(5): 41–9.
Cenfetelli, R., Benbasat, I., and Al-Natour, S., ‘Addressing the What and How of Online
Services: Positioning Supporting-Services Functionality and Service Quality for Business-
to-Consumer Success’, Information Systems Research, 19(2): 161–81.
Christensen, C. (1997). The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great Firms
to Fail. Boston, MA: Harvard Graduate School of Business Press.
Clemons, E. K. and Row, M. C. (1991). ‘Sustaining IT Advantage: The Role of Structural
Differences’, MIS Quarterly, 15(3): 275–92.
Collis, D. J., and Montgomery, C. A. (1995). ‘Competing on Resources: Strategy in the 1990s’,
Harvard Business Review, 73(4): 118–28.
Cuff, D., Hansen, M., and Kang, J. (2008). ‘Out of the Woods: Urban Sensing’, Communica-
tions of the ACM, 51(3): 24–33.
D’Aveni, R. A. (1994). Hypercompetition: Managing the Dynamics of Strategic Maneuvering.
New York: The Free Press.
Davenport, T. H. (1998). ‘Putting the Enterprise into the Enterprise System’, Harvard
Business Review, 76(4): 121–31.
Dierickx, I., and Cool, K. (1989). ‘Asset Stock Accumulation and Sustainability of Competitive
Advantage’, Management Science, 35: 1504–11.
390
MICHAEL WADE, GABRIELE PICCOLI, AND BLAKE IVES

Eisenhardt, K., and Martin, J. (2000). ‘Dynamic Capabilities: What are They?’, Strategic
Management Journal, 21: 1105–21.
Evans, P. B., and Wurster, T. S. (2000). Blown to Bits: How the New Economics of Information
Transforms Strategy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Feeny, D. F., and Ives, B. (1990). ‘In Search of Sustainability: Reaping Long-Term Advantage
from Investments in Information Technology’, Journal of Management Information Sys-
tems, 7(1): 27–46.
—— and Willcocks, L. P. (1998). ‘Core IS Capabilities for Exploiting Information Technolo-
gy’, Sloan Management Review, 39(3): 9–21.
Fichman, R. G. (2004). ‘Real Options and IT Platform Adoption: Implications for Theory and
Practice’, Information Systems Research, 15(2): 132–54.
Goldman, S. L., Nagel, R. N., and Preiss, K. (1995). Agile Competitors and Virtual Organiza-
tions: Strategies for Enriching the Customer. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Grant, R. M. (1991). ‘The Resource-based Theory of Competitive Advantage: Implications for
Strategy Formulation’, California Management Review, 33(1): 114–35.
Hambrick, D. (1987).‘Top Management Teams: Key to Strategic Success’, California Man-
agement Review, 30: 88–108.
Hidding, G. (2001). ‘Sustaining Strategic IT Advantage in the Information Age: How Strategy
Paradigms Differ by Speed’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 10: 201–22.
Hirshliefer, J. (1980). Price Theory and Applications. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Jarvenpaa, S. L., and Leidner, D. E. (1998). ‘An Information Company in Mexico: Extending
the Resource-Based View of the Firm to a Developing Country Context’, Information
Systems Research, 9(4): 342–61.
Jeffers, P. I., Muhanna, W. A., and Nault, B. R. (2008). ‘Interaction of IT and non-IT
Resources on Process Coordination: An Exploratory Investigation’, Decision Sciences
Journal, 39(4): 703–35.
Keizer, G. (2007). ‘Microsoft Gives in to Vista Search Change Demands’, Computerworld, 20
June.
Lacity, M., Willcocks, L., and Rottman, J. (2008). ‘Global Outsourcing of Back Ofﬁce Services:
Lessons, Trends and Enduring Challenges’, Strategic Outsourcing: An International Jour-
nal, 1(1): 13–34.
Light, B., and Wagner, E. (2006). ‘Integration in ERP environments: Rhetoric, Realities and
Organisational Possibilities’, New Technology Work and Employment, 21(3): 215–28.
Lippman, S., and Rumelt, R. (1982). ‘Uncertain Imitability: An Analysis of Interﬁrm Differ-
ences in Efﬁciency under Competition’, Bell Journal of Economics, 13: 418–38.
McAfee, A., and Brynjolfsson, E. (2008). ‘Investing in the IT that Makes a Competitive
Difference’, Harvard Business Review (July–August).
McGrath, R. G., MacMillan, I. C., and Venkataraman, S. (1995). ‘Deﬁning and Developing
Competence: A Strategic Process Paradigm’, Strategic Management Journal, 16: 251–75.
Markus, M. L. (2000). ‘Paradigm Shifts: E-Business and Business/Systems Integration’, Com-
munications of the AIS, 4(10).
Mata, F. J., Fuerst, W. L., and Barney, J. B. (1995). ‘Information Technology and Sustained
Competitive Advantage: A Resource-Based Analysis’, MIS Quarterly, 19(4): 487–505.
Melville, N., Kraemer, K., and Gurbaxani, V. (2004). ‘Review: Information Technology and
Organizational Performance: An Integrative Model of IT Business Value’, MIS Quarterly,
28(2).
IT-DEPENDENT STRATEGIC INITIATIVES AND SUSTAINED COMPETITIVE
391

Miller, D., and Shamsie, J. (1996). ‘The Resource-Based View of the Firm in Two Environ-
ments: The Hollywood Firm Studios from 1936–1965’, Academy of Management Journal,
39(3): 519–43.
Orlikowski, W. J., and Iacono, C. S. (2001). ‘Research Commentary: Desperately Seeking the
“IT” in IT Research—A Call to Theorizing the IT Artifact’, Information Systems Research,
12(2): 121–34.
Parasuraman, A. (2000). ‘Technology Readiness Index (TRI): A Multiple-Item Scale to
Measure Readiness to Embrace New Technologies’, Journal of Service Research, 2(4):
307–20.
Pemberton, J. D., Stonehouse, G. H., and Barber, C. E. (2001). ‘Competing with CRS-
Generated Information in the Airline Industry’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems,
10(1): 59–75.
Peteraf, M. A. (1993). ‘The Cornerstones of Competitive Advantage: A Resource-based View’,
Strategic Management Journal, 14: 179–91.
Piccoli, G., Bass, B., and Ives, B. (2003). ‘Custom Made Apparel at Lands’ End’, MIS Quarterly
Executive, 2(2): 74–85.
——Feeny, D., and Ives, B. (2002). ‘Creating and Sustaining IT-Enabled Competitive Advan-
tage’, in J. Luftman (ed.), Competing in the Information Age: Strategic Alignment in Practice.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—— and Ives, B. (2005). ‘IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives and Sustained Competitive
Advantage: A Review and Synthesis of the Literature’, MIS Quarterly, 29(4): 747–76.
—— and Watson, R. (2008). ‘Proﬁt from Customer Data by Identifying Strategic Opportu-
nities and Adopting the “Born Digital” Approach’, MIS Quarterly Executive, 7(3): 113–22.
Powell, T. C., and Dent-Micalleff, A. D. (1997). ‘Information Technology as Competitive
Advantage: The Role of Human, Business, and Technology Resources’, Strategic Manage-
ment Journal, 18(5): 375–405.
Ranganathan, C., and Balaji, S. (2007). ‘Critical Capabilities for Offshore Outsourcing of
Information Systems’, Working paper, Indiana University.
Ray, G., Barney, J. B., and Muhanna, W. A. (2004). ‘Capabilities, Business Processes, and
Competitive Advantage: Choosing the Dependent Variable in Empirical Tests of the
Resource- Based View’, Strategic Management Journal, 25(1): 23–37.
Ricardo, D. (1966). Economic Essays. New York: A. M. Kelly.
Rivkin, J. W. (2000). ‘Imitation of Complex Strategies’, Management Science, 46(6): 824–44.
Ross, J. W., Beath, C. M., and Goodhue, D. L., (1996). ‘Develop Long-Term Competitiveness
through IT Assets’, Sloan Management Review, 38(1): 31–42.
Sambamurthy, V., Bharadwaj, A., and Grover, V. (2003). ‘Shaping Agility through Digital
Options: Reconceptualizing the Role of Information Technology in Contemporary Firms’,
MIS Quarterly, 27(2): 237–63.
Santhanam, R., and Hartono, E. (2003). ‘Issues in Linking Information Technology Capability
to Firm Performance’, MIS Quarterly, 27(1): 125–53.
Stinchcombe, A. L. (2000). ‘Social Structure and Organizations: A Comment’, in J. Baum and
F. Dobbins (eds.), Economics Meets Sociology in Strategic Management: Advances in
Strategic Management. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Teece, D. J., Pisano, G., and Shuen, A. (1997). ‘Dynamic Capabilities and Strategic Manage-
ment’, Strategic Management Journal, 18(7): 509–33.
Volberda, H. W. (1996). ‘Toward the Flexible Firm: How to Remain Vital in Hypercompeti-
tive Environments’, Organization Science, 7(4): 359–74.
392
MICHAEL WADE, GABRIELE PICCOLI, AND BLAKE IVES

Wade, M., and Hulland, J. (2004). ‘Review: The Resource-Based View and Information
Systems Research. Review, Extension and Suggestions for Future Research’, MIS Quarterly,
28(1): 107–42.
Wagner, E., and Newell, S. (2004). ‘“Best” for whom? The Tension between “Best Practice”
ERP Packages and Diverse Epistemic Cultures in a University Context’, Journal of Strategic
Information Systems, 13(4): 305–28.
—— Scott, S. V., and Galliers, R. D. (2006). ‘The Creation of Best Practice Software: Myth,
Reality and Ethics’, Information and Organization, 16(3): 251–75.
Zaheer, A., and Zaheer, S. (1997). ‘Catching the Wave: Alertness, Responsiveness, and Market
Inﬂuence in Global Electronic Networks’, Management Science, 43(11): 1493–509.
IT-DEPENDENT STRATEGIC INITIATIVES AND SUSTAINED COMPETITIVE
393

c h a p t e r 1 5
...............................................................................................
CHANGING THE STORY
SURROUNDING
ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS TO
IMPROVE OUR
UNDERSTANDING OF
WHAT MAKES ERP WORK IN
ORGANIZATIONS
...............................................................................................
ERICA WAGNER AND SUE NEWELL
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
Enterprise Systems (ES) have been the most popular business software of the
twentieth century (Robey, Ross, and Boudreau 2002). These packages are popular in
organizations (Davenport 2000) because of their potential ability to streamline and
integrate business operations across an organization’s value chain (Shanks and Seddon
2000). ES work by integrating core business functions, including ﬁnance, logistics, and
human resources, through the creation of a single system with a shared database (Lee
and Lee 2000). This provides a powerful business system infrastructure for organiza-
tions. The idea is that this integration will help to leverage organizational competitive-
ness through improving the way in which valuable information is produced, shared,
and managed across functions and locations, providing the administrative backbone
for an organization (Davenport 1998). Historically in large, globally distributed orga-
nizations legacy systems were developed to meet a speciﬁc functional need but were not
designed to ‘talk with one another’. As such processes were redundant and data that
resided in these functional systems had various formatting conventions and meaning

attributed to each ﬁeld. This made business and systems integration across the organi-
zation difﬁcult. ES are implemented in an attempt to replace these legacy systems with
a single tightly coupled enterprise-wide system.
ES, then, are seen as systems that support competitiveness through streamlining
work ﬂow in order to try to increase productivity, reduce costs, and improve decision
quality and resource control, thereby enabling leaner production. To be effective,
however, the integration of systems needs to be coupled with business integration,
where business processes are streamlined across functions and departments. However,
while ES hold the promise of business integration across an organization, accomplish-
ing this promise requires changes that affect an unprecedented amount of people
across the enterprise. In particular, the standardization of work practices across
functional areas of the business is often difﬁcult to achieve, with resistance from
stakeholder groups being common (Aladwani 2002; Scott and Wagner 2003). Thus,
many organizations that implement ES ﬁnd that achieving the promise of this tech-
nologically enabled change is problematic (Scott and Vessey 2002). Indeed, today, ES
are associated with high levels of project failure (Robbins-Gioia 2001). Nevertheless,
while 20 per cent of IT projects are shut down prior to installation (Cooke, Gelman,
and Peterson 2001), 80 per cent of implementations do at least go ahead. This suggests
that our focus might usefully be turned from looking at the short-term problems and
opportunities associated with an ES implementation project towards understanding
how organizations learn to exploit the functionality of these potentially powerful
systems over the long term.
In taking this longer-term view of ES, we will demonstrate in this chapter that it
requires rethinking many of the assumptions about IT implementation and use. Our
starting premiss for understanding the long-term relationship between an ES and an
organization, is that we need to move away from the very simplistic notion that IT
‘drives’, ‘forces’, or even merely ‘enables’ change (Robey and Boudreau 1999). Instead,
it is evident that we need to explore the complex relationship of reciprocal causality
between IT and organization with the outcomes emergent and difﬁcult to predict in
advance (e.g. Walsham 1993; Orlikowski 2000). Moreover, we also need to explore how
the institutional context (Scott 2000) inﬂuences this reciprocal relationship. In this
chapter then, we will identify a number of themes that need to be rethought in relation
to understanding the long-term relationship between and ES and the adopting organi-
zation. The themes include:
· Rethinking best practice—from best practice to negotiated practice
· Rethinking approaches to negotiation—from consensus to compromise
· Rethinking user participation—from pre- to post-implementation
· Rethinking implementation—from implementation/use to continuous cycles of
conﬁguration/customization/use.
We take each of these related themes in turn and examine them in this chapter. Before
doing this we describe an ES case. We use this case throughout the chapter to illustrate
the different issues that we deal with.
CHANGING THE STORY SURROUNDING ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS
395

AN ES CASE ILLUSTRATION
..................................................................................................................
In the summer of 2002, Uni, an elite US university, began modernizing its administra-
tive information systems through a two-year ES implementation. Uni was one of the
ﬁrst universities to select ES and chose to work with Vision Corporation in order to
develop two software modules related to grants and contracts activities. That October
the project structure was formed and functional teams were created with co-business
and technical leaders. The composition of teams was mostly Uni middle-level man-
agers from Central Administration whose permanent positions had been back-ﬁlled for
the duration of the project. Although an experienced ES project manager had been
hired, the real authority lay with the teams who communicated directly with Uni’s
newly appointed Vice President for Finance and Administration.
Once under way, the project team found that Vision’s technical experts were not on-
site as often as expected, leaving team members working with an incomplete software
suite and having to imagine how the grants and contracts module would be integrated.
Uni was concerned about the project’s lack of progress after a year of high-level
theorizing and very little technical development. They hired consultants to audit the
readiness of the ES for its scheduled ‘big bang’ implementation in October 2004. Their
ﬁndings caused Uni to modify expectations and switch to a phased implementation
strategy. A revised deadline of July 2005 was set for the deployment of the integrated
suite. Uni met this deadline in that the basic ES functionality was operational on the
ﬁrst day of the new ﬁscal year but the user interface and reporting environment still
required signiﬁcant development. The sub-optimal roll-out of the ES was complicated
by user resistance to the grants and contracts design. The academic constituencies who
had expectations of an improved working environment were unable to complete
crucial administrative tasks. Faculty demanded changes in the ES’s design as well as
interim support for their administrators whose workload increased dramatically in the
ES-enabled environment. For more than two years the project team was involved in
post-implementation design changes before ﬁnally receiving buy-in from the academic
community.
Below, two contentious episodes that nearly caused the derailment of Uni’s ES
project are described. These episodes have been selected because they illustrate the
kinds of factions that one might typically come in contact with during large software
projects where multiple stakeholder groups are involved in the implementation. The
ﬁrst episode adopts an internal-external perspective which is important to consider in
light of the growing trend for contractual relationships between client organizations
and external experts such as software vendors. Whereas the second episode concen-
trates on the goals of different organizational groups who share in the university
mission but also have unique aims.
396
ERICA WAGNER AND SUE NEWELL

Uni-Vision Conﬂict
The Uni-Vision strategic partnership was created to beneﬁt both parties through the
development of a higher education ES suite. This product would form the basis of Uni’s
administrative infrastructure and would help Vision enter an untapped vertical market.
Vision sought the industry expertise of Uni in order to help the software vendor modify
their government/public sector ES product to meet university needs. The result would
be the creation of a new product which both Uni and Vision would continue to ﬁne-tune
over time through migrations to new releases of the ES product. Through coordinated
action Uni and Vision were expecting to achieve this common aim because alone
neither had all the necessary skills to create a higher education enterprise solution.
However, during the ﬁrst two years of the project Vision failed to become enrolled in
the project to the extent that Uni expected—being largely absent from the project site.
Moreover, Uni felt the level of resources provided by Vision to be inadequate and a
misrepresentation of their partnership agreement, and struggled to move forward
because of this. From Vision’s perspective this resource allocation was understandable
given that Uni represented one client within a small vertical market, which had limited
growth opportunities; Vision staffed the project to reﬂect this. Vision approached
development as a modiﬁcation to their government package which they wanted to
do in the most efﬁcient manner possible so that they could see the highest return on
investment given the market potential. Over time, those on the Uni team came to
realize this. In contrast the project represented a major commitment for Uni in terms
of time and resources and was a substantial capital investment that was expected to
have long-term implications for their operation and governance.
When the original October 2004 deadline arrived Vision was still developing one of
the modules and decided to completely redesign the other. Their absence, coupled with
the failure to produce tangible products, led Uni team members to organize themselves
more closely to one another and simultaneously reinterpret their relationship with
Vision. Uni began considering alternative ways to achieve its goal given its reliance on
Vision—what did Vision want and how best should Uni negotiate with them? It was
clear that Vision needed discipline expertise with regards to university grants manage-
ment; and Uni team members began to realize that their modernization initiative was
more complex because of the partnership with Vision due to the vendor’s need to
create a marketable product. Uni had a well-respected grants management ofﬁce that
administered the external funding process for faculty. Uni was happy with the current
operations of this ofﬁce and their accompanying IS, however they lacked the ability to
centrally manage the way in which faculty budgeted and spent their award dollars. So
while Uni would have preferred to leave pre-awards out of the scope of the ES project,
they realized that they were in an interdependent relationship with Vision who saw
pre- and post-award activities as parts of the same process, both of which were
necessary to develop as part of a higher education solution that would be sold to
CHANGING THE STORY SURROUNDING ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS
397

research institutions. Uni saw the potential to leverage their grants management
expertise in order to obligate Vision for repayment to Uni sometime in the future.
As Uni began to reinterpret their partnership with Vision by seeking compromise, the
VP decided to mediate divergent goals and beliefs by using his power and inﬂuence to get
things done. The VP began by exerting his power over the project and hired an enterprise
computing expert as Technical Director of Administrative Systems whose charge was to
stop waiting for Vision and ‘ramp up’ the technical development. In addition to
refocusing the project team through strong leadership, the VP and newly hired Director
felt that it was necessary to give Vision an ultimatum. In-house technical expertise
(internal ‘geniuses’) were mobilized to start creating an alternative solution and the
threat was made that they would abandon Vision and go with the in-house solution.
The VP also made a personal visit to Vision headquarters where he indicated that
there was indeed ‘no free lunch’ available for the vendor but rather they had an
obligation to repay Uni for its commitment to developing the higher education product.
While the project team ‘geniuses’ continued to develop an alternative solution for grant
and labour functionality, Vision produced what they called ‘essential’ functionality in
time for Uni’s ﬁscal year 2005 and Uni chose not to drop Vision as a development
partner. Their continued involvement with the vendor was directly related to their own
interests for a robust product which they understood would only be achieved if they
were able to inﬂuence Vision’s behaviour and development trajectory by visiting the
vendor and being involved in product functionality decisions, despite the costs involved.
Conﬂict between Academic Constituencies and Central
Administration
During implementation, team members focused on professionalizing the university’s
administrative practices in order to ensure institutional governance and mediate ﬁnan-
cial and regulatory risk. This goal was spearheaded by the Financial Management (FM)
team leader who persuaded project members of this agenda, and through coordinated
action they purposely excluded legacy grants management practices (based on a com-
mitment accounting approach) from the enterprise system design in preference for a
corporate accounting approach based on time-phased budgeting interpreted as more
rigorous. The FM team leader described the legacy system as ‘old-fashioned’ and likened
it to a ‘Quicken’ solution (a simplistic software program for the management of personal
ﬁnances). He excluded the possibility of other views in favour of quashing the old ways
of working. In his mind, everyone should be on the same page—sharing common
aims—or they had no place at the university. The content and tone of his message
illustrates little respect for the different views across the university.
When the ES was rolled out to the Uni community it was met with resistance from
academic administrators who were unable to inform their faculty members about the
ﬁnancial details of their grant and contract awards using the time-phased approach
398
ERICA WAGNER AND SUE NEWELL

embedded in the ES. Faculty, in turn, became deeply unhappy about the ES because
they were unable to receive the answers they needed in order to do their jobs effectively.
At this time the project entered paralysis because the project team was unable to gain
political support from the academic departments. It is in this moment of controversy
that all parties involved realized the lack of common aims and began to consider how
they might advance their particular interests.
Frustrated by this situation and cognizant of the increased stress levels of their staff,
powerful faculty members reminded the VP of his ofﬁcial promise that the ES would
improve university administrative practices for the entire community. Faculty and
their administrators joined forces and used their power to secure a meeting with the
Provost, VP, and project leadership where they gave an ultimatum threatening to build
local systems and use the ES only as a data repository unless the legacy functionality
replaced the time-phased approach. As a result of these meetings the project began to
move out of paralysis. The legacy commitment accounting system remained live and
new, ‘bolt-on’ tools were developed that customized the ES system, so that faculty
needs were met. The expectation was that by appeasing faculty with regards to grants
management, the ES as a whole would be more likely to succeed.
Compromising on system functionality was not something that the project team had
envisioned having to do. However, the project team came to realize that if they were
going to successfully move users out of shadow systems and into the integrated ES
environment they were going to have to temper their hard-line approach. The team
thus reprioritized their post-installation development activities and created a custo-
mized piece of software that was bolted onto the ES software.
What Needs Rethinking?
We next consider some issues that we can rethink in relation to the adoption,
implementation, and appropriation of packaged software that may be different to
traditional IT systems that were custom-made for a particular context.
FROM BEST PRACTICE TO
NEGOTIATED PRACTICE
..................................................................................................................
Traditional IT systems were customized for particular contexts. However, ES are
packages that supposedly embed ‘best practices’ (O’Leary 2000) so that the adopting
organization is theoretically adopting the ‘best practices’ for a particular business
process. However, this notion is problematic for a number of reasons. We can look
at this from different theoretical perspectives including:
CHANGING THE STORY SURROUNDING ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS
399

Institutional theory and the idea of competing institutional logics (cf. Chapter 6)—As
Yoo, Lyytinen, and Brente (2007: 14) argue, ES represent ‘a rationalization, encoding
and abstraction of “best practices” that, while being congruent with the logics of
particular areas of certain organizations can be in conﬂict with others’. In other
words, ‘best’ is contextually and dynamically contingent so that what is considered to
be the ‘best’ way of operationalizing a process in one context and at one point in time
may be different in another context and time. This is because there is an institutional
logic inherent in an ES that may align with what is considered best by one community
of users but be at odds with what is considered best by another community. From an
institutional theory perspective, the ‘best’ aspect of an ES is simply what is institution-
ally legitimated at a particular point in time—it is a fashion (Abrahamson 1996) that
will be adopted because adopting a fashion legitimizes the wearer (i.e. the adopter).
Moreover, an institutional theory perspective would alert us to the idea that there may
be a disconnect between how the technology is supposed to operate and how it works
in practice, because this theory identiﬁes how there may be decoupling between
systems that are adopted to conform to institutional pressures and the actual operating
core of an organization (Meyer and Rowan 1977).
Practice theory and the idea of situated knowledge and learning —This perspective
takes as a starting point the idea that knowledge is created and recreated through
engagement in a practice within a particular ﬁeld of relations, so there can actually be
no such thing as a ‘best practice’. As Cook and Brown (1999: 92) argue: ‘A body of
knowledge cannot be understood in and of itself, allowing it to be transferred un-
changed from one context to another, without changes to its properties.’ In other
words, knowing and learning are constructed by relations among people (and objects)
engaged in an activity. Thus, ‘best’ practice is always locally deﬁned and moreover
emergent and changing since practices are constantly changing so that there are always
inconsistencies, even when it is supposedly the same practice. As Nicolini (2007: 894)
says, ‘pursuing the same thing necessarily produces something different’, so that a
singular best practice is a nonsense. Here we might think about ES users as performing
in a play (rather than a ﬁlm)—a play changes every time it is performed, because of
subtle differences in terms of how the actors interact in the moment; unlike a ﬁlm,
which once shot can be rerun over and over again in an identical way.
Power and ability to impose deﬁnition—A power perspective views power and
knowledge as indistinguishable because those with power have the ability to deﬁne
what is perceived to be reality—what is valid knowledge. As a result knowledge is a
product of power. Thus, an ES is simply the embodiment of the interests of those
who have power. This, it can be argued, is why the ES ‘best practices’ emphasize
efﬁciency and automated integration rather than, for example, empowerment and
worker identity.
The problem of assuming that a ‘best practice’ exists and can be designed into
software is illustrated in the Uni case. The project team, mostly composed of people
from central administration, and the VP for Finance in particular, saw the introduction
of the ES as an opportunity to move from what they saw as ‘old-fashioned’ and
400
ERICA WAGNER AND SUE NEWELL

‘amateurish’ practices accounting to what they considered a more corporate approach
to budgeting. The initial stance of the Financial Management team was that others
simply had to come around to their view of what was ‘best’ because they only tolerated
one deﬁnition of this. However, faculty found the corporate approach did not meet
their needs—it was not a ‘best practice’ from their perspective—and they ultimately
rebelled against the design imposition, declaring that they would not use the ES unless
their legacy accounting functionality was added back. In this case they were able to get
the project team to go back and ‘bolt on’ the legacy functionality so that they could
continue to manage their budgets in the way they considered ‘best’.
This suggests that rather than seeing ES as embedding ‘best practices’ it would be
better to see an ES as providing an opportunity for negotiated practice. Negotiated
practice depends on ﬁrst recognizing and then selectively accommodating competing
views of what is ‘best’ by adopting a cooperative approach that includes being willing to
compromise (see next section). Proactively managing this process, and identifying the
critical areas where compromise is needed around what is ‘best’, will likely smooth out
complex implementation efforts.
FROM CONSENSUS TO COMPROMISE
..................................................................................................................
Organization by common aims or reciprocity (compromise) represent opposing ways in
which problems are solved and goals achieved with the former being based on
participants having the same goal and the latter on their wanting different things
(Fuller 1978). In an organizational context it might be assumed that the best way to
achieve change is through establishing common aims—all buying-in to a common
vision. However, while organizations are built on common aims, it is dangerous to
assume that all parties will want the same thing over time and that if different goals
emerge it is just a matter of educating the dissenters so that they can ‘see the truth’
(Fuller 1978: 361). Moreover, the more stakeholders affected by a change initiative, the
more challenging it is to create and maintain common interests due to the diffuse
nature of the effort (Latour 1999) and due to differences in goals and beliefs about how
best to approach and solve a particular problem (Pfeffer 1992). These differences are
the inevitable result of specialization since this means there are groups with different
backgrounds and training and so different ‘thought worlds’ (Dougherty 1992). The
coexistence of these disparate views is particularly relevant when considering ES
implementations as a major form of organizational change because the software’s
integrated design encourages the institutionalization of a dominant perspective (i.e.
the best practice idea discussed above) across the organization while attempting to
silence other ways of working (Wagner and Newell 2004). As a result ES implementa-
tions are notorious for attempting to imbue a social order that impacts power relations
in a dictatorial manner—either all agree to the common vision or they keep their
dissenting views to themselves.
CHANGING THE STORY SURROUNDING ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS
401

However, given the existence of heterogeneous perspectives in an organization,
Fuller (1978) argues that it is important that one is sceptical of organizing through
common aims. Instead, he argues one should consider what the other party wants and
how to best negotiate with them. This suggests that in situations of interdependence
and divergence of goals and beliefs, it will be necessary to use power and inﬂuence to
get things done (Pfeffer 1992). If power and inﬂuence are not used there will be a
paralysis, reﬂecting ‘an inability to mobilize sufﬁcient political support and resources to
take action’ (Pfeffer 1992: 4). While it may be possible to move forward using hierar-
chical power to impose a particular decision, this will not in itself lead to successful
problem solving, since as Pfeffer notes (1992: 19) ‘a decision by itself changes nothing’.
For example, while senior managers can dictate that particular ES functionality be
implemented (e.g. the corporate budgeting method) this does not necessarily translate
into ES use, since there are many ways in which users can resist using the ES, at least as
it was intended (Bordreau and Robey 2005). Other means must, therefore, be found to
mobilize action in these situations of interdependence and capitalizing on the norm of
reciprocity is important. There is ‘no free lunch’ is an oft-quoted saying that deﬁnes the
norm of reciprocity which implies that we are obligated to future repayments of
favours, gifts, invitations, etc. received from others (Gouldner 1960). This is different
from a straightforward exchange, based on a market transaction, since the returned
favour is not explicitly speciﬁed. Rather, the favour implies a diffuse, generalized
obligation for repayment sometime in the future. This norm facilitates transactions
between individuals and groups over time and is extremely important in facilitating
organizational change (Pfeffer 1992). In a decision-making situation it suggests that
while each party must stand up for their goals and needs, they must at the same time be
aware of the needs and goals of others because at some time in the future, each might
want what the other party can give. Central to this form of working, then, is that each
party involved has an understanding of what makes the other tick—what are their
motivations and goals.
The focus on organizing by common aims was evident in the initial phase of the Uni
case, where the common aim among the internal stakeholders was improved adminis-
trative efﬁciency and the common aim for the Uni-Vision partnership was the devel-
opment of an ES system to modernize the administrative practices of higher education
institutions. None of the parties possessed the skills to create these goals alone.
However, by joining forces the entities expected to be able to create the desired solution
by participating in organization by common aims. While the impetus for creating such
relationships, either internally or externally is, therefore, common aims, over time the
extent to which consensus is truly felt in more than name alone—where it informs
the actions of those involved—will ebb and ﬂow. Thus, during controversial episodes,
the common aim among those involved did not prevent problems arising because of
conﬂicting interests that threatened to derail the project; there was a real danger that
the Uni-Vision partnership would be disbanded and that a system would be produced
that faculty departments would not use. The only way to avoid these negative outcomes
402
ERICA WAGNER AND SUE NEWELL

was for the parties to begin to negotiate on the basis of reciprocity rather than common
aims.
For example, underneath the common aim of changing administrative practice the
Financial Management leader developed a narrative around ‘professionalizing practice’
and was able to enrol the project team around this storyline. However, this meant that
they designed the grant accounting functionality based on corporate budgeting tech-
niques that were directly at odds with legacy faculty accounting methods. It was only
during the post-implementation ‘use phase’ of the project that faculty interests surfaced
through narratives of betrayal and demands for design modiﬁcations. While initially
this opposing narrative was dismissed as ‘amateurish’, eventually it was recognized that
ignoring the demands embedded in this narrative would not help in creating the
working ES that all were seeking. The result was that the team worked with faculty
to develop a hybrid ES involving post-installation customization. This hybrid was
negotiated once the decision makers involved recognized reciprocal interests, and
stopped trying to impose a common aim (the FM’s vision). Similarly, the tension
between Uni and Vision was resolved when both parties began to ‘give a little’,
recognizing and accepting as legitimate the narratives of the other that were initially
seen as unacceptable. For example, Uni came to realize that the market for a university-
focused ES was actually very small for Vision, helping Uni to understand why Vision
did not want to put too much effort into developing specialized functionality for this
market. Realizing this, they then agreed to help Vision develop some functionality
around grant applications that Uni itself did not need because they had their own
more-than-adequate system in place, but which they recognized that Vision would
need if they were going to sell the ES as a university-focused system. This led Vision to
compromise on the timeline and put in the resources that were needed to meet the
deadline that Uni was working towards.
While it is possible in such situations for one party to impose its design requirements
as the ‘common aim’ through the use of hierarchical power, this approach is likely to be
limited (Pfeffer 1981). For example, as the client in the relationship, Uni could have
withdrawn from the partnership agreement with Vision. However, this would not have
helped them to develop the integrated system that they sought. Similarly, the team
could have insisted on sticking to the corporate budgeting approach, ignoring faculty
demands for legacy accounting functionality. However, the likelihood of creating a
stable post-implementation environment where employees actually used the software
as intended was small (Boudreau and Robey 2005), especially given the setting where
the use of absolute power is antithetical to the ﬁefdom-like structure of universities
(Pollock 1999; Cornford 2000; Allen and Kern 2001). In such contexts, attempting to
impose a software system on different users, without a consideration of their interests
and demands, is likely to, at best, create a system that will be only partially used and, at
worst, lead to complete system failure. Instead, what is important is to ‘give a little’ so
that the demands of users are met, even though decision makers may believe that these
demands are based on ‘old thinking’. One way of enabling this compromise is to bring
forward some of the valued legacy practices to ensure buy-in to the change. This may
CHANGING THE STORY SURROUNDING ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS
403

not be ‘rational’ from the perspective of the project team, in the sense that the
underpinning legacy thinking may be unnecessary in the changed organizational
context, but it is necessary to ensure the commitment and motivation of those who
need to be enticed to use the system. Such ‘irrationality’, argues Brunnson (1985), is
often the key to effective decision implementation in organizations.
In other words, achieving a working information system does not mean that
consensus must be sought or achieved in all instances as is articulated in the principle
of common aims. Rather, the important thing appears to be coordinating action that
will allow goals to be achieved, even if this involves compromise along the way. Such
compromise depends on reciprocity to produce social order and doesn’t expect a
shared aim as long as a solution can be negotiated. Moreover, this compromise is
likely to occur in the post-implementation use phase, having implications therefore for
the issue of user participation.
FROM PRE-IMPLEMENTATION TO
POST-IMPLEMENTATION PARTICIPATION
..................................................................................................................
User acceptance is seen to be the number one critical success factor for software
projects, and user participation can help to achieve this (Mumford and Weir 1979;
Mumford 1983, 1995, 2000; Davis and Olsen 1985). Moreover, user participation
continues to be seen as critical in relation to ES implementation success (Holland
and Light 1999; Parr, Shanks, and Darke 1999; Markus et al. 2000; Rosario 2000;
Sumner 2000; Nah et al. 2001; Nah, Lau, and Kuang 2003). Participation has been
described as ‘institutionalized practice’ (Howcroft and Wilson 2003) so ubiquitous is its
emphasis within the IS literature, dating back to the early work of the Tavistock
Institute in the UK. Mumford (1983), for example, assumed that it is important to
create IS that take account of people’s social as well as technical needs and that user
participation is necessary to achieve this. However, we need to consider how this can be
realized in the context of packaged software when users cannot actually be involved in
software design, precisely because the design is relatively ﬁxed by the package. Thus,
historically early user participation was considered necessary in order to specify the
system requirements; after all the system was being speciﬁcally designed for a particular
group of users. However, today’s off-the-shelf packages come embedded with ‘best
practices’ which organizations are encouraged to adopt by vendors and consultants
rather than change the package to follow users’ existing practices. This raises questions
about the importance and usefulness of user participation in the early stages of an ES
project given that the system design is pre-speciﬁed and non-negotiable, at least if the
adopting organization wants to follow vendor advice and implement the ‘vanilla’
system.
404
ERICA WAGNER AND SUE NEWELL

Based on such analysis, Wagner and Newell (2007) identiﬁed a series of limits to user
participation during the initial conﬁguration/customization phase including:
Legacy thinking. Users ﬁnd it difﬁcult during the early stages of requirements
deﬁnition to see beyond their current practices and anticipate how things could be
done differently if they had new tools to enable more integration within and across
functions. This is because much work practice is rooted in everyday interactions
(Suchman 1987) so that trying to appreciate a new way of working by just looking at
the technical system is difﬁcult. Add this to the users’ limited technical knowledge
(Beath and Orlikowski 1994) and it becomes understandable why, when users are
involved in the conﬁguration/customization phase, their main concern is that the new
system will enable them to do what they did before—with ‘as little change as possible’.
Arguably, given such ‘legacy thinking’, user involvement during the design stage can
actually restrict the potential for the new system to be used in transforming ways. This
problem is not traditionally experienced in software development because bespoke
software is being developed speciﬁcally to support organizational processes (even if
these have been previously reengineered). This highlights a key difference between the
traditional and packaged IS development lifecycle and the implications for user
participation.
‘Vanilla’ implementation. Since the option to purchase software was ﬁrst recognized
in the literature so too was the question raised as to whether one should implement an
unmodiﬁed (‘vanilla’) package, or enhance and customize the purchased package
(Rands 1992). While the new generation ES packages do allow conﬁguration options,
the general advice from software companies and consultants is to avoid, as far as
possible, customizations to the package (changes to the actual software code), and so go
for a vanilla implementation. Given this context, does it not beg the question of the
point of user involvement if users are not listened to because of the desire for a ‘vanilla’
implementation? Instead it may actually create frustration and resentment, thus
eliminating one of the primary goals of participation: to reduce user resistance
(Wong and Tate 1994). In the instances where ‘vanilla’ implementation is a project
goal, user participation beyond the consultative level (informing users of what is
happening rather than actively involving them in the process—Avison and Fitzgerald
1995) during the conﬁguration/customization phase might in some circumstances be
counter-productive. Of course, such a problem would not surface during traditional IS
development.
Motivation. A ﬁnal problem during the pre-implementation phase is actually getting
users interested in participation throughout the initiative. Lack of engagement is a
reﬂection of human nature, as depicted by the situated learning school, where we only
become interested in something when it is salient to us and when we can actually begin
to learn about the technology through practice and participation (Wenger 1998). Even
genuine attempts involving users will fall short because of more pressing matters that
are in front of them at the time (Wagner and Piccoli 2007). Users who are busy at work
will have their attention captured by immediate responsibilities and the ES will remain
low in salience, failing to fully engage their attention. In addition, a temporal element
CHANGING THE STORY SURROUNDING ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS
405

needs to be considered, involving the examination of how closely the content provided
impacts on daily life. According to elaboration likelihood (Petty and Cacioppo 1986),
individuals have to be both motivated and able to process information in order for it to
become salient and move them into action. Thus, when an ES completion is imminent
and the reality of new work practices becomes apparent, users begin to evaluate the
new system more closely and signiﬁcant issues are raised, often leading to user
resistance and the need for post-implementation modiﬁcations. In the Uni case this
problem was very evident—users may have shown up at meetings where the develop-
ing ES was described, but it was not until actual implementation that users actually
started to raise questions about the functionality. This was a surprise to the project
team leader who had, up until this point, assumed that all stakeholders were happy
with the ES that was being developed.
Given these difﬁculties of user participation in the initial conﬁguration/customiza-
tion phase organizations should consider how users may be encouraged to participate
in the post-implementation environment. If we take the notions of salience during
situated learning as our point of departure with regards to the engagement of human
resources during ES projects, then the framework for effective user participation
changes. Modiﬁcations occur in the post-implementation period, when users ﬁnally
become engaged in making the software work for them—in the context of their
everyday situated learning from practice.
This leads us to question high levels of continuous user participation throughout the
duration of the initiative, especially when consensus is so difﬁcult to achieve given
the political nature of organizations (Howcroft and Wilson 2003). Furthermore,
the ‘whole house’ scope of ES implementations means that consensus participation
(Mumford 1983) would require an unwieldy amount of user participation during pre-
implementation (reﬂected in the discussion above about the importance of compro-
mise rather than assuming common aims can be identiﬁed and maintained). Given the
integrated nature of an ES, involving users from all the different areas is likely to lead to
a situation where agreement is difﬁcult, if not impossible, to achieve. Different groups
will want different things included/excluded and if consensus is sought this is likely to
lead to a stalemate (Wagner and Newell 2006) or to the development of a conﬁguration
that is initially seen to be ‘perfect’ and yet ‘falls apart’ in use. The issue here is that users
(and designers) are attempting to create an ES that suits current demands, but ignore
the fact that demands change rapidly today and/or that once a system is ‘in use’, users
will in any case adapt/modify and develop ‘work arounds’ so that, through a process of
situated learning, any system will change from its intended use pattern (Suchman 1987;
Orlikowski 1996). Therefore, it may be more advantageous both in terms of resource
time and eventual buy-in to ﬁnd out how the basic system is used before deciding what
customizations are going to add real value, beyond those that are initially agreed to be
essential to accommodate unique organizational nomenclature.
This indicates that it may be sensible to treat the ‘vanilla’ system as a prototype—
‘simple and relatively quick to create, amend and rebuild’ (Dearnley and Mayhew 1983:
41). From this perspective, the prototype is a system ‘in use’ (Avison and Fitzgerald
406
ERICA WAGNER AND SUE NEWELL

1995) that will continue to evolve as the organization does. This is in keeping with the
idea of growth and emergence as opposed to design (Truex, Baskerville, and Klein
1999) where user acceptance will never be complete because organizations are con-
stantly changing. As such, ES development needs to be seen as a continuous process of
evolution with no ﬁnal design being possible or warranted. User participation from this
perspective may not be constrained to the pre-implementation phase but may also be
considered in the context of use, both in terms of informal learning and improvisation
(Orlikowski 1996) but also in terms of formal processes of continuous and iterative ES
development.
FROM IMPLEMENTATION/USE TO CYCLES
OF IMPLEMENTATION/USE
..................................................................................................................
The above discussion suggests that an ES implementation is best not viewed as a one-
time process but rather as a series of cycles of implementation/use with reﬂection and
learning occurring during each cycle so that gradually the ES becomes more embedded
and adapted to the particular context of use. In relation to an ES the implementation
phase of the cycle involves making decisions about what to conﬁgure and what to
customize. During the cycles of conﬁguration/customization and use the reality of the
new system certainly becomes salient and users will inevitably become more interested
as they begin to learn from their situated practice. During these iterations users will
really look at what the new system offers and be concerned about whether it makes
their job easier or more difﬁcult. Where the new system is seen to make their job
difﬁcult, there will be signiﬁcant user resistance, as in Uni with time-phased budgeting.
Two issues stand out if we see ES adoption as cycles of conﬁguration/customization
and use—selective engagement and resources allocation.
Selective Engagement
In the post-implementation environment it is much easier to engage users effectively.
This does not necessarily imply that users should not be engaged in consultative
participation during the initial conﬁguration/customization phase of the implementa-
tion since this is in any case likely to be both politically important and necessary for the
intelligence function of the project team (Kawalek and Wood-Harper 2002). What it
does mean is that there are limits to user participation in the early stages of an ES
implementation, as discussed above, while once they have to actually use the system
and begin to learn about its advantages and limitations from their situated practice
they are much more likely to want and be able to have their voices heard. At ﬁrst
consideration, thinking about involving users after installation of the software seems
CHANGING THE STORY SURROUNDING ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS
407

unrealistic and expensive but we can introduce the notion of selective engagement as
an additional form of participation that would augment the existing levels of partici-
pation (Dearnley and Mayhew 1983; Mumford 1983; Avison and Fitzgerald 1995).
Engaging users selectively in the post-implementation use phase is likely to be particu-
larly important and productive in terms of creating a viable, working ES.
Others have shown that analysts don’t do a good job of hearing users during
requirements deﬁnition (Alvarez and Urla 2002). This is in part due to the storytelling
approach users adopt when talking about their requirements where they share stories
about their current activities and point out limitations, challenges, and highlights of
their business practices. This is a reﬂection of the situated embeddedness of everyday
work practices (Lave and Wenger 1991; Wenger 1998). However, analysts discount this
information as superﬂuous and become frustrated when users cannot list their require-
ments in a more linear, rule-based manner. Analysts fail to recognize the extent to
which rules of action do not proscribe practice, since each episode of action is unique
and in some way dependent on the meaning that actors determine, rather than on
predeﬁned causal connections (Garﬁnkel 1986).
Despite the wisdom of conceptual modelling such as Soft Systems Methodology
(Checkland 1981)—see Chapter 4—as an aid in information requirements determination
(cf. Galliers 1987) many analysts still discount these ‘stories’ during pre-implementation.
It is easier to ‘hear’ the users when there are tangible products/processes/functions to refer
back to and users are working in the new environment. If users have migrated to the
ES environment, they will likely tell stories about their experiences in that environment
and highlight what they feel is lacking both in terms of what they used to have and of new
functionality that might be incomplete. This is not to argue that requirements deﬁnition
should be avoided during the initial conﬁguration/customization phase. Indeed, this is
necessary, both in terms of facilitating users to move away from ‘legacy thinking’ and the
political necessities associated with system ‘ownership’. Rather, this is to say that sticking
more closely to the vanilla implementation may be preferable—as long as key actors are
willing to engage selectively in the post-implementation engagement. Doing so will
highlight that which is non-negotiable from the users’ perspective and that which is not.
Determining non-negotiable requests is much easier in the post-implementation
environment when users will highlight that which is most likely to lead to a rejection of
the system. The power of an implemented system is not to be underestimated in terms
of persuading users to make it work.
Resource Allocation
If we see implementation as a series of cycles of conﬁguration/customization and use
then it becomes important to ensure that resources are allocated to these cycles, rather
than front-loading resources to the ﬁrst cycle only. In addition, budgeting for post-
implementation work efforts can aid in resource-intensive activities like data cleaning.
408
ERICA WAGNER AND SUE NEWELL

Of course, prior to ‘go-live’, it is important to try and clean up the data from legacy
systems in order, for example, to avoid duplication of records. However, it is likely to be
impossible or at least extremely time consuming to get the data completely ‘clean’. As
users actually use the system, they will be more focused and able, iteratively, to pick it
up and rectify any problems with the data in order to gradually improve the database
that everyone is working with.
CONCLUSIONS
..................................................................................................................
In this chapter we have highlighted the problem of identifying ‘best practice’. Instead
we have advocated seeing the introduction of an ES as cycles of learning where
practices are negotiated through time. This is because trying to ﬁgure out what is
‘best’ from the packaged software and ‘best’ from existing practice is going to be an
iterative process that is unlikely to be easily worked through in advance of actual
implementation and use. This is because users themselves need to participate in this
decision process and for a number of reasons—legacy thinking, lack of engagement and
motivation—this participation is going to be limited prior to actual implementation
and situated learning through use. We therefore advocate seeing an ES in terms of an
iterative experience life cycle where phases of conﬁguration/customization and imple-
mentation/use will alternate cyclically, gradually helping to exploit the functionality of
the software. Getting users to buy in to the ﬁnal product and empowering them to take
an active role in their work lives are goals of participation efforts (Mumford 1983).
Post-implementation engagement is an effective way of garnering user interest and
assistance, at least in respect of an ES. Given this iterative cycle of ES exploitation in the
post-implementation period, ﬁnding ways to speed up and more effectively facilitate
this iteration through user participation would seem to be a signiﬁcant opportunity for
organizations. The problem is that if the importance of this post-implementation user
participation is not legitimized it is likely to be less effective and exploitation will be
slower (just as post-build additions to one’s house often get postponed) although
adaptations will eventually happen (just as post-build tinkering with one’s house
happen). This post-implementation is particularly problematic in an ES implementa-
tion because members of the core project team who could usefully facilitate user
participation during this period may not be available. This may be for a number of
reasons—because the team has been disbanded, or because team members have left to
take advantage of their ES implementation experience, or simply because, given the
long duration of many ES projects, the project team is ‘burnt out’.
In the earlier cycles, attempting to get users to appreciate and use all the potential
functionality of the new system appears to be a mistaken or unrealistic target. A more
realistic goal appears to be providing users with a system that makes their jobs not
signiﬁcantly more difﬁcult and at the same time provides them with the prospect that
they will be able to do even more in the future. This incremental or piecemeal approach
CHANGING THE STORY SURROUNDING ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS
409

to ES implementation (Robey, Ross, and Boudreau 2002) has been criticized because, in
the post-implementation environment, resources are not typically provided to source
the effort that is required to continue the development process. However, we argue that
this is a matter of planning for resources to be available in the post-implementation
environment, rather than a fundamental problem with the piecemeal approach. In-
deed, we would argue, based on our research, that such an approach is likely to be more
realistic and more successful, provided that these resources can be made available.
So what are the practical implications of our rethinking analysis? First, it suggests
that it is important for managers to recognize ES as a long-term learning process where
beneﬁts will be emergent as users learn to appropriate the ES as part of their ongoing
daily work practices in ways that help them to do their jobs better. This learning
process is dependent on those involved recognizing that there is not one ‘best’ way to
do something and that others will have alternative views of what is best. Negotiating
practice through time as part of a learning orientation can help organizations exploit an
ES for their unique beneﬁt, rather than be straitjacketed into an ES. We might call this a
‘sand-box’ approach to ES implementation, since it recognizes the potential of learning
from ‘playing’ with the system rather than training users to press certain buttons in a
rote learning fashion that will severely restrict the ability to appropriate beneﬁt over
time.
Another implication is that, while IT-enabled organizational change involving
partnerships and projects affecting multiple internal stakeholders, in their inception,
are built on common aims, there will nevertheless be numerous controversial moments
that are faced, when opposing voices emerge which indicate divergent opinions about
how to achieve the common aims, or even different aims. How these controversies are
dealt with is likely to be critical in relation to whether a working system is produced. In
this respect our analysis indicates that it is important for managers to be aware of the
emergence of opposing voices and not to dismiss or ignore them, however irrational
they may appear from their particular perspective. In Uni, for example, the project
implementation team was able to initially marginalize the dissenting voices about the
problems of time-phased budgeting and design a system which ignored the concerns
being expressed. However, in this case the dissension came from a powerful group in
the organization and it became clear that it was not going to be possible to ignore them,
at least if they wanted the ES to be fully used. Faculty in a university setting may be
different in this respect from employees in other kinds of organization. Indeed, the
departmental administrators had been unable to make their voices heard when they
were expressing similar concerns and it was only the involvement of the faculty that
ﬁnally led to functionality being added as a customization. In other organizational
contexts, it may be easier to continue to ignore or dismiss the dissenting voices. This is
likely to lead to a situation where the ES is implemented but remains under- or unused,
explaining perhaps why many ES implementations do not meet expectations and often
involve substantial employee workarounds.
A ﬁnal implication of our rethinking of ES implementations is that in some organiza-
tions, as in Uni, select customizations will be necessary if the ES is to be made to work
410
ERICA WAGNER AND SUE NEWELL

because these valued legacy practices cannot be met through conﬁguration alone. This
goes against all the advice about avoiding customization to ensure the beneﬁts of
upgrades, etc. (Alshawi, Themistocleous, and Almadani 2004). However, our ﬁndings
indicate that customization to a system is sometimes necessary to achieving a working
IS. In fact, if done strategically customization can ease tensions, and sustain employees’
commitment and motivation through the complex transitional phases that are part of
any organizational change initiative.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Ideas presented in this chapter have been previously published in the following publications:
Wagner, E., and Newell, S. (2004). ‘“Best” for Whom? The Tension between Best Practice
ERP Packages and the Epistemic Cultures of an Ivy League University’, Journal of Strategic
Information Systems, 13(4): 91–6.
———— (2006). ‘Repairing ERP: Producing Social Order to Create a Working Information
System’, Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 42(1): 40–57.
———— (2007). ‘Exploring the Importance of Participation in the Post-implementation
Period of an Enterprise System Project: A Neglected Area’, Journal of the Association
for Information Systems, 8(10): article 32.
REFERENCES
Abrahamson, E. (1996). ‘Management Fashion’, Academy of Management Review, 21: 254–85.
Aladwani, A. (2002). ‘IT Project Uncertainty, Planning and Success: An Empirical Investiga-
tion from Kuwait’, Information Technology and People, 15: 210–26.
Allen, D. K., and Kern, T. (2001). ‘Enterprise Resource Planning Implementation: Stories of
Power, Politics and Resistance’, in N. L. Russo, B. Fitzgerald, and J. I. Degross (eds.),
Realigning Research and Practice in Information Systems Development: The Social and
Organizational Perspective. Boston, MA: Kluwer, 149–54.
Alshawi, S., Themistocleous, M., and Almadani, R. (2004). ‘Integrating Diverse ERP Systems:
A Case Study’, Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 17(6): 454–62.
Alvarez, R., and Urla, J. (2002). ‘Tell me a Good Story: Using Narrative Analysis to Examine
Information Requirements Interviews during an ERP Implementation’, SIGMIS Database,
33(1): 38–52.
Avison, D., and Fitzgerald, G. (1995). Information Systems Development: Methodologies,
Techniques and Tools. 2nd edn., London: McGraw-Hill.
Beath, C., and Orlikowski, W. (1994). ‘The Contradictory Structure of Systems Development
Methodologies: Deconstructing the IS-User Relationships in Information Engineering’,
Information Systems Research, 5(4): 350–77.
Boudreau, M.-C., and Robey, D. (2005). ‘Enacting Integrated Information Technology: A
Human Agency Perspective’, Organization Science, 16: 3–19.
CHANGING THE STORY SURROUNDING ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS
411

Brunsson, N. (1985). The Irrational Organization: Irrationality as the Basis for Organizational
Action and Change. New York: John Wiley.
Checkland, P. B. (1981). Systems Thinking, Systems Practice. Chichester: Wiley.
Cook, S. D. N., and Brown, J. S. (1999). ‘Bridging Epistemologies: The Generative Dance
between Organizational Knowledge and Organizational Knowing’, Organization Science,
10: 381–400.
Cooke, D., Gelman, L., and Peterson, W. J. (2001). ERP Trends (Report No. R-1292-01-RR).
New York: The Conference Board.
Cornford, J. (2000). ‘The Virtual University is . . . the University Made Concrete?’, Informa-
tion, Communication and Society, 3: 508–25.
Davenport, T. (1998). ‘Putting the Enterprise into the Enterprise System’, Harvard Business
Review, 76(4): 121–31.
——(2000). Mission Critical: Realizing the Promise of Enterprise Systems. Boston, MA:
Harvard Business School Press.
Davis, G., and Olsen, M. (1985). Management Information Systems. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Dearnley, P. A., and Mayhew, P. J. (1983). ‘In Favor of System Prototypes and their Integra-
tion into the System Development Life Cycle’, Computer Journal, 26(1).
Dougherty, D. (1992). ‘Interpretive Barriers to Successful Product Innovation in Large Firms’,
Organization Science, 3: 179–202.
Fuller, L. L. (1978). ‘The Forms and Limits of Adjudication’, Harvard Law Review, 92:
394–404.
Galliers, R. D. (1987). Information Analysis: Selected Readings. Wokingham: Addison-Wesley.
Garﬁnkel, H. (ed.) (1986). Ethnomethodological Studies of Work. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
Gouldner, A. (1960). ‘The Norm of Reciprocity: A Preliminary Statement’, American Socio-
logical Review, 25: 161–78.
Holland, C., and Light, B. (1999). ‘A Critical Success Factors Model for ERP Implementation’,
IEEE Software, 16(3): 30–6.
Howcroft, D., and Wilson, M. (2003). ‘Participation: “Bounded Freedom” or Hidden Con-
straints on User Involvement’, New Technology, Work and Employment, 18(1): 2–19.
Kawalek, P., and Wood-Harper, A. T. (2002). ‘The Finding of Thorns: User Participation in
Enterprise System Implementation’, ACM SIGMIS DataBase, 33(1): 13–22.
Latour, B. (1999). ‘On Recalling ANT’, in J. Law and J. Hassard (eds.), Actor Network Theory
and After. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 15–25.
Lave, J., and Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lee, Z., and Lee, J. (2000). ‘An ERP Implementation Case Study from a Knowledge Transfer
Perspective’, Journal of Information Technology, 15: 281–8.
Markus, M. L., Axline, S., Petrie, D., and Tanis, C. (2000). ‘Learning from Adopters’ Experi-
ences with ERP: Problems Encountered and Success Achieved’, Journal of Information
Technology, 15: 245–65.
Meyer, J., and Rowan, B. (1977). ‘Institutionalized Organizations: Formal Structure as Myth
and Ceremony’, American Journal of Sociology, 83: 340–63.
Mumford, E. (1983). ‘Participative Systems Design: Practice and Theory’, Journal of Occupa-
tional Psychology, 4(1): 47–57.
——(1995). Effective Systems Design and Requirements Analysis. Basingstoke: MacMillan.
412
ERICA WAGNER AND SUE NEWELL

——(2000). ‘Socio-technical Design: An Unfulﬁlled Promise or a Future Opportunity? ’, in
R. Baskerville, J. Stage, and J. DeGross (eds.), Organizational and Social Perspectives on
Information Technology. London: Kluwer, 33–46.
——and Weir, D. (1979). Computer Systems in Work Design: The ETHICS Method. New York:
Wiley.
Nah, F. F., Lau J. L., and Kuang, J. (2001). ‘Critical Factors for Successful Implementation of
Enterprise Systems’, Business Process Management, 7(3): 285–96.
——Zuckweller, K., and Lau, J. (2003). ‘ES Implementation: Chief Information Ofﬁcers’
Perceptions of Critical Success Factors’, International Journal of Human-Computer Inter-
actions, 16(1): 5–22.
Newell, S., Huang, J., and Tansley, C. (2004). ‘Social Capital and Knowledge Integration in an
ES Project Team: The Importance of Bridging and Bonding’, British Journal of Manage-
ment, 15: 43–57.
——Cooprider, J., David, G., Edelman, L., and Logan, T. (2005). ‘Analyzing Different
Strategies to Enterprise System Adoption: Reengineering-Led versus Quick Deployment’,
International Journal of Enterprise Information Systems, 1(2): 1–16.
Nicolini, D. (2007). ‘Stretching out and Expanding Medical Practices: The Case of Telemedi-
cine’, Human Relations, 60(6): 889–920.
O’Leary, D. E. (2000). Enterprise Resource Planning Systems: Systems, Life Cycle, Electronic
Commerce, and Risk. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Orlikowski, W. (1996). ‘Improvising Organizational Transformation over Time: A Situated
Change Perspective’, Information Systems Research, 7(1): 63–92.
——(2000). ‘Using Technology and Constituting Structures: A Practice Lens for Studying
Technology in Organizations’, Organization Science, 11: 404–28.
Parr, A., Shanks, G., and Darke, P. (1999). ‘Identiﬁcation of Necessary Factors for Successful
Implementation of ERP Systems’, in O. Ngwenyama, L. Introna, M. Myers, and J. DeCross
(eds.), New Information Technologies in Organizational Process. Boston, MA: Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 99–119.
Petty, R. E., and Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). Communication and Persuasion: Central and
Peripheral Routes to Attitude Change. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Pfeffer, J. (1981). Power in Organizations. Marshﬁeld, MA: Pitman.
——(1992). Managing with Power: Politics and Inﬂuence in Organizations. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard Business School Press.
Pollock, N. (1999). ‘ “The Virtual University” as “Accurate and Timely Information” ’,
Information, Communication and Society, 3: 1–17.
Rands, T. (1992). ‘The Key Role of Applications Software Make-or-Buy Decisions’, Journal of
Strategic Information Systems, 1(4): 215–23.
Robbins-Gioia (2001). The Robbins-Gioia Survey at <http://www.robbinsgioia.com/>.
Robey, D., and Boudreau, M. (1999). ‘Accounting for the Contradictory Organizational
Consequences of Information Technology’, Information Systems Research, 10: 167–85.
——Ross, J. W., and Boudreau, M. C. (2002). ‘Learning to Implement Enterprise Systems: An
Exploratory Study of the Dialectics of Change’, Journal of Management Information
Systems, 19: 17–46.
Rosario, J. (2000). ‘On the Leading Edge: Critical Success Factors in ERP Implementation
Projects’, Business World.
Scott, J., and Vessey, I. (2002). ‘Managing Risks in Enterprise Systems Implementations’,
Communications of the ACM, 45(4): 74–81.
CHANGING THE STORY SURROUNDING ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS
413

Scott, S. V., and Wagner, E. L. (2003). ‘Networks, Negotiations, and New Times: The
Implementation of Enterprise Resource Planning into an Academic Administration’,
Information and Organization, 13(4): 285–313.
Scott, W. R. (2000). Institutions and Organizations. London: Sage.
Shanks, G., and Seddon, P. (2000). Editorial. Journal of Information Technology, 15: 243–4.
Suchman, L. (1987). Plans and Situated Actions: The Problem of Human/Machine Communi-
cation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sumner, M. (2000). ‘Risk Factors in Enterprise-wide/ERP Projects’, Journal of Information
Technology, 15: 317–27.
Truex, D., Baskerville, R., and Klein, H. (1999). ‘Growing Systems in Emergent Organiza-
tions’, Communications of the ACM, 42(8): 117–23.
Wagner, E., and Newell, S. (2004). ‘ “Best” for Whom? The Tension between Best Practice
ERP Packages and the Epistemic Cultures of an Ivy League University’, Journal of Strategic
Information Systems, 13(4): 305–28.
————(2006). ‘Repairing ERP: Producing Social Order to Create a Working Information
System’, Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 42(1): 40–57.
————(2007). ‘Exploring the Importance of Participation in the Post-implementation
Period of an ES Project: A Neglected Area’, Journal of the AIS, 8(10): article 32.
——and Piccoli, G. (2007). ‘A Call to Engagement: Moving beyond User Participation in
Order to Achieve Successful Information Systems Design’, Communications of the ACM,
50(12): 51–5.
Walsham, G. (1993). Interpreting Information Systems in Organizations. London: John Wiley
& Sons.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning and Identity. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Wong, E., and Tate, G. (1994). ‘A Study of User Participation in Information Systems
Development’, Journal of Information Technology, 9: 51–60.
Yoo, Y., Lyytinen, K., and Brente, N. (2007). ‘An Institutional Analysis of Pluralistic
Responses to Enterprise Systems Implementations’, ICIS Proceedings. Montreal, Canada.
414
ERICA WAGNER AND SUE NEWELL

c h a p t e r 1 6
...............................................................................................
A MULTI-THEORETIC
APPROACH TO IT
GOVERNANCE: THE NEED
FOR COMMITMENT AS
WELL AS ALIGNMENT
...............................................................................................
SUE NEWELL AND CYNTHIA CLARK WILLIAMS
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
it investment accounts for a signiﬁcant proportion of the operational budget and
capital investment made by many organizations. For example, Computer Economics,
which conducts annual surveys of IT spending, stafﬁng, and technology trends, shows
that while IT spending reduces in response to a slowdown in the economy, growth of
IT operational budgets was still at 4 per cent in 2008, even when GDP was only growing
at about 1 per cent (Computer Economics 2008/9). The same survey showed that
organizations spent on average 1.5 per cent of revenue on IT in 2008, with median IT
spending per user averaging $6,667. These ﬁgures demonstrate the importance of IT to
contemporary business.
Since the importance of IT is not a hotly debated issue today, some have argued that
IT is no longer of strategic signiﬁcance for organizations (Carr 2003). From this
perspective, IT is like water or electricity—it is essential to the running of a business
but does not differentiate between businesses. It is just a commodity. However, given
that studies also show that many IT projects are over budget and/or delivered late and
more importantly perhaps fail to deliver on the expected business beneﬁts, then
exploiting the potential from one’s IT investment would seem to be of major strategic
signiﬁcance for an organization. For example, the Standish Group, an organization that
has studied the effectiveness of software projects since 1994, recently reported some

improvement over the last ﬁfteen years. In 1994, it reported that 16.2 per cent of
software projects could be classiﬁed as successful in the sense of being on time, on
budget, and meeting user requirements. By 2006, the group reported that 35 per cent of
projects could be so classiﬁed (Standish Group 2006), still leaving 65 per cent of IT
projects classiﬁed as not wholly successful.
In addition to these IT project problems, there are also many examples of problems
associated with the mishandling of data that have been accumulated on an organiza-
tion’s IT system, once operational (see website <http://www.privacyrights.org/ar/
ChronDataBreaches.htm#CP> for a catalogue of data breaches). Some companies are
careless in the extreme over the precautions they take in relation to personal data
(Solove 2008), an issue of poor governance. As an example of a data breach, HM
Revenues and Customs in the UK caused an unnecessary data interface when they sent,
by courier, two CDs full of personal information (i.e. name, address, national insurance
number, bank details) to the National Audit Ofﬁce. Unfortunately, the CDs were
intercepted, compromising the privacy and identity of 25 million Britons. As another
example, TJX Companies, owner of retailer T.J. Maxx in the USA, maintained credit
card information on unsecured wireless networks that were tapped into with the loss of
a signiﬁcant amount of customer data. These data breaches continue to happen despite
the requirement of the US Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002 that companies put in place
systems to protect data, through reducing the numbers of interfaces through which
data must pass, thus reducing the opportunity for human error in the ﬂow of data
(Maurizio, Girolami, and Jones 2007). Under this law, public companies must also
attest, annually, to the veracity of their internal controls over the privacy protections of
this data and whether they have any material weaknesses in their systems frameworks
(<http://www.sec.gov>). These examples of regular IT project and data-mishandling
problems suggest that while IT may be generally important to most contemporary
businesses, how it is exploited to support the business strategy (or not) will determine
what value it has for an organization. In this sense, IT is very different to water or
electricity—although current environmental concerns suggest that the use of water and
electricity may itself become strategically important to environmental and social
governance metrics.
Much research in IS has looked at what contributes to the poor performance of
many IT projects and/or improper use of data produced by IT systems. This research
has shown that organizational factors such as the available IT capabilities, support of
top management, alignment between IT and business strategy, change management
capabilities, and resources are crucial to ensuring healthy performance of IT (Holland
and Light 1999; Holland, Light, and Gibson 1999; Markus, Tanis, and Fenema 2000;
Markus et al. 2000; Parr and Shanks 2000; Sousa and Collado 2000; Sumner 2000; Nah,
Lau, and Kuang 2001; Nah, Zuckweller, and Lau 2003; Bajwa, Garcia, and Mooney
2004). While research looking at the individual organizational factors that support IT
implementation and use is important, we can also take a step back from this level of
analysis and look at the ways decisions get made about IT in different organizations.
Focusing on how decisions about IT—both current and future—are made, who makes
416
SUE NEWELL AND CYNTHIA CLARK WILLIAMS

these decisions and what rules and norms guide decisions is a fundamental ﬁrst step as
this will likely inﬂuence whether the necessary organizational structures are put in
place to support the strategic adoption and use of IT. In looking at the allocation of IT
‘decision rights’ (how decisions are made and by whom), we are examining IT
governance (Sambamurthy and Zmud 1999). In this chapter, we are also interested
in broadening the notion of IT governance to look at the overall rights and responsi-
bilities associated with the use, storage, retrieval, and collection of data.
In examining IT governance we draw upon the more general corporate governance
literature as well as the speciﬁc IT governance literature. Corporate governance is
concerned with ensuring that there is correspondence between the interests of man-
agers, as decision makers, and the interests of shareholders, as owners (cf. Eisenhardt
1989). In other words, the focus is on how to ensure that managers make decisions that
maximize the interests of shareholders, rather than merely their own self-interests. In
this chapter, we combine aspects of the stakeholder and stockholder views of the ﬁrm,
and consider governance to be about ensuring that IT decisions are made in the
interests of the long-term sustainability of the organization. In this sense, governance
relates to how to ensure ethical decision making and improved corporate social
responsibility so that decisions are made which focus on the sustainability of a
company. Sustainability is deﬁned as meeting the needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs (Brundtland
1987). Sustainability, it is argued, is dependent on expanding the criteria used for
measuring organizational success. A popular approach was articulated by John Elk-
ington (1994) who coined the term ‘triple-bottom line’ to indicate that organizations
should be measured according to three criteria—ﬁnancial, social, and environmental
performance (or proﬁt, people, and planet)—rather than merely ﬁnancial. In this
chapter we discuss IT governance in relation to its ability to ensure such sustainability
through balancing the need to make a proﬁt with respect for the rights of people and
the planet.1 In other words, we focus on how the IT governance structures and
processes ensure the interests of all stakeholders are taken into consideration with
respect to the decisions that are made regarding IT and whether those decisions are in
sync with the social, ﬁnancial, and environment context within which the company
does business.
EXAMINING TWO DIMENSIONS
OF IT GOVERNANCE
..................................................................................................................
Much has been written about IT governance and how it can inﬂuence the effective use
of IT in an organization, supporting both the current and future strategy if done
appropriately but creating major problems when IT governance is poor (Weill and
Ross 2004). In exploring this issue of ‘good’ versus ‘bad’ IT governance the main focus
A MULTI-THEORETIC APPROACH TO IT GOVERNANCE
417

has been on structural alignment. Alignment addresses the question of whether the IT
governance structures, and the underlying rules and resources, adopted by an organi-
zation, match or align with the prevailing circumstances to ensure decisions are made
that take into account interests of all the various stakeholders and so the overall
sustainability of the business. (See also Chapter 22.) For example, here one could
examine how far, if at all, the reward structures in place encourage CIOs to focus on
making IT decisions that help organizations reduce their carbon footprint.
While structural alignment is an important issue, we argue in this chapter that there
is a second dimension that needs to be considered, which we label commitment.
Commitment refers to the manner in which those involved in IT governance follow
the rules and use the resources that have been formalized in the governance structures.
Thus, in some situations there may be low commitment so that compliance with the
rules and use of resources (i.e. the governance structures) is superﬁcial and dependent
on sanctions, with what might be described as a check-box mentality. On the other
hand, there may be other situations where those involved actively engage with the rules,
because they are committed, believing in the underpinning values (i.e. following the
spirit of the rules rather than merely the letter). Colyvas and Powell (2006), for
example, distinguish between practices that simply conform to socio-political pres-
sures, more of a check-box idea, versus practices that are driven by cultural-cognitive
underpinnings, those that are laden with meaning and drive the sense-making process.
This second dimension of governance is becoming more inﬂuential. Enron, for
example, was heralded as a bastion of good governance—it had all the appropriate
structures in place to supposedly support ethical decision making. As we know,
however, the way the structures were operationalized in practice meant that decisions
were made which completely disregarded the spirit of the underlying rules (Kulik,
O’Fallon, and Salimath 2008); and, indeed, included use of resources which was illegal.
In Argyris’ and Schon’s (1974) terms there was a major disconnect between the
espoused theories and the theories-in-use. In other words, commitment addresses
whether those involved in IT governance comply with the governance structures for
fear of sanction, without any ethical commitment to the implied rules, or fully support
and believe in the underpinning ethical values. Its importance is demonstrated by prior
research which has shown that top executives’ values inﬂuence organizational out-
comes because these executives possess the status necessary to inﬂuence vital organi-
zational actions (Finklestein and Hambrick 1990). Managers who are committed to the
values will invest in ethics programmes, policies, and structures in order to demon-
strate their commitment to moral responsibility (Weaver, Trevino, and Cochran 1999).
In Figure 16.1 we outline these two dimensions of governance and their interaction.
The alignment dimension contrasts organizations where the IT governance structures
are in high alignment—with rules and resources provided that can, potentially, support
decision making in the interests of sustainability—versus situations where IT gover-
nance structures are in low alignment—with rules and resources at odds with what is
needed to support sustainability. The second dimension of commitment then relates to
whether this potential is likely to be realized in practice based on actors’ orientations to
418
SUE NEWELL AND CYNTHIA CLARK WILLIAMS

these rules and implied resource allocations. In this sense, we present the commitment
dimension as a contrast between low commitment, which represents a compliance
culture—where actors comply but only as long as they believe sanctions are in place
that would be used if they got caught not complying—and high commitment, which
represents a high level of top management engagement in the governance issues—
where actors follow the spirit of the rule and use resources to beneﬁt sustainability
because it is what decision makers actually believe in. It should be noted that compli-
ance can very easily become non-compliance where decision makers believe they can
‘get away with it’, as in Enron.
In understanding these two dimensions of IT governance, we will argue that it is
necessary to take a multi-theoretic approach (Lynall, Golden, and Hillman 2003) since
different theories throw light on different aspects of IT governance. In doing so, we take
up the call by recent governance researchers suggesting that a single theory of gover-
nance is limiting (cf. Daily, Dalton, and Cannella 2003). A more holistic understanding
of governance is derived from using different theoretical lenses to explore different
aspects of governance. More speciﬁcally, we will use agency theory and contingency
theory to explore the structural alignment dimension of governance, and institutional
theory and stewardship theory to explore the commitment dimension of governance.
May serve broad range of stakeholders
through:
Unlikely to serve broad range of
stakeholders through:
Low alignment:
Some self-interest
Little decoupling
High trust-based decision-making
Highly collaborative
Some conflicts of interest
Unresponsive to context
Low alignment:
Some self-interest
Some conflicts of interest
Unresponsive to context
High Commitment:
High decoupling
Little trust-based decision-making
Minimal collaboration
Low Alignment
High Alignment
Alignment
1
3
2
4
Low Commitment:
Low Commitment
Serves broad range of stakeholders
through:
Unlikely to serve broad range of
stakeholders through:
High alignment:
Little self-interest
Little decoupling
Highly trust-based decision-making
Highly collaborative
Low conflicts of interest
Highly responsive to context
HIgh alignement:
Some self-interest
Some conflicts of interest
Some responsiveness to context
High Commitment:
High Commitment
Commitment
High decoupling
Low trust-based decision-making
Minimal collaboration
Low Commitment:
FIGURE 16.1 The alignment and commitment dimensions of (IT) governance
A MULTI-THEORETIC APPROACH TO IT GOVERNANCE
419

In brief, agency theory helps us understand why there is a misalignment problem,
indicating that agents, those charged with making a decision, may make a decision in
their best interests rather than in the best interests of the principals, those delegating
responsibility for the decision making. Contingency theory, then, has been used to
indicate how best to deal with this misalignment problem, identifying different con-
textual factors that inﬂuence this agency problem and different structures that alleviate
the agency problem in different situations.
On the other hand, institutional theory (see Chapter 6) helps us understand the
commitment dimension through the concept of decoupling. Decoupling recognizes
that practices are often adopted by organizations because they confer legitimacy and
that adoption is sometimes more important than appropriation (i.e. the actual use of
the practice in daily work). This tendency can lead to a disconnect between adoption of
a structure and its actual use in practice, as in the case of Enron, with the rhetoric not
matching the reality. In this case, the structures may be aligned with the agency
problem as suggested by contingency theory, but the formal structures do not actually
guide the way decisions get made in practice. Finally, stewardship theory helps us to
understand how we might be able to overcome this decoupling problem through
engaging—rather than simply trying to control as with agency theory—the IT decision
makers, and building trusting, collaborative relationships between agents and princi-
pals. In using these four theories we are not suggesting that they are the only theoretical
lenses that can shed light on IT governance. For example, resource dependency theory
(Pfeffer and Salancik 1978) is likely to be a useful theory to understand the role of an IT
board governance structure, focusing not on the oversight and control role of a board
but on the resources and advice that board members bring to the decision-making
process (Daily, Dalton, and Cannella 2003). Rather, the objective of the paper is to
demonstrate the importance of looking at the issue of IT governance from a multi-
theoretic perspective if we are to understand what makes for effective IT governance in
different organizational and institutional contexts. In developing this multi-theoretic
approach we explore how to enable IS researchers to contribute to management and
organizational literature on corporate governance rather than merely borrowing from
it, thus addressing a concern that is repeatedly raised in the IS community (Baskerville
and Myers 2002; Galliers 2003; Avison and Eliot 2006). Before we look at the different
theories that can help us understand the two dimensions of IT governance explored
here, however, we ﬁrst need to deﬁne our terms.
Deﬁning Governance and IT Governance
To think about governance one needs to analyse the purpose of an enterprise since one
governs to fulﬁl a particular purpose, whether in a nation state or a business organiza-
tion. In the literature there are opposing views about the purpose of a business
enterprise. Sometimes this tension is simpliﬁed to a mere contrast between the
420
SUE NEWELL AND CYNTHIA CLARK WILLIAMS

stockholder and stakeholder views, which differ in terms of how they see corporate
executives’ obligations and responsibilities. The stockholder view maintains that
the purpose of an enterprise is to provide the best returns for the owners of a ﬁrm,
that is, the shareholders (at least of a publicly traded ﬁrm); other interests are
subservient to this purpose as long as there is no rule breaking (Friedman 2004). On
the other hand, the stakeholder view maintains that a ﬁrm should be managed to
ensure that the best interests of all stakeholders are considered, with the shareholders
given no particular priority in this process (Freeman and Reed 1983).
In reality, this contrast is over-pronounced because, as instrumental stakeholder
theory argues, ﬁrms will be successful in conventional performance terms by addres-
sing stakeholder interests (Donaldson and Preston 1995). This instrumental stakehold-
er view can be contrasted with the normative stakeholder view, which posits that there
is an ethical obligation to respond to stakeholder claims regardless of whether doing so
advances the interests of shareholders (Donaldson and Preston 1995). Thus, the
instrumental view of stakeholder management emphasizes the fulﬁlment of traditional
corporate objectives such as proﬁtability and growth while the normative view stresses
doing the right thing because the interests of stakeholders have intrinsic value. In this
chapter we assume that it is important to take into account the interests of different
stakeholders because this will ultimately be important for long-term sustainability; that
is, we adopt an instrumental stakeholder perspective. Such a view is especially applica-
ble to IT governance as it involves a set of processes and structures affecting all
stakeholders unlike an equity investment made by shareholders alone. The instrumen-
tal stakeholder approach is generally associated with the expanded view of corporate
responsibility discussed earlier, that is, the triple-bottom line, including social and
environmental as well as ﬁnancial responsibilities (O’Donovan and Gibson 2007).
Applied to IT governance, this debate reﬂects whether IT decisions should be made
from a purely ﬁnancial cost-beneﬁt analysis or whether broader stakeholders’ needs
and interests should also be taken into consideration. For example, the IS literature
emphasizes the importance of user participation to ensure that social as well as
technical user needs are contemplated (Mumford 1983). From a normative stakeholder
perspective user social needs are important in their own right—it is important to satisfy
employees’ social needs because this indicates a respect for human dignity. From an
instrumental stakeholder perspective, participation would also be a concern if it was
shown to increase the business value of IT. It could certainly be argued that taking into
consideration the social context of IT—for example, constituents’ privacy rights and
concerns—would be important in relation to optimizing the exploitation of IT, which
in turn would increase proﬁts.
In reality, therefore, while there are opposing views of the purpose and responsi-
bilities of a business enterprise, if one considers that the purpose of a ﬁrm is to sustain
itself into the future then the interests of the shareholders can only be fully served if the
interests of other stakeholders are taken into consideration (Watson 2006). Therefore,
while a ﬁrm may increase short-term proﬁts by adopting IT that alienates and deskills
users or sells customer data without their knowledge and ignores their privacy rights in
A MULTI-THEORETIC APPROACH TO IT GOVERNANCE
421

order to make money, its actions are not consistent with the stakeholder view of the
ﬁrm, either normatively or instrumentally. In the long term such practices are likely to
undermine the ability of an organization to maintain productive relationships with key
constituents such as employees, green pressure groups, suppliers, customers, and
regulators. Empirical evidence conﬁrms this inference: Orlitzky, Schmidt, and Rynes
(2003) conducted a meta-analysis which showed a signiﬁcant positive effect of corpo-
rate social/environmental performance on corporate ﬁnancial performance.
Given the above discussion, we can deﬁne corporate governance as being concerned
with the rights, responsibilities and balance of power among management and other
parties who have a stake in the ﬁrm so as to ensure that decisions are made about the
use of resources that contribute to the long-term ﬁnancial, social and environmental
sustainability of an enterprise. This deﬁnition coincides with the deﬁnition provided by
Daily and colleagues (2003: 371) in going beyond a narrow focus on executive self-
interest and shareholder protection. Thus, our deﬁnition considers the rights and
responsibilities of ‘the myriad participants in an organization’.
Extending this to IT governance, we can deﬁne IT governance as being concerned
with the rights and responsibilities and balance of power among management and
other parties who have a stake in the IT processes and structures that are adopted and
utilized within or across ﬁrms with the purpose of ensuring that IT is used to help
promote the long-term ﬁnancial, social, and environmental sustainability of a ﬁrm.
This view is similar to the deﬁnition proposed by Weill and Ross (2004: 4): ‘IT
governance is the decision rights and accountability framework for encouraging
desirable behaviours in the use of IT’. But it extends their deﬁnition in terms of what
are ‘desirable behaviours’ in the light of our discussion of the purpose of business.
In relation to these rights and responsibilities, Weill and Ross (2004) identify ﬁve
major IT governance decision areas: IT principles (the stated strategic role of IT in
relation to business goals); IT architecture (the overall policies and procedures that
deﬁne how IT will be used and new IT adopted to support the business); IT infrastruc-
ture (the overall framework of IT that reﬂects the strategy and the policies and
procedures, including the network infrastructure that enables electronic communica-
tions within and across the enterprise, the hardware and software that supports
transaction processing and analysis, the expertise available to support the adoption
and management of IT, and the training infrastructure to support both IT professionals
and IT users); business application needs (speciﬁc IT applications that will meet
particular business needs); and prioritization and investment (decisions about what
IT to invest in and the extent of investment). What is perhaps missing from this list is
governance over data that are captured, stored, and shared through IT systems. That is,
a company must determine the rights and responsibilities it has to consumers regard-
ing the storage, use, retrieval, and mining of data beyond what the law requires. Given
the concerns about privacy in general and the violations that are all too common in
organizations of all types, as discussed above, this is arguably a distinct area that IT
governance should cover, requiring leadership at the most senior levels.
422
SUE NEWELL AND CYNTHIA CLARK WILLIAMS

This discussion emphasizes that IT governance is concerned with managing and
controlling an organization’s portfolio of IT systems, and the data that exist on these
systems, to serve the business both currently and in the future (Brown 2006). There is,
therefore, a direct link between IT and corporate governance—because both are geared
to serving the business strategy of a ﬁrm (Van Grembergen 2002; Greenaway and Chan
2005) and are fundamentally about rights and responsibilities. Indeed, the goal of
effective IT governance is that it creates the conditions that allow IT to be exploited to
support the strategic value of IT investments while also considering the impact of
technology on all the various stakeholders. We return to this important link between IT
and corporate governance in the following sections because it suggests that the IT
context offers a new understanding beyond what organization and management
literature have contributed to date. Next, we turn to a review of the four selected
theories to help us understand the source of the governance problems that we have
deﬁned—alignment and commitment—and the solutions to overcoming these pro-
blems.
AGENCY THEORY AND UNDERSTANDING
THE ALIGNMENT PROBLEM
..................................................................................................................
To recap, alignment refers to how far the IT governance framework is structured to
ensure decisions are made that take into consideration the interests of all stake-
holders—so decisions balance ﬁnancial, social, and environmental risks. Alignment
traditionally, in the corporate governance research literature, refers to the alignment
between managers and shareholders (cf. Eisenhardt 1989). Here we are concerned with
whether the IT governance structures and processes ensure the interests of the different
stakeholders are taken into consideration in IT decisions so that decisions are made
that are aligned with the social, ﬁnancial, and environment context within which the
company does business.
The ﬁrst theoretical lens that we will explore is agency theory (Eisenhardt 1989)
because agency theory helps us understand the basic decision-making dilemma in
business organizations and reveals why there is the potential for discrepancy (i.e.
misalignment) between IT decisions that get made and the interests of all stakeholders.
IT governance, as we have discussed, relates to the rights and responsibilities of a ﬁrm’s
management to its owners and other constituents so as to ensure that decisions are
made because they beneﬁt the long-term sustainability agenda of the organization.
That this does not always happen is due to the so-called agency problem—that is, that
managers act opportunistically with self-interest and guile. It is this fundamental
agency problem that governance is all about: how to ensure there are structures and
processes in place to ensure that agents—those given responsibility for making
A MULTI-THEORETIC APPROACH TO IT GOVERNANCE
423

decisions about something—act in the best interests of the principals, those who
delegated responsibility, rather than in the best interests of the agents themselves.
In corporate governance terms, agents of a ﬁrm refer to those executives making
decisions while principals refer to the owners/shareholders. More generally, agents are
those responsible for making decisions and principals are those who have delegated the
decision-making power. Applied to governance, from an agency theory perspective
(Jensen and Meckling 1976) it is not that agents and principals do not both want high
returns. Rather, the problem is that agents and principals may differ in how they want
the returns allocated or in their time horizon. Often, too, the problem occurs due to
conﬂicts of interest. When interests are virtually identical, the agency problem is small:
executives do what is in principals’ best interests. But, interests don’t always overlap. As
an example, when a company receives a purchase offer, shareholders (principals) might
beneﬁt because price assures a good return on their investment, while management
(agents) may resist because they may lose their jobs. In agency theory terms there is
incentive misalignment between agents and principals.
In many cases, these agency problems arise because of information asymmetry. The
agent typically has access to information that the principal does not so that the
principal is not able to evaluate the decisions that the agent is making on his/her
behalf. The agent can, therefore, make decisions that prioritize his/her self-interests
rather than the interests of the principal. Governance structures are put in place to try
and reduce this agency problem with the goal of reducing the incentive misalignment,
so creating a situation where the agent’s best interests are served by fulﬁlling the
interests of the principal.
As in the corporate governance literature the agency problem in IT is related to
problems of incentive misalignment and information asymmetry (Gu, Xue, and Ray
2008). Incentive misalignment and information asymmetry can create a situation
where business units make decisions about IT which are beneﬁcial for them, but
which are not the most sensible from the enterprise perspective or from the perspective
of all stakeholders. For example, a decision may be made by the CIO to buy cheaper but
more energy-intensive laptops because this decision will then allow her to achieve her
goal of reducing the IT budget, for which she receives a bonus. As another example,
selling client data may prove lucrative in the short term (and be reﬂected in executive
bonuses) but may reduce client loyalty in the longer term, harming proﬁts. These
examples demonstrate how the alignment issue agency theory seeks to solve is very real
in relation to IT governance.
This theoretical lens suggests that a useful research stream could focus on what kinds
of incentive structures can encourage IT decision makers to focus on the broad social,
environmental, and long-term ﬁnancial implications of their decisions, rather than
what might be most expedient for their own career success. It would also suggest that
researchers might usefully examine whether organizations that do incentivize IT
decision makers to adopt a broader perspective for evaluating their IT decisions, one
that encourages them to balance the impacts on people and the planet as well as proﬁts,
are any better at exploiting the potential from their IT investments. In sum, agency
424
SUE NEWELL AND CYNTHIA CLARK WILLIAMS

theory emphasizes governance control—agents must be controlled to ensure that they
make decisions in the interests of principals or more broadly in the interests of
stakeholders. Contingency theory takes this notion a step further and helps us to
understand what governance structures are needed in different circumstances, given
that the agency problem will vary across contexts.
CONTINGENCY THEORY AND UNDERSTANDING
THE ALIGNMENT SOLUTION
..................................................................................................................
Understanding the agency problem directs attention to ﬁnding ways to reduce or
eliminate the problem. Governance structures are thus put in place that direct decision
making so that it is in line with sustainability objectives, rather than allowing decisions
to be made in an ad hoc way or, more speciﬁcally, in ways that are in line with decision
makers’ interests. In the agency theory literature, the key recommendations for addres-
sing these concerns are to use incentives that help to align the interests of agents and
principals and to embolden boards of directors to provide rigorous oversight of the
decision-making process. Consistent with broader corporate governance research, the
focus in IT governance is on ensuring that there are effective organizational structures
in place in order to protect all those impacted by the IT (e.g. company users, customers,
suppliers) from the self-interested actions of decision makers or from a focus on the
short-term expedient rather than the long-term sustainable. In Table 16.1, we distin-
guish structures, processes, and mechanisms, as deﬁned in the IT literature (e.g. Brown
2006). All, however, are part of the overall governance structure in the sense that they
deﬁne the rules and resource allocation criteria that decision makers need to follow. IT
needs to be governed in a transparent and effective way for all stakeholders with their
diverse interests and needs in relation to information, recognizing that needs are
Table 16.1 Structures, processes, and mechanisms related to IT governance
Governance structures
Governance processes
Governance mechanisms
CIO on Board
Strategic information systems
planning
Active participation of
stakeholders
Executive management
committee
Balanced scorecards
Partnership rewards and
incentives
IT strategy committee
Service level agreements
Business/IT co-location
IT leadership committee
IT portfolio management
Cross-functional collaboration
IT steering committee
Demand management
IT training
IT coordinator
Security management
IT/business rotation
Source: Adapted from Peterson (2004).
A MULTI-THEORETIC APPROACH TO IT GOVERNANCE
425

context dependent. In other words, ensuring that rights and responsibilities are
allocated to produce sustainability of a ﬁrm depends on having a set of structures,
processes, and relational mechanisms that can facilitate it (Brown 2006) and the most
appropriate structures and processes will depend on the circumstances. In Table 16.1,
governance structures are the most visible consisting of committees and boards that
are set up to deal with different types of IT decision making and oversight and roles
that are assigned in relation to speciﬁed responsibilities. Important IT governance
structures include:
1. IT strategy committee—comprises members of the corporate board who provide
oversight and advice about the strategy and alignment of IT with the business (IT
Governance Institute 2003). Having a board sub-committee dedicated to IT
issues demonstrates commitment that IT is perceived as important to the success
of the corporation; this committee can also be important in ensuring that
necessary resources are available (Premkumar and King 1994).
2. IT steering committee— comprises senior management from across divisions
and/or functions whose role is to support the planning and management of
IT issues in the organization. The steering committee would, for example, be
responsible for linking IT decisions with business strategy and helping to garner
support for IT projects (IT Governance Institute 2003). The CIO would typically
sit on the steering committee. The importance of an IT steering committee has
been demonstrated by previous research (cf. Karimi et al. 2000; Vaswani 2003).
3. Head of IT role—organizations differ in terms of the seniority associated with the
individual vested with overall responsibility for IT. This can range from having a
CIO who reports directly to the CEO, thus having equal seniority alongside other
functional heads like CFO and COO, to organizations where the head of IT is a
departmental manager who reports to an executive member, often the CFO.
Research has demonstrated that the closer the distance between CIO and the
CEO the more successful the IT infrastructure tends to be (Law and Ngai 2007).
In Table 16.1, governance processes refer to management practices that relate to the
actual development and use of IT, helping to ensure that IT is used in the ways that
were intended by the structural entities. So, an enterprise-wide IT strategy committee
might set a strategy that all business units adopt the same enterprise system, and
management processes would then be in place to track and evaluate the impact of this
decision. Important IT governance processes include:
1. Performance measure systems—such systems can provide information about
how IT systems are performing relative to their stated objectives. An example
of such a measurement system would be a balanced scorecard (Kaplan and
Norton 1992).
2. Risk management systems—having appropriate processes in place to manage risk
associated with IT is essential to ensure data security and privacy, as well, of
course, as ensuring ﬁnancial control of IT systems, both new and existing.
426
SUE NEWELL AND CYNTHIA CLARK WILLIAMS

3. Planning systems—having methodologies that set out how to design a new IT
system or how to maintain an existing one are an essential part of the IT
governance process. Such systems set out the roles and responsibilities, the action
steps, and the control processes for IT development and use.
Finally, governance mechanisms relate to how communication about IT policy,
development, and use is effected in the organization so that there is stakeholder buy-
in for IT decisions that are made. Mechanisms are thus relational; focused on ensuring
stakeholders support and understand decisions related to IT (Weill and Ross 2004).
Important IT governance mechanisms include:
1. Business/IT coordination—this is especially important in relation to IT gover-
nance, given what we know about the communication problems that exist
between IT departments and the business functions. Mechanisms that establish
good communication between business and IT will therefore be very important
(De Haes and Grembergen 2005).
2. Participation—user participation is a long-established mechanism that inﬂuences
user acceptance and use of IT (Mumford 1983; Wagner and Newell 2007).
Governance structures can be conﬁgured to be more or less centralizing. Weill and
Ross (2004) suggest that centralized IT governance approaches are effective where the
key organizational driver is low cost and efﬁciency since this enables the creation of
standardized IT solutions that maximize economies of scale. Decentralized IT gover-
nance approaches are effective where the key organizational driver is innovation,
ﬂexibility, and local responsiveness. A centralized approach would vest signiﬁcant
power in the CIO and a central executive IT committee who would dictate a standard
architecture and infrastructure to be used across the organization; governance process-
es would be standardized and mechanisms would focus on communication of the
standards through for example centrally designed training programmes. A decentra-
lized approach, on the other hand, might have multiple CIOs, one in each business
unit, committees with considerable power at each business unit or function, and
signiﬁcant participation from local stakeholders in IT decisions.
While these central/dispersed structures do coincide with different business strate-
gies supporting, respectively, efﬁciency/innovation, it is also clear today that many
organizations need to be both efﬁcient and innovative, and global and local; in short,
they need to be ambidextrous (Adler, Goldoftas, and Levine 1999). In line with this
strategic need to be ambidextrous, IS research has also identiﬁed hybrid forms of
organizational governance that enable ﬂexibility in IT decision-making authority
depending on the type of decision being made and the strategic orientation that the
particular IT supports. Thus, researchers have identiﬁed forms including matrixed
IT governance (Weill and Ross 2005), hybrid IT governance (Brown 2006), and federal
IT governance (Sambamurthy and Zmud 1999). In the federal form, for example, IT
infrastructure decisions may be centralized to encourage efﬁciencies, while decisions
A MULTI-THEORETIC APPROACH TO IT GOVERNANCE
427

about IT business applications may be decentralized to encourage ﬂexible responsive-
ness to the local context.
This implies a contingency approach to IT governance and considerable research in
the IS space has been done from this perspective (Sia, Soh, and Weill 2008). For
example, Gu, Xue, and Ray (2008) developed a multiple contingency model that
identiﬁed the appropriate IT governance structure given the particular circumstances
of the ﬁrm (e.g. company size, degree of diversiﬁcation, level of IT expertise available
locally). The aim of the particular structures is to reduce information asymmetry and
increase incentive alignment. They were able to contrast ﬁrms whose IT governance
structure was either aligned or misaligned with this ideal. They found that ﬁrms that
were misaligned obtained less value from their IT investment compared to ﬁrms that
were aligned.
This work is clearly important and has practical value—aligning a company’s IT
governance framework with its particular organizational strategy is very important, as
demonstrated by the study by Gu and colleagues (2008). More research can be done on
identifying the key contingency variables and the appropriate governance design given
the circumstances. Moreover, looking at these contingencies from a stakeholder per-
spective, the key issue is how IT governance structures can be selected to ensure that IT
decisions and the follow-on behaviour meets the sustainability requirements of the
particular organizational context. Doing so might suggest, for example, that IT prin-
ciples reﬂecting sustainability concerns would need to be set by the board while
decisions about particular business applications would be made locally, involving as
many people as possible in order to generate innovative ideas about how to meet
diverse needs of people and the environment. In other words, research is needed that
identiﬁes what conﬁguration of IT governance structures supports sustainable IT
decision making.
In undertaking such research it would be helpful for IS researchers to be more
explicit about linking their contingency frameworks to the underlying agency problems
in place in order to achieve high structural alignment. This would enable a clearer link
with, and therefore contribution to, the management and organization literature on
governance. Identifying what the particular agency problems are in relation to IT
governance and how they can be overcome through contingency management can,
then, contribute to the broader literature on governance. While some of the examples
described above (e.g. Gu, Xue, and Ray 2008) do situate their contingency framework
within the theoretical debate about agency, not all IS researchers do this, or indeed use
any theoretical perspective. Yet there are ways that IT research can contribute to the
broader governance discussions if the researchers involved engage with these broader
debates and situate their studies using common language and common metrics such as
incentive alignment and board composition. There may be differences between the
contingency variables that inﬂuence IT governance as opposed to corporate gover-
nance and the agency problems may also be different. However, using common
theoretical lenses will enable researchers to be explicit about these differences and
thus, potentially, contribute to governance theory as well as IT governance practice.
428
SUE NEWELL AND CYNTHIA CLARK WILLIAMS

INSTITUTIONAL THEORY AND UNDERSTANDING
THE COMMITMENT PROBLEM
..................................................................................................................
As already indicated, agency and contingency theory focus on the structural alignment
problem of governance, helping us understand why misalignment is a common
problem and what can be done to manage it. However, even where there is align-
ment—structures are in place that supposedly ensure that decisions are made that
contribute to the long-term sustainability of the enterprise—it does not necessarily
mean that the decisions actually will get made as the structures would suggest.
Decisions continue to get made that are not aligned with the rules because organiza-
tions are composed of both formal and informal activity systems. As Suchman (1987)
describes so neatly, plans—or formal procedures of work—do not equate to situated
actions (i.e. how work actually gets done in practice). The formal structures describe
how the system should work. It is individuals, however, who enact these structures
(Weick 1980). In structuration theory terms (Giddens 1984)—see Chapter 5—structures
constrain action but they also enable action, including generative action which breaks
away from and changes the existing structures.
Formally, therefore, there may be a set of rules and resources embedded in the
established governance structures—both externally imposed through legislation and
internally imposed through corporate mandates. These may indicate how decisions
should be made that are aligned to the business objectives. However, the enactment of
these formal structures may create a set of norms and practices that inﬂuence decisions
in ways that are very different to those indicated by the formal structures. Therefore, it
is important to look at the second dimension of IT governance—the commitment
dimension. In looking at commitment we are focusing on the interplay between the
formal rules and resources embedded in the structures and the enactment of these in
practice. Labelling this governance dimension commitment represents how actors’
values and beliefs—their ethical compass—will inﬂuence this enactment process (see
also Chapter 23).
When actors, especially upper echelon managers, are strongly committed to ethics
they will create governance structures and other ethics programmes and policies in
order to demonstrate their commitment (Weaver, Trevino, and Cochran 1999). When
managers do not believe in the underpinning ethical values they are more likely to look
for ways to avoid what they see as inappropriate constraints on their actions. When
values and structures are in tune, there will be high engagement with the formal rules
and routines. When they are opposed so that commitment is lacking, there may be a
semblance of compliance, but actual decisions will get made in ways that are not in line
with the spirit or intention of the formal rules (DeSanctis and Poole 1994). This
suggests that we need to be aware of the policies that hold more weight in an
organization—the way things are actually done—versus the stated procedures. In the
case of Enron, there were many policies regarding governance that looked sound on
paper, but the overriding policy that drove the company was the policy of eliminating
A MULTI-THEORETIC APPROACH TO IT GOVERNANCE
429

poor performing employees, creating a culture of unethical behaviour in order to meet
performance goals.
Commitment is thus an important issue, because even where there is alignment
there may not be compliance. To understand this we can turn to institutional theory.
Adopting formal governance reforms confers legitimacy on an organization because it
indicates to the market that the agency problem is being addressed. For example,
Greenaway and Chan (2005) showed that an organization’s IT privacy behaviours can
help a ﬁrm achieve legitimacy and can provide a strategic advantage to an organization.
However, research indicates that this legitimacy can be earned even when the gover-
nance reforms are announced but not implemented (Westphal and Zajac 1998). This
situation can be explained by institutional theory which suggests that ‘the appearance
rather than the fact of conformity is often presumed to be sufﬁcient for the attainment
of legitimacy’ (Oliver 1991: 155). Such symbolic rather than substantive reform is
explained in institutional theory terms by the concept of decoupling (Meyer and
Rowan 1977)—formal structures are adopted in response to external pressures but
actual practices are not reﬂected by these formal structures. Structures are adopted but
do not constrain action in the ways intended, so that structure and practice are
decoupled. Decoupling, it is argued, helps to buffer an organization from the uncer-
tainties and rapid ﬂuctuations of the external environment while still ensuring that
organizations are conferred legitimacy by the external environment. For example,
Westphal and Zajac (1998) found that companies that announced but did not imple-
ment long-term incentive plans for their CEO, nevertheless received a signiﬁcant boost
in ﬁrm market value. Moreover, this boost was enhanced where the announcement of
the new plan was couched in agency terms, thus indicating that socially legitimating
verbal explanations can be helpful even when it is mere rhetoric.
There is debate about whether it is possible to maintain such decoupling, especially
in a competitive market context where institutional investors attempt to ensure that
companies do behave in the long-term interests of their shareholders (Zuckerman
2004). This caveat is perhaps why in the original article by Meyer and Rowan (1977)
they distinguish between public organizations and market-based organizations, sug-
gesting that it is in the former that legitimacy through conformity to rules and
regulations is more important since there are no external market mechanisms to
control behaviour. In such organizations there are, therefore, stronger pressures to-
wards institutional isomorphism (DiMaggio and Powell 1983). However, it is clear
from research and from everyday experience that a signiﬁcant number of companies do
not ‘practice what they preach’ when it comes to governance structures.
Self-interested decision making does occur and includes decisions in relation to IT,
as well as other types of corporate decisions. We can look, for example, at the literature
on participation. User participation is advocated to help ensure that the needs of the
users are taken into consideration in the design of a new IT system (Mumford 1983).
User participation is prescribed as a fundamental part of the IT development method-
ology in many organizations (Howcroft and Wilson 2003). However, research has
demonstrated that in some cases where user participation may be formally included, it
430
SUE NEWELL AND CYNTHIA CLARK WILLIAMS

is ultimately the IT professionals who actually make the ﬁnal decisions. Avison and
Fitzgerald (1995) refer to this as ‘pseudo participation’. Wagner and Newell (2007)
demonstrate that this pseudo participation can be both top-down and bottom-up.
Bottom-up pseudo participation refers to the situation where users ‘pretend’ to be
involved in the IT project in the pre-implementation phase but actually are not at all
interested or engaged in the decisions that are being made. Users may be unengaged,
for example, because of time constraints or simply a lack of salience as to the
importance and relevance of the decisions being made, as noted in Chapter 15.
Because institutional theory is at its very fundamental level about control and
coordination, it has been a natural setting for exploring corporate governance and
the pressures that produce varying levels of conformity across cultures, political
systems, and legal frameworks (Aguilera and Jackson 2003). Interestingly, a growing
stream of recent research has pointed to the heterogeneity of actors and activities that
underlie apparent conformity (Lounsbury 2007) and, speciﬁcally, the variation in
governance practices as these practices are adapted to local country needs (Aguilera
and Jackson 2003; Fiss and Zajac 2006; Lounsbury 2007). These variations tend to
occur in the implementation stage following the diffusion of a uniﬁed set of institu-
tional pressures (Fiss 2008) largely because implementation is a technical, cultural, and
political process taking place within various country contexts. These studies drawing
upon institutional theory and the concept of decoupling help to explain why the
governance structures recommended by agency theory and contingency theory, such
as having a majority of independent board members, separating the roles of CEO and
Chairman or incentivizing executives with equity ownership, have not been found to be
related to ﬁrm performance (Dalton et al. 1998; Dalton et al. 2003).
Institutional theory and ethical frameworks, however, have not been prevalent in the
IS literature on governance, which may be why there is very little discussion about the
issue of commitment (Greenaway and Chan 2005; Islamoglu and Liebenau 2007). It is
true that there is discussion of the importance of governance mechanisms as part of the
overall governance structure. These mechanisms are focused on ensuring that there is
good communication about the governance framework being used and its underpin-
ning rationale. Indeed, Weill and Ross (2004) found that a key factor inﬂuencing the
effectiveness of IT in an organization was whether the top executives and managers
understood and agreed upon the formal governance structure in the organization.
Moreover, studies as described in the contingency theory section above seem to
indicate that the presence of aligned structures, albeit contingent upon the speciﬁc
context, does predict IT effectiveness in an organization. However, this does not mean
that non-compliance due to low commitment is not an issue in the IT governance
sphere (Carroll and Fitz-Gerald 2005). The very fact that there are so many failed IT
projects and data breaches suggests that we should not be complacent about this issue.
Moreover, the user participation example provided above suggests that commitment to
the formal structures, as demonstrated by the gap between what should happen and
what actually does happen, can be very tenuous.
A MULTI-THEORETIC APPROACH TO IT GOVERNANCE
431

However, while corporate governance scholars do use the institutional theory lens to
demonstrate in broad theoretical terms that governance decoupling happens, there has
been little qualitative research that has been able to study what happens in practice at
corporate boards when decisions are taken that do not follow the formal rules. This is
hardly surprising since board level discussions are generally proprietary so that allow-
ing researchers to sit in and observe has not been possible. Such a situation is even
more likely where decisions are sensitive, controversial, or rule bending in nature.
However, qualitative research exploring IT governance may be much more possible
and while we could ﬁnd no such research which explicitly used an institutional theory
lens, there are scholars who have been able to gain access to rich qualitative material
about the IT governance process (e.g. Sia, Soh, and Weill 2008). This suggests that IT
research may be able to actually contribute to the broader corporate governance
literature by being able to conduct research that explores the interactions between
formal governance structures and their enactment in practice. Undertaking research in
organizations that have a clearly stated sustainability strategy and identifying when and
why decisions get made that do not ﬁt with this stated strategy would be particularly
fruitful.
Studying the divide between the formal IT governance structure and where, how,
and what decisions actually get made in practice is therefore an important area for
future IS research. Such research needs to be in-depth, processual, and qualitative
rather than quantitative research that simply relates the presence of governance
structures to some dependent measure of IT effectiveness (Pettigrew 1992). Also,
since governance is not static, but rather co-evolutionary (Lubatkin et al. 2007), with
agents and principals responding recursively as they each engage in a sense-making
process (Weick 1995) that is deeply embedded (Granovetter 1985) in the emergent
institutional context, analysis of IT governance problems needs to be context speciﬁc.
Moreover, given the diversity of stakeholders involved, we must examine how IT
governance is embedded in a particular ﬁrm’s social context (Aguilera and Jackson
2003). The importance of producing more of this type of research for studying
governance decoupling is articulated in the corporate governance literature (Forbes
and Milliken 1999; Daily, Dalton, and Cannella 2003).
STEWARDSHIP THEORY AND UNDERSTANDING
THE SOLUTION TO LOW COMMITMENT
..................................................................................................................
Agency theory often portrays agents (e.g. CEOs or CIOs) as villains mainly pursuing
their own self-interest. However, this is not always the case. Thus, recent research has
called for organizational theorists to investigate when shareholder returns, efﬁciency,
stakeholder rights, and the amelioration of social issues all matter (Margolis and Walsh
2003) especially in the governance of a ﬁrm (Aoki 2001; Aguilera and Jackson 2003). In
432
SUE NEWELL AND CYNTHIA CLARK WILLIAMS

this section, we consider this state of affairs as we move to understand how to resolve
the low commitment problem by looking at stewardship theory.
Stewardship theory is often contrasted with agency theory. Agency theory empha-
sizes governance control—agents (i.e. executives) must be controlled to ensure that they
make decisions in the interests of principals (i.e. shareholders). On the other hand, we
know that excessive control reduces trust and can lead to a self-reinforcing cycle that
eventually reduces performance—the so-called paradox of control (Sundaramurthy and
Lewis 2003). An alternative view of governance, therefore, emphasizes collaboration.
Theoretically, this approach is based in stewardship theory (Davis, Schoorman, and
Donaldson 1997) with sociological/psychological roots rather than the economic roots
of agency theory. These opposing theories make different assumptions about human
nature (Sundaramurthy and Lewis 2003): agency theory stressing individual opportun-
ism, self-interest, and extrinsic motivation; stewardship theory stressing collectivist
cooperation and intrinsic motivation. These different assumptions about human nature
translate, then, into very different governance proposals. Agency theory stresses control
and discipline mechanisms and stewardship theory stresses trust-developing and em-
powering collaborative mechanisms, such as building strong social ties between execu-
tives and IT board members. Such trust-based mechanisms would provide the context
within which it would be less likely that lack of commitment undermined compliance
with the formal rules, since the parties are collaborating rather than competing.
Sundaramurthy and Lewis (2003) point out the negative implications of both the
control and collaboration perspectives on governance. Too much emphasis on control
mechanisms leads to a self-reinforcing cycle that builds ever-greater distrust, as noted
above in the paradox of control. On the other hand, too much emphasis on collabora-
tion leads potentially to groupthink (Janis 1982). Thus, where the emphasis is on
collaboration and trust, research has shown that in contexts of reducing performance,
where there are strong groupthink pressures, rather than rethinking whether the
decision was initially a good one, decisions are often made which exacerbate the failure
(Kisvalﬁ2000). As an example, Drummond (1998) illustrates how in the context of a
large IT project in the Bank of England, which was not going well, executives infused
greater resources into the failing project in order to ‘save face’ rather than admit that
things were not going well.
To overcome the limitations of both approaches to governance, Sundaramurthy and
Lewis (2003) advocate embracing the paradoxes between them and using both control
and collaboration mechanisms simultaneously. This approach will beneﬁt from the
trust-enhancing effects of collaboration but at the same time ensure that some conﬂict
is present in order to counter the possible negative effects of too much trust, that is
groupthink. Finding ways to balance the trust-conﬂict paradox is, they argue, key to
successful governance. In particular, they stress the importance of diversity to stimulate
conﬂict. For example, in relation to the composition of the executive team and board,
they argue, diversity must be coupled with approaches that can encourage shared
understanding (Dougherty 1992) that can provide the context in which conﬂict can
be used creatively rather than destructively (Leonard and Barton 1995). However, while
A MULTI-THEORETIC APPROACH TO IT GOVERNANCE
433

Sundaramurthy and Lewis (2003) suggest that they are advocating a system of gover-
nance that includes prescriptions from both agency and stewardship theory, it may be
fairer to suggest that they are advocating a stewardship model, but with some mechan-
isms to prevent groupthink. Thus, in advocating a stewardship model, they recognize
the potential problems of groupthink, including mechanisms that will help to ensure
that the decision-making body does not get overly cohesive, and at the same time
ensuring that varied stakeholders interests will be represented through diverse partici-
pation (Montgomery and Kaufman 2003). Stimulating productive conﬂict is not the
same as imposing control mechanisms (as per agency theory), especially as they also
point to the importance of creating a shared understanding. Indeed, their prescription
for effective governance bears remarkable similarity to the long-established ideas about
effective team working that very much comes from a paradigm of collaboration and
trust building rather than externally imposed control (Hackman 1990).
Stewardship theory reminds us that effective IT governance depends ultimately on
people and that without their willing cooperation (i.e. commitment) people are usually
able to subvert rules and regulations, however complex these become and however
many monitoring devices are used. If people believe in the rules and regulations they
are much more likely to comply in substance rather than merely symbolically (Meyer
and Rowan 1977). Rotvold (2008) endorses this view in her examination of IT security
issues. As she indicates, security is achieved not simply by assigning roles and respon-
sibilities associated with maintaining data security; it is also about creating a security
culture through educating people about the importance of security and how, in their
daily practice, they can ensure security (see also Chapter 17).
As another example, promoting IT to support environmental initiatives is unlikely to
be effective unless there is real commitment to these issues (Jaffe and Stavins 1994).
Gaining user commitment means that users might want to comply with new environ-
mental rules (e.g. putting personal computers onto the energy-saving setting) because
of personal beliefs in the importance of reducing climate change, rather than because of
speciﬁc incentives they may (or may not) receive. Certainly, from a stewardship
perspective, a key to green IT would be to work with the various stakeholders to
develop a collective agreement about the importance of reducing energy use. Moreover,
this collective intelligence is likely to be a signiﬁcant source of ideas about reducing
wasteful use of resources using IT (see also Chapter 22).
In the IS literature, although not always explicitly referring to stewardship theory per
se, it is probably fair to say that this collaborative model of governance, as opposed to
the agency control model, implicitly underpins much of the literature. In this sense, the
IS literature may have something to offer the organization and management literatures
on corporate governance—demonstrating how to achieve this more collaborative
orientation to overcome different stakeholder interests and orientations. In particular,
the long-standing research on how to bridge the divide between IT departments and
other functional business departments can be important here (Jarvenpaa and Ives
1991). Indeed, the issue of IT-business cooperation is a key element identiﬁed in
much of the IT governance literature, whether related to how to ensure senior
434
SUE NEWELL AND CYNTHIA CLARK WILLIAMS

corporate involvement in IT decisions about data security and privacy at the board
level or how to ensure user requirements are captured accurately in the context of IT
development. Using this past literature to inform the debate around governance
stewardship more generally could prove a fruitful avenue for IS researchers. Thus, IS
research has looked at how to move beyond a ‘tick-box compliance’ in the relationship
between IT and business employees to a situation of real engagement between IT and
Business where they work together as partners, enabling IT solutions that add real
business value. This collaboration is an issue that IS research has been working on since
the 1980s and it is highly relevant to the commitment governance problem.
ALIGNMENT AND COMMITMENT
INTERACTIONS
..................................................................................................................
Having explained the two dimensions of our IT governance model (see Figure 16.1), we
look at their interactions in this ﬁnal section of the chapter. Thus, Figure 16.1 depicts
four unique quadrants, which depend on the joint operation of both alignment and
commitment, each of which can be independently high versus low. Below we suggest
some probable outcomes of this interaction while recognizing that a ﬁrm’s position in
each quadrant is not static as its commitment or alignment levels may change over
time. Clearly research is needed to test these propositions.
Low Alignment and Low Commitment (Quadrant 1)
In this situation, it is least likely that IT decisions will be made that serve the interests of a
broad range of stakeholders and most likely that decisions are made that serve the
interests of only the decision makers. On the alignment dimension, interests are likely
to be misaligned with conﬂicts of interest common. There is likely to be little effort to
adapt to the contingencies through using appropriate structures, processes, and me-
chanisms that are presented in the particular ﬁrm context. On the commitment dimen-
sion, decoupling between rhetoric and practice is likely to be common with signiﬁcant
symbolic managementaction; trust between managers and IT professionals is likely to be
low, and business managers are likely to show very little engagement in the IT function.
Low Alignment and High Commitment (Quadrant 2)
In this situation, decisions may be made that serve the interests of a broad range of
stakeholders in spite of a lack of formal governance structures that are designed to
A MULTI-THEORETIC APPROACH TO IT GOVERNANCE
435

facilitate it. Managers are likely to exhibit some evidence of conﬂicts of interest, some
self-interested decision making, indicative of low alignment, but be highly committed
to trust-based and collaborative IT procedures and mechanisms. Still, this situation
presents the possibility of substantive change as committed executives have the power
to make changes to the structural alignment issues in their particular context. Organi-
zations in this quadrant are therefore likely to move to the high alignment/high
commitment space over time.
High Alignment and Low Commitment (Quadrant 3)
In this situation, incentives and conﬂicts of interests may be under control and highly
coordinated but the decision makers remain uncommitted to a trusting and value-
driven set of processes and to the mechanisms and structures already in place—perhaps
instituted by previous management. There is likely a high level of decoupling between
these structures and the actual IT practices due to the low commitment. In this case, IT
decisions may be made that serve the interests of a broad range of stakeholders only if
there are monitoring mechanisms in place and sanctions that are seen as threatening if
self-interested decisions are made. It may be possible to stay in this position for a
considerable amount of time, since symbolic management can be a powerful illusion.
High Alignment and High Commitment (Quadrant 4)
In this situation, it is most likely that decisions are made that serve the interests of a
broad range of stakeholders. There is high commitment by managers and board
members for making IT decisions that are utilizing trust-based mechanisms and are
collaborative in nature. On the alignment dimension, there are structures in place that
ensure a high level of user coordination and control as well as a minimum of
information asymmetry and conﬂicts of interest; these structures and the associated
commitment also mean that there is likely to be collaboration between the IT suite and
the broader corporate governance members.
The above provides an indication of what we would expect to ﬁnd depending on the
joint interactions between alignment and commitment. It is important to note, how-
ever, that an organization will not sit in a particular quadrant indeﬁnitely. Taking the
most extreme conditions, quadrants 2 and 3, we can demonstrate how movement
between quadrants can occur. An example of quadrant 2 would be a board member
who represents an IT organization putting pressure on decision makers to invest in IT
from his/her own company even when the technology is not in the best interests of the
stakeholders. This situation represents low alignment because it indicates a conﬂict of
interest. Such low alignment may be a problem even when the company is committed
to collaborative, trust-based decision making, indicative of high commitment. If the
436
SUE NEWELL AND CYNTHIA CLARK WILLIAMS

organization removes the board member or discloses the conﬂict of interest and makes
it explicit that decisions will not be so prioritized, the alignment problem may be
resolved. In this case, the organization would move to the high commitment/high
alignment quadrant, ceteris paribus.
As an example of quadrant 3, an organization might have a diverse IT board, no
conﬂicts of interest and principles that indicate IT decisions will be made in pursuit of
sustainable business goals, indicative of high alignment. However, this organization
might also have an informal compensation policy that steers people to prioritizing the
short-term ﬁnancial implications of decisions (e.g. linking annual bonuses to quarterly
earnings). The subtext of this policy means that there is low commitment to the
underlying governance values so that IT decisions only pay lip-service to the broad
stakeholder concerns about the impact of IT decisions. In this situation, if the com-
pensation policy is changed to encourage a longer-term perspective (e.g. removing
bonus payments that are linked to short-term measures of ﬁnancial success) then
commitment to the IT principles might increase and the organization would move to
the high alignment/high commitment quadrant.
CONCLUSION
..................................................................................................................
We have argued that there are two important dimensions of IT governance—alignment
and commitment—that are independent but that need to be considered holistically. It
is also important to note that an organization’s IT governance system is dynamic so
that there will be movement in terms of strengths and weaknesses on both these
dimensions depending on particular situations that are encountered and how these
are responded to. Alignment is important because of the agency problem and suggests
that decision-making structures need to be carefully aligned and contingent on the
particular circumstances of the organization and the decision focus, to ensure the
interests of all stakeholders are taken into consideration in IT decisions. Commitment
is important because of the decoupling that we know exists between formal structures
and the enactment of these in practice. Building trust-based, collaborative relationships
can assist in overcoming this decoupling because it can help to ensure that decision
makers believe in the underlying value systems implied by the structures.
In this chapter we have demonstrated the importance of looking at both dimensions
and explored how different theoretical lenses are needed to understand both the causes
and solutions to the alignment and commitment problems. A key point that we have
tried to emphasize throughout the chapter is that IT governance research can make
important theoretical contributions, as well as being highly relevant to practice.
We suggest that more explicitly engaging with the breadth of theoretical lenses that
have been used in the broader governance literature will help IS researchers fulﬁl that
potential and contribute to, rather than merely borrow from, the organization and
management literatures. As a further example of this potential, Daily, Dalton, and
A MULTI-THEORETIC APPROACH TO IT GOVERNANCE
437

Cannella (2003) point to governance during organizational crises as an important area
for future research and highly pertinent given the economic crises that companies of all
sorts are facing across the globe in 2009. Given that so many IT projects are crisis
ridden, there may be an excellent opportunity for IS researchers to contribute to the
literature on governance. How establishing control (from an agency theory perspec-
tive) and/or effecting collaboration (from a stewardship perspective) can help to meet
the challenges faced in a crisis is a question for future IS research. In turn, such research
can inform broader corporate governance discussions related to the sustainability of
the business itself.
Another area where IT governance research may be able to contribute to the broader
governance literature is in the area of organizational collaborations. IT outsourcing (see
Chapter 19) is now a well-known phenomenon and research has explored what factors
inﬂuence how to govern such outsourcing arrangements (Islamoglu and Liebenau
2007). More generally, there is a trend towards networked organizational forms—
organizations collaborating to achieve particular goals—whether this collaboration is
designed to develop a new product or to service a particular type of customer. There
has been little written about how to govern these networked organizational forms—i.e.
how to align the rights, responsibilities, and power dynamics of the various parties
involved in these collaborative relationships in order to ensure sustainability. There-
fore, applying IT governance to networked organizations is potentially an area where IS
researchers could comment on what types of governance arrangements might be most
appropriate and theoretically why this is the case.
NOTE
1. This is not to say that all companies focus on sustainability; some companies may adopt a
strategy of turning over a quick proﬁt and then exiting. In this chapter, however, we
consider governance as it relates to ensuring sustainability.
REFERENCES
Adler, P., Goldoftas, B., and Levine, D. (1999). ‘Flexibility versus Efﬁciency: A Case Study of
Model Changeovers in the Toyota Production System’, Organization Science, 10: 43–68.
Aguilera, R., and Jackson, G. (2003). ‘The Cross-National Diversity of Corporate Governance:
Dimensions and Determinants’, Academy of Management Review, 28(3): 447–65.
Argyris, C., and Schön, D. (1974). Theory in Practice. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Aoki, M. (2001). Towards a Comparative Analysis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Avison, D., and Eliot, S. (2006). ‘Scoping the IS Discipline’, in J. King and K. Lyytinen (eds.),
Information Systems: The State of the Field. Chichester: Wiley, 3–18.
438
SUE NEWELL AND CYNTHIA CLARK WILLIAMS

——and Fitzgerald, G. (1995). Information Systems Development: Methodologies, Techniques
and Tools, 2nd edn. London: McGraw-Hill.
Bajwa, D., Garcia, J., and Mooney, T. (2004). ‘An Integrative Framework for the Assimilation
of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems: Phases, Antecedents and Outcomes’, Journal of
Computer Information Systems, Spring: 81–90.
Baskerville, R., and Myers, M. (2002). ‘Information Systems as a Reference Discipline’, MIS
Quarterly, 17(2): 209–26.
Brown, W. (2006). ‘IT Governance, Architectural Competency and the Vasa’, Information
Management and Computer Security, 14(2): 140–54.
Brundtland, G. H. (1987). Our Common Future: Report of the World Commission on Envi-
ronment and Development. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carroll, J., and Fitz-Gerald, L. (2005). ‘Beyond an IT project: Governance in an ERP Driven
Business Transformation’, 16th Australasian Conference on Information Systems, Sydney.
Carr, N. (2003). ‘IT Doesn’t Matter’, Harvard Business Review, May: 41–9.
Colyvas, J. A., and Powell, W. W. (2006). ‘Roads to Institutionalisation: The Re-making
of Boundaries between Public and Private Science’, Research in Organisational Behaviour,
27: 305–53.
Computer Economics (2008/9). ‘IT Spending, Stafﬁng and Technology Trends’. Irvine, CA:
Computer Economics.
Daily, C., Dalton, D., and Cannella, A. (2003). ‘Corporate Governance: Decades of Dialogue
and Data’, Academy of Management Review, 28(3): 371–82.
Dalton, D. R., Daily, C. M., Ellstrand, A. E., and Johnson, J. L. (1998). ‘Meta-analytic Reviews
of Board Composition, Leadership Structure, and Financial Performance’, Strategic
Management Journal, 19: 269–2.
————Certo, S. T., and Roengpitya, R. (2003). ‘Meta-analyses of Financial Performance and
Equity: Fusion or Confusion?’, Academy of Management Journal, 46: 13–26.
Davis, J. H., Schoorman, F. D., and Donaldson, L. (1997). ‘Toward a Stewardship Theory of
Management’, Academy of Management Review, 22: 20–47.
De Haes, S., and Grembergen, W. V. (2005). ‘IT Governance Structures, Processes and
Relational Mechanisms: Achieving IT/Business Alignment in a Major Belgian Financial
Group’, Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences.
DeSanctis, G. M., and Poole, M. S. (1994). ‘Capturing the Complexity in Advanced Technol-
ogy Use: Adaptive Structuration Theory’, Organization Science, 5(2): 121–47.
Di Maggio, P., and Powell, W. (1983). ‘The Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional Isomor-
phism and Collective Rationality in Organisational Fields’, American Sociological Review,
48: 147–60.
Dougherty, D. (1992). ‘Interpretive Barriers to Successful Product Innovation in Large Firms’,
Organization Science, 3: 179–202.
Donaldson, T., and Preston, L. E. (1995). ‘The Stakeholder Theory of the Corporation:
Concepts, Evidence, and Implications’, Academy of Management Review, 20(1): 65–91.
Drummond, H. (1998). ‘Is Escalation Always Irrational?’, Organization Studies, 19: 911–29.
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). ‘Agency Theory: An Assessment and Review’, Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 14: 57–74.
Elkington, J. (1994). ‘Towards the Sustainable Corporation: Win-Win-Win Business Strate-
gies for Sustainable Development’, California Management Review, 36(2): 90–100.
A MULTI-THEORETIC APPROACH TO IT GOVERNANCE
439

Finkelstein, S., and Hambrick, D. C. (1990). ‘Top-Management-Team Tenure and Organiza-
tional Outcomes: The Moderating Role of Managerial Discretion’, Administrative Science
Quarterly, 35(3): 484–503.
Fiss, P. C. (2008). ‘Institutions and Corporate Governance’, in R. Greenwood, C., Oliver,
K. Sahlin, and R. Suddaby (eds.), Handbook of Organizational Institutionalism. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage, 389–410.
——and Zajac, E. J. (2006). ‘Symbolic Management of Strategic Change: Sensegiving via
Framing and Decoupling’, Academy of Management Journal, 49: 1173–93.
Forbes, D., and Milliken, F. (1999). ‘Cognition and Corporate Governance: Understanding
Boards of Directors as Strategic Decision-Making Groups’, Academy of Management
Review, 24: 489–505.
Freeman, R., and Reed, D. (1983). ‘Stockholders and Stakeholders: A New Perspective on
Corporate Governance’, California Management Review, 25 (Spring).
Friedman, M. (2004). ‘The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Proﬁts’,
reprinted in Tom L. Beauchamp and Norman E. Bowie (eds.), Ethical Theory and Business,
7th edn. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson, 50–5.
Galliers, R. D. (2003). ‘Change as Crisis or Growth? Toward a Trans-disciplinary View of
Information Systems as a Field of Study: A Response to Benbasat and Zmud’s Call
for Returning to the IT Artifact’, Journal of the Association for Information Systems,
4(6): 337–51.
Giddens, A. (1984). The Constitution of Society. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Granovetter, M. (1985). ‘Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of Embedded-
ness’, American Journal of Sociology, 91: 481–510.
Greenaway, K. E., and Chan, Y. E. (2005). ‘Theoretical Explanations of Firms’ Information
Privacy Behaviors’, Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 6(6): 171–98.
Gu, B., Xue, L., and Ray, R. (2008). ‘IT Governance and IT Investment Performance: An
Empirical Analysis’, ICIS Proceedings.
Hackman, R. (1990). Groups That Work (and Those That Don’t): Conditions for Effective
Teamwork. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Holland, C., and Light, B. (1999). ‘A Critical Success Factors Model for ERP Implementation’,
IEEE Software 16(3): 30–6.
————and Gibson, N. (1999). ‘A Critical Success Factors Model For Enterprise Resource
Planning Implementation’, Proceedings of the 7th European Conference on Information
Systems. Copenhagen, 273–87.
Howcroft, D., and Wilson, M. (2003). ‘Participation: “Bounded Freedom” or Hidden Con-
straints on User Involvement’, New Technology, Work and Employment, 18(1): 2–19.
Islamoglu, M., and Liebenau, J. (2007). ‘Information Technology, Transaction Costs and
Governance Structures’, Journal of Information Technology, 22: 275–83.
IT Governance Institute (2005). ‘The Governance Institute Home Page’, available at: <http://
www.governanceinstitute.com/>.
Jaffe, A., and Stavins, R. (1994). ‘The Energy Paradox and the Diffusion of Conservation
Technology’, Resource and Energy Economics, 16(2): 91–123.
Janis, I. (1982). Groupthink. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Jarvenpaa, S., and Ives, B. (1991). ‘Executive Involvement and Participation in the Manage-
ment of Information Technology’, MIS Quarterly, 15(2): 204–27.
Jensen, M. C., and Meckling, W. F. (1976). ‘Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency
Costs, and Ownership Structure’, Journal of Financial Economics, 3: 305–60.
440
SUE NEWELL AND CYNTHIA CLARK WILLIAMS

Kaplan, R., and Norton, D. (1992). ‘The Balanced Scorecard: Measures that Drive Perfor-
mance’, Harvard Business Review, January–February: 71–9.
Karimi, J., Bhattacherjee, A., Gupta, Y. P., and Somers, T. M. (2000). ‘The Effect of MIS
Steering Committees on Information Technology Management Sophistication’, Journal of
Management Information Systems, 17(2): 207–30.
Kisfalvi, V. (2000). ‘The Threat of Failure, the Perils of Success and CEO Character: Sources of
Strategic Persistence’, Organization Studies, 21: 611–39.
Kulik, B., O’Fallon, M., and Salimath, M. (2008). ‘Do Competitive Environments Lead to the
Rise of Unethical Behaviour: Parallels from Enron’, Journal of Business Ethics, 83: 703–23.
Law, C., and Ngai, E. (2007). ‘IT Infrastructure Capabilities and Business Process Improve-
ments: Association with IT Governance Characteristics’, Information Resources Manage-
ment Journal, 20(4): 25–47.
Leonard-Barton, D. (1995). Well-springs of Knowledge: Building and Sustaining the Sources of
Innovation. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Lounsbury, M. (2007). ‘A Tale of Two Cities: Competing Logics and Practice Variation in the
Professionalization of Mutual Funds’, Academy of Management Journal, 50: 289–307.
Lubatkin, M., Lane, P., Collin, S., and Very, P. (2007). ‘An Embeddedness Framing of
Governance and Opportunism: Towards a Cross-nationally Accommodating Theory of
Agency’, Journal of Organizational Behaviour, 28: 43–58.
Lynall, M., Golden, B., and Hillman, A. (2003). ‘Board Composition from Adolescence to
Maturity’, Academy of Mangement Journal, 28(3): 416–31.
Margolis, J. D., and Walsh, J. P. (2003). ‘Misery loves Companies: Rethinking Social Initiatives
by Business’, Administrative Science Quarterly, 48: 268–305.
Markus, M. L., Tanis, C., and Fenema, P. C. (2000). ‘Multisite ERP Implementations’,
Communications of the ACM, April, 43(4).
——Axline, S., Petrie, D., and Tanis, C. (2000). ‘Learning from Adopters’ Experiences with
ERP: Problems Encountered and Success Achieved’, Journal of Information Technology,
15: 245–65.
Maurizio, A., Girolami, L., and Jones, P. (2007). ‘EAI and SOA: Factors and Methods
Inﬂuencing the Integration of Multiple ERP Systems (in an SAP Environment) to Comply
with the Sarbanes–Oxley Act’, Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 20(1):
14–31.
Meyer, J., and Rowan, B. (1977). ‘Institutional Organizations: Formal Structure as Myth and
Ceremony’, American Journal of Sociology, 83: 340–63.
Montgomery, C., and Kaufman, R. (2003). ‘The Board’s Missing Link’, Harvard Business
Review, 81(3): 86–93.
Mumford, E. (1983). ‘Participative Systems Design: Practice and Theory’, Journal of Occupa-
tional Psychology, 4(1): 47–57.
Nah, F. F., Lau, J. L., and Kuang, J. (2001). ‘Critical Factors for Successful Implementation of
Enterprise Systems’, Business Process Management, 7(3): 285–96.
——Zuckweller, K., and Lau, J. (2003). ‘ES Implementation: Chief Information Ofﬁcers’
Perceptions of Critical Success Factors’, International Journal of Human–Computer Inter-
actions, 16(1): 5–22.
O’Donovan, G., and Gibson, K. (2007). ‘Corporate Governance and Environmental Report-
ing: An Australian Study’, Corporate Governance: An International Review, 15: 944–56.
Oliver, C. (1991). ‘Strategic Responses to Institutional Processes’, Academy of Management
Journal, 16: 145–79.
A MULTI-THEORETIC APPROACH TO IT GOVERNANCE
441

Orlitzky, M., Schmidt, F., and Rynes, S. (2003). ‘Corporate Social and Financial Performance:
A Meta-analysis’, Organization Studies, 24(3): 403–41.
Parr, A.,and Shanks, G.(2000). ‘AModelofES ProjectImplementation’,Journalof Information
Technology, 15: 289–303.
Peterson, R. (2004). ‘Information Strategies and Tactics for Information Technology
Governance’, in Strategies for Information Technology Governance. Hershey, PA: Idea
Group.
Pettigrew, A. (1992). ‘On Studying Managerial Elites’, Strategic Management Journal
13: 163–82.
Pfeffer, J., and Salancik, G. (1978). The External Control of Organizations: A Resource
Dependence Perspective. New York: Harper and Row.
Premkumar, G., and King, W. R. (1994). ‘The Evaluation of Strategic Information System
Planning’, Information and Management, 26: 327–40.
Rotvold, G. (2008). ‘How to Create a Security Culture in your Organization’, Information
Management Journal, 42(6): 32–8.
Sambamurthy, V., and Zmud, R. W. (1999). ‘Arrangements for Information Technology
Governance: A Theory of Multiple Contingencies’, MIS Quarterly, 23(2): 261–90.
Sia, S., Soh, C., and Weill, P. (2008). ‘IT Governance in Global Enterprises: Managing in Asia’,
ICIS Proceedings, Paris, France.
Solove, D. J. (2008). ‘The New Vulnerability: Data Security and Personal Information’, in
A. Chander, L. Gelman, and M. J. Radin (eds.), Securing Privacy in the Internet Age. Palo
Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Sousa, J. E., and Collado, J. P. (2000). ‘Towards the Uniﬁcation of Critical Success Factors for
ERP Implementations’, in 10th Annual Business Information Technology (BIT) Conference,
Manchester.
Standish Group (2006). Chaos report. <http://www.standishgroup.com>.
Suchman, L. (1987). Plans and Situated Actions: The Problem of Human/Machine Communi-
cation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sumner, M. (2000). ‘Risk Factors in Enterprise-wide/ERP Projects’, Journal of Information
Technology, 15: 317–27.
Sundaramurthy, C., and Lewis, M. (2003). ‘Control and Collaboration: Paradoxes of Gover-
nance’, Academy of Management Review, 28(3): 397–415.
Van Grembergen, W. (2002). ‘Introduction to the Minitrack, IT Governance and its Mechan-
isms’, Proceedings of the 35th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS),
IEEE.
Vaswani, R. (2003). ‘Determinants of Effective Information Technology (IT) Governance’,
unpublished thesis, School of Business, University of Queensland, Australia.
Wagner, E., and Newell, S. (2007). ‘Exploring the Importance of Participation in the Post-
implementation Period of an Enterprise System Project: A Neglected Area’, Journal of the
Association for Information Systems, 8(10): article 32.
Watson, T. (2006). ‘Organizing and Managing Work’, Financial Times Management.
Weaver, G. R., Trevino, L. K., and Cochran, P. L. (1999). ‘Corporate Ethics Programs as
Control Systems: Inﬂuences of Executive Commitment and Environmental Factors’, Acad-
emy of Management Journal, 42(1): 41–57.
Weick, K. E. (1995). Sensemaking in Organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Weill, P., and Ross, J. (2004), IT Governance. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
442
SUE NEWELL AND CYNTHIA CLARK WILLIAMS

Westphal, J., and Zajac, E. (1998). ‘The Symbolic Management of Stockholders: Corporate
Governance Reforms and Shareholder Reactions’, Administrative Science Quarterly,
43: 127–53.
Zuckerman, E. (2004). ‘Towards the Social Reconstruction of an Interdisciplinary Turf War’,
American Sociological Review, 69(3): 458–71.
A MULTI-THEORETIC APPROACH TO IT GOVERNANCE
443

c h a p t e r 1 7
...............................................................................................
RETHINKING
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
SECURITY
...............................................................................................
AMY W. RAY
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
Survey reports on security practices indicate that spending on information security
management is steadily increasing. However, a quick review of the chronology of
security breaches updated and maintained by privacyrights.org reveals that security
breaches are also increasing. If both security breaches and spending are increasing, it is
time to rethink current approaches to information security management.
Typically, security management involves some combination of organizational secu-
rity policies development and investment in security tools and technologies. These two
approaches may be viewed as top-down and bottom-up, respectively, where top-down
security policies and procedures are based on the expected, known use of organiza-
tional information systems by authorized users and the bottom-up technology man-
agement efforts involve identifying and securing the speciﬁc vulnerabilities associated
with the technologies employed by the organization. Examples of commonly used top-
down guidance include the Information Systems Audit and Control Organization’s
Control Objectives for Information and related Technology (COBIT) and the Interna-
tional Standards Organization’s ISO17799. Examples of bottom-up guidance include
procedures for securing a UNIX platform or an Oracle database, various encryption
methods appropriate for different wireless standards, or appropriate password manage-
ment techniques for a speciﬁc end-user application (Zviran and Haga 1999; Soderborg,
Crawley, and Dori 2003; Hesseldahl 2004).
The combination of policy- and technology-based security management efforts has
worked reasonably well in the past. However, information systems and their use have
become considerably more complex in recent years as the volume and variety of both

systems components and authorized users is continuously growing. Newer technolo-
gies, from large and powerful computers to inventory tags, are more feature rich and
more intelligent and thus more inherently complex than ever. When all of the intelli-
gent computing components are interconnected for use in an organization, the result is
an information systems network that is quite complex in terms of features, capabilities,
and access points. The advantage of these intelligent and feature-rich systems is that
they enable new and creative uses of data that may improve organizational effectiveness
or efﬁciency. However, the seemingly endless variety of possible uses also often leads to
unexpected and sometimes unknown developments that can potentially result in
unexpected and unknown risks. Keeping up with emergent security risks is a daunting
task in this computing environment where both increased access and increased com-
plexity prevail.
Current security management approaches are insufﬁcient because they can overlook
additional risks resulting from interactions among technologies as well as the growing
variety of unexpected ways that users interact with the technologies. Practical research
on how to address known vulnerabilities associated with speciﬁc technological com-
ponents is very active in the professional communities as witnessed by the speed with
which software companies such as Symantec or Microsoft respond when new hacker
exploits are uncovered. Research related to theoretical development and improvement
of strategic-level, top-down information security guidance is also growing (Nance
and Straub 1988; Straub and Welke 1998; Alter and Sherer 2004; Deshmuhk 2004;
Sherer and Alter 2004). However, research that looks into the processes and outcomes
resulting from interactions among newer feature-rich systems and the growing diver-
sity of authorized users is quite limited.
Another problem is that security policies and technology management practices
tend to remain fairly static until there is a problem such as loss of data from new and
insecure employee practices or identiﬁcation of a new type of malware. This reactive
approach to changes in security management has become problematic because the
network of organizational information systems and devices is not only increasingly
more complex but also highly dynamic, and changes in users and uses of those systems
is more dynamic than ever as well. Accordingly, the volume and variety of risks and
vulnerabilities is constantly growing, requiring a more proactive security management
approach that goes beyond top-down policies and bottom-up plugging of individual
technological vulnerabilities. We need to incorporate into our security management
methods explicit consideration of the dynamic and complex interactions of more
feature-rich technologies with each other and with their users. The ﬁrst part of this
chapter considers how the growing sophistication of newer technologies demands new
security management thinking beyond addressing individual vulnerabilities. The next
section describes some new complexities resulting from interactions among more
feature-rich technologies and their use, along with consideration of related security
risks. The following section presents some ideas for improving security management
efforts and includes suggestions for more proactively identifying risks resulting from
emergent use of these systems. Speciﬁcally, the potential role of logical models similar
RETHINKING INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY
445

to those used for decades for information systems analysis and design is introduced as a
method to more effectively identify and manage security risks and vulnerabilities that
result from the interactions among more complex systems components as well as the
risks from more diverse and complex systems use. In summary, this chapter presents
an effort to bridge the gap between high-level policy-based security management and
low-level technology-based security management to consider how more attention to
technological and business processes may lead to improvements in information secu-
rity management efforts.
CHANGING FEATURES AND CHARACTERISTICS
OF TECHNOLOGY
..................................................................................................................
Organizational boundaries are non-existent in business today as a result of electronic,
interorganizational information-sharing systems for supply chain management or
other business purposes. Systems components including computers, cellphones, and
even inventory tags are now equipped with features that enhance their support of
mobile and distributed organizational and interorganizational information systems.
These features have enabled improvements in communications efﬁciencies but have
also increased communications complexity and related security risks.
Six characteristics of technologies enhanced with features to improve mobility and
distribution are explored in this section for their capacity to increase the vulnerability
of systems to attack. The purpose of this exploration is to demonstrate the challenge of
security management in these complex environments rather than to represent an all-
inclusive list of characteristics and associated vulnerabilities. RFID (radio-frequency
identiﬁcation) examples are used for purposes of illustration because they epitomize
the highly distributed, mobile technologies in use today. Also, investments in RFID are
growing rapidly, and as a consequence, most readers will likely have some familiarity
with the technology. However, the six characteristics presented apply generally to other
distributed, mobile applications (see also Chapter 18).
Table 17.1 presents a summary of the six distributed, mobile systems characteristics
and associated vulnerabilities discussed here.
More Access
Most mobile applications are extensions to existing applications rather than replace-
ments for them. For example, one common use of RFID is tracking inventory items in
warehouses. Electronic, wireless tag readers are either placed at ﬁxed points in build-
ings, provided to authorized users as handheld devices, or both. Since data are collected
electronically, most companies anticipate reductions in labour, and consequently,
446
AMY W. RAY

reductions in human error as well as employee theft. However, replacing humans with
electronic polling devices produces an exchange of risks rather than a reduction of risks,
for several reasons. The polling devices are electronic access points that can support
new methods of data theft or corruption, and because distributed, mobile systems are
wireless, introducing rogue devices to create new, unauthorized access points is also
possible. Examples of potential attacks enabled by the new access points include
intercepting and modifying product price information on a tag using a rogue device,
interrupting network communications by placing a barrier over either a reader or a tag,
and collecting inventory status information sent over wireless communications be-
tween polling devices and corporate systems (see Figure 17.1). In the case of informa-
tion interception, RFID systems may provide a false sense of security to management
because tag readers will continue to automatically send reports that inventory items are
safe and secure as long as tags remain readable, readers remain functional, and no
material differences in reports are encountered during or after an unauthorized access
occurrence. Similarly, intentional interference with signals may be interpreted by
security personnel as an ordinary technical failure, especially if the interference is
temporary. However, a hacker may only need to disrupt service temporarily to steal
inventory or to otherwise prevent security managers from electronically viewing
malicious activities.
Table 17.1 Mobile system characteristics and related security vulnerabilities
characteristics
Vulnerbilities
More Access
· More points to control
· More authorized users
· No clear interorganizational policy guidelines
· Mobile systems for sharing critical/sensitive data hold great promise
to organizations and great temptation to hackers
Standards-Based
Communications
· Mobile devices designed to trust each other, including rogue devices
· Knowledge of data format standards may be enough to delete or
modify ﬁelds (data visibility not necessary)
Greater Data Storage
Capacity
· More mobile data increases potential cost per incident
· More mobile data increases rewards form theft
· Programmable storage at greater risk
Remote Objects and
Sensors
· Remote objects more vulnerable to attack
· Recovery from attack on remote abjects may take longer
· Less human monotoring
· Risk to in-transit objects may be greater
New Data Types
· Increases security management complexity
· New location data difﬁcult to manage and secure
Use of Public Networks
· Attacks can come from anywhere
· Data in transit may be more visible
RETHINKING INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY
447

Since many RFID investments are in response to mandates for increased supply
chain integration, there is increasing pressure to provide external access points to
trading partners. Ensuring security of external connections from rogue access involves
interorganizational agreement on security measures and trust that partners will com-
ply. Coordinating interorganizational access controls is particularly important when
the data exchanged across organizational boundaries are highly sensitive or valuable. In
healthcare, for example, interorganizational use of RFID is growing in efforts to reduce
administrative costs and medical errors through better and faster access to a variety of
critical and sensitive data. Popular healthcare uses of RFID include using active tags to
track patients in hospitals, using programmable tags to update patient care schedules,
tagging medical equipment, devices, and pharmaceuticals to identify their location
within facilities, and tagging and tracking hazardous waste. Clearly, giving authorized
users distributed, mobile access to these types of data can improve healthcare manage-
ment, but only if data thieves interested in anything from blackmail to asset theft to
terrorism can be effectively deterred from using the same access points. Obtaining
interorganizational consensus regarding who will be authorized users, how security
policies and procedures will be developed and managed, and who is responsible for
safeguarding infrastructure is challenging but essential where sensitive data are involved.
Collect & Modify
Eavesdrop on reports
RFID
Tag
RFID Reader
Inventory
system
Inventory Status
Item Data
RFID
Tag
RFID Reader
Inventory
system
Inventory Status
Item Data
RFID
Tag
Interrupted
Transmission
Intercepted
Transmission
Normal
Transmission
RFID Reader
Shield over reader
Inventory
system
Inventory Status
Item Data
FIGURE 17.1 Access concerns
448
AMY W. RAY

This is especially true in an environment like healthcare where the scope of authorized
users can include personnel at hospitals, doctors’ ofﬁces, laboratories, research facil-
ities, pharmacies, and other locations.
Standards-Based Open Communications
The second characteristic of distributed mobile technologies affecting security risk is
the growing dependence on standards. Data standards are applied to facilitate inter-
pretation of information transmitted while transmission standards are applied to
facilitate movement of data from one point to another. The ultimate goal is to apply
data and transmission standards together for seamless, automatic information sharing
across different systems without human intervention. For example, the Electronic
Product Code (EPC) was developed at MIT as a data standard for assigning unique
product identiﬁcation codes to all items carrying an RFID tag. EPCglobal develops
transmission standards to support the EPC data standard. Similarly, the Open Mobile
Alliance has developed application-level protocols for retrieving the position of mobile
devices independent of the underlying network technologies and the Open Geospatial
Consortium (OGC) has worked with the OMA on frameworks for processing and
transmitting location-based data. The Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP),
the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C),
and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers are also all working on various
standards to facilitate sharing of mobile communications.
Standards-based applications are popular because they facilitate improved efﬁciency
and effectiveness of mobile communications, but they can also facilitate the efforts of
intruders. A standard, by deﬁnition, is well-documented and published, and is thus
available to anyone interested in learning how to apply it. Communications and
operations standards such as the OMA and OGC standards are designed to facilitate
interoperability and compatibility of legitimate mobile systems but they also facilitate
connection of rogue devices and applications to organizational systems. Where trans-
mission standards are used to successfully obtain rogue systems connections, publicly
available information on data standards such as the EPC may be used to understand
how the data are structured on a tag, which can in turn be used to manipulate the data.
At the 2004 Black Hat Conference, for example, a demonstration was given to show
how a tool known as RFDump could display all metadata on programmable RFID tags
and allow the user to modify the tag data using a simple text or hex editor (Hesseldahl
2004). Hackers may also use knowledge of mobile data standards to render objects
unrecognizable to authorized readers, in turn making the object easier to steal or
relocate. Security personnel must understand that weaknesses of each standard vary
and recognize that hackers are studying standards to uncover associated vulnerabilities.
In private sector applications, standards may be strategically manipulated to steal an
inventory item or to change its value while more frightening scenarios may play out in
RETHINKING INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY
449

public sector uses of these technologies, especially where tagged ‘objects’ include
soldiers as well as weapons.
Greater Data Storage Capacity
The dynamic storage capacity of all sizes of mobile devices including notebooks, USB
hard drives, mobile phones, PDAs, and RFID tags continues to grow, presenting its
own set of security challenges. RFID tags typically have less storage capacity than other
mobile objects, but some RFID tags are designed to store several thousand bits of
information. As storage capacities continue to increase and prices continue to drop, the
desire for greater efﬁciencies and proﬁts will likely drive creative use of excess storage
capacity on all mobile devices. For example, a business may start by using only EPC
information in RFID tags but then subsequently elect to add static or even program-
mable information about items or transactions if it is considered proﬁtable to do so.
Item descriptions, source and destination information, useful life information, and
other information that the tag encoder desires may be included on tags. While
encryption may help secure data, it adds to tag costs while simultaneously reducing
processing efﬁciencies, leading some companies to reject such security measures.
Programmable (i.e. changeable) tags are at greater risk than read only tags because
there is a risk that information about the object or the transaction may be changed by
an unauthorized user to reﬂect a new state. The efﬁciency/security trade-offs associated
with inclusion of rich information in tags must be carefully weighed in each situation.
On one hand, adding more data to mobile devices can increase organizational efﬁ-
ciencies and effectiveness while on the other hand, successful hacks can result in greater
cost per theft for organizations (e.g. more data stolen per theft). In addition, as the
volume and richness of data carried on mobile devices grows, they will pose greater
temptation to hackers since the potential rewards are greater.
Degree of Asset Remoteness
Risks to distributed assets may increase as the distribution and/or mobility of those
assets increases. For example, handheld scanners carried on freight trucks may be more
susceptible to theft or loss than handheld scanners used within a warehouse. Remotely
located equipment such as RFID tag readers and other mobile sensors are vulnerable to
physical attack and may be stolen, altered, or replaced with rogue equipment. Infor-
mation transmitted to and from wireless, mobile devices is more vulnerable to inter-
ception than information transmitted over wired devices, so remotely located mobile
devices present greater risks to organizations than remotely located wired equipment.
Remotely located equipment is also vulnerable to intentionally distributed malicious
code such as viruses, Trojan horses, and spyware as well as signal jamming through a
450
AMY W. RAY

variety of very low-tech means such as creating a temporary shield over remote
equipment using a metal container. In addition, identifying the source of attacks on
remotely located, highly distributed systems may take longer since they are typically
not as well monitored as equipment more centrally located. Accordingly, greater
damage to systems may be sustained and more data lost before attacks are discovered,
consequently increasing the time required to recover from attacks.
In-transit mobile objects are at greater risk of being sensed by rogue equipment.
Rogue readers can be placed anywhere along transportation routes and used to scan for
interesting tagged objects en route. For example, a hacker could wander around trucks
at a truck stop using a concealed handheld scanner to look for signals from trucks
carrying tagged products. The goal may not be to read the tags but rather to simply pick
up evidence that tagged objects are near, similar in concept to pinging a computer to
identify its presence. The presence of a signal in conjunction with visual cues from the
type of vehicle (e.g. armoured commercial truck, armoured military truck, delivery van,
etc.) may provide enough intelligence to trigger a physical attack.
New Data Types
Many mobile technologies, including RFID and GPS (global positioning system), have
location-sensing capabilities and thus introduce a new data type, location information,
which must now be securely managed. Unlike other types of information that are simply
read from a storage device, location information is derived either internally at the object
level or externally at the reader level. It may be easier to control dissemination of
location information that is internally generated as many such devices are programmed
to remove location information from transmission, whereas externally derived location
information cannot be controlled by the managing ﬁrm. Some devices, such as GPS-
enabled cellphones, are locatable through internal as well as external means. For
example, a GPS-enabled cellphone can be programmed to remove the GPS information
from a transmission. However, the same cellphone can have its location externally
derived using other positioning techniques simply because it is on a cellular network.
In addition to security efforts to control transmission of location information,
companies need to consider the security implications of how location information is
formatted and stored. For instance, the location of an object may be recorded as a
physical location within a well-known spatial context such as the global coordinate
system or, alternatively, as a symbolic location relative to some special context. For
example, the location of a warehouse may be described by its longitude and latitude or
by its proximity to a particular road or landmark. Physical location information is
more vulnerable than symbolic location information when location data is transmitted
over an insecure network. Once an information stream has been compromised,
physical location information can be used to pinpoint the locations of objects with a
degree of accuracy consistent with the location positioning technology. GPS-enabled
RETHINKING INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY
451

tracking systems, for example, can report the locations of assets within a few metres in
the global coordinate system. Once the physical location of an asset is captured, the
information can be easily placed on a map. Further, as most tracking systems repeat-
edly report asset locations every few minutes or seconds, this information can be
extrapolated to predict the future position of an asset.
The transmission of symbolic locations, on the other hand, is inherently more secure
as the location information is coded within the context of the business application and
can only be discovered by understanding the coding scheme. For example, an invento-
ry item transmitted between a warehouse and a retail location might be encoded and
have facility codes representing the symbolic location of assets. Only when the coding
scheme is compromised can the symbolic locations be identiﬁed and interpreted.
Use of Ubiquitous, Public Networks
Perhaps the most readily apparent characteristic of mobile, distributed information
technology that affects information security is that most distributed applications
depend on the Internet for transferring information from one point to another. The
Internet is designed to be open and available to every computer conﬁguration, making
it simultaneously ideal for information sharing and vulnerable to attack. Every com-
puter connected to the Internet is theoretically connected to every other computer on
the Internet. As a result, attacks on Internet-enabled applications can literally come
from anywhere.
Prior to the Internet, organizations could avert most computer-related threats to
information by implementing an effective enterprise risk management programme.
However, as use of externally distributed systems grows, newer approaches are needed
for identifying breaches, recognizing patterns of abuse from all internal and external
authorized users, and for securing external connections to the extent possible. Acci-
dental as well as intentional data entry errors can also have a greater negative impact
over ubiquitous networks, since invalid data entered at one point may update multiple
other data repositories.
In summary, evidence suggests that hackers are quickly learning how to exploit
vulnerabilities associated with the mobile capabilities of computers and computing
devices (Sullivan 2005). The distributed and mobile characteristics of systems today are
attractive to hackers because of the increase in the inherent vulnerabilities of systems.
Anticipated improvements in organizational efﬁciency and effectiveness have over-
shadowed concerns about the information security risks associated with these systems.
Given the growing volume and complexity of risks associated with employment of
feature-rich technologies, a reactive approach to security management is increasingly
problematic. First, patching systems in reaction to each new attack will be ﬁnancially
unsustainable with distributed, mobile systems because of the number and variety of
possible attack strategies. Some evidence suggests that the bulk of corporate spending
452
AMY W. RAY

on information security is in reaction to external forces such as legislative mandates
and threats from malware. Many companies react to legislative mandates by focusing
on how they are going to provide evidence of compliance rather than focusing on the
process of creating a more secure environment. To provide assurance of compliance
with legislation, managers may create checklists of narrowly focused controls put into
place to assure that each systems component is secure. For example, one checklist item
might be that encryption is used for transmission of a particular type of sensitive data
such as credit card information. While this approach to security management is clearly
better than providing no security, it is ultimately suboptimal and can result in too
much spending in one area while key vulnerabilities are missed in another area. Also,
and as previously noted, changes in the way that technologies interact with each other
has resulted in greater diversity of expected and unexpected uses of the systems, further
exacerbating the challenges of security management. These additional concerns are
discussed in the following section.
SYSTEMS COMPLEXITY AND USE
..................................................................................................................
Information security is dependent upon what we know about information systems and
what we know about their use. While challenging, as discussed above, it is still easier to
analyse systems components and their inherent weaknesses than it is to consider all the
possible uses of interconnected information systems and associated devices and appli-
cations. This is an important consideration in light of the fact that most security
breaches reveals are associated with unexpected and previously unknown uses of
technology (privacyrights.org).
Findings from the IS literature (Truex, Baskerville, and Klein 1999) conﬁrm that
when complex systems are used by a diverse set of interorganizational users, opportu-
nities for new, emergent uses of systems are created. For example, in healthcare, once a
practice begins using an EHR system for patient visits, the care providers may decide
to add new functionality (e.g. the ability to submit prescriptions electronically), new
hardware (e.g. addition of handhelds for use in examination or hospital rooms), or
simply change business practices (e.g. access records from a home computer as well as
ofﬁce computers). All of these are examples of emergent use of systems and data that can
increase efﬁciency and effectiveness but may also have potential consequences for the
security of the information that is accessed (Baskerville and Siponen 2002; Ray and
Newell 2008). In particular, emergent use can increase the complexity of the system
itself through the addition of features, functions, and component connections. As the
volume and diversity of uses increases, the complexity of systems use will also increase.
In turn, the complexity of systems and uses makes effective security management more
challenging (Ray and Newell 2008). Approaches to the creation and maintenance of
security policies that can keep up with contexts where there is a high level of system
RETHINKING INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY
453

emergence are severely lacking, both in practice and in theory (Baskerville and Siponen
2002).
In situations where information systems are linked for interorganizational com-
munications, an additional concern is that the needs of these different groups are
likely to be contradictory so that competing needs must coexist rather than be
resolved by tighter or more centralized control (Law 2000). As the diversity of users
and uses increases, interorganizational system complexity increases. Interorganiza-
tional systems are made more complex due to their technologically sophisticated,
organizationally and geographically dispersed nature. The complexity associated
with interorganizational information systems stems from the interdependencies
and interactions between the many different elements, managed by different orga-
nizations, with a large number of human actors attempting to accomplish diverse
work processes in a variety of different organizational contexts. Such complex
systems usually give rise to errors (social and technical), which can lead to failure
(Perrow 1984), including a breach of security. Further, the complexity of large
technical systems undermines the ability to plan and regulate them (LaPorte 1994)
so that they constantly present threats of instability and security breaches, some-
times with dire consequences. Complexity typically involves an increase in the non-
linearity of an environment, resulting in management complications where inputs
lead to unexpected outputs (Daft and Lewin 1990). Non-linearity occurs when there
is an interaction between two or more elements in a system that cannot be
predicted at the time of design. Small changes in the behaviours of any one of
the actors in the network can have multiple, small, secondary effects on the rest of
the system that can ultimately lead to dramatic consequences. The result is that
complex systems do not reach equilibrium states (Dooley and Van de Ven 1999)
and can be upset by small unanticipated events (Arthur 1989). Complex systems,
therefore, have emergent properties: ‘They bafﬂe us because we acted in terms of
our own designs of a world that we expected to exist—but the world was different’
(Perrow 1984: 75).
There are essentially two types of emergent use of an information system: intended
and unintended. Intended emergent use is documented, planned use that results from
efforts to exploit untapped potential in the data. One can see this emergent use in
currently popular Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems. (See also Chapter 15.)
Initially ERP systems contained primarily ﬁnancial and operational planning func-
tions. Over time many new functions have been added, such as human resource and
knowledge management functions that can exploit the integrated database that is the
central characteristic of an ERP system (Newell, Huang, and Tansley 2004). In elec-
tronic health record (EHR) systems, emergent intended uses that have already arisen
are e-prescribing and e-referral. Emergent intended use is, thus, planned based on the
ideas of those involved in using, managing, or designing the system. Emergent intended
use includes new functionality added to the system by software vendors, often based on
feedback from users (Stefan and Von Hippel 2002).
454
AMY W. RAY

On the other hand, unintended emergent use evolves organically as users appropri-
ate a system and includes available functionality that is gradually adopted by a
particular user or group of users. Cook and Brown (1999) refer to this as dynamic
affordance. Dynamic affordance occurs through a process of situated learning as those
using, managing, or designing an IT system learn about potential new opportunities to
add to the functionality of the system to improve practice. This type of emergence is
unplanned and often occurs without any knowledge of the system managers. Such
unintended emergent use has been described as improvisation or tinkering, and
research has shown that it is widespread as individuals learn to use new systems and
identify ways to use a system that were not intended or anticipated by the system
designers (Suchman 1987; Ciborra et al. 2000). Orlikowski (1996), for example,
demonstrated how the customer support group in a software company appropriated
the use of Lotus Notes technology. As she describes:
In this organization, a series of subtle but nonetheless signiﬁcant changes were
enacted over time as organizational actors appropriated the new technology into
their work practices, and then experimented with local innovations, responded to
unanticipated breakdowns and contingencies, initiated opportunistic shifts in
structure and coordination mechanisms, and improvised various procedural,
cognitive, and normative variations to accommodate their evolving use of the
technology. (p. 63)
Both intended and unintended emergent use is likely to pose increased security risks.
Intended emergent use of highly distributed organizational or interorganizational
information systems is likely to increase security risks because as functionality is
added the number of users and organizations is increased, thus increasing the com-
plexity of the system. Unintended emergent use is likely to further increase security
risks because those involved may not be aware of the security implications of their
improvisations; moreover, unintended emergence also increases complexity. Thus,
there is a duality between emergence and complexity with emergence leading to
complexity and complexity increasing the opportunities for emergence, while both
complexity and emergent use have the potential to increase security risks.
As users work together and with technologies they establish ‘normal’ and ‘unac-
ceptable’ behaviour (Gersick and Hackman 1990). These behaviours evolve into social
structures encompassing the rules and norms that guide future behaviour (Giddens
1979). However, as the behaviours change so too do the structures. Thus, there is also
a duality of interaction here as well, where action creates structures and structures
constrain action (DeSanctis and Poole 1994). Action is ‘conditioned by existing
cultural structures and also creates and recreates those structures through the enact-
ment process’ (Walsham 1993: 34). This constant interplay of action and structure
eventually settles into a somewhat stable state for most sets of users (DeSanctis and
Poole 1994). However, as already noted, highly distributed organizational and inter-
organizational systems will involve multiple groups or communities of users across
multiple settings, often with contradictory and conﬂicting needs and demands. So
RETHINKING INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY
455

while a temporary equilibrium may be achieved within a set of users, the interde-
pendencies between user groups means that any small alteration in use by one group
can impact the structures governing the behaviour of other groups and can amplify
across the whole system of use.
Email is an example of a technology that is currently used in a number of emergent
ways, planned and unplanned. Email was an investment originally designed to simply
facilitate rapid electronic communications. Organizations cost-justiﬁed investments in
email systems through expectations that expenditures on traditional mail would fall,
labour costs from routing external and internal mail would fall, and decision-making
processes would be more efﬁcient and effective than ever. Further, there was the
expectation that use of email would be straightforward and the cost of the required
software, server, and maintenance would be minimal. However, as a result of how
quickly email was accepted by the business world, email vendors were soon offering
enhanced applications with innovative capabilities such as support for attaching
documents, and this led to a host of creative uses of email by users that were not
originally anticipated when organizations initially invested in the software. For exam-
ple, users began to use email as a backup for data storage, as a group decision support
aid, as a document-sharing mechanism, as a method of advertising, as a method of
collecting survey data, and as a source of non-business communications and entertain-
ment. Email has become so embedded in our communications culture that new devices
to support mobile access to email, for example Blackberries, emerged. While email has
certainly fulﬁlled its promise as a rapid facilitator of communications, the inherent
ﬂexibility of email’s structure led to the development of many other uses that were
unforeseen at the time of the original investment. There have been a number of very
positive outcomes from the alternative uses of email, but there have been numerous
unforeseen costs. Immeasurable sums of time and money have been spent on efforts to
control spam, malware, and non-work related use of email systems. Controlling access
to only authorized users has become a daunting task as authorized users access
sensitive business information through their email applications on various different
computers and computing devices from virtually any location around the globe. Had
there been a way to accurately forecast these additional costs and then include them in
the decision model that included the time gained from efﬁciencies, would management
have decided to invest in email? Another cost of email that was unforeseen in the early
days is the cost of upgrading the networks to provide enough bandwidth for transmis-
sions that continuously increase in volume and size. Foretelling the impact of email was
impossible, but through examination of the evolution of feature-rich email applications
that in turn led to a host of secondary positive and negative emergent uses, it becomes
possible to consider some of the potential alternative uses of other feature-rich tech-
nologies.
For example, it is important to learn from our lessons with email that the same
characteristics of systems that facilitate cost-effective improvements in business may
also contribute to security management challenges. As with email, any highly
distributed
information
technology
that
facilitates
instantaneous
sharing
of
456
AMY W. RAY

information is harder to secure because perimeter controls are ineffective. Also, the
wireless communications and mobile devices that we use in business today are in-
herently insecure and so increase the vulnerability of all systems connected via these
networks and through these devices. A connection between any two computers can
potentially put entire networks of computers at risk if, for example, unauthorized
access into the system is obtained through just one improperly secured computer.
As systems and use evolve, it often becomes unclear who should own which part of
the interorganizationally relevant data and thus who is responsible for securing the
data. In healthcare, for example, different constituents (e.g. payers, physicians,
laboratories, insurance agencies, and patients) require different levels of ownership
and accessibility to health data. However, the heterogeneity and complexity of health
data make it difﬁcult to clearly deﬁne the ownership of data. Second, although
healthcare systems are expected to enhance effectiveness and efﬁciency, the use of
such systems also brings about legal risks. The sensitive and personal nature of the
data associated with healthcare systems make these systems unique both in legal
ramiﬁcations and their desirability for unwelcome guests to gain unauthorized access
to them.
Additionally, because healthcare systems share information among multiple orga-
nizations, differences in organizational cultures and management processes further
increase the security management challenges. Securing data that are used to support
multiple types of processes and decisions makes identifying a complete set of potential
security weaknesses across all processes challenging, especially given the fact that usage
of the system and the data will change over time. Use of the system that was not
anticipated at the time of system implementation and deployment may also lead to
lawsuits in the future. Physicians and other health providers may hesitate to use the
system due to the fear of lawsuits.
In summary, security against accidental and intentional destruction, and modiﬁca-
tion and misuse by the complete set of authorized and unauthorized users, is both
critically important and managerially daunting. It will require an understanding of how
the organizational and interorganizational processes interact with the supporting
information technology infrastructure to appreciate the potential security risks to
systems. How these factors collectively and individually inﬂuence security is not well
understood and as a result, existing frameworks for security management, while
helpful, are insufﬁcient. Understanding how the interaction of the users, the organiza-
tion, the work processes, and the technology will impact the system use will greatly
enhance our ability to enhance effective security policies and practices. Research which
explores the potential organizational and interorganizational uses of modern mobile
and distributed systems will help us to understand how to leverage the systems’
potential power without sacriﬁcing security and privacy. In the following section, the
potential uses of logical models, adapted from information systems analysis and design
methods, are presented as an option for looking into the complex interactions among
feature-rich technologies and users.
RETHINKING INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY
457

RETHINKING SECURE MANAGEMENT OF
COMPLEX SYSTEMS
..................................................................................................................
Designing effective information system security requires an understanding of the range
of relevant, possible attacks on any given system. The discussion thus far illustrates that
in order to better understand information security vulnerabilities, it is imperative to
understand the complex interactions among various technological elements of an
information system, and thus understand the information structures and processes
that are in place. The chapter began with a discussion on how most modern technol-
ogies today include mobile capabilities as well as many other features, rendering the
technologies themselves inherently more complex than ever before. The following
section addressed how interactions among these technologies and authorized users
are creating new complexities in the organizational systems, and how these complex-
ities are creating novel security challenges. As noted at the beginning of the chapter,
these new security challenges are not fully addressed by the predominant approach to
security management that employs a combination of top-down information security
policy development and bottom-up ‘plugging’ of known technological vulnerabilities.
The primary problem is that by simply considering known vulnerabilities of the
technologies and expected use of the systems by the users, the risks that result from
unexpected or unintended interactions are missed.
An additional issue that compounds these problems is that organizational informa-
tion systems are heterogeneous, so learning about the unique complexities in one
organizational information system typically will not be generalizable to other organi-
zational systems. Further, research suggests that there is no ‘best’ IT architecture to use
as a goal or a benchmark because IT architectures should be designed to support the
uniquely complex decentralized organizational structures in place today (Agarwal and
Sambamurthy 2002). As organizational structures increase in individuality as well as
complexity, the information security challenges facing organizations become more
voluminous as well as more complex. Accordingly, an important step in rethinking
information security management is to develop systematic processes for identifying
vulnerabilities and risks in our heterogeneous and highly complex organizational
information systems. Providing processes for dealing with complexity will allow
managers to address their unique security problems more effectively than creating
evermore checklists and general policies.
Thus, it is proposed here that logical models, similar to the traditional, formal
models used for decades in the analysis and design of complex information systems
processes may be effectively adapted for analysis of security risks and vulnerabilities
associated with the complex processes in modern organizational information systems
and can lead to more effective design of security management strategies. Use of logical
models to understand complex systems is not a new concept. However, in this age of
packaged software and plug and play systems, decreasing attention has been paid to
458
AMY W. RAY

methods like logical modelling that are typically associated with custom development
of programs and systems, although some research demonstrates that there may be a
renewed interest in the possible use of logical and other models for understanding
information technology activities in ﬁrms (Agarwal and Sambamurthy 2002). Addi-
tional research suggests that modelling techniques for complex systems should simply
address the question of what are the primary functional capabilities of the systems and
how can the information be used to better support organizational decision making.
Using overly complicated diagramming techniques can confuse the readers of dia-
grams, thus defeating the purpose of creating the diagrams in the ﬁrst place (Soderborg,
Crawley, and Dori 2003). Accordingly, the diagramming technique used here for
purposes of illustration is quite simple.
Returning to the concepts introduced in the section on the characteristics of modern
technologies where RFID was used for illustration purposes, the examples used here
will refer to location aware systems (LAS) technology generally, with some additional
speciﬁc examples involving RFID, GPS, cellphones, or any other location aware
technology. LAS technologies are used here for the same reasons that RFID was used
earlier: they are growing in popularity and epitomize the organizational trend to invest
in increasingly feature-rich and thus complex technology. LAS are also used because
they are emerging as popular means for conducting a wide range of business transac-
tions (Mitchell and Whitmore 2003). Location-based applications aim to determine
with reasonable accuracy the relative position of one object, the object being located, to
an object collecting the location information or external referencing scheme in order to
provide value-added services at the point of the object being located. For example,
cellphone applications to help locate the nearest gas and food, transportation manage-
ment systems for optimizing routes and tracking assets, and inventory management of
consumer goods as they move from manufacturing to warehousing to retail outlets are
common uses of LAS in business. In addition, by using one type of technology to
illustrate the use of logical modelling for security management, it is possible to provide
more thorough examples of how alternative use result in different risks.
Two alternative ways that location aware systems are used in business are presented
in this section. Mobile objects being located are referred to as locatable objects, and the
objects performing location data collection as location collection objects. A locatable
object is any object that can have its location derived using a location collection process.
A location collection process is then an interaction between locatable objects and
location collection objects and involves the transmission of location data from a
locatable object to a location collection object (Figure 17.2).
The location data that are transmitted during a location process contain two
fundamental properties: an object reference and a location reference. Additionally a
temporal reference determining the time for which the location reference is valid can be
sent in explicit or implicit form (Rodden et al. 2002). The object reference is used to
denote uniqueness or class membership such as a product code, for the locatable object.
In some cases, the object reference might be transmitted as actual data or conversely,
implied within the properties of the signal itself (e.g. a speciﬁc radio signature). The
RETHINKING INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY
459

location reference is deﬁned within the spatial context of the location process and can
consist of explicit, derivable, or implied location information. Explicit location refer-
ences, such as a geographical coordinate, place the locatable object in an external spatial
context such as the global coordinate system. A GPS-enabled transponder, for example,
can transmit the actual geographic coordinate of the device. Derivable location refer-
ences require the use of external positioning techniques to determine the location of the
locatable object based on the physical properties of the transmission. A cellphone can
be located with some degree of accuracy using triangulation methods, for example.
Lastly, implied location references place the locatable object in the spatial context of a
collection object based on a Boolean result of a collection process, i.e. the object is
either there or it is not. The presence of an RFID tag, for example, can only be detected
when it is within spatial proximity to a suitable reader.
A location collection process is initiated by a location event. A location event results
in the transmission of location data and can originate from either locatable objects or
location collection objects. When a locatable object initiates a location event, the
collection process is a push system as location data are broadcast from the locatable
object to any collection objects within range. When a location collection object initiates
a location event, the collection process is a pull system and location data are shared
through a speciﬁc request.
In push systems, locatable objects initiate location events. A locatable object trans-
mits location data that can be received by location collection objects (Figure 17.3).
The transmission of location data in push systems requires the locatable object to
carry an internally generated signal and have a power source. Data contained in the
locatable object are generally broadcast based upon a particular event that is initiated
by the locatable object. An example push event might be a periodic transmission from a
mobile vehicle which is transmitted via a wireless system to a home base or an E-911
call from a cellular phone. While locatable objects in location-based system employing
push models have the capability to initiate the dissemination of data, they have little or
no control over the number and nature of collection objects that may receive the
location data. Access controls on the collection infrastructure are then required to
ensure security and integrity of any location data transmitted.
Technologies in this category include devices such as GPS-enabled transponders,
cellphones that can be located via various triangulation methods and radio beacons
such as those used to guide aircraft or locate aircraft black boxes. Active RFID tags also
Location
Collection
Object
Locatable
Object
Location Data
FIGURE 17.2 Logical model
460
AMY W. RAY

fall into this category as once activated, they can transmit location data without being
in proximity to a reader until their power supply is exhausted.
In contrast to push systems, location event data in pull systems are transmitted in
response to a query initiated by a location collection object. With pull systems, the
location collection object queries locatable objects for location and other information
contained within the object. During the location process, the location collection object
broadcasts a query to which locatable objects within range respond with the requested
data (Figure 17.4).
Data collection objects can only collect data from locatable objects that exist within
the range of the collection objects capacity or range. An RFID scanner inventorying
objects passing through a doorway, for example, will retrieve RFID identiﬁers and
determine locations of objects relative to the scanner. The location context of the
scanner is restricted to the scan tunnel and the concept of location in this example is a
Boolean: the object is either present in the scanned space or it is not. Applying this
Event
Initator
Location
Collection Object
Locatable
Object
Query
Location Data
(Object ID, Location Result)
FIGURE 17.4 Pull system
Event
Initator
Location
Collection Object
Locatable
Object
Location Data
(Object ID, Location Result)
FIGURE 17.3 Push system
RETHINKING INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY
461

concept, UPCs (universal product codes) and bar scanners may be placed in the same
framework. The location of the UPC reader sets the location context of locatable
objects (i.e. objects with bar codes). The only difference between the UPC and RFID
technologies for purposes of this model is that UPCs require line of sight and therefore
have a signiﬁcantly restricted location context. UPC scanners can also inventory
objects one at a time.
TECHNOLOGY PROCESSES, ALTERNATIVE USE,
AND SECURITY IMPLICATIONS
..................................................................................................................
Common to most strategic security frameworks is the balance of three security services:
information integrity, conﬁdentiality, and availability (Bishop 2003). Information
integrity refers to the trustworthiness of data content and data sources, information
conﬁdentiality refers to protection of data from unauthorized users and uses, and
information availability refers to assurance that data-sharing processes are protected
from interruption. Table 17.2 provides examples of general information security
threats in each of these three categories of security services. Note that some threats
are against multiple security services. Consider further that each threat may be
associated with multiple methods of attack. For example, categories of individuals
who may attempt to intercept and collect (read) data include employees, former
employees, random hackers, competitors, or terrorists. Similarly, methods employed
for interception and collection of data may include stealing or hacking a password of a
legitimate user, tapping into the communications medium, breaking into the database
where desired information is stored, modifying an application program to change
routing of information, or theft of a computer or device that will allow access to the
desired information. While some efforts to expand categorization of security services
beyond these three elements have been proposed, not all security professionals and
researchers agree on the expanded models, but most will agree to the generalizability
and importance of integrity, conﬁdentiality, and availability.
To illustrate the use of logical models for analysing security vulnerabilities and risks
in location-based systems, the three security services described above and the logical
model of location aware computing deﬁned earlier are applied to a simple example
Table 17.2 Information security services and security threats
Integrity
Conﬁdentiality
Availability
Intercepting and modifying data
Intercepting and collecting data
Poaching network
Poor data quality controls
Intercepting and modifying data
services
Destruction of data
Malicious code
Denial of service
Malicious code
Malicious code
462
AMY W. RAY

from electronic supply chain integration. The problem analysed requires providing
visibility of pallets of goods as they move from manufacturer to warehouse. If the
inventory management system employed active RFID on products and/or GPS on
trucks in transit with the goods (i.e. using the push alternative for processing informa-
tion), the basic process would involve periodic transmission of location information
from the device, every ﬁfteen minutes for example. These signals would pass the data
onto an application in one or more organizations, which can use the data to update the
location of the container.
Use of pull system processes for pallets might be implemented using passive RFID
tags, where the tags are activated when in the presence of a suitable reader. The reader
can record the time at which each tag was read and send the data to an application
which can update the time at which the container was read by a speciﬁc reader. Readers
are typically placed in a ﬁxed location known a priori to the application: the exit gate of
the manufacturer, an in-transit location, or the entrance to a storage facility, for
example.
Results showing the different risks associated with alternative uses of LAS generally
and RFID speciﬁcally are provided in Table 17.3. As the reader can see, the processes
and use of technology signiﬁcantly impact the risks associated with use of the technol-
ogy, beyond the inherent characteristics of the technologies used.
Table 17.3 Application of push/pull model
Push system
Pull system
Integrity
issues
Loss or attenuation of signal due to
‘blind spots’, out-of-range, and system
black-outs.
Spurious location readings due to
external effects on signal reception.
Malicious use of technologies to
confuse or jam signals (e.g. GPS
jammers).
Control of network to ensure data
received and processed are not altered.
Recoding of RFID tags once they have
been attached.
Relocation of readers.
Conﬁdentiality
Interception of signal by non-
authorized systems.
Ability to relate signal to physical
object (i.e. the container).
Ability to infer container content from
signal.
Ability to track container as it moves
from source to destination and predict
future location and time.
Controlled access to readers.
Controlled access to proximity of
container within ‘scan range’ of
reader.
Availability of technical speciﬁcation
of implementation e.g. RFID transmit
frequencies, range, etc.
Reconciliation of pallet contents to
RFID tag.
Availability
Internal power source.
Dependent on availability of network.
Network trafﬁc.
Access to readers.
Power source for readers.
Frequency interference.
RETHINKING INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY
463

The goal of this illustration is not to make technology recommendations or to
determine the general beneﬁt of one technology over the other. Rather, the intent is
to illustrate how important considerations for ensuring information security are more
readily apparent when using logical models to assess alternatives uses and processes.
CONCLUSIONS
..................................................................................................................
To complement analysis of the inherent vulnerabilities in information systems com-
ponents, consideration of electronic business processes and uses of information may
reveal a broader and more complete set of vulnerabilities. By considering possible
alternative unauthorized as well as authorized uses of information and systems,
potential security risks and vulnerabilities may become clear that would not be visible
otherwise.
Malicious attackers focus as much on how systems support electronic processes as they
do on the inherent vulnerabilities of speciﬁc technologies used. If an attacker has access
at any point in a system, she will consider how to use it to gain access elsewhere. Thus, a
thorough analysis of all possible uses of a system prior to its implementation could help
companies identify changes to systems architectures that will reduce security risks. This
approach is proposed as particularly valuable where information architectures are
complex and the number of possible electronic paths to data become too numerous
to consider informally, as is the case with distributed, mobile systems.
Much research has focused on the efﬁciencies and effectiveness afforded companies
through their investments in highly distributed, externally facing applications such as
supply chain integration systems. The potential improvements in organizational efﬁ-
ciency and effectiveness are exciting to consider, but the information security risks
associated with complex systems of feature-rich technologies must be addressed before
systems can be fully trusted by their authorized users. This chapter presented reasons
why we need to rethink information security management and demonstrated that the
current guidelines for information security are increasingly insufﬁcient for organiza-
tions with highly decentralized systems. More attention to how systems are employed is
needed.
REFERENCES
Agarwal, R., and Sambamurthy, V. (2002). ‘Principles and Models for Organizing the IT
Function’, MIS Quarterly Executive, 1(1).
Alter, S., and Sherer, S. (2004). ‘A General But Readily Adaptable Model of Information
Systems Risk’, Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 14: 1–28.
Arthur, B. W. (1989). ‘Positive Feedback in the Economy’, Scientiﬁc American, 262(2).
464
AMY W. RAY

Baskerville, R., and Siponen, M. (2002). ‘An Information Security Meta-policy for Emergent
Organizations’, Journal of Logistics Information Management, 15(5/6): 337–46.
Bishop, M. (2003). Computer Security: Art and Science. Boston: Addison Wesley Publishing.
Ciborra, C., et al. (2000). From Control to Drift: The Dynamics of Corporate Information
Infrastructures. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cook, S. D., and Brown, J. S. (1999). ‘Bridging Epistemologies: The Generative Dance between
Organizational Knowledge and Organizational Knowing’, Organization Science, 10:
381–400.
Daft, R. L., and Lewin, A. R. (1990). ‘Can Organization Studies Begin to Break out of the
Normal Science Straight-jacket: An Editorial Essay’, Organization Science, 1: 1–19.
DeSanctis, G., and Poole, M. S. (1994). ‘Capturing the Complexity in Advanced Technology
Use: Adaptive Structuration Theory’, Organization Science, 5(2): 121–47.
Deshmukh, A. (2004). ‘A Framework for Online Internal Controls’, Proceedings of the
Americas Conference on Information Systems, August: 4471–9.
Dooley, K., and Van de Ven, A. (1999). ‘Explaining Complex Organizational Dynamics’,
Organization Science, 10(3): 358–72.
Gersick, C., and Hackman, J. R. (1990). ‘Habitual Routines in Task-Performing Groups’,
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 47(1): 65–97.
Giddens, A. (1979). Central Problems in Social Theory: Action, Structure, and Contradiction in
Social Analysis. Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press.
Hesseldahl, A. (2004). ‘A Hacker’s Guide to RFID’, Forbes, July. <http://www.rfdump.org/
media/forbes.pdf>.
LaPorte, T. R. (1994). ‘Large Technical Systems, Institutional Surprises and Challenges to
Political Legitimacy’, Technology and Society, 16(3): 269–88.
Law, J. (2000). Ladbroke Grove, or How to Think about Failing Systems. Centre for Science
Studies, Lancaster University.
Mitchell, K., and Whitmore, M. (2003). ‘Location Based Services: Locating the Money’, in
B. E. Mennecke and T. J. Strader (eds.), Mobile Commerce: Technology Theory and
Applications. Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishing.
Nance, W. D., and Straub, D. W. (1988). ‘An Investigation into the Use and Usefulness of
Security Software in Detecting Computer Abuse’, Proceedings of the Ninth International
Conference on Information Systems, 283–94.
Newell, S., Huang, J., and Tansley, C. (2004). ‘Social Capital and Knowledge Integration in an
ERP Project Team: The Importance of Bridging and Bonding’, British Journal of Manage-
ment, 15: 43–57.
Orlikowski, W. (1996). ‘Improving Organizational Transformation over Time: A Situated
Change Perspective’, Organization Science, 7(1): 63–92.
Perrow, C. (1984). Normal Accidents: Living with High Risk Technologies. New York: Basic
Books.
Ray, A., and Newell, S. (2008). ‘Exploring Information Security Risks in Healthcare Systems’,
in Encyclopedia of Healthcare Information Systems. Hershey, Pa.: Idea Group Reference.
Rodden, T., Friday, A., Muller, H, and Dix, A. (2002). A Lightweight Approach to Managing
Privacy in Location-Based Services Technical Report Equator–02–058. University of Not-
tingham, Lancaster University, and University of Bristol.
Sherer, S., and Alter, S. (2004). ‘Information Systems Risks and Risk Factors: Are They Mostly
about Information Systems?’, Communications of the Association for Information Systems,
14: 29–64.
RETHINKING INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY
465

Soderborg, N. R., Crawley, E. F., and Dori, D. (2003). ‘System Function and Architecture:
OPM-Based Deﬁnitions and Operational Templates’, Communications of the ACM, 46(10).
Stefan, T., and Von Hippel, E. (2002). ‘Customers as Innovators: A New Way to Create
Value’, Harvard Business Review, 80: 74–81.
Straub, D. W. (1990). ‘Effective IS Security: An Empirical Study’, Information Systems
Research, 1(3): 255–76.
——and Welke, R. J. (1998). ‘Coping with Systems Risk: Security Planning Models for
Management Decision-Making’, MIS Quarterly, 441–69.
Suchman, L. (1987). Plans and Situated Actions: The Problem of Human/Machine Communi-
cation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sullivan, B. (2005). ‘Hacker Spies on T-Mobile Customers’, MSNBC <http://msnbc.msn.com/
id/6818785/>.
Truex, D., Baskerville, R., and Klein, H. (1999). ‘Growing Systems in Emergent Organiza-
tions’, Communications of the ACM, 42(8): 117–23.
Walsham, G. (1993). Interpreting Information Systems in Organizations. Chichester: Wiley.
Zviran, M., and Haga, W. J. (1999). ‘Password Security: An Empirical Study’, Journal of
Management Information Systems, 15(4): 161–85.
466
AMY W. RAY

c h a p t e r 1 8
...............................................................................................
MOBILE IT
...............................................................................................
CARSTEN SRENSEN
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
There are in 2009 over 4.5 billion mobile phone connections globally and a growing
number of other mobile information technologies permeate all aspects of life.1 The
around 1 billion mobile phones in developing countries is rapidly coming close to
matching the global total of 1.5 billion Internet connections in 2008 (Kluth 2008). It is
estimated that 6 billion mobile phone connections will be reached by 2013. The mobile
phone offers a highly visible new information technology (IT) that has found its way into
social and organizational life. A growing body of research studies this global socio-
technical experiment of instant interactivity through the mobile phone. This signiﬁcant
strand of research uncovers a wealth of issues ranging from mobile phone usage across
countries to the deeper cultural issues of instant touch between people. It generally
provides a balanced discussion of how technological opportunities play out in social
contexts. However, characteristic of most mobile IT research is its concern with one
single technology in one particular sphere of life—the mobile phone in a general social
context. Compared with this, little research has so far broadened the focus to include a
range of mobile IT, mainly as such technological arrangements are not yet considered
mainstream. It is, however, not uncommon to ﬁnd people managing complex portfolios
of mobile IT, for example, consisting of more than one mobile phone, a dedicated mobile
email client, a notebook computer with wireless Internet access, and perhaps peripheral
equipment interacting with the devices in Personal Area Networks (PANs) such as
Bluetooth headsets, cameras, photo printers, and speakers. While the mobile phone
offers a strikingly successful information technology, everyday life is for most people
partially shaped by what Yoo (forthcoming) characterizes as ‘experiential computing’,
i.e. activities involving everyday artefacts with embedded computing capabilities—mobile
phones, iPods, cameras, GPS navigators, digital photo frames, toasters, ovens, etc.
There is, however, an even more striking lack of research into the organizational use
of mobile IT, enterprise mobility. This issue is critical as both increased personalization

and ubiquity of information technology at work raise important issues on the intersec-
tion between the individual experience at work, the coordination of work within teams,
and the organizational concern for efﬁciency. The aim of this chapter is to outline the
main issues of relevance for the understanding of mobile IT, such as the technological
background, unpacking the issue of mobility, and contemporary research themes. The
chapter also provides examples of discussions of enterprise mobility based on a series of
case studies conducted 2001–7.
The following section characterizes mobile IT. The third section discusses mobility as a
means of conceptualizing the use of mobile IT. The fourth section presents pertinent
themes related to the study of mobile IT. The ﬁfth section illustrates issues speciﬁc to the
organizational use of mobile IT by way of results from a number of case studies. The sixth
section concludes the chapter.
TECHNOLOGY
..................................................................................................................
Mobile information technology relies critically on the combination of a number of
technological developments discussed in this section. The miniaturization of compu-
ters has made them portable or embedded into the environment. Wireless connections
to local or global information infrastructures have been established enabling wide-
spread interconnectivity.
The Invention of Cellular Communication
When Lars Magnus Ericsson in 1910 built a telephone for his wife Hilda’s car, this
marked the beginning of a new era, even if its use required Hilda stopping the car and
connecting the phone to telephone wires (Agar 2003: 8). However, it was two-way
closed radio systems sharing frequencies that during the 1930s and 1940s became the
ﬁrst mobile IT of signiﬁcant importance for the military and police forces. Two-way
radio systems still play an important role in many contexts, such as in taxis and police
vehicles. Harold S. Osborne forwarded in 1954 the prediction for a device similar to a
mobile (or cell) phone with video connection and a phone number given to the owner
at birth and which would follow him or her to their death (Ling 2004). However, the
use of mobile communication systems beyond the police, military, and ﬁre services was
not possible until the 1970s invention of frequency reuse through a system of cells.
During the 1980s ﬁrst-generation (1G) mobile phone networks were established in
cities around the world, gradually replaced in the 1990s with 2G GSM infrastructure
and handsets. The ﬁrst 3G network was established in Tokyo in 2001 and different
3G standards have since increasingly provided mobile phone users with fast data
services. In 2003 the number of mobile phone subscriptions exceeded the number of
ﬁxed-line subscriptions (Castells et al. 2007).
468
CARSTEN SRENSEN

Shrinking Computation to Portability
Intertwined with the global expansion of mobile telephony is the miniaturization and
widespread diffusion of computational devices, of which the mobile phone of course is
one. Making computers mobile and embedded has been a process of both signiﬁcant
technological achievements and of radical changes in the ways computation has been
perceived. IBM’s Chairman Thomas Watson in 1943 famously stated, ‘I think there is a
world market for maybe ﬁve computers.’ Digital Equipment Corporation’s co-founder
Ken Olsen predicted in 1977, ‘there is no reason for any individual to have a computer
in his home.’ Even Bill Gates’s statement that ‘Microsoft was founded with a vision of a
computer on every desk, and in every home’ no longer seems visionary. Already in the
late 1960s and early 1970s, at the time of the large monolithic mainframes, Alan Kay
and others from Xerox Parc formulated the conceptual design of the Dynabook, which
in essence was a notebook or tablet computer. The Dynabook represented a conceptual
leap in the understanding of how computers ought to support human activities.
Another Xerox Parc researcher, Mark Weiser (1991), was later one of the ﬁrst to
properly formulate a vision of hundreds of computers becoming integrated into
everyday life. Each such computer would be embedded in the environment or in
portable objects providing a ubiquitous environment of everyday computational ob-
jects. The 1980s and 1990s produced a range of hand-held computers, Personal Digital
Assistants (PDAs), supporting personal information management. These were subse-
quently equipped with wireless access capabilities accessing WiFi and GSM networks
as well as Bluetooth technology for Personal Area Networks (PAN). The process of
transforming PDAs into mobile phones is mirrored by the process of expanding the
mobile phone with personal information management, document management, Inter-
net access, etc. This began in the early 1990s and has resulted in the smart phone
category converging the mobile phone and the PDA (Lind 2007).
Digital Convergence
The convergence between two distinct types of mobile technologies, the mobile phone
and the PDA into the smart phone (Lind 2007), is a good example of the emerging
convergence between the computing and the telecommunications industries where
previous clear demarcations have become blurred. The duality of mobile IT in terms
of complex infrastructures relying on global standards providing services through a
variety of clients, handsets, and tags has shaped research in Mobile IT (Lyytinen and
Yoo 2002b). The combined forces of mass-scale adoption of digitally converged mobile
IT constitute emerging nomadic information environments that provide new challenges
and opportunities for the development of infrastructures and services (Lyytinen and Yoo
2002b). Cultivating global mobile telecommunications infrastructures relies on a com-
plex set of constantly evolving standards ensuring interoperability of services and
MOBILE IT
469

handsets across countries. Research into processes of standardization of mobile tele-
communications infrastructures seeks to understand how standards, policies, directives,
and incentives relate to an innovation system, the marketplace, and regulatory regimes
(Lyytinen and King 2002); for example, studies of international competition between
standards (Funk 2002), understanding how innovation processes differ across countries
(Yoo, Lyytinen, and Yang 2005; Tilson 2008), and interorganizational innovation based
on standard infrastructures, such as mobile content services (Nielsen 2006).
The popularized technical understanding of digital convergence stipulates mergers
of core functionalities from the computer (calculation), the telephone (point-to-
point connection), and the television (broadcasting) (Yofﬁe 1997; Braa, Srensen,
and Dahlbom 2000). The concept of digital convergence has, however, been used as
a broader conceptual clearing covering a range of possible interpretations, and through
the lack of speciﬁc agreed meaning allow for an open-ended exploration with partici-
pants who each may have varying and even conﬂicting understanding of its precise
meaning. The most common interpretation of digital convergence is the digitization of
previous analogue communications and data, thereby allowing processing of data
across previously separated carriers through open standards (Lyytinen and Yoo
2002b). Convergence has also been used to describe convergence of the PDA and the
mobile phone (Lind 2007); and the broader issue of converging the IT and telecom-
munications industries (Kärrberg and Liebenau 2006). The concept has also been
associated with much broader meaning beyond particular technical phenomena or
speciﬁc industries, for example as the cornerstone in characterizing technological
development (Schmidt 2008) or as a broad category of a number of phenomena,
such as technical, economic, organic, global, and cultural convergence (Jenkins
2006). Studying the use of the concept of convergence within the Information Systems
literature, Herzhoff (2009) ﬁnds that 317 articles in the top ten IS journals the past ten
years have used the concept but also that only 48 of these (15 per cent) use the term in
the context of technological change. The concept of digital convergence is essential for
understanding phenomena related to mobile IT, but also as an emerging concept
mirroring the dynamic reality of changing technologies, industries, and behaviour as
digitization destabilizes established vertical industry arrangements (Tilson, Lyytinen,
and Srensen 2010).
Ubiquitous Computing
The term ‘mobile’ in mobile IT essentially refers to the client-part of the technology
being portable and therefore implicitly supporting users who are geographically mo-
bile. Although the client does not necessarily connect to a wireless infrastructure, this
will often be the case. Characterizing wireless networking of portable information
technology does, however, not fully cover the technologies considered here. Informa-
tion technology can be characterized both in terms of the degree to which it is mobile
470
CARSTEN SRENSEN

and the extent to which it is pervasive, i.e. the technology has built-in capabilities of
relating to its environment (Lyytinen and Yoo 2002a; Kourouthanassis and Giaglis
2008). The PDA and the notebook computer are both examples of information
technologies that are mobile but not pervasive since they do not generally embed any
understanding of the environment. A built-in sensor measuring the water level in a
tank and sending a message to a server when the level is reduced below a certain point
is an example of a stationary pervasive technology. Ubiquitous technologies display
both characteristics of being mobile and pervasive (Lyytinen and Yoo 2002a). The
mobile phone is a simple example of such a technology as it is only able to function due
to a built-in ability to move across predeﬁned cells. However, in terms of the user
experience, the traditional mobile phone does not provide the user with ubiquitous
services, for example, conﬁguring services according to speciﬁc aspects of the environ-
ment. Contemporary location-based consumer services on GPS navigation devices or
3G mobile phones do, however, offer the user ubiquitous services. The Apple iPhone
application Urbanspoon, for example, will suggest a restaurant near the user when the
iPhone is shaken.2
Technology arrangements can also combine separate mobile and pervasive elements,
where one part is embedded into the environment and the other is mobile. The best
example of this is the large class of near ﬁeld communication technologies used for
contact-less cards and in RFID (radio-frequency identiﬁcation) tags.3 Tags and readers
can both be mobile and stationary, for example, mobile pallets of goods with RFID tags
passing by stationary readers (Arbin and Julander 2007), or RFID tags embedded in the
environment patrolled by security guards carrying mobile phones with built-in readers
(Kietzmann 2008). Expanding the perspective of mobile IT beyond handheld devices
interacting with telecommunication networks offers a range of interesting opportu-
nities for creating experiences by allowing the individual devices and the environment
to interact (Mccullough 2004). This merger between the environment and client-
devices has been characterized as augmented reality and originally emerged in the
early 1980s when researchers experimented with wearable computing (Barﬁeld and
Caudell 2001).
Ubiquitous information technology raises serious issues of privacy as, for example,
embedding tracking devices allow for subsequent inspections of human movement
(Albrecht and McIntyre 2006). Registered contact less payment cards and mobile
phones already constitutes opportunities for tracking either with proper legal authority
or indeed without (Pamplin 2005). Steve Mann has since the late 1970s been experi-
menting with long-term use of wearable computing and advocates using such technol-
ogy for counter-surveillance (Mann and Niedzviecki 2002). While the notion of the
cyborg as a merger of the human body and wearable (Mann and Niedzviecki 2002) or
bodily embedded technology (Warwick 2002) generates media interest and feeds into
the collective imagination of strange futures, the mobile phone is through mass
adoption and ubiquitous use in effect turning the global population into cyborgs.
Augmented reality is no longer the dream of laboratory geeks, or reserved jetﬁghter
pilots with head-up displays, but downloadable from the iPhone Store.4
MOBILE IT
471

MOBILITY
..................................................................................................................
The primary aspect of mobile IT in use is obviously the ability to free the user from
the constraints of engaging with technology in predetermined contexts, leading to the
much-touted notion of anytime, anywhere interaction (Kleinrock 1996). The idea of
simultaneously interacting with others or otherwise engaged in computing whilst
mobile has inspired highly optimistic accounts of technological possibilities, such as
Makimoto and Manners’s (1997) early exposition of the ‘digital nomad’ who unhin-
dered engages in fairly unproblematic global nomadic working. However, the issues are
more complex than the initial technology-focused accounts of how the sheer techno-
logical opportunity in a linear manner alters behaviour, and these accounts tend to
neglect the socially and organizationally situated nature of interaction (Wiberg and
Ljungberg 2001; Pica and Kakihara 2003). This section discusses how the understand-
ing of mobile IT can be situated in a context of social interaction and presents this in
terms of: mobility as human movement; the mobilization of interaction; the paradoxes
of technology in use: and the general notion of mobilities in society.
Human Movement
The term mobility is used to characterize a range of phenomena, such as: mobilization
of armed forces, economic mobility, social mobility up and down the class system, and
population mobility in terms of migration. Mobility as broadly related to the deﬁnition
and use of physical space also relates to research within geography, architecture,
sociology, organizational theory, and philosophy. Geographers have a long-standing
interest in understanding everyday human movements (Hägerstrand 1975; Carlstein
1983), and in how social and economic development transform our understanding
of space, for example, how social space is extended under globalization (Gregory and
Urry 1985; Massey and Jess 1995). Nandhakumar (2002) applies time-geography
techniques from the social geographers to understand locational and spatial aspects
of software development work. Architects also seek to understand relationships be-
tween workplace design, social engagement, and working practices (Becker 2004).
Within sociology, Goffman’s (1959) detailed analyses of the use of space as means of
reproduction of social routines and his spatial dramaturgical metaphor characterizing
front- and backstage interaction has informed the study of mobile communications, for
example, Ling’s (2008) discussion of rituals. In organization studies, the issue of
changing human geographical mobility and the role of space in organizational life in
general, is largely under-researched (Felstead, Jewson, and Walters 2005). Dale and
Burrell (2008) offer a critical analysis of the intertwined physical and symbolic role of
space in organizations in terms of the shaping of identity and power. This work is
472
CARSTEN SRENSEN

partly based on Lefebvre’s (1991) philosophical discussion of the meaning of space, in
its broadest sense, as experienced in everyday life.
The understanding of how different mobile information technologies related to
human physical movement can be characterized as the modalities of: (1) travelling and
therefore being able to interact with a notebook computer; (2) visiting a place for a period
of time and therefore having access to a desk, electricity, etc.; or (3) wandering within a
local area, for example within a medical ward, or a manufacturing plant, thus rendering
the use of any technology requiring two hands and a stable surface difﬁcult or impossible
(Kristoffersen and Ljungberg 2000). In addition to this simple classiﬁcation of types of
human movement and the subsequent evaluation of appropriate technological support, a
more integrative approach can be illustrated by Luff and Heath’s (1998) synthesis of
three types of mobility in collaboration supported by technology. They distinguish
between micro-, local, and remote mobility. Micro-mobility characterizes the way in
which physical artefacts can be handled and managed at arms length between people.
Local mobility signiﬁes the ways in which people collaborate through moving around
their place of work thereby using information and colleagues available to them where
they are. Remote mobility implies the wider mobility of actors distributed across distance
and moving between these. Here, the application of various artefacts and procedures will
often support coordination of remote mobile activities. In terms of more comprehensive
discussions of human movement and the use of a variety of ubiquitous information
technologies, traditional categorizations of places are insufﬁcient and further exploration
of the tensions in the co-construction of everyday places and the ubiquitous technologies
inhabiting these places (Bassoli 2010).
Mobilizing Interaction
Rather than merely categorizing and classifying modalities of human movement in time
and space as the core aspect of mobility, further understanding can be gained by the
more abstract notion of the mobilization of interaction through information technology
in general and mobile information technology in particular (Kakihara 2003). This is
similar to the concept of ‘mobile communication’ used by several researchers, such as
Katz (2006) and Ling (2008) The essence of mobile IT is indeed a dramatic and
interactive mobilization of interaction mediated by handsets, tags, readers, services,
and associated infrastructures. The mobile phone enables personalized, situated, and
thereby mobilized interaction between people and allows for new arrangements in the
co-evolution of technological affordances and human practices, for example in terms of
the temporal, spatial, and contextual aspects of interaction (Kakihara 2003). Mobilized
interaction further challenges the notion of linear clock-time and supports social time
with more ﬂexible time disciplines (Lee and Liebenau 2002). Traditional spatial barriers
for interaction are transcended allowing individual, social, or organizational concerns to
inﬂuence the spatial aspects of interaction. Finally, mobile interaction alters the broader
MOBILE IT
473

contextual aspects of interaction from being locally conditioned to ﬂexible, coordinated
by the participants in mobile interaction, for example in terms of who is engaged in the
interaction, their moods, cultural context, and mutual recognition (Kakihara 2003).
John Urry suggests going even further than merely characterizing the mobilization
of interaction and to include all mobilities in a mobile sociology (Urry 2000). This
much broader sociological perspective is founded in the observation that global ﬂows
of people, objects, information, and images call for deeper inquiry than has been the
case. Such a study involves understanding mobilities in terms of: corporeal travel
of people; the physical movement of objects; the imaginative travel of images of places
and people; virtual travel transcending geographical and social distance; and commu-
nicative travel through person-to-person messages (Urry 2007: 47).
Technology Paradoxes and Contrary Performances
The socio-technical relationship between the user and their mobile IT may be considered
as a linear relationship of purposes being met by straightforward technological affor-
dances, e.g. a person needs to obtain an address from a friend and therefore calls the
person from their mobile phone. This, however, constitutes a techno-centric assumption
of linear performances directly relating affordance to purpose without apparent contra-
dictions and paradoxes (Mick and Fournier 1998; Arnold 2003). The use of technology
can instead be conceptualized as a non-linear relationship between technical affordance
and a diversity of contrary performances, partly where the user will engage coping
mechanisms as a means of resolving the contradictions (Mick and Fournier 1998; Arnold
2003; Jarvenpaa and Lang 2005). Mobile IT will most often both follow the user and offer
access to ubiquitous connections. The technology therefore follows the user in pockets
and handbags while the user follows the technology by being disrupted when the phone
rings. The mobile phone both facilitates the user’s mobility and provides an uniquely
ﬁxed point of contact: ‘We can move, but we are always there’ (Arnold 2003: 243). It can
render even the busiest person instantly available; yet provide an easy means for even the
most available person to appear busy. The user is both liberated and leashed by the
technology, which at the same time is deeply private and yet often making conversations
into public events (Arnold 2003). Mobile IT offers an employee easy access to ﬂexibly
coordinate activities with a colleague on the ﬂy but also his or her manager an instrument
for instant control and micro-management. Technology performances emerge when
technological affordance is socially situated thereby being thrown into a context of
contradictions. Rudy Giuliani expressed this well when his wife had called him while
he was addressing a large audience during the US presidential primaries: ‘Well this is one
of the great blessings of the modern age, being always available. Or maybe it isn’t, I’m not
sure’ (Ling and Donner 2009: 108). Performances emerge from situated improvisation
informed by individually cultivated coping strategies and can be stipulated by social and
organizational practices (Schmidt 1999).
474
CARSTEN SRENSEN

THEMES
..................................................................................................................
This section outlines the main themes related to mobile IT and exempliﬁes these
with contemporary research—primarily research monographs and edited books.5
The research cited is concerned with socio-technical aspects of mobile IT and not
primarily with purely technical aspects as this is an entirely separate technical ﬁeld.
Most of the work is not produced within Information Systems, although the use of
mobile IT is a relevant area of concern for the Information Systems ﬁeld. The study
of mobile IT within Information Systems is an emerging ﬁeld and there are relatively
few articles published on this in the main Information Systems journals.6
The Social Aspects of Mobile Phone Use
Given the rapid diffusion of mobile phones across all regions of the world, and with the
speed this particular technology has gained prominence in societies, it is natural that a
large body of research engages in the social study of the mobile communication in
everyday life. The relatively brief history and broad impact of the mobile phone in
modern societies has been dealt with by a large number of books and edited collections,
for example Brown, Green, and Harper (2001) and Agar (2003). As a truly global
phenomenon, several efforts have documented the impact of the mobile phone across
countries and regions, for example Katz and Aakhus (2002), Castells et al. (2007),
Hjorth (2009), or speciﬁcally emphasizing the phenomenon in developing countries
(Horst and Miller 2006; Donner 2008). The mobilization of interaction through
technology raises a range of issues in everyday life, such as: the micro-coordination
of social relationships, changing dynamics of family life, the reproduction of social
rituals, the expression of identity, health, and safety, and disruptions (Ling 2004, 2008).
Studies have explored: the relationship between the use of mobile phones and the
development of language (Baron 2008); SMS practices (Harper, Palen, and Taylor
2005); the mobile phone as fashion and the relationship between the body and
technology (Fortunati, Katz, and Riccini 2003); and the mobile phone and emotions
(Vincent and Fortunati 2009).
It is also important to draw upon the lessons learnt from previous studies of ﬁxed-
line telephone use in order to compare and contrast ﬁndings (e.g. Pool 1997). Licoppe
(2004) studies the use of ﬁxed-line telephones, mobile phones, and SMS messages as
means of managing social relations as a repertoire of connected relationships. The
commercial aspects of mobile phone use have been the subject of substantial research,
for example, mobile commerce in general (Urbaczewski, Valacich, and Jessup 2003),
understanding the conditions for mobile data service usage (Blechar, Constantiou, and
Damsgaard 2006), or the diffusion of wireless data services (Knutsen and Lyytinen
2007).
MOBILE IT
475

Mobile IT beyond the Mobile Phone
A smaller body of research outside the ﬁeld of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI)
and the technical ﬁelds has studied mobile and ubiquitous IT beyond the mobile
phone, for example: a general theoretical understanding of embodied interaction
using ubiquitous information technologies (Dourish 2001), the impact of RFID tech-
nology on consumer privacy (Albrecht and McIntyre 2006), or using mobile IT for
learning (Kukulska-Hulme and Traxler 2005). The changing role of the city and the
individual inhabiting this world of merging architectural and ubiquitous informational
elements raises essential design issues (Mccullough 2004). The broader relationships
between people, ubiquitous technologies, and the built environment are explored by
emerging research conceptualized in terms of, for example, ambient information
environments, or urban computing. Dourish and Bell (2007), for example, explore
the everyday use of space as an infrastructure of experience.
Enterprise Mobility
Enterprise mobility, which is the use of mobile IT for the accomplishment, coordina-
tion, and management of organizational activities, is an emerging area of research
and has received relatively little attention in research compared with the signiﬁcant
body of research on the impact of mobile communications on social life in general.7
Technology-centric work on enterprise mobility emphasizes opportunities for changes
to working practices through new technologies (Makimoto and Manners 1997; Lat-
tanzi, Korhonen, and Gopalakrishnan 2006). Another strand of research emphasizes
the work arrangements and changes in these, for example, characterized in terms of:
homework; tele-work; remote work; mobile work; tele-commuting; Small Ofﬁce Home
Ofﬁce; and virtual work (Daniels, Lamond, and Standen 2001). The fragmentation of
workscapes into shared ofﬁces, home ofﬁces, and mobile working has implications
for how work is managed and coordinated (Felstead, Jewson, and Walters 2005).
A number of studies have explored mobile working, such as highly distributed photo-
copy repair engineers (Orr 1996), medical trial work and IT support (Ljungberg 1997),
mobile journalists (Fagrell 2000), telephone engineers (Wiberg 2001), or equity in-
vestors (Mazmanian, Yates, and Orlikowski 2006); cab drivers (Skok and Kobayashi
2005), and policing (Manning 2008). These studies generally document changing
working practices and the precarious balance between individuals and their supportive
technologies. Generally, the issue of enterprise mobility still needs considerable
research attention in order to shape a coherent research agenda emphasizing any
unique aspects contributing to the general study of IT in organizational contexts.
476
CARSTEN SRENSEN

Approaches for Studying Mobile IT
Any existing method discussion within Information Systems can be replayed and
appropriated to the context of studying mobile IT, and current research of the social
and organizational use of mobile IT also illustrates a diversity of approaches, for
example: qualitative interviews (Kakihara 2003), remote recording of activities (Ela-
luf-Calderwood, Kietzmann, and Saccol 2005) factor-based approaches for analysing
survey data (Hong and Tam 2006), participant observation (Horst and Miller 2006),
analysis of industry data (Castells et al. 2007), and action research (Kietzmann 2008).
The speciﬁc characteristics of in-depth studies of enterprise mobility may call for
approaches containing more than one data collection method, for example combining
interviews and participant observation (Al-Taitoon 2005; Pica 2006) or remote record-
ing of activities combined with interviews (Elaluf-Calderwood, Kietzmann, and Saccol
2005). Within human-computer interaction research it has been recognized that the
unique characteristics of mobile IT requires new approaches to studying usability
(Kjeldskov and Stage 2004). Similarly, it is important to invigorate a discussion within
Information Systems of the relative strengths and weaknesses of the various elements
in our methodological arsenal for the study of mobile IT.
Based on the experiences gathered during the past decade from studying enterprise
mobility8 it is clear that there are signiﬁcant strengths associated with the interview-
based approach for broadly understanding mobile activities and interviewee opinions
about their socio-technical arrangements. It is, however, also evident that the often
highly individually determined and emerging mobile activities make some form of
observation an important source of primary data. The increased body closeness of
most mobile IT potentially alters the perspective of the inquiry to encounter more for
the individual that the traditional information systems approaches tend to do. In this
sense, there is perhaps a need for a closer investigation of how to draw on lessons learnt
within HCI research typically drawing upon theories from psychology. It can be argued
that HCI research into usability must appreciate that the organizational usability is
essential when the technology in question spans from the individual to service-layer
and corporate and global infrastructures (Srensen and Al-Taitoon 2008). Similarly,
IS research must consider if the fact that our technological object of study is much more
closely connected to individual discretionary actions also must lead to a re-appreciation
of how best to study and analyse this phenomenon. This should also include discussions
of the use of experimental approaches similar to much of HCI research; as well as the
analysis of usage logs similar to Straub and Karahanna (1998) due to the difﬁculties in
directly observing use. It is clear that it is a signiﬁcant methodological challenge to
comprehensively analyse the entire system spanning mobile or embedded technologies
supporting mobile individual, distributed teams, the organization, concerns across
organizations, and relying on organisational and global infrastructures. Table 18.1
illustrates the methodological diversity of a selection of the research efforts conducted
at LSE in the period 2001–7.
MOBILE IT
477

Table 18.1 Selected examples of enterprise mobility studies 2001–7
#
Workers
Year
Location
Method
Extent
Topic
References
1
Professionals
2001–2
Japan
Interviews
63 interviews and in-situ
observations
Mobilization of
interaction for modern
Tokyo professionals
(Kakihara 2003) (Kakihara and
Srensen 2004)
2
Off-premises
foreign
exchange
traders
2003–4
Middle
East
Interviews &
observation
102 interviews plus
observation of traders
Discretion and control
in mobile working for
off-premises foreign
exchange traders
(Al-Taitoon 2005) (Srensen
and Al-Taitoon 2008)
3
London black
cab drivers
2004–5
UK
Interviews &
video
observation
39 interviews and 14
hours of videotaped
observations
The choice of location
as core business
strategy and the role of
mobile technologies in
pooling resources and
informing individuals
(Elaluf-Calderwood 2008)
(Elaluf-Calderwood and
Srensen 2008)
4
Police ofﬁcers
2002–4
UK
Observation,
interviews, &
focus group
250þ hours’ participant
observation with 40þ
ofﬁcers and managers.
20þ interviews. 2 focus
groups
The rhythms of
interaction with mobile
information technology
by operational police
ofﬁcers
(Pica 2006) (Srensen and
Pica 2005)
5
Health
professionals
2002–4
UK
Action
research
Intensive collaboration
with 16 students þ others
participating in project
Supporting situated
and remote learning for
medical professionals
(Perioperative Specialist
Practitioners) with
mobile information
technology
(Wiredu 2005) (Wiredu and
Srensen 2006) (Wiredu
2007)
478
CARSTEN SRENSEN

6
Security
guards
2004–5
UK
Action
research
350 hours of meetings,
interviews, & observation
for Study 6 & 7
Real-life
experimentation with
RFID (radio-frequency
ID) enabled mobile
phone technology
supporting new ways of
working
(Kietzmann 2007)
(Kietzmann 2008)
7
Industrial
waste
management
workers
2004–5
UK
Action
research
350 hours of meetings,
interviews, & observation
for Study 6 & 7
Real-life
experimentation with
RFID enabled mobile
phone technology
supporting new ways of
working
(Kietzmann 2007)
(Kietzmann 2008)
8
Delivery
drivers
2006–7
UK
Observation
& interviews
50þ people participating
in interviews and
participant observation
Establishing IT
mediated control of
work tasks with low
degree of discretion
through enterprise
infrastructure and
mobile information
technology
(Boateng forthcoming)
MOBILE IT
479

WORK
..................................................................................................................
This section provides illustrative examples of issues particularly relevant for the
understanding of enterprise mobility. The section draws upon eight studies of enter-
prise mobility conducted 2001 to 2007 (Srensen et al. 2008). Table 18.1 provides a
brief overview of the eight cases, the empirical data collection approach applied, and
references to key publications from each of the studies. The section emphasizes
challenges, which although of possible general relevance for other socio-technical
assemblages, gain particular importance when considering the organizational use of
mobile IT. The following three aspects of mobile work are explored: Issues emerging
for individual workers when supported by mobile IT; the challenges and opportunities
for individuals engaged in the coordination of teamworking; and the interrelationships
between individual mobile workers and broader organizational concerns for effective-
ness.
Fluidity of Individual Mobile Performances
The introduction of mobile technology in the workplace signiﬁes a closer and more
intimate relationship between the individual worker and their everyday use of technol-
ogy as a means of supporting decisions, managing information, and coordinating work
with others. Contacting colleagues or accessing information may therefore be done
immediately and be associated less with speciﬁc places. The straightforward discourse
emphasizing technological opportunities rather than social and organizational realities,
or indeed their interaction, leads to simplistic claims of mobile technology as a means
of enabling work to be conducted anytime, anywhere, and with anyone (Kleinrock
1996; Makimoto and Manners 1997). Although mobile IT supports these opportu-
nities, this does not imply that organizational realities and indeed the emerging
operational demands are best satisﬁed through such ﬂuidity as the requirements of
work often will be organized under speciﬁc constraints (Wiberg and Ljungberg 2001;
Cousins and Daniel Robey 2005). Characteristic for the studies listed in Table 18.1 was
individuals facilitating ﬂuid performances by carefully matching situational factors,
individual preferences, and speciﬁc mobile IT affordances.
Hiro, the CEO of a small company developing various digital services for Internet-
enabled mobile phones and television (Study 1), had extensive discretion regarding
how he organized his day (Kakihara 2003). As a result he often engaged in one of his
favourite pastimes: to ﬁnd inspiration for new mobile services through immersing
himself in Tokyo street life. He observed what people would do, what they would buy
and wear. Being in the ﬁeld of the Japanese consumer was a source of inspiration to
Hiro, and he characterized this behaviour as ‘being analogue’ as opposed to surﬁng the
Internet for inspiration. Wandering the streets of Tokyo was an important way for him
480
CARSTEN SRENSEN

to get new ideas for his company. Whilst traversing through Tokyo as a mobile age
ﬂaneûr (Kopomaa 2000) he is subjected to a large amount of requests for interaction
through emails and calls to his mobile phone. His mobile phone was specially custo-
mized for him by one of his client companies—a mobile operator who also manufac-
tures handsets. It represented signiﬁcant symbolic value, as it was the only one of its
kind. Hiro maintained a complex arrangement of alerts and ring-tones depending on
who sought his attention. Hiro can be characterized as a digital nomad with extensive
individual discretion, yet it is not the case that his working life is ‘anytime, anywhere’.
Hiro’s extensive discretion to select and shape his workscapes (Felstead, Jewson, and
Walters 2005) translated into speciﬁc choices for the purpose of getting inspiration.
From a phenomenological point of view, situations always matter and the notion of
anytime, anywhere can at most be translated into a discussion of the extent to which
the constraints are imposed by the individual through exercising discretion, by neces-
sities of work, or by organizational arrangements. Emphasizing the possibilities af-
forded by technological opportunities—interaction anytime, anywhere—favours the
technological opportunities and not the emerging performances or indeed the human
disposition (Pica and Kakihara 2003; Ciborra 2006). Hiro had very good reasons for
going about his business as he did, and the mobile phone supported him in doing so.
All the studies listed in Table 18.1 displayed complex interrelationships between the
use of technology and the speciﬁcs of the situations users found themselves in.
Ray owned one of the 21,000 licensed London Black Cabs (Study 3). As an indepen-
dent taxi driver, he also had extensive discretion regarding where and when he
worked. Our interviews found that many cab drivers were motivated by a desire for
ﬂexible working arrangements in order to better balance work and family life (Elaluf-
Calderwood 2008). However, choices regarding where and when to work were mostly
informed by deep experiences in where to be located in order to make money as an
independent business owner. The insights shaping Ray’s choices were fashioned
through extensive training and, as with Hiro, not merely a matter of choosing among
seemingly open opportunities. Prior to becoming a licensed cab driver, Ray drove
around the streets of London on a moped for several years in order to be able to pass a
strict set of exams, ‘The Knowledge’, covering 25,000 streets in a six-mile radius from
the centre of London. This exam has been largely unchanged since 1865. Having passed
the exam and working as a black cab driver, Ray subsequently spent 5–6 years learning
how to maximize his proﬁt by choosing where and when to obtain cab fares. Gaining
practical knowledge on how to use ‘The Knowledge’ allowed Ray to both be able to
make immediate decisions based on his assessment of emerging situations as well as
establishing a rhythm of working that both suited him and provided income. Explain-
ing his work in terms of ‘anytime, anywhere’ would be misleading and simplify the
underlying complexity.
Black cab drivers used mobile phones extensively as a means to get in touch with
family and colleagues in order to socialize. Ongoing conversations with colleagues,
furthermore, provide critical information about emerging events inﬂuencing the choice
of location, such as particularly proﬁtable work or essential trafﬁc situations. In order
MOBILE IT
481

to be able to meet steadily growing competition from minicabs where drivers are not
required to pass ‘The Knowledge’ exam, London black cab drivers are turning to
organizing themselves through joining computer-cab ﬁrms and accepting a certain
quota of monthly jobs through an in-car terminal connected to a central dispatch
ofﬁce. This development is, in effect, almost the opposite of the traditional hierarchical
organization seeking more ﬂexible decision making through facilitating emerging
mobile connections between its members.
The cases of Hiro and Ray both illustrate the paradox of mobile technology concur-
rently enabling ﬂexibility and imposing constraints. Both were free to roam the streets
of Tokyo and London respectively. However, they were also both constantly available
through their mobile phones. Many of the cab drivers studied had more than one
mobile phone in the cab. This naturally led to emerging contradictory performances as
technological affordance of instant connectivity met the user’s multiple contradictory
dispositions. The intensiﬁcation of the human-computer relationship by personalizing
the technology and at the same time wirelessly connecting it to a variety of communi-
cation and information infrastructures also intensiﬁes the technology paradoxes. Users
engaged in coping strategies as a means of dealing with such paradoxes (Jarvenpaa and
Lang 2005). Hiro dealt with the excessive demand on him wherever he was by
customizing his mobile phone to ﬁlter incoming calls and emit a variety of subtle
and less subtle sounds according to who was calling. This helped him make instant
decisions of rejecting or accepting the call depending on the speciﬁc situation he found
himself in. Ray would screen calls to his mobile phone and for example text a caller
back with ‘POB’ explaining that he did not pick up the call as he had a ‘passenger
onboard’. However, both cab drivers and passengers equally used the mobile phone as
means of absent presence when spending the cab ride on the mobile phone or doing
email (Gergen 2002).
Characteristic for both examples above is that the performances, patterns of tech-
nology use, mainly emerge as complex individual responses to situations, personal
preferences, and technological affordances. However, mobile work is of course not
governed by such extensive individual discretion alone allowing for emerging perfor-
mances to dominate. The role of mobile IT together with organizational procedures is
also to stipulate speciﬁc sets of performances. For example, the requirements for cab
drivers joining a computer cab organization to fulﬁl a speciﬁc quota of monthly fares
through the computer system. The case of off-premises foreign exchange trading at a
large Middle Eastern bank illustrates this (Study 2) (Al-Taitoon 2005). The traders
spent their days trading on an ordinary trading ﬂoor. After normal hours a selective
subset of traders continued trading using Reuters SmartWatches to follow the ﬁnancial
markets in London, New York, and Tokyo throughout the evenings and nights. They
used their mobile phone for infrequent coordination of trading limits and to record
trades on an answer machine inside the bank. Traders would largely engage in
emerging performances and on their own decide how and when they engaged with
the mobile technologies. This was essential as their working day implied extensive
coordination of activities, something that was unrealistic to expect outside normal
482
CARSTEN SRENSEN

working hours. Indeed a previous conﬁguration of off-premises trading based on
trading stations set up in the traders’ homes was not successful as it tied the traders
to their homes (Srensen and Al-Taitoon 2008). Off-premises trading stipulated,
however, one speciﬁc mobile IT performance of documenting each trade separately
by recording a message on a separate answer machine in the bank.
Late at night in an industrial estate in the outskirts of Manchester (Study 6),
the security guard Simon was doing his nightly round at an electronics warehouse
(Kietzmann 2007). At each checkpoint he waved his mobile phone, which had a built-
in RFID (radio-frequency identiﬁcation) reader, over a tag mounted on the wall and a
message was automatically sent to a central server to update his whereabouts. The
previous system was less interactive in reporting Simon’s position immediately, but
otherwise required him to touch tags on his rounds. The RFID reader mobile phone
and associated back-end database further strengthens the remote control in a working
arrangement where Simon engages in clearly stipulated performances with little room
for emerging trade-offs.
Mobile IT can support the individual in managing information and in their interac-
tion with others. An intimate relationship is fostered between the individual user
and the mobile IT they engage with day in and day out. Combinations of emerging
and stipulated technology performances express the mesh of situational characteristics,
individual preferences, organizational arrangements, and technological affordances.
The everyday cultivation of these performances through the years produce highly
specialized skills dedicated to the socio-technical assemblage of mobile information
and interaction management. In cases where individuals have extensive discretion and
where they may be subjected to a range of conﬂicting demands, they will also cultivate
individual coping mechanisms. Hiro stipulated relationships between expected distur-
bances and speciﬁc ring-tones in order to allow him to rapidly ﬁlter requests for his
attention. Simon, on the other hand, was engaged in highly regulated work with the
socio-technical assemblage of embedded tags, inspection routes, and recorded RFID
tag-swipes establishing a regimented performance. Mobile IT will be experienced as
providing either ubiquitous or opaque support for work depending on the extent to
which the technology supports (Srensen 2010): (1) a range of features enabling the
user to establish priority of interaction if needed—Hiro’s extensive email ﬁlters are an
example of such prioritization, another example is the display of a mobile phone
caller’s identity; (2) and support for ongoing technology-mediated relationships as
opposed to a series of individual encounters—for example the police radio supporting
ongoing relationship between ofﬁcers and the control room during incidents, as will be
discussed in the following section. Mobile IT performances are, therefore, not only best
described as an affordance subjected to contrary performances, but rather the process
of cultivating the affordance to support appropriate counter-measures to complex
demands is equally essential. Such interaction management mechanisms can, for
example, support the negotiation of availability (Wiberg and Whittaker 2005), and
hereby provide further individual experience of interaction ubiquity by embedding
an
individual
coordination
mechanism,
without
which
the
individual
user
MOBILE IT
483

would have had to carry the entire interactional burden on their own. This denotes an
individualization of coordination mechanisms. The purpose is not exclusively the
negotiation of mutual interdependencies but general interaction management in
order to seek ﬂuid interactivity.
Transparency in Team Collaboration
Carefully cultivated individual and organizational practices with mobile IT can serve
a broad variety of purposes. One of the essential purposes is to support individuals
participating in team collaboration. The coordination of work activities within teams
implies managing their mutual interdependencies (Schmidt and Bannon 1992; Malone
and Crowston 2001), which can be resolved through combinations of mutual adjust-
ment, standardization, and direct supervision (Mintzberg 1983). Mobile IT can support
both emerging and stipulated performances of mobile team members coordinating
activities through: (1) lightweight support for mutual adjustments by affording direct
access to synchronous and asynchronous connections; (2) the ability to push systems
of standardization to the individual mobile worker allowing teams to operate based on
shared understanding of these standards; and (3) offering extensive means for
mediated supervision. Mobile IT offers through such support both the promise of
increased transparency in distributed collaborative efforts as well as opportunities for
rendering collaborative arrangements more opaque as both individuals and groups no
longer may be able to gain an overview. From an analytical perspective, focusing on the
coordination of mutual interdependencies emphasizes the cultivation of horizontal
coordination of work amongst peers as opposed to the vertical aspects of managing
work through command-and-control decision processes (Schmidt and Bannon 1992;
Malone 2004). Such distinction is, however, analytical as the organization of individual
teams can mix horizontal and vertical aspects depending on how dependent the team is
on a project leader (Perlow, Hoffer Gittell, and Katz 2004).
In the south of England two operational police ofﬁcers, John and Mary, drove at high
speed towards a domestic disturbance incident (Study 4) (Pica 2006). Whilst driving to
the incident they were in constant touch with the control room over the radio to report
on their progress and to arrange for information about the incident and past incidents
at the same address to be streamed from the control room to a small computer in the
patrol vehicle—a Mobile Data Terminal. Mary read out the received information
displayed on a detachable screen while at the same time supporting John in manoeuvr-
ing the car across intersections at high speed. As they arrived at the scene most mobile
IT receded into the background. However, throughout the incident they kept in
constant touch with the control room via their shoulder-mounted personal radios.
Maintaining an overview of the collaborative arrangement was essential for both the
highly distributed operational police ofﬁcers and for control room staff and senior
police ofﬁcers. The two-way radio system was ﬁrst used outside the military by the
484
CARSTEN SRENSEN

Chicago Police Force in the 1930s Prohibition period of emerging organized crime
(Agar 2003). Since then, police forces have embraced a diversity of mobile voice and
data services as means of collecting intelligence, distributing information to ofﬁcers in
the ﬁeld, and for coordination of efforts (Manning 2008).
The operational police ofﬁcers studied had signiﬁcant discretion when dealing
with incidents and used a combination of emerging and stipulated performances
with a portfolio of mobile IT. Using available information to translate a sense of
uncertainty about the situations they were about to enter into a sense of calculated
risks formed an essential part of their preparations for engaging. The Mobile Data
Terminal installed in the vehicle offered several means for accessing both data and
other ofﬁcers to gain such understanding. The ofﬁcers could search the national person
and vehicle database, receive data from the control room, see the active queue of
incidents, and send instant messages to other vehicles. In-car and personal two-way
radios and mobile phones offered further means for direct point-to-point access to
other police vehicles and to citizens. Ofﬁcers were also held accountable for their
actions and therefore subjected to a range of administrative measures ensuring this
accountability in terms of following procedures, ﬁlling in forms and reporting progress.
In the coordination of work, emerging performances continuously sought to balance
the push of information to all ofﬁcers with the dedicated pull of information from
individual ofﬁcers. The two-way radio system helped establish shared mutual aware-
ness of the state of affairs but also offered a more limited resource for information. The
Mobile Data Terminal offered a rich source of appropriated information pulled by
individual ofﬁcers before engaging with an incident, however, at the cost of providing
other ofﬁcers a chance to obtain awareness of the situation. This illustrates the constant
balancing between rendering relevant aspects of the collaboration transparent and
others opaque.
In the study of a team of truck drivers managing a ﬂow of empty and full industrial
waste containers between client organization sites and dumps (Study 7), the work had
previously been conducted in a self-organized manner whereby several aspects of
work were documented centrally (Kietzmann 2007). The team were, therefore, the
only members of the organization with full insight into the exact whereabouts of
containers as coping practices had emerged as a means of optimizing the overall
performance of the team. These practices included temporarily storing empty contain-
ers halfway between the customers to save on transport time, borrowing containers
from or lending to colleagues from competing ﬁrms, or producing elaborate excuses to
avoid being called to far-away emergencies. Extensive RFID tagging of containers was
deployed and workers were equipped with RFID-reader enabled mobile phones auto-
matically relaying information back to headquarters. This resulted in managers obtain-
ing insight into the movement of containers through this direct link between the
core elements in the common ﬁeld of work (Schmidt and Simone 1996)—waste
containers—and their symbolic representation in a central system. The movement of
waste containers became visible beyond the team of truck drivers but the speciﬁc
reasons for the workarounds did not. This was the cause of a conﬂict as local team
MOBILE IT
485

discretion to organize work was challenged. The use of mobile IT can support trans-
parency of activities beyond the immediate co-present group in similar ways as
ordinary groupware technology, for example, the design team suddenly realizing that
a remote group of top management are following their progress (Ciborra 1996).
However, the central system directly modelling the interactive behaviour of the com-
mon ﬁeld of work, containers, produced such transparency of teamworking allowing
remote managers to not only question previously hidden mobile working practices, but
also assume that all that was needed for effective teamworking was this transparency.
This section has mainly illustrated situations where a team is co-located, for exam-
ple, two ofﬁcers in one police vehicle or a team of waste disposal workers. In the cases
of the Tokyo CEO (Study 1), off-premises traders (Study 2), and security guards
(Study 6) mutual interdependencies were either resolved through mobile interaction
or through predetermined stipulations of behaviour. The discussion of how coordina-
tion mechanisms can support not only distributed working needs to take into account
the speciﬁc challenges of mobile working, for example, the opportunities and risks of
rendering the actions, movements, and interactions of mobile workers visible for others
to inspect. Increasing transparency of individual behaviour supports ﬂuid negotiation
of mutual interdependencies in collaboration as it allows remote inspection of the
situation and thereby facilitates remote awareness of the state of affairs. For the police
ofﬁcers (Study 4), transparency was essential, as immediate assistance from colleagues
required their awareness of what was going on. However, the design of collaborative
working arrangements clearly needs to take into consideration the speciﬁc require-
ments for mutual awareness of mobile activities. This will relate directly to the extent of
mobile worker discretion. Furthermore, as illustrated in the case of off-premises
traders, it is not always optimal or indeed acceptable for mobile workers to be mutually
interdependent and subjected to external inspection, for example when conducted
outside normal working hours.
Efﬁciency in Managing Mobile Workers
This section is concerned with the management of mobile work emphasizing vertical
processes of command-and-control rather than horizontal processes of coordination
(Malone 2004). Managing mobile workers generally implies relying on technology
mediation of direct supervision, mutual adjustments, and standardization. As argued
by Yates (1989) in the case of early scientiﬁc management, control can be obtained
through socio-technical systems collecting and aggregating operational data on orga-
nizational performance upstream and communicating decisions and values down-
stream. Information technology served as a means of satisfying increasing need for
increased sophistication of control as industrial societies became more complex and
faster (Beniger 1986). Similarly, enterprise mobility can be seen as a response to further
fragmentation and intensiﬁcation of information and interaction work.
486
CARSTEN SRENSEN

At Foods International (Study 8) they provided food, drinks, and just about every-
thing else needed to run small restaurants and fast-food outlets (Boateng, forthcom-
ing). Jason worked as a delivery driver for the company and he had, like many of his
colleagues, only worked there for a relatively short period of time. However, the
systems he relied on in his daily work delivering goods to the customers were designed
to guide him through his working day. In the course of performing his duties, Jason
relied on the strength of technology-mediated interaction to update him on the
readiness of customers to collect their orders and any road diversions or blocks on
his routes. If he found a customer’s shop closed at the time of delivery, Jason used the
company’s mobile phone to ﬁnd out from Customer Services the whereabouts of
the customer. The answer would determine if he would have to return at a later time
with the customer’s purchased order. Jason’s work was characterized by a low degree of
individual discretion and his activities were, similarly to the security guard in Study 6,
to a large extent stipulated and controlled by systems. Logistics technology carefully
orchestrated top down the ﬂow of activities expected of Jason, but as GPS technology
was not yet implemented, the system critically relied on Jason to report his progress
and any emerging changes, for example, due to the unpredictable London trafﬁc or
unavailable customers. The study demonstrated the use of mobile IT integrated with an
extensive organizational infrastructure allowing for replacement of emerging perfor-
mances with stipulated ones. Mutual interdependencies between delivery drivers and
call-centre staff who took orders from customers, workers who picked items in the
warehouse, and those packing the lorry for delivery were largely mediated and stipu-
lated by organizational systems. This illustrates the strength of an integrated station-
ary-mobile work support system for not only supporting highly distributed activities
but also as a viable tool to further limit individual discretion. However, the study also
revealed how improvised emerging technology performances could utilize the limita-
tions of the control system to allow the mobile workers pockets of discretion to
organize their work.
The work-integrated training of sixteen National Health Service professionals
distributed across Great Britain (Study 5) sought to use mobile IT for the management
of the learning process (Wiredu 2005). This, however, resulted in signiﬁcant conﬂict
and eventual abandonment of the technology for this purpose. The one-year process
involved the professionals engaging in on-the-job training at the hospital at which they
worked. An essential part of the theoretical learning and practical training was done at
one-week sessions every six weeks in London. Here, the main coordinator of the
programme was keen to follow and record the progress of each of the participants
when they were back at their respective hospitals. This was deemed essential both for
providing feedback on the learning and for documenting progress to ensure
subsequent certiﬁcation. The students were therefore provided with a personal digital
assistant (PDA) with proprietary software to record conduct and outcomes of each
session back at their respective hospitals. The centrally stipulated technology perfor-
mances of recording the learning process for the purpose of management, feedback,
and certiﬁcation, ended up intrinsically being in the way of work being done both in
MOBILE IT
487

terms of the ﬂuidity of individual activities and as a disruptive element in teamwork on
the hospital wards. At the individual level, the participants, however, engaged in a rich
set of emerging technology performances using the PDAs for personal information
management, for reference using installed medical dictionaries, and for participants
wirelessly exchanging documents when meeting up in London for sessions. The
conﬂicts between the localized control of the participants at their hospitals and the
desire for centralized inﬂuence and control through the technology from the central
London-based learning-centre presented a signiﬁcant barrier for using the mobile
technology effectively. The aims for strong local control over activities locally clashed
in territorial dispute with the attempts to exercise equally strong remote control
from the central learning centre. As a result, the only useful aspect of the PDA was
individual use.
A balanced approach to obtaining organizational control over mobile workers
through stipulating technology performances was identiﬁed in the study of London
black cab drivers (Study 3) who volunteered to join a computer-cab company in order
to obtain more diverse access to fares. Each computer-cab company had its own rules
for how many jobs were required of each driver, and for how jobs were allocated
to drivers. Such stipulated technology performances through the allocation of jobs to
mobile workers worked well from the perspective of the drivers as it was up to each
of them where and when they decided to satisfy the quota. However, in terms of
organizational efﬁciency of mobile working, the system could due to this discretion
not guarantee the same performance as the minicab companies where drivers were
much more centrally organized.
In terms of the management of mobile working, mobile IT can ensure that actors
have sufﬁcient information to engage localized discretion and thereby ensure emerging
decision making suiting the speciﬁc situation. However, mobile IT performances also
imply immediate access to exercise direct supervision. The degree to which the
relationship between the assumed and real state of affairs is ambiguous, the individual
mobile worker will be able to create spaces of freedom. However, with these increas-
ingly easily being closed, the question is to what extent organizations will experience a
further polarization into mobile work that is extensively based on individual discretion
and work that is minutely observed and controlled. Several of the studies showed
examples of mobile workers on purpose circumventing rules in order to gain small
amounts of freedom. Study 2 also illustrated the limits to tightly coordinated work with
traders being managed and engaging in tight coordination during the day and the
subset of mobile traders being granted extensive discretion as a means of making off-
premises out-of-hours trading possible at all.
For contemporary organizations enterprise mobility will raise a number of organi-
zational issues regarding how to increase organizational effectiveness through enabling
mobile working. In some cases this includes increasing the degree of centralized control
and supervision, whilst other cases will demand increased cultivation of localized
collaboration where mobile workers retain a high degree of individual discretion.
Balancing the concern for direct supervision with the need for decentralized mutual
488
CARSTEN SRENSEN

adjustment will be an essential issue. The extreme examples of highly individualized
executives, such as Hiro, or highly managed workers, such as Simon, only reveal the
relatively simple part of the story as a large group between these two extremes still work
from ﬁxed locations, or engage in mobile working where organizations have yet to
formulate how best to see mobilizing the workforce as a means of placing people where
they matter and not only providing a perk to key members of the organization.
CONCLUSION
..................................................................................................................
This chapter has explored the technical elements of mobile information technology and
forwarded different interpretations of mobility as a way of conceptualizing the use of
mobile IT. Subsequently, an overview of current research on mobile IT demonstrated
that there is still a considerable gap between the possible research questions within MIS
research of this signiﬁcant technological phenomenon. Furthermore, it was argued that
whilst the large majority of work has been concerned with the everyday use of mobile
phones, there is much less research broadening the perspective to studying mobile
and ubiquitous information technologies beyond the mobile phone. Even more signiﬁ-
cantly, it was argued that there is a dire need for comprehensive research on the use of
mobile IT for enterprise mobility, despite a clearly formulated portfolio of research
questions by Lyytinen and Yoo (2002b). To illustrate the emerging research in enter-
prise mobility, results from eight case studies were highlighted and discussed in terms
of: the relationships of ﬂuid interaction between user, task, situation, and technology;
the challenges of managing mobile activities through increased discretion and by
creating transparency of remote activities, and the effective organization of work
through mobile IT.
A long list of issues could not be included, but mobile IT is still a phenomenon to be
investigated, experimented with, and reﬂected upon. What is clear is that although
most of the traditional classical concerns within information systems will be relevant to
discuss in the context of this new technology, then it is also evident that the speciﬁc
characteristics of the technology and of its individual, social, and organizational
appropriation will give rise to uniquely new questions as well as nudging the classical
ones in slightly different directions.
NOTES
1. Updated statistics from the GSM Association are available on <http://www.gsmamobi-
leinfolink.com>.
2. See <http://www.urbanspoon.com/blog/27/Urbanspoon-on-the-iPhone.html>.
3. For more information on RFID, see <http://www.wikipedia.org/wiki/RFID>.
MOBILE IT
489

4. For example, Layar, <http://www.layar.com>.
5. There are just over sixty books on various aspects of mobile IT constituting a fairly
exhaustive list of all the books written on mobile IT excluding the practitioner-oriented
books on mobile commerce.
6. Searching all volumes of main IS journals for titles or abstracts containing either the term
‘mobile’ or ‘cell’ plus adding articles found manually, identiﬁed the following number
of articles on mobile IT: MISQ 1, ISR 2, CAIS 1, JAIS 1, BIT 2, IT&P 2, JISM 2, SJIS 2, ISJ 3,
JIT 5, JSIS 7, I&O 7, CSCW 8, ISM 10, and EJIS 11. The journals dedicated to mobile and
ubiquitous computing, such as IEEE Pervasive Computing, Personal and Ubiquitous
Computing, Journal of Mobile Marketing, as well as the HCI journals for obvious reasons
have many more articles. However, the discourse in these journals will also often be remote
from the core concerns within MIS, as for example illustrated by Srensen and Al-Taitoon
(2008) extending the usability concept to encompass organizational issues.
7. The total of 6 out of over 300 pages in Castells et al. (2007: 78–83) serves as a good
illustration of this.
8. The research reported here has been conducted within the mobility@lse research unit
established in 2001 at The London School of Economics and Political Science. For more
information, see <mobility.lse.ac.uk>.
REFERENCES
Agar, J. (2003). Constant Touch: A Global History of the Mobile Phone. Cambridge: Icon
Books.
Al-Taitoon, A. (2005). ‘Making Sense of Mobile ICT-Enabled Trading in Fast Moving
Financial Markets as Volatility-Control Ambivalence: Case Study on the Organisation of
Off-Premises Foreign Exchange at a Middle-East Bank’, Ph.D. dissertation, London School
of Economics and Political Science.
Albrecht, K., and McIntyre, L. (2006). Spychips: How Major Corporations and Government
Plan to Track Your Every Move with RFID. Nashville, TN: Nelson Current.
Arbin, K., and Julander, C.-R. (2007). ‘Is RFID the Solution to Inventory Problems in the
Retail Supply Chain?’, in P. Andersson, U. Essler, and B. Thorngren (eds.), Beyond
Mobility. Malmö: Studentlitteratur, 207–31.
Arnold, M. (2003). ‘On the Phenomenology of Technology: The “Janus-Faces” of Mobile
Phones’, Information and Organization, 13: 231–56.
Barﬁeld, W., and Caudell, T. (eds.) (2001). Fundamentals of Wearable Computers and
Augmented Reality. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Baron, N. S. (2008). Always On: Language in an Online and Mobile World. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Bassoli, A. (2010). ‘Living the Urban Experience: Implications for the Design of Everyday
Computational Technologies’, Ph.D. thesis, London School of Economics and Political
Science.
Becker, F. (2004). Ofﬁces at Work: Uncommon Workspace Strategies That Add Value and
Improve Performance. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Business & Management.
490
CARSTEN SRENSEN

Beniger, J. R. (1986). The Control Revolution: Technological and Economic Origins of the
Information Society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Blechar, J., Constantiou, I. D., and Damsgaard, J. (2006). ‘Exploring the Inﬂuence of Reference
Situations and Reference Pricing on Mobile Service User Behaviour’, European Journal of
Information Systems, 15(3): 285–91.
Boateng, K. (forthcoming). ‘ICT-Driven Interactions: On the Dynamics of Mediated Control’,
Ph.D. Dissertation, London School of Economics.
Braa, K., Srensen, C., and Dahlbom, B. (eds.) (2000). Planet Internet. Lund: Studentlitteratur.
Brown, B., Green, N., and Harper, R. (eds.) (2001). Wireless World. Godalming: Springer-
Verlag UK.
Carlstein, T. (1983). Time Resources, Society and Ecology. London: George Allen & Unwin.
Castells, M., Qiu, J. L., Fernandez-Ardevol, M., and Sey, A. (2007). Mobile Communication
and Society: A Global Perspective. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ciborra, C. (ed.) (1996). Groupware and Teamwork. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
——(2006). ‘The Mind or the Heart? It Depends on the (Deﬁnition of) Situation’, Journal of
Information Technology, 21: 129–39.
Cousins, K. C., and Robey, D. (2005). ‘Human Agency in a Wireless World: Patterns
of Technology Use in Nomadic Computing Environments’, Information and Organization,
15: 151–80.
Dale, K., and Burrell, G. (2008). The Spaces of Organisation & the Organisation of Space:
Power, Identity & Materiality at Work. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Daniels, K., Lamond, D., and Standen, P. (2001). ‘Teleworking: Frameworks for Organiza-
tional Research’, Journal of Management Studies, 38(8): 1151–86.
Donner, J. (2008). ‘Research Approaches to Mobile Use in the Developing World: A Review
of the Literature’, The Information Society, 24(3), June: 140–59.
Dourish, P. (2001). Where the Action Is: The Foundations of Embodied Interaction.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——and Bell, G. (2007). ‘The Infrastructure of Experience and the Experience of Infrastructure:
Meaning and Structure in Everyday Encounters with Space’, Environment and Planning B:
Planning and Design, 34(3): 414–30.
Elaluf-Calderwood, S. (2008). ‘Organizing Self-Referential Taxi-Work with mICT: The Case
of the London Black Cab Drivers’, Ph.D. dissertation, London School of Economics and
Political Science.
—— Kietzmann, J., and Saccol, A. Z. (2005). ‘Methodological Approach for Mobile Studies:
Empirical Research Considerations’, in 4th European Conference on Research Methods in
Business and Management, Paris.
—— and Srensen, C. (2008). ‘420 Years of Mobility: ICT Enabled Mobile Interdependencies
in London Hackney Cab Work’, in D. Hislop (ed.), Mobility and Technology in the
Workplace. London: Routledge.
Fagrell, H. (2000). ‘Mobile Knowledge. Gothenburg Studies in Informatics’, Ph.D. disserta-
tion, Department of Informatics, Gothenburg University, October.
Felstead, A., Jewson, N., and Walters, S. (2005). Changing Places of Work. London: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Fortunati, L., Katz, J. E., and Riccini, R. (2003). Mediating the Human Body: Technology,
Communication, and Fashion. Mahwah, NJ: L. Erlbaum.
Funk, J. L. (2002). Global Competition between and within Standards: The Case of Mobile
Phones. Chippenham: Palgrave.
MOBILE IT
491

Gergen, K. J. (2002). ‘The Challenge of Absent Presence’, in J. E. Katz and M. Aakhus (eds.),
Perpetual Contact. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 227–41.
Goffman, E. (1959). The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. New York: Bantam.
Gregory, D., and Urry, J. (eds.) (1985). Social Relations and Spatial Structures. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Hägerstrand, T. (1975). ‘Space, Time and Human Conditions’, in A. Karlqvist, L. Lundqvist,
and F. Snickars (eds.), Dynamic Allocation of Urban Space. Farnborough: House.
Harper, R., Palen, L., and Taylor, A. (eds.) (2005). The Inside Text: Social, Cultural and Design
Perspectives on SMS. Dordrecht: Springer.
Herzhoff, J. (2009). ‘The ICT Convergence Discourse in the Information Systems Literature:
A Second-Order Observation’, in Proceedings of European Conference of Information
Systems (ECIS). Verona.
Hjorth, L. (2009). Mobile Media in the Asia-Paciﬁc. Oxford: Routledge.
Hong, S.-J., and Tam, K. Y. (2006). ‘Understanding the Adoption of Multipurpose Informa-
tion Appliances: The Case of Mobile Data Services’, Information Systems Research, 17(2):
162–79.
Horst, H., and Miller, D. (2006). The Cell Phone: An Anthropology of Communication. Oxford:
Berg Publishers Ltd.
Jarvenpaa, S. L., and Lang, K. R. (2005). ‘Managing the Paradoxes of Mobile Technology’,
Information Systems Management, 22(4): 7–23.
Jenkins, H. (2006). Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. New York: New
York University Press.
Kakihara, M. (2003). ‘Emerging Work Practices of ICT-Enabled Mobile Professionals’, Ph.D.
thesis, London School of Economics and Political Science.
——and Srensen, C. (2004). ‘Practicing Mobile Professional Work: Tales of Locational,
Operational, and Interactional Mobility’, INFO: The Journal of Policy, Regulation and
Strategy for Telecommunication, Information and Media, 6(3): 180–7.
Kärrberg, P., and Liebenau, J. (2006). ‘IT and Telecoms Convergence: Mobile Service Delivery
in the EU and Japan’, in Global Mobility Roundtable. Helsinki.
Katz, J. E. (2006). Magic in the Air: Mobile Communication and the Transformation of Social
Life. London: Transaction Publishers.
——and Aakhus, M. (eds.) (2002). Perpetual Contact. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Kietzmann, J. (2007). ‘In Touch out in the Field: Coalescence and Interactive Innovation of
Technology for Mobile Work’, Ph.D. dissertation, London School of Economics and
Political Science and Political Science.
——(2008). ‘Internative Innovation of Technology for Mobile Work’, European Journal of
Information Systems, 17(3): 305–20.
Kjeldskov, J., and Stage, J. (2004). ‘New Techniques for Usability Evaluation of Mobile
Systems’, International Journal of Human–Computer Studies, 60: 599–620.
Kleinrock, L. (1996). ‘Nomadicity: Anytime, Anywhere in a Disconnected World’, Mobile
Networks and Applications, 1: 351–7.
Kluth, A. (2008). ‘Nomads at Last: A Special Report on Mobile Telecoms’, Economist, 12 April,
<http://www.economist.com/specialreports/displayStory.cfm?story_id=10950394>.
Knutsen, L. A., and Lyytinen, K. (2007). ‘Messaging Speciﬁcations, Properties and Gratiﬁca-
tions as Institutions: How Messaging Institutions Shaped Wireless Service Diffusion in
Norway and Japan’, Information and Organization, 17: 101–31.
492
CARSTEN SRENSEN

Kopomaa, T. (2000). The City in your Pocket: Birth of the Mobile Information Society, trans.
T. Snellman. Helsinki: Gaudeamus.
Kourouthanassis, P. E., and Giaglis, G. M. (eds.) (2008). Pervasive Information Systems.
Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe.
Kristoffersen, S., and Ljungberg, F. (2000). ‘Mobility: From Stationary to Mobile Work’, in
K. Braa, C. Srensen, and B. Dahlbom (eds.), Planet Internet. Lund: Studentlitteratur,
41–64.
Kukulska-Hulme, A., and Traxler, J. (2005). Mobile Learning: A Handbook for Educators and
Trainers. London: Routledge.
Lattanzi, M., Korhonen, A., and Gopalakrishnan, V. (2006). Work Goes Mobile: Nokia’s
Lessons from the Leading Edge. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
Lee, H., and Liebenau, J. (2002). ‘A New Time Discipline: Managing Virtual Work Environments’,
in R. Whipp, B. Adam, and I. Sabelis (eds.), Making Time: Time and Management in Modern
Organizations. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 115–25.
Lefebvre, H. (1991). The Production of Space. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Licoppe, C. (2004). ‘Connected Presence: The Emergence of a New Repertoire for Managing
Social Relationships in a Changing Communication Technoscape’, Environment and
Planning D: Society and Space, 22: 135–56.
Lind, J. (2007). ‘The Convergence Between the PDA and the Mobile Phone’, in P. Andersson,
U. Essler, and B. Thorngren (eds.), Beyond Mobility. Malmö: Studentlitteratur, 269–97.
Ling, R. (2004). The Mobile Connection: The Cell Phone’s Impact on Society. Amsterdam:
Morgan Kaufmann.
——(2008). New Tech, New Ties: How Mobile Communication is Reshaping Social Cohesion.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——and Donner, J. (2009). Mobile Communication. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Ljungberg, F. (1997). ‘Networking’, Ph.D. thesis, Göteborg University, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Luff, P., and Heath, C. (1998). ‘Mobility in Collaboration’, in Proceedings of ACM 1998
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work. New York: ACM Press.
Lyytinen, K., and King, J. L. (2002). ‘Editorial: Around the Cradle of the Wireless Revolution.
The Emergence and Evolution of Cellular Telephony’, Telecommunications Policy,
26: 97–100.
——and Yoo, Y. (2002a). ‘Issues and Challenges in Ubiquitous Computing’, Communications
of the ACM, 45(12): 62–5.
————(2002b). ‘The Next Wave of Nomadic Computing: A Research Agenda for Information
Systems Research’, Information Systems Research, 13(4): 377–88.
Mccullough, M. (2004). Digital Ground: Architecture, Pervasive Computing, and Environmental
Knowing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Makimoto, T., and Manners, D. (1997). Digital Nomad. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
Malone, T. W. (2004). The Future of Work: How the New Order of Business Will Shape your
Organization, your Management Style, and your Life. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business
School Press.
——Crowston, K. (2001). ‘The Interdisciplinary Study of Coordination’, in G. M. Olson,
T. W. Malone, and J. B. Smith (eds.), Coordination Theory and Collaboration Technology.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc, 7–50.
Mann, S., and Niedzviecki, H. (2002). Cyborg: Digital Destiny and Human Possibility in the
Age of the Wearable Computer. Toronto: Doubleday Canada.
MOBILE IT
493

Manning, P. K. (2008). The Technology of Policing: Crime Mapping, Information Technology,
and the Rationality of Crime Control. New York: New York University Press.
Massey, D., and Jess, P. M. (eds.) (1995). A Place in the World? Places, Cultures and
Globalization. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mazmanian, M., Yates, J., and Orlikowski, W. (2006). ‘Ubiquitous Email: Individual Experi-
ences and Organizational Consequences of Blackberry Use’, in Proceedings of the 65th
Annual Meeting of the Academy of Management, Atlanta, GA.
Mick, D. G., and Fournier, S. (1998). ‘Paradoxes of Technology: Consumer Cognizance,
Emotions, and Coping Strategies’, Journal of Consumer Research, 25(September): 123–43.
Mintzberg, H. (1983). Structure in Fives: Designing Effective Organizations. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Nandhakumar, J. (2002). ‘Managing Time in a Software Factory: Temporal and Spatial
Organization of IS Development Activities’, The Information Society, 18(4): 251–62.
Nielsen, P. (2006). ‘A Conceptual Framework of Information Infrastructure Building:
A Case Study of the Development of a Content Service Platform for Mobile Phones in
Norway’, Ph.D. thesis, Oslo University, Oslo, Norway.
Orr, J. E. (1996). Talking about Machines: An Ethnography of a Modern Job. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press.
Pamplin, J. (2005). ‘How to Track Any UK GSM Mobile Phone (Without the User’s
Consent)’, 2600: The Hacker Quarterly, 17.
Perlow, L. A., Hoffer Gittell, J., and Katz, N. (2004). ‘Contextualizing Patterns of Work
Group Interaction: Toward a Nested Theory of Structuration’, Organization Science,
15(5): 520–36.
Pica, D. (2006). ‘The Rhythms of Interaction with Mobile Technologies: Tales from the
Police’, Ph.D. thesis, London School of Economics and Political Science.
——and Kakihara, M. (2003). ‘The Duality of Mobility: Understanding Fluid Organizations
and Stable Interaction’, in Proceedings of European Conference of Information Systems.
Naples.
Pool, I. D. S. (1997). Social Impact of the Telephone. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Schmidt, K. (1999). ‘Of Maps and Scripts: The Status of Formal Constructs in Cooperative
Work’, Information and Software Technology, 41(6): 319–29.
——and Bannon, L. (1992). ‘Taking CSCW Seriously: Supporting Articulation Work’, CSCW
Journal, 1(1 –2): 7–40.
——and Simone, C. (1996). ‘Coordination Mechanisms: Towards a Conceptual Foundation
of CSCW Systems Design’, Computer Supported Cooperative Work: The Journal of Collab-
orative Computing, 5(2–3): 155–200.
Schmidt, S. (2008). The Coming Convergence: Surprising Ways Diverse Technologies Interact
to Shape our World and Change the Future. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.
Skok, W., and Kobayashi, S. (2005). ‘An International Taxicab Evaluation: Comparing Tokyo
with London, New York and Paris’, Knowledge and Process Management, 14(2): 117–30.
Srensen, C. (2010). ‘Cultivating Interaction Ubiquity at Work’, The Information Society,
26(4): 276–87.
——and Al-Taitoon, A. (2008). ‘Organisational Usability of Mobile Computing: Volatility
and Control in Mobile Foreign Exchange Trading’, International Journal of Human–
Computer Studies, 66(12): 916–29.
——and Pica, D. (2005). ‘Tales from the Police: Mobile Technologies and Contexts of Work’,
Information and Organization, 15(3): 125–49.
494
CARSTEN SRENSEN

——Al-Taitoon, A., Kietzmann, J., Pica, D., Wiredu, G., Elaluf-Calderwood, S., Boateng, K.,
Kakihara, M., and Gibson, D. (2008). ‘Enterprise Mobility: Lessons from the Field’,
Information Knowledge Systems Management Journal, Special Issue on Enterprise Mobility,
7(1, 2): 243–71.
Straub, D., and Karahanna, E. (1998). ‘Knowledge Worker Communications and Recipient
Availability: Toward a Task Closure Explanation of Media Choice’, Organization Science,
9(5): 160–75.
Tilson, D. (2008). ‘The Interrelationships between Technical Standards and Industry Structures:
Actor-Network Based Case Studies of the Mobile Wireless and Television Industries in the
US and the UK’, unpublished doctoral dissertation, Case Western Reserve University.
——Lyytinen, K., and Srensen, C. (2010). ‘Desperately Seeking the Infrastructure in
IS Research: Conceptualization of “Digital Convergence” as the Co-evolution of Social
and Technical Infrastructures’, in 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Science
(HICSS 43). Kauai, Hawaii.
Urbaczewski, A., Valacich, J. S., and Jessup, L. M. (2003). Special Issue: Mobile Commerce-
Opportunities and Challenges, Communications of the ACM, 46(12): 31–2.
Urry, J. (2000). ‘Mobile Sociology’, British Journal of Sociology, 51(1): 185–203.
——(2007). Mobilities. Cambridge: Polity.
Vincent, J., and Fortunati, L. (eds.) (2009). Electronic Emotion: The Mediation of Emotion Via
Information and Communication Technologies. Bern: Peter Lang Publishing.
Warwick, K. (2002). I, Cyborg. London: Century.
Weiser, M. (1991). ‘The Computer for the Twenty-First Century’, Scientiﬁc American,
September: 94–110.
Wiberg, M. (2001). ‘In between Mobile Meetings: Exploring Seamless Ongoing Interaction
Support for Mobile CSCW’, Ph.D. dissertation, Department for Informatics, Umeå
University, Umeå, Sweden.
——and Ljungberg, F. (2001). ‘Exploring the Vision of “Anytime, Anywhere” in the Context
of Mobile Work’, in Y. Malhotra (ed.), Knowledge Management and Virtual Organizations.
Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishing, 157–69.
——and Whittaker, S. (2005). ‘Managing Availability: Supporting Lightweight Negotiations
to Handle Interruptions’, ACM Transactions of Computer–Human Interaction, 12(4): 1–32.
Wiredu, G. (2005). ‘Mobile Computing in Work-Integrated Learning: Problems of Remotely
Distributed Activities and Technology Use’, Ph.D. dissertation, London School of Econom-
ics and Political Science.
——(2007). ‘User Appropriation of Mobile Technologies: Motives, Conditions, and Design
Properties’, Information and Organization, 17: 110–29.
——and Srensen, C. (2006). ‘The Dynamics of Control and Use of Mobile Technology in
Distributed Activities’, European Journal of Information Systems, 15(3): 307–19.
Yates, J. (1989). Control through Communication: The Rise of System in American Management.
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Yofﬁe, D. B. (1997). Competing in the Age of Digital Convergence. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
Business School Press.
Yoo, Y. (2010). ‘Computing in Everyday Life: A Call for Research on Experiential Comput-
ing’, MIS Quarterly, 34(2): 213–31.
——Lyytinen, K., and Yang, H. (2005). ‘The Role of Standards in Innovation and Diffusion of
Broadband Mobile Services: The Case of South Korea’, Journal of Strategic Information
Systems, 14: 323–53.
MOBILE IT
495

c h a p t e r 1 9
...............................................................................................
A REVIEW OF THE IT
OUTSOURCING
LITERATURE: INSIGHTS
FOR PRACTICE
...............................................................................................
MARY C. LACITY, SHAJI A. KHAN, AND
LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
This chapter provides substantial evidence that information technology outsourcing
(ITO) research has meaningfully and signiﬁcantly addressed the call by Lee (1999) and
Westfall (1999) for academics to produce knowledge relevant to practitioners. The ITO
academic literature that studies practice is widely cited and indicates that academics
have clearly served to disseminate learning. In addition, thoughtful practitioners have
published their IT outsourcing experiences in academic outlets (Huber 1993; Cross
1995), further fuelling the ability of academics to abstract lessons for practice. In several
ways then, ITO research has been an exemplar of how information systems (IS)
academics can study and inform practice.
ITO research aimed at studying and inﬂuencing practice has examined multiple
aspects of the phenomena, from reasons why organizations outsource through to the
long-term consequences of outsourcing from both client and supplier perspectives. The
ﬁrst published outputs from academic research appeared in 1991, which documented
companies pursuing large-scale domestic IT outsourcing (Applegate and Montealegre
1991; Huber 1993). More quantitative research and multiple-case studies followed,
focusing on why ﬁrms outsource (Loh and Venkatraman 1992a) and how ﬁrms beneﬁt
(or do not beneﬁt) from IT outsourcing (Lacity and Hirschheim 1993; Willcocks and
Fitzgerald 1993). Between 1994 and 2000, at least 79 other academic studies were

published (Dibbern, Winkler, and Heinzl 2004), many geared towards practice. Since
the beginning of 2009, we found 357 published papers on ITO.
The eighteen years of research on domestic IT outsourcing has generated a good
understanding of the practice. Overall, we learned why ﬁrms outsource (mostly to
reduce costs, access resources, and focus internal resources on more strategic work1),
what ﬁrms outsource (mostly a portion of their overall IT portfolio), how ﬁrms
outsource (mostly by formal processes), and IT outsourcing outcomes as measured
by realization of expectations, satisfaction, and performance (Dibbern, Winkler, and
Heinzl 2004). Overall, we know that client readiness, good strategy, good processes,
sound contracts, and good relationship management are key success factors (Teng,
Cheon, and Grover 1995; Feeny and Willcocks 1998; Cullen, Seddon, and Willcocks
2005a; Willcocks and Lacity 2006).
More recently, much of the academic research has focused on offshore outsourcing.
Offshore outsourcing research addresses macroeconomic issues, supplier capabilities in
developing countries, and speciﬁc client and supplier practices to ensure success. From
the client perspective, researchers have found that offshore IT outsourcing poses
additional challenges when compared to domestic IT outsourcing (Rottman and Lacity
2006). Some of these issues are so difﬁcult to manage that, more recently, according to
Carmel and Abbott (2007), practitioners are turning to nearshore alternatives.
There are many other emerging outsourcing trends that interest practitioners,
including business process outsourcing (BPO), application service provision, freelance
outsourcing, rural sourcing, certiﬁcations of outsourcing professionals, and global
standards. Academics have already contributed to practice for the ﬁrst two trends
among this list. The remaining topics offer academics a chance for future research.
Our aim in this chapter is to extract the insights academics have identiﬁed for ITO
practice. From an in-depth study of the literature, we classiﬁed 191 ITO research
papers into six topics. Each topic is thoroughly reviewed in this paper (see Table
19.1). Each topic answers speciﬁc questions relevant to practice.
RESEARCH METHOD
..................................................................................................................
Our study goal requires a complete review of past ITO research relevant to practice. To
identify papers which adequately represent the topics above, we searched the full-text
of articles within ABI/INFORM, EBSCOHost, and JSTOR databases with ITO-related
keywords for articles published between 1990 and 2008. The preliminary search
resulted in 765 papers. Perusal of abstracts resulted in the elimination of 408 articles
which did not directly pertain to ITO. This resulted in a list of 357 papers related to
ITO across 71 journals (see Appendix 19.1). Following this, we carefully examined each
paper and categorized it into the six topics (see Table 19.1). Some papers cover more
than one topic, thus the total number of papers considered for this review was 191.
These papers are a rich mix of conceptual and empirical studies.
A REVIEW OF THE IT OUTSOURCING LITERATURE: INSIGHTS FOR PRACTICE
497

As ITO researchers will well attest, there are few standard terms and deﬁnitions
applied across ITO studies. For example, ITO outcomes have been measured as cost
expectations realized (Lacity and Willcocks 1998), project duration, re-work, and
quality (Gopal, Mukhopadhyay, and Krishnan 2002), perceptions of strategic, econom-
ic, and technical beneﬁts (Grover, Cheon, and Teng 1996), and effects on stock price
performance (Hall and Liedtka 2005). In order to compare ﬁndings across this vast
body of literature, we coded the empirical ﬁndings2 for both qualitative and quantita-
tive articles using a unique grounded coding technique we developed and published in
Jeyaraj, Rottman, and Lacity (2006).
The method works as follows. We ﬁrst extracted the authors’s terms and deﬁnitions
for dependent and independent variables to begin building a master list. We then began
to combine variables that had similar deﬁnitions, altering the master list with each pass
through another article. For example, eighteen articles empirically examined the
variable we call ‘Access to Expertise/Skills’. The speciﬁc variable names in the articles
were, for example, ‘Technical expertise for new IT’ (Kishore et al. 2003), ‘Access to
experts’ (Al-Qirim 2003), and ‘Access to a larger group of highly schooled profes-
sionals’ (Sobol and Apte 1995). Each pass through a new article also triggered a
reanalysis of the master list and a re-examination of previously coded articles, until
all articles were coded against the master list of terms and deﬁnitions. In the end, we
identiﬁed 174 variables of which 130 were independent variables, 17 were dependent
Table 19.1 ITO topics relevant to practice
Topic
Questions relevant to practice
Number
of articles
1. Determinants of IT
outsourcing
· Which types of ﬁrms are more likely to outsource IT?
73
2. IT outsourcing
strategy
· What is the strategic intent behind IT outsourcing
decisions?
· What are the strategic effects of IT outsourcing
decisions?
24
3. IT outsourcing risks
· What are the risks of IT outsourcing?
· How are IT outsourcing risks mitigated?
34
4. Determinants of IT
outsourcing success
· Which practices increase the likelihood that a client’s
outsourcing decision will be successful?
86
5. Client and supplier
capabilities
· Which capabilities do client ﬁrms need to develop to
successfully engage IT outsourcing suppliers?
· Which capabilities do client ﬁrms seek in an IT
outsourcing supplier?
64
6. Sourcing varietals
· How do practices differ when pursuing different types
of outsourcing such as offshore outsourcing,
application service provision, and business process
outsourcing?
49
Total unique articles (topics overlap across articles)
191
498
MARY C. LACITY, SHAJI A. KHAN, AND LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS

variables, and 27 variables were used as both an independent and a dependent variable.
We use these codes to report on the overall ﬁndings for practice for the six topic areas.
DETERMINANTS OF IT OUTSOURCING
..................................................................................................................
As evidenced by Table 19.1, the category ‘Determinants of IT Outsourcing’ is one of the
most researched areas in our database of ITO articles with 73 empirical articles.
Researchers who study the determinants of IT outsourcing primarily ask:
· Which types of ﬁrms are more likely to outsource IT?
Researchers examine attributes of client organizations that engage in IT outsourcing.
These client ﬁrm attributes include ﬁnancial attributes (ﬁrm proﬁtability, return on
assets, earnings per share, operating expenses, and ﬁnancial slack in the organization),
size attributes (size of the client ﬁrm in terms of total revenues or number of employees
or size of the IT department within the client ﬁrm), and industry attributes. Below we
present the ﬁndings from the academic literature on the three types of determinants
of ITO.
Financial Attributes
Concerning the client-ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial attributes, we coded fourteen relationships that
examined ﬁnancial attributes as determinants of IT outsourcing decisions. Five rela-
tionships were not signiﬁcant. Among the nine signiﬁcant relationships, eight found
that poor ﬁnancial performance was a determinant of IT outsourcing decisions. Thus,
more than half the ﬁndings report that IT outsourcing is primarily done by ﬁrms with
poor ﬁnancial performance.
Practitioners became aware of this ﬁnding from Paul Strassmann’s controversial
1995 article ‘Outsourcing: A Game for Losers’. He looked at ﬁnancial data and layoff
data for thirteen companies with the largest IT outsourcing contracts. He concluded
‘Strategy isn’t driving outsourcing. Statistics show the real reason companies outsource
is simple: They’re in ﬁnancial trouble.’ In a 2004 publication, Strassmann conducted
another statistical analysis on 324 companies and reached the same conclusion: ‘My
1995 assertion that “outsourcing is a game for losers” still stood up in 2002.’
Academic research has generally found Stassmann’s ﬁndings to be robust across
time, from the most widely cited study by Loh and Venkatraman in 1992a to a more
recent study by Mojsilovic et al. in 2007. This was particularly true for client-ﬁrms
pursuing large-scale IT outsourcing because academic researchers primarily rely on
outsourcing announcements in the trade press to identify a pool of outsourcing clients
to study. (Small IT outsourcing contracts are unlikely to be announced in press
A REVIEW OF THE IT OUTSOURCING LITERATURE: INSIGHTS FOR PRACTICE
499

releases.) For example, Loh and Venkatraman (1992a) is one of the ﬁrst major articles
on the determinants of IT outsourcing—it has been cited 341 times. Based on data from
55 large US ﬁrms, the authors found that high business cost structures, poor business
performance in terms of reduced proﬁts, high levels of debt, high annual IT costs, and
poor IT performance determine large-scale outsourcing of IT in client ﬁrms. Thirteen
years later, Hall and Liedtka (2005) found very similar ﬁndings. They examined the
ﬁnancial determinants of large-scale IT outsourcing decisions. They used secondary
data to compare 51 ﬁrms doing large-scale outsourcing of IT with 1,261 control ﬁrms.
The authors conclude that IT outsourcing is a practice of ‘ﬁnancial losers’ in that the 51
ﬁrms had signiﬁcantly lower proﬁts, higher operating expenses, and less cash than
control ﬁrms. Mojsilovic et al. (2007) studied 68 publicly traded ﬁrms and found that
companies with lower proﬁts and lower earnings per share were more likely to
outsource IT.
Size Attributes
Concerning size of the client ﬁrm, the ﬁndings are mixed. Of the eleven relationships
we found in the empirical ITO literature, six found that size of the client ﬁrm did not
matter (e.g. Grover, Cheon, and Teng 1994), two found that larger client ﬁrms are more
likely to outsource (e.g. Nam et al. 1996), and three found that smaller ﬁrms are more
likely to outsource (e.g. Ang and Straub 1998). Studies of the size of the IT department
also produced mixed results. Of the seven relationships we examined, three found that
larger IT departments are more likely to outsource (e.g. Sobol and Apte 1995), two
found that smaller IT departments were more likely to outsource (e.g. Barthélemy and
Geyer 2004), and two found no relationship between size of IT department and IT
outsourcing (e.g. Miranda and Kim 2006).
Industry Attributes
We coded fourteen relationships between client industry and IT outsourcing. Five
relationships did not ﬁnd that industry mattered (e.g. Barthélemy and Geyer 2005).
Nine relationships found that industry mattered, but it is difﬁcult to identify a clear
pattern because of the variety of ways researchers operationalize ‘industry’. Some
researchers use Standard Industry Classiﬁcation (SIC) codes (e.g. Oh, Gallivan, and
Kim 2006). Some researchers use dichotomous classiﬁcations such as public versus
private (e.g. Slaughter and Ang 1996) or service versus industrial (e.g. Loh and
Venkatraman 1992a). Some researchers use categories of industries such as
manufacturing, ﬁnance, and healthcare industries (e.g. Grover, Cheon, and Teng 1994).
500
MARY C. LACITY, SHAJI A. KHAN, AND LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS

Insights for Practice
For the practitioner, this body of research does not extract best practices, but instead
provides a deeper understanding of the attributes of client ﬁrms that pursue IT out-
sourcing. Which types of ﬁrms are more likely to outsource IT? Overall, client ﬁrms that
are more likely to pursue IT outsourcing—particularly large-scale IT outsourcing—are
in poorer ﬁnancial health compared to peer ﬁrms. Some industries are more likely to
outsource than others, but because researchers have used so many different industry
classiﬁcations, there is no clear list of particular industries to report. Size of the client
ﬁrm and size of the client ﬁrm’s IT function also have no clear pattern to report.
Academic research has also looked at the determinants of second generation out-
sourcing decisions (e.g. Lacity and Willcocks 2000; Cullen, Seddon, and Willcocks
2005b; Whitten and Leidner 2006). After a client ﬁrm outsourced IT, did the ﬁrm next
decide to bring the IT function back in-house, renew the contract with the existing
supplier, or continue outsourcing using a different supplier? For example, Whitten and
Leidner (2006) found that both economic and relationship constructs are important
determinants of second generation outsourcing decisions. Clients renewing contracts
report high levels of product, service, and relationship quality, and higher switching
costs. Clients that switched suppliers report high product and service quality but low
relationship quality and switching costs. Clients that brought back IT in-house report
low levels on all four variables.
IT OUTSOURCING STRATEGY
..................................................................................................................
This topic examines ITO strategies and how IT outsourcing strategies either affect or
are affected by ﬁrm strategies and ﬁrm performance. Researchers have addressed the
questions:
· What is the strategic intent behind IT outsourcing decisions?
· What are the strategic effects of IT outsourcing decisions?
The Strategic Intent behind IT Outsourcing Decisions
As evident in the section on the determinants of IT outsourcing decisions, empirical
results generally found that large-scale ITO decisions are driven by poor ﬁnancial
performance, suggesting that the ‘strategic’ intent of IT outsourcing is to reduce costs.
To get a more thorough view on ITO strategy, we coded the motivations for IT
outsourcing as assessed by client ﬁrm representatives. Research on what motivates
client organizations to outsource ITO has uncovered a long list of motivations or
expectations from outsourcing IT (see Table 19.2). By far, cost reduction was the most
A REVIEW OF THE IT OUTSOURCING LITERATURE: INSIGHTS FOR PRACTICE
501

Table 19.2 Motivations for IT outsourcing
Motivation for
Outsourcing
Description
Number
of Articles
Cost reduction
A client organization’s need or desire to use outsourcing to
reduce or control IS costs.
39
Focus on core
capabilities
A client organization’s desire or need to outsource in order
to focus on its core capabilities.
24
Access to expertise/
skills
A client organization’s desire or need to access supplier(s)
skills / expertise.
18
Improve business/
process performance
A client organization’s desire or need to engage a supplier
to help improve a client’s business, processes, or
capabilities.
17
Technical reasons
A client organization’s desire or need to gain access to
leading-edge technology through outsourcing.
10
Flexibility
The ability to adapt to change.
7
Political reasons
A client stakeholder’s desire or need to use an outsourcing
decision to promote personal agendas such as eliminating
a burdensome function, enhancing their career, or
maximizing personal ﬁnancial beneﬁts.
5
Change catalyst
A client organization’s desire or need to use outsourcing to
bring about large-scale changes in the organization.
4
Commercial
exploitation
A client organization’s desire or need to partner with a
supplier to commercially exploit existing client assets or
form a new enterprise.
3
Scalability
A client organization’s desire or need to outsource to be
able to scale the volume of IS services based on demand.
3
Access to global
markets
A client organization’s desire or need to gain access to
global markets by outsourcing to suppliers in those
markets.
2
Alignment of IS and
business strategy
The ﬁt or congruence between a ﬁrm’s business strategy
(conceptualized as defenders, prospectors, analysers) and
its outsourcing strategy (e.g. arm’s length, independent,
and embedded).
2
Cost predictability
A client organization’s desire or need to use outsourcing to
better predict IS costs.
2
Headcount reduction
A client organization’s need or desire to use outsourcing to
reduce the number of staff.
2
Need to generate
cash
A client organization’s desire or need to generate cash
through the sale of IT assets to the supplier.
2
Rapid delivery
A client organization’s desire or need to engage in
outsourcing in order to speedup project delivery.
2
Innovation
A client organization’s desire or need to use outsourcing as
an engine for innovation.
1
Total articles
143
502
MARY C. LACITY, SHAJI A. KHAN, AND LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS

common motive identiﬁed by researchers. Despite all the rhetoric of using outsourcing
strategically, cost reduction has remained an important driver for a majority of client
ﬁrms, from the earliest studies (e.g. Lacity, Hirschheim, and Willcocks 1994) to more
recent ones (e.g. Fisher, Hirschheim, and Jacobs 2008).
Some of the most interesting research, however, challenges practitioners to consider
outsourcing for more strategic reasons other than just cost reduction. One of the most
widely cited articles on this topic is by DiRomualdo and Gurbaxani (1998).3 The
authors addressed three strategic intents for IT outsourcing: IS improvement (includ-
ing cost savings), business impact (such as improving business processes), and com-
mercial exploitation. Their paper also suggested which types of contracts, incentives,
measures, and pricing provisions should be used to match the strategic intent. The logic
of their prescriptions is solid, but many of the examples cited in the article as exemplars
of an IT strategy actually failed to deliver the expected beneﬁts in the longer term,
including Xerox, J. P. Morgan, Swiss Bank, and Delta Airlines. This suggests that
realizing the strategic intent of IT outsourcing is exceedingly difﬁcult and requires a
high degree of managerial attention.
Other authors have also tried to challenge practitioners to use IT outsourcing more
strategically. The main issue is that these papers rely on anecdotal evidence from a few
exceptional ﬁrms. Most notable are three excellent papers by James Brian Quinn
(Quinn and Hilmer 1994; Quinn 1999, 2000). His work, although based on anecdotal
evidence and not focused on IT, celebrates the most innovative and strategic uses of
outsourcing. Linder (2004), Ross and Beath (2006), and Lacity, Feeny, and Willcocks
(2003, 2004) also wrote about a few companies using IT outsourcing to facilitate large-
scale transformation. Some of their examples, however, pertain to BPO rather than IT
outsourcing.
The Strategic Effects of IT Outsourcing Decisions
Researchers have also assessed the effects of IT outsourcing on ﬁrm-level performance
using such metrics as stock price performance and ﬁnancial performance. Concerning
stock price, senior executives want to know how stockholders perceive their large-scale
IT outsourcing decisions. Therefore, a number of academic event studies have exam-
ined how announcements of large-scale IT outsourcing decisions affect stock prices
(Loh and Venkatraman 1992b; Smith, Mitra, and Narasimhan 1998; Hayes, Hunton,
and Reck 2000; Farag and Krishnan 2003; Madison, San Miguel, and Padmanabhan
2006; Oh, Gallivan, and Kim 2006). In total, we coded thirteen effects of IT outsourcing
on stock price performance. Six found signiﬁcant positive effects on stock price
(e.g. Agrawal, Kishore, and Rao 2006), four found no relationship (e.g. Florin, Bradford,
and Pagach 2005), and three found a negative effect on stock price (e.g. Oh, Gallivan, and
Kim 2006).
A REVIEW OF THE IT OUTSOURCING LITERATURE: INSIGHTS FOR PRACTICE
503

Oh, Gallivan, and Kim (2006) is the best paper to help understand these mixed
results. These authors summarize all prior event studies and also present the results of
their own event study. Their event study is unique because they did not just look at the
overall change in stock market value, which tends to be very small. Instead, they looked
at the differences between announcements that led to above Average Abnormal Returns
(AAR) versus announcements that led to below AAR. The authors examined 192 IT
outsourcing announcements during a nine-year period (1995 to 2003). On the day of an
announcement, 97 announcements led to negative AAR and 95 announcements lead to
positive AAR. The authors conclude that the content of ITO announcement matters.
Investors reacted favourably to ITO announcements about smaller contracts, ITO
contracts intending to reduce costs, transactions with low asset speciﬁcity (data centres
and telecommunications), and contracts signed with larger supplier ﬁrms.
Concerning the effects of IT outsourcing on a client-ﬁrm’s ﬁnancial performance, we
coded nine relationships. Again, the results were mixed. Four relationships found that
the client’s ﬁnancial position improved (e.g. Mojsilovic et al. 2007), three relationships
found that the ﬁnancial performance worsened (e.g. Wang et al. 2008), and two found
no effects on ﬁnancial performance (e.g. Bhalla, Sodhi, and Son 2008).
Insights for Practitioners
For nearly twenty years of ITO research, client ﬁrms have primarily pursued outsour-
cing as a way to reduce ITO costs. Cost reduction drove domestic ITO decisions in the
1990s and continues to drive both domestic and offshore outsourcing in the 2000s.
We are perplexed when practitioners argue with this seemingly ignominious ﬁnding.
Indeed, some of the world’s most respected thinkers—such as Oliver Williamson—
argue that cost efﬁciency is the only long-term viable strategy a company should pursue:
I furthermore aver that, as between economizing and strategizing, economizing is
much the more fundamental . . . More importantly, I maintain that a strategizing
effort will rarely prevail if a program is burdened by signiﬁcant cost excesses in
production, distribution, or organization. All the clever ploys and positioning, aye,
all the king’s horses and all the king’s men, will rarely save a project that is seriously
ﬂawed in ﬁrst-order economizing respects. (Williamson 1991: 75).
While both practitioners and academics are highly interested in more strategic uses of
ITO (Galliers and Leidner 2009), the preponderance of evidence is based on single-case
studies of exceptional ﬁrms. The strategic exploitation of IT outsourcing remains a
minority pursuit. Furthermore, the effects of IT outsourcing on ﬁrm-level attributes are
small, even when they are statistically signiﬁcant. On average, most ﬁrms only spend
3 per cent of their annual revenues on IT; outsourcing even a large portion of IT may
not be substantial enough to affect ﬁrm-level ﬁnancial metrics such as proﬁtability
(Aubert et al. 2008). Another challenge is trying to isolate the true effects of IT
outsourcing on ﬁrm-level performance.
504
MARY C. LACITY, SHAJI A. KHAN, AND LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS

IT OUTSOURCING RISKS
..................................................................................................................
Another important topic for practitioners is managing IT outsourcing risks. Risks are
generally deﬁned as the probability that an action will adversely affect an organization.
Risk management is a set of activities geared toward identifying, assessing, prioritizing,
and addressing risks in order to minimize their probability or impact. ITO researchers
address two questions relevant to practitioners:
· What are the risks of IT outsourcing?
· How are IT outsourcing risks mitigated?
In the ITO academic literature, we found 34 published papers on ITO risks and risk
management, of which 18 were conceptual. Conceptual papers primarily identify lists of
ITO risks (e.g. Jurison 1995; Earl 1996; Sakthivel 2007) or develop ITO risk models (e.g.
Aron, Clemons, and Reddi 2005; Osei-Bryson and Ngwenyama 2006). The empirical
papers primarily address speciﬁc risks and risk management strategies as they pertain to
IT outsourcing in general (Currie and Willcocks 1998; Aubert et al. 1999; Willcocks and
Lacity 1999; Willcocks, Lacity, and Kern 1999; Bahli and Rivard 2005), or as they pertain
to speciﬁc types of outsourcing such as offshore outsourcing (Iacovou and Nakatsu
2008) or application service provision (Kern, Kreijger, and Willcocks 2002; Kern, Lacity
and Willcocks 2002; Kern, Willcocks, and Lacity 2002). Measurement of risks has also
been studied (e.g. Bahli and Rivard 2005; Whitten and Wakeﬁeld 2006).
The most cited paper on ITO risks is by Michael Earl (1996).4 Earl discusses eleven risks
of IT outsourcing: possibility of weak management, inexperienced staff, business uncer-
tainty, outdated technology skills, endemic uncertainty, hidden costs, lack of organiza-
tional learning, loss of innovative capacity, dangers of an eternal triangle, technology
indivisibility, and fuzzy focus. One of the reasons why this paper is so valuable is because it
holds the client accountable for the success of outsourcing. Before IT outsourcing can
work, ‘a company must be capable of managing the IT services ﬁrst’ (p. 27).
In reviewing the body of literature, the number of identiﬁed ITO risks is quite
intimidating. For example, we counted 43 unique ITO risks from just the ﬁrst
three sources we coded (Jurison 1995; Kern, Willcocks, and Lacity 2002; Lacity and
Rottman 2008)! The most common risks are found in Table 19.3.
Concerning risk mitigation advice for practitioners, academic researchers have
identiﬁed many speciﬁc practices designed to reduce risk and therefore increase the
likelihood of ITO success. In general, we found as many risk mitigation practices as
we found ITO risks. Advice, therefore, is tied to each speciﬁc ITO risk. For example,
one ITO risk is ‘supplier has too much power over the customer’. Many ITO practices
mitigate this risk such as engaging multiple suppliers (Currie 1998), signing short-term
contracts (Lacity and Willcocks 1998), outsourcing standard IT services for which
there are many suppliers capable of delivering good services (Lacity and Hirschheim
1993; De Loof 1995; Apte et al. 1997), and insourcing highly speciﬁc assets (Watja-
trakul 2005).
A REVIEW OF THE IT OUTSOURCING LITERATURE: INSIGHTS FOR PRACTICE
505

Academics have also discussed risks speciﬁc to certain types of outsourcing, such as
application service provision or offshore outsourcing (Kern, Lacity, and Willcocks
2002; Kern, Willcocks, and Lacity 2002; Sakthivel 2007). Kern, Willcocks, and Lacity
(2002) examine speciﬁc risks and risk mitigation strategies for application service
provision. Sakthivel (2007) identiﬁes 18 risks and 18 risk control mechanisms speciﬁc
to offshore systems development. As new IT sourcing models emerge, early adopters
will always face more risks.
Insights for Practice
Facing so many risks may prompt clients to rephrase the IT sourcing question to ‘Why
should we not insource IT services?’ (Earl 1996: 27). Although the number of ITO risks
and risk mitigation practices are daunting, practitioners may ﬁnd that the best way to
mitigate risks is through experience. Clients cannot fully bypass the learning curve
based on explicit risk mitigation practices identiﬁed from other organizations—there is
no substitute for the tacit knowing that comes from actual experiences. Many research-
ers have found that learning curve effects and prior client experience are vital to ITO
success (Lacity and Willcocks 1998; Barthélemy 2001; Carmel and Agarwal 2002;
Kaiser and Hawk 2004; Rottman and Lacity 2006). Any organization that explores a
new sourcing option in terms of new suppliers, new services, or new engagement
models with existing suppliers must plan on false starts and many mistakes. Executives
often manage learning by pilot testing new sourcing options. This is a risk-mitigating
Table 19.3 Common ITO Risks
Backlash from internal IT staff
Loss of in-house capability
Biased portrayal by vendors
No overall cost savings
Breach of contract by the vendor
Perceived as unpatriotic (offshore)
Cultural differences between client and
supplier
Poor supplier capability, service, ﬁnancial stability,
cultural ﬁt
Difﬁculty in managing remote teams
Security/Privacy breech
Excessive transaction costs
Supplier employee turnover/burnout
Hidden costs
Supplier employees are inexperienced
Inability to manage supplier relationship
Supplier employees have poor communication skills
Inﬂexible contracts
Supplier goes out of business
Infringement of IP rights
Supplier has too much power over the customer
Lack of trust
Transition failure
Loss of autonomy and control over IT
decisions
Treating IT as an undifferentiated commodity
Loss of control over data
Uncontrollable contract growth
Loss of control over vendor
Vendor lock-in (high switching costs)
506
MARY C. LACITY, SHAJI A. KHAN, AND LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS

practice, but we also note that when pilot tests are too small, the learning is slow,
supplier capabilities are not fully tested, and expected beneﬁts are not often realized.
Thus there is a trade-off between mitigating risks and achieving substantial beneﬁts
from outsourcing.
DETERMINANTS OF IT
OUTSOURCING SUCCESS
..................................................................................................................
We found 86 articles on the determinants of ITO success. Speciﬁcally, this body of
research answers:
· Which practices increase the likelihood that a client’s outsourcing decision will be
successful?
Researchers have deﬁned and measured ITO success using three units of analysis—the
organization, the IT function, and the project. At an organizational level, we have already
discussed the strategic impact of outsourcing decisions on ﬁrm-level performance using
such metrics as stock price performance and ﬁnancial performance (see above, section
entitled ‘Determinants of IT Outsourcing’). At the level of an IT function, researchers
have examined the effects of ITO decisions on IS improvements such as reduced costs or
increased service levels. At the level of a project, researchers have examined the effects
of ITO decisions on cost, quality, and time to complete outsourced projects.
Concerning the determinants of ITO success, researchers have inspected three
categories—the ITO Decision, Contractual Governance, and Relational Governance.
These are very broad categories of determinants meant to capture the practices
associated with ITO decisions, the practices associated with contracts, and the practices
associated with managing supplier relationships.
The ITO Decision
Researchers have examined the relationships between the types of ITO decisions made
and their subsequent outcomes. In particular, researchers have examined how the
degree of outsourcing, top management commitment, and the evaluation process
have affected ITO success.
The degree of outsourcing is the amount of outsourcing as indicated by percentage of
IT budget outsourced and/or the type and number of IS functions outsourced. We
coded nine relationships that looked at the effects of degree of outsourcing on ITO
success. Seven relationships found that the degree of outsourcing mattered. In general,
too much outsourcing was associated with lower levels of success (Currie 1998; Lacity
and Willcocks 1998; Seddon 2001; Straub, Weill, and Schwaig 2008). As an example of
A REVIEW OF THE IT OUTSOURCING LITERATURE: INSIGHTS FOR PRACTICE
507

‘too much’, Lacity and Willcocks (1998) found that clients who outsourced more than
80 per cent of their IT budgets had success rates of only 29 per cent; clients who
outsourced less than 80 per cent of their IT budgets had success rates of 85 per cent.
Seddon (2001) provides another example of outsourcing ‘too much’. He examined one
of the most aggressive public sector ITO programmes in the world—the Australian
federal government’s Au$1.2 billion ITO programme. The Australian federal govern-
ment experienced poor results, both ﬁnancially and operationally. One reason for the
disappointing ﬁnancial results is that the Australian government clustered disparate IT
functions in hopes of achieving cost savings through economies of scale. However, the
increased coordination costs across disparate IT functions cancelled the intended
effects of cost savings through economies of scale.
The types of IT functions outsourced also mattered. For example, Grover, Cheon,
and Teng (1996) found clients had higher levels of satisfaction from outsourcing
systems operations and telecommunications than they did from outsourcing applica-
tions development, end user support, and systems management.
Top management commitment/support in ITO initiatives is a critical factor for
success. Ten out of the ten relationships we coded suggest top management’s commit-
ment and support are critical for client satisfaction (e.g. Lee and Kim 1999; Han, Lee,
and Seo 2008), offshore project success (Iacovou and Nakatsu 2008), and overall
outsourcing success (e.g. Quinn 1999; Seddon 2001; Koh, Ang, and Straub 2004). For
example, Lacity and Willcocks (1998) report the positive effects of joint IT and non-IT
senior management involvement in the ITO decision on cost savings realized. Smith
and McKeen (2004) suggest top management’s involvement in outsourcing decisions
impact overall outsourcing success.
The client organization’s evaluation process for selecting suppliers seems to be a rather
consistent predictor of the contract price, the outsourcingdecision, expected cost savings
being realized, and the achievement of outsourcing success in general. Eight out of
the nine relationships we coded for the evaluation process reported signiﬁcant ﬁndings
(e.g. Lacity and Willcocks 1998; Kern, Willcocks, and Lacity 2002; Cullen, Seddon, and
Willcocks 2005a). For example, inviting internal and external bids has been identiﬁed as
a proven practice (e.g. Lacity and Willcocks 1998; Smith and McKeen 2004).
Contractual Governance
In all, we coded 40 relationships between contractual governance and ITO success.
Contractual governance was operationalized most frequently as contract detail
(12 relationships), contract type (11 relationships), contract duration (6 relationships),
and contract size (4 relationships).
Contract detail is the number or degree of detailed clauses in the outsourcing
contract, such as clauses that specify prices, service levels, benchmarking, warranties,
and penalties for non-performance. Overall, 10 of the 12 relationships found that
508
MARY C. LACITY, SHAJI A. KHAN, AND LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS

higher levels of contractual detail led to higher levels of ITO success. For example,
Poppo and Zenger (2002) found that contractual complexity (i.e. contract detail) was
signiﬁcantly related to ITO performance.
Contract type is a term denoting different forms of contracts used in outsourcing.
Examples include customized, ﬁxed, time and materials, fee for service, and partnership-
based contracts. Out of 11 relationships, all 11 found that the type of contract affected
the level of ITO success. For example, Gopal, Mukhopadhyay, and Krishnan (2002)
found that ﬁxed-fee contracts resulted in less rework than time and materials contracts.
Contract duration also produced consistent ﬁndings—all six studies that examined
contract duration found that shorter-term contracts had higher frequencies of success
than longer-term contracts. For example, Lacity and Willcocks (1998) found that
contracts that were three years or less had a higher frequency of success than contracts
greater than three years.
Somewhat counter to prior ﬁndings—all four relationships that studied the effects of
contract size on ITO success found that the larger contracts had higher frequencies of
success than smaller contracts. For example, Domberger, Fernandez, and Fiebig (2000)
found that higher-valued contracts (price) were positively related to service quality.
How can the contract duration and contract size ﬁndings be reconciled? Contract
duration is measured in years and long-term relationships tend to lose their momen-
tum and enthusiasm. Contract size is measured in dollars—larger-valued contracts lead
to successful outcomes because suppliers are more motivated to allocate their best
resources to clients with large contracts. Large contracts also spread the enormous
transaction costs associated with outsourcing over more volume of work.
Relational Governance
Relational governance covers the softer issues of managing client-supplier relation-
ships, including trust, norms, open communication, open sharing of information,
mutual dependency, and cooperation. In total, we coded 44 relationships on relational
governance. In ALL instances, the research shows that higher levels of all the relational
governance attributes are associated with higher levels of ITO success. In some ways,
the ﬁndings are obvious and trivial. Few people would argue that distrust, closed
communication, or lack of cooperation would lead to better outsourcing relationships!
Some of the more interesting research in this area uses interviews and case studies
rather than sample surveys (e.g. Kern and Willcocks 2002; Heiskanen, Newman, and
Eklin 2008). These qualitative methods allow researchers to understand why factors are
important or how relational governance develops over time. For example, Sabherwal
(1999) studied eighteen outsourced IS development projects in seven client organiza-
tions to determine the role of trust in client-supplier relationships. The paper
provides a good overview of the different types of trust, including (1) calculus-based
trust that is rooted in rewards and punishments associated with a particular project,
A REVIEW OF THE IT OUTSOURCING LITERATURE: INSIGHTS FOR PRACTICE
509

(2) knowledge-based trust that depends on the two parties knowing each other well,
(3) identiﬁcation-based trust that follows from the two parties identifying with each
other’s goals, and (4) performance-based trust that depends on early project successes.
The paper is one of the ﬁrst to incorporate two important determinants of ITO
success—trust (a form of relational governance) and structural control (a form of
contractual governance). ITO success was measured by the quality and timeliness of
project deliverables. The author found that relational governance and contractual
governance must both be in place to ensure ITO success. More interesting, however,
was the reciprocal relationships among trust, contractual governance, and ITO success.
ITO success fuelled further trust among clients and suppliers. In contrast, projects that
suffered from delays or poor performance led to decreased trust.
Since Sabherwal (1999), a number of researchers have begun to simultaneously study
contractual and relational governance (Kern and Willcocks 2000; Poppo and Zenger
2002; Goo et al. 2009). Are they substitutes? Are they complements? Newer studies
show them as complements. Kern and Willcocks (2000) used twelve case studies to
argue the importance of both contractual and relational governance. Poppo and Zenger
(2002) surveyed 151 US client ﬁrms and found that ITO success was greater when both
contractual complexity and relational governance were greater. Goo et al. (2009) also
found that formal contracts and relational governance function as complements, rather
than as substitutes, in a sample of South Korean ﬁrms.
Researchers have also studied the interactions between ITO decision and contractual
governance. Lee, Miranda, and Kim (2004) is a very interesting article that used the
same dependent variable to measure ITO success as Grover, Cheon, and Teng (1996)
and many of the same independent variables used in Lacity and Willcocks (1998)
including ITO decision (degree of outsourcing) and contract governance (contract
duration and contract type). The authors surveyed 311 South Korean ﬁrms. Instead of
treating outsourcing decision scope, contract duration, and contract type as indepen-
dent variables, they created three ideal proﬁles that integrate these constructs. For
example, one ideal pattern is called ‘arms-length’ and has the ideal value of selective
outsourcing for decision scope, detailed contract for contract type, and medium
contract duration. The expected effect of ‘arms-length’ proﬁle on ITO success is ‘cost
efﬁciency’. The other two patterns are ‘independent’ and ‘embedded’. The authors
found that two of the three proﬁles were signiﬁcant—the arms-length and the embed-
ded proﬁles. Overall, they show the importance of matching ITO decision and con-
tractual governance to achieve higher levels of ITO success.
Insights for Practitioners
The three major categories of determinants of ITO Success are ITO decisions, contractual
governance, and relational governance. These determinants are depicted as direct rela-
tionships to ITO success in Figure 19.1. Overall, we know ITO decisions that entailed
510
MARY C. LACITY, SHAJI A. KHAN, AND LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS

selective use of outsourcing, the involvement of senior managers, and rigorous evaluation
processes were associated with higher levels of ITO success. Contractual governance also
positively affected ITO success. In general, more contract detail, shorter-term contracts,
and higher-dollar valued contracts were positively related to ITO success. Such contracts
maintain the balance of power between clients and suppliers, clearly deﬁne expectations,
and motivate good supplier performance. Relational governance positively affected ITO
outcomes. Trust, norms, open communication, open sharing of information, mutual
dependency, and cooperation were always associated with higher levels of ITO success.
Recently, research has found that the interaction among these determinants is
important. The combination of ITO decision and contractual governance are asso-
ciated with higher levels of ITO success (Lee, Miranda, and Kim 2004) and the
combination of contractual governance and relational governance are associated with
higher levels of ITO success (Sabherwal 1999; Poppo and Zenger 2002; Goo et al. 2009).
Finally, what is also clear from the preponderance of evidence is that ITO success is
not only caused by sound decisions and strong contractual and relational governance,
but ITO success in turn caused better ITO decisions and stronger governance. Thus,
the relationship between ITO success and its ‘dependent variables’ (sound decisions,
contractual governance, and relational governance) is reciprocal. Speciﬁcally, ITO
success fuelled higher levels of trust (relational governance), built stronger client and
supplier capabilities, and determined the kinds of ITO decisions and ITO contracts
clients made moving forward (Sabherwal 1999; Seddon 2001; Gopal et al. 2003; Levina
Relational Governance:
Trust, Norms, Communication, 
Sharing Information, 
Mutual Dependency,
Cooperation
ITO Success
ITO Decision:
Degree of Outsourcing
Top Management Commitment/Support 
Evaluation Process
Contractual Governance:
Contract Detail
Contract Type
Contract Duration
Contract Size
FIGURE 19.1 Three main categories of determinants of ITO success
A REVIEW OF THE IT OUTSOURCING LITERATURE: INSIGHTS FOR PRACTICE
511

and Ross 2003; Whitten and Leidner 2006). Conversely, ITO failure fuelled greater
need for controls, monitoring mechanisms, tougher contracts, and determined the
kinds of ITO decisions clients made moving forward (Lacity and Willcocks 1998;
Sabherwal 1999; Choudhury and Sabherwal 2003). For practice, then, a more compli-
cated but richer depiction of the relationships among ITO decision, contractual
governance, relational governance, and ITO success is found in Figure 19.2.
CLIENT AND SUPPLIER CAPABILITIES
..................................................................................................................
Organizational capability is deﬁned as the previous experience, productive capacity,
personnel, and other resources which indicate that the applying organization can carry
out a proposal.5 In general, this research topic asks:
· Which capabilities do client ﬁrms need to develop to successfully engage IT
outsourcing suppliers?
· Which capabilities do client ﬁrms seek in an IT outsourcing supplier?
Relational Governance:
Trust, Norms, Communication, 
Sharing Information, 
Mutual Dependency,
Cooperation
ITO Success
ITO Decision:
Degree of Outsourcing
Top Management Commitment/Support 
Evaluation Process
Contractual Governance:
Contract Detail
Contract Type
Contract Duration
Contract Size
FIGURE 19.2 The complementary and reciprocal relationships of ITO success
512
MARY C. LACITY, SHAJI A. KHAN, AND LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS

In Table 19.4, we list the overall capabilities found in the articles we reviewed sorted by
frequency of occurrence. The most frequently mentioned capability was ‘IS technical/
methodological capability’ (e.g. Kishore et al. 2003; Levina and Ross 2003; Oza, Rainer,
and Grey 2006; Ross and Beath 2006). This is an operational capability that is
important to both client and supplier ﬁrms. For the outsourcing of new application
development, research has found that it is important for clients and suppliers to have
shared processes (Davenport 2005). For example, Rottman and Lacity (2006) inter-
viewed 149 people from both client and supplier organizations. They found that ITO
Table 19.4 Client and supplier capabilities
Number of Articles
Capability
Capability description
For clients
For suppliers
Total
IS Technical/
Methodological
Capability
An organization’s level of maturity in terms
of technical or process related standards
including the Capability Maturity Model
(CMM), Capability Maturity Model Integrated
(CMMI), and the Information Technology
Infrastructure Library (ITIL).
5
8
13
IS human
Resource
Management
Capability
An organization’s ability to identify, acquire,
develop, and deploy human resources to
achieve its organizational objectives.
1
9
10
Supplier
Management
Capability
The extent to which a client organization is
able to effectively manage outsourcing
suppliers.
10
0
10
Contract
Negotiation
Capability
The extent to which an organization is able
to effectively bid, select, and negotiate
effective contracts with suppliers.
7
0
7
Domain
Capability
The extent to which a supplier has built a
capability of the client organization’s
business and technical contexts, processes,
practices, and requirements.
0
4
4
IS Change
Management
Capability
The extent to which an organization
effectively manages change.
3
0
3
Transition
Management
Capability
The extent to which an organization
effectively transitions services to
outsourcing suppliers or integrates client
services with supplier services.
2
0
2
Client
Management
Capability
The extent to which a supplier organization
is able to effectively manage client
relationships.
0
2
2
Total
28
23
51
A REVIEW OF THE IT OUTSOURCING LITERATURE: INSIGHTS FOR PRACTICE
513

success was greater when both the client and supplier ﬁrms had at least CMMI6 level 3
capabilities.
The most important capability for clients is the ‘Supplier Management Capability’.
This is deﬁned as the extent to which a client organization is able to effectively manage
outsourcing suppliers (e.g. Cross 1995; Michell and Fitzgerald 1997; Al-Qirim 2003;
Ranganathan and Balaji 2007). For example, Michell and Fitzgerald (1997) found that
among clients that disputed with vendors, nearly four-ﬁfths said they would ‘strength-
en their ability to manage the vendor’ (p. 232).
The most important capability for suppliers was the ‘IS human resource manage-
ment capability’ (e.g. Gopal et al. 2003; Beulen and Ribbers 2003; Rao et al. 2006; Oshri,
Kotlarsky, and Willcocks 2007a). This is an organization’s ability to identify, acquire,
develop, and deploy human resources to achieve its organizational objectives. Clients
achieved higher levels of ITO success when supplier staff turnover was low and when
the supplier assigned the most capable people to the client’s account.
Insights for Practice
Our review treats these capabilities as independent, but the most widely cited and
respected papers on this topic identify a mix of complementary capabilities that lead to
ITO success (see Table 19.5). The ﬁrst paper to meaningfully address this question is
Feeny and Willcocks (1998).7 The authors identiﬁed nine interrelated capabilities,
Table 19.5 The mix of complementary capabilities
Research
study
Empirical base
Focus
Critical capabilities identiﬁed
Feeny and
Willcocks
(1998)
Analysis of over 100
sourcing decisions
Client
(1) IS leadership, (2) business systems
thinking, (3) relationship building, (4)
technical architecture, (5) making
technology work, (6) informed buying,
(7) contract facilitation, (8) contract
monitoring, and (9) vendor development
Levina and
Ross (2003)
Detailed case study
of client/supplier
relationship
Supplier
(1) IT personnel career development,
(2) methodology development and
dissemination, and (3) client relationship
management
Feeny, Lacity,
and Willcocks
(2005)
Analysis of over 100
sourcing decisions
Supplier
(1) planning and contracting,
(2) governance, (3) organizational design,
(4) leadership, (5) business management,
(6) customer development, (7) domain
expertise, (8) behaviour management,
(9) sourcing, (10) process re-engineering,
(11) technology exploitation, and
(12) programme management
514
MARY C. LACITY, SHAJI A. KHAN, AND LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS

depicted as three interlocking rings. Levina and Ross (2003) found that suppliers need
three complementary capabilities: (1) IT personnel career development, (2) methodol-
ogy development and dissemination, and (3) client relationship management. They
showed how supplier capabilities were complementary in that engaging in one capa-
bility improved the other two capabilities. Feeny et al. (2005) developed a sister
model to identify the twelve most important, interrelated capabilities clients seek in
a supplier.
SOURCING VARIETALS: OFFSHORE,
ASP, AND BPO
..................................................................................................................
Thus far we have covered foundational issues associated with ITO practice, including
strategy, risk management, best practices, and capabilities. The insights for practice
have been primarily derived from the studies of domestic IT outsourcing. Recently,
much of the academic research has focused on ITO using other sourcing models,
including the offshore outsourcing of IT work, application service provision, and
business process outsourcing. A common question for all these sourcing varietals is:
· How do practices differ when pursuing different types of outsourcing such
as offshore outsourcing, application service provision, and business process
outsourcing?
Offshore Outsourcing
Recently, academics have extracted important insights for practice about offshore
outsourcing of IT work. We have coded 69 ﬁndings from 20 major papers in this
area. Academics are beginning to have a good understanding of how offshore out-
sourcing differs from domestic outsourcing. So far, researchers have found that
offshore outsourcing poses considerably more challenges than domestic outsourcing.
Offshore outsourcing is more challenging because of time zone differences (Carmel
2006; Gokhale 2007), the need for more controls (Choudhury and Sabherwal 2003;
Kotlarsky, van Fenema, and Willcocks 2008), problems transferring knowledge (Gupta
et al. 2007; Oshri, Kotlarsky, and Willcocks 2007a), cultural differences (Smith
and McKeen 2004; Carmel and Tjia 2005; Oza and Hall 2005; Rao et al. 2006; Iacovou
and Nakatsu 2008), having to deﬁne requirements more rigorously (Gopal et al. 2003),
and difﬁculties in managing dispersed teams (Zviran, Ahituv, and Armoni 2001; Oshri,
Kotlarsky, and Willcocks 2007a, 2007b). The transaction costs of offshore outsourcing
are considerably higher than domestic outsourcing (Dibbern, Winkler, and Heinzl
2008; Lacity and Rottman 2008).
A REVIEW OF THE IT OUTSOURCING LITERATURE: INSIGHTS FOR PRACTICE
515

Researchers are also identifying practices and capabilities that are speciﬁc to offshore
outsourcing (Rottman and Lacity 2004; Ranganathan and Balaji 2007). Sample prac-
tices include the use of middlemen (Mahnke, Wareham, and Bjorn-Andersen 2008),
the design of special interfaces between client and offshore supplier employees (Kaiser
and Hawk 2004; Rottman and Lacity 2006; Oshri, Kotlarsky, and Willcocks 2007a;
Leonardi and Bailey 2008), and the use of increased number of liaisons (Gopal et al.
2003; Lacity and Rottman 2008). Researchers have also studied up to ten capabilities
required for offshore outsourcing (Ranganathan and Balaji 2007; Jarvenpaa and Mao
2008). Achieving total cost savings has been difﬁcult in the context of offshore out-
sourcing because of all the additional challenges and practices needed to ensure
success. Client organizations need to commit a high enough volume of work offshore
to ensure total cost savings.
The recent economic downturn may predict a signiﬁcant change in the way such
offshore sourcing is organized and structured. Cash strapped organizations, both large
and small, are selling off their captive centres to offshore suppliers which get lengthy
offshore outsourcing contracts in return for purchasing an organization’s captive
centre assets. For example, Citigroup has reportedly sold its IT captive centre in
India to Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) Ltd for (US) $505 million, and in turn got
into an offshore outsourcing arrangement with TCS resulting in a (US) $2.5 billion,
nine-year deal (Wall Street Journal, 8 June 2009).
Application Service Provision
Initially, application service provision (ASP) was a business model in which suppliers
hosted and rented standard applications to clients over the Internet. ASP was one way
small client ﬁrms could access expensive software—like enterprise resource planning
software by SAP or Oracle—while avoiding high infrastructure costs, support costs, or
hefty software licence fees. The ASP model ﬂourished during the dot.com era, but
although the value proposition to clients was solid, suppliers had difﬁculty generating
revenues. Many ASP suppliers went bankrupt because the client contracts were too
small, their duration too short, the marketing costs to educate clients about ASP too
high, the margins from reselling propriety software too thin, and the transaction costs
of serving so many needy clients too high (Kern, Kreijger, and Willcocks 2002; Kern,
Lacity, and Willcocks 2002).
The ASP bubble burst by 2001, but has since been revived into what we call
‘netsourcing’. Netsourcing uses the internet as the delivery mechanism, but the sup-
pliers, clients, and services have changed. Netsourcing suppliers have new business
models and are attracting larger-sized clients. Rather than reselling other vendors’
software, the new netsourcing suppliers have developed net-native applications (pro-
prietary applications designed and delivered speciﬁcally for Internet delivery) that are
only available through ASP delivery (e.g. Salesforce.com). Traditional IT suppliers like
516
MARY C. LACITY, SHAJI A. KHAN, AND LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS

IBM and EDS (now part of HP) also incorporated netsourcing into their service
options, offering a portfolio of application delivery options to their clients. Providers
got the message: clients want customized services, even if the products are standar-
dized. The need for customized services actually increases the service providers’
viability because they can generate proﬁts by charging for value-added services.
Companies like Xchanging and Hewitt have highly customized service contracts but
deliver many services in an ASP manner (Willcocks and Lacity 2006).
Kern, Willcocks, and Lacity (2002) provide a good overview of how ASP differs from
traditional IT outsourcing. They conclude that the risks of ASP are similar to tradi-
tional IT outsourcing, but that the probabilities of occurrence for many risks are higher
with ASP. In particular, the probabilities for risks increase with ASP because of
immature suppliers, immature customers, and immature technologies.
Loebbecke and Huyskens (2006) examined the determinants of netsourcing deci-
sions in 88 German companies. The authors found that the companies that netsource
applications had signiﬁcantly lower values for (1) competitive relevance of the software
application, (2) strategic vulnerability of netsourcing, and (3) technical uncertainty.
Thus, applications that were netsourced were perceived as non-strategic and technical-
ly certain and thus could be safely netsourced—very similar ﬁndings to traditional
outsourcing. Susarla, Barua, and Whinston (2003) examine the determinants of ASP
success as measured by ASP satisfaction and ASP supplier performance. Based on a
sample of 256 client ﬁrms that netsource at least one software application, the authors
found that the clients most satisﬁed with ASP (1) rated ASP supplier performance
higher, (2) had more prior systems integration experience, (3) had higher a priori
expectations about the ASP’s functional capability, and (4) had lower gaps between a
priori expectations and a posteriori perceptions of ASP performance. Like ﬁndings
from research in traditional IT outsourcing, clients have more success with ASP when
they have realistic expectations and have already conquered the learning curve through
prior experience.
Business Process Outsourcing
Business process outsourcing (BPO) entails a supplier taking over the execution of a
client’s business processes within functions such as human resource management,
ﬁnance, and accounting (Lacity, Feeny, and Willcocks 2003). BPO is a growing trend
and, with increasing standardization of business processes, is expected to permeate the
organizations of the future (Davenport 2005). Although research on BPO is still
evolving, much in the way IT outsourcing research did, we do see some important
patterns emerging.
As standards for processes become available, outsourced processes will become
increasingly commoditized (Davenport 2005). This idea is supported by the current
view that, in general, BPO is suitable for well-deﬁned, self-contained, modular,
A REVIEW OF THE IT OUTSOURCING LITERATURE: INSIGHTS FOR PRACTICE
517

IT-enabled, and easily measurable processes (e.g. Borman 2006; Tanriverdi, Konana,
and Ge 2007). Concerning IT enablement, IT may help reduce the transaction costs
associated with BPO (Borman 2006). Based on data from 287 manufacturing plants,
Bardhan, Whitaker, and Mithas (2006) report that plants with higher IT spending were
more likely to engage in production process outsourcing. Also, when processes can be
detached from the underlying IT infrastructure at a client organization they may be
more suitable for offshoring. However, when processes are tightly coupled with IT,
domestic sourcing or insourcing may be a better option (Tanriverdi, Konana, and
Ge 2007).
As with IT outsourcing, cost savings, greater ﬂexibility, and access to specialized
process expertise remain key motivators of BPO (Lacity, Feeny, and Willcocks 2003;
Davenport 2005). However, indicators of BPO success go beyond cost reduction and
ﬂexibility to include quality improvement, realized core competence focus, and realized
strategic advantage (Wüllenweber et al. 2008). Wüllenweber et al. (2008) studied the
impact of contractual and relational governance mechanisms on BPO success and
report that process standardization, contract completeness, coordination, and consen-
sus are directly associated with BPO success. Like Sabherwal (1999), Poppo and Zenger
(2002), and Goo et al. (2009), Wüllenweber et al. (2008) also found that sound
contracts (contract completeness) and relational governance (high values of coordina-
tion and consensus between client and supplier ﬁrms) are determinants of success.
We anticipate that future research will increasingly focus on the bundling of ITO
and BPO because client ﬁrms are increasingly pursuing this practice. Thus, studies such
as the one by Wüllenweber et al. (2008) maybe bellwethers for future research and
practice.
CONCLUSION
..................................................................................................................
In effect, research on practice has documented the 20-year rise to globalism of IT and
business services outsourcing. The key quest for clients has been how to leverage the
ever expanding services market for signiﬁcant business advantage. The common
denominator in the ﬁndings: researchers have uncovered no quick ﬁx. Much depends
on experiential learning and sheer hard work. Executives must conquer a signiﬁcant
learning curve and build key in-house capabilities in order to successfully exploit
outsourcing opportunities. They need to accept that outsourcing is not about giving
up management, but managing in a different way.
Suppliers have also faced learning curves in their attempts to differentiate their
services, ﬁnd new markets, and deal with new competition from potentially anywhere
in the world. Maturing their ability to deliver fully on the promise of cost-effective
service delivery, strong relationships and back-ofﬁce transformation has been a con-
stant challenge. As the 2007 economic downturn turned into 2008 recession,
518
MARY C. LACITY, SHAJI A. KHAN, AND LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS

suppliers’s abilities to develop and leverage requisite capabilities in ITO, BPO, and
‘bestshoring’ have become ever more critical.
The sheer dynamism of modern business and public sectors makes any lessons
derived more important to learn and apply, and trends more important to watch and
take suitable action on. Looking forward, McDonald (2007) suggests IT leaders need to
develop an enterprise capability, comprising nine elements that are standardized,
integrated, and operated together to achieve strategic goals. The nine elements address
human capital, organization, processes, facilities and equipment technology, applica-
tions, information, rules and metrics, and speciﬁc tasks. Many of these elements will be
sourced through a comprehensive portfolio of in-house workers, contract workers, and
third party suppliers. Lacity, Willcocks, and Rottman (2008) predict thirteen trends
about the size and growth of ITO and BPO markets, about suppliers located around the
world, and about particular sourcing models including application service provision,
insourcing, nearshoring, rural sourcing, knowledge process outsourcing, freelance
outsourcing, and captive centres. They also identify ﬁve perennial, prickly, future
challenges for practice pertaining to business back ofﬁce alignment, client and supplier
incentives, knowledge transfer, knowledge retention, and sustainability of outsourcing
relationships.
As outsourcing spend increases, the alignment of business and sourcing strategy
does indeed becomes a key issue, as does CEO and business executive involvement in
outsourcing objectives, relationships, and implementation. This requires a further
advance in client thinking and action. One way of looking historically at outsourcing
practice research work is to say that it has documented how organizations have been
learning, experientially and often painfully, how to manage back-ofﬁce outsourcing.
But the increased size, importance, complexity of the phenomena, and the risks they
engender, suggest that in the next phase researchers will be examining how organiza-
tions seek to provide leadership in outsourcing. Leadership is about shaping the context
and mobilizing resources to deal with the adaptive challenges organizations face. In
glimpsing the future, it is pretty clear that changing business needs, the globalizing and
technologizing of the supply of business services, and the much greater use of out-
sourcing, will provide challenges that will require this shift from management to
leadership—if governance, control, ﬂexibility, and superior business outcomes are to
be the consequences of outsourcing practice.
A REVIEW OF THE IT OUTSOURCING LITERATURE: INSIGHTS FOR PRACTICE
519

Appendix 19.1 Distribution of ITO articles by journal
Journal Name
No. of
Articles
Journal Name
No. of
Articles
Academy of Management
Journal
1
International Journal of Organizational
Analysis
1
Academy of Management
Review
3
Journal of Applied Business Research
1
ACM SIGMIS Database
1
Journal of Electronic Commerce in
Organizations
3
BT Technology Journal
1
Journal of Global Information
Management
4
California Management
Review
2
Journal of Global Information
Technology Management
5
Communications of the ACM
18
Journal of High Technology
Management Research
1
Communications of the AIS
10
Journal of Information Systems
2
Computers & Operations
Research
4
Journal of Information Systems
Management
1
Database for Advances in
Information Systems
2
Journal of Information Technology
22
Decision Sciences
3
Journal of Information Technology
Case and Application Research
5
Decision Support Systems
1
Journal of Information Technology
Cases and Applications
5
Engineering Management
Journal
1
Journal of International Management
Studies
1
European Journal of
Information Systems
10
Journal of Management
1
European Journal of
Operational Research
3
Journal of Management Information
Systems
14
European Management
Journal
2
Journal of Operations Management
2
Foreign Affairs
1
Journal of Purchasing & Supply
Management
1
Harvard Business Review
8
Journal of Strategic Information
Systems
10
IEEE Computer
1
Journal of Systems Management
5
IEEE Transactions on
Engineering Management
2
Journal of the Association for
Information Systems
3
Industrial Management &
Data Systems
1
Management Science
8
Industrial Management þ
Data Systems
8
MIS Quarterly
18
520
MARY C. LACITY, SHAJI A. KHAN, AND LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS

NOTES
1. Besides these rational reasons, some studies ﬁnd personal agendas dominating large-scale
outsourcing decisions (Lacity and Hirschheim 1993; Hall and Liedtka 2005).
2. The articles were coded by Mary C. Lacity, Shaji Khan, and Aihua Yan.
3. Cited 261 times by Summer 2009 according to Harzing’ Publish or Perish.
4. Cited 399 times by Summer 2009 according to Harzing’ Publish or Perish.
5. <http://www.broward.k12.ﬂ.us/grants/old/html/resources/deﬁnitions.html>.
6. CMMI (Capability Maturity Model Integrated) deﬁnes ﬁve levels of software development
maturity and speciﬁes what processes must be in place to achieve those levels.
Industry and Innovation
1
MIS Quarterly Executive
12
Information & Management
17
Omega
1
Information and Software
Technology
1
Organization Science
1
Information Management &
Computer Security
7
Public Personnel Management
1
Information Resources
Management Journal
2
S.A.M. Advanced Management Journal
1
Information Systems
Frontiers
12
Sloan Management Review
21
Information Systems Journal
2
Strategic Management Journal
3
Information Systems
Management
35
Strategic Outsourcing: An International
Journal
1
Information Systems
Research
8
Technovation
1
Information Technology &
People
1
The Academy of Management
Executive
2
Information Technology and
Management
2
The Academy of Management Review
1
International Journal of E-
Business Research
1
The Journal of Applied Behavioral
Science
1
International Journal of
Information Management
11
The Journal of Computer Information
Systems
12
International Journal of
Logistics Management
1
The Journal of Management
Development
1
International Journal of
Management
1
TOTAL
357
A REVIEW OF THE IT OUTSOURCING LITERATURE: INSIGHTS FOR PRACTICE
521

7. Their model has been adopted by many large organizations, including DuPont and
Commonwealth Bank in Australia. As further evidence of this model’ impact, the original
paper has been cited 336 times as of 2009. The paper has been updated in Willcocks and
Feeny 2006.
REFERENCES
Agrawal, M., Kishore, R., and Rao, H. R. (2006). ‘Market Reactions to E-business Outsourcing
Announcements: An Event Study’, Information & Management, 43: 861–73.
Al-Qirim, N. A. (2003). ‘The Strategic Outsourcing Decision of IT and eCommerce: The
Case of Small Businesses in New Zealand’, Journal of Information Technology Cases and
Applications, 5(3): 32–56.
Ang, S., and Straub, D. (1998). ‘Production and Transaction Economies and IS Outsourcing:
A Study of the U.S. Banking Industry’, MIS Quarterly, 22(4): 535–52.
Applegate, L. M., and Montealegre, R. (1991). ‘Eastman Kodak Company: Managing Infor-
mation Systems through Strategic Alliances’, Harvard Business School Case 9-192-030.
Apte, U., Sobol, M., Hanaoka, S., Shimada, T., Saarinen, T., Salmela, T., and Vepsalainen,
A. (1997). ‘IS Outsourcing Practices in the USA, Japan, and Finland: A Comparative Study’,
Journal of Information Technology, 12: 289–304.
Aron, R., Clemons, E., and Reddi, S. (2005). ‘Just Right Outsourcing: Understanding and
Managing Risk’, Journal of Management Information Systems, 22(2): 37–55.
Aubert, B. A., Dussault, S., Patry, M., and Rivard, S. (1999). ‘Managing the Risk of IT
Outsourcing’, Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences.
——Beaurivage, G., Croteau, A. M., and Rivard, S. (2008). ‘Firm Strategic Proﬁle and IT
Outsourcing’, Information Systems Frontiers, 10(2): 129–43.
Bahli, B., and Rivard, S. (2005). ‘Validating Measures of Information Technology Outsourcing
Risk Factors’, Omega, 33(2): 175–87.
Bardhan, I., Whitaker, J., and Mithas, S. (2006). ‘Information Technology, Production Process
Outsourcing, and Manufacturing Plant Performance’, Journal of Management Information
Systems, 23(2): 13–40.
Barthélemy, J. (2001). ‘The Hidden Costs of IT Outsourcing’, Sloan Management Review, 42
(3): 60–9.
——and Geyer, D. (2004). ‘The Determinants of Total IT Outsourcing: An Empirical Investi-
gation of French and German Firms’, Journal of Computer Information Systems, 44(3):
91–8.
————(2005). ‘An Empirical Investigation of IT Outsourcing versus Quasi-outsourcing in
France and Germany’, Information & Management, 42(4): 533–42.
Beulen, E., and Ribbers, P. (2003). ‘International Examples of Large-Scale Systems—Theory
and Practice II: A Case Study of Managing IT Outsourcing Partnerships in Asia’, Commu-
nications of the AIS, 11: 357–76.
Bhalla, A., Sodhi, M. S., and Son, B.-G. (2008). ‘Is More IT Offshoring Better? An Exploratory
Study of Western Companies Offshoring to South East Asia’, Journal of Operations
Management, 26(2): 322–35.
522
MARY C. LACITY, SHAJI A. KHAN, AND LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS

Borman, M. (2006). ‘Applying Multiple Perspectives to the BPO Decision: A Case Study of
Call Centers in Australia’, Journal of Information Technology, 21: 99–115.
Carmel, E. (2006). ‘Building your Information Systems from the Other Side of the World:
How Infosys Manages Time Zone Differences’, MIS Quarterly Executive, 5(1): 43–53.
——and Abbott, P. (2007). ‘Why Nearshore Means That Distance Matters’, Communications
of the ACM, 50(10): 40–6.
——and Agarwal, R. (2002). ‘The Maturation of Offshore Sourcing of Information Technol-
ogy Work’, MIS Quarterly Executive, 1(2): 65–78.
——and Tjia, P. (2005). Offshoring Information Technology: Sourcing and Outsourcing to a
Global Workforce. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Choudhury, V., and Sabherwal, R. (2003). ‘Portfolios of Control in Outsourced Software
Development Projects’, Information Systems Research, 14(3): 291–314.
Cross, J. (1995). ‘IT Outsourcing: British Petroleum’s Competitive Approach’, Harvard
Business Review, 73(3): 94–103.
Cullen, S., Seddon, P., and Willcocks, L. (2005a). ‘Managing Outsourcing: The Life Cycle
Imperative’, MIS Quarterly Executive, 4(1): 229–46.
——————(2005b). ‘IT Outsourcing Conﬁguration: Research into Deﬁning and Designing
Outsourcing Arrangements’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 14(4): 357–87.
Currie, W. (1998). ‘Using Multiple Suppliers to Mitigate the Risk of IT Outsourcing at ICI and
Wessex Water’, Journal of Information Technology, 13: 169–80.
——and Willcocks, L. (1998). ‘Analyzing Four Types of IT Sourcing Decisions in the Context
of Scale, Client/Supplier Interdependency and Risk Mitigation’, Information Systems
Journal, 8(2): 119–43.
Davenport, T. (2005). ‘The Coming Commoditization of Processes’, Harvard Business Review,
83(6): 101–8.
De Loof, L. A. (1995). ‘Information Systems Outsourcing Decision Making: A Framework,
Organizational Theories and Case Studies’, Journal of Information Technology, 10: 281–97.
Dibbern, J., Winkler, J., and Heinzl, A. (2008). ‘Explaining Variations in Client Extra Costs
between Software Projects Offshored to India’, MIS Quarterly, 32(2): 333–66.
——Goles, T., Hirschheim, R., and Bandula J. (2004). ‘Information Systems Outsourcing:
A Survey and Analysis of the Literature’, Database for Advances in Information Systems, 34
(4): 6–102.
DiRomualdo, A., and Gurbaxani, V. (1998). ‘Strategic Intent for IT Outsourcing’, Sloan
Management Review, 39(4): 67–80.
Domberger, S., Fernandez, P., and Fiebig, D. G. (2000). ‘Modelling the Price, Performance
and Contract Characteristics of IT Outsourcing’, Journal of Information Technology,
15: 107–18.
Earl, M. (1996). ‘The Risks of Outsourcing IT’, Sloan Management Review, 37(3): 26–32.
Farag, N., and Krishnan, M. (2003). ‘The Market Value of IT Outsourcing Investment
Announcements: An Event-Study Analysis’, Proceedings of the 9th Americas Conference
on Information Systems, 1623–9.
Feeny, D., Lacity, M., and Willcocks, L. (2005). ‘Taking the Measure of Outsourcing Provi-
ders’, Sloan Management Review, 46(3): 41–8.
——and Willcocks, L. (1998). ‘Core IS Capabilities for Exploiting Information Technology’,
Sloan Management Review, 39(3): 9–21.
A REVIEW OF THE IT OUTSOURCING LITERATURE: INSIGHTS FOR PRACTICE
523

Fisher, J., Hirschheim, R., and Jacobs, R. (2008). ‘Understanding the Outsourcing Learning
Curve: A Longitudinal Analysis of a Large Australian Company’, Information Systems
Frontiers, 10: 165–78.
Florin, J., Bradford, M., and Pagach, D. (2005). ‘Information Technology Outsourcing and
Organizational Restructuring: An Explanation of their Effects on Firm Value’, Journal of
High Technology Management Research, 16(2): 241–53.
Galliers, R., and Leidner, D. (2009). Strategic Information Management: Challenges and
Strategies in Managing Information Systems. 4th edn., London: Routledge.
Gokhale, A. A. (2007). ‘Offshore Outsourcing: A Delphi Study’, Journal of Information
Technology Case and Application Research, 9(3): 6–18.
Goo, J., Kishore, R., Rao, H. R., and Nam, K. (2009). ‘The Role of Service Level Agreements in
Relational Management of Information Technology Outsourcing: An Empirical Study’,
MIS Quarterly, 33(1): 1–28.
Gopal, A., Mukhopadhyay, T., and Krishnan, M. (2002). ‘The Role of Software Processes
and Communication in Offshore Software Development’, Communications of the ACM,
45(4): 193–200.
——Sivaramakrishnan, K., Krishnan, M., and Mukhopadhyay, T. (2003). ‘Contracts in
Offshore Software Development: An Empirical Analysis’, Management Science, 49(12):
1671–83.
Grover, V., Cheon, M., and Teng, J. (1994). ‘A Descriptive Study on the Outsourcing of
Information Systems Functions’, Information & Management, 27: 33–44.
——————(1996). ‘The Effect of Service Quality and Partnership on the Outsourcing
of Information Systems Functions’, Journal of Management Information Systems, 12(4):
89–116.
Gupta, A., Seshasai, S., Mukherji, S., and Ganguly, A. (2007). ‘Offshoring: The Transition
from Economic Drivers toward Strategic Global Partnership and 24-Hour Knowledge
Factory’, Journal of Electronic Commerce in Organizations, 5(2): 1–23.
Hall, J., and Liedtka, S. (2005). ‘Financial Performance, CEO Compensation, and Large-Scale
Information Technology Outsourcing Decisions’, Journal of Management Information
Systems, 22(1): 193–222.
Han, H., Lee, J., and Seo, Y. (2008). ‘Analyzing the Impact of a Firm’s Capability on
Outsourcing Success: A Process Perspective’, Information & Management, 45: 31–42.
Hayes, D., Hunton, J., and Reck, J. (2000). ‘Information Systems Outsourcing Announcement:
Investigating the Impact on the Market Value of Contract Granting and Receiving Firms’,
Journal of Information Systems, 14(2): 109–25.
Heiskanen, A., Newman, M., and Eklin, M. (2008). ‘Control, Trust, Power, and the Dynamics
of Information System Outsourcing Relationships: A Process Study of Contractual
Software Development’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 17(4): 268–86.
Huber, R. (1993). ‘How Continental Bank Outsourced its “Crown Jewels”’, Harvard Business
Review, 71(1): 121–9.
Iacovou, C. L., and Nakatsu, R. (2008). ‘A Risk Proﬁle of Offshore-Outsourced Development
Projects’, Communications of the ACM, 51(6): 89–94.
Jarvenpaa, S., and Mao, J. (2008). ‘Operational Capabilities Development in Mediated
Offshore Software Service Models’, Journal of Information Technology, 23(1): 3–17.
Jeyaraj, A., Rottman, J., and Lacity, M. (2006). ‘A Review of the Predictors, Linkages, and
Biases in IT Innovation Adoption Research’, Journal of Information Technology, 21(1):
1–23.
524
MARY C. LACITY, SHAJI A. KHAN, AND LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS

Jurison, J. (1995). ‘The Role of Risk and Return in Information Technology Outsourcing
Decisions’, Journal of Information Technology, 10: 239–47.
Kaiser, K., and Hawk, S. (2004). ‘Evolution of Offshore Software Development: From
Outsourcing to Co-Sourcing’, MIS Quarterly Executive, 3(2): 69–81.
Kern, T., Kreijger, J., and Willcocks, L. (2002c). ‘Exploring ASP as a Sourcing Strategy:
Theoretical Perspectives, Propositions for Practice’, Journal of Strategic Information
Systems, 11(2): 153–77.
——Lacity, M., and Willcocks, L. (2002). Netsourcing: Renting Business Applications and
Services over a Network. New York: Prentice Hall.
——and Willcocks, L. (2000). ‘Exploring Information Technology Outsourcing Relationships:
Theory and Practice’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 9(4): 321–50.
————(2002). ‘Exploring Relationships in Information Technology Outsourcing: The In-
teraction Approach’, European Journal of Information Systems, 11: 3–19.
————and Lacity, M. (2002). ‘Application Service Provision: Risk Assessment and Risk
Mitigation’, MIS Quarterly Executive, 1(2): 113–26.
Kishore, R., Rao, H., Nam, K., Rajagopalan, S., Chaudhury, A. (2003). ‘A Relationship
Perspective on IT Outsourcing’, Communications of the ACM, 46(12): 86–92.
Koh, C., Ang, S., and Straub, D. (2004). ‘IT Outsourcing Success: A Psychological Contract
Perspective’, Information Systems Research, 15(4): 356–73.
Kotlarsky, J., van Fenema, P., and Willcocks, L. (2008). ‘Developing a Knowledge-Based
Perspective on Coordination: The Case of Global Software Projects’, Information and
Management, 45(2): 96–108.
Lacity, M., Feeny, D., and Willcocks, L. (2003). ‘Transforming a Back-Ofﬁce Function:
Lessons from BAE Systems’ Experience with an Enterprise Partnership’, MIS Quarterly
Executive, 2(2): 86–103.
——————(2004). ‘Commercializing the Back Ofﬁce at Lloyds of London: Outsourcing and
Strategic Partnerships Revisited’, European Management Journal, 22(2): 127–40.
——and Hirschheim, R. (1993). ‘The Information Systems Outsourcing Bandwagon’, Sloan
Management Review, 35(1): 73–86.
————and Willcocks, L. (1994). ‘Realizing Outsourcing Expectations’, Information Systems
Management, 11(4): 7–18.
——and Rottman, J. (2008). Offshore Outsourcing of IT Work. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
——and Willcocks, L. (1998). ‘An Empirical Investigation of Information Technology Sourc-
ing Practices: Lessons from Experience’, MIS Quarterly, 22(3): 363–408.
————(2000). ‘Survey of IT Outsourcing Experiences in US and UK Organizations’, Journal
of Global Information Management, 8(2): 5–23.
————and Rottman, J. (2008). ‘Global Outsourcing of Back Ofﬁce Services: Lessons, Trends
and Enduring Challenges’, Strategic Outsourcing: An International Journal, 1(1): 13–34.
Lee, A. (1999). ‘Rigor and Relevance in Information Systems Research: Beyond the Approach
of Positivism Alone’, MIS Quarterly, 23(1): 29–34.
Lee, J., and Kim, Y. (1999). ‘Effect of Partnership Quality on IS Outsourcing Success:
Conceptual Framework and Empirical Validation’, Journal of Management Information
Systems, 15(4): 29–61.
——Miranda, S., and Kim, Y. (2004). ‘IT Outsourcing Strategies: Universalistic, Contingency,
and Conﬁgurational Explanations of Success’, Information Systems Research, 15(2):
110–31.
A REVIEW OF THE IT OUTSOURCING LITERATURE: INSIGHTS FOR PRACTICE
525

Leonardi, P. M., and Bailey, D. E. (2008). ‘Transformational Technologies and the Creation of
New Work Practices: Making Implicit Knowledge Explicit in Task-Based Offshoring’, MIS
Quarterly, 32(2): 411–36.
Levina, N., and Ross, J. (2003). ‘From the Vendor’ Perspective: Exploring the Value Proposi-
tion in Information Technology Outsourcing’, MIS Quarterly, 27(3): 331–64.
Linder, J. (2004). ‘Transformational Outsourcing’, Sloan Management Review, 45(2): 52–8.
Loebbecke, C., and Huyskens, C. (2006). ‘What Drives Netsourcing Decisions? An Empirical
Analysis’, European Journal of Information Systems, 15(4): 415–23.
Loh, L., and Venkatraman, N. (1992a). ‘Determinants of Information Technology Outsour-
cing: A Cross-Sectional Analysis’, Journal of Management Information Systems, 9(1): 7–24.
————(1992b). Stock Market Reaction to IT Outsourcing: An Event Study. Cambridge, MA:
Sloan School of Management, MIT.
McDonald, M. (2007). ‘The Enterprise Capability Organization: A Future for IT’, MIS
Quarterly Executive, 6(3): 179–92.
Madison, T., San Miguel, P., and Padmanabhan, P. (2006). ‘Stock Market Reaction to
Domestic Outsourcing Announcements by U.S. Based Client and Vendor Firms’, Journal
of Information Technology Case and Application Research, 8(4): 6–26.
Mahnke, V., Wareham, J., and Bjorn-Andersen, N. (2008). ‘Offshore Middlemen: Transna-
tional Intermediation in Technology Sourcing’, Journal of Information Technology,
23(1): 18–30.
Michell, V., and Fitzgerald, G. (1997). ‘The IT Outsourcing Market-Place: Vendors and their
Selection’, Journal of Information Technology, 12: 223–37.
Miranda, S., and Kim, Y. (2006). ‘Professionalism versus Political Contexts: Institutional
Mitigation and the Transaction Cost Heuristic in Information Systems Outsourcing’,
MIS Quarterly, 30(3): 725–53.
Mojsilovic, A., Ray, B., Lawrence, R., and Takriti, S. (2007). ‘A Logistic Regression Framework
for Information Technology Outsourcing Lifecycle Management’, Computers & Operations
Research, 34(12): 3609–27.
Nam, K., Rajagopalan, S., Rao, H. R., and Chaudhury, A. (1996). ‘A Two-Level Investigation
of Information Systems Outsourcing’, Communications of the ACM, 39(7): 36–44.
Oh, W., Gallivan, M., and Kim, J. (2006). ‘The Market's Perception of the Transactional Risks
of Information Technology Outsourcing Announcements’, Journal of Management Infor-
mation Systems, 22(4): 271–303.
Osei-Bryson, K.-M., and Ngwenyama, O. K. (2006). ‘Managing Risks in Information Systems
Outsourcing: An Approach to Analyzing Outsourcing Risks and Structuring Incentive
Contracts’, European Journal of Operational Research, 174(1): 245–64.
Oshri, I., Kotlarsky, J., and Willcocks, L. (2007a). ‘Managing Dispersed Expertise in IT
Offshore Outsourcing: Lessons from Tata Consultancy Services’, MIS Quarterly Executive,
6(2): 53–66.
——————(2007b). ‘Global Software Development: Exploring Socialization and Face-to-
Face Meetings in Distributed Strategic Projects’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems,
16: 25–49.
Oza, N., and Hall, T. (2005). ‘Difﬁculties in Managing Offshore Software Outsourcing
Relationships: An Empirical Analysis of 19 High Maturity Indian Software Companies’,
Journal of Information Technology Case and Application Research, 7(3): 25–41.
526
MARY C. LACITY, SHAJI A. KHAN, AND LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS

————Rainer, A., and Grey, S. (2006). ‘Trust in Software Outsourcing Relationships:
An Empirical Investigation of Indian Software Companies’, Information and Software
Technology, 48: 345–54.
Poppo, L., and Zenger, T. (2002). ‘Do Formal Contracts and Relational Governance Function
as Substitutes or Complements?’, Strategic Management Journal, 23: 707–25.
Quinn, J. B. (1999). ‘Strategic Outsourcing: Leveraging Knowledge Capabilities’, Sloan
Management Review, 40(4): 9–21.
——(2000). ‘Outsourcing Innovation: The New Engine of Growth’, Sloan Management
Review, 41(4): 13–28.
——and Hilmer, F. (1994). ‘Strategic Outsourcing’, Sloan Management Review, 35(4): 43–55.
Ranganathan, C., and Balaji, S. (2007). ‘Critical Capabilities for Offshore Outsourcing of IS’,
MIS Quarterly Executive, 6(3): 147–64.
Rao, M. T., Poole, W., Raven, P. V., and Lockwood, D. L. (2006). ‘Trends, Implications, and
Responses to Global IT Sourcing: A Field Study’, Journal of Global Information Technology
Management, 9(3): 5–23.
Ross, J., and Beath, C. (2006). ‘Sustainable IT Outsourcing: Let Enterprise Architecture be
your Guide’, MIS Quarterly Executive, 5(4): 181–92.
Rottman, J., and Lacity, M. (2004). ‘Twenty Practices for Offshore Sourcing’, MIS Quarterly
Executive, 3(3): 117–30.
————(2006). ‘Proven Practices for Effectively Offshoring IT Work’, Sloan Management
Review, 47(3): 56–63.
Sabherwal, R. (1999). ‘The Role of Trust in Outsourced IS Development Projects’, Commu-
nications of the ACM, 42(2): 80–6.
Sakthivel, S. (2007). ‘Managing Risk in Offshore Systems Development’, Communications of
the ACM, 50(4): 69–75.
Seddon, P. B. (2001). ‘The Australian Federal Government’s Clustered-Agency IT Outsour-
cing Experiment’, Communications of the AIS, 5: 1–33.
Slaughter, S. A., and Ang, S. (1996). ‘Employment Outsourcing in Information Systems’,
Communications of the ACM, 39(7): 47–54.
Smith, H. A., and McKeen, J. D. (2004). ‘Developments in Practice XIV: IT Outsourcing—
How Far can you Go?’ Communications of the AIS, 14: 508–20.
Smith, M., Mitra, S., and Narasimhan, S. (1998). ‘Information Systems Outsourcing:
A Study of Pre-Event Firm Characteristics’, Journal of Management Information Systems,
15(2): 61–93.
Sobol, M., and Apte, U. (1995). ‘Domestic and Global Outsourcing Practices of America’s
Most Effective IS Users’, Journal of Information Technology, 10: 269–80.
Strassmann, P. (1995). ‘Outsourcing: A Game for Losers’, Computerworld, 21 August.
——(2004). ‘Most Outsourcing is Still for Losers’, Computerworld, 2 February.
Straub, D., Weill, P., and Schwaig, K. (2008). ‘Strategic Dependence on the IT Resource
and Outsourcing: A Test of the Strategic Control Model’, Information Systems Frontiers,
10(2): 195–211.
Susarla, A., Barua, A., and Whinston, A. B. (2003). ‘Understanding the Service Component of
Application Service Provision: An Empirical Analysis of Satisfaction with ASP Services’,
Management Information Systems Quarterly, 27(1): 91–123.
Tanriverdi, H., Konana, P., and Ge, L. (2007). ‘The Choice of Sourcing Mechanisms for
Business Processes’, Information Systems Research, 18(3): 280–302.
A REVIEW OF THE IT OUTSOURCING LITERATURE: INSIGHTS FOR PRACTICE
527

Teng, J., Cheon, M., and Grover, V. (1995). ‘Decisions to Outsource Information Systems
Functions: Testing a Strategy-Theoretic Discrepancy Model’, Decision Sciences, 26(1):
75–103.
Wang, L., Gwebu, K. L., Wang, J., and Zhu, D. X. (2008). ‘The Aftermath of Information
Technology Outsourcing: An Empirical Study of Firm Performance Following Outsourcing
Decisions’, Journal of Information Systems, 22(1): 125–59.
Watjatrakul, B. (2005). ‘Determinants of IS Sourcing Decisions: A Comparative Study of
Transaction Cost Theory and the Resource-Based View’, Journal of Strategic Information
Systems, 14: 389–415.
Westfall, R. (1999). ‘An IS Research Relevance Manifesto’, Communications of the AIS, 2(14),
<http://cais.asinet.org/articles/2-14/article.htm>.
Whitten, D., and Leidner, D. (2006). ‘Bringing Back IT: An Analysis of the Decision to
Backsource or Switch Vendors’, Decision Sciences, 37(4): 605–21.
——and Wakeﬁeld, R. (2006). ‘Measuring Switching Costs in IT Outsourcing Services’,
Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 15(3): 219–48.
Willcocks, L., and Feeny, D. (2006). ‘IT Outsourcing and Core IS Capabilities: Challenges at
Lessons at DuPont’, Information Systems Management, 23(1): 49–56.
——and Fitzgerald, G. (1993). ‘Market as Opportunity? Case Studies in Outsourcing Infor-
mation Technology and Services’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 2(3): 223–42.
——and Lacity, M. (1999). ‘IT Outsourcing in Insurance Services: Risk, Creative Contracting,
and Business Advantage’, Information Systems Journal, 9(61): 1–18.
————(2006). Global Sourcing of Business and IT Services. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
————and Kern, T. (1999). ‘Risk Mitigation in IT Outsourcing Strategy Revisited: Longitu-
dinal Research at LISA’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 8(3): 285–314.
Williamson, O. (1991). ‘Comparative Economic Organization: The Analysis of Discrete
Structural Alternatives’, Administrative Science Quarterly, 36(2): 269–96.
Wüllenweber, K., Beimborn, D., Weitzel, T., and Kőnig, W. (2008). ‘The Impact of Process
Standardization on Business Process Outsourcing Success’, Information Systems Frontiers,
10(2): 211–24.
Zviran, M., Ahituv, N., and Armoni, A. (2001). ‘Building Outsourcing Relationships across
the Global Community: The UPS-Motorola Experience’, Journal of Strategic Information
Systems, 10(4): 313–33.
528
MARY C. LACITY, SHAJI A. KHAN, AND LESLIE P. WILLCOCKS

P A R T I V
...............................................................................................
RETHINKING MIS
PRACTICE IN A
BROADER
CONTEXT
...............................................................................................
Part IV extends our coverage of Information Systems to consider a somewhat wider
set of topics that are nonetheless central to our ﬁeld of study in the twenty-ﬁrst century.
To recap, we introduced the book with a chapter from Lynne Markus that attempted
to embrace the totality of the ﬁeld of MIS, as we have construed it in this volume.
We followed this with a historical account of how things have developed, through the
eyes of Rudy Hirschheim and the late Heinz Klein. Building on these introductory
contributions, Part II set the foundation for a consideration of MIS by providing a
reprise of the various theoretical and methodological perspectives that exist to assist us
in researching MIS phenomena—many of which are emerging as the technology, and
our understanding of the subject matter, advances. Part III built on this foundation by
considering key topics in the MIS domain. Some of these topics have been with us for
some time, such as IS strategizing; business-IT alignment; IT for competitive advan-
tage, and the like. Others have become more centre-stage in more recent years:
enterprise systems; questions of IT governance; matters of security, and the emergence
and impact of mobile IT, for example. Part IV expands the boundaries of MIS still

further by considering such important topics as managing knowledge work; gender
issues in IT; issues of sustainability and ethics; aspects of globalization, human devel-
opment and the related topic of IT in developing countries, and—to bring things to a
close—insights into questions of technological innovation and further emerging
themes that are likely to attract our attention into the future.
We commence Part IV with Chapter 20, which focuses on the topic of managing
knowledge work. Written by Jacky Swan, this chapter introduces the core concepts of
knowledge, organizational knowledge, knowledge management, and—importantly—
innovation. It draws from material that can be found in the second edition of Managing
Knowledge Work and Innovation (Newell et al. 2009). Importantly, because this
extends our understanding of why we wish to ‘manage knowledge’; why it is that
increasing attention is being paid to knowledge creation (e.g. von Krogh, Ichijo, and
Nonaka 2000; Gourlay 2006) rather than the more static view that went with the earlier
treatments of knowledge management that were more akin to the collection and reuse
of existing ‘knowledge’, with terms like ‘harvesting’ and ‘mining’ being used liberally.
The chapter draws on theory developed in the organizational behaviour and strategy
literatures and shows how these concepts have been—and can be—applied to the world
of Information Systems through knowledge management systems (e.g. Leidner 2000).
While the philosophical debates about what exactly is knowledge (e.g. Tsoukas and
Vladimirou 2001; Tsoukas 2003) and the implications for IS (e.g. Newell, Swan, and
Scarbrough 2001; Galliers and Newell 2003) are left to others, the chapter, nonetheless,
covers a great deal of territory. A working deﬁnition of knowledge is provided and
aspects of knowledge sharing across organizational boundaries are also dealt with
(Hansen 1999; Carlile 2004). The distinction between knowledge and knowing is also
highlighted (Cook and Brown 1999), with organizational learning (e.g. Boisot 1995;
Brown and Duguid 2001; Gheradi 2001) coming to the fore, and—with the impact of
new technologies—networking concepts are introduced in addition (e.g. McAfee
2006).
We next turn our attention—in Chapter 21—to matters of gender in the ﬁeld of
MIS. Written by Eileen Trauth, this chapter begins by asking the question: ‘Why should
the MIS ﬁeld be concerned about gender?’ or rather, why should we be concerned with
this question now? As she states, ‘The rationale for the inclusion of gender among
the “legitimate” topics of MIS attention is embedded within the larger rationale for the
inclusion of the human resource dimension of the MIS ﬁeld.’ The chapter traces the
evolution of research in the ﬁeld of gender and information systems in the context of
developments in and forces shaping the twenty-ﬁrst century. Highlighting, for exam-
ple, the impact of globalization in providing impetus for the IS academy to pay greater
attention to human differences, she identiﬁes increased opportunities for research in
relation to gender and socio-cultural differences, building on the work of Lisa von
Hellens and colleagues (e.g. von Hellens and Nielsen 2001; von Hellens, Nielsen, and
Trauth 2001), for example, and on social inclusion (e.g. Huang et al. 2006). The
chapter, therefore, provides some interesting links with subsequent chapters that deal
with matters related to IT and globalization, and IT in developing countries.
530
RETHINKING MIS PRACTICE IN A BROADER CONTEXT

The following chapter, by Pierre Berthon and colleagues, highlights some of the
paradoxes associated with IT, noting that ‘sometimes IT has done more to compound
problems than create sustainable solutions’. Some of these paradoxes include the
promise of efﬁciency gains, of cleanliness, of education, and of community, with
each being questioned in turn (e.g. Sellen and Harper 2001; Grossman 2006; Sigman
2009). Unlike others before them, however, the authors of this chapter focus not on
green information systems or green IT, but rather on the way in which we go about
thinking about the topic. As a result, they identify three ‘paradigms of sustainability’
that lead to varying ways of using IT ‘to achieve the goal of a viable planet’, as opposed
to the exploitative view of IT that has permeated much of the earlier treatment of the
topic. Building their argument on the work of Heidegger (1977)—see also Chapters 9
and 10—they argue that (information) technology is ‘a mode of revelation . . . a process
of bringing forth . . . a way of seeing . . . ’. Thus, rather than merely exploiting nature,
they propose viewing IT in terms either of preserving, returning to, or transforming
nature.
Already, then, we are considering ethical considerations when we talk of MIS, and
this is the speciﬁc focus of Chapter 23. This chapter, written by Simon Rogerson, might
usefully be read in combination also with Chapter 16, in which Sue Newell and
Cynthia Williams consider questions of governance, sustainability, and the so-called
‘triple-bottom line’ (Elkington 1994): ﬁnancial, social, and environmental perfor-
mance. In this chapter, the author considers the many different deﬁnitions of what
he terms ‘computer and information ethics’, with the aim of demonstrating the breadth
and multi-disciplinarity of the ﬁeld. Building on this introduction, the chapter then
focuses on application: how to embed an ethical perspective into the way in which we
develop information systems, and how to instil ethical professionalism into our
practice. A series of challenges are identiﬁed, including privacy (see also questions of
security covered by Amy Ray in Chapter 17), culture, and crime. This chapter leads
nicely into the following chapter, by Geoff Walsham, as Rogerson concludes his
chapter with a look into a future that involves a technology that ‘continually increases
choice in global interaction within a dispersed community and between different and
geographically distant communities’.
Thus, in Chapter 24, Geoff Walsham reviews the literature on IT and globalization,
and argues, in line with the likes of Grey and Willmott (2002), for ‘critical research
which addresses issues of IT and human development in our more globalized world’.
This literature includes some of his own prior work (e.g. Walsham 2001, 2005), and the
work of others including that of Manuel Castells (1996, 1997, 1998). First, though,
he considers varying treatments of globalization itself, most notably, the work of
Robertson (1992), and Beck (2000). This chapter, in turns, provides a useful segue
into Chrisanthi Avgerou’s treatment of information systems research in developing
countries, in the chapter that follows. It does so by providing two examples of the
critical research for which he argues: in relation speciﬁcally to health information
systems (e.g. Braa and Hedberg 2002) and IT for the poor (cf. the so-called ‘digital
divide’).
RETHINKING MIS PRACTICE IN A BROADER CONTEXT
531

As indicated, Chapter 25 broadens our perspective to consider information systems
in the context of developing countries. As Chrisanthi Avgerou points out, there is
considerable literature on the topic, but this has more recently been extended to include
‘the broader socio-economic context of the organizations hosting new technologies’,
rather than simply focusing on development and implementation issues per se. This is
where her use of the term ‘innovation’ comes in: as she points out, ‘even if the
technologies implemented . . . are already common elsewhere . . . the local experience
of technology implementation and socio-organizational change constitutes an innova-
tion for the organization concerned and [possibly] . . . for its socio-economic context’.
Her treatment of the innovation process focuses in the main on two perspectives:
transfer and diffusion on the one hand, and socially embedded action on the other. In
the former case, the local context means that one size does not ﬁt all (cf. Bada 2002),
and in the latter, incorporating such considerations as empowerment into the process
(cf. Sahay and Walsham 2005). The chapter ends with a plea that echoes the arguments
raised by Geoff Walsham in the preceding chapter: critical research that will have real
impact in policy circles.
Our ﬁnal chapter is by Rick Watson, Pierre Berthon, and Leyland Pitt. In it, the
authors take an expansive view of the ﬁeld of MIS and argue for a broadening of the
ﬁeld’s traditional boundaries as we confront the issues of the twenty-ﬁrst century.
Traditional foci associated with information systems within organizations, or theories
or approaches formed within the industrial as opposed to the information age con-
strain our research and are inappropriate as the ﬁeld develops. Watson and colleagues
argue that some of the recent debate as to what properly constitutes the ﬁeld of
Information Systems (cf. King and Lyytinen 2006) is potentially misplaced: research
into instrumental design and research into emergent ‘IS phenomena’ is required, not
one or the other.
We have covered a vast territory in this Handbook. We have done so, quite
deliberately, with a view to demonstrating how the ﬁeld of MIS has developed in recent
years—and continues to do so. To echo the argument of the authors of Chapter 26: ‘the
instrumental and the emergent are inherent aspects of any technology—neither can be
ignored for they feed each other . . . ’ We have therefore attempted to cover some of the
ground that has been the traditional haunt of MIS researchers in recent decades: the use
and impact of IT in and between organizations. In addition, however, we have
attempted to expand our focus to include managing knowledge, information systems
and human development, and broader issues of ethics, sustainability, and globalization
as they relate to IT. To do so, we need sound theoretical and methodological tools to
guide our endeavours, and that is why we have provided what we hope to be a strong
foundation for our treatment of this expanding universe in Part II. We conclude that
issues or emergence and innovation are the very stuff of MIS as we attempt to address
the many pressing issues of the twenty-ﬁrst century—a century in which information
and communication technologies will play an increasing, and as yet, only dimly
perceived role.
532
RETHINKING MIS PRACTICE IN A BROADER CONTEXT

REFERENCES
Bada, A. O. (2002). ‘Local Adaptations to Global Trends: A Study of an IT-Based Organizational
Change Programme in a Nigerian Bank’, Information Society, 18(2): 77–86.
Beck, U. (2000). What is Globalization? Cambridge: Polity Press.
Boisot, M. (1995). Information Space: A Framework for Learning in Organizations, Institu-
tions and Culture. London: Blackwell.
Braa, J., and Hedberg, C. (2002). ‘The Struggle for District-Based Health Information Systems
in South Africa’, Information Society, 18(2): 113–28.
Brown, J. S., and Duguid, P. (2001). ‘Knowledge and Organization: A Social-Practice Perspective’,
Organization Science, 12(2): 198–213.
Carlile, P. (2004). ‘Transferring, Translating and Transforming: An Integrative Framework
from Managing Knowledge across Boundaries’, Organization Science, 15(5): 555–68.
Castells, M. (1996). The Rise of the Network Society. Oxford: Blackwell.
——(1997). The Power of Identity. Oxford: Blackwell.
——(1998). End of Millenium. Oxford: Blackwell.
Cook, S., and Brown, J. (1999). ‘Bridging Epistemologies: The Generative Dance between Organi-
zational Knowledge and Organizational Knowing’, Organization Science, 10(4): 381–400.
Elkington, J. (1994). ‘Towards the Sustainable Corporation: Win-Win-Win Business Strategies
for Sustainable Development’, California Management Review, 36(2): 90–100.
Galliers, R. D., and Newell, S. (2003). ‘Back to the Future: From Knowledge Management to
the Management of Information and Data’, Information Systems and e-Business Management,
1(1): 5–13.
Gherardi, S. (2001). ‘From Organizational Learning to Practice-Based Knowing’, Human
Relations, 54(1): 131–9.
Gourlay, S. (2006). ‘Conceptualizing Knowledge Creation: A Critique of Nonaka’s Theory’,
Journal of Management Studies, 43(7): 1415–36.
Grey, C., and Willmott, H. (2002). ‘Contexts of Critical Management Studies’, Organization, 9
(3): 411–18.
Grossman, E. (2006). High Tech Trash: Digital Devices, Hidden Toxics, and Human Health.
Washington, DC: Shearwater.
Hansen, M. T. (1999). ‘The Search Transfer Problem: The Role of Weak Ties in Sharing
Knowledge across Organizational Sub-units’, Administrative Science Quarterly, 44: 82–111.
Heidegger, M. (1977). The Question Concerning Technology, and Other Essays. New York:
Harper & Row.
Huang, H., Quesenberry, J. L., Morgan, A. J., and Yeo, B. (2006). ‘Where Have We Been and
Where Are We Going? Social Inclusion in the Last Decade of IFIP WG 8.2 Research’,
poster presentation at IFIP 8.2 Conference (Limerick, June).
King, J. L., and Lyytinen, K. (2006). Information Systems: The State of the Field. Chichester:
Wiley.
Leidner, D. E. (ed.) (2000). Special Issue: Knowledge Management and Knowledge Management
Systems, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 9(2–3): 101–261.
McAfee, A. (2006). ‘Enterprise 2.0: The Dawn of Emergent Collaboration’, MIT Sloan
Management Review, 47(3): 21–8.
Newell, S., Swan, J., and Scarbrough, H. (2001). ‘From Global Knowledge Management to
Internal Electronic Fences: Contradictory Outcomes of Intranet Development’, British
Journal of Management, 12(2): 97–111.
RETHINKING MIS PRACTICE IN A BROADER CONTEXT
533

Newell, S., Robertson, M., Scarbrough, H., and Swan, J. (2009). Managing Knowledge Work
and Innovation, 2nd edn. Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan.
Robertson, R. (1992). Globalization: Social Theory and Global Culture. London: Sage.
Sahay, S., and Walsham, G. (2005). ‘Scaling of Health Information Systems in India:
Challenges and Approaches’, Enhancing Human Resource Development through ICT,
IFIP WG9.4. Abuja-Nigeria.
Sellen, A., and Harper, R. (2001). The Myth of the Paperless Ofﬁce. Boston, MA: The MIT
Press.
Sigman, A. (2009). ‘Technology and Community’, Biologist, January.
Tsoukas, H. (2003). ‘Do We Really Understand Tacit Knowledge?’, in M. Easterby-Smith and
M. A. Lyles (eds.), The Blackwell Handbook of Organizational Learning and Knowledge
Management. Oxford: Blackwell, 410–27.
Tsoukas, H., and Vladimirou, E. (2001). ‘What is Organizational Knowledge?’, Journal of
Management Studies, 38(7): 973–93.
von Hellens, L. A., and Nielsen, S. (2001). ‘Australian Women in IT’, Communications of the
ACM, 44(7): 46–52.
————and Trauth, E. M. (2001). ‘Breaking and Entering the Male Domain: Women in the
IT Industry’, in M. Serva (ed.), Proceedings of the 2001 ACM SIGMIS Conference on
Computer Personal Research (San Diego, April), 116–20.
von Krogh, G., Ichijo, K., and Nonaka, I. (2000). Enabling Knowledge Creation: How to Unlock
the Mystery of Tacit Knowledge and Release the Power of Innovation. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Walsham, G. (2001). Making a World of Difference: IT in a Global Context. Chichester: John
Wiley.
——(2005). ‘Development, Global Futures and IS Research: A Polemic’, Journal of Strategic
Information Systems, 14(1): 5–15.
534
RETHINKING MIS PRACTICE IN A BROADER CONTEXT

c h a p t e r 2 0
...............................................................................................
MANAGING KNOWLEDGE
WORK
...............................................................................................
JACKY SWAN
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
Without doubt amongst the most important applications of MIS to improving
business performance in the last ﬁfteen years has been via their central role in
‘Knowledge Management’ (KM). Even well before the term KM was used, the ‘infor-
mating’ role of technologies for managers has been stressed over and above their ability
to automate organizational processes (Zuboff 1988). However, the more recent surge of
interest in KM has heightened the strategic importance afforded to MIS by business
organizations, many of whom are now taking seriously the mantra that ‘knowledge is
our greatest asset’ and making major investments in MIS as part and parcel of broader
KM initiatives.
Attempts to manage organizational knowledge have also gone hand in hand with
major advances in MIS design (social networking technologies, for example) and there
are now a vast number of academic offerings on the subject of using MIS to improve
knowledge sharing in organizations. Underpinning this interest in KM is the central
notion that work tasks are relying more and more on knowledge and information. The
management of knowledge work and knowledge workers, then, is seen as the single
most important challenge being faced by all kinds of organizations and as essential to
efforts to improve competitiveness and innovation through the deployment of MIS and
other means.
Yet, we also know many attempts to manage knowledge and knowledge workers
have failed, and continue to fail, to deliver promised improvements (Scarbrough and
Swan 2001; Walsham 2002). More speciﬁcally, there have been numerous failures
associated with attempts to mobilize knowledge ﬂows using MIS. Hence the now
well-versed critique of so-called ‘ﬁrst wave’ approaches to KM, in the late 1990s, is
that they failed because they were overly focused on generically applicable IT-based

tools and methods to store and transfer ‘knowledge’ and information, and took little
heed of the social, organizational, and cultural context needed to apply that knowledge
and information and to support and enable knowledgeable work (McDermott 1999).
Whilst ‘second wave’ approaches—focused on generating the social and cultural
conditions necessary for knowledge sharing—have been offered as an antidote to
formerly overly deterministic technocratic approaches, these have been similarly criti-
cized for leaving technologies ‘black boxed’ and for failing to acknowledge the subtle-
ties of MIS design and their material effects on how work is actually done.
This see-sawing of attention to technical and social interests in KM—oddly reminis-
cent of earlier debates around determinism versus choice in socio-technical systems—
is perhaps an inevitable consequence of the division of professional knowledge and
interests (Scarbrough and Swan 2001). It has also been rather unhelpful as it has
focused attention on how to increase knowledge stocks and ﬂows (i.e. through techni-
cal or social means) and has diverted attention from what it is we are actually managing
knowledge for. These criticisms aside, given the importance of the ‘KM revolution’ (or,
at least evolution) as a backdrop to the enhanced strategic role of MIS, it is useful to
take a broader look at the major approaches deployed in managing knowledge work,
the challenges these entail, and the role of MIS in resolving (or perhaps creating) these
challenges.
In this chapter, then, I ﬁrst outline some reasons why, while the label may change,
KM is rather unlikely to be another management fad that will quickly disappear.
The chapter then provides a brief overview and critique of different approaches to
managing knowledge work, and looks at how ideas in the ‘ﬁeld’ have developed and the
implications of these approaches for the development of MIS. The purpose is not to
engage deeply in philosophical debates about the nature of knowledge—this has been
done rather well elsewhere (Tsoukas and Vladimirou 2001; Tsoukas 2003). Rather, we
outline and critique three broad approaches—termed here as structuralist, process, and
practice—that have been developed in organizational theory and strategy and which
help inform our understanding of what it is that ﬁrms are trying to do when they claim
to be managing knowledge.
THE IMPORTANCE OF KNOWLEDGE WORK
..................................................................................................................
Whilst it has been recognized for a very long time that applying knowledge to work
tasks is crucial for economic performance, in recent decades a ‘new’ language has arisen
around concerns that, in the ‘knowledge society’, it is knowledge, and not other
resources, such as labour or capital, that is the main source of competitive advantage
across sectors. This language is now deeply embedded in the rhetoric of politicians,
management practitioners, and academic scholars, reﬂected in such terms as ‘the
learning organization’, ‘Knowledge Management’, ‘core competencies’, ‘dynamic
536
JACKY SWAN

capabilities’, ‘the knowledge-based view of the ﬁrm’, ‘knowledge-intensive ﬁrms’,
‘intellectual and social capital’, talent management, and so forth.
Of course, popular fashions and associated rhetorics do come and go—for example,
the corresponding chapter in the forerunner to this Handbook (Currie and Galliers
1999) used the term ‘Knowledge Management’, and this has largely lost ground as
‘ﬂavour of the month’ (Scarbrough and Swan 2001). Yet, the rapid onset and demise of
management fads is itself continued testimony to the phenomena which they address—
that is, the importance of change and innovation for organizations facing increasingly
turbulent environments, the impact of discourse on patterns and styles of management,
and the seemingly endless importance of information systems (IS) on work and work
relationships. These factors are not the product of fashion, then, but of history—a
convergent set of forces which have unleashed fundamental patterns of change on
advanced industrial economies. These forces have been the focus of ongoing concern
across a number of different studies of industrial, occupational, and organizational
change in recent decades (see e.g. Drucker 1969; Bell 1973; Drucker 1988; Gibbons
et al. 1994; Castells 1996) and include:
· The importance of knowledge as a primary means of production, acting upon
itself in ‘an accelerating spiral of innovation and change’.
· The extent to which knowledge has been ‘globalized’, or freed up from material,
physical, and geographic constraints.
· The convergence of computing power and communications technology, with a
new generation of web-based technologies having major impacts on the structur-
ing of work and occupations.
· An emphasis on normative, or cultural, rather than hierarchical forms of control
so that knowledge workers effectively manage and discipline themselves (and
each other).
· Fundamental changes in the ways knowledge itself is produced—no longer just in
‘ivory tower’ academic organizations or isolated R&D departments (i.e. ‘Mode 1’)
but ‘co-produced’ by heterogeneous groups as it is applied to solving problems in
new contexts (‘Mode 2’—Gibbons et al. 1994; Nowotny, Scott, and Gibbons
2003).
· The rise of the ‘service economy’ and the economic value of intangibles, such as
services, ideas, software, and network relationships.
It is also argued, moreover, that the challenges for managing knowledge work posed
now are greater than ever. This is because the knowledge economy is also a service
economy (Dankbarr 2003). Hence we have seen massive growth in the service sector
and major changes in the ways knowledge and information are applied to new service
delivery. The pressures to develop, not just new products and technologies, but also
new ways of dealing with shifting user needs and demands, often on a global scale, are,
it is argued, signiﬁcantly greater now than in years past (Dankbarr 2003) and informa-
tion systems have undoubtedly had an important role to play. In insurance and
ﬁnancial services, for example, forms of service delivery have changed drastically,
MANAGING KNOWLEDGE WORK
537

with the worldwide web providing much greater information to consumers and on-line
service providers such as Direct Line. This means more knowledgeable customers can
‘shop around’ much more easily. It is also the case that the boundaries traditionally
seen between services and products are blurring. Indeed some scholars even argue that
‘material products (e.g. computers, mp3 players, mobile phones) are themselves only
material embodiments of the services they deliver’ (Dankbarr 2003: 79). It can even be
difﬁcult to tell whether we are actually buying a service or a product—the iPhone is
intrinsically linked to iTunes and 3 Mobile Media, for example.
The implications of the rise in information-intensive services for managing knowl-
edge work are extensive. With services, relevant knowledge is nearly always distributed
across a whole range of stakeholders including, on a much greater basis than before, the
customer (Dodgson, Gann, and Salter 2005). Knowledge workers also need signiﬁcant
autonomy so that they can deal ﬂexibly with more knowledgeable customers and
actively match services to requirements. The deep frustration that many of us experi-
ence when we telephone service companies only to be met by inﬂexible, ‘rote’ responses
is testament indeed to the need for worker autonomy. In short, in a service economy,
managing knowledge is not a support function but, rather, is intrinsic to the work itself
(Coombs 2003; Miles 2003).
Taking a more critical approach, it is of course important that we continue to ask
questions about the extent to which the changes outlined above have been as wide-
spread, or as inherently positive, as predicted by their proponents. There are still many
types of works—call centres, for example—where hierarchy, strict top-down control,
and standardization continue to be the norm. Web-based and increasingly mobile
information technologies also create their own problems. On the one hand, they
decentralize work and free people and activities from the constraints of physical location
or even identity. At the same time, however, they may depersonalize the experience of
work and generate social isolation, or intensify it by blurring the boundaries between
home and work and shifting the home-work life balance toward the latter. Finally, they
can increase opportunities for more subtle forms of the surveillance and control—
normative pressures to respond more instantly to email, by way of example, than to hard
copy forms of communication.
A ﬁnal point of critique concerns the links between knowledge and innovation.
These linkages—and the virtue of knowledge management for improving innovative
capabilities—have been rarely questioned in the literature. For example, Nonaka’s
(1994) now widely cited work on ‘the knowledge creating company’ emphasized the
need to accumulate knowledge to improve creativity and innovation. More recent
literature on ‘dynamic capabilities’, similarly, highlights the importance of developing
and managing knowledge processes—‘experience accumulation’, ‘knowledge codiﬁca-
tion’, and ‘knowledge articulation’—in order to generate and modify operating routines
in the pursuit of organizational innovation and improved competitiveness (Zollo and
Winter 2002; Bjorkman, Barner-Rasmussen, and Li 2004). Similarly the ‘Mode 1’,
‘Mode 2’ thesis is underpinned by the quite normative proposition that accumulated
knowledge, produced in more socially reﬂexive ways, will beneﬁt society (Nowotny,
538
JACKY SWAN

Scott, and Gibbons 2001). Indeed, increased knowledge has been roughly equated with
more innovation. Yet, it is also important to retain a healthy scepticism about this
rather straightforward, functionalist equation between (more) knowledge and (more)
innovation (see debates in special issues of the Journal of Management Studies 2001;
Journal of Information Technology 2001, for example). Arguably, innovation stems as
much from breaks with knowledge (forgetting previous recipes, for example) as from
its steady accumulation.
Positive or negative, the changes heralded by the ‘Information Age’ are, however,
undoubtedly having a visible impact on organizational forms, with ﬂatter, decentra-
lized structures and more ﬂexible, open-ended, ﬂuid, and networked arrangements
becoming the norm rather than the exception in many sectors. The rise of networked
organizations (sometimes referred to as polycentric organizations), virtual modes of
organizing, and more open-ended, collaborative forms of innovation and product
development (Chesbrough 2004) illustrate the extent to which organization designs
have evolved in pace with changes in information systems that break down traditional
boundaries of time and space.
These changes in organizational design have brought with them new problems for
managing knowledge. For example, outsourcing brings with it risks of knowledge ‘loss’
and more open, collaborative forms of innovation bring challenges around ownership
and intellectual property (Chesbrough 2003). And, when organizations are stretched
across time and space (global and networked organizations, for example), they inevita-
bly lose opportunities for casual and easy sharing of knowledge and learning afforded
by physical proximity and shared culture (Prusak 1997). Indeed, it has been suggested
that one of the reasons that ‘Knowledge Management’ initiatives became so popular in
the late 1990s was because of the profound problems posed by changes of organization
in the ‘information age’ (Prusak 1997). Hence, even though the scope and positive
impact of changes associated with the ‘Knowledge Era’ may indeed be over-claimed,
fundamental changes in the way practices of work are actually carried out and in the
primary means of production (and consumption) do suggest that the challenges on
managing knowledge work are likely to persist for some considerable time.
What is Knowledge Work?
In outlining the challenges of managing knowledge work, it seems important to ﬁrst
deﬁne terms, especially because there is rather little agreement on what knowledge
actually is. There is a whole branch of philosophy, ‘epistemology’—from the Greek
words ‘episteme’ (knowledge) and ‘logos’ (word/speech)—that deals with, and debates
on, the nature, origin, and scope of knowledge. However, in studies of knowledge work
in organizational settings two views stand out. These have been usefully summarized by
Cook and Brown (1999) as the ‘epistemology of possession’ and the ‘epistemology of
practice’.
MANAGING KNOWLEDGE WORK
539

The epistemology of possession view treats knowledge as something people have—
knowledge is seen as a possession of the human mind and treated as a mental (or
cognitive) capacity, or resource, that can be developed, applied, and used to improve
effectiveness in the workplace. Those adopting this view often describe knowledge
along a kind of pyramid, or hierarchy, comprising data (the dots of ink on this page,
for example), information (the words and sentences that are inscribed by data), and
knowledge (and even wisdom) (Ackoff 1989). Whereas data and information are
‘out there’—objective properties of the world, external to individuals, which can be
searched, stored, sorted, transmitted, sent, and received—knowledge is a different
kind of thing altogether. Knowledge, according to this view, is a personal property
of the individual knower who confers meaning on data and information by drawing
from his/her subjective experiences, perceptions, and previous understandings
(or cognitive schema). This is the sense in which knowledge is ‘possessed’ by
individuals. The sense you make of the words and sentences on this page is about
knowledge. Moreover, because different people have different experiences and
‘frames of reference’, it is quite possible that they also infer different things from
the same information.
The ‘knowledge as possession’ view is implicit in much of what is written about
managing knowledge within contemporary organizations. For example, the oft-cited
conversion of tacit knowledge into explicit knowledge, inspired by writers such as
Nonaka (1994), is underpinned by a view of knowledge as something that needs to be
grasped from the narrow conﬁnes of individual cognition, codiﬁed, and made more
widely available. However, this view has also been heavily criticized by proponents of
an ‘epistemology of practice’ who start from the rather different premiss that knowl-
edge is something that people do (Lave and Wenger 1991; Lave et al. 1992; Brown and
Duguid 2001; Gherardi 2001; Orlikowski 2002; Nicolini, Gherardi, and Yanow 2003).
According to this view, knowledge is constructed and negotiated through social
interaction. It is intrinsic to practices (including discursive practices) that people
actually perform in speciﬁc local contexts and not something that can stand outside
those practices.
Empirical studies from this viewpoint show how social groups as diverse as
construction engineers, photocopier technicians, radiologists, ship builders, and
alcoholics learn to do things, not by converting tacit knowledge into explicit knowl-
edge, but, rather, by sharing and creating norms, stories, representations, tools, and
symbols which enable the experience of individuals to be related to the knowledge
of the wider community. Knowledge is, in effect, ‘enacted’ through the practices of
social groups and inextricably bound up with the development of shared identities,
beliefs, and systems of power. Some proponents of this ‘knowledge as practice’ view
prefer to use the term ‘knowing’ rather than knowledge, precisely to underline this
interweaving of what people know with what they do and who and where they
are. The term ‘knowing’ (as a verb rather than a noun) draws our attention to the
active, processual, social and negotiated nature of knowledge (or knowledge claims—
Suchman 1987).
540
JACKY SWAN

Yet others have attempted to reconcile these different epistemologies by arguing that
it is possible to see processes of knowing and forms of knowledge as equally important
and complementary. Thus, Cook and Brown (1999: 381) note: ‘Organizations are
better understood . . . if knowledge and knowing are seen as mutually enabling (not
competing). We hold that knowledge is a tool for knowing, that knowing is an aspect of
our interaction with the social and physical world, and the interplay of knowledge and
knowing can generate new knowledge and new ways of knowing’. Whilst, this ‘happy
marriage’ of such different philosophical standpoints is somewhat controversial, the
debate itself reminds us that we need to reﬂect on underlying assumptions about
knowledge when we analyse and manage knowledge work because these do have a
profound inﬂuence on the tactics, strategies, and analytical tools that we use. For
example, a ‘knowledge as possession’ view will lead to efforts to manage knowledge
by freeing tacit knowledge from the individual and making it explicit and more widely
available as an organizational resource through the use of IT and other codiﬁed forms.
A ‘knowledge as practice’ view, in contrast suggests that the challenge for KM is to
provide an enabling context that allows people to do (and say) things differently and,
hopefully, better.
Here, then, I refer to knowledge simply as ‘the ability to discriminate within and
across contexts’ (Swan 2007). This working deﬁnition borrows from Tsoukas and
Vladimirou (2001: 979) who theorize knowledge as ‘the individual ability to draw
distinctions within a collective domain of action, based on an appreciation of context
or theory or both’. This approach is broad enough to encompass the individual
cognitive aspects of knowledge as well as its social nature. It also suggests that it is
important for to consider the roles of material artefacts in managing knowledge
work—technologies, tools, computers, physical spaces, clocks, schedules, and
the like—because the ability to discriminate is mediated by them (Barley 1986;
Orlikowski and Yates 2002; Black, Carlile, and Repenning 2004;
Schultze and
Orlikowski 2004; Orlikowski 2007).
Following this line of reasoning, knowledge work refers to organizational activities
and occupations that are characterized by an emphasis on using theoretical knowledge
and analytical and social skills to discriminate across contexts and resolve problems.
Finally, organizational knowledge can be understood as ‘a learned set of norms, shared
understandings and practices that integrates actors and artefacts to produce valued
outcomes within a speciﬁc social and organizational context’ (Scarbrough 2008).
Organizational knowledge is thus reﬂected in what people say, the actions they take,
and in the technologies, routines, and systems that they use.
Managing knowledge work, then, includes strategies, tools, and practices that enable
actors in particular social and organizational contexts to understand and make sense of
what it is that they, and others, are doing and to do things differently. Major theories
and frameworks for managing knowledge work can be broadly grouped in three
areas—structural perspectives, which essentially adopt a ‘knowledge as possession’
epistemology, and process and practice perspectives, which adopt a ‘knowledge as
practice’ epistemology. These are reviewed and compared in brief next.
MANAGING KNOWLEDGE WORK
541

Structural Perspectives and Types of Knowledge
Structural perspectives on knowledge have drawn largely from the epistemology of
possession, outlined above, and have focused on identifying different types, or forms, of
knowledge that individuals and groups possess. Citing Polanyi’s (1962) earlier work on
‘personal knowledge’, two forms or types of knowledge—tacit and explicit—are very
often distinguished (e.g. Nonaka 1994). Tacit knowledge is associated with the personal
skills or know-how that people develop through their own experience in speciﬁc
contexts (e.g. knowing how to ride a bicycle) and, because of its personal nature, is
hard to formalize or communicate. In contrast, explicit knowledge is that which has
been ‘spelled out’ or codiﬁed, making it more communicable across contexts (e.g.
knowing what components a bicycle needs to have to make it work and how they
should be put together).
An important, but sometime neglected, aspect of tacit knowledge is that we know
more than we can articulate or attend to at any point in time. Hence tacit knowledge is
often referred to as ‘know-how’—it resides in our heads and in practical skills and
actions. An apprentice learning a new task, for example, does so through a combination
of instruction and ﬁrst-hand practical experience, including feedback from the practi-
cal action itself. However, if everything in organizations had to be learned from ﬁrst-
hand experience then learning in organizations—especially highly distributed organi-
zations—would be greatly limited. Explicit knowledge, on the other hand, then, can be
readily codiﬁed, articulated and communicated to others and is, therefore, seen by
some as more useful for organizational learning (Teece, Pisano, and Shuen 1997; Zollo
and Winter 2002). According to the structural perspectives, then, the way to create
knowledge in organizations is to identify important tacit knowledge, ﬁnd a way of
making it explicit, and convert it back again into the tacit knowledge of others
elsewhere in the organization so that it can be further applied (Nonaka 1994).
Structural perspectives have provided numerous frameworks that help us to under-
stand what types of knowledge are involved in knowledge work and how knowledge
can be expanded by converting one type to another. Nonaka’s now well cited ‘SECI’
model, for example, sees knowledge creation as a spiralling process of interactions
between tacit and explicit knowledge. He identiﬁed four distinct knowledge conversion
processes: socialization (tacit/tacit); externalization (tacit/explicit); combination
(explicit/explicit); and internalization (explicit/tacit). He suggested, further, that orga-
nizational knowledge creation stemmed from the individual. If we take socialization,
for example, this rests on individuals interacting with others and reﬂecting on their
own and others’ experiences.
This is not to suggest, however, that managers of organizations do not have a role to
play in knowledge creation. Nonaka also stressed that managers needs to design
organizations in such a way as to provide the necessary enabling context for individuals
to share and create knowledge. Thus in his more recent elaborations of the SECI model,
Nonaka developed the notion of ‘ba’—a concept originally developed by Japanese
542
JACKY SWAN

philosopher Kitaro Nishida, meaning ‘a context which harbours meaning’ (Nonaka
and Konno 1998). According to Nonaka and Konno, ‘ba’ (roughly translated in English
as ‘place’) is ‘a shared space for emerging relationships. This space can be physical (e.g.
ofﬁce, dispersed business space), virtual (e.g. email, teleconference), mental (e.g. shared
experience, ideas, ideals), or any combination of them’ (p. 40). Relating back to the
distinction between knowledge and information discussed earlier, knowledge is seen as
embedded in ‘ba’ where it is acquired though individuals’ experiences and reﬂections.
Information, in contrast, is knowledge that is separated from ba and so able to be
communicated independently—‘Information resides in media and networks. It is
tangible. In contrast knowledge resides in ‘ba’. It is intangible’ (ibid.).
The SECI model is not without critics. Not least, and despite the notion of ‘ba’, it
presents an overly individualized view of knowledge and is a bit ‘slippery’ in how it
treats knowledge. For example, on the one hand knowledge separated from ‘ba’ is not
knowledge but information. At the same time, the model continues to classify knowl-
edge as either tacit or explicit, leaving open the question of what explicit knowledge
actually is. Others suggest that the whole idea of being able to convert essentially
personal knowledge into explicit forms is a fundamental misreading of the original
ideas of Polanyi, upon whom Nonaka draws (Gourlay 2006).The SECI model also
signiﬁcantly downplays the differences of interests, power, and political dynamics that
knowledge creation processes in organizational contexts inevitably encounter. Instead
the ‘knowledge spiral’—the movement of knowledge from being the possession of an
individual to becoming an organizational resource—is depicted as rather smooth,
linear, uncontested, and unproblematic. These criticisms aside, the model has no
doubt been very inﬂuential and has played an important part in channelling attention,
not just to the cognitive, information processing aspects of knowledge creation in
organizations, but also to the importance of values and the enabling context in which
such values are shared, acquired, and played out.
Other structuralist perspectives share Nonaka’s interest in tacit and explicit knowl-
edge but argue that in order to understand where organizational knowledge comes
from, we need to be concerned, not only with types of knowledge (i.e. epistemology),
but also where it is rooted (i.e. ontology). For example, Spender (1998) incorporates
tacit and explicit knowledge into his framework but also makes a distinction between
individual and social (or collective) knowledge (see Figure 20.1). Combining concerns
about what knowledge is (i.e. tacit or explicit) and where it resides (individual or social)
means that the four, rather than two, types of knowledge are identiﬁed: (i) individual/
explicit (conscious); (ii) individual/implicit (automatic); (iii) social/explicit (objecti-
ﬁed); and (iv) social/implicit (collective).
Spender’s framework makes an important additional point, then, which is that forms
of knowledge exist beyond the individual. Hence it is possible to make a ‘contrast
between the explicit knowledge that individuals feel they possess and the collective
knowledge on which this explicit knowledge actually stands, and the interaction of the
two’ (Spender 1998: 238). For example, the culture of an organization is a form of social
knowledge that survives beyond the contribution of particular individuals.
MANAGING KNOWLEDGE WORK
543

Critique of Structural Perspectives
Structuralist approaches assume, in the main, a ‘knowledge as possession’ view (Cook
and Brown 1999) and because of this have been challenged for failing to take sufﬁcient
account of the more subjective, highly equivocal, and dynamic nature of knowledge
(Bijker, Hughes, and Pinch 1987; Weick 1990). Other critics of structural approaches
claim that the separation between tacit and explicit knowledge has been overstated and
is not, in fact, a very accurate reﬂection of Polanyi’s original idea (Gourlay 2006).
Indeed Polanyi argued that all knowledge has an indispensable personal component
but that, depending on the circumstances, we are only aware of certain aspects at
particular points in time. Explicit knowledge, then, is merely that which we are aware of
at any given moment, in much the same way as shining a spotlight highlights particular
features of a landscape at that point in time. These explicit features are always
connected, though, to the things that lie behind in the dark and that can come into
view at any moment as the spotlight, and our focus, shifts. Taking this view we can see,
in fact, that tacit and explicit knowledge are mutually ‘constituted’ (Boisot 1995;
Tsoukas 1996; Gourlay 2006). In other words they deﬁne each other. By attending to
something, and making it explicit, we automatically push other things into the back-
ground, or into tacitness, so to speak. Gourlay (2006) points out, then, that tacit
knowledge may be better considered as a continuum where the degree of ‘tacitness’
and ‘explicitness’ is a function of the extent to which knowledge is communicated.
In the oft-used example of bicycle riding, it may be useful for the novice to be told
to hold lightly onto the handle bars. This brings knowledge about how to hold the
Type of Knowledge
implicit
explicit
Locus of Knowledge
individual
social
AUTOMATIC
CONSCIOUS
COLLECTIVE
OBJECTIFIED
FIGURE 20.1 Forms of knowledge—Spender’s framework
544
JACKY SWAN

handle bars into focus, making it explicit. But, at the same time, it pushes other
knowledge (e.g. on how to balance weight onto the pedals) further into the background.
This is not a trivial point when it comes to managing knowledge and MIS design
because it means that any explicit, codiﬁed knowledge will always be incomplete or
partial. It is only by combining this explicit knowledge with tacit ‘know-how’ developed
through experience (for example, about balance and hand-eye coordination) that tasks
can be accomplished. This means that it is actually quite misleading to call an MIS a
‘KM system’, as only selected aspects of knowledge can ever be revealed.
By focusing on what knowledge is, structural approaches also tend to adopt what has
been termed an ‘entitative’ view of knowledge (Hosking and Morley 1991). Hence
knowledge is seen as ‘thing-like’—an object or resource that can be moved around
much like other resources such as money. Like other resources the aim is to accumulate
it and move it around for the good of the organization. In short, more knowledge
equals more proﬁt. However, there is no particular reason, a priori, why beneﬁt should
automatically follow from having more and more knowledge. As seen with the
widespread diffusion of email, it is quite conceivable that information overload
might result and/or that existing, embedded knowledge might constrain attempts to
do new things. Thus knowledge, unlike money, is not valuable in and of itself, but only
where it is applied to speciﬁc tasks.
Another criticism of this approach lies in its largely functionalist view of organiza-
tions (Burrell and Morgan 1979). In other words organizations are depicted as a
collection of interdependent parts (e.g. machines and people) that work in harmony
toward a common, agreed-upon goal (e.g. organizational survival and proﬁt). However,
this assumes that common goals actually exist in organizations and, therefore, doesn’t
address important issues of power and conﬂict in organizations and in society at large
(Foucault 1980). For example, encouraging individual employees to surrender their
knowledge for the beneﬁt of ‘the organization’ may actually beneﬁt shareholders or
senior managers but can, equally, be disempowering for the individuals themselves.
This is one reason why individuals may choose to ‘hoard’ rather than share knowledge.
Moreover, it is quite conceivable that those in power could use knowledge to further
their own interests rather than the interests of the collective organization.
As well as theoretical objections, there are some very practical issues when it comes
to using structural approaches to manage knowledge work. For one thing, understand-
ing types of knowledge (e.g. tacit/explicit) and where it resides (e.g. individual/collec-
tive) doesn’t actually tell us much about where it comes from or how to use it—
knowing, in this sense of the word, does not equal doing (Pfeffer and Sutton 2000).
Furthermore, there is now good evidence that Knowledge Management initiatives
based solely on this kind of thinking often fail (Walsham 2002). For example, in an
empirical study of an initiative to encourage knowledge transfer in a worldwide bank,
Newell, Swan, and Scarbrough (2001) found that the introduction of a Knowledge
Management system—a global intranet—designed to capture and share tacit knowl-
edge across the organization had the opposite effect to that intended by senior
management.
MANAGING KNOWLEDGE WORK
545

These points of critique have led people to develop more nuanced ‘contingency’
frameworks that show us how strategies for managing knowledge can be linked to
speciﬁc aspects of the organizational tasks at hand. For example, Hansen (1999)
studied innovation in a large electronics company and concluded that strong social
relationships with a few people were beneﬁcial for tasks that required the transfer of
complex, highly tacit knowledge, whereas weak relationships with many people were
more effective where the knowledge involved was less complex and more explicit. This
approach is promising as it takes into account purpose—i.e. what knowledge is to be
used for. However it still, fundamentally, sees knowledge as a thing or commodity that
is valuable for its own sake and tells us relatively little about the processes involved in
creating and using knowledge across contexts.
Process and Practice Perspectives:
Knowledge and Knowing
The failure of many initiatives that have attempted to ‘capture’ and ‘transfer’ indivi-
duals’ knowledge have helped fuel shifts towards accounts that take as their focus the
development of processes and enabling contexts capable of supporting knowledge work.
This shift can be seen in organization theories which focus on ‘knowing’ as a social and
organizational activity, in contrast to ‘knowledge’, as a thing or object. Process, and
more recently practice, perspectives draw, then, from an epistemology of practice
(outlined above—Cook and Brown 1999).
Our working deﬁnition of knowledge—as the ability to discriminate within and
across contexts—is based on this processual perspective in that it avoids notions of
‘truth’ and deﬁnes knowledge in dynamic terms as a practice of making distinctions
(Tsoukas and Vladimirou 2001). Process approaches to managing knowledge work
draw from theoretical traditions of ‘social constructivism’, seeing knowledge, or know-
ing, as a process of ‘sensemaking’, whereby actors interacting within particular social
contexts come to negotiate understandings of the world (Berger and Luckman 1966;
Weick 2001). Knowledge is, therefore:
· equivocal (subject to different meanings and interpretations);
· dynamic (accepted meanings can change as actors and contexts change); and
· context dependent (difﬁcult, if not impossible, to separate from the context in
which it is produced).
While structural approaches see a direct relationship between increased knowledge,
knowledge transfer, and organizational performance, process approaches view this
relationship as socially and politically mediated. Whether or not knowledge (or
knowing) leads to improvement depends, then, on how tasks, actors, and contexts
come together. For example, Clark (2003) describes how the US game of American
Football originated from knowledge of the game of rugby in the UK. However, it was
546
JACKY SWAN

not simply a case of capturing knowledge about rugby and transferring this to the USA.
His historical analysis showed how key stakeholders (including players, sports promo-
ters, and the media) reinterpreted the British rules of the game and created ‘pivotal
modiﬁcations’ that allowed it to be adapted to the particular context in the USA at the
time. Hence, in order to generate advertising revenue through media breaks, they
introduced shorter ‘periods’ (instead of halves) and ‘time-outs’.
This example shows how the particular interests and interpretations of actors within
and across different social and institutional contexts come to bear in reproducing and
legitimating particular forms of knowledge and innovation. The process approach also
highlights the central role of social networks in translating (not just transferring)
knowledge across groups and contexts:
knowing is not a static embedded capability or stable disposition of actors, but
rather an ongoing social accomplishment, constituted and reconstituted as actors
engage the world in practice. (Orlikowski 2002)
Managing knowledge work, then, is less about converting, capturing, and transferring
different forms of knowledge and more about building an enabling context that
connects different social groups and interests, identities, and perspectives to accom-
plish speciﬁc tasks or purposes. Management initiatives aimed at building so-called
‘communities of practice’ (Wenger and Snyder 2000; Thompson 2005) or social net-
works (Cross and Sproull 2004) reﬂect such a view.
PRACTICE PERSPECTIVES
..................................................................................................................
In the last decade there has been a new surge of interest in ‘practice perspectives’ as a
way of studying and analysing social and organizational life (Schatzki 2001). In terms
of managing knowledge work, however, practice perspectives have had less attention.
Even advocates of the so-called ‘communities of practice’ approach to managing
knowledge within ﬁrms have emphasized the importance of communities and net-
works for improving knowledge ﬂows but have left ‘practice’ relatively untouched
(Bechky 2003).
Practice and process perspectives have more in common than not—both see know-
ing as a social activity and address process, context, and purpose, for example.
However, practice perspectives emphasize in particular the links between knowledge
and action, or practice. In short, knowledge is inextricably linked to practice—it ﬂows
where practice is shared (for example within specialist or functional groups) and sticks
where practice is not shared (for example, across functional departments). It is useful to
look at practice perspectives more closely because they help focus attention to aspects
of managing knowledge work that have not been so commonly addressed to date.
Many different kinds of theorists have inﬂuenced practice perspectives, including
social philosophers (e.g. Wittgenstein 1958; Dreyfuss 1991), and ethnomethodologists
MANAGING KNOWLEDGE WORK
547

(e.g. Garﬁnkel 1967), cultural theorists (e.g. Lyotard 1988), and social theorists (e.g.
Bourdieu 1990). It is impossible to do them justice here. Deﬁnitions of ‘practice’
include ‘action informed by meaning drawn from a particular group context’ (Cook
and Brown 1999) and ‘socially recognized forms of activity, done on the basis of what
members learn from others, and capable of being done well or badly, correctly or
incorrectly’ (Barnes 2001: 19). However, it is perhaps useful to identify some general
insights that practice perspectives offer over and above process perspectives to our
understanding of knowledge work.
First, practice perspectives highlight that knowledge is ‘sticky’—it sticks to practice
and is therefore difﬁcult to share where peoples’ practices are not also shared. This
helps to explain why sharing knowledge across specialist functions or disciplines within
an organization, or from one organization to another, is so difﬁcult—even where
people appreciate others’ ideas, they may not be able to apply them because it would
be too difﬁcult to change their current practices. This means that knowledge is not
uniformly good but is actually quite paradoxical in relation to organizational perfor-
mance. On the one hand, division of labour results in different groups performing
different practices which means that valuable specialized knowledge can develop. On
the other hand, the ‘knowledge boundaries’ created by specialization pose barriers to
knowledge sharing across different groups of practitioners (Brown and Duguid 2001;
Carlile 2004; Scarbrough et al 2004). As Carlile (2002: 442) puts it: ‘the irony is that
these knowledge boundaries are not only a critical challenge, but also a perceptual
necessity because much of what organizations produce has a foundation in the
specialization of different kinds of knowledge’.
Second, when we perform practice we use many kinds of material and physical
objects, not just words and thoughts. Material objects are not just tools that people use
to achieve ends, however, they also set limits around what practices are actually
possible (Swan et al. 2007). For example, Orlikowski (2007) describes an on-line
business meeting where laptop computers, internet connections, phone lines, cables,
connectors, pens, mute buttons on telephones—in her terms, the ‘stuff’ of everyday
life—serve to ‘scaffold’ the social activity of the people involved. She uses the metaphor
of ‘scaffolds’ to highlight the ways in which temporary material arrangements help
constitute particular kinds of social activity in real time. Practice perspectives on
knowledge work draw attention, then, to the ‘materiality’ of social activity (Schatzki
2001; Orlikowski 2007). In other words they focus on the ways that all human activities,
including knowledge work, are interwoven with non-human, material artefacts,
objects, and physical arrangements. While there is considerable debate around exactly
how this interweaving takes place (the importance of human versus non-human
agency, being a particular bone of contention—Latour 1987), practice perspectives
agree that the social world is: ‘a ﬁeld of embodied, materially interwoven practices
centrally organized around shared practical understandings’ (Schatzki 2001: 3).
This has important implications for managing knowledge work and MIS. On the one
hand it means that the ability (or lack thereof) to transform knowledge and innovate
depends, at least to some extent, on what Schatzki (2001: 3) describes as the ‘solidifying
548
JACKY SWAN

inertia’ of material layouts. Many computers rely fundamentally on the keyboard
which is still laid out (in the Qwerty design) very much the same today as it was
decades ago, for example. On the other hand, material objects (mobile technologies,
drawings, prototypes, and so on) can also act as critical tools for Knowledge Manage-
ment. An important point, however, is that this is not a one-way relationship—the
design of material objects (e.g. the layout of the meeting room) inﬂuences human
activity but also results from it.
Third, practice perspectives remind us that knowledge work actually takes place in a
broader ‘ﬁeld of practices’ (Schatzki 2001). For example, the practices of medical
professionals are part of the broader ﬁeld of scientiﬁc practice. This includes ‘epistemic
practices’ (or ‘knowledge cultures’) that govern how knowledge is created and legiti-
mated—in science via the rules of scientiﬁc method for example (Knorr-Cetina 1999).
Therefore, to manage knowledge work, we also need to be sensitive to the broader
institutional contexts and interconnected sets of practices in which that knowledge
work is located. The notion of ‘the ﬁeld of interconnected practices’ reminds us that
change in one area of practice potentially disrupts a wide range of other practices. It is
for this reason that creating and using knowledge in interdisciplinary settings can be so
challenging since, ‘unfortunately, interdisciplinary subjects have a way of escaping
from any discipline whatever’ (Drexler 1989).
Fourth, practice perspectives emphasize, not just the socially situated nature of
knowledge, but also the investment of knowledge in peoples’ practice (Carlile 2002).
In other words, practices often take considerable time and effort to establish and, once
established, can be reinforced by a whole range of other, interconnected practices. For
this reason they are difﬁcult to change, even where there is good evidence to do so and
good intent. For example, new integrated IT systems are notoriously difﬁcult to
introduce into organizations because people ﬁnd it very difﬁcult to change from their
current ‘legacy’ systems. Moreover, even if one group is willing to change, they may
face challenges in introducing the system because other groups can’t (or won’t).
IMPLICATIONS FOR MIS
..................................................................................................................
Table 20.1 provides a summary of the contrasts between structural, process, and
practice perspectives on knowledge and managing knowledge work. This albeit brief
review suggests that, if we want to design MIS that enable knowledge work (i.e. where
people work with knowledge in order to accomplish tasks), rather than to manage
knowledge for its own sake, then process and practice perspectives may be more a
promising basis from which to start. This is because these: (a) take closer account of the
core aspects of knowledge work—i.e. processes, purposes, and enabling contexts and;
(b) balance attention to the social and the material/technological aspects of knowledge
work. MIS may thus act, both as a technology that enables communication, and also as
MANAGING KNOWLEDGE WORK
549

a material fabric through which social practices and identities are woven, sustained,
and dismantled (Orlikowski 2007).
Yet many MIS aimed at KM (KM systems) still assume a possession/structural
view—valuable knowledge, located inside people’s heads can be identiﬁed, captured,
Table 20.1 Perspectives on knowledge work compared
Epistemology of possession
Epistemology of practice
Structural
Process
Practice
View of social
life
Individuals navigate in
an objective external
world through
cognitive processes
Individual and
collective
interpretations
embedded in social
interactions, roles, and
structures
Materially interwoven
(human and non-
human) practices
centrally organized
around shared practical
understandings
View of
Knowledge
Knowledge as a
cognitive entity—a
resource to be
accumulated, captured,
transferred
Knowing as a social
and organizational
activity—socially
constructed through
interactions in
particular contexts
Knowing as practice—
constituted by and
constituting ﬁelds of
interconnected
practices
Major locus of
knowledge
Embedded and
embodied in the skills
and heads of
individuals or
organizations
Embedded and
encultured in social
context
Embedded, embodied
and invested in practice
Link between
knowledge and
organizational
performance
Knowledge directly
related to, and
functional (good) for
performance
Relationship between
knowledge and
performance socially
and politically
mediated: reﬂecting
interests of powerful
groups
Relationship between
knowledge and
performance mediated
through practice:
Knowledge paradoxical
for performance—sticks
at practice boundaries
Major focus
for managing
knowledge
work
Transfer/convert
knowledge from one
type (e.g. tacit to
explicit) or location
(individual,
organizational) to
another
Share, translate, and
legitimate knowledge
amongst interacting
groups
Transform knowledge
through overlapping
practices
Major tasks of
knowledge
management
Capturing/transferring
knowledge, e.g. using IT
Translating knowledge
across social groups,
e.g. by building social
networks and trust
Transforming practice
and transversing
boundaries of practice
e.g. using objects and
creating communities
of practice
550
JACKY SWAN

and processed via the use of ICT tools so that it can be applied in new contexts (Tseng
2007). Indeed, ‘Knowledge Management’ is frequently reduced to the implementation
of ICTs for knowledge transfer (Jennex and Olfman 2003). Thus, surveys of ﬁrms
introducing what they describe as ‘Knowledge Management initiatives’ show that these
are dominated by ICT implementations. For example, a recent survey in Australia (Xu
and Quaddus 2005) found that nearly 70 per cent of the 1,500 participants indicated
that they had some type of IT-based KM system. Alavi and Tiwana (2003) categorized
KM systems, further, in terms of the knowledge processes that they aim to enhance
(knowledge creation, storage, transfer, and application), as depicted in Table 20.2. This
is helpful in the sense that it recognizes that different types of IS will be more or less
useful for different knowledge processes. At the same time, the Xu and Quaddus (2005)
study demonstrates that, whilst the range of what is deﬁned as a KM system has been
expanded over time, it is the storage and transfer technologies which remain the most
popular in terms of the types of KM systems actually used in practice.
In relation to the storage and transfer processes, we can contrast two different types
of KMS: McAfee (2006) describes these as ‘platform’ and ‘channel’ technologies; while
Alavi (2000) distinguishes between ‘network’ and ‘repository’ technologies. Channel or
network technologies (e.g. email) can be used where it is clear that a particular
individual or group needs speciﬁc information and knowledge from another individu-
al—for example, a software project manager needing information from sales about the
client requirements for a new system. Channel technologies are thus used to pass
information and knowledge from a source to one or more recipients. In other cases,
however, it is not known in advance who will need, or ﬁnd useful, particular informa-
tion and knowledge, either right now or in the future. In this situation some kind of
platform or repository technology (e.g. an organizational intranet) is used so that
people can store and search/retrieve information and knowledge as they need it. The
fact that so many organizations have adopted these two types of KMS implies that
decision makers believe that sophisticated ICT tools can help in the capture, storage,
and transfer of knowledge.
Table 20.2 Knowledge processes featured in KM systems
Knowledge
process
Knowledge
creation
Knowledge
storage
Knowledge transfer
Knowledge
application
KMS
E-learning
systems
Collaboration
support
systems
Knowledge
repositories
(data
warehousing
and data
mining)
Communication support
systems (email)
Enterprise information
portals (intranets/
internets)
Expert
systems
Decision
support
systems
Source: After Alavi and Tiwana 2003.
MANAGING KNOWLEDGE WORK
551

Many commentators, however, are more sceptical about the utility of new ICTs for
delivering organizational performance improvements (Blair 2002). Thus, many orga-
nizations have put a lot of effort into putting content on to their intranets—a type of
platform technology (McAfee 2006) where documents can be stored and searched—
but research has found that users do not always ﬁnd these platform technologies useful.
Davenport (2005) for example, found that only 44 per cent of survey respondents felt
that it was easy to ﬁnd information they needed by looking on the company intranet.
The other very popular type of KMS involves channel technologies, such as email
(McAfee 2006), which allow the sharing of documents between particular individuals,
either one-to-one or one-to-many. This research ﬁnds that those involved in knowl-
edge work rely more heavily on the channel (e.g. email) than the platform (e.g.
intranets) technologies, reﬂecting the extent to which knowledge work is a social
activity dependent on joint production of knowledge. However, even the channel
tools have problems with regard to their ability to enhance knowledge processes. For
example, Davenport (2005) found that 26 per cent of people in a survey felt that email
was overused in their organization; 15 per cent felt that it reduced their productivity;
and 21 per cent actually felt overwhelmed by the amount of email that they received.
One reason for the limitations of these KM systems is that they will not in themselves
improve the capture, storage, and sharing of knowledge. As process/practice
approaches tell us, it depends on how the KM system is perceived and materially
enacted and used as part of people’s everyday work practices. Thus practice/process
views suggest that KM systems are limited by the very possession view of knowledge
that they assume. In contrast, the knowledge-as-practice view highlights the importance
of relationships and shared understandings and attitudes to knowledge formation and
knowledge sharing (Kofman and Senge 1993). It is important to acknowledge these
issues since they help to deﬁne the likely success or failure of attempts to implement KM
systems. The knowledge-as-practice view suggests, moreover, that it is likely to be fairly
easy to share knowledge between individuals who are relatively homogeneous in terms
of their practice, because they are likely to share a common understanding, identity, and
belief system. For example, globally distributed software engineers, with a similar
training and education, may be able to work collaboratively without much difﬁculty
and to share information via a KM system. However, it is extremely difﬁcult for such
globally distributed collaboration to occur where the individuals have heterogeneous
beliefs and understandings. Yet, the sharing of knowledge across functional, organiza-
tional, and/or national boundaries is precisely the goal of most KM initiatives. Para-
doxically, then, this means that attempts to manage knowledge work using KM systems
may actually be most problematic in the very conditions where the need is greatest—i.e.
where there are signiﬁcant divisions of practice.
Developments in IS do, however, open up opportunities for managing knowledge
work and knowledge workers from a practice perspective. In particular, new material
properties of IS, in particular the development of so-called Web 2.0 and Enterprise 2.0,
can facilitate the types of interaction that support knowing in practice. Web 2.0
software, then, can allow users themselves to create content and share directly with
552
JACKY SWAN

each other, whether through social networking sites like Facebook, MySpace, YouTube
and LinkedIn, or through wikis and blogs. The internet has thus become a tool for
collaboration through a shared social space and networking rather than a repository.
In the context of an organization, McAfee (2006) uses the term ‘enterprise 2.0’ to
deﬁne these same kinds of technologies, but used within the ﬁrewall of an organization.
The key characteristic of these 2.0 technologies, according to McAfee is that they not
only allow the sharing of documents (i.e. outputs of knowledge work) but also make
visible the practices of knowledge workers and interdependencies between practices
(i.e. valuable process knowledge not just content or product knowledge). McAfee
suggests that there are six key features of 2.0 technologies that differentiate them
from traditional ICT:
· Search—new tools that make it possible to search for information rather than
having to rely on navigation options.
· Links—dynamic links between content, reﬂecting how people have actually
moved across pages and sites, make it possible to identify related content, thus
facilitating users in ﬁnding useful content.
· Authoring—blogs (enabling individuals to author content that others can add to),
wikkis (enabling groups to author content in an iterative fashion), and YouTube
(enabling individuals or groups to produce multi-media content for others to
view) provide everyone with the opportunity to author content that others can
read or view—many people are now actively engaged in either producing or
consuming this user-generated content.
· Tags—allow individuals to have control of categorizing the content of their digital
material (e.g. del-icio.us allows users to tag websites with book marks). These
user-generated categorization systems are called folksonomies—a folksonomy
emerges over time depending on what users ﬁnd useful to group together based
on the information structures and relationships that are actually used in practice.
· Extensions—systems can also go beyond this tagging process to develop algo-
rithms based on the pattern of use of different information which then allows for
automatic referrals to individuals who have shown interest in a certain type of
content. This is done by Amazon very effectively to make recommendations to
their customers of other books they might enjoy reading, based on their pattern of
consumption to date as compared to the millions of other customers.
· Signals—given the sheer amount of information that is digitally available, it can
also be helpful to have certain information automatically pushed to users based
on their interests. Signals are the means of doing this, alerting users to the fact that
new information is available that they may be interested in. RSS (really simple
syndication) is now a popular technology that provides this kind of signal.
McAfee (2006: 26), thus, argues, that
Enterprise 2.0 technologies have the potential to let an intranet become what the
Internet already is—an online platform with a constantly changing structure built
MANAGING KNOWLEDGE WORK
553

by distributed autonomous and largely self-interested peers. On this platform,
authoring creates content; links and tags knit it together; and search, extensions,
tags and signals make emergent structures and patterns in the content visible and
help people stay on top of it all.
In reality, though, many organizations have yet to take advantage of 2.0 technologies. A
major reason is that they can reduce managerial control and may be used by some to
express negativity, which many senior managers want to avoid. For example, indivi-
duals can use blogs to broadcast weaknesses in a company’s strategy or to deride
organizational decision makers. Some may fear that chaos may rein if knowledge
workers are allowed to add or change content on their departmental website without
this being vetted by a central authority. Nevertheless, we can expect that KM systems
will change over time in organizations as the potential of these new 2.0 technologies
become more fully understood, especially in support of knowledge work, and more
accepted in practice.
CONCLUSIONS
..................................................................................................................
This albeit brief overview, and the points raised in this chapter, suggests that process/
practice approaches may be a more fruitful starting point from which to manage
knowledge work and to design the systems used to support it. Process/practice
approaches suggest that those attempting to manage knowledge, then, need be less
concerned with capture and control of knowledge (i.e. from individuals into systems)
and more concerned with providing an enabling context that supports employees in
the processes and practices of applying knowledge for speciﬁc tasks and purposes. This
is especially the case when talking about knowledge work because workers here
demand signiﬁcant autonomy. Returning to the deﬁnition of knowledge earlier, ‘man-
aging knowledge’ from a process/practice perspective means, simply, enabling people
to discriminate more readily within and across contexts and to engage in shared
problem solving. In other words, managing means coping with the work at hand and
not controlling the way that work is actually performed. Consequently, one can argue
that a more promising avenue for MIS is not to capture and share ‘knowledge’ per se,
but to allow people to cope with their work by being able to draw from a broader range
of skills and resources and by providing opportunities for the sharing of practice and
identity.
In terms of KM as a (changing) ﬁeld of study, we have seen how ‘ﬁrst wave’
approaches focused on codiﬁcation of (tacit) knowledge, primarily through the devel-
opment of IT systems, whereas ‘second wave’ approaches emphasized the development
role of social relations, networks, and communities. Both approaches assume, however,
that sharing knowledge is a good thing per se. If we really accept, however, that
knowledge is only as useful as the ends to which it is applied, then simply increasing
554
JACKY SWAN

knowledge ‘stocks’ and ‘ﬂows’ does not in itself add value and may, indeed, deﬂect
attention from critical tasks.
More serious attention to practice suggests, in contrast, a ‘third wave’ of KM—one
that focuses on purpose, not just process, and that takes account of the strategic intent
of KM initiatives and the new capabilities that these afford in organizations (cf. Wenger
2009). As Wenger has noted recently, this ‘third wave’ might address such core issues
as, how to identify business-critical knowledge domains, how to connect KM initiatives
and organizational imperatives, how to make knowledge work a formal strategy, and
how to assess the impact of KM on ground-level results. This means taking critical
decisions with regard to the purpose of KM—is it to improve efﬁciency of current
activities and/or to do things differently and innovate, for example? The role of MIS
implied in this ‘third wave’ then, is neither to stock ever increasing quantities of
knowledge in IT systems (the focus of the ﬁrst wave), nor to use communication
technologies to make knowledge ﬂow between people (the focus of the second). Rather,
it is to help knowledge workers cope with ever changing work demands by applying
information (however sourced) to particular problems, and to inform decisions regard-
ing core knowledge domains and future (not just past) capabilities and interests.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Aspects of this chapter have been extracted and developed from: S. M. Newell, M. Robertson,
H. Scarbrough, and J. Swan (2009). Managing Knowledge Work and Innovation, 2nd edn.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, with permission from the authors.
REFERENCES
Ackoff, R. L. (1989). ‘From Data to Wisdom’, Journal of Applied Systems Analysis, 16(1): 3–9.
Alavi, M. (2000). ‘Managing Knowledge’, in R. Zmud (ed.), Framing the Domain of IT
Management. Cincinnati, OH: Pinnoﬂex Educational Resources Ltd., 15–28.
——and Tiwana, A. (2003). ‘Knowledge Management: The Information Technology Dimen-
sion’, in M. Easterby-Smith and M. Lyles (eds.), The Blackwell Handbook of Organizational
Learning and Knowledge Management. Oxford: Blackwell, 104–21.
Barley, S. R. (1986). ‘Technology as an Occasion for Structuring: Evidence from Observation
of CT Scanners and the Social Order of Radiology Departments’, Administrative Science
Quarterly, 31: 78–108.
Barnes, B. (2001). ‘Practice as Collective Action’, in T. Schatzki, K. Knorr-Cetina, and E. von
Savigny (eds.), The Practice Turn in Contemporary Theory. London: Routledge, 17–28.
Bechky, B. A. (2003). ‘Sharing Meaning across Occupational Communities: The Transforma-
tion of Understanding on a Production Floor’, Organization Science, 14(3): 312–30.
Bell, D. (1973). The Coming of Post-industrial Society. New York: Basic Books.
MANAGING KNOWLEDGE WORK
555

Berger, P., and Luckmann, T. (1966). The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the
Sociology of Knowledge. New York: Doubleday Anchor Books.
Bijker, W. E., Hughes, T. P., and Pinch, T. J. (1987). The Social Construction of Technological
Systems. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bjorkman, I., Barner-Rasmussen, W., and Li, L. (2004). ‘Managing Knowledge Transfer in
MNCs: The Impact of headquarters Control Mechanisms’, Journal of International Busi-
ness Studies, 35: 443–55.
Black, L. J., Carlile, P. R., and Repenning, N. P. (2004). ‘A Dynamic Theory of Expertise and
Occupational Boundaries in New Technology Implementation: Building on Barley’s Study
of CT Scanning’, Administrative Science Quarterly, 49(4): 572–607.
Blair, D. (2002). ‘Knowledge Management: Hype, Hope or Help’, Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology, 53(12): 1019–28.
Boisot, M. (1995). Information Space: A Framework for Learning in Organizations, Institu-
tions and Culture. London: Blackwell.
Bourdieu, P. (1990). The Logic of Practice. Cambridge: Polity.
Brown, J. S., and Duguid, P. (2001). ‘Knowledge and Organization: A Social-Practice Per-
spective’, Organization Science, 12(2): 198–213.
Burrell, G., and Morgan, G. (1979). Sociological Paradigms and Organizational Analysis:
Elements of a Sociology of Corporate Life. London: Heinemann.
Carlile, P. (2002). ‘A Pragmatic View of Knowledge and Boundaries: Boundary Objects in
New Product Development’, Organization Science, 13(4): 442–55.
——(2004). ‘Transferring, Translating and Transforming: An Integrative Framework from
Managing Knowledge across Boundaries’, Organization Science, 15(5): 555–68.
Castells, M. (1996). The Rise of Network Society. Oxford: Blackwell.
Chesbrough, H. (2003). ‘The Logic of Open Innovation: Managing Intellectual Property’,
California Management Review, 45(3): 33.
——(2004). ‘Managing Open Innovation’, Research Technology Management, 47(1): 23–6.
Clark, P. (2003). Organizational Innovations. London: Sage.
Cook, S., and Brown, J. (1999). ‘Bridging Epistemologies: The Generative Dance between
Organizational Knowledge and Organizational Knowing’, Organization Science, 10(4):
381–400.
Coombs, R. (2003). ‘The Changing Character of “Service Innovation” and the Emergence of
“Knowledge Intensive Business Services” ’, in B. Dankbarr (ed.), Innovation Management
in the Knowledge Economy. London: Imperial College Press, 83–96.
Cross, R., and Sproull, L. (2004). ‘More than an Answer: Information Relationships for
Actionable Knowledge’, Organization Science.
Currie, W. L. and Galliers, R. D. (eds.) (1999). Rethinking Management Information Systems:
An Interdisciplinary Perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dankbaar, B. (2003). Innovation Management in the Knowledge Economy. London: Imperial
College Press.
Davenport, T. (2005). Thinking for a Living. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Dodgson, M., Gann, D., and Salter, A. (2005). Think, Play, Do: Technology, Innovation and
Organization. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Drexler, K. E. (1989). Engines of Creation. New York: Doubleday.
Dreyfuss, H. (1991). Being-in-the-World: A Commentary on Heidegger’s Being and Time,
Division One. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
556
JACKY SWAN

Drucker, P. (1969). The Age of Discontinuity: Guidelines to our Changing Society. London:
Heinemann.
——(1988). ‘The Coming of the New Organization’, Harvard Business Review, Summer:
53–65.
Foucault, M. P. (1980). Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972–1977.
Brighton: Harvester Press.
Garﬁnkel, H. (1967). Studies in Ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Gherardi, S. (2001). ‘From Organizational Learning to Practice-Based Knowing’, Human
Relations, 54(1): 131–9.
Gibbons, M., Limoges, C., Nowotny, H., Schwarzman, S., Scott, P., and Trow, M. (1994). The
New Production of Knowledge: The Dynamics of Science and Research in Contemporary
Societies. London: Sage.
Gourlay, S. (2006). ‘Conceptualizing Knowledge Creation: A Critique of Nonaka’s Theory’,
Journal of Management Studies, 43(7): 1415–36.
Hansen, M. T. (1999). ‘The Search Transfer Problem: The Role of Weak Ties in Sharing
Knowledge across Organizational Sub-units’, Administrative Science Quarterly, 44: 82–111.
Hosking, D., and Morley, I. (1991). A Social Psychology of Organizing. London: Harvester
Wheatsheaf.
Jennex, M., and Olfman, L. (2003). ‘Organizational Memory’, in C. Holsapple (ed.), Hand-
book of Knowledge Management, 2nd edn. New York: Springer, 207–34.
Knorr-Cetina, K. (1999). Epistemic Cultures: How the Sciences Make Knowledge. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Kofman, F., and Senge, P. (1993). ‘Communities of Commitment: The Heart of Learning
Organizations’, Organizational Dynamics, 22(2): 5–22.
Latour, B. (1987). Science in Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lave, J., and Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——Duguid, P., Fernandez, N., and Axel, E. (1992). ‘Coming of Age in Birmingham: Cultural-
Studies and Conceptions of Subjectivity’, Annual Review of Anthropology, 21: 257–82.
Lyotard, J. F. (1988). The Differend: Phrases in Dispute, trans. G. van den Abbeele. Minnea-
polis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
McAfee, A. (2006). ‘Enterprise 2.0: The Dawn of Emergent Collaboration’, MIT Sloan
Management Review, 47(3): 21–8.
McDermott, R. (1999). ‘Why Information Technology Inspired but Cannot Deliver Knowl-
edge Management’, California Management Review, 41: 103–17.
Miles, I. (2003). ‘Services Innovation: Coming of Age in the Knowledge Based Economy’, in
B. Dankbarr (ed.), Innovation Management in the Knowledge Economy. London: Imperial
College Press, 59–82.
Newell, S., Swan, J., and Scarbrough, H. (2001). ‘From Global Knowledge Management to
Internal Electronic Fences: Contradictory Outcomes of Intranet Development’, British
Journal of Management, 12(2): 97–111.
Nicolini, D., Gherardi, S., and Yanow, D. (eds.) (2003). Knowing in Organizations: A Practice-
Based Approach. New York: M. E. Sharpe.
Nonaka, I. (1994). ‘A Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation’, Organization
Science, 5(1): 14–37.
——and Konno, N. (1998). ‘The Concept of “Ba”: Building a Foundation for Knowledge
Creation’, California Management Review, 40(3): 40–54.
MANAGING KNOWLEDGE WORK
557

Nowotny, H., Scott, P., and Gibbons, M. (2001). Rethinking Science: Knowledge and the Public
in an Age of Uncertainty. Cambridge: Polity Press.
——————(2003). ‘ “Mode 2” Revisited: The New Production of Knowledge’, Minerva, 41:
179–94.
Orlikowski, W. J. (2002). ‘Knowing in Practice: Enacting a Collective Capability in Distributed
Organizing’, Organization Science, 13(3): 249–73.
——(2007). ‘Sociomaterial Practices: Exploring Technology at Work’, Organization Studies,
28(9): 1435.
——and Yates, J. A. (2002). ‘It’s about Time: Temporal Structuring in Organizations’,
Organization Science, 13(6): 684–700.
Pfeffer, J., and Sutton, R. I. (2000). The Knowing–Doing Gap: How Smart Companies Turn
Knowledge into Action. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Polanyi, M. (1962). Personal Knowledge. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Prusak, L. (1997). Knowledge in Organizations. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Scarbrough, H. (2008). ‘Organizational Knowledge’ entry in James R. Bailey and Stewart
Clegg (eds.), International Encyclopedia of Organization Studies, vol. iii. London: Sage
Publications.
——and Swan, J. (2001). ‘Explaining the Diffusion of Knowledge Management: The Role of
Fashion’, British Journal of Management, 12(1): 3–12.
————Laurent, S., Edelman, L., and Newell, S. (2004). ‘Project-Based Learning: An Explor-
atory Study’, Management Learning, 35(4): 491–506.
Schatzki, T. (2001). ‘Practice Theory’, in T. Schatzki, K. Knorr-Cetina, and E. von Savigny
(eds.), The Practice Turn in Contemporary Theory. London: Routledge, 1–14.
Schultze, U., and Orlikowski, W. J. (2004). ‘A Practice Perspective on Technology-Mediated
Network Relations: The Use of Internet-Based Self-Serve Technologies’, Information
Systems Research, 15(1): 87–106.
Spender, J.-C. (1998). ‘Pluralist Epistemology and the Knowledge-Based Theory of the Firm’,
Organization, 5(2): 233–56.
Suchman, L. (1987). Plans and Situated Actions: The Problem of Human–Machine Commu-
nication. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Swan, J. (2007). ‘Knowledge’, in James R. Bailey and Stewart Clegg (eds.), International
Encyclopedia of Organization Studies. London: Sage Publications, vol. ii.
——Bresnen, M., Newell, S., and Robertson, M. (2007). ‘The Object of Knowledge: The Role
of Objects in Interactive Innovation’, Human Relations, 60(12): 1809–37.
Teece, D. J., Pisano, G., and Shuen, A. (1997). ‘Dynamic Capabilities and Strategic Manage-
ment’, Strategic Management Journal, 18(7): 509–33.
Thompson, M. (2005). ‘Structural and Epistemic Parameters in Communities of Practice’,
Organization Science, 16(2): 151–64.
Tseng, S. (2007). ‘The Effects of Information Technology on Knowledge Management
Systems’, Expert Systems with Applications, 35(1–2): 1–11.
Tsoukas, H. (1996). ‘The Firm as a Distributed Knowledge System: A Social Constructionist
Approach’, Strategic Management Journal, 17(Winter Special Issue): 11–25.
——(2003). ‘Do we Really Understand Tacit Knowledge’, in M. Easterby-Smith and
M. A. Lyles (eds.), The Blackwell Handbook of Organizational Learning and Knowledge
Management. Oxford: Blackwell, 410–27.
——and Vladimirou, E. (2001). ‘What is Organizational Knowledge?’, Journal of Management
Studies, 38(7): 973–93.
558
JACKY SWAN

Walsham, G. (2002). ‘What can Knowledge Management Systems Deliver?’, Management
Communication Quarterly, 16(2): 267–73.
Weick, K. E. (1990). ‘Technology as Equivoque: Sensemaking in New Technologies’,
in P. S. Goodman, L. S. Sproull et al. (eds.), Technology and Organizations. Oxford:
Jossey-Bass.
——(2001). Making Sense of the Organization. Oxford: Blackwell Business.
Wenger, E. (2009). ‘Communities of Practice’, presentation at the ‘Knowledge and Innovation
Quarterly’ Workshop, University of Warwick, September.
——and Snyder, W. M. (2000). ‘Communities of Practice: The Organizational Frontier’,
Harvard Business Review, January–February: 139–45.
Wittgenstein, L. (1958). Philosophical Investigations, trans. G. E. M. Anscombe, 3rd edn.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Xu, J., and Quaddus, M. (2005). ‘Adoption and Diffusion of Knowledge Management
Systems: An Australian Survey’, Journal of Management Development, 24(4): 335–61.
Zollo, M., and Winter, S. G. (2002). ‘Deliberate Learning and the Evolution of Dynamic
Capabilities’, Organization Science, 13(3): 339.
Zuboff, S. (1988). In the Age of the Smart Machine: The Future of Work and Power. Oxford:
Heinemann.
MANAGING KNOWLEDGE WORK
559

c h a p t e r 2 1
...............................................................................................
RETHINKING GENDER
AND MIS FOR THE
TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
...............................................................................................
EILEEN M. TRAUTH
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
A reasonable starting point for this chapter might be to ask the question: why should
the MIS ﬁeld be concerned about gender? Indeed, as various reviews of the MIS
literature reveal, it does not appear to have been all that concerned about gender
until quite recently. Hence, an additional question might be: why should the MIS ﬁeld
be concerned about gender now? This chapter considers these questions by tracing the
evolution of research and thinking about gender and MIS against the background of
forces that are shaping the twenty-ﬁrst century. It begins by addressing the question of
why gender should be part of our thinking about MIS. It then moves on to consider the
evolution of research on gender and MIS. It ends with some thoughts about the topic of
gender and MIS in the future. It is important to note that this is by no means a review of
the entire body of gender and MIS literature, but merely signposts along the way.
THE ARGUMENT FOR RESEARCH
ON GENDER AND MIS
..................................................................................................................
The rationale for the inclusion of gender among the ‘legitimate’ topics of MIS attention
is embedded within the larger rationale for the inclusion of the human capital dimen-
sion in the MIS ﬁeld. Counter to the stereotype of the computing ﬁeld as not being
concerned about humans, ‘computer personnel’ has been recognized as a component

of the computing ﬁeld almost since its inception. For example, the Association for
Computing Machinery (ACM) has held conferences that focus on computer personnel
research since the early 1960s.1 In addition to this dedicated conference, ‘air time’ is
also given to this topic in generic information systems research conferences such as the
International Conference on Information Systems, the European Conference on Infor-
mation Systems, the Americas Conference on Information Systems, and the Paciﬁc
Asia Conference on Information Systems, all of which regularly have papers and tracks
devoted to human resource aspects of the MIS ﬁeld.2
In addition to conference venues, an increased interest over the past decade in human
capital in MIS has spawned special issues of journals such as Communications of the
ACM,3 Human Resources Management Journal,4 European Journal of Information
Systems,5 and The Database for Advances in Information Systems.6 Further, in research
books, the topic of human resources, human capital, or IT workforce has been the focus
of attention.7 It has also been included as a topic in overview books. For example,
the ﬁnal chapter of Rethinking Management Information Systems, the forerunner of
this Handbook, is a discussion of the management of knowledge workers (Scarbrough
1999). Likewise, the Oxford Handbook of Information and Communications Technolo-
gies (Mansell et al. 2007) contains two chapters that are directly focused on personnel
topics (the global labour force, and inequality), and several more that indirectly focus on
personnel (e.g. productivity, digital divide, sourcing, and ICT literacy).
From this quick tour of human capital in MIS literature we can see that a trend
toward investigation of these aspects of MIS is clearly present. So we can now rephrase
the question that introduced this chapter: given the interest in human capital within the
MIS ﬁeld, why should there be (or why is there) a particular focus on gender? The
rationale for including gender among the human capital topics of MIS attention can be
viewed as part of the overall argument for the inclusion of diversity as a topic in the
MIS ﬁeld. So, in addressing the topic of ‘why study gender’, we can approach it as an
aspect of the broader question of ‘why study diversity’.
Overall, one can observe that as IT has spread throughout all aspects of personal and
work life, so too has grown an interest in understanding more about the people who use
and develop IT, as well as those who are affected by it at both the organizational and the
societal levels. Thus, in the twenty-ﬁrst century, the task of ensuring a supply of
qualiﬁed IT personnel is increasingly bound up with issues of diversity. This has led
to increasing interest in the demographic characteristics of those who are the con-
sumers and developers of IT products. As the appetite for IT continues to grow, the IT
profession is challenged with meeting the demand to enlarge the IT workforce by
recruiting and retaining personnel from historically under-represented groups. Gender
is one such type of demographic diversity of interest.8 Hence, we can reframe the
generic diversity argument (Trauth et al. 2006) and focus it on the topic of gender
diversity.
The ﬁrst argument for including gender diversity in studies of the MIS ﬁeld can be
called the consumer argument. In an information society, in which all citizens are
engaged in the consumption of information products, it is crucial that the varying
RETHINKING GENDER AND MIS FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
561

needs of the entire consumer base be represented. The airbag story is now given as a
classic example of the failure to include diverse perspectives in design considerations.
The problem with the airbag is that it was designed with a typical Euro-American
man’s physique in mind as the generic ‘person’, without sufﬁcient consideration being
given to the effect of the deployed airbag on someone of a lighter and slighter build,
with the tragic consequences that have resulted. Other examples include the artiﬁcial
knee that was designed by men for a man as the generic ‘person’ with similarly negative
consequences (Smith 2009).
The second argument for considering gender diversity is the demographic argument.
In much of the Western world, demographic changes add urgency to the desire to
create a more diverse MIS labour force. The impending retirement of baby boomers is
being compounded by the shift in countries such as the United States from a white
majority (Frey 2008). These two trends coupled with projected growth in the IT sector
over the next ten years will produce an MIS labour force demand that cannot be
satisﬁed by white men alone. Yet, women typically make up less than 25 per cent of the
IT labour force of many countries (Panko 2008).
The third argument for gender diversity can be termed the innovation economy
argument. The post-industrial or information society is also described as a service
economy. In this economy there is greater emphasis on innovation. This is because in
the knowledge economy information services become emphasized over information
technology. As technology becomes a commodity it is likely to move offshore to lower
wage economies. Therefore, advanced economies such as the USA need to focus on
what cannot be easily offshored: continuous innovation. In such an economy ‘talent’ or
human capital development is prized. Florida (2002) argues that the recruitment and
retention of technology talent to a particular region is intimately bound up with
tolerance of diversity. This is because it is brainpower and creativity that fuels innova-
tion. And the ‘best brains’ can come in a variety of bodies: female, male, Black, White,
gay, straight, etc.
The ﬁnal argument for gender diversity in the IT ﬁeld is the equity argument. Simply
put, women should have the same opportunity to pursue a career as men. However, the
data show that that is not the case in the information technology ﬁeld. A new study in
the USA, The Athena Factor: Reversing the Brain Drain in Science, Engineering and
Technology (Hewlett et al. 2008), examined factors inﬂuencing the career trajectories of
women in the science, engineering, and technology ﬁelds (which would include IT
jobs) in private sector companies. The ﬁndings point to a troubling rate of attrition
among women as many of them reach a ‘breaking point’ in their careers. The report’s
authors characterize their ﬁndings about the sources of this retention crisis as ‘antigens’
in the culture of these technical organizations that include: a hostile macho culture,
isolation in the workplace, mysterious career paths, systems of risk and reward, and
extreme work pressures (pp. i–ii). These ﬁndings about gender equity issues in industry
are consistent with the situation in the academy. Similar ﬁndings about gender equity
issues in higher education were published in the report from The National Academy of
Sciences (2006) study: Beyond Bias and Barriers: Fulﬁlling the Potential of Women in
562
EILEEN M. TRAUTH

Academic Science and Engineering. In the UK an investigation by Tattersall et al. (2006)
of the working conditions and the cultural barriers of women in the information
technology industry in North West England produced similar ﬁndings about causes
of female attrition from the ﬁeld.
These ﬁndings about female attrition in the information technology ﬁeld can be
viewed as a part of a larger mosaic of challenges being posed to the IT ﬁeld. Female
attrition, combined with the labour force projections and the other arguments for
gender diversity, have presented a compelling argument for considering gender as an
important topic to be examined in MIS research. Indeed, one could argue that in
response to this situation scholars in the MIS ﬁeld are being compelled to consider
gender and IT insofar as their societies are requiring it. In some places, gender and IT
research has been motivated by government demands for more equal representation of
women in the information society. For example the European Union’s Commission on
Women’s Rights and Equal Opportunities (2003) report recognizes the unequal and
gendered path into the information society, and the under-representations of women
in the European ICT sector. For this reason it recommends the continuation of gender
mainstreaming policies and the undertaking of new initiatives to increase the repre-
sentation of women. In other countries, funding agencies are motivating research into
the gender imbalance in the IT ﬁeld. For example, the United States’ National Science
Foundation funds a variety of research programmes aimed at increasing the participa-
tion of women in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) ﬁelds,
which include IT. It also funds action-oriented research directed at facilitating broader
participation in computing ﬁelds. These examples give evidence that the topic of
gender and IT will increasingly shift from the periphery of the ﬁeld to its core. The
argument developed in this section concludes that for these reasons, managerial
perspectives on the use and management of information systems and technology in
the twenty-ﬁrst century need to take gender into account.
THE STATUS OF GENDER RESEARCH IN MIS
..................................................................................................................
Despite the case that can be made for the importance of gender research in the MIS
ﬁeld, the reality is that there hasn’t been that much published. Thus, not only is there a
gender imbalance in the MIS labour force, but there is also an imbalance in terms of
what research is being conducted. This conclusion has been supported by several meta
studies of gender and MIS research. Trauth, Quesenberry, and Huang (2006) con-
ducted an investigation of papers presented at the ACM SIGMIS computer personnel
research conference between 1961 and 2005. A search of 862 papers yielded 29 that
were about gender and the IT workforce or gender and preparation for the IT
workforce. The ﬁrst paper was presented in 1988. The majority of the papers (10)
were published in 2003 when the conference theme was ‘difference and diversity’.9
These ﬁndings also indicate that this body of research is of fairly recent vintage: only 6
RETHINKING GENDER AND MIS FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
563

out of 29 articles on gender issues in the IT workforce and education were presented
before 2000. Adam, Howcroft, and Richardson (2004) also conducted an investigation
of gender and MIS research. But whereas Trauth et al. looked at the gender research in
a single conference, Adam et al. examined top MIS journals over a ten-year period from
1993 to 2002. Their results shown in Table 21.1 indicate that only nineteen papers on
gender were published in this time period.
Kvasny, Greenhill, and Trauth (2005) conducted a similar examination of gender
and IS research using publications in top MIS journals stretching back to the 1970s.
Their search of abstracts for papers that use gender as a central construct in the analysis
yielded the results shown in Table 21.2. The difference in journals selected in these two
studies reﬂects their regional origins: Adam, Howcroft, and Richardson (2004) reﬂects
more of the European ranking of top journals whereas Kvasny, Greenhill, and Trauth
(2005) reﬂects more of the American ranking. Finally, a review of gender articles
published recently in top MIS journals was done for this chapter. As Table 21.3
shows, the publication trend between 2003 and 2009 is consistent with earlier conclu-
sions that there is a dearth of gender papers in inﬂuential MIS journals.
Table 21.1 Gender papers published in IS journals 1993–2002
Journal
Number of papers
Methodology
MIS Quarterly
4
Quantitative
Information Systems Research
1
Quantitative
Communications of the ACM
3
Quantitative
Information Technology & People
1
Quantitative
4
Qualitative
Information Systems Journal
2
Qualitative
European Journal of Information Systems
1
Mixed methods
1
Theoretical
Journal of Information Technology
1
Theoretical
Information and Organization
1
Theoretical
Source: Adam, Howcroft, and Richardson 2004: 226.
Table 21.2 Gender papers published in IS journals 1976–2004
Journal
Number of papers
MIS Quarterly
5
Communications of the ACM
33
Information Systems Research
0
Journal of Management Information Systems
3
Management Science
1
Source: Kvasny, Greenhill, and Trauth 2005: 10.
564
EILEEN M. TRAUTH

THE EVOLUTION OF THINKING
ABOUT GENDER AND MIS
..................................................................................................................
The evolution of research on gender and MIS can be represented as occurring through
several phases. The criteria used for aligning research with these different phases
include: methodology, epistemology, and gender theory. As this analysis will demon-
strate, it has not been a linear evolution; phases of research overlap and inﬂuence each
other.
Table 21.3 Gender papers published in IS journals 2003–9
Journal
The number of the papers by year
2003 2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
Total
MIS Quarterly(MISQ)
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
2
Information Systems
Research (ISR)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Communication of the
ACM (ACM)
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
4
Information Technology
& People (ITP)
0
2
1
1
2
0
0
5
Information System
Journal (ISJ)a
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
European Journal of
Information Systems
(EJIS)
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
3
Journal of Information
Technology (JIT)
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
The DATA BASE for
Advances in
Information Systems
(DB)
0
1
1
5b
1
1
1
10
Information and
Organization (IO)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Journal of Management
Information Systems
(JMIS)
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
Management Science
(MS)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
a It should be noted that as this chapter is being written the development of a special issue of
Information Systems Journal on Women and IT is underway (see von Hellens, Fisher, and Trauth,
forthcoming).
b One issue this year was devoted to articles on diversity in the IT workforce, all of which were about
gender (see Trauth and Niederman 2006).
RETHINKING GENDER AND MIS FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
565

Positivist Thinking: Observing Gender and MIS
The ﬁrst phase of research on the topic of gender and MIS began in the 1970s and
continues today. It can be characterized as positivist and quantitative. The goal of this
phase of gender and MIS research is to document gender as a phenomenon of interest
in investigations of the design, use, and effect of information technology and systems.
Adam, Howcroft, and Richardson (2004) note that the bulk (47 per cent) of the
gender papers published in the journals they reviewed employed positivist and
quantitative methodology. Kvasny, Greenhill, and Trauth (2005) found that every
paper in their study that was published in Management Science, MIS Quarterly, and
Journal of MIS was positivist in its epistemological orientation and utilized quanti-
tative methods to test hypotheses. Ahuja’s (2002) review of the gender and MIS
literature agreed that, at the time of her research, it was dominated by quantitative/
positivist studies.
The approach taken in these papers is typically to measure gender differences along a
variety of factors related to information technology use and participation in the IT
profession. One category of papers looks at gender as a variable in studies of technology
adoption and use. For example, Venkatesh and Morris (2000) and Venkatesh, Morris,
and Ackerman (2000) employed the technology acceptance model (TAM) for theoret-
ical insights as they measured gender differences in computer usage in a workplace
setting. Gefen and Straub (1997) used TAM to study gender differences in perceptions
about email usage. Gender differences in measures of computer playfulness were taken
by Webster and Martocchio (1992). Ahuja and Thatcher (2005) employed the theory of
reasoned action to examine the inﬂuence of work environment and gender on trying to
innovate with information technology. The ﬁndings show that work overload interacts
with autonomy to affect trying to innovate with IT and that these relationships vary by
gender.
The other category contains research that examines gender differences in member-
ship in the IS profession. With respect to gender differences in the workplace Frenkel
(1990) and Igbaria and Baroudi (1995) examined job performance and career advance-
ments. Pay disparity was examined by Truman and Baroudi (1994) and participation
rate was measured by Carayon et al. (2003). Quite recently, McKinney et al. (2008)
reported on a quantitative study that collected data about gender differences with
respect to the IT profession, including: motivations for entering the ﬁeld, professional
socialization, work experiences, and attitudes about the profession. Wardell et al.
(2006) followed the career trajectory of 2,823 male and female IT professionals and
found that women are nearly two and a half times more likely than men to leave the IT
labour force. Ahuja’s (2002) overview of the gender and MIS literature hypothesized
that IT career choice, persistence, and advancement are determined by a set of social
factors (such as social expectations, work family conﬂict, informal networks) and
structural factors (such as lack of role models and mentors, the culture of IT education
and industry).
566
EILEEN M. TRAUTH

A related stream of research focuses on recruitment and retention in the computer
ﬁelds. For example, Katz et al. (2006) investigated factors related to persistence in an
undergraduate computer science programme in the USA. They found that female
students who received a grade lower than a B in the introductory computing course
were much less likely than male students to take the next course in the curriculum.
They speculate that the female students interpreted an average or below average grade
as validating the societal stereotype that women do not belong in the IT ﬁeld. Joshi and
Schmidt (2006) found that gender stereotypes that have plagued computer science have
pervaded information systems education as well. They surveyed students’ perceptions
of the gendered nature of tasks associated with the information systems profession.
These ﬁndings are consistent with the prevailing gender stereotype that most of the
traits and abilities associated with IS careers were perceived as masculine rather than
feminine or gender neutral. Gallivan (2004) examined the challenge of adapting to
technological changes in IS departments using hypotheses about the linkage between
personal attributes (tolerance of ambiguity and openness to experience) and IT profes-
sionals’ ability to adapt to a technological innovation. The ﬁndings revealed that the
women in the study had lower job satisfaction on a dimension that captured job stress,
and this effect was exacerbated for the women working at the ﬁrm that expected its IT
employees to develop mastery of the innovation on their own time (i.e. outside the
normal work day). In many of these quantitative gender and MIS papers—particularly
the early ones—gender theory is not explicitly used to guide the research. Rather, the
papers published in top MIS journals—the journals that typically require theoretically
informed research—tend to employ ‘implied’ gender essentialism in conjunction with a
theory about technology adoption and/or organizational change. That is, they assume
the categorization of individuals into two clearly delineated gender categories, mascu-
line and feminine, and that homogeneity exists within them. This theoretical lens is
then used to interpret observed quantitative gender differences. The reader is left to
infer from this gender essentialism that men and women are fundamentally different in
ways that matter with respect to interaction with information systems. The source of
this gender essentialism is sometimes revealed as resulting from social construction of
gender and IT; other times it is left to the reader to decide whether statistically
documented gender differences are biological or sociological in origin.
The review of papers from the ACM SIGMIS computer personnel research confer-
ence (Trauth, Quesenberry, and Huang 2006) revealed a similar pattern of ‘implied’
gender theory, though it falls heavily in the social construction rather than the
biological essentialism camp. Articles were coded into four categories: gender essen-
tialist theory, gender social construction theory, individual differences theory of gen-
der, and non-gender theories. This categorization reﬂects the common theoretical
anchor points on the landscape of gender and IT research. The essentialist theory
invokes biological differences between men and women to explain differences in their
relationship to technology. This theoretical position is based on the assertion that such
differences are ﬁxed and uniﬁed (see critiques by De Cecco and Elia 1993; and Adam,
Howcroft, Richardson 2001). The social construction theory argues that various
RETHINKING GENDER AND MIS FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
567

socio-cultural factors are the primary constructs that shape individuals and their
relationship to IT (see Berger and Luckmann 1966; Marini 1990). Hence, since IT
has been socially shaped as ‘men’s work’, IT careers are placed outside the female
domain (Wajcman 1991; Webster 1996; von Hellens et al. 2000; von Hellens, Nielsen,
and Trauth 2001). The individual difference theory of gender and IT is situated between
the essentialist theory and social construction theory and is based upon the premiss
that gender groups are neither dichotomous nor homogeneous. It argues that there are
a variety of expressions of gender identity and, hence, relationships between gender
and IT.
Analysis of the twenty-nine papers presented at the ACM SIGMIS CPR conference
shows that the dominant theoretical perspective is social construction theory: 21 of the
papers (75.9 per cent) use the lens that information technology is socially constructed
as a male domain. However, this theoretical alignment did not come from the authors
themselves. In 11 of the papers (52 per cent) there was no explicit mention of gender
theory. Ten of the papers were subsequently classiﬁed by Trauth, Quesenberry, and
Huang (2006) as ‘social construction’ and one was classiﬁed as ‘no explicit theory’.
Hence, in half of the papers the authors did not explicitly identify any gender theory.
Also, consistent with the examinations of gender and IT research published in the MIS
journals that were discussed above, three of the papers employed non-gender related
theories. These results are shown in Table 21.4.
The conclusion from this review of the ﬁrst phase of research on gender and MIS is
that these studies are primarily concerned with tracking the gender variable in quanti-
tative measurement of business information systems. In general, this research is about
observing gender differences in IT but not understanding them. A further and more
political interpretation of this phase of gender research is offered by Adam, Howcroft,
and Richardson (2004: 223). They posit that in the effort to obtain legitimacy as a
Table 21.4 Treatment of theory in gender papers published in ACM SIGMIS
Conference 1988–2005
Number
Theoretical perspective
Theoretical analysis
2
Individual Difference Theory
Explicit
1
Individual Difference Theory / Social Construction Theory
Explicit
9
Social Construction Theory
Explicit
10
Social Construction Theory
Implied
1
Social Construction Theory / Essentialism
Explicit
1
Essentialism
Explicit
1
Social Construction Theory / Organizational Culture Theory
Implied
1
Institutional Discourse Theory
Explicit
1
Structuration Theory
Explicit
1
Theory of Reasoned Action
Implied
1
No Theory
Source: Trauth, Quesenberry, and Huang 2006: 19.
568
EILEEN M. TRAUTH

discipline, information systems has been conservative and narrow in its deﬁnition of
‘proper’ research topics, an approach that has generally excluded gender. They observe
that from the limited gender research that has been conducted it can be concluded that
‘the concept of gender in IS research largely lacks theorization’ (p. 222). They conclude
that if we are to adequately understand information technologies we must also under-
stand gender.
Interpretive Thinking: Understanding Gender and MIS
When a positivist approach has been applied to studying gender and MIS, the objective
has typically been to discover whether and where there are gender differences. The
purpose of increasing gender diversity would be to further managerial objectives such
as increased effectiveness and productivity. The criticism of this research is that such
studies remain on the surface of observable and documentable differences and run the
risk of engaging in a superﬁcial and unproblematic treatment of gender. In reaction to a
view of gender as a variable to be counted and contrasted in studies of technology
adoption or the IT workforce, an alternative approach to gender research began to
emerge in the ﬁnal years of the twentieth century. This second phase of gender and MIS
research—one that employs qualitative methods and interpretive epistemology—is
gaining momentum in the gender and MIS research community. However, this
approach remains more dominant outside the United States; in the USA quantita-
tive/positivist studies still dominate.
The limitations of quantitative/positivist studies are addressed in qualitative/inter-
pretivist gender and MIS research. This latter type of research focuses on developing a
better understanding of the forces at work that bring about the observed gender
differences. The goal is to develop a better understanding of how these gender differ-
ences in IT use and careers have come about. It does this through the inclusion of
context into the scope of study. In this view, gender is among the important social
factors shaping both personal and professional spheres. That is, the tension between
dichotomizing people into feminine and masculine, on the one hand, and the recogni-
tion of variation among and within gender categories, on the other, reveals much about
social organization, hierarchies, power, etc. Hence, it is an important factor to be taken
into account whether one is studying the producers or consumers of IT.
Consistent with this research movement that goes beyond measuring gender differ-
ences in IT use or occupations towards understanding the mutual shaping of technol-
ogy and gender has been a methodological shift. Because this phase of research seeks
not so much to measure as to understand the gender factor in IT adoption, use, and
careers, it has gravitated towards an interpretive epistemology and qualitative methods.
The effect of epistemology on the study of a phenomenon was demonstrated in Trauth
and Jessup’s study of group support systems (2000). They showed how the shift from a
positivist to an interpretive analysis of a group support system revealed a considerably
RETHINKING GENDER AND MIS FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
569

different and much more nuanced understanding of the same data. Likewise, qualita-
tive methods, which provide the opportunity to introduce nuance and unanticipated
themes, have dominated. Much of the data in this research comes directly from women
themselves, through such methods as: open-ended interviews, case studies, focus
groups, or ethnographic research. In this way, the subjective reality being experienced
by the women who are the object of the statistical studies is being revealed. Statistics tell
one story. This type of research is able to tell the story behind the statistics by exploring,
in depth, the voices of those women.
This body of gender and MIS research takes as a given that there is a gender
imbalance with respect to IT design, use, and professional involvement. In this sense,
it is building upon the research ﬁndings from the ﬁrst phase of gender and MIS
research. It signiﬁes a desire to go beyond statistical documentation of gender differ-
ences towards a deeper understanding of those statistics. In doing so, there is also
recognition of the need for relevant theory to guide the interpretations. Thus, whereas
some quantitative/positivist gender and MIS research uses no theory, or at least no
gender theory to guide the collection and analysis of data, the role of theory in
qualitative/interpretive gender and MIS research is heightened. Much of this research
employs social construction theory to interpret the subtleties of women’s interaction
with IT and the IT profession.
The publication of the special issue of Information Technology & People on gender
and information systems (Adam, Howcroft, and Richardson 2002) signalled a deﬁnite
movement into this next phase of gender and MIS research. In introducing this special
issue, the editors articulated their agenda: to move gender and IS research forward both
theoretically and methodologically. In doing so, they also summarized the research
gaps present in the ﬁrst phase of gender and MIS research. They note that as the ﬁeld of
IS has attached increasing importance to the social context and content of systems that
are developed, gender has remained largely neglected. In this regard, they suggest, the
IS discipline is behind other disciplines, where gender is present and gender analysis is
an inﬂuencing factor. Further, they note that the little bit of gender research in IS that
has been published is under-theorized and, consequently, tends to base analyses on
gender stereotyping rather than on gender theorizing.
By way of explaining the papers that were chosen for publication in this issue, the
editors explained that the direction of their gaze was shifting away from papers that
focused primarily on documenting the low participation of women in the IS profession.
In doing so, they signalled the need for gender and MIS research to move beyond a
simplistic view of the gender imbalance as simply ‘add more women’ without probing
deeper into why so few women want to enter the IS arena to begin with. Thus, the
papers that were featured in this issue did more than meet the standard of high-quality
gender and IS research. They also revealed a new type of gender and IS research. These
papers all see gender as a social rather than as a biological construction and they moved
beyond dualist thinking that dichotomized men and women based on gender stereo-
typical characteristics and behaviours. According to the editors, these papers combine
570
EILEEN M. TRAUTH

empirical study with gender theorizing so as to advance a deeper understanding of the
gender imbalance in MIS.
Habib and Cornford (2002) investigated the themes of domestication, gender, and
technology through an ethnographic study of computers in the home. They found that
IT is situated within a web of values, relationships, symbols, and routines. Woodﬁeld
(2002) begins with the premiss that women bring a different approach to IS work. She
then wonders whether a quantitative increase in the number of women in the MIS
workforce would result in an accompanying change in the nature of systems develop-
ment work. Her analysis of interviews conducted with developers revealed that pro-
cesses by which skills are recognized tend to privilege the ‘masculine work’ and
competencies of male workers. Hence, she remains sceptical about a quantitative
change in the gender imbalance resulting in a qualitative change in the way IS work
is accomplished. Wilson (2002) employed an empirical study of an automated care
planning system that was resisted by nurses as a setting for her theoretical work that
combines feminist theory with social shaping of technology theory. Trauth’s paper
(2002) contributes to the movement toward greater theorizing about gender and IT in
that it initiated a programme of interpretive research directed at developing new theory
about within-gender variation to guide research about gender in MIS.
The contribution of qualitative/interpretive research is that it has taken a signiﬁcant
step forward in helping to explain the gender factor in MIS adoption, use, and
professional afﬁliation, etc. However, while this phase of gender and MIS research
has contributed a better understanding of the phenomena, qualitative/interpretive
studies of gender and MIS have also been taken to task on the basis of epistemology
and gender theory. Hence, Kvasny, Greenhill, and Trauth (2005: 10) observe that it
suffers from some of the same drawbacks as quantitative/positivist research:
What is lost is inclusion of the critical, radical, and problem-posing nature of
feminist theory and practice as an anti-paternalistic discourse. Gender as operatio-
nalized in ‘mainstream’ MIS escapes intensive probing and questioning; it is simply
taken as a given dimension for determining differences between men and women. It
remains a challenge to get those who conduct gender research to move from the
center, the place of safety which excludes the lives, identities and experience of the
‘other.’ Consequently, the most privileged discourse community, the premiere
academic journals, has not, to date, contended with feminist projects in MIS.
TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY RETHINKING
OF GENDER AND MIS
..................................................................................................................
In the twenty-ﬁrst century gender and MIS research is continuing to evolve even as the
MIS ﬁeld, itself, is evolving. Hence, we now have evidence of the emergence of the third
phase of gender and MIS research. This new phase is marked by the introduction of
RETHINKING GENDER AND MIS FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
571

critical epistemology, the new ways in which positivist and quantitative tools are being
used, and the treatment of theory in this research.
Rethinking Epistemology
The past decade has witnessed epistemological evolution via the emergence of critical
theory in MIS research. Though not nearly as ‘mainstream’ as positivist and interpre-
tive research, there are clear signs that critical IS research (and critical gender and IS
research as well) is moving in that direction. One indication is the attention given to
critical research in MIS research books, dedicated conferences, and special issues of
journals.10 Whereas the contribution of interpretive gender and IS research has been to
enable more nuanced understanding of gender relations in the IS ﬁeld, in the new
century momentum is gathering around critical gender and IS research. The research
objective is to challenge existing assumptions about gender relations in order to address
the question of why gender relations exist as they do. The ultimate objective is to
change gender relations in society so as to achieve greater gender equality. Thus, this
goal is pursued by reaching beyond an understanding of how gender relations emerge,
to look at why they exist. In doing so, this gender research enters the unstable territory
of power, control, resistance, and inequality.
But what, exactly, does critical gender and IS research look like? For illustrative
purposes, consider the series of papers11 by Trauth and Howcroft. They began by
framing gender and IS research as a continuum according to epistemological orienta-
tion: from ‘that there is a gender difference’ (positivist) to ‘how the current status of
gender relations has come to occur’ (interpretive) to ‘why is gender constructed as it is
and whose interests are being privileged’ (critical). They begin by considering how the
understanding of the gender and IS research topic changes when the epistemology
shifts from interpretive to critical. The example is Trauth’s research programme to
investigate the individual and environmental factors that explain the way American
women are inﬂuenced by and react to the social shaping of both gender identity and IT.
The goal of this research is to develop a better understanding of factors that are
enhancing or inhibiting women’s participation in the IS profession. This overall goal
has embedded within it two speciﬁc objectives. One is to gain a better understanding of
the particular individual and environmental factors at play. The other is to develop
interventions to be implemented by public policy makers, parents, educators, and
employers. At the outset, the research methods consisted of interpretive ﬁeld interviews
with women IT professionals. The individual differences theory of gender and IT is used
as a sensitizing device to guide both data collection and analysis.
Howcroft and Trauth then show how this research would be enacted differently
when the epistemological lens shifts from interpretive to critical. First, the goal would
change from investigating the reasons for the under-representation by exploring the
ways in which women are inﬂuenced by and react to the social shaping of both gender
572
EILEEN M. TRAUTH

identity and IT. It would change to an investigation of the wider systems of repression
at work and an exploration of how the social construction of gender identity is seen as
being incompatible with IT. And the research, itself, would also change to enable
exploration of the interests being served by creating and maintaining the existing
power structure. It would shift away from detailed and comprehensive interpretations
of interview transcripts which illustrate individual women’s responses to the environ-
mental inﬂuences they experience. Instead, it would move towards an attempt to better
understand the wider economic, social, and political forces that shape this particular
construction of differential power.
For example, in the interpretive study the focus is on the story of women who
‘overcame the odds’ and how they did so; in the critical study the focus would be on
why the odds are stacked against women to begin with. Whereas with the interpretive
study the results are intended for use in supporting and evaluating interventions
directed at women and their societal context, a critical study shifts the focus from
how an individual woman copes to uncovering the systems of gender relations at work
that create the need for women to cope. Hence the critical understanding of the
research topic would move beyond articulating key inﬂuencing factors affecting
women and the within-gender variation in how they overcome them. It would change
to showing issues of a structural and ideological nature that may frame the experiences
that hold women back and serve to reproduce inequality.
Rethinking Methodology
Trauth and Howcroft, then, consider the ways in which the data collection and analysis
methods are altered by this change in epistemological orientation. In a critical ﬁeld
study the focus shifts from emphasis on eliciting the participant’s subjective represen-
tation of her career history to encouraging critical reﬂection upon her experiences as
she recounts them. Sometimes this is achieved by encouraging development of aware-
ness of the contradictions between her accounts of her behaviour, on the one hand, and
her self-characterizations on the other. Like an interpretive interview, the focus of a
critical interview remains the subjective representation of the participant’s experience.
But what is added is the subjective representation of the participant’s own critical
thinking about her experience. In the data analysis phase of the research, a critical
reading of the interview transcript will yield insights not only by what is said, but also
by what is not said. Other insights are garnered from non-verbal communication and
contradictions that are observed during the interview. The researcher is also on the
alert for instances of the exercise of power experienced by the women and their
responses to this as manifested in their narratives. Finally, the researcher engages in
reﬂexive analysis by consciously incorporating her or his own subjective experiences
into the process. Thus, critical gender and IS research seeks to do more than merely
observe and explain; it also seeks to challenge and change the status quo of gender
RETHINKING GENDER AND MIS FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
573

relations. Hence, there is a close linkage between a critical epistemology and an action
research methodology in that the researcher does not remain aloof from the phenom-
enon and is invested in bringing about change.
In addition to the inﬂuence of critical epistemology on research methods, what is
also evident in this third phase of gender and MIS research is a new sophistication that
is being brought to positivist and quantitative studies. While there continues to be
positivist/quantitative research being published that limits itself to documenting gen-
der differences, increasing numbers of gender researchers are using these research
tools—sometimes in combination with qualitative methods—to develop a deeper and
more nuanced understanding of gender issues in the MIS ﬁeld. Armstrong et al. (2007)
employed revealed causal mapping, a highly detailed qualitative method, to conduct
positivist examinations of cognitive linkages that female MIS professionals make
among workplace issues that inﬂuence voluntary turnover and perceived promotion
opportunities. Riemenschneider, Moore, and Armstrong (2006) studied barriers facing
women in the IT workforce of a Fortune 500 ﬁrm using revealed causal mapping. They
found that two of the four workplace barriers women had faced that had inﬂuenced
voluntary turnover decisions or those of their female co-workers were linked to
perceptions about family responsibilities and ﬂexibility to determine work schedule.
Kuhn and Joshi (2009) argued that in the absence of research demonstrating gender
group-level differences in what employees want from their work, any attempt at
targeted recruitment strategies is at best based on anecdotal evidence and at worst on
mistaken premisses and potentially invalid gender stereotypes. They supported their
argument through a quantitative examination of gender similarities and differences in
job attribute preferences among prospective IT professionals. In some cases, observed
results were contrary to gender differences reported in prior research, suggesting that
commonly accepted stereotypes do not necessarily apply. For instance, the men in this
study were actually somewhat more averse to lengthy work weeks than the women, and
the women did not place any less weight on income than did the men.
Adya and Kaiser (2005) make a contribution to bridging the positivist-interpretive
gap by employing qualitative methods to develop a model of females’ career choices in
technology ﬁelds that resulted in a set of hypotheses that can be employed in
subsequent positivist studies. Similarly, Trauth et al. (2007) are building upon the
results of their prior qualitative/interpretive research on gender, race, and ethnicity to
develop and test hypotheses about the intersectionality of these identity characteristics
and their inﬂuence on IT career choice.
Rethinking Theory
Accompanying the need for new methods to support a deeper and more critical
examination of gender relations in MIS is the need to peer inside the ‘black box’ of
gender. Therefore, developing a better understanding of existing gender relations also
574
EILEEN M. TRAUTH

requires the use of appropriate gender theories. As noted earlier, much of the published
work on gender and MIS does not employ gender theory to inform the design of the
research, to interpret the ﬁndings, or to develop implications emanating from them.
Consequently, it has been characterized by Adam, Howcroft, and Richardson (2004) as
under-theorized.
Trauth (2006b) has identiﬁed three different forms of under-theorization. One
occurs when no gender theory is used in the research. Hence, while some other theory
(such as about technology or organizational behaviour) might be employed, there is no
gender lens to guide the conceptualization of the gender dimension of the research, or
to inform the data collection and analysis. The focus is limited to compiling and
representing statistical data regarding the differences between men and women with
respect to technology adoption, use, or organizational impact. This form of under-
theorization is labelled pre-theoretical research insofar as it provides limited opportu-
nity for future work that could test, refute, or extend it. The second category of gender
and MIS research also employs theories about technology and organizations. And
while it does not explicitly articulate a particular gender theory it, nevertheless, is
guided by a gender theory-in-use. This has been most prevalent in the positivist,
quantitative studies that dominated the early gender and MIS literature. The theory-
in-use most often employed is gender essentialism that espouses fundamental, inherent
differences between men and women that are applicable to the context of IT. While not
explicitly declared as such, this theory-in-use has been used to guide the interpretation
of ﬁndings in a gender essentialist direction. This form of under-theorization is labelled
implicit-theoretical research. It is a type of under-theorization because the failure to
explicitly articulate the gender lens being used to interpret the data makes it difﬁcult for
others to discuss, challenge, or extend the research. Finally, even the corpus of gender
and MIS research that explicitly employs gender theory reveals gaps in the theoretical
landscape. It has been argued that current theories about gender and IS do not fully
account for the observed differences in men’s and women’s relationships to informa-
tion technology and the IT ﬁeld. This form of under-theorization is labelled insufﬁ-
cient-theoretical research. It is this third condition that signals the need for new
theoretical insights to guide our effort to understand the gender imbalance in the
MIS discipline.
A promising area of new gender theorizing is about within-gender variation as it
relates to women and men in the IT profession. For example Allen et al. (2006)
employed standpoint theory and causal mapping in their examination of mentoring.
They showed that mentoring can serve as an important intervention to enhance the
retention of women in the IT workforce because of its correlation with professional
advancement. And several studies (Nielsen et al. 1997; Adya and Kaiser 2005; Adya
2008; Soe and Yakura 2008) have addressed the topic of varied cultural inﬂuences in
analyses of gender and IT.
The individual differences theory of gender and IT has been developed to provide a
theoretical lens that focuses explicit attention on with-gender rather than between-
gender variation in the ways that individuals are exposed to, experience and respond to
RETHINKING GENDER AND MIS FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
575

gender relations in the IT profession (Trauth and Quesenberry 2006, 2007). This
theory conceptualizes gender relations in the IT ﬁeld at two different levels of analysis.
One level—the societal level—is concerned with gender group biases that women
encounter. The other level of analysis—the individual level—deals with the variation
among women with respect to how they respond to gender group biases. This variation
is posited as resulting from differences in demographic traits, personalities, and
individual and socio-cultural inﬂuences.
This theory comprises three constructs. The individual identity construct includes
both personal demographics (e.g. age, race, nationality, socio-economic class, and
parenthood), and career items (e.g. industry in which one works). The individual
inﬂuence construct includes personal characteristics (e.g. educational background,
personality traits, and abilities) and personal inﬂuences (e.g. mentors, role models,
and signiﬁcant life experiences). Finally, the environmental inﬂuence construct which
relates to the geographic region in which an individual lives and works, includes four
items. These are: cultural inﬂuences (e.g. national, regional, or organizational attitudes
about women or about women and IT); economic inﬂuences (e.g. cost of living); policy
inﬂuences (e.g. laws about gender discrimination, and policies about maternity leave);
and infrastructure inﬂuences (e.g. the existence of childcare facilities). The individual
differences theory of gender and IT argues that, collectively, these constructs account for
the differences among women in the ways they relate to the IT ﬁeld, and respond to
gendered discourses about IT.
Theorizing in this way is intended to help the effort to identify those individual and
societal factors that serve to both enhance and inhibit women’s participation in the IT
ﬁeld. Research to date has investigated: the intersectionality of gender, race, ethnicity,
and class in the choice of an IT career (Kvasny, Trauth, and Morgan 2009); varied
responses to exclusion from social networks in the workplace (Morgan, Quesenberry,
and Trauth 2004); regional economic and cultural factors that help to explain variation
in women’s participation in the IT sector (Trauth, Quesenberry, and Yeo 2008); the
inﬂuence of motherhood on IT careers (Quesenberry, Trauth, and Morgan 2006); the
effects of ubiquitous IT on work life balance (Quesenberry and Trauth 2005); variation
in career motivations among women in the IT profession (Quesenberry and Trauth
2007, 2008); national cultural inﬂuences on women in the IT ﬁeld (Trauth, Ques-
enberry, and Huang 2008); and the inﬂuence of organizational factors on the retention
of women in the IT workforce (Trauth, Quesenberry, and Huang 2009). This theory
provides a robust way in which to focus on the differences within rather than between
the sexes, thereby adding to the ‘toolbox’ of theoretical perspectives to guide investiga-
tions of gender and MIS.
In order to serve as a bridge to feminist, gender, and women’s studies literature,
gender and MIS theories need to provide links to feminist theory. For example,
employing Rosser’s (2006) classiﬁcation of feminist theories related to gender and
technology, the individual differences theory of gender and IT has theoretical linkages
to: liberal feminism, socialist feminism, feminist standpoint theory, postmodern
576
EILEEN M. TRAUTH

feminism, and post-structuralist feminism. Consistent with liberal feminism, it is
concerned with removing gender barriers to equal access. But it relates to socialist
feminism’s recognition of gender along with class as societal factors that explain
the social shaping of technology and technology professions. The recognition in
the individual difference theory of gender and IT on individual characteristics and
experiences aligns it with feminist standpoint theory (FST) which emphasizes the
situated knowledge of marginalized individuals (Harding 2004). The inﬂuence
of postmodern and post-structuralist feminism are evidenced in the recognition
that women do not all speak with a uniﬁed voice. Postmodern feminism believes
that the variation in women’s national, class, and cultural identities means that the
category of ‘woman’ can no longer be regarded as smooth, uniform, and homogeneous
(Brooks 1997).
As more of the feminist theories currently present in the broader gender and
technology literature migrate into MIS research, gender and MIS theorizing in the
twenty-ﬁrst century will take on a decidedly critical tone. A return to essentialism
accompanies ecofeminism, which bases its arguments on the belief that all women
work and learn differently from men (Cockburn 1985; Faulkner and Arnold 1985;
Hacker 1990), have a different voice (Gilligan 1982) and, therefore, design and use
technology differently from men. But in contrast with more traditional versions of
essentialism which would conclude with women’s inferiority, ecofeminism argues for
women’s superiority. Women would design technology differently, and presumably
better than men.
Whereas cyberfeminism focuses on the ways in which the Internet can be used to
both liberate and oppress women, it is utopian in its vision of a new, electronic
world in which disembodied individuals can gain greater equality. In this way,
cyberspace is seen as a realm in which the playing ﬁeld is levelled (Plant 1996).
However, its critics argue that cyberfeminism is a bit naive in the belief that the
structures of patriarchy and oppression that inhabit the real world do not inhabit
the virtual world as well. Wajcman’s (2007) response is technofeminism, a theoreti-
cal stance that rejects the inherent essentialism of ecofeminism and cyberfeminism.
Instead, it draws upon science and technology studies (STS) to reassert the social
construction argument: the relationship between gender and technology is one of
mutual shaping.
As these feminist debates show, a theoretical tension along the essentialist–constructivist
continuum will continue in the twenty-ﬁrst century. But in addition to debates about ways
of theorizing gender and MIS, are coming new discussions that challenge our basic
assumptions about how gender is conceptualized in MIS research. Whereas ‘gender’ in
MIS research, to date, has been understood to mean ‘woman’, the ﬁeld is beginning to see
research on men and masculinity (e.g. Light 2007). The questioning of heteronormativity
and the automatic binding of gender to biological sex in gender and MIS research can also
be expected to appear. These challenges will take on new forms as the research domain
increasingly includes the virtual world.12
RETHINKING GENDER AND MIS FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
577

CONCLUSION
..................................................................................................................
The evolution in gender research during this century will occur against a backdrop of
important trends and will be accompanied by challenges within the MIS ﬁeld itself. The
very confusion over the labels used—MIS, IS, IT, ICT—is but one indication of this
tension. Some of these trends will have a direct effect on the conduct and prominence
of gender and MIS research in this century. One such trend that will intensify is the
globalization of MIS (see also Chapter 24 in this volume). As the professional and
academic communities in the information professions globalize they will bring with
them the research and practice challenges associated with socio-cultural differences.
Accompanying the general set of issues related to a global IT workforce and consumer
base will be the particular challenges associated with gender differences in the IT
workforce and consumer base. Globalization will provide signiﬁcant impetus for
paying greater attention to human differences. Further, it will challenge the hegemony
of the Western white man as the prototypical ‘IT worker’ or ‘IT consumer’. Hence, we
can expect to see increased interest in the topic of gender and socio-cultural differences
and a need for more research on the inﬂuences of cultural context on gender and MIS.
A second trend inﬂuencing MIS that will have an impact on gender research is the
movement toward social inclusion in the MIS ﬁeld. This term refers to the consider-
ation of the ‘haves’ and the ‘have nots’ in the information age: who is invited to
participate in the digital revolution; who cannot afford to do so; who is deliberately
kept away; who has never heard of the information age. Perhaps because of MIS’s
origins in business, this is a topic that until quite recently has not been considered a
relevant topic within MIS. For example, Huang et al.’s (2006) meta-analysis of the
treatment of this theme at the IFIP 8.2 conferences since 1997 revealed that 16 per cent
of the 286 papers presented during this time period dealt with this topic. But in sharp
contrast, the past few years have seen an explosion of venues for the presentation of this
research. Huang’s paper was presented the year that the IFIP 8.2 conference theme was
social inclusion. This was followed in 2007 by the ICIS conference theme of ‘under-
served groups’. In 2008 a special issue of Information Technology & People (Cushman
and McLean 2008) was published. In 2009 a special issue of Journal of Information,
Communication & Ethics in Society (Urquhart and Underhill-Sem 2009) was published,
and a new special interest group within the Association for Information Systems—SIG
Social Inclusion—was established. The theme of the 2010 ECIS conference, held in
South Africa for the ﬁrst time, was ‘IT to Empower’. As the concept of social inclusion
becomes embedded within the MIS consciousness, the subtheme of ‘gendered social
inclusion’ can be expected to become more prominent and commonplace as well.
As the global economy expands in the twenty-ﬁrst century, and CIOs are faced with
managing an increasingly geographically dispersed and culturally disparate IT labour
force, new questions arise about the professional development of the IT workforce.
Among them are questions about gender in the IT labour force. Should there be special
578
EILEEN M. TRAUTH

recruitment and retention strategies for women in the MIS profession? What can be
done to recruit and retain more women in the IT ﬁeld? What are the management
challenges associated with a more gender-balanced MIS workforce? Should gender
balance only be seen as a social goal or can it also be seen as a resource to be leveraged
for competitive advantage? These and other questions about possible interventions
(Klawe, Whitney, and Simard 2009) require that gender and MIS research remain an
important component of the MIS ﬁeld. All three different approaches to gaining more
knowledge about gender and MIS—positivist, interpretive, critical—and their asso-
ciated methods, will no doubt continue to appear in the gender and MIS literature. This
can result in a productive tension regarding the types of knowledge produced by each
different approach and whether/how they further the goal of a gender balance in the
MIS ﬁeld.
NOTES
1. That conference is now called the ACM SIGMIS Computer Personnel Research Confer-
ence.
2. For example, the 2010 ICIS conference has a dedicated track on human capital and IS.
3. See Arnold and Niederman (2001).
4. See Niederman et al. (2007).
5. See Riemenschneider, Moore, and Armstrong (2009).
6. See Mandviwalla and Niederman (2004).
7. See e.g. Niederman and Ferratt (2006); Lowry and Turner (2007); Yoong and Huff
(2007).
8. Evidence of this is the publication of the two-volume Encyclopedia of Gender and IT in
2006. (See Trauth 2006a.)
9. See Trauth (2003).
10. See e.g. Adam et al. (2001); Howcroft and Trauth (2005); Richardson and Kvasny (2006);
Cecez-Kecmanovic, Klein, and Brooke (2008).
11. See Howcroft and Trauth (2004); Trauth and Howcroft (2006); Howcroft and Trauth
(2008).
12. See e.g. Blodgett, Xu, and Trauth (2007).
REFERENCES
Adam, A., Howcroft, D., and Richardson, H. (2001). ‘Absent Friends? The Gender Dimension
in Information Systems Research’, in N. L. Russo, B. Fitzgerald, and J. DeGross (eds.),
Realigning Research and Practice in Information Systems Development: The Social and
Organizational Perspective. Boston, MA: Kluwer, 333–52.
—— —— ——(2002). ‘Guest Editorial’, Information Technology & People, Special Issue on
Gender and Information Systems, 15(2): 94–118.
RETHINKING GENDER AND MIS FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
579

Adam, A., Howcroft, D., and Richardson, H. (2004). ‘A Decade of Neglect: Reﬂections on
Gender and IS’, New Technology, Work and Employment, 19(3): 222–40.
—— —— —— and Robinson, B. (eds.) (2001). Proceedings of the Critical Research in
Information Systems (CRIS) Workshop (Salford, July).
Adya, M. P. (2008). ‘Women at Work: Differences in IT Career Experiences and Perceptions
between South Asian and American Women’, Human Resources Management, 47(3):
601–35.
——and Kaiser, K. M. (2005). ‘Early Determinants of Women in the IT Workforce: A Model
of Girls’ Career Choices’, Information Technology & People, 18(3): 230–59.
Ahuja, M. (2002). ‘Women in the Information Technology Profession: A Literature Review,
Synthesis and Research Agenda’, European Journal of Information Systems, 11: 20–34.
——and Thatcher, J. B. (2005). ‘Moving Beyond Intentions and Toward the Theory of Trying:
Effects of Work Environment and Gender on Post-adoption Information Technology Use’,
MIS Quarterly, 29(3): 427–59.
Allen, M. W., Armstrong, D. J., Riemenschneider, C. K., and Reid, M. F. (2006). ‘Making
Sense of the Barriers Women Face in the Information Technology Workforce: Standpoint
Theory, Self-Disclosure, and Causal Maps’, Sex Roles, 54: 831–44.
Armstrong, D. J., Riemenschneider, C. K., Reid, M., and Allen, M. (2007). ‘Advancement,
Voluntary Turnover and Women in IT: A Cognitive Study of Work–Family Conﬂict’,
Information and Management, 44(2): 142–53.
Arnold, D., and Niederman, F. (eds.) (2001). Communications of the ACM, Special Issue on
the Global IT Workforce, 44(7).
Berger, P. L., and Luckmann, T. (1966). The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the
Sociology of Knowledge. New York: Doubleday.
Blodgett, B. M., Xu, H., and Trauth, E. M. (2007). ‘Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender
(LGBT) Issues in Virtual Worlds’, The Data Base for Advances in Information Systems,
38(4): 97–9.
Brooks, A. (1997). Postfeminisms: Feminism, Cultural Theory and Cultural Forms. New York:
Routledge.
Carayon, P., Hoonakker, P., Marchand, S., and Schwarz, J. (2003). ‘Job Characteristics and
Quality of Working Life in the IT Workforce: The Role of Gender’, Proceedings of the ACM
SIGMIS Computer Personnel Research Conference (Philadelphia, April), 58–63.
Cecez-Kecmanovic, D., Klein, H. K., and Brooke, C. (eds.) (2008). Information Systems
Journal, Special Issue on Exploring the Critical Agenda in Information Systems Research
18(2).
Cockburn, C. (1985). Machinery of Dominance: Men, Women and Technical Know-How.
London: Pluto Press.
Commission on Women’s Rights and Equal Opportunities (2003). Report on Women in the
New Information Society, <http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-//
EP//NONSGML+REPORT+A5-2003-0279+0+DOC+PDF+V0//EN>, accessed 10 April
2009.
Cushman, M., and McLean, R. (eds.) (2008). Information Technology & People, Special Issue
on Living and Functioning in the E-society: Issues of Inclusion and Exclusion, 21(3).
DeCecco, J. P., and Elia, J. P. (1993). ‘A Critique and Synthesis of Biological Essentialism
and Social Constructionist Views of Sexuality and Gender’, Journal of Homosexuality,
24(3–4): 1–26.
Faulkner, W., and Arnold, E. (eds.) (1985). Smothered by Invention. London: Pluto Press.
580
EILEEN M. TRAUTH

Florida, R. (2002). The Rise of the Creative Class. New York: Basic Books.
Frenkel, K. A. (1990). ‘Women and Computing’, Communications of the ACM, 33(11): 34–46.
Frey, H. W. (2008). ‘The Census Projects Minority Surge’. The Brookings Institution, Metro-
politan
Policy
Program,
<http://www.brookings.edu/opinions/2008/0818_census_frey.
aspx>, accessed 20 March 2009.
Gallivan, M. (2004). ‘Examining IT Professionals’ Adaptation to Technological Change: The
Inﬂuence of Gender and Personal Attributes’, The Data Base for Advances in Information
Systems, 35(3): 28–49.
Gefen, D., and Straub, D. (1997). ‘Gender Differences in the Perception and Use of E-mail: An
Extension to the Technology Acceptance Model’, MIS Quarterly, 21(4): 389–400.
Gilligan, C. (1982). In a Different Voice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Habib, L., and Cornford, T. (2002). ‘Computers in the Home: Domestication and Gender’,
Information Technology & People, Special Issue on Gender and Information Systems,
15(2): 159–74.
Hacker, S. (1990). Doing it the Hard Way: Investigations of Gender and Technology. Winches-
ter, MA: Unwin Hyman.
Harding, S. (ed.) (2004). The Feminist Standpoint Theory Reader. New York: Routledge.
Hewlett, S. A., Luce, C. B., Servon, L. J., Sherbin, L., Shiller, P., Sosnovich, E., and Sumberg, K.
(2008). The Athena Factor: Reversing the Brain Drain in Science, Engineering, and Technol-
ogy. Boston, MA: Harvard Business Review Research Report.
Howcroft, D., and Trauth, E. M. (2004). ‘The Choice of Critical IS Research’, in B. Kaplan,
D. P. Truex, D. Wastell, A. T. Wood-Harper, and J. I. DeGross (eds.), Relevant Theory and
Informed Practice: Looking Forward from a 20 Year Perspective on IS Research. Boston, MA:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 195–211.
————(eds.) (2005). Handbook of Critical Information Systems Research: Theory and
Application. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing.
————(2008). ‘The Implications of a Critical Agenda in Gender and IS Research’, Informa-
tion Systems Journal, Special Issue: Exploring the Critical Agenda in IS research
18(2): 185–202.
Huang, H., Quesenberry, J. L., Morgan, A. J., and Yeo, B. (2006). ‘Where Have We Been and
Where Are We Going? Social Inclusion in the Last Decade of IFIP WG 8.2 Research’, Poster
Presentation at IFIP 8.2 Conference (Limerick, June).
Igbaria, M., and Baroudi, J. (1995). ‘The Impact of Job Performance Evaluations on Career
Development Prospects: An Examination of Gender Differences in the IS Workplace’, MIS
Quarterly, 19(1): 107–23.
Joshi, K. D., and Schmidt, N. L. (2006). ‘Is the Information Systems Profession Gendered?
Characterization of IS Professionals and IS Careers’, The Data Base for Advances in
Information Systems, 37(4): 26–41.
Katz, S., Allbritton, D., Aronis, J., Wilson, C., and Soffa, M. L. (2006). ‘Gender, Achievement
and Persistence in an Undergraduate Computer Science Program’, The Data Base for
Advances in Information Systems, 37(4): 42–57.
Klawe, M., Whitney, T., and Simard, C. (2009). ‘Women in Computing—Take 2’, Commu-
nications of the ACM, 52(2): 68–76.
Kuhn, K., and Joshi, K. D. (2009). ‘The Reported and Revealed Importance of Job Attributes
to Aspiring Information Technology: A Policy-Capturing Study of Gender Differences’,
The Data Base for Advances in Information Systems, 40(3): 40–60.
RETHINKING GENDER AND MIS FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
581

Kvasny, L., Greenhill, A., and Trauth, E. M. (2005). ‘Giving Voice to Feminist Projects in
Management Information Systems Research’, International Journal of Technology and
Human Interaction, 1(1): 1–18.
——Trauth, E. M., and Morgan, A. (2009). ‘Power Relations in IT Education and Work: The
Intersectionality of Gender, Race and Class’, Journal of Information, Communication and
Ethics in Society, Special Issue on ICTs and Social Inclusion, 7(2/3): 96–118.
Light, B. (2007). ‘Introducing Masculinity Studies to Information Systems Research: The Case
of Gaydar’, European Journal of Information Systems, 16(5) 658–65.
Lowry, G., and Turner, R. (eds.) (2007). Information Systems and Technology Education: From
the University to the Workplace. Hershey, PA: Idea Group, Inc.
McKinney, V. R., Wilson, D. D., Brooks, N., O’Leary-Kelly, A., and Hardgrave, B. (2008).
‘Women and Men in the IT Profession’, Communications of the ACM, 51(2): 81–4.
Mandviwalla, M., and Niederman, F. (2004). The Data Base for Advances in Information
Systems, Special Issue on Computer Personnel Research, 35(3).
Mansell, R., Avgerou, C., Quah, D., and Silverstone, R. (eds.) (2007). The Oxford Handbook of
Information and Communications Technologies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Marini, M. M. (1990). ‘Sex and Gender: What Do We Know?’, Sociological Forum, 5(1):
95–120.
Morgan, A. J., Quesenberry, J. L., and Trauth, E. M. (2004). ‘Exploring the Importance of
Social Networks in the IT Workforce: Experiences with the “Boy’s Club” ’, Proceedings of
the Americas Conference on Information Systems (New York, August).
Naivinit, S. (2009). ‘Gender, Access to Community Telecenter and Livelihood Asset Changes’,
Journal of Information, Communication & Ethics in Society, Special Issue on ICTs and
Social Inclusion, 7(2/3): 128–35.
National Academy of Sciences (2006). Beyond Bias and Barriers: Fulﬁlling the Potential of
Women in Academic Science and Engineering. Committee on Maximizing the Potential of
Women in Academic Science and Engineering, National Academy of Sciences, National
Academy of Engineering, Institute of Medicine. Washington, DC: National Academy of
Sciences.
Niederman, F., and Ferratt, T. (eds.) (2006). IT Workers: Human Capital Issues in a Knowl-
edge-Based Environment. Hershey, PA: Information Age Publishing.
——Maertz, C. P., Kaplan, D. M., and LeRouge, C. (2007). Human Resource Management
Journal, Special Issue on Human Resource Management of Information Technology
Employees, 46(3).
Nielsen, S. H., von Hellens, L. A., Greenhill, A., and Pringle, R. (1997). ‘Collectivism and
Connectivity: Culture and Gender in Information Technology Education’, Proceedings of
the ACM Computer Personnel Research Conference (San Francisco), 9–13.
Panko, R. R. (2008). ‘IT Employment Prospects: Beyond the Dotcom Bubble’, European
Journal of Information Systems, 17: 182–97.
Plant, S. (1996). ‘On the Matrix: Cyberfeminist Simulations’, in R. Shields (ed.), Cultures of the
Internet: Virtual Spaces, Real Histories, Living Bodies. London: Sage.
Quesenberry, J. L., and Trauth, E. M. (2005). ‘The Role of Ubiquitous Computing in
Maintaining Work–Life Balance: Perspectives from Women in the IT Workforce’, in
C. Sorensen, Y. Youngjin, K. Lyytinen, and J. I. DeGross (eds.), Designing Ubiquitous
Information Environments: Socio-Technical Issues and Challenges. New York: Springer,
43–55.
582
EILEEN M. TRAUTH

————(2007). ‘What Do Women Want? An Investigation of Career Anchors among
Women in the IT Workforce’, Proceedings of the ACM SIGMIS Computer Personnel
Research Conference (St Louis, April): 122–7.
————(2008). ‘Revisiting Career Path Assumptions: The Case of Women in the IT
Workforce’, Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Systems (Paris,
December).
——and Morgan, A. (2006). ‘Understanding the “Mommy Tracks”: A Framework for Ana-
lyzing Work–Family Issues in the IT Workforce’, Information Resources Management
Journal, 19(2): 37–53.
Richardson, H., and Kvasny, L. (eds.) (2006). Information Technology & People, Special Issue
on Critical Research in Information Systems, 19(3).
Riemenschneider, C., Moore, J. E., and Armstrong, D. (2009). European Journal of Information
Systems, Special Section on Meeting the Renewed Demand for IT Workers, 18(5): 458–61.
——Armstrong, D., Allen, M., and Reid, M. (2006). ‘Barriers Facing Women in the IT
Workforce’, The Database for Advances in Information Systems, 37(4): 58–78.
Rosser, S. V. (2006). ‘Using the Lenses of Feminist Theories to Focus on Women and
Technology’, in M. F. Fox, D. G. Johnson, and S. V. Rosser (eds.), Women, Gender and
Technology. Chicago, IL: University of Illinois Press, 13–46.
Scarbrough, H. (1999). ‘The Management of Knowledge Workers’, in W. Currie and
R. Galliers (eds.), Rethinking Management Information Systems. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 474–96.
Soe, L., and Yakura, E. K. (2008). ‘What’s Wrong with the Pipeline? Assumptions about
Gender and Culture in IT Work’, Women’s Studies, 37(3): 176–201.
Smith, D. (2009). ‘The Imperative of Diversity for Institutional Viability: Building Capacity
for a Pluralistic Society’, presentation at The Pennsylvania State University (University
Park, PA, 27 March).
Tattersall, A., Keogh, C., Richardson, H. J., and Adam, A. (2006). ‘Women and the IT
Workplace: Issues from North West England’, in E. M. Trauth (ed.), Encyclopedia of
Gender and Information Technology. Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishing, 1252–7.
Trauth, E. M. (2002). ‘Odd Girl Out: An Individual Differences Perspective on Women in the
IT Profession’, Information Technology and People, Special Issue on Gender and Informa-
tion Systems, 15(2): 98–118.
——(ed.) (2003). Freedom in Philadelphia: Leveraging Differences and Diversity in the IT
Workforce. Proceedings of the ACM SIGMIS Computer Personnel Research Conference. New
York: ACM Press.
——(ed.) (2006a). Encyclopedia of Gender and IT. Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishing.
——(2006b). ‘Theorizing Gender and Information Technology Research’, in E. M. Trauth
(ed.), Encyclopedia of Gender and Information Technology. Hershey, PA: Idea Group
Publishing, 1154–9.
——and Howcroft, D. (2006). ‘Critical Empirical Research in IS: An Example of Gender and
IT’, Information Technology and People, Special Issue on Critical Research in Information
Systems, 19(3): 272–92.
——and Jessup, L. (2000). ‘Understanding Computer-Mediated Discussions: Positivist and
Interpretive Analyses of Group Support System Use’, MIS Quarterly, Special Issue on
Intensive Research, 24(1): 43–79.
——and Niederman, F. (2006). The Data Base for Advances in Information Systems, Special
Issue on Achieving Diversity in the IT Workforce, 37(4).
RETHINKING GENDER AND MIS FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
583

Trauth, E. M., and Quesenberry, J. (2006). ‘Are Women an Underserved Community in the
Information Technology Profession?’, Proceedings of the International Conference on
Information Systems (Milwaukee, December).
————(2007). ‘Gender and the Information Technology Workforce: Issues of Theory and
Practice’, in P. Yoong and S. Huff (eds.), Managing IT Professionals in the Internet Age.
Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishing, 18–36.
————and Huang, H. (2006). ‘Cross-Cultural Inﬂuences on Women in the IT Workforce’,
Proceedings of the ACM SIGMIS Computer Personnel Research Conference (Claremont,
Calif., April), 12–19.
——————(2008). ‘A Multicultural Analysis of Factors Inﬂuencing Career Choice for
Women in the Information Technology Workforce’, Journal of Global Information Man-
agement, 16(4): 1–23.
——————(2009). ‘Retaining Women in the U.S. IT Workforce: Theorizing the Inﬂuence
of Organizational Factors’, European Journal of Information Systems, Special Issue on
Meeting the Renewed Demand for IT Workers, 18: 476–97.
———— and Morgan, A. J. (2004). ‘Understanding the Under Representation of Women in
IT: Toward a Theory of Individual Differences’, in Proceedings of the ACM SIGMIS
Computer Personnel Research Conference (Tucson, AZ, April), 114–19.
———— and Yeo, B. (2008). ‘Environmental Inﬂuences on Gender in the IT Workforce’, The
Data Base for Advances in Information Systems, 39(1): 8–32.
——Huang, H., Morgan, A., Quesenberry, J., and Yeo, B. J. K. (2006). ‘Investigating the
Existence and Value of Diversity in the Global IT Workforce: An Analytical Framework’, in
F. Niederman and T. Ferratt (eds.), IT Workers: Human Capital Issues in a Knowledge-
Based Environment. Hershey, PA: Information Age Publishing, 331–60.
——Kvasny, L., Joshi, K. D., Mahar, J., and Kuturel, S. (2007). Exploration of the Effects of
Race, Ethnicity and Socio-economic Class on Gender Stereotyping of STEM Disciplines.
National Science Foundation #0733747.
Truman, G. E., and Baroudi, J. J. (1994). ‘Gender Differences in the Information Systems
Managerial Ranks: An Assessment of Potential Discriminatory Practices’, MIS Quarterly,
18(2): 129–41.
Urquhart, C., and Underhill-Sem, Y. (2009). Journal of Information, Communication & Ethics
in Society, Special Issue on ICTs and Social Inclusion, 7(2/3).
Venkatesh, V., and Morris, M. (2000). ‘Why Don’t Men Ever Stop to Ask for Directions?
Gender, Social Inﬂuence, and their Role in Technology Acceptance and Usage Behavior’,
MIS Quarterly, 24(1): 115–39.
———— and Ackerman, P. L. (2000). ‘A Longitudinal Field Investigation of Gender Differ-
ences in Individual Technology Adoption Decision Making Processes’, Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 83(1): 33–60.
von Hellens, L. A., Fisher, J., and Trauth, E. M. (forthcoming). Information Systems Journal,
Special Issue on Women and IT: Increasing the Representation of Women in Information
and Communications Technology—Research on Interventions.
——and Nielsen, S. (2001). ‘Australian Women in IT’, Communications of the ACM,
44(7): 46–52.
———— and Trauth, E. M. (2001). ‘Breaking and Entering the Male Domain: Women in the
IT Industry’, in M. Serva (ed.), Proceedings of the 2001 ACM SIGMIS Conference on
Computer Personal Research (San Diego, April), 116–20.
584
EILEEN M. TRAUTH

——Pringle, R., Nielsen, S., and Greenhill, A. (2000). ‘People, Business and IT Skills: The
Perspective of Women in the IT Industry’, in W. Nance (ed.), Proceedings of the 2000 ACM
SIGCPR Computer Personnel Research Conference: Electronic Commerce and Internet
Business. Roles, Relationships, Skills and Strategies for the New Millennium, Chicago, 6–8
April, 152–7.
Wajcman, J. (1991). Feminism Confronts Technology. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State
University Press.
——(2007). ‘ICTs and Inequality: Net Gains for Women?’, in R. Mansell, C. Avgerou,
D. Quah, and R. Silverstone (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Information and Commu-
nications Technologies. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 581–99.
Wardell, M., Sawyer, S., Reagor, S., and Mitory, J. (2006). ‘Women in the United States’ IT
Workforce: Current Status and Issues’, Labor & Industry, 16(3): 39–58.
Webster, J. (1996). Shaping Women’s Work: Gender, Employment and Information Technolo-
gy. London: Longman.
——and Martocchio, J. (1992). ‘Microcomputer Playfulness: Development of a Measure with
Workplace Implications’, MIS Quarterly, 16(2): 201–26.
Wilson, M. (2002). ‘Making Nursing Visible? Gender, Technology and the Care Plan as
Script’, Information Technology & People, Special Issue on Gender and Information
Systems, 15(2): 139–58.
Woodﬁeld, R. (2002). ‘Woman and Information Systems Development: Not Just a Pretty
(Inter) Face?’, Information Technology & People, Special Issue on Gender and Information
Systems, 15(2): 119–38.
Yoong, P., and Huff, S. (eds.) 2007. Managing IT Professionals in the Internet Age. Hershey,
PA: Idea Group Publishing.
RETHINKING GENDER AND MIS FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
585

c h a p t e r 2 2
...............................................................................................
GREEN DIGITS: TOWARDS
AN ECOLOGY OF IT
THINKING
...............................................................................................
PIERRE BERTHON,* PHILIP DESAUTELS,
BRIAN DONNELLAN, AND
CYNTHIA CLARK WILLIAMS
‘The most thought-provoking thing in our thought-provoking time is
that we are still not thinking’
(Heidegger)
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
The world faces an ecological crisis: population, pollution, and planetary perturbation.
Despite years of industry-funded propaganda, the scientiﬁc evidence for the unsustain-
able nature of modern living has become overwhelming. As humans, we are faced with
a stark choice: change or face the possibility of extinction. There are differing opinions
as to the causes of our ecological crisis, but there are many symptoms: on the abiotic
front we are faced with rising temperatures, decreased rainfall, desertiﬁcation, rising
sea levels, vast toxic wastelands, and acidiﬁcation of the oceans. On the biotic front we
are faced with overpopulation, de-speciation, extinctions, and decreasing biodiversity
in terms of both species and ecosystems. Hart (1997) argues that humans have
contributed to the ecological crisis in three ways: population, lifestyle, and technology.
Increased human population, living an unsustainable, environmentally destructive
lifestyle has drained the earth of resources and ﬂooded it with pollutants. The enabling
mechanism for both the increase in population and the increase in afﬂuence has been
technology. Technology is the multiplier effect for every human action: and to date our

technology has been focused on human needs without thought for the environment.
The ecological crisis is forcing us to change our myopic views of both the environment
and technology. Indeed the irony is that technology may well be the mechanism for our
saviour as it has been the instrument of our plight.
To say we are still learning about our relationship with nature is palpable, however
what is less obvious is that we are still learning about our relationship with technology.
Indeed we have been as unconscious in our relationship with technology as we have
been in our relationship with nature. We tend to think of both nature and technology
as ‘other’: something out there; something separate from us. The difference being that
we ﬁnd the former and create that latter—but we treat them both the same: instrumen-
tally. That is we use both technology and nature for our own ends. The ecological crisis
has alerted us to the fact that our use of technology is causing us to consume and alter
nature in unsustainable ways. While our ecological awareness has increased, our
relationship with technology is more ambivalent. Indeed our use of technology for
instrumental purposes has been plagued by paradoxes of intent and result.
IT PARADOXES
..................................................................................................................
Much has been written about the information technology paradox (cf. Thatcher and
Pingry 2007)—IT was meant to be the solution to inefﬁciency, yet in many ways, IT has
failed to deliver the productivity gains promised. IT has done more to shift business
practices than make industry more efﬁcient. Further, IT has not delivered on its
promise of increased leisure and freedom, but has rather blurred the boundaries of
personal and work time, to the extent that many are always working. More recently,
with the emerging climate and energy crises, IT is once again being touted as a solution:
can it deliver this time? We argue that it can, but will require (1) a deeper understand-
ing of our relationship with technology; and (2) a more thoughtful reﬂection on what it
means to be green: there are many shades of green.
Information systems, that is, the design and implementation of entire systems of
storage and retrieval, have promised the world—but more soberly have done more to
change it than deliver it. IT, or the software and hardware that enables us to do more,
faster; but to what end? Indeed the history of information technology has been beset by
paradoxes. A few are summarized below, under the headings of: the promise of
efﬁciency, the promise of cleanliness, the promise of education, the promise of satis-
faction, and the promise of community.
Like some great thaumaturge IT’s primary promise was that of making the world a
better and less onerous place in which humans could live. At the core of this claim is the
promise of efﬁciency—more for less. However, from the simple promise of the paperless
ofﬁce, where advances in IT have contributed to a massive explosion in the use of paper
and concomitant deforestation (Sellen and Harper 2001), through the utopia of reduced
energy consumption, where although IT has increased local energy efﬁciency, overall
GREEN DIGITS: TOWARDS AN ECOLOGY OF IT THINKING
587

energy consumption has skyrocketed, with IT installations being one of the highest
consumers of energy per unit of space occupied (Thatcher and Pingry 2007), IS has been
conspicuous in its failure to manifest large-scale, systemic efﬁciencies.
In terms of making the world a less onerous place to live, IT contributions are once
again paradoxical. For example, computers and robots were originally envisaged to
reduce work—they were labour-saving devices; however, research suggests that this has
not been the case. Indeed in many countries automation, although changing the types
of jobs people do, has been accompanied by an increase in the number of hours
humans work each week (Jackson 2008); machines that work tirelessly around the
clock, around the world, and around the year need humans to do the same. The same
goes for leisure: rather than increase leisure time, IT has blurred the distinction
between work and the personal, such that the latter is increasingly eroded (Rubery
et al. 2005). The irony here is that the very machines that we created are recreating us in
their own image.
The next promise is that of cleanliness: IS has promised a cleaner, less wasteful
world; the felicity of such claims is once again equivocal. For example, server farms
appear the epitome of high-tech cleanliness (especially when compared to heavy
industry such as steel); however, the disposal of IT equipment has become a major
environmental problem: toxic materials in components have been found to be detri-
mental to many forms of life—including humans (Grossman 2006). Indeed, approxi-
mately 93 per cent of the materials used in the production of computers and electronics
never end up in salable products and an estimated 99 per cent of the materials in
products used in their manufacture end up as waste within six weeks of their sales
(Weizsacker, Lovins, and Lovins 1997). Likewise, most products have been deliberately
designed for obsolescence (Slade 2006), a condition that has existed for decades
(Packard 1960).
Perhaps the most insidiously redolent of promises has been that of IT’s potential to
enhance and even transform education. It’s insidious because it’s so intuitively appeal-
ing. Education is all about information and thus information systems must by deﬁni-
tion enhance the endeavour. Yet research suggests the very opposite: information
systems can be inimical to education.
Consider the recent poster-child of IS enabled education: the one laptop per child
initiative. Laudable in its ideals (to bring IS to the poor), longitudinal research suggests
that such initiatives are detrimental to student learning (Cuban 2001; Malamud and
Pop-Eleches forthcoming), matched groups of students with and without laptops
clearly showing that those without laptops outperform (across subjects) those with
laptops. Indeed, not only is IS intensive education less effective than traditional, but it
also has a wider environmental footprint (Smith 2004); for example the environmental
cost of manufacturing, running, and disposing of laptops is greater than traditional
paper textbooks.
Moreover the more general relationship between ubiquitous information systems
and a more informed and better educated populace is being questioned. There is
growing concern that more information can result in less knowledge, or more facts
588
PIERRE BERTHON ET AL.

can result in confusion rather than clarity (Manjoo 2008). Consider the debate over
global warming; despite growing evidence and widespread promotion of the facts, the
number of Americans believing in climate change is decreasing (Eilperin 2009)! How
might this be? Procter (1991, 2001) argues that information ubiquity can be accom-
panied by a corresponding decrease in knowledge, or agnosis (from the Greek ‘without
knowledge’) amongst the general population; agnosis is a social process whereby
alternative narratives are constructed, typically by ideologically or ﬁnancially driven
groups, around a small subset of the available facts. Ideas (ideology) or money drives
the collection and interpretation of facts, rather than facts driving ideas. This inversion
of facts and knowledge is further compounded by the ease of selective search in
advanced information systems: ideology replaces knowledge both as the container
and driver of facts.
Indeed the wider iatrogenic effects of IS on human cognition are becoming apparent.
There is increasing concern that ubiquitous information systems are rewiring the
human brain with unforeseen consequences (see Rosen 2008). Research suggests that
information overload is destroying our ability to focus attention; nuanced reasoning is
replaced by simplistic black and white thinking; and reﬂection and creative thinking is
replaced by distraction and bounded and shallow cognition (Keim 2009). Obviously
more research is needed, but there is little doubt that IS tools are changing their makers
in unforeseen ways.
Allied with the promise of increased efﬁciencies has been the promise that IS will
deliver enhanced consumer satisfaction (cf. Day 1991). Yet the irony is that in recent
years, despite accelerated investment in service industries such as banking, both
productivity and customer satisfaction have deteriorated (Olazabal 2002). More broad-
ly technology, and IS speciﬁcally, offers the promise of a better and easier life, yet
paradoxically, as the rate of technological change in modern life has increased, happi-
ness and societal health have decreased. Rather than yielding their promise of happi-
ness, the technology has delivered a negative result (Tofﬂer 1970; Miringoff, Miringoff,
and Opdycke 1999).
Finally, there is little doubt that the apophthegm ‘global village’ is the corollary of the
connectivity. However, this connectivity is once again replete with contradictions. IS
has delivered the dream of instant communication between people and groups almost
anywhere on the planet: we live in a hyperconnected, socially networked world—
contact is only a click, swipe, or call away. Yet despite this, study after study has
demonstrated that it is precisely this technology of connection that is resulting in
increased isolation. As people spend more and more time in mediated interaction,
unmediated interaction is declining, resulting in a potential epidemic of loneliness,
depression, and concomitant diseases (Sigman 2009).
The point here is not to present some dystopian, Malthusian picture of technology,
but highlight the fact that intention and manifestation are typically at odds; and it is the
acknowledgement of this that may be critical if we are to use information systems to
help us out of the ecological predicament in which we ﬁnd ourselves.
GREEN DIGITS: TOWARDS AN ECOLOGY OF IT THINKING
589

In this chapter we explore the paradox of IT and IS and the promise of these as one
of the solutions to our ecological predicament. We explore Green IT by focusing on a
third, neglected level of information systems analysis: Information Views, or ‘ways of
thinking’ about information technology and systems. We suggest that it is this ignored
conceptual level that has in part contributed to the IT paradoxes. Speciﬁcally we
differentiate instrumental versus emergent thinking about technology, and identify
three paradigms that suggest very different uses of information technology to achieve
the goal of Green IT in the service of sustainability.
GREEN IT
..................................................................................................................
Terms such as green computing, Green IT, and Green IS have been used loosely and
interchangeably in government and industry for some years; all are closely linked to the
concept of sustainability. This latter term is generally considered to mean a strategy of
meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future genera-
tions to meet their own needs (Brundtland 1987: 8). This somewhat ambiguous
deﬁnition, privileges society over the environment, conﬂates fact, intent, and value,
and leaves a high degree of latitude for interpretation. Others have tried to operatio-
nalize the deﬁnition for practical implementation. Marshall and Toffel (2005) identify
four such frameworks of sustainability: the ecological footprint (Wackernagel and Rees
1996), the triple bottom line (Elkington 1998), the natural step (Nattrass and Altomare
1999), and the sustainable emissions and resource usage (Graedel and Klee 2002).
These are summarized in Table 22.1.
FROM INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
TO INFORMATION VIEWS
..................................................................................................................
Watson et al. (2008) differentiate Green information technology from Green informa-
tion systems. The former focuses primarily on the matter and energy embodiment of
information technology. It is concerned with issues such as efﬁciency, recycling of
materials, reduction or elimination of toxic compounds in manufacturing, renewable
energy, etc. In contrast Green IS focuses on the design and implementation of
information systems—the linking together of components into purposeful organiza-
tions. Here the focus is on systemic initiatives to manage the transport of matter,
energy, and information for optimum efﬁciency and effectiveness. Examples include
systems to manage the energy consumption of an airline ﬂeet, systems to manage trafﬁc
ﬂow, systems to optimize information streams over the internet, etc. However the
590
PIERRE BERTHON ET AL.

question must be asked: how do we decide the purpose of an information system?
What does it mean to produce an efﬁcient and effective technology or system? We
propose that what has been lacking in the debate around Green IT is not the technology
or the systems, but the ways of thinking that underpin each. The paradoxes outlined
above all too clearly show that despite the best intentions of designers and managers,
information technology has had a poor ecological track record. Why? Perhaps because
of our naive relationship to technology and our simplistic understanding of what it
means to be sustainable.
Green information views (Green IV) has two important elements—how we think
about technology and how we think about the environment. We discuss each in turn.
Table 22.1 Sustainability frameworks
The triple bottom
line
The natural step
The ecological
footprint
Sustainable
emissions and
resource usage
Organizations
pursuing
sustainability make
decisions based on
three criteria:
economic returns,
environmental
protection, and social
equity. These three
elements can be
combined: eco-
efﬁciency balances
economic and
environmental goals;
fair trade balances
economic activities
with social justice;
and environmental
justice balances
social equity with
environmental
protection.
A sustainable society
is one in which
human needs
worldwide are met,
but nature is not
subject to
systematically
increasing
concentrations of
substances extracted
from the earth’s
crust, concentrations
of substances
produced by society,
and degradation by
physical means.
Sustainability is
calculated by
comparing the
environmental
impact of speciﬁc
actions to the
limitations of the
earth’s natural
resources and
ecosystem
functionality: the
ratio of ‘how many
earths’ would be
required to provide
enough biologically
productive land area
to maintain the ﬂows
of resources and
wastes, if everyone
lived like a speciﬁc
person or group of
people.
A sustainable rate of
resource use can be
determined by: (i)
calculating the
available supply of
virgin materials
(mass); (ii) allocating
consumption of this
supply over a speciﬁc
time scale and
among the global
population (mass per
person per year); (iii)
accounting for
recycling and for
existing stockpiles
and then updating
the allocated
consumption rate;
and (iv) considering
this rate to be
the maximum
sustainable
consumption rate
and comparing it to
the current usage
rate.
GREEN DIGITS: TOWARDS AN ECOLOGY OF IT THINKING
591

RE-VIEWING TECHNOLOGY
..................................................................................................................
Heidegger (1977) notes that the common view of technology is twofold: ﬁrst technolo-
gy is instrumental—i.e. it is a means to an end; a means of getting something done.
Second, it is anthropological—i.e. the product of human activity; simply, humans
create technology. Whilst this view is undoubtedly correct, it is also partial and
misleading. Technology, Heidegger (1977) points out, stems from the Greek åÅ,
techne. There are two aspects to this term. First, techne is more than the Greek for the
activities and skills of the craftsperson, it also means the art of the mind; techne is a
‘bringing forth’, a ‘revealing’; it is a form of poiesis, a poetic creation. Second, from early
Greek times, the word techne is linked with episteme. Both words are essential parts of
knowing. Aristotle unites and differentiates thus: episteme and techne—the ‘what’ and
‘how’ of revelation. Heidegger’s etymological review of the word technology suggests a
very different meaning from the popular, instrumental view of technology as a means
to an end: technology is also a mode of revelation. Here Heidegger employs the Greek
word ºŁØÆ, aletheia which literally means ‘unveiling’ or ‘revealing’ and is also the
Greek word for ‘truth.’ Thus technology is a mode of aletheia, an act of revelation, a
process of bringing forth. The compass brings forth a world of magnetic ﬁelds; just as
the chronograph reveals a world of abstract time.
Once brought forth Heidegger argues that technology becomes a way of seeing: in
this context he uses the word gestell, best translated as enframing. Technology becomes
a frame of mind, a way of viewing the world: technology becomes a way of seeing. Thus
to the stem cell researcher, embryos become a resource for harvest, to the recycler, trash
becomes gold. Technology has both a physical and a conceptual dimension—and it the
conceptual dimension of enframing which Heidegger sees as the essence of technology.
To the dominant views of technology as instrumental and anthropologic, we might
add the views of technology as aletheia and gestell—technology as revelation and
enframing (cf. Berthon, Hulbert, and Pitt 2005). Technology can, therefore, be seen
as both emergent and anthropoetic—it creates new ends and shapes the humans that
created it— for the essence of technology is not the physical, it is the conceptual.
Technology is a frame of mind that shapes both the viewer and the viewed, the actor
and the acted. Our technology empowers and possesses us.
Conventionally, technology is seen as a neutral object, the product of people and a
tool to enable them to achieve speciﬁed ends. To this we can now add technology as an
active subject, a shaper of people and a revealer of new worlds. These four modes of
technology can be mapped by two axes. Technology can either be seen as a passive or
neutral object or an active subject or force; and technology is always viewed in relation
to the people who created it and to the wider environment or world. This is summar-
ized in Figure 22.1.
592
PIERRE BERTHON ET AL.

RE-VIEWING THE ENVIRONMENT
..................................................................................................................
The relationship between the environment and technology is confounded. In the
traditional view, technology is a neutral object produced by people as a means to an
end, nature a resource to be exploited. From this perspective, nature is subjugated as a
resource which technology can unlock, transform, and store for future use as needed
(Heidegger 1977). Technology applied in this way to transform and leverage nature to
our own ends does not remain merely a neutral object, but rather becomes an active
subject in shaping our view of nature and of technology itself. Through this shifting of
views, technology has become more than a tool to transform; it has become a means to
reveal our impact on the environment and it has become a producer of successive
generations of people who are more attuned to the environment and our technological
impact on it. As technology has moved from a neutral, passive state to an active
participatory state, our paradigm of interaction with nature has also shifted drastically.
The world’s market economy encompasses approximately half of the world popula-
tion, with one billion people in developed nations and two billion in emerging ones
(Hart 1997). In emerging nations, technology is used naively as the engine of growth to
enable rapid industrialization (and its associated urbanization) and through this
industrialization there is movement towards a more developed state. In much the
same way as their developmental predecessors, industrial cultures see nature as an
inexhaustible resource to be exploited at all costs to increase the standard of living to
Relationship
to World
Neutral
Object
Active
Subject
Instrumental
(means to an end)
Anthropologic
(product of people)
Anthropoetic
(producer of people)
Emergent
(mode of revelation)
Relationship
to Humanity
FIGURE 22.1 Four views of technology
GREEN DIGITS: TOWARDS AN ECOLOGY OF IT THINKING
593

that of the ‘developed’ world. Thus, they consume nature regardless of the cost or
impact, focusing solely on growth. Those in the poorest countries tend to misuse
natural resources often just to survive (Lawrence, Weber, and Post 2005). Information
technology, much in the same light as industrial technology, is seen merely as a tool for
growth, a means to achieve the end goal of development or survival.
Questioning the Industrial Model: The Efﬁciency Solution
The industrial model of treating the earth as a resource to be exploited emerged from
the Enlightenment and the rise of modern science; these ‘objectiﬁed’ the natural world
in a hitherto radical way. Human kind was set apart and above nature, which was seen
as needing to be subjugated to the will of man (sic). The exploitation of the natural
world proceeded unquestioned in mainstream Western culture until the 1960s when
the effects of unbridled harvesting of resources and unrestrained sowing of pollutants
became manifest to all but the most myopic denizens (Carson 1964). Thus, the
industrial model gave way to the post-industrial model.
While the ecological impact of the world’s emerging economies is evident (defores-
tation, desertiﬁcation, mass urbanization), it is the ecological footprint of the developed
world’s post-industrial consumer cultures which imparts the predominant planetary
impact. In these cultures, while the importance of nature is evident, society and nature
are separate. It is the responsibility of society to manage and exploit nature, but to do so
responsibly. The realization of the ﬁnality of nature has shifted the human–nature
relationship to one of stewardship in order to maintain the status quo of life and the
environment. Technology holds no more than a neutral role in achieving this goal. The
predominant mechanism employed is relentless technocratic efﬁciency—doing more
with less, reducing and reusing waste, and minimizing the impact that technology has
on nature. Information technology is viewed as an end unto itself and faces the same
demands for efﬁciency that all other technology faces.
Questioning the Efﬁciency Solution: The Simplify Model
Despite the fact that the efﬁciency model dominates much of current thinking (see
Forester Report 2009 for IT and Hawken, Lovins, and Lovins 1999 for industry), its
efﬁcacy is coming under increasing scrutiny. For example Price (2008) starts with an
interesting question: is modern efﬁciency inefﬁcient—does its constant quest to pare
down ‘extraneous’ elements in fact make life unsustainable—literally compromising
the ability of future generations to meet their own needs? The issue is that efﬁciency is
typically anthropocentrically deﬁned and over too short a time period. Efﬁciency for
whom and over what time period is seldom asked on the planetary level. The ques-
tioning of the efﬁciency or management paradigm and the concomitant questioning of
594
PIERRE BERTHON ET AL.

the Enlightenment legacy of viewing humans separate and above their environment
has led to radical rethinking.
Out of this arose the deep ecology movement which sees humans as fundamentally
and indeed spiritually a product of the earth. Its proponents champion a return to more
natural ways of living, reducing our dependence on high-tech solutions in favour of
simple, appropriate technology and a more harmonious and spiritual way of life. The
Amish might be illustrative of this model. This counterculture has developed across
both emerging and developed economies. This romantic desire to return to nature
produces a paradoxical relationship with technology. Technology is treated with
distrust and it is seen as the primary cause of society’s ecological and social problems
(pollution, globalization, conﬂict, poverty) but it also serves as an enabling tool of the
movement. Information technology is applied to higher purposes to enable the goals of
the movement.
Questioning the Simpliﬁcation Solution:
The Transformation Model
Despite the neutral (or ambivalent) role that technology has taken in the paradigms
described thus far, the anthropoetic impact of technology on society has resulted in the
emergence of a fourth wave or way of green that is itself a product of technology. It
rejects both the efﬁciency model as misguided and ‘back to nature’ as simply untenable.
It is epitomized in movements such as Viridian Design (cf. Steffen 2006). The perspec-
tive here is that what we think of as the ‘natural’ world is a myth; for there is not a drop
of water, a grain of soil, or a molecule of air that is unaltered by humanity. As Sterling
of Viridian Design argues:
‘Nature’ is over. The twentieth century did it in. There’s not a liter of seawater
anywhere without its share of PCB and DDT. An altered climate will reshufﬂe the
ecological deck for every creature that breathes. You can’t escape industrialism and
hide from the sky. It’s over. (Quoted in Roberston 2008)
This movement embraces the fact that humans are an intrinsic part of nature, but
inverts the relationship arguing that nature is now fundamentally ‘human’. Nature thus
transformed itself into a product of humanity rather than an entity unto itself. To them,
technology is no longer a tool to be leveraged, but rather a means to achieving a post-
human cybernetic existence. Information technology is fundamental to this culture and
serves a higher purpose, enabling the transformation of both society and the planet.
Each of the four paradigms of the human–nature interaction presented here—Exploit-
ative, Technocratic, Romantic and Transformative, is summarized in Table 22.2. The
ﬁrst two of these present a view of technology as neutral object while in the latter two,
technology is an active subject. In the last of these paradigms, Transformative, the impact
GREEN DIGITS: TOWARDS AN ECOLOGY OF IT THINKING
595

Table 22.2 Paradigms of human–nature interaction
Naive
Exploitative
Efﬁciency
Technocratic
Simplify Romantic
Evolve
Transformative
Strategy
exploit
Exploit nature
manage
Preserve nature
return
Return to nature
transform
Transform
nature
Culture
Primary goal
Industrial
culture.
Growth—at all
costs Increase
standard of
living—
regardless of
costs
Consumer
culture. Maintain
the status quo:
standard of
living whilst
minimizing
impact
Counter-culture.
Devolve Return to
a simpler way of
living
Cyber-culture.
Evolve; create
new world
Examples
Industrial:
Industrial
countries such
as China, India,
etc.
Post-industrial
Europe;
emerging
paradigm in
Western
business today
Deep Ecology:
Arne Naess,
Gandhi,
E. F. Schumacher’s
Small is Beautiful
and Meadows’s
Limits to Growth;
Honore’s In Praise
of Slow
Bright Green,
Bruce Stirling,
Viridian Green,
etc.
Relationship
with nature
Separate:
Nature is seen
as an
inexhaustible
resource to
exploit
Separate:
Nature is a ﬁnite
resource to
manage; humans
as stewards of
the natural world
Part:
We are a product
of nature, but have
lost touch with it—
we need to return.
Stresses our deep
spiritual
relationship with
nature. Return to
Eden
Part:
‘Nature is
over’—nature is
a product of
humanity;
Idealistic,
Creative,
Entrepreneurial
Relationship
with
technology
Naive:
Technology
seen as the
unproblematic
engine of
growth
Neutral:
Technology seen
as neutral. Focus
on efﬁciency—
minimizing the
impact of
technology
Ambivalent:
Ambivalence, even
mistrust of
technology.
Technology is seen
as a primary cause
of the problem
Utopian:
Belief in the
power of
technology to
transform,
post-human
View of IT
Internalist:
Bigger, more
powerful; IT an
end in itself
Internalist:
More efﬁcient;
do more with
less; IT an end in
itself
Telos:
Do less with less—
de-complexify;
IT used for a higher
purpose
Telos:
Use IT to
transform
ourselves and
the planet;
IT used for a
higher purpose
596
PIERRE BERTHON ET AL.

of technology on the culture is so profound that the very frame of reference for the
culture has been shifted.
CONCLUSION
..................................................................................................................
At the start of this chapter we argued for a third level of IT: to information technology
and information systems we need to add an integrating framework of information
views—or ways of thinking about technology and systems. We suggest that this new
level is particularly important as we contemplate technological solutions to the prob-
lem of global warming and planetary change, as IT solutions have in the past been
characterized by an etiology of opposite effects. For local problems this may have been
overlooked, but in an increasingly strongly interlinked and critically interdependent
world there are no local problems.
Drawing on the work of Heidegger we uncover two underappreciated aspects of
technology. To the mainstream views of technology as a product of people, created and
employed for instrumental ends, we must add a complementary view: technology as
the producer of people and as an emergent, evolving entity in and of itself. For this view
we realize that technology cannot be conﬁned to the instrumental—it will always
escape our control and change us and how we think of ourselves and our environment
in the process.
Turning to the environment, we see that our position towards nature has remarkable
parallels with our stance towards technology. Nature has been used instrumentally—as
a resource to be exploited. Even humanity’s genesis has until recently been thought of
as somehow apart from nature (e.g. Rosenstand 1994). Ironically, it has been technol-
ogy that has changed our relationship with nature: technology has revealed our
dependence upon our environment through our instrumental use of the environment.
This re-framing of our view of nature has produced a variety of different perspectives
on sustainability. Each offers us a very different vision of sustainability and the role of
Green IT.
The Technocratic solution presents a paradigm of thought focused on efﬁciency:
doing more with less. This level, we argue, is where the bulk of Green IT thinking is at
present, and will be a critical element to any ongoing strategy. It recognizes the ﬁnite
nature of resources and the importance of getting the maximum out of a given
resource; however, in and of itself the Technocratic perspective is incomplete. The
Romantic solution recasts the question of our relationship with the environment as a
‘losing touch’ with our natural being. This ‘fall’ is no felix culpa but rather a tragedy of a
spiritual dimension. Indeed it is this insight that can help inform Green IT: technology
and nature are more than value imbued—they are fundamental aspects of ourselves.
Nature and technology are the mirrors in which we discover ourselves; at the moment
what we see is not pretty. Finally, the Transformative solution offers us the compelling
vision of a mutual evolution. It ﬂips the Romantic perspective of ‘we are children of
GREEN DIGITS: TOWARDS AN ECOLOGY OF IT THINKING
597

nature’ to ‘nature is now our product’. It stresses radical innovation and entrepreneur-
ial solutions—rather than step back and let nature ‘heal’ itself, it argues for new forms
of nature and humanity.
We argue that Green IV needs to integrate insights from each of these paradigms.
From the naive industrial perspective we take the pragmatic instrumental perspective
that humanity will always ‘use’ nature to some extent, and, to some degree, all societies
must. Moreover, we need the Romantic to balance the Transformative, lest hubris
become our nemesis. Indeed the emergent aspect of technology should lead us to value
what the ancient Greeks termed sophrosyne, self-restraint, through a reﬂexive aware-
ness of self-limitations; clearly our ability to predict the future is severely compromised.
So in conclusion, what can we learn from Green IV? First, we cannot treat technol-
ogy in the way we have nature—instrumentally. Technology manifestly has emergent
properties in exactly the same way nature has. Second, any technological solution to
manage nature will escape our intentions. Third, every technological solution to
manage nature will transform us—radically. Fourth, rather than try to control nature
and technology we must build ﬂexibility into our responses to its emergence—and
ours. Fifth, rather than try to limit technological repercussions we need to instil values
into it, just as nature is now instilling values into us—this is particularly pressing as
machines reach and exceed humans. Finally, our future may be more determined by
our ecological mindsets than our ecological footprints.
NOTE
* Corresponding author; co-editor of ‘The Greening of IT’, Special Issue of the Journal of
Strategic Information Systems, 20(1), March 2011: 3–79.
REFERENCES
Berthon, P., Hulbert, J., and Pitt, L. (2005). ‘Consuming Technology: Why Marketers Get It
Wrong’, California Management Review, 48(1): 110–28.
Braungart, M., and McDonough, W. (2008). Cradle to Cradle: Remaking the Way we Make
Things. London: Jonathan Cape.
Brundtland, G. H. (1987). Our Common Future: Report of the World Commission on Envi-
ronment and Development. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carson, R. (1964). Silent Spring. New York: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Cuban, L. (2001). Oversold and Underused: Computers in the Classroom. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Day, G. S. (1991). ‘Learning about Markets. Report No. 91-117’, Marketing Science Institute,
Cambridge, MA.
598
PIERRE BERTHON ET AL.

Eilperin, J. (2009). ‘Fewer Americans Believe in Global Warming, Poll Shows’, Washington
Post, 25 November: 1.
Elkington, J. (1998). Cannibals with Forks: The Triple Bottom Line of 21st Century Business.
Gabriola Island, BC: New Society Publishers.
Forester Report (2009). Global IT Market Outlook. Forrester Research <http://www.forrester.
com/rb/Research/global_it_market_outlook_2009/q/id/46676/t/2>.
Graedel, T. E., and Klee, R. J. (2002). ‘Getting Serious about Sustainability’, Environmental
Science and Technology, 36: 523–9.
Grossman, E. (2006). High Tech Trash: Digital Devices, Hidden Toxics, and Human Health.
Washington, DC: Shearwater.
Hart, S. L. (1997). ‘Beyond Greening: Strategies for a Sustainable World’, Harvard Business
Review, 75(1): 66–76.
Hawken, P., Lovins, A. B., and Lovins, L. H. (1999). Natural Capitalism: Creating the Next
Industrial Revolution. Boston, MA: Little, Brown & Co.
Hayes, B. (2009). ‘Automation on the Job’, American Scientist, 97(1): 34–40.
Heidegger, M. (1977). The Question Concerning Technology, and Other Essays. New York:
Harper & Row.
Jackson, M. (2008). Distracted: The Erosion of Attention and the Coming Dark Age. New York:
Prometheus Books.
Keim, B. (2009). ‘Digital Overload Is Frying Our Brains’, Wired, February 06: 43–7.
Laitner, J., and Ehrhardt-Martinez, K. (2008). ‘Information and Communication Technolo-
gies: The Power of Productivity—How ICT Sectors are Driving Gains in Energy Produc-
tivity’. Report No. E081, American Council for an Energy Efﬁcient Economy, February.
Lawrence, A. T., Weber, J. E., and Post, J. (2005). Business & Society: Stakeholders, Ethics and
Public Policy. New York: McGraw Hill.
Malamud, O., and Pop-Eleches, C. (2008). ‘The Effect of Computer Use on Child Outcomes’,
University of Chicago, Working Paper No. wp.08.12.
———— (forthcoming). ‘Home Computer Use and the Development of Human Capital’,
Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Manjoo, F. (2008). True Enough: Learning to Live in a Post-Fact Society. New York: Wiley.
Marshall, J. D., and Toffel, M. W. (2005). ‘Framing the Elusive Concept of Sustainability:
A Sustainability Hierarchy’, Environmental & Scientiﬁc Technology, 39(3): 673–82.
Miringoff, M. L., Miringoff, M.-L., and Opdycke, S. (1999). The Social Health of the Nation:
How America is Really Doing. New York: Oxford University Press.
Nattrass, B., and Altomare, M. (1999). The Natural Step for Business: Wealth, Ecology and the
Evolutionary Corporation. Gabriola Island, BC: New Society Publishers.
Olazabal, N. G. (2002). ‘Banking the IT Paradox’, McKinsey Quarterly, 1: 47–51.
Packard, V. (1960). ‘Progress through Planned Obsolescence’, in V. Packard, The Waste
Makers. New York: Pocket, 45–57.
Price, A. (2008). Slow-Tech: Manifesto for an Over-wound World. New York: Atlantic.
Proctor, R. (1991).Value-Free Science? Purity and Power in Modern Knowledge. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
——(2001). ‘Anti-Agate: The Great Diamond Hoax and the Semiprecious Stone Scam’,
Conﬁgurations, 9: 381–412.
Robertson, R. (2008). ‘A Brighter Shade of Green: Rebooting Environmentalism for the 21st
Century’, Wired, June: 158–65.
GREEN DIGITS: TOWARDS AN ECOLOGY OF IT THINKING
599

Rosen, C. (2008). ‘People of the Screen’, New Atlantis: Journal of Technology and Society, Fall:
20–32.
Rosenstand, N. (1994). The Moral of the Story: An Introduction to Questions of Ethics and
Human Nature. Mountain View, CA: Mayﬁeld.
Rubery, J., Ward, K., Grimshaw, D., and Beynon, H. (2005). ‘Working Time, Industrial
Relations and the Employment Relationship’, Time & Society, 14: 89–111.
Sellen, A., and Harper, R. (2001). The Myth of the Paperless Ofﬁce. Boston, MA: MIT Press.
Sigman, A. (2009). ‘Technology and Community’, Biologist, January.
Slade, G. (2006). Made to Break: Technology and Obsolescence in America. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Smith, G. R. (2004). ‘How Green is Technology? The Paradox of Online Sustainable Educa-
tion’, International Journal of Sustainable Development & World Ecology, 11(3): 262–70.
Steffen, A. (2006). Worldchanging: A User’s Guide for the 21st Century. New York: Abrams,
Inc.
Thatcher, M., and Pingry, D. (2007). ‘Modeling the IT Value Paradox’, Communications of the
ACM, 50(8): 41–52.
Tofﬂer, A. (1970). Future Shock. New York: Random House.
Wackernagel, M., and Rees, W. (1996). Ecological Footprint: Reducing Human Impact on the
Earth. Gabriola Island, BC: New Society Publishers.
Watson, R., Boudreau, M.-C., Chen, A., and Huber, M. (2008). ‘Green IS: Building Sustainable
Business Practices’, The Global Text Project, <http://docs.globaltext.terry.uga.edu:8095/
anonymous/webdav/Information%20Systems/Green%20IS.pdf>.
Weizsäcker, E. U. V., Lovins, A. B., and Lovins, L. H. (1997). Factor Four: Doubling Wealth,
Halving Resource Use: The New Report to the Club of Rome. London: Earthscan.
600
PIERRE BERTHON ET AL.

c h a p t e r 2 3
...............................................................................................
ETHICS AND ICT
...............................................................................................
SIMON ROGERSON
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
Information has increasingly become the new lifeblood of society, its organizations
and its peoples. The dawn of the Information Society offers huge potential beneﬁts for
us all. Our dependence on information grows daily with the advance of information
and communication technologies (ICT) and its global application. ICT now inﬂuences
the way we live, work, socialize, learn, interact, and relax. We expect the information on
which we rely to be correct. The integrity of such information relies upon the
development and operation of computer-based information systems. Those who un-
dertake the planning, development, and operation of these information systems have
obligations to assure information integrity and overall contribute to the public good
(Rogerson 2001).
The Information Society can be a dangerous world. Indeed Johnson (1997) explains
that the potential beneﬁt of the Information Society is being devalued by antisocial
behaviour such as unauthorized access, theft of electronic property, launching of
viruses, racism, and harassment. Add to that list identity theft, spam, electronic
snooping, and aggressive electronic marketing, and it is clear that this new society is
not problem free (see also Chapter 17). Such issues raise new ethical, cultural, economic,
and legal questions. It is questionable whether legal or technological counter-measures
are and ever will be very effective in combating the ever changing antisocial behaviour in
the Information Society. The absence of effective formal legal or technological controls
presents grave dangers for us all (Rogerson 2004a). Even when controls are implemen-
ted the ICT has moved on and facilitated new ethical issues. In the absence of effective
controls we must rely upon ethics coupled with education and awareness. The added
advantage of this approach is that it not only addresses problematic issues within the
Information Society but also promotes its positive attributes.
This chapter focuses on the ethical perspective of ICT, which will be termed
computer and information ethics from now on in this chapter. The discussion starts

with a brief look at the roots of computer and information ethics focusing on the work
of Norbert Wiener. There then follows an overview of the many deﬁnitions of
computer and information ethics where the aim is to illustrate the breadth of this
multidisciplinary ﬁeld. Having laid some foundations, the chapter turns to application.
The section on practice considers two distinct issues. The ﬁrst is how to embed an
ethical perspective into information systems development and the second is to consider
the nature of ICT professionalism within the Information Society. A series of Informa-
tion Society challenges are then considered in turn. These include privacy, property,
culture, and crime. The ﬁnal substantive section looks at the future, paying particular
attention to how ICT continually increases choice in global interaction within a
dispersed community and between different and geographically distant communities
(see also Chapter 24).
ROOTS
..................................................................................................................
It may seem surprising but the roots of computer and information ethics are to be
found in the mid-1940s. This foundation lay unappreciated for many decades and has
only recently become widely accepted primarily through the scholarship of Terrell
Ward Bynum (see e.g. Bynum 2004, 2008) who has undertaken a detailed analysis of
the writings of Norbert Wiener. This section relies heavily upon Bynum’s work as it is
considered an appropriate interpretation of Wiener for today’s Information Society.
Wiener was a professor of mathematics and engineering at MIT in the USA. He
worked on electronic computer advances during the Second World War and with
colleagues created a new branch of applied science called cybernetics. Through his
work Wiener became aware of the huge social and ethical impacts this ﬂedgling ICT
would have. Bynum (2008) explains that Wiener ‘predicted that after the War, the
world would undergo a second industrial revolution—an automatic age with enormous
potential for good and for evil that would generate a staggering number of new ethical
challenges and opportunities’. Bynum’s analysis shows that Wiener discussed a range
of computer and information ethics related topics which are still very relevant today.
These include computers and security, computers and unemployment, responsibilities
of computer professionals, computers for persons with disabilities, computers and
religion, information networks and globalization, virtual communities, teleworking,
merging of human bodies with machines, robot ethics, and artiﬁcial intelligence.
Wiener (1950) had the insight to see ICT in the context of fundamental human values
such as access, freedom, happiness, health, knowledge, life, and opportunity. This
concept of core human values has been developed further by Moor (1998) where he
suggests this is the essential grounding for ethical judgement related to ICT. Bynum
(2008) suggests that the metaphysical ideas and analytical methods that Wiener
employed are so powerful and wide-ranging that they could help in identifying,
analysing, and resolving social and ethical problems associated with all kinds of ICT.
602
SIMON ROGERSON

These quotations from The Human Use of Human Beings (1950, 1954) illustrate
the signiﬁcance of Wiener’s work to computer and information ethics. Wiener wrote,
‘It is the thesis of this book that society can only be understood through a study of
the messages and the communication facilities which belong to it; and that in the
future . . . messages between man and machines, between machines and man, and
between machine and machine, are destined to play an ever-increasing part’ (1954:
16). ‘To live effectively is to live with adequate information. Thus communication and
control belong to the essence of man’s inner life, even as they belong to his life in
society’ (1954: 18); ‘ . . . communications in society . . . are the cement which binds its
fabric together’ (1954: 27). Wiener warned, ‘The choice of good and evil knocks at our
door’ (1954: 186).
The ﬁeld of computer and information ethics is relatively new. ‘It has existed only
since the late 1940s when Norbert Wiener created it. During the ﬁrst three decades, it
grew very little because Wiener’s insights were far ahead of everyone else’s’ (Bynum
2008). The start of a growing consciousness is illustrated by two important events. In
1976, Joseph Weizenbaum, the eminent MIT computer scientist, published his inﬂu-
ential book Computer Power and Human Reason in which he examined the dangers of
ICT and suggested that computers should never be allowed to make important
decisions because computers will always lack human qualities such as wisdom and
compassion. In October 1981 a group of concerned computer professionals from
Xerox/PARC and Stanford University started to have meetings articulating concerns
over the increasing role of computers in nuclear war and how the misuse of computers
would increase the risk of nuclear war. They adopted the name ‘Computer Profes-
sionals for Social Responsibility’ (CPSR). During the next year other CPSR groups
formed in other cities around the USA. Early in 1983 President Reagan announced
plans for the Strategic Defence Initiative (SDI). CPSR’s policy advice against SDI
swelled its membership ranks. CPSR quickly addressed other issues of professional
responsibility such as privacy and voting. CPSR is now an international organization
with chapters in over thirty countries. ‘In the past 25 years, information and computer
ethics has grown exponentially in the industrialised world, and the rest of the world has
begun to take notice’ (Bynum 2008). In the next section deﬁnitions from some of the
key players are considered.
DEFINITIONS
..................................................................................................................
According to van Luijk (1994) ethics comprises both practice and reﬂection. Ethical
practice is the conscious appeal to norms and values to which individuals are obliged to
conform, whilst reﬂection on practice is the elaboration of norms and values that
colour daily activity. Norms are collective expectations regarding a certain type of
behaviour whilst values are collective representations of what constitutes a good
society. The computer and information ethics ﬁeld considers both practice and
ETHICS AND ICT
603

reﬂection related to the development and application of ICT within society. It is a ﬁeld
of contrasting views which reﬂect differences in both discipline and experience of those
working in the ﬁeld. Bynum and Rogerson (2004: 17–20) discuss ﬁve different deﬁni-
tions which have credibility and together have helped shape the ﬁeld.
Maner’s Deﬁnition
The name ‘computer ethics’ was not commonly used until the mid-1970s when Walter
Maner (1980) began to use it. He deﬁned this ﬁeld of study as one that examines
‘ethical problems aggravated, transformed or created by computer technology’. Some
old ethical problems, he said, were made worse by computers, while others came into
existence because of computer technology. Maner (1996) showed how the key char-
acteristics of computers have led to a series of signiﬁcant ethical challenges. He
suggested that we should use traditional ethical theories of philosophers, such as the
utilitarian ethics of the English philosophers Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill, or
the rationalist ethics of the German philosopher Immanuel Kant.
Johnson’s Deﬁnition
In her book, Computer Ethics Deborah Johnson (1985) claims that computer ethics
studies the way in which computers ‘pose new versions of standard moral problems
and moral dilemmas, exacerbating the old problems, and forcing us to apply ordinary
moral norms in uncharted realms’. Like Maner before her, Johnson adopted the
‘applied philosophy’ approach of using procedures and concepts from utilitarianism
and Kantianism. But, unlike Maner, she did not believe that computers create wholly
new moral problems. Rather, she thought that computers gave a ‘new twist’ to ethical
questions that were already well known. Johnson (2004) later argues that as ICT
evolves it will become increasingly integrated into the human and natural world, and
consequently new profound ethical issues will arise. Johnson (2004: 74) claims that, ‘as
we become more and more accustomed to acting with and through [ICT], the
difference between ethics and computer [and information] ethics may well disappear’.
Moor’s Deﬁnition
In his seminal paper ‘What Is Computer Ethics?’, James Moor (1985) provided a
deﬁnition of computer ethics that is much broader and more wide-ranging than that
of Maner or Johnson. It is independent of any speciﬁc philosopher’s theory; and it is
compatible with a wide variety of approaches to ethical problem solving. Since 1985,
604
SIMON ROGERSON

Moor’s deﬁnition has been the most inﬂuential one. He deﬁned computer ethics as a
ﬁeld concerned with ‘policy vacuums’ and ‘conceptual muddles’ regarding the social
and ethical use of information technology. Moor (1985: 266) wrote,
A typical problem in Computer Ethics arises because there is a policy vacuum about
how computer technology should be used. Computers provide us with new capabil-
ities and these in turn give us new choices for action. Often, either no policies for
conduct in these situations exist or existing policies seem inadequate. A central task of
Computer Ethics is to determine what we should do in such cases, that is, formulate
policies to guide our actions. . . . A difﬁculty is that along with a policy vacuum there is
often a conceptual vacuum. Although a problem in Computer Ethics may seem clear
initially, a little reﬂection reveals a conceptual muddle. What is needed in such cases is
an analysis that provides a coherent conceptual framework within which to formulate
a policy for action.
Moor (1985: 269) explained that computer technology is genuinely revolutionary
because it is ‘logically malleable’:
Computers are logically malleable in that they can be shaped and moulded to do any
activity that can be characterised in terms of inputs, outputs and connecting logical
operations. . . . Because logic applies everywhere, the potential applications of comput-
ertechnology appearlimitless.The computer isthenearest thing wehavetoa universal
tool. Indeed, the limits of computers are largely the limits of our own creativity.
Bynum’s Deﬁnition
In 1989 Terrell Ward Bynum developed another broad deﬁnition of computer ethics
following a suggestion in Moor’s 1985 paper. According to this view, computer
ethics identiﬁes and analyses the impacts of information technology on social and
human values like health, wealth, work, opportunity, freedom, democracy, knowledge,
privacy, security, and self-fulﬁlment. Solution generation is not covered by this deﬁni-
tion. This very broad view of computer ethics employs applied ethics, sociology of
computing, technology assessment, computer law, and related ﬁelds. It employs con-
cepts, theories, and methodologies from these and other relevant disciplines. This
conception of computer ethics is motivated by the belief that, eventually, information
technology will profoundly affect everything that human beings hold dear.
Gotterbarn’s Deﬁnition
In the 1990s, Donald Gotterbarn became a strong advocate for a different approach to
computer ethics. From his perspective, computer ethics should be viewed as a branch of
professional ethics, concerned primarily with standards of good practice and codes of
conduct for computing professionals. Gotterbarn (1991) wrote:
ETHICS AND ICT
605

‘There is little attention paid to the domain of professional ethics—the values that
guide the day-to-day activities of computing professionals in their role as profes-
sionals. By computing professional I mean anyone involved in the design and
development of computer artefacts . . . The ethical decisions made during the de-
velopment of these artefacts have a direct relationship to many of the issues
discussed under the broader concept of computer ethics.
With this ‘professional ethics’ approach to computer ethics, Gotterbarn co-authored
the 1992 version of the ACM Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct and led a team
of scholars in the development of the 1999 ACM/IEEE Software Engineering Code of
Ethics and Professional Practice.
A deﬁnition for ICT
Given these differing deﬁnitions it would be useful to derive a common deﬁnition
which is applicable to the discussions in this chapter. Therefore computer and infor-
mation ethics is deﬁned as integrating ICT and human values in such a way that ICT
advances and protects human values, rather than doing damage to them which
therefore must include the formulation and justiﬁcation of policies for the ethical use
of ICT and carefully considered, transparent, and justiﬁed actions leading to ICT
products and services.
This deﬁnition provides a foundation on which to build some clear guidance. ICT is
a practical pursuit whose participants are signiﬁcantly affected by ethically volatile
situations (Rogerson, Weckert, and Simpson 2000). The practice element of ethics
mentioned earlier manifests itself in methods and procedures adopted in the develop-
ment of, for example, information systems, whereas the reﬂection element of ethics
manifests itself in, for example, professional codes of conduct which are concerned
with establishing what are the generalized ways of working that are acceptable to a
wider community. These two elements are now considered in more detail.
PRACTICE
..................................................................................................................
The ethical dimension of the ICT practice has two distinct elements: process and
product. Process concerns the activities of ICT professionals when undertaking re-
search, development, and service/product delivery. The ethical focus is professional
conduct. It is this focus which is typically addressed by professional bodies in their
codes of conduct. The aim is for professionals to be virtuous in Aristotelian terms. In
other words a professional knows that an action is the right thing to do in the
circumstances and does it for the right motive. For example, cutting proﬁt so that
more development time can be spent on making systems more accessible to those with
606
SIMON ROGERSON

limited ability, such as dexterity, is a virtuous action if it helps to overcome social
exclusion. Process is considered in the professionalism section below.
Product concerns the outcome of professional ICT endeavour. One of the issues of
ICT is to avoid systems being used for inappropriate secondary reasons, for example, a
security system which has been implemented to reduce the risk of property theft being
used additionally to monitor employee movement. Another issue is the thirst of the
ICT industry to add more and more facilities in future system releases. Both issues are
illustrations of unwarranted function creep. The emphasis should be on accessibility
and transparency of information systems so people can use them more easily and can
understand, where necessary, how such systems work internally. One ﬁnal issue
regarding product is to do with the increasing use of non-human agents based on
complex systems. Such agents might interact with humans, for example, those used on
the Internet to enable e-trading, or they might interact with each other, for example
agents which monitor the environment and order other agents to take remedial action
if necessary.
The ethics focus of the product element is technological integrity from, for example,
a Kantian or utilitarian perspective. This can be addressed by embedding ethics within
ICT products themselves. This might be as simple as building in ‘opt-in’ facilities in
service provision via the Internet whereby a person must ask to be informed of future
service offerings rather than having to request explicitly not to receive such informa-
tion by default. They might be more complex, for example, whereby a non-human
agent in telecare is programmed with deﬁned ethical principles so that it will only
instigate actions which are deemed to be societally acceptable. Product is considered in
the development section below.
Development
ICT applications are about satisfying a particular requirement or need so that people
can realize for example some economic and/or social and/or leisure objective. Consid-
eration of stakeholders should not be limited to those who are ﬁnancing the develop-
ment project or politically inﬂuential or using the developed information system but
broadened to be consistent with models of ethical analysis. Stakeholder must include
individuals or groups who may be directly or indirectly affected by the information
system and thus have a stake in the development activities. For example, the unelected
political candidate due to a poor voting machine interface is a stakeholder in the
development of an electronic voting system. Similarly, anyone who suffers identity
theft through a security ﬂaw in an information system is a stakeholder, albeit indirect,
of that system (Gotterbarn, Clear, and Kwan 2008: 435). Those stakeholders who are
negatively affected are particularly important regarding ethical sensitivity because they
are often the ones overlooked.
ETHICS AND ICT
607

Information systems developers must guard against the design principles where
users must adapt to ICT rather than ICT being moulded to users. The Design for All
(DfA) approach is a way forward. This is because DfA’s perspective is one of individu-
alism and acceptability (Stary 2001). Roe (2007: 1) explains that DfA is not a one-off
effort but an ongoing and permanent commitment over the longer term so that
throughout the design cycle of products and services the focus is always on ensuring
use by the broadest possible section of the population. DfA principles must focus on
understanding the potential impact on people. These people include those whose
behaviour/work process will be affected by the development or delivery of ICT systems
or whose circumstance/job will be affected by the development or delivery of ICT
systems or whose experiences will be affected by the development or delivery of
ICT systems (Gotterbarn and Rogerson 2005: 741). Such principles are found, for
example, in advice for designing for the elderly which includes: putting users centre
stage, respecting individuals’ wishes, realizing needs change, integrating social care
and healthcare (European Commission—Information Society and Media 2006: 6–7).
However, it is important to recognize that identiﬁed needs are often difﬁcult to turn
into feasible and realistic design requirements and subsequent speciﬁcations (Roe 2007:
3). Roe (2007: 133) cites the example of smart homes which include devices and
services that may have an impact on the privacy and the autonomy of users. Often
these effects are deeply embedded in the technology used to develop them and cannot
be removed when the system is ﬁnished. However, designers are predisposed to ignore
these issues, due frequently to the lack of knowledge and supporting methodologies,
guidelines, and tools. Therefore, Roe (2007: 200) argues that in order to prevent
undesired ethical impacts, it is necessary to provide designers with ethical or moral
guidelines. This is not a new call. For example, Gotterbarn (1992) suggests that
professionals must be aware of their professional responsibilities, have available meth-
ods for resolving non-technical ethics questions, and develop proactive skills to reduce
the likelihood of ethical problems occurring.
One such approach is the Software Development Impact Statement (SoDIS) process
which belongs to the family of issues-oriented approaches (see e.g. Hirscheim and
Klein 1989) used in information systems development. SoDIS takes a comprehensive
stakeholder perspective of the whole development cycle through considering each
development task within the structured/deﬁned plan of the information system project
(Gotterbarn and Rogerson 2005: 738) It expands existing information systems devel-
opment quantitative risk analysis methods by explicitly addressing a range of qualita-
tive and ethically grounded questions about the impacts of the information system
from a stakeholder perspective. ‘The use of qualitative best practice questions associates
a full range of stakeholders with the [information system] project tasks providing a
comprehensive risk analysis which helps identify social, professional and ethical risks
for a project. SoDIS is the ﬁrst fully-developed approach of this kind. It points the way to
achieving successful [information system] development . . . ’ (Gotterbarn and Rogerson
2005: 746). As Gotterbarn, Clear, and Kwan (2008: 442) explain, ‘The process of
developing a SoDIS requires the consideration of ethical development and the ethical
608
SIMON ROGERSON

impacts of [an information system] product. The SoDIS analysis process also facilitates
the identiﬁcation of new requirements or tasks that can be used as a means to address
the ethical issues.’ It is this type of explicit ethical consideration from a stakeholder
perspective which will reduce the risk of information system failure during implemen-
tation and/or operation. It will increase the chance of ﬁt for purpose systems which are
acceptable and adopted.
Professionalism
ICT professionals have specialized knowledge and often have positions with authority
and respect in the community. Their professional activity spans the management,
development, and operation of all kinds of applications. For this reason, they are able
to have a signiﬁcant impact upon the world, including many of the things that people
value. Along with such power to change the world comes the duty to exercise that
power in a socially responsible manner. Six social responsibility principles (Rogerson
2004b) establish an ethos of professionalism within ICT. These principles are as
follows:· Develop a socially responsible culture within work which nurtures moral individ-
ual action
· Consider and support the well-being of all stakeholders
· Account for global common values and local cultural differences
· Recognize social responsibility is beyond legal compliance and effective ﬁscal
management
· Ensure all business processes are considered from a social responsibility
perspective
· Be proactive rather than reactive.
Adherence to such principles can be problematic because of ICT professional relation-
ships. ICT professionals ﬁnd themselves in a variety of professional relationships with
other people (Johnson 1994), including: employer-to-employee; client-to-professional;
professional-to-professional; and society-to-professional. These relationships involve a
diversity of interests, and sometimes these interests can come into conﬂict with each
other. Socially responsible ICT professionals, therefore, have to be aware of possible
conﬂicts of interest and try to avoid them thereby adhering to the six principles. In line
with the six social responsibility general principles, speciﬁc guidance has been provided
in the codes of conduct of professional bodies such as the British Computer Society
(BCS), the Institute for the Management of Information Systems (IMIS), the Australian
Computer Society (ACS), the Association of Computing Machinery (ACM), and the
inﬂuential Software Engineering Code of Ethics and Professional Practice (Gotterbarn,
Miller and Rogerson 1999). In addition to such codes, professional bodies have
ETHICS AND ICT
609

established curriculum guidelines and accreditation requirements to help ICT profes-
sionals understand and manage ethical responsibilities.
This is because there are many ethical issues surrounding the decisions and actions
within the information systems ﬁeld and there are limitations on professional time to
respond to such issues. An ICT professional educated in ethical responsibilities will be
better placed to respond in a socially responsible manner. It is important to prioritize
these issues on the basis of impact on the public good and so focus effort on the ethical
hotspots (Rogerson 1997). It is some of these issues which are now considered in the
remaining sections of this chapter.
SOME CHALLENGES
..................................................................................................................
Privacy
Privacy is one of the earliest computer and information ethics issues to capture public
interest both across Europe and in the USA from the mid-1960s onwards. It continues
to be a hot topic because privacy is a fundamental right of individuals and is an
essential condition for the exercise in self-determination and the advances in technol-
ogy have facilitated more incursions into privacy. Much has been written about privacy
as it relates to ICT. Before ICT, privacy primarily referred to non-intrusion and non-
interference but that has now changed. There are those who propose that privacy is
about control over personal information (see e.g. Westin 1967; Miller 1971; Fried 1984;
Elgesem 1996). This is countered by an argument that control of personal information
is insufﬁcient to establish or protect privacy and that privacy is best deﬁned in terms of
restricted access rather than control (Tavani and Moor 2001). Privacy even extends to
our presence in public spaces or circumstances (Nissenbaum 1998) with the advent of,
for example, CCTV, electronic voting, and government-operated data matching. The
ability to restrict access to or control personal information is certainly an important
factor in sustaining privacy. Collste (2008) argues that the right to privacy exists, albeit
in varying degrees, across cultures as it is seen as an instrument for sustaining
autonomy, freedom, and personal relationships.
Organizations are increasingly computerizing the processing of personal informa-
tion. This may be without the consent or knowledge of the individuals concerned.
There has been a growth in databases holding personal and other sensitive information
in multiple formats of text, pictures, and sound. The scale and type of data collected
and the scale and speed of data exchange have changed with the advent of computers.
The potential to breach people’s privacy at less cost and to greater advantage continues
to increase. It is situations like this that have led to a growing unwillingness to
submit personal data to information systems. Furthermore, there is growing public
discernment and demand for evaluation of ICT trustworthiness (Camp, McGrath, and
Nissenbaum 2001).
610
SIMON ROGERSON

ICT privacy is a new twist on an old ethical problem, as Johnson (1985) would put it,
and involves issues not previously raised or that cannot be predicted. For example,
advances in genetic data have led to some interesting ethical questions as it can
accurately deﬁne genetic relatives and thus establish hereditary traits and diseases.
Individuals have certain rights to how and where that information is distributed but in
order to exercise those rights they will undoubtedly learn of their genetic proﬁles and
that is the new twist. Knowledge of one’s genetic proﬁle will undoubtedly affect the
individual’s self-perception, self-esteem, and lifestyle. Thus privacy in this situation
must also include an individual’s right not to know.
Balancing the rights and interests of different parties in a free society is difﬁcult. The
acceptable balance will be speciﬁc to the context of a particular relationship and will be
dependent upon trust between concerned parties and subscription to the principle of
informed consent. This balance might incur the problem of protecting individual
privacy while satisfying government and business needs. For example, a social services
department might hold sensitive information about individuals that provides an
accurate proﬁle of individual tendencies, convictions, and so on. The sharing of these
data with, for example, the local education authority in cases of child sex offenders
living in the area might be considered morally justiﬁed even though it might breach
individual privacy. Furthermore, once personal information is digitized and entered
into a computer on a network the information becomes greased data that can easily slip
across networks and into many different computers (Moor 1997). It leaves data
shadows across the whole network. As a result, personal information may no longer
be controlled and people may have unauthorized access to it. Unlike ordinary shadows,
our data shadows remain long after (and often permanently after) we have passed
through the network of conduits in the Information Society. Such problems are
indicative of the Information Society, where it is the norm to hold electronic personal
information about health, lifestyle, ﬁnance, buying habits, relationships, ethnicity,
gender, religion, genetic make-up, and much more.
Property
Ownership is having control of one’s property with the right to use it and the right to
decide whether and how others can use it. Ownership extends to intellectual property
which includes, for example, stories, poems, drawings, watercolour paintings, musical
recordings, paintings, photographs, computer programs, ﬁlms, and television pro-
grammes. Most forms of intellectual property can now have digital forms. Thus
intellectual property ownership is an important computer and information ethics
topic. At least four theories can be used when considering intellectual property rights.
Locke’s theory of labour argues that a person who mixes his/her labour with resources
that are not owned by others, and thereby creates a product, has gained the right to own
and control the resulting product. Hegel’s theory of personality argues that intellectual
ETHICS AND ICT
611

property is an expression or extension of the creator’s personality and therefore the
creator has the right to control it. Utilitarian theory of ownership argues that property
rights should be recognized, promoted, and protected as they provide incentives for
creative people to generate a continuous ﬂow of new creations, which in turn will
contribute to the greatest happiness for the greatest number of people. Finally, social
contract theory views ownership as a social agreement whereby the community agrees
to pass laws and create conditions that are conducive to property ownership and in
return owners agree to use their property in ways that society consider appropriate.
Software ownership continues to be controversial. Johnson (1994) argues that a
utilitarian framework is best for analysing software intellectual property rights because
it puts the focus on deciding ownership in terms of affecting continued creativity and
development of software. She argues that software developers would not invest the
necessary time and signiﬁcant funds if they could not get the investment back in the
form of licence fees or sales of software. In contrast, Stallman (1992) claims that current
forms of software ownership are unjust and immoral, inﬂict many kinds of harm on
society, and should be eliminated. Using utilitarian theory of ownership he concludes
that current laws restrict and discourage creativity and invention and therefore should
be abandoned in favour of free software. Stallman’s position led to the open source
movement. These two opposing positions are described by de Laat (2005) as the private
regime and public regime. The private regime is based on exclusion of outsiders.
Organizations use secrecy, copyright, and patents to protect their intellectual properties
from imitation and theft by others. The public regime is based upon property rights
being used to include others through open source licences and regulated commons
where intellectual property is freely exchanged and discussed.
Copies of digital intellectual property are identical to the originals. Owners of
intellectual property can easily ﬁnd they are unable to sell, lease, or rent their property,
thereby making a proﬁt, because of the ease and trivial cost of creating digital copies
which can then be easily distributed and sold cheaply or even disseminated for free as
was the case with Napster music ﬁle swapping and Morpheus movie swapping. This
latter case of peer-to-peer software has been ethically scrutinized by Spinello (2005). He
argues that those who provide peer-to-peer software are accomplices in wrongdoing if
they deliberately design their software to enable illicit copying of copyrighted music
and movie ﬁles.
Overall, where software contains ideas and knowledge that can beneﬁt society as a
whole, clashes can occur between the owner, who has the right to exploit the product
commercially, and society which has a general right to access and beneﬁt from it. An
equitable balance must be found that takes into account these competing rights. From
an ethical perspective there are two fundamental questions that summarize this debate
and that need to be answered regarding software. Who owns the software? Who has the
right to modify, distribute, or use it?
612
SIMON ROGERSON

Culture
Culture can be deﬁned as the totality of shared meanings and interpretations of a given
group or community. Groups or communities can align with, for example, countries or
geographical regions, faiths, political ideologies, organizations, or social interests. They
can be physically or virtually constructed. Cultures possess a normative element which
lays out how things ought to be and how community members are expected to behave.
These norms are the culture’s ethics from which implicit cultural values can be derived
(Stahl, Rogerson, and Kashmeery 2007). Common core values do exist that we all share
such as life, happiness, ability, freedom, knowledge, resources, and protection (Moor
1998). It is this which enables alignments among differing cultural traditions to prevail
which Hongladarom and Ess (2007) term harmonies. For instance, it is an ethical
harmony that Collste (2008) is drawing upon when he suggests that privacy exists in all
cultures but that they might differ when it comes to the question of how to balance a
right to privacy against other social goods. In some cultures privacy is given more
weight, in others less.
Everyone belongs to one or more cultural communities and so, as Hongladarom and
Ess (2007) point out, it is impossible to consider ICT from a culturally neutral
perspective. For example, Brey (2006) describes a positive view of the Internet from a
libertarian ideology which is in marked contrast with the negative view he describes
from the perspective of Orthodox Judaism. This cultural variability has been explored
by Nance and Strohmaier (1994). They suggest there are two important dimensions to
consider regarding cultural variability. The ﬁrst dimension is the continuum from
individualism to collectivism. Individualism emphasizes self-interest and promotes the
self-realization of talent and potential. Its demands are universal. Collectivism empha-
sizes pursuit of common interests and belonging to a set of hierarchical groups where,
for example, the family group might be placed above the job group. The demands on
group members are different to those on non-group members. The second dimension
concerns cultural differences in communication referred to as low context communi-
cation and high context communication. In the former the majority of the information
resides in the message itself whilst in the latter the communication is implicit. Nance
and Strohmaier (1994) suggest that the USA utilizes low-context communication
whilst Japan uses high context. So even with a shift towards cultural homogenization
through ICT usage, the variability that remains makes it very challenging to provide
information or conduct a debate in a way that is acceptable to all (Fairweather and
Rogerson 2003). It involves establishing a set of common behavioural standards whilst
ensuring that there is no dominant participant. The current Internet seems a long
distance from this position.
It is clear from this discussion that computer and information ethics must embrace a
cultural perspective. The cultural groups and communities we live in are characterized
by their relationship to ICT. Terms such as Information Society and Global Village are
indicative of our awareness of the importance of ICT on our cultures (Stahl, Rogerson,
ETHICS AND ICT
613

and Kashmeery 2007). For example, on the one hand ICT enables social institutions to
function whilst on the other hand social institutions accepts the use and development
of ICT in their midst. There is a two-way relationship between ICT and culture in
which ICT must be adaptable to culture and culture must be tolerant of ICT. The social
and cultural consequences of ICT must be considered within this relationship. Brey
(2006) suggests that there are three ways to change the social and cultural consequences
of ICT: technological delegation which involves ICT redesign to realize a different
outcome, structuration which changes the social context in which ICT is used, and
signiﬁcation which changes the way ICT is described, presented, and understood. An
ICT professional primarily impacts the ﬁrst, might impact the third, but has little
inﬂuence on the second.
Those working in ICT must be culturally and ethically sensitive as well as having the
moral desire to deliver ICT products and services are culturally acceptable either
through the ethical harmonies of Hongladarom and Ess (2007) or Brey’s cultural
adaptability (Brey 2006). Whichever way it is achieved it is clear that an ICT-dependent
Information Society must be tolerant of the global moral pluralism (Vedder 2001). This
has yet to be covered explicitly in professional practice guidelines.
Crime
As ICT becomes more widely used and is used in more domains, the risk of misuse
increases and the detrimental impacts of such acts are likely to be greater for society,
organizations, and individuals. The laws around the world have struggled to address
these new forms of criminal activity. It is a classic Moorian policy vacuum which is
slowly being addressed. The Convention on Cybercrime is the ﬁrst international treaty
seeking to address ICT-related crime. It was drawn up by the Council of Europe (2001)
in cooperation with Canada, Japan, and the USA, and adopted on 8 November 2001.
The Convention lays out a framework within which ICT-related crime can be ad-
dressed. This framework is summarized as:
Offences against the conﬁdentiality, integrity and availability of computer data and
information systems
Illegal access
Illegal interception
Data interference
System interference
Misuse of devices
Computer-related offences
Computer-related forgery
Computer-related fraud
Content-related offences
614
SIMON ROGERSON

Offences related to child pornography
Offences related to infringements of property ownership
Offences related to infringements of copyright and related rights.
The framework provides good coverage but there are some omissions. For example,
under content-related offences, it is unclear why all pornography or content which
incites hatred are not included. Nevertheless, it is possible to categorize most of
incidents of ICT misuse. The Parliamentary Ofﬁce of Science and Technology (2006)
suggests there are two types of incidents: old crimes conducted using computers as a
tool and new types of crime made possible by speciﬁc types of ICT. Examples of old
crimes are storage of illegal images on a hard disk instead of in print, harassment using
mobile telephones, illegal downloads of music, and conﬁdence tricks involving spoof
emails and fraudulent websites to acquire sensitive information known as phishing.
Examples of new crimes are denial of service attacks which prevent ICT resources
being available to intended users, gaining unauthorized access to an ICT system
through hacking, and releasing a virus to delete stored data.
Whilst ICT-related crime is a legal consideration it is also an ethical consideration.
In creating laws account must be taken of civil liberties. This is particularly important
within the Information Society. There are civil liberties concerns about the Convention
on Cybercrime. For example, the treaty allows information to be exchanged between all
the national governments signing up to the treaty thus creating seamless monitoring of
activities using electronic networks across Europe. The treaty’s common approach fails
to take into account cultural differences. An act deemed criminal in the country of the
target of the crime may not be considered so in the country from which the offending
act was launched. For example, the attitude towards nudity is different across cultures
and this has led to different legal positions on the availability of images of nudes over
the Internet.
Spinello (1995) argues that organizations and individuals are ethically obliged to
protect the systems and information entrusted to their care and must strive to prevent
or minimize the impact of computer misuse incidents. He suggests that those stake-
holders at greatest risk from a computer misuse incident might be party to decisions
made concerning security arrangements. He argues that computer misuse offences
should not be treated lightly, even if the detrimental outcome is negligible, because, at
the very least, valuable resources will have been squandered and property rights
violated. Spinello also points out that a balance has to be struck regarding stringent
security measures and respect for civil liberties. Threats to business and personal
computers and information assets are an everyday menace. It is essential that organi-
zations and individual users identify the vulnerabilities and plan for corrective action to
thwart these threats. Indeed, there is a dual responsibility regarding computer misuse.
Organizations have a duty to minimize the temptation of perpetrating computer
misuse whilst individuals have a responsibility to resist such temptations. ICT profes-
sionals have a responsibility not to facilitate computer crime. For example, it is
unacceptable to use programming languages which easily allow buffer overloading
ETHICS AND ICT
615

because this is the most common way to break into computer systems and commit
offences against conﬁdentiality and integrity.
THE FUTURE
..................................................................................................................
Those who have tried to forecast the next technological advances are usually incorrect.
ICT has a track record of unpredictability in the speciﬁc nature and consequent impact
of these future advances. The only certain thing is that there will always be signiﬁcant
advances and these will always impact upon society and its people. For this reason the
ethical input from the onset of ICT development is essential. Consider just three views
of the future.
Vaughn (2006: 8–14) suggests that there are four key ICT trends; ever-increasing
computational power plus decreasing size and cost; technology advances enabling new
types of interfaces; ability to be connected anywhere, anytime with services on demand;
and creation of virtual places, service providers, and products. These general trends can
be seen in the topics of new developments and dramatic inputs discussed by Baase
(2009: 20–37) which include amateur creative works using blogs and video sharing;
human connections through email, cell phones, and social networking; collaborative
efforts among strangers using wikis; artiﬁcial intelligence, robotics, and motion sens-
ing; tools for people with disability; and ﬁnally wearable and invasive ICT. The FP7
European funded project, ETICA looks at ICT in ten to ﬁfteen years’s time in an
attempt to identify the ethical issues in advance. The landscape of ICT looks very
different with the following advances suggested: concurrent terra-device computing;
quantum information foundations and technologies; bio-chemistry-based ICT;
human-computer conﬂuence; self-awareness in autonomous systems; molecular-scale
devices and systems; and, ﬁnally, brain-inspired ICT which focuses on how the brain
processes information and/or how it communicates with the peripheral nervous
system, and to explore potential ICT applications of this (Stahl and Rogerson 2009).
Two broad issues which are likely to continue to impact on the peoples of the world
are ICT in the context of globalization and ICT in the context of inclusion.
Global
One of the biggest changes to occur with the advent of ubiquitous ICT is the arrival of
what is often called the global village. Indeed Moor (1998) explains that ‘The prospects
of a global village in which everyone on the planet is connected to everyone else with
regard to computing power and communication is breathtaking. What is difﬁcult to
comprehend is what impact this will have on human life. Surely some of the effects will
be quite positive and others quite negative.’ Once people had to go to a particular place
616
SIMON ROGERSON

in order to communicate but now communication comes to people. Through such
communication the global village has a global reach but yet must still be locally
sensitive if it is to be an acceptable space, albeit virtual space, in which to exist.
Traditional borders and barriers between countries have now become less meaning-
ful because people and organizations in most countries are interconnected by the
Internet. Different kinds of social processes occur which are neither locally limited
nor territorially limited (Collste 2008). For this reason, individuals, companies, and
organizations in every culture can engage in global business transactions, distance
education, remote employment, on-line discussions of social and political issues,
sharing and debating of values and perspectives. The question is whether this global
dialogue brings about better understanding between peoples and cultures resulting in
new shared values and goals or new national and international laws and policies. Some
argue that the individual cultures will become diluted, leaving a global homogenized
society. Others argue that the global heterogeneous demography will remain. If so it is
likely that the remaining cultural diversity will result in great national differences
which in turn lead to variability in ICT acceptance (Roe 2007). This is problematic
for on-line infrastructures such as the Internet as there is a tendency towards a one-
service provision which is culturally neutral. Consider these three examples related to
publication, commerce, and medicine.
Publication. If sexually explicit materials are provided on a website in a culture in
which they are permitted, and then they are accessed by someone in a different culture
where such materials are outlawed as obscene, whose laws and values should apply?
Should the offending person in the ﬁrst culture be extradited to the second culture and
prosecuted there as a purveyor of pornography? Should the values of the ﬁrst culture be
permitted to undermine those of the second culture via the Internet? How can such
cultural clashes be reasonably resolved? One suggestion that is sometimes offered to
help avoid or resolve cultural clashes on the Internet is to avoid doing anything that
might offend someone—to be sensitive to the values and beliefs of cultures other than
one’s own. But how does one know what could be offensive to others? Almost anything
could offend somebody somewhere; so does this mean that we should simply stop
using the Internet?
Commerce. When people in one country purchase goods and services from vendors
in another country, who should regulate or tax the transactions? Will electronic
commerce in a global market detrimentally affect local business or local tax collections?
What new laws, regulations, rules, practices should be adopted, and who should create
or enforce them? How will global electronic commerce affect the gap between rich
nations and poor nations? Will that gap get even wider? Will the Internet lead to a new
form of colonialism in which the information rich hold power over the information
poor? (See also Chapter 24.)
Medicine. Medical advice and psychological counselling on the Internet, keyhole
surgery conducted at a distance, medical tests and examinations over the net, on-line
prescriptions for medicine written by doctors in one part of the world for patients in
other parts of the world are just a few of the medical services and activities that already
ETHICS AND ICT
617

exist via the Internet. How safe is on-line medicine? Who will have access to sensitive
information held in electronic patient records? Who should regulate, license, and
control cyber medicine?
These global issues demand global ethical consideration. For the ﬁrst time in history,
efforts to develop mutually agreed standards of conduct, and efforts to advance and
defend human values, are being made in a truly global context (Gorniak-Kocikowska
1996). Ethics and values will be debated and transformed in a context that is not limited
to a particular geographic region, or constrained by a speciﬁc religion or culture. This
may very well be one of the most important social developments in history. Indeed
Collste (2008: 76) argues,
When societies exist isolated from each other, they will develop different moral
standards. However, when there is interaction between individuals belonging to
different societies one can . . . expect an interchange of moral norms and values . . .
With increasing interactions of individuals belonging to different societies one can
expect a convergence of moral standards in the direction towards universal values.
Inclusion
Speciﬁc attention needs to be given to those groups in society that are at high risk of
being excluded, due to a wide variety of reasons such as location, age, gender, disability,
literacy, and culture (European Commission—Information Society and Media 2006).
Despite the many new opportunities for improvement in the daily lives of individuals
with disabilities, including work, education, travel, entertainment, healthcare, and
independent living, there is a risk that ICT could set people apart, create new barriers,
and increase social exclusion. Indeed, ICT advances can pose new barriers to people
with disabilities, including loss of access to products they had access to before the
advances in technology (Vaughn 2006: 21–36). For example, the advent of electronic
hand-held readers for books is changing the process of publication and could result in
inaccessibility of books and other printed material by those people without a suitable
reader. Whilst ICT means for many of us increased comfort and improved functioning,
the same issues can mean for disadvantaged people the difference between dependency
and autonomous living (Roe 2007: 188). For example, the advances in Internet
shopping with facilities to buy and arrange delivery of groceries might lead to both
fewer supermarkets and increased prices in shops, both of which have a greater impact
on poorer members of society than on richer ones.
Computer and information ethics demands we look beyond legal compliance to
moral requirements when planning, developing, and implementing ICT systems. This
is particularly so regarding e-inclusion. Törenli (2006: 435) argues that if the utilization
of ICT opportunities in disadvantaged groups is left purely to time or market forces, e-
exclusion will continue to increase rapidly. Indeed he points out that market-led ICT
strategies take too little account of the plight of the disadvantaged groups (Törenli
618
SIMON ROGERSON

2006: 452). He suggests that under these conditions the problems caused by the present
inequalities in society would reach new proportions. Warren (2007) discusses this in
relation to those living in rural areas and their access to the Internet. He argues that
‘The Internet is becoming embedded in society so rapidly that it is becoming a default
medium for anyone wishing to provide information, to perform transactions, to create
civic engagement’ (2007: 385). There is an increasing cost-effectiveness of producing
information only in electronic form. Those without access to the Internet, or intermit-
tent access while travelling, will be penalized and indeed excluded as more and more
information, which is essential to our lives, is available only via the Internet. Warren
(2007) explains that the Internet offers signiﬁcant beneﬁts for rural dwellers in that it
helps to overcome the barriers of distance and social dispersion. Therefore, he argues
that the loss for those without Internet access in rural areas is greater than for those in
urban areas.
And Finally . . .
In the Information Society individuals are subjected to e-junkmail, e-money, e-com-
merce, e-library, e-identity, e-education to mention but a few. Whether these are
beneﬁcial depends on a number of factors, some of which have been discussed here.
An Information Society that empowers everyone including those with disabilities and
less fortunate members of society, and sustains equality of opportunity regardless of
race, colour, or creed is achievable. Governments, policy makers, developers, and
service providers of the Information Society, have the wherewithal to balance global
common values and local cultural differences. They must have the commitment as well,
else apocalypse beckons.
REFERENCES
Baase, S. (2009). A Gift of Fire: Social, Legal and Ethical Issues for Computing and the Internet,
3rd edn. New York: Pearson Education.
Brey, P. (2006). ‘Evaluating the Social and Cultural Implications of the Internet’, Computers
and Society, 36(3): 41–8.
Bynum, T. W. (2004). ‘Ethical Challenges to Citizens of “The Automatic Age”: Norbert
Wiener on the Information Society’, Journal of Information, Communication and Ethics
in Society, 2(2): 65–74.
——(2008). ‘Computer and Information Ethics’, in Edward N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter edn.), accessed at <http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
win2008/entries/ethics-computer/> on 5 April 2009.
——and Rogerson, S. (eds.) (2004). Computer Ethics and Professional Responsibility. Oxford:
Blackwell Publishing.
ETHICS AND ICT
619

Camp, J., McGrath, C., and Nissenbaum, H. (2001). ‘Trust: A Collision of Paradigms’, Faculty
Research Working Papers Series, John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA.
Collste, G. (2008). ‘Global ICT-ethics: The Case of Privacy’, Journal of Information, Commu-
nication and Ethics in Society, 6(1): 76–87.
Council of Europe (2001) ETS No. 185—Convention on Cybercrime, <http://conventions.
coe.int/Treaty/EN/Treaties/Html/185.htm>, accessed 26 April 2009.
de Laat, P. B. (2005). ‘Copyright or Copyleft? An Analysis of Property Regimes for Software
Development’, Research Policy, 34(10): 1511–32.
Elgesem, D. (1996), ‘Privacy, Respect for Persons, and Risk’, in C. Ess (ed.), Philosophical
Perspectives on Computer-Mediated Communication. Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 45–66.
European Commission—Information Society and Media (2006). Information Society and
Inclusion: Linking European Policies. Brussels: European Communities.
Fairweather, N. B., and Rogerson, S. (2003). ‘The Problems of Global Cultural Homogenisa-
tion in a Technologically Dependent World’, Information, Communication & Ethics in
Society, 1(1): 7–12.
Fried, C. (1984). ‘Privacy’, in F. D. Schoeman (ed.), Philosophical Dimensions of Privacy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 203–22.
Gorniak-Kocikowska, K. (1996). ‘The Computer Revolution and the Problem of Global
Ethics’, Science and Engineering Ethics, 2(2): 177–90.
Gotterbarn, D. (1991). ‘Computer Ethics: Responsibility Regained’, National Forum: The Phi
Beta Kappa Journal, 71: 26–31.
——(1992). ‘The Use and Abuse of Computer Ethics’, Journal of Systems and Software,
17: 75–80; reprinted in J. Weckert (2007) Computer Ethics. Aldershot: Ashgate, 57–62.
——Clear, T., and Kwan, C. (2008). ‘A Practical Mechanism for Ethical Risk Assessment: A
SoDIS Inspection’, in K. E. Himma and H. T. Tavani (eds.), The Handbook of Information
and Computer Ethics. New York: John Wiley & Son.
——Miller, K., and Rogerson, S. (1999). ‘Software Engineering Code of Ethics is Approved’,
Communications of the ACM, 42(10): 102–7.
——and Rogerson, S. (2005). ‘Next Generation Software Development: Responsible Risk
Analysis Using SoDIS’, Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 15
(May): 730–50, <http://aisel.aisnet.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=3162&context=cais>.
Hirschheim, R., and Klein, H. (1989). ‘Four Paradigms of Information Systems Development’,
Communications of the ACM, 33(10): 1199–216.
Hongladarom, S., and Ess, C. (eds.) (2007). Information Technology Ethics: Cultural Perspec-
tives. Hershey, PA: Idea Group Inc.
Johnson, D. G. (1985). Computer Ethics. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall (2nd edn. 1994,
3rd edn. 2000, 4th edn. 2009).
——(1994). Computer Ethics, 2nd edn. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
——(1997). ‘Ethics Online’, Communications of the ACM, 40(1): 60–5.
——(2004). ‘Computer Ethics’, in L. Floridi (ed.), Philosophy of Computing and Information.
Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 65–75.
Maner, W. (1980). Starter Kit in Computer Ethics. Zurich: Helvetia Press (published in
cooperation with the National Information and Resource Center for Teaching Philosophy)
(originally self-published by Maner in 1978).
——(1996). ‘Unique Ethical Problems in Information Technology’, Science and Engineering
Ethics, 2(2): 137–54.
620
SIMON ROGERSON

Miller, A. (1971). The Assault on Privacy: Computers, Data Banks, and Dossiers. Ann Arbor,
MI: University of Michigan Press.
Moor, J. H. (1985). ‘What Is Computer Ethics?’, Metaphilosophy, 16(4): 266–75.
——(1997), ‘Towards a Theory of Privacy in the Information Age’, Computers and Society, 27
(3): 27–32.
——(1998). ‘Reason, Relativity, and Responsibility in Computer Ethics’, Computers and
Society, 28(1): 14–21.
Nance, K. L., and Strohmaier, M. (1994). ‘Ethical Accountability in the Cyberspace’, Ethics in
the Computer Age. Gatlinburg, TN: ACM, 115–18.
Nissenbaum, H. (1998). ‘Protecting Privacy in an Information Age: The Problem of Privacy in
Public’, Law and Philosophy, 17: 559–96.
Parliamentary Ofﬁce of Science and Technology (2006). ‘Computer Crime’, Postnote, October
(271).
Roe, P. R. (ed.) (2007). Towards an Inclusive Future: Impact and Wider Potential of Informa-
tion and Communication Technologies, a COST 219ter Report. Brussels: COST.
Rogerson, S. (1997). ‘Software Project Management Ethics’, in C. Myers, T. Hall, and D. Pitt
(eds.), The Responsible Software Engineer. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 100–6.
——(2001). ‘A Practical Perspective of Information Ethics’, in P. Goujon and B. H. Dubreuil
(eds.), Technology and Ethics: A European Quest for Responsible Engineering. Leuven:
Peeters, 305–25.
——(2004a). ‘The Virtual World: A Tension between Global Reach and Local Sensitivity’,
International Journal of Information Ethics, November, 2(002-01), <http://www.i-r-i-e.net/
inhalt/002/ijie_002_22_rogerson.pdf>, accessed 5 April 2009.
——(2004b). ‘Aspects of Social Responsibility in the Information Society’, in G. I. Doukidis,
N. A. Mylonopoulos, and A. Pouloudi (eds.), Social and Economic Transformation in the
Digital Era. Hershey, PA: IDEA Group Publishing, 31–46.
——Weckert, J., and Simpson, C. (2000). ‘An Ethical Review of Information Systems Devel-
opment: The Australian Computer Society’s Code of Ethics and SSADM’, Information
Technology and People, 13(2): 121–36.
Spinello, R. A. (1995). Ethical Aspects of Information Technology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
——(2005). ‘Secondary Liability in the Post Napster Era: Ethical Observations on MGM
v. Grokster’, Journal of Information, Communication and Ethics in Society, 3(3): 121–30.
Stahl, B. C., and Rogerson, S. (2009). ‘Landscapes of Ethical Issues of Emerging ICT Applica-
tions in Europe’, CEPE (Computer Ethics Philosophical Enquiry) 2009. Corfu: Ionian
University, 26–8 June.
————and Kashmeery, A. (2007). ‘Current and Future State of ICT Deployment and
Utilisation in Healthcare: An Analysis of Cross-cultural Ethical Issues’, in S. Hongladarom
and C. Ess (eds.), Information Technology Ethics: Cultural Perspectives. Hershey, PA: Idea
Group Inc., 169–83.
Stallman, R. (1992). ‘Why Software should be Free’, in T. W. Bynum, W. Maner, and
J. L. Fodor (eds.), Software Ownership and Intellectual Property Rights. New Haven, CT:
Research Center on Computing and Society, Southern Connecticut State University, 35–52.
Stary, C. (2001). ‘User Diversity and Design Representation: Towards Increased Effectiveness
in Design for All’, Universal Access in the Information Society, 1(1): 16–30.
ETHICS AND ICT
621

Tavani, H. T., and Moor, J. H. (2001). ‘Privacy Protection, Control of Information, and
Privacy-Enhancing Technologies’, in R. A. Spinello and H. T. Tavani (eds.), Readings in
CyberEthics. Sudbury, MA: Jones & Bartlett, 378–91.
Törenli, N. (2006). ‘The “Other” Faces of Digital Exclusion: ICT Gender Divides in the
Broader Community’, European Journal of Communication, 21: 435–55.
van Luijk, H. (1994). ‘Business Ethics: The Field and its Importance’, in B. Harvey (ed.),
Business Ethics: A European Approach. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Vaughn, J. R. (2006). Over the Horizon: Potential Impact of Emerging Trends in Information
and Communication Technology on Disability Policy and Practice. Washington, DC:
National Council on Disability.
Vedder, A. (2001). ‘Misinformation through the Internet’, ETHICOMP 2001 Conference
Proceedings, 2: 35–41.
Warren, M. F. (2007). ‘The Digital Vicious Cycle: Links between Social Disadvantage and
Digital Exclusion in Rural Areas’, Telecommunications Policy, 31(6–7): 374–88.
Westin, A. (1967). Privacy and Freedom. New York: Atheneum.
Wiener, N. (1950, 1954). The Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society. Boston,
MA: Houghton Mifﬂin, (2nd edn. rev. 1954).
622
SIMON ROGERSON

c h a p t e r 2 4
...............................................................................................
IT, GLOBALIZATION, AND
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT:
A PERSONAL VIEW
...............................................................................................
GEOFF WALSHAM
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
This chapter addresses the relationship between IT, globalization, and human devel-
opment, and discusses how IS research can inform our understanding of this relation-
ship. The topic area is of such wide scope that it could be considered impossible to say
anything meaningful in the limited space of a book chapter. However, I have included the
phrase ‘a personal view’ in the chapter title to emphasize that no attempt will be made
here to survey in any depth the massive literature on concepts such as globalization and
development. The chapter will try, instead, to condense some of my own thoughts on the
broad topic area, using a relatively limited set of literature to support my arguments, and
drawing on some of my earlier publications (Walsham 2001, 2005a, 2005b).
The term globalization has achieved the unusual status, in a relatively short time, of
becoming fashionable in academic debates in the social sciences, in the business world,
and to some extent in the popular media. However, even a cursory examination of
these sources would demonstrate that the term is highly ambiguous, and that it masks a
wide variety of opinions on what is happening in the world. Most writers on the subject
would agree that information and communication technologies are of crucial impor-
tance to globalization processes, but again there is no clear consensus on the precise
nature of this connection.
The next section of the chapter will summarize some key literature on globalization
through the eyes of various well-known scholars of the contemporary world. Whilst
their analyses are not the same, all of them argue the need for increasing reﬂection and
changed action in order to make a better world or, to put it another way, to support
human development in its broadest sense. I will follow the material on globalization

with a brief discussion of ‘human development’ arguing that this is needed by all people
and countries, not just by the developing countries. But what can IS researchers offer to
this broad agenda? The argument will be made that IS researchers can contribute by
addressing their research explicitly to issues of human development through a critical
approach, and the rest of the chapter will be devoted to the question of how to go about
doing this. Two illustrations will be given of critical research on IT in a globalized
world, namely health information systems and IT for the poor. Finally, some conclu-
sions will be drawn.
WHAT IS GLOBALIZATION?
..................................................................................................................
Robertson (1992) wrote an early inﬂuential book on globalization in which he said that:
‘Globalization as a concept refers both to the compression of the world and the
intensiﬁcation of consciousness of the world as a whole’ (p. 8). The ﬁrst of these two
points relates directly to time-space compression, largely mediated through informa-
tion and communication technologies. The second point refers to people’s awareness of
the world and applies quite generally, not only to the well educated. The widespread
accessibility of communications media such as television, even in remote rural villages
in the Third World or underprivileged urban communities anywhere, means that news
of happenings in the world as a whole are available to the great majority of the world’s
population. This does not necessarily imply a well-informed world, since the ‘news’ is
chosen, condensed, ﬁltered, and manipulated by a host of complex mechanisms.
However, it does mean that remoteness and isolation are not the same in the contem-
porary age, and that most people are more aware than they were of a wider global arena
within which their own community forms only a small part.
Beck (2000: 10) referred to this change in global consciousness using the term
‘globality’, deﬁned as follows: ‘Globality means that we have been living for a long
time in a world society, in the sense that the notion of closed spaces has become
illusory. No country or group can shut itself off from others.’ Beck reserved the term
globalization for processes of interconnection and inﬂuence between national states
and international actors such as the transnational corporations (TNCs). Beck argued
that the TNCs are ‘bidding farewell to the framework of the national state and refusing
loyalty to its actors’, through such devices as minimizing their taxes, but externalizing
the costs of unemployment to the nation states.
Giddens (1999) argued that global ﬁnancial ﬂows are a key element of these
globalization processes:
Geared as it is to electronic money—money that exists only as digits in computers—
the current world economy has no parallels in earlier times. In the new global
electronic economy, fund managers, banks, corporations, as well as millions of
individual investors, can transfer vast amounts of capital from one side of the world
624
GEOFF WALSHAM

to another at the click of a mouse. As they do so, they can destabilise what might
have seemed rock-solid economies—as happened in East Asia.
This chapter is being written at the time of the global ﬁnancial crisis in 2009 and
Giddens’ words of a decade earlier seem quite prophetic.
Global ﬁnancial ﬂows are one element in trends towards more global business as a
whole, although we need to be wary of simplistic generalizations here. Although there
is much talk in the business world, and the management schools, of global businesses,
global markets, and global supply chains, the degree to which this has occurred to date,
and the degree to which it might occur in the future, remain in dispute. For example,
Doremus et al. (1998) investigated a range of multinational corporations, mainly in
Germany, Japan, and the USA, and argued that such companies, who after all should
surely be at the forefront of the move towards globally minded enterprises, remained
tied to approaches derived from their unique national identities: ‘However lustily they
sing from the same hymn book when they gather together in Davos or Aspen, the
leaders of the world’s great business enterprises continue to differ in their most
fundamental strategic behaviour and objectives’ (quoted in Kogut 1999).
Cultural Diversity
This leads on to one of the most controversial issues in the globalization debate, namely
the issue of homogenization and diversity. The broad question is whether the globali-
zation phenomena that we have outlined above, such as time-space compression, an
increased awareness of the world as a whole, and movements toward global business,
will inevitably lead to a decrease in cultural difference among nations, companies, and/
or individuals. There is a school of thought, prevalent amongst the Western business
community for example, which takes this for granted. The argument runs that there is
only one economic system now, capitalism, and that enterprises need to compete
globally under this one set of rules. Therefore, all companies that wish to survive will
need to adopt the practices of the winners, leading towards more homogeneous ways of
doing things and, by extension to the wider society, to a less diverse cultural world.
A range of writers have taken exception to this conclusion of the inevitability of
homogenization. For example, Robertson (1992) discussed the way in which imported
themes are ‘indigenized’ in particular societies, with local culture constraining the
receptivity to some ideas rather than others, and adapting them all in speciﬁc ways.
He cited Japan as a good example of this blending of the ‘native’ and the ‘foreign’ as an
ongoing process. Whilst accepting the idea of time-space compression facilitated by
information technology, Robertson argued that one of its main consequences is an
exacerbation of collisions between global, societal, and communal attitudes.
Beck (2000: 9) deﬁned the ideology of global homogenization as ‘globalism’: ‘By
globalism, I mean the view that the world market eliminates or supplants political
action—that is, the ideology of the rule by the world market, the ideology of
IT, GLOBALIZATION, AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: A PERSONAL VIEW
625

neoliberalism’. Beck argued strongly against this ideology, citing many different rea-
sons. For example, he argued that globalism reduces the complexity of globality and
globalization to a single economic dimension, showing no understanding of the
importance of speciﬁc political and cultural meanings in particular contexts. Globalism
also ‘sings the praises’ of worldwide ‘free trade’, but Beck argued that we live in a world
far removed from any fair model of free trade due to enormously skewed initial
conditions.
Appadurai (1996), coming from a non-Western background, argued against the
global homogenization thesis on the basis of cultural considerations. Societies have
different cultural histories and will appropriate global trends in a local way:
. . . globalization is itself a deeply historical, uneven and even localizing process.
Globalization does not necessarily or even frequently imply homogenization or
Americanization, and to the extent that different societies appropriate the materials
of modernity differently, there is still ample room for the deep study of speciﬁc
geographies, histories, and languages. (p. 17)
The term ‘glocalization’ reﬂects the ways in which the global, macroscopic aspects of
contemporary life are appropriated locally. According to Robertson (1992), the term
originated in Japan as a translation of the Japanese word dochakuka, roughly meaning
global localization.
Globalization and the Self
The debate about the extent to which various processes linked to globalization may lead
to homogenization in terms of business processes or national cultures rests to a
signiﬁcant extent on the effect of the processes on the individual member of society,
whether in the Western or developing world. The argument will be made here that
there is no strong evidence of any simple standardization of humanity, and indeed that
global forces may, somewhat paradoxically perhaps, have some effects which tend
towards the exact opposite.
Going back to the work of Giddens and Beck, both these writers about contemporary
Western society talk about the need for individual life projects, speciﬁc to a person’s
own past history and context, and to his or her future trajectory and aspirations. The
world of relatively set rules, traditions, social classes, and job roles has been under-
mined. The new uncertain world requires active navigation. Authors such as these have
sometimes been criticised as emphasizing individual freedom of action, in societies
where the underprivileged can be thought to have little choice. It is certainly true that
some people’s choices are more constrained than others, and that life chances are very
different at birth dependent on one’ parentage and background. Nevertheless, any
individual growing up and working in the twenty-ﬁrst century will need to chart their
own course with some vigour, within the range of possibilities available to them, or risk
being carried away by the waves of change which will undoubtedly continue to roll.
626
GEOFF WALSHAM

Robertson (1992) talked about this issue related speciﬁcally to globalization, and he
added a subtle distinction regarding concepts such as life projects themselves, which
can be seen to be Western individualistic constructs. More group-oriented societies
such as many of those in Asia, and religions such as Islam which place great emphasis
on community, would tend not to see the world as composed of distinct individuals
with discrete life goals, opportunities, and problems.
Appadurai (1996) took these arguments on cultural difference further, with speciﬁc
reference to self-identity, and in particular using the concept of imagination. He argued
that people draw on contemporary sources, such as the media, and their own cultural
histories, to ‘annex the global’ into their own ‘practices of the modern’ through their
imagination. Thus, even conventional objects such as T-shirts and music become
transformed differently in different contexts: ‘T-shirts, billboards, and grafﬁti as well
as rap music, street dancing, and slum housing all show that the images of the media
are quickly moved into local repertoires of irony, anger, humor and resistance’ (p. 7).
Gopal (1997) quoted Appadurai’s arguments against global homogenization, and the
role of imagination, with a speciﬁc focus on IT. He argued that the vision of an
IT-driven world of progress, efﬁciency, unlimited markets, individualism, and the
superiority of the Western developmental trajectory needs to be challenged, not least
because the effects of the use of IT in the West itself have not always been benign. He
argued that each developing country must forge its own path in the future, and not try
to imitate inappropriate western models:
They (developing countries) have different pasts; their historical trajectories
have led to different conﬁgurations of valences, patterns of trust, responsibilities,
and allegiances. They have, as a result, different presents: priorities, voices, cap-
abilities, and capacities are arranged in patterns quite unlike those of the societies
from which the technologies originate. And, in spite of the attempts of a few to
sediment in the popular imagination a singular vision of prosperous IT-driven
existence, they have different imagined futures (Appadurai, 1996); their varieties of
aspirations and expectations bear little resemblance to the visions embedded in the
technology. (p. 140)
The Role of the Nation State
A key topic identiﬁed by many writers about globalization concerns the changing role
of the nation state in an increasingly globalized world. Is the nation state a redundant
entity, at the mercy of international forces that it cannot control, to be replaced by large
federal groupings or even world government? What policy measures and other action
remain within the control of the individual nation state, and can these be effective in
improving the lives of the citizens of that country, and protecting them from the worst
effects of the cold winds of global competition and the actions of the transnational
corporations?
IT, GLOBALIZATION, AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: A PERSONAL VIEW
627

The answer to the ﬁrst of these questions is a qualiﬁed no, in my view, leading us to
the details and complexities of the second question, which will be country and context
speciﬁc. The nation state is not redundant, although its inﬂuence is more conditional
than in some previous eras. Hirst and Thompson (1996) adopted the stronger view that
the rhetoric of globalization is often used to attack the concept of the nation state as a
strategy from the right of the political spectrum to undermine the welfare gains that
have been achieved in most Western economies. They argued that this rhetoric should
be opposed, and that the state should continue to pursue approaches to counter
asymmetries of privilege within its borders.
Clark (1997) also supported the importance of the nation state, and argued
that globalization tendencies should be analysed in conjunction with tendencies
towards fragmentation, the latter referring to the multiplicity of diverse interests
within the state which need to be accommodated. In addition to challenges to
the welfare state, globalization brings with it political costs such as high levels
of unemployment in a country as a whole, or in particular regions. The state is
required to mediate between increasingly potent international pressures and
heightened levels of domestic discontent from those affected negatively as a result
of such pressures. Clark argued:
In the circumstances, it is to be expected that fragmentationist policies will have
renewed appeal amongst the motley groups and peoples who have most to lose by
continuing globalization: employment sectors in the First World felt to be
threatened by the ‘export’ of jobs to low-wage areas of globalized production;
embattled politicians who see globalization eroding their own sources of power
and control; traditionalist societies within the Third World disenchanted by the
empty promises of development but subject none the less to its seemingly pervasive
effects; ethnic identities which may seem to be the only stable anchors in the fast-
moving tides of cultural change.’ (p. 202)
Beck (2000) was deeply concerned with the type of issues raised in the above
quotation, and he placed great emphasis on the need for new forms of political
action that cross national borders as a means of moulding ‘responsible globaliza-
tion’. He argued the need for collaboration among nation states, for example to
limit or obstruct the ‘horse trading’ whereby global ﬁrms minimize their tax
obligations and maximize state subsidies. Using Europe as an example, he argued
that a new transnational federalism would enable states to have a new life as
‘individual glocal states’, limiting the power of transnational centres. Turning to
the wider world, Beck pointed to the need for political action in the form of a social
contract against exclusion, and a sense of global responsibility in the face of
enormous inequity:
The share of the poorest ﬁfth of humanity in world income fell from 4 to 1 per cent
between 1960 and 1990. By contrast, 358 dollar billionaires possess more than what
a half of humanity put together currently earns. (p. 153)
628
GEOFF WALSHAM

Beck’s overall argument, therefore, was the need to oppose the hegemony of ‘global-
ism’, and to develop a new transnational politics that engages with the issues of
globalization, particularly those concerned with social consequences.
The Information Age
A major analysis of contemporary society is contained in the three-volume magnum
opus of Manuel Castells (1996, 1997, 1998). It draws on a wide range of empirical data,
much of it collected by the author and his research collaborators over a period of more
than a decade. The geographical coverage of the work is impressive, with major
material on Latin America and Asia, for example, in addition to Europe and the USA.
Castells assigned a central role to information and communications technologies in
the societal transformations that have taken place in the modern world. The basic
thesis of Volume I, Castells (1996), is that a new ‘network society’ is emerging from
current processes of change that is both capitalist and informational. The latter is
deﬁned as follows:
. . . the term informational indicates the attribute of a speciﬁc form of social organi-
zation in which information generation, processing and transmission become the
fundamental sources of productivity and power, because of new technological
conditions emerging in this historical period. (p. 21)
Castells believed that globalization is real, in the sense that the markets for goods and
services are becoming increasingly globalized. This does not mean that all ﬁrms sell
worldwide, but that the strategic aims of all ﬁrms, large and small, is to sell wherever
they can throughout the world, either directly or via their linkage with networks that
operate in the world market.
However, in the informational economy, there is complex interaction between
historically rooted political and social institutions, and increasingly globalized eco-
nomic agents. There is, thus, wide variety in the way in which individual countries and
regions act as part of the globalized world. Castells argued that the global economy is
characterized by its interdependence, but also by its asymmetry, and the increasing
diversiﬁcation within each region. In this sense, Castells supported the theory of
glocalization, discussed earlier.
Castells placed great emphasis on networking, and indeed argued that ﬁrms have
become network enterprises, and that we are in the era which forms the title of Volume
I, namely the network society. Information technology is assigned a key role: ‘While the
networking form of social organization has existed in other times and spaces, the new
information technology paradigm provides the material basis for its pervasive expan-
sion throughout the entire social structure’ (p. 469). It is interesting to note that this
ﬁrst volume was published in 1996, and that no doubt the material was developed
rather earlier. Although the Internet has existed for a relatively long time, it is only in
IT, GLOBALIZATION, AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: A PERSONAL VIEW
629

the last decade or so that its enormous potential impact has started to be exploited.
Castells anticipated the network society before these developments, and the growth of
the internet lends further support to his thesis here.
The processes of change to a network society have been accompanied by a transfor-
mation of work and employment but not to a uniﬁed global labour market. However,
according to Castells, there is increasing interdependence of the labour force on a
global scale, through three mechanisms. These are global employment in the multina-
tional corporations and their associated cross-border networks; the impact of interna-
tional trade on employment conditions, both in the North and in the South; and the
effects of global competition and of the new mode of ﬂexible production on each
country’s labour force. Castells argued that information technology is deeply impli-
cated in these change processes, but that there is no simple structural relationship
between the diffusion of IT and the evolution of employment levels in a particular
economy taken as a whole.
Finally, in keeping with his roots in urban geography, Castells argued that the ‘global
city’ plays a key role in the network society. However, he deﬁnes the global city not as a
place, but as a process. This process connects centres of production and consumption
of advanced services, and their ancillary local societies, in a global network, whilst
simultaneously downplaying the linkages with their hinterlands. The megacities, in
particular, provide a linkage for informational networks and concentrate the world’s
power. However, they also provide a depository of all those segments of the population
who ﬁght to survive, as well as those groups who want to make visible their dereliction.
Castells (1997) started Volume II with an impassioned plea for a multicultural world
view of globalization:
There is in this book a deliberate obsession with multiculturalism . . . This approach
stems from my view that the process of techno-economic globalization shaping our
world is being challenged, and will eventually be transformed, from a multiplicity of
sources, according to different cultures, histories and geographies . . . I would like
also . . . to break the ethnocentric approach still dominating much social science at
the very moment when our societies have become globally interconnected and
culturally intertwined. (p. 3)
The challenges to techno-economic globalization come from people’s search for
communal or collective identity, according to Castells. Reﬂexive life planning, of the
type discussed earlier in the work of Giddens, is only possible for the elite, or the
‘globapolitans’. For those people excluded from the global networks of power and
wealth, cultural communes of religious, national or territorial foundation provide the
main alternative for the construction of meaning in society.
There are clear links here with Appadurai’s arguments on the diversity of imagina-
tion, and Castells (1997) provided detailed material on ‘resistance movements’ to the
global order, both within particular national contexts, and in wider arenas. With
respect to the former, three examples are given. First, the role of the Zapatistas in
Mexico in ﬁghting what they deﬁned as a conjunction of American imperialism and
630
GEOFF WALSHAM

corrupt, illegitimate national government. It is interesting to note their use of the media
and Internet-based alliances to publicize and support their resistance. The second
example is of the American militia of the far right opposing what they see as the
excessive power of the US federal government, with the Oklahoma bombing as a stark
example of their resistance. Finally, the Japanese movement Aum Shinrikyo, responsi-
ble for the Tokyo subway nerve gas attack, deﬁned the global opposition as uniﬁed
world government representing the interests of the multinational corporations, and
enforced by the Japanese police.
In addition to these dramatic and violent examples of social resistance to the
perceived global order in particular national contexts, Castells also analysed more
cross-cultural resistance movements, who use largely peaceful means to pursue their
opposition. The ﬁrst of these is the environmental movement, representing the wide-
spread fear of the people concerning the uncontrolled pursuit of science and technolo-
gy without an adequate consideration of long-term consequences:
The ecological approach to life, to the economy, and to the institutions of society
emphasises the holistic character of all forms of matter, and of all information
processing. Thus, the more we know, the more we sense the possibilities of our
technology, and the more we realise the gigantic, dangerous gap between our
enhanced productive capacities, and our primitive, unconscious and ultimately
destructive social organization. (p. 133)
The second widespread opposition to the established order, cited by Castells, is
feminism or, more generally, the transformation of women’s work and women’s
consciousness (see also Chapter 21). Castells argued that the decline of patriarchalism,
coupled with the change in women’s roles and attitudes, requires a reconstruction of
the family under more egalitarian relations. However, organizations and institutions
have not in general adapted to this new world.
This leads on to Castells’ analysis of the role of the state. He argued that the state is
losing its power, in comparison to earlier eras, but not its inﬂuence. Nation states have
been transformed from sovereign subjects into strategic actors. There is a paradox in
their role, in that the more they emphasize communal identity, the less effective they
become as co-agents of a global system of shared power. However, the more they
triumph in the planetary sphere, in close partnership with the agents of globalization,
or what Beck would call globalism, the less they represent their national constituencies.
In particular, they must cope with the those groups who are largely excluded from the
power and resources of the globalized production networks, whether as producers or as
consumers. There are strong echoes here with the arguments of Beck on the role of the
nation state, although Beck is perhaps more positive about what could be done to
counteract the power of globalism and its agents.
Castells does, however, end Volume II on a relatively optimistic note concerning the
possibilities for ‘informational politics’ in the information age. He argued for the
recreation of the local state, using the opportunity offered by electronic communication
to enhance political participation and horizontal communication among citizens. He
IT, GLOBALIZATION, AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: A PERSONAL VIEW
631

believed that we have entered the era of ‘symbolic politics’ in which ‘The new power lies
in the codes of information and in the images of representation around which societies
organise their institutions, and people build their lives, and decide their behaviour. The
sites of this power are people’s minds’ (p. 359). Castells’ analysis of the excluded
‘Fourth World’ is an important feature of Volume III. He argued that the development
of the complex set of linkages of informational capitalism has been accompanied by the
rise of inequality, social polarization, poverty, and misery in much of the world.
Globalization proceeds selectively, including and excluding segments of economies
and societies in and out of the networks of information, wealth, and power that
characterize the new dominant system:
. . . a new world, the Fourth World, has emerged, made up of multiple black holes
of social exclusion throughout the planet. The Fourth World comprises large areas
of the globe, such as much of sub-Saharan Africa, and impoverished rural areas of
Latin America and Asia. But it is also present in literally every country, and in every
city, in this new geography of social exclusion. It is formed of American inner-city
ghettos, Spanish enclaves of mass youth unemployment, French banlieues ware-
housing North Africans, Japanese Yoseba quarters, and Asian megacities’ shanty
towns. (pp. 164–5)
Castells ended Volume III, and the work as a whole, with an appeal for conscious,
purposive social action, supported by information, in order to address the many
problems and challenges identiﬁed in the books.
. . . if people are informed, active and communicate throughout the world;
if business assumes its social responsibility; . . . if political actors react against
cynicism, and restore faith in democracy; . . . if humankind feels the solidarity of
the species across the globe; if we assert intergenerational solidarity by living in
harmony with nature . . . then, we may, at last, be able to live and let live, love and be
loved. (p. 360)
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
..................................................................................................................
The material in the previous section reﬂects the complexity of the globalization
phenomenon itself and is not easily summarized. However, some key themes can be
discerned from the work of these various scholars. Firstly, the contemporary world is
undergoing major processes of change. In addition to the evident increase in intercon-
nection between societies, there is an increased consciousness of the world as a whole,
which Beck called globality. This consciousness includes an awareness of the produc-
tion of global risks that transcend national boundaries, of which global warming and
the current global ﬁnancial crisis provide graphic examples. The transnational corpora-
tions have increased their power in this new globalized world, a cause of major concern
to writers such as Giddens and Beck.
632
GEOFF WALSHAM

A second key argument is that information and communication technologies are
deeply implicated in the global changes that are taking place, through their ability to
enable new modes of work, communication, and organization across time and space.
For example, Castells argued that we are in the ‘information age’ where information
generation, processing, and transmission are fundamental to organizational and socie-
tal change. IT enables pervasive expansion of networking throughout the social
structure, and is intimately involved in changes in economic and social activity.
These change processes can have profound effects on self-identity, the nature of
work and employment, organizational structure, and the nature and governance of
the nation state.
However, thirdly, the change processes are not uniform in their effects, and organiza-
tions and societies will remain distinct and differentiated, although increasingly
interconnected, though a process which has been labelled as glocalization. This arises
through the selective appropriation and variable use of new ideas by different indivi-
duals, organizations, and societies. We are entering an age of globalization and
interconnection, but also one of multiculturalism, in the sense that many cultures
with speciﬁc geographies, histories and languages will be involved, and will affect the
nature of the future world. Unfortunately, there are many excluded segments of all
societies, referred to as the ‘Fourth World’ by Castells, who do not have adequate access
to the networks of information, wealth, and power that characterize the new world
order.
All the writers cited above were united that these changed conditions and uneven
effects, brought about in part through the use of IT, imply an increased need for
reﬂection and action. For example, Beck argued the need to oppose the ideology of rule
by world markets, which he calls globalism. Castells talked about the power of
‘resistance movements’ such as environmentalism, feminism, and various religious
movements. The goal of reﬂection and action is to make a better world or, to put it
another way, to support human development in its broadest sense. But what can IS
researchers contribute to this broad agenda? I would argue that IS researchers can
contribute by addressing their research explicitly to issues of human development. The
remainder of the chapter will be devoted to the question of how to go about doing this.
The rest of this section will expand a little on the meaning of human development in
this context.
The term ‘development’ is often associated only with the so-called developing
countries. This contrasts with the term ‘developed countries’ which is the label often
used to describe the rich countries of the world in terms of GDP per capita. This latter
term is most unfortunate since it carries two implications, both of which I wish to argue
against. First, that our sole measure of ‘development’ should be economic, calculated in
terms of average income. However, there are many other non-material aspects of
human development which we all recognize in other people, such as selﬂessness,
courage, and kindness. Many people, for example, would accept that Mahatma Gandhi
(1949) and Nelson Mandela (1994) travelled further on the path of individual devel-
opment than most of the rest of us, even though they came from ‘developing countries’.
IT, GLOBALIZATION, AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: A PERSONAL VIEW
633

The second reason why I do not like the term ‘developed countries’ is that it appears
to ignore the myriad of individual, social, and political problems which beset the rich
countries of the world. Examples include drug abuse, discrimination against women
and ethnic communities, crime of all types, child pornography, and neglect of the
elderly. Less dramatically, but equally important, problems at the workplace include
feelings of dissatisfaction and alienation, concerns about inappropriate surveillance
and monitoring methods, excessive working hours, and fears of job loss. All of these
problems call for approaches that respect the need for human development in its
broadest sense.
My argument that the rich countries also need to work at human development issues
is not an argument that we should ignore the very different economic living standards
in different countries, or the different standards within a given country. It is a global
scandal, of which we should all be ashamed, that the world is so dramatically uneven
and unfair. The Millennium Development goals (United Nations 2009) are laudable in
themselves but it is appalling that these basic levels of provision in areas such as health
services, education, and clean water are currently not achieved in large parts of the
world and progress in this direction is so desperately slow. In terms of disparity within
countries, a good example is India, where the high economic growth rates for the last
ﬁfteen years or so have not ‘trickled down’ to the poor in any major way, as evidenced
by the statistics that roughly one in two children in India under the age of 5 is
malnourished and one in two Indian women is illiterate (UNICEF 2004; World Bank
2007). The development economist Sen (1999) points out that poverty of such people is
not simply material, but also relates to the capabilities that people have to make choices
and take action in their lives.
So, in summary, human development is a complex multi-level ongoing process for
all individuals, groups, organizations, societies, and the world as a whole. This applies
to the rich as well as the poor countries, although the importance of particular
problems will vary across different contexts. It is right that global attention should be
directed towards the economically poor, but not to the exclusion of other issues of
human development throughout our more globalized world. A further human devel-
opment goal for all of us concerns the reduction of conﬂict within and between
different societies and ethnic groupings, something which touches us all in our global
interconnectedness: wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, the continuing Israeli-Arab conﬂict,
global terrorism, and intra-society conﬂict such as in Darfur.
What about the role of IT in human development? It was argued earlier that
information and communication technologies are deeply implicated in global changes
that are taking place. However, they are not a silver bullet to solve human development
problems whether these are wars or global poverty or, at a less dramatic level, concerns
about surveillance or work-life balance. Nevertheless, in all these situations, IT is
invariably present, whether to target bombs in war zones, to try to bridge the ‘digital
divide’ for the poor, or to enable workplace monitoring. The role of IS researchers
interested in issues of human development is, therefore, to catalogue and analyse
particular situations in order to provide insight into whether IT is contributing,
634
GEOFF WALSHAM

in this context, to making a better world. I turn now to how IS researchers can try to
do this.
RESEARCH WITH A CRITICAL EDGE
..................................................................................................................
I wish to argue that IS research that focuses on exploring the role of IT in making a
better world needs to have a critical edge to it. To simplify somewhat, a critical stance is
concerned with what is wrong with the world rather than what is right. It tends to focus
on issues such as asymmetries of power, alienation, disadvantaged groups, or structural
inequity. This ﬁts well with an agenda focused on human development. A more precise
deﬁnition of critical research in the IS ﬁeld was given in the early seminal article by
Orlikowski and Baroudi (1991) on different research traditions. They describe the
critical researcher’ beliefs about reality, knowledge, and the role of research as follows:
. . . social reality is historically constituted . . . everything possesses an unfulﬁlled
potentiality, and people, by recognizing these possibilities, can act to change their
material and social circumstances . . . knowledge is grounded in social and historical
practices . . . the role of the researcher is to bring to consciousness the restrictive
conditions of the status quo, thereby initiating change in the social relations
and practices, and helping to eliminate the bases of alienation and domination.
(pp. 19–21)
This is a clear anti-establishment agenda and therefore it is not surprising that
Orlikowski and Baroudi recorded that critical studies in four ‘major information
systems outlets’ were non-existent. Nearly two decades later, the position would not
be dissimilar in the more conservative journals, but overall the position has changed
somewhat. There is an increasing interest in critical studies in IS research, as evidenced
by focused conferences (e.g. Adam et al. 2004), books (e.g. Howcroft and Trauth 2005),
special issues of journals (e.g. Information Systems Journal, 19(2), 2009), and a whole
range of individual contributions. In the latter category, a wide range of topics have
been addressed from a critical stance including the life of call centre workers (Richard-
son 2003), gender discrimination in the IS ﬁeld (Woodﬁeld 2002), the ethics of the UK
government’ identity card scheme (Whitley 2009), and a range of issues concerned
with information systems in developing countries (Walsham, Robey, and Sahay 2007).
It is also noticeable that the editors of this handbook have chosen to include several
chapters with an explicit critical focus, such as that on critical social theory and the later
contributions on IT and gender, green issues, ethics and IT, and the digital divide.
Why has critical IS research increased in scope and range over the last decade or so?
A full discussion of this is beyond the remit of the present chapter but I would like to
argue, to support the theme of this chapter, that our more globalized world has thrown
up many issues that cry out for a critical approach which is focused on human
development in the broadest sense. Our increased consciousness of the world as a
IT, GLOBALIZATION, AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: A PERSONAL VIEW
635

whole, which Beck called globality, leads us to increased awareness of the enormous
asymmetries of wealth and power in the world. The ‘restrictive conditions of the status
quo’ and ‘bases of alienation and domination’ noted in Orlikowski and Baroudi’s
deﬁnition of critical research are highly relevant to the contemporary world. The
next two sections will aim to support this assertion, and more generally to illustrate
critical IS research in action in the world, aimed at human development goals.
HEALTH INFORMATION SYSTEMS
..................................................................................................................
This section describes work which has been carried out over the last ﬁfteen years under
the label of HISP (Health Information Systems Programme). A summary and analysis
of the work from 1994 to 2001 is given in Braa and Hedberg (2002) and later work is
described in Braa, Monteiro, and Sahay (2004) and Braa et al. (2007). The basic
objective of the work has been to develop locally relevant health information systems
for public health administrations in developing countries, together with associated data
collection procedures, linked to a national strategic approach to improving health
standards across the country as a whole. The HISP approach was pioneered in South
Africa but has been extended to a range of other African countries such as Mozambi-
que and developing countries in other regions such as India. The main focus here will
be on the work in South Africa, but the programme as a whole has a much wider global
focus.
The initiation of the work needs to be viewed within the political context of post-
apartheid South Africa. Following an armed struggle and international pressure, the
notorious apartheid system was ended in South Africa in the early 1990s. A democra-
tically elected government of national unity was formed in 1994 under the leadership of
Nelson Mandela. The government brought with it a new policy agenda, and health was
regarded as a key area. Government health policy stated that the health system would
be decentralized to focus on districts, subdivisions of the country containing between
50,000 and 500,000 people. Part of the plan was the development of a new national
health information system to support the changed focus, and work on HISP formed
part of this.
The HISP Approach and Achievements
In its ﬁrst phase up to 1998, HISP aimed at supporting the emerging decentralized
structures in three pilot districts in Cape Town, the main town in the province of the
Western Cape. A key goal of the approach was the empowerment of local health
workers. In terms of data collection and related computer-based IS, this translates
into the need to create, analyse, and use data at the same level at which it is collected.
636
GEOFF WALSHAM

This contrasts with the ‘typical’ approach in many developing countries, and certainly
in apartheid South Africa, where the health data collected by local level workers are
passed up the hierarchy, and data collection is perceived as a burden by local workers,
irrelevant to their work with sick people. As an illustration of work under HISP to
address such issues, Thompson (2002) described changed data collection approaches in
some large Cape Town clinics in the poorest areas of the city. These were based on the
use of simple tools such as hand-held counters (e.g. for patients arriving at the clinic)
and simpliﬁed and more transparent procedures and forms for data collection.
One metaphor used by the researchers to describe their approach to the develop-
ment of locally relevant information systems is that of ‘cultivation’. The argument is
that particular information systems (hardware/software/standards) may be planted in
speciﬁc locations, so that the seeds are similar, but local growing conditions are
inﬁnitely variable. Thus the developing plant needs to be tended and nurtured through
people at the lower level who have ownership and commitment towards it. Braa (1997)
argued that a participatory design process is crucial in helping to create such owner-
ship, and thus a bottom-up approach to IS development is essential.
However, although local empowerment and commitment is crucial, there is a need
at the higher policy levels, both in districts and nationally, to create standardized data.
A key rationale for this is to identify and target areas of need as described by Braa and
Hedberg (2002: 114): ‘striving for equity between geographical areas and racial groups
will require a system of national standards to measure and monitor the extent to which
this policy is being achieved and to pinpoint areas where more resources and efforts are
needed’. Braa and Hedberg discuss a tension between this need for standardization and
the ﬂexibility needed for effective localization. They describe their approach to resolv-
ing this tension through a hierarchy of standards, where each level in the health system
has freedom to deﬁne its own standards as long as they align with the standards of the
level above.
With respect to the progress of HISP following the Cape Town pilot projects, the
South African Department of Health adopted the strategies, processes, and software
developed in the pilot districts as a national standard. Braa, Monteiro, and Sahay
(2004) reported that these were rolled out to all districts in South Africa in 2003.
Other countries are experimenting with the HISP approach (Braa, Monteiro, and
Sahay 2004; Braa et al. 2007), and it is worth noting that the HISP software has been
deliberately designed as open source, based on the political view that such systems
should be freely available to other developing countries.
Critical Engagement of the Researchers
The action research on HISP has been a collaborative endeavour, initially involving the
University of Oslo in Norway, the University of the Western Cape in South Africa, and
the Department of Health in South Africa. More recently, a wide range of other
IT, GLOBALIZATION, AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: A PERSONAL VIEW
637

individuals and institutions have been included. However, a core team has worked on
the project since its inception. This core team offers a classic example of critical IS
research and what I have called critical engagement (Walsham 2005c), as discussed
below.
Orlikowski and Baroudi’s deﬁnition of critical research emphasized the importance
of recognizing unfulﬁlled potential and therefore the possibility of people acting to
change their material and social circumstances. The unfulﬁlled potential in South Africa
can be related directly to the oppression of non-white people during the apartheid years
and, in the speciﬁc context of the health system, change includes the need to provide
improved health services through decentralization and locally relevant information
systems. This was a key motivation for the core team, as described by Braa and
Hedberg (2002: 113):
As a legacy of apartheid, the new South Africa (post-1994) inherited one of the least
equitable health care systems in the world . . . the new government launched the
Reconstruction and Development Program . . . with a title that clearly expressed its
intent: the reconstitution and development of communities that suffered under
apartheid. The restructuring of the health sector . . . is based on a decentralized
system of health districts. Development of new national health information systems
to support the restructuring of the health sector is part of this plan.
A second feature of Orlikowski and Baroudi’s deﬁnition of critical research is the
recognition that knowledge is grounded in social and historical practices. The South
African health system provides an excellent example of this, where the data collected
during the apartheid years, and thus the ‘knowledge’ concerning the health of the
overall population, were subordinated to the need to discriminate between the various
races. Again, this is well recognized and articulated by Braa and Hedberg (2002: 113):
The politics of apartheid—segmentation, centralism and exclusion of ‘black’ South
Africans—have all been deeply inscribed into all the bits and pieces of the informa-
tion systems in which standards for data collection are basic elements.
Finally, Orlikowski and Baroudi’s deﬁnition suggests the role of the critical researcher
as bringing to consciousness the restrictive conditions of the status quo, initiating
changes in social relations and practices and thus helping to eliminate the bases of
alienation and domination. The whole HISP activity has been geared to achieving such
ends by the development of decentralized systems through local prototyping, the
empowerment of local level health workers, and the improved ability to target poor
areas and disadvantaged parts of the population by comparing standards across
districts and the country as a whole.
I argued in an earlier publication (Walsham 2005c) for the use of the term ‘engage-
ment’ as a valuable characteristic of critical IS researchers, and its meanings as an
undertaking, a battle, and a duty or commitment. With respect to the ﬁrst of these
meanings, an undertaking implies a long-term approach in order to address complex
and deep-seated problems and inequities. HISP has been operating for ﬁfteen years
638
GEOFF WALSHAM

already and its scope has widened rather than narrowed. The researchers have engaged
with the complexity of the area across a wide range of activities as noted by Braa and
Hedberg (2002: 116): ‘The authors have been deeply and directly involved in strategic
planning, daily implementation, political brokering, software prototyping, institutional
development, and training at all levels’.
Turning to the metaphor of engagement as a battle, it is notable that Braa and
Hedberg entitle their 2002 paper ‘The Struggle for District-Based Health Information
Systems in South Africa’. They articulate their political motives for engaging in this
struggle as follows:
It is important to note that the original key members of the HISP team have
background as social/political activists in the antiapartheid struggle and other social
movements, and that we have always explicitly and implicitly seen ourselves as
political actors in a larger development process. (p. 114)
Engagement as a ‘duty or commitment’ is also captured in the above quote from the
long-term members of the core HISP team.
IT FOR THE POOR
..................................................................................................................
This section describes IS research carried out to investigate whether and how IT can be
used to support better lives for people who are poor in economic terms. Unlike the
previous section, this is not a uniﬁed body of work carried out by a particular team of
researchers, but rather reﬂects the work of a variety of people. The uniting feature is
their adoption of a broadly critical approach. In order to restrict the scope of this
section, the work which is described here is focused on India. The section discusses
research on three areas of IT application in India, namely telecentres, mobile phones,
and e-government services to see to what extent the development objective of being
pro-poor was achieved in particular projects.
Telecentres
A direct approach to the use of IT aimed at bettering the lives of the poor is through the
setting up of telecentres. Many telecentre projects were started in India over last decade
or so and there is a sizeable research literature on the topic. For example, Kumar and
Best (2006) described the SARI (Sustainable Access in Rural India) project in the state
of Tamil Nadu. Some 80 telecentre kiosks were set up offering a range of services
including basic computer education, e-mail, web browsing, and various e-government
services including the provision of certiﬁcates. Although the kiosks succeeded initially
in delivering the e-government services, many failed subsequently. Kumar and Best
IT, GLOBALIZATION, AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: A PERSONAL VIEW
639

identify a range of reasons for the failure including lack of trained staff, movement of
key ofﬁcials, and, at a deeper level, opposition from government ofﬁcials at the local
level who perceived a threat from the kiosks to their role, authority, and inﬂuence in the
community and, more darkly, to their opportunities for corruption.
Gollakota (2008) analysed a telecentre kiosk initiative, also in Tamil Nadu, by the
sugar manufacturer EID Parry aimed at providing information to farmers, with some
of the kiosks being company owned but some operating through kiosk franchisees who
were also able to offer more general computer-based services such as Internet brows-
ing, communication services, and desk top publishing. Gollakota concluded that better
relationships between local farmers and the company were achieved through the
project, which had 36 kiosks by 2006, but there were also problems. There were
concerns that caste, community, and gender inﬂuenced access to the kiosks and
therefore that the poor and disadvantaged were often not reached by the initiative. In
addition, there were serious problems of ﬁnancial viability for the franchisees since, in
poor rural areas, it is difﬁcult to generate adequate revenue to make such a business
viable. Rao (2008) examined a wide range of telecentre projects throughout India
and echoed this concern about ﬁnancial viability in addition to issues such as staff
capability, community acceptance, and adequate service delivery. Kuriyan, Ray, and
Toyama (2008) examined the extensive Akshaya telecentre project in the state of
Kerala, and argued that it is problematic to achieve the twin goals of commercial
proﬁtability of telecentres with social development for those at the bottom of the
pyramid.
It is clear that telecentre projects are not a simple way to bridge the so-called digital
divide for poor people, but nevertheless many authors writing on the topic do not wish
to see their abandonment but look for a more sophisticated way of thinking about
and addressing the problems of telecentres. Kanungo (2004) drew on empirical data
from a telecentre project in the union territory of Pondicherry to argue the need for
social processes that bring together an alliance of funding agencies, government
organizations, non-governmental organizations, villagers, scientists, etc. This focus
on actors and governance processes of telecentre projects was also addressed by
Madon (2005), drawing on her own ﬁeld research on the Akshaya project mentioned
above. Madon suggested a ‘sociology of governance’ approach to analysing telecentre
projects and processes, focusing on how interactions are managed between a host of
players including the government, private entrepreneurs, international donors, tele-
communications suppliers, local companies, civil society organizations, and individual
community members.
Mobile Phones
There are currently over three billion mobile phones in the world and there are more
than twice as many in the poorer compared to the richer countries (Heeks and Jagun
640
GEOFF WALSHAM

2007). Of course, mobile phone ownership is skewed towards the wealthier groups in
poorer societies but nevertheless mobile phone usage amongst the poor is not negligi-
ble, in India or elsewhere. Mobile phone ownership in India was estimated to be
around 340 million at the end of 2008 with mobile operators currently targeting
smaller villages and towns to attract new users. It is also a remarkable bottom-up
phenomenon, in that mobile phone ownership and usage results primarily from the
aggregate of individual purchasing and use decisions (see also Chapter 18).
The rapid spread of this new technology across the planet has, in large measure,
outstripped research on the topic. Nevertheless, Donner (2008) was able to review
around 200 studies of mobile phone use in the developing countries. He noted that
there were still relatively few detailed studies of rural users and he called for further
research which provided a better understanding of linkages between richer and poorer
communities, and between rural and urban users. The same author (Donner 2007)
provided an example of such work in an Indian context through a study of small
businesses in the town of Hyderabad, and the role played by the mobile phone in
customer acquisition and retention. He concluded that mobile phones were still not
crucial to these small businesses in customer acquisition and retention, and that we
should be careful to ascribe major transformative beneﬁts to the mobile phone without
hard evidence of how this is achieved.
It is clear that we are at a very early stage in our understanding of the impact of the
mobile phone on the lives of the poor, in India and elsewhere in the developing world.
An example of work that increases such understanding was provided by Abraham
(2007) in his detailed case study of the extensive use of mobile phones in the ﬁshing
industry in Kerala. He concluded that there were clear beneﬁts to the ﬁshermen in areas
such as responding to market demand, wasting less time and resources, and being less
isolated and at risk in emergencies. Abraham argued more generally that demand-
driven bottom-up interventions are more likely to succeed in developing countries than
are top-down ones, and that technologies such as the mobile phone which reduce
transaction costs are likely to be better investments than amorphous, ill-deﬁned
attempts to bridge the ‘digital divide’. Jensen (2007) studied the same ﬁsheries case
using different ﬁeld data and an economics lens, and he also concluded that there were
measurable beneﬁts from the mobile phone technology including the complete elimi-
nation of waste, a dramatic reduction in price dispersion, and an increase in both
consumer and producer welfare.
e-Government Services
Many of the states in India have embarked on e-government programmes and in-
itiatives. For example, Krishna and Walsham (2005) described two systems in the state
of Andhra Pradesh. The ﬁrst of these was the Computer-Aided Administration of
Registration Department (CARD) system which computerized the registration of
IT, GLOBALIZATION, AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: A PERSONAL VIEW
641

property transfers, resulting in signiﬁcant reductions in processing time. The second
was the e-Seva project which set up computerized centres where citizens can pay bills to
multiple agencies, register births and deaths, get a passport, and so on. The previous
manual processes had to be done in different places, involved large amounts of citizen
time and often bribery to the desk ofﬁcials to speed things up.
Krishna and Walsham described these as ‘success stories’ for e-government and
attributed the success to a variety of factors including the hands-on leadership provided
by the Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh, Chandrababu Naidu, the involvement of
multiple stakeholder groups such as consultants, government staff, and private ﬁrms,
and the willingness to persist and learn over time. Whilst undoubtedly beneﬁcial to
some Indian citizens, the term ‘success’ is problematic. Dabla (2004) carried out
extensive empirical work in Andhra Pradesh and concluded that projects such as
CARD and e-Seva were mainly of beneﬁt to urban dwellers and the relatively well
off with few beneﬁts to poor and rural social groups. One of the objectives of the
e-government projects was to reduce corruption, namely the payment of bribes to
government ofﬁcials for preferential treatment. However, Caseley (2004) argued that,
ironically, CARD reforms had made corruption easier since staff no longer had to ﬁnd
and copy documents by hand, freeing them up to concentrate on extracting additional
money from citizens.
Other states in India have substantial e-government initiatives and Vasudevan
(2007) described the STAR project in the state of Tamil Nadu, whose objectives and
core technologies were similar to those of the CARD project in Andhra Pradesh. A
complementary initiative in Tamil Nadu was REGiNET, a citizen accessible website to
ﬁnd the guideline value of any property in the State. Ofﬁcials of the Tamil Nadu
government claimed that STAR and REGiNET were superior to CARD since they
enabled data entry and retrieval in both Tamil, the local language in the state, and
English, whereas CARD used only English. In addition, CARD did not provide the on-
line services enabled by REGiNET. However, Vasudevan (2007) qualiﬁed this claimed
success in Tamil Nadu with the observation that the core processes of document
registration were unreformed and that government ofﬁcials persisted with citizen-
unfriendly practices such as not allowing people to sit in government ofﬁces, not
making prior appointments resulting in long queues, and continuing to solicit bribes.
A further case study of e-government, aimed speciﬁcally at poor communities, was
provided by the Gyandoot project in the drought-prone rural Dhar district of the state
of Madhya Pradesh. Sreekumar (2007) described how this started in 2000 with the
objective of enhancing participation by citizens and government together in commu-
nity affairs through creative uses of IT, and of ensuring equal access to emerging
technologies for the oppressed and exploited segments of society. Forty kiosks were set
up in different parts of the Dhar district and they offered a wide set of services such
as agricultural prices, on-line registration of applications, rural email, information
regarding government programmes, etc. However, Sreekumar observed that the kiosks
were mainly used by the literate and middle-income groups and he described three
particular case studies on how the complex layers of social power that characterize
642
GEOFF WALSHAM

Indian village society severely limit the potential of an initiative like Gyandoot to
provide empowerment for the poor and disadvantaged. An earlier paper by Cecchini
and Raina (2004) also concluded that the poor were not participating in the project,
and that usage was low. They argued the need for pro-poor services rather than
ﬁnancial viability as a criterion for success, the important role for intermediaries to
enable poor people to access e-government applications, and campaigns to raise
awareness.
The Critical Agenda of the Researchers
It is clear that all of the researchers described above felt a commitment to investigate the
unfulﬁlled potential of the poor and how IT could support their actions to change their
material and social circumstances. With respect to the objective of helping to eliminate
the bases of alienation and domination, the emphasis of some of the work on the
embedded problems of caste or gender is a ﬁrst step towards trying to address such
problems in future initiatives. Corruption was also explicitly addressed in a number of
the research studies. The mobile phone research contains some optimistic notes of IT
providing valuable support in improving the livelihoods of relatively poor ﬁshermen
and their families. On the other hand, research is at a very early stage on the remarkable
growth, even in poor communities, of mobile technology, and more research with a
critical edge is needed to investigate whether and to what extent the mobile phone is
effective in helping the poor to better their lives.
CONCLUSIONS
..................................................................................................................
The examples of critical IS research given above are interesting illustrations of globali-
zation processes in themselves. Both HISP in South Africa and IT for the poor in India
reﬂect a complex network of actors and alliances which reach across the world. Local
actions in a health district in a poor part of South Africa, or in a telecentre project in an
Indian village, are inﬂuenced by many forces outside the individual location and they,
in turn, affect our global view. The fact that I am writing about them in this chapter is
an illustration of the latter point. Globalization is not a one-way top-down process but
a complex, multi-level, multifaceted, and changing phenomenon.
The two examples I have given were both from the context of so-called
developing countries (see also Chapter 25). This reﬂects my personal research
interests to some extent. However, I wish to emphasize that IS research with a
critical edge, focused on human development, is important in all countries
and contexts. I brieﬂy mentioned examples such as the life of call centre work-
ers, gender discrimination in the IS ﬁeld, and the ethics of identity card
IT, GLOBALIZATION, AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: A PERSONAL VIEW
643

schemes, but these are only the tip of the iceberg, since IT is deeply implicated in a
very wide range of human contexts and issues in the contemporary world.
Am I arguing that all IS researchers should pursue critical IS research aimed
explicitly at human development issues? I would not go this far. Indeed I would
support the assertions of Grey and Willmott (2002), both well-known critical research-
ers in the ﬁeld of management studies, who argue that critical management studies is
concerned with knowledge of management whereas a primary function of a business
school is also to provide relatively non-critical knowledge for management. Neverthe-
less, I would like to end this chapter with my personal view that the balance in IS
research is still weighted too heavily towards non-critical work, and that we need more
critical IS research in the future that investigates IT for human development in the
context of our more globalized world.
REFERENCES
Abraham, R. (2007). ‘Mobile Phones and Economic Development: Evidence from the Fishing
Industry in India’, Information Technologies and International Development, 4(1): 5–17.
Adam, A., Basden, A., Richardson, H., and Robinson, B. (eds.) (2004). Critical Reﬂections on
Critical Research in Information Systems. Salford: University of Salford.
Appadurai, A. (1996). Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization. New Delhi:
Oxford University Press.
Beck, U. (2000). What is Globalization? Cambridge: Polity Press.
Braa, J. (1997). ‘Use and Design of Information Technology in Third World Contexts with a
Focus on the Health Sector: Case Studies from Mongolia and South Africa’, Ph.D. thesis,
Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Norway.
——and Hedberg, C. (2002). ‘The Struggle for District-Based Health Information Systems in
South Africa’, Information Society, 18(2): 113–28.
——Monteiro, E., and Sahay, S. (2004). ‘Networks of Action: Sustainable Health Information
Systems across Developing Countries’, MIS Quarterly, 28(3): 337–62.
——Hanseth, O., Heywood, A., Mohammed, W., and Shaw, V. (2007). ‘Developing Health
Information Systems in Developing Countries: The Flexible Standards Strategy’, MIS
Quarterly, 31(2): 381–402.
Caseley, J. (2004). ‘Public Sector Reform and Corruption: CARD Façade in Andhra Pradesh’,
Economic and Political Weekly, 39(11): 1151–6.
Castells, M. (1996). The Rise of the Network Society. Oxford: Blackwell.
——(1997). The Power of Identity. Oxford: Blackwell.
——(1998). End of Millenium. Oxford: Blackwell.
Cecchini, S., and Raina, M. (2004). ‘Electronic Government and the Rural Poor: The Case of
Gyandoot’, Information Technologies and International Development, 2(2): 65–75.
Clark, I. (1997). Globalization and Fragmentation: International Relations in the Twentieth
Century. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
644
GEOFF WALSHAM

Dabla, A. (2004). ‘The Role of Information Technology Policies in Promoting Social and
Economic Development: The Case of the State of Andhra Pradesh, India’, Electronic
Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries, 19(5): 1–21.
Donner, J. (2007). ‘Customer Acquisition among Small and Informal Businesses in Urban
India: Comparing Face-to-Face and Mediated Channels’, Electronic Journal of Information
Systems in Developing Countries, 32(3): 1–16.
——(2008). ‘Research Approaches to Mobile Use in the Developing World: A Review of the
Literature’, Information Society, 24(3): 140–59.
Doremus, P. N., Keller, W. W., Pauly, L. W., and Reich, S. (1998). The Myth of the Global
Corporation. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Gandhi, M. (1949). An Autobiography: The Story of my Experiments with Truth. London:
Phoenix Press.
Giddens, A. (1999). Reith Lectures 1999, <http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/static/events/
reith_99>.
Gollakota, K. (2008). ‘ICT Use by Businesses in Rural India: The Case of EID Parry’ Indiagri-
line’, International Journal of Information Management, 28(4): 336–41.
Gopal, A. (1997). ‘Information Technology and Globalization: Exploring the Underbelly’, in
M. Barrett, D. Cooper, C. R. Hinings, G. Lowe, H. Krahn, and K. Hughes (eds.), Proceedings
of Workshop on Understanding Information Technology, Globalization, and Changes in the
Nature of Work. Edmonton: University of Alberta.
Grey, C., and Willmott, H. (2002). ‘Contexts of Critical Management Studies’, Organization,
9(3): 411–18.
Heeks, R., and Jagun, A. (2007). ‘Mobile Phones and Development,’ <http://www.id21.org/
insights/insights69/insights69.pdf>.
Hirst, P., and Thompson, G. (1996). Globalization in Question: The International Economy
and the Possibilities of Governance. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Howcroft, D., and Trauth, E. A. (eds.) (2005). Handbook of Critical Information Systems
Research. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Jensen, R. (2007). ‘The Digital Provide: Information (Technology), Market Performance,
and Welfare in the South Indian Fisheries Sector’, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
122(3): 879–924.
Kanungo, S. (2004). ‘On the Emancipatory Role of Rural Information Systems’, Information
Technology & People, 7(4): 407–22.
Kogut, B. (1999). ‘What Makes a Company Global’, Harvard Business Review, January–
February: 165–70.
Krishna, S., and Walsham, G. (2005). ‘Implementing Public Information Systems in Devel-
oping Countries: Learning from a Success Story’, Information Technology for Development,
11(2): 123–40.
Kumar, R., and Best, M. L. (2006). ‘Impact and Sustainability of e-Government Services in
Developing Countries: Lessons Learned from Tamil Nadu, India’, Information Society,
22(1): 1–12.
Kuriyan, R., Ray, I., and Toyama, K. (2008). ‘Information and Communication Technologies
for Development: The Bottom of the Pyramid Model in Practice’, Information Society,
24(2): 93–104.
Madon, S. (2005). ‘Governance Lessons from the Experience of Telecentres in Kerala’,
European Journal of Information Systems, 14(4): 401–16.
IT, GLOBALIZATION, AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT: A PERSONAL VIEW
645

Mandela, N. (1994). Long Walk to Freedom: The Autobiography of Nelson Mandela. London:
Little, Brown.
Orlikowski, W. J., and Baroudi, J. J. (1991). ‘Studying Information Technology in Organiza-
tions: Research Approaches and Assumptions’, Information Systems Research, 2(1): 1–28.
Rao, S. S. (2008). ‘Social Development in Indian Rural Communities: Adoption of Telecen-
tres’, International Journal of Information Management, 28(6): 474–82.
Richardson, H. (2003). ‘CRM in Call Centres: The Logic of Practice’, in M. Korpela,
R. Montealegre, and A. Poulymenakou (eds.), Organizational Information Systems in the
Context of Globalization. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Robertson, R. (1992). Globalization: Social Theory and Global Culture. London: Sage.
Sen, A. (1999). Development as Freedom. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sreekumar, T. T. (2007). ‘Decrypting e-Governance: Narratives, Power Play and Participation
in the Gyandoot Intranet’, Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing
Countries, 32(4): 1–24.
Thompson, M. P. A. (2002). ‘Cultivating Meaning: Interpretive Fine-Tuning of a South
African Health Information System’, Information and Organization, 12(3): 183–211.
UNICEF (2004). <http://www.unicef.org>.
United Nations (2009). <http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/poverty.shtml>.
Vasudevan, R. (2007). ‘Changed Governance or Computerized Governance? Computerized
Property Transfer Processes in Tamil Nadu, India’, Information Technologies and Interna-
tional Development, 4(1): 101–12.
Walsham, G. (2001). Making a World of Difference: IT in a Global Context. Chichester: Wiley.
——(2005a). ‘Learning about Being Critical’, Information Systems Journal, 15(2): 111–17.
——(2005b). ‘Development, Global Futures and IS Research: A Polemic’, Journal of Strategic
Information Systems, 14(1): 5–15.
——(2005c). ‘Critical Engagement: Why, What and How?, in D. Howcroft and E. M. Trauth
(eds.), Handbook of Critical Information Systems Research: Theory and Application. Chel-
tenham: Edward Elgar.
——Robey, D., and Sahay, S. (2007). ‘Foreword: Special Issue on Information Systems in
Developing Countries’, MIS Quarterly, 31(2): 317–26.
Whitley, E. (2009). ‘Perceptions of Government Technology, Surveillance and Privacy: The
UK Identity Cards Scheme’, in D. Neyland and B. Goold (eds.), New Directions in Privacy
and Surveillance. Cullompton: Willan Publishers.
Woodﬁeld, R. (2002). ‘Women and Information Systems Development: Not Just a Pretty
(Inter)face?’, Information Technology and People, 15(2): 119–38.
World Bank (2007). ‘India Country Overview’, <http://www.worldbank.org.in>.
646
GEOFF WALSHAM

c h a p t e r 2 5
...............................................................................................
DISCOURSES ON
INNOVATION AND
DEVELOPMENT IN
INFORMATION SYSTEMS IN
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
RESEARCH
...............................................................................................
CHRISANTHI AVGEROU
INTRODUCTION
..................................................................................................................
There is a fairly large literature on Information Systems in Developing Countries
(ISDC) research.1 Being nurtured within the ﬁeld of Information Systems, ISDC
research tends to focus on the development and implementation of information
technology applications and the organizational changes associated with them. Never-
theless ISDC research has extended the IS research domain to consider the broader
socio-economic context of the organizations hosting new technologies. I will refer to
this object of study of ISDC research as ‘IS innovation’ to convey the notion of novelty
of experiences of IS implementation and the associated changes within the hosting
organization and beyond it. The rationale for using the term innovation is that, even if
the technologies implemented in an IS project are already common elsewhere and
widespread, the local experience of technology implementation and socio-organiza-
tional change constitutes an innovation for the organization concerned and may well
constitute innovation for its socio-economic context. Seeing IS implementation as
innovation sensitizes the researcher to consider the effort of technology and organiza-
tional change and the value of such change in relation to an organization’s context. As
I argue in this chapter, this is particularly important in ISDC research.

ISDC research is premissed on the potential of ICT to contribute to the improve-
ment of socio-economic conditions in developing countries (Sahay 2001; Walsham,
Robey, and Sahay 2007). It aspires to the realization of perceptions of desirable
world orders, such as Sen’s theory of capabilities (Madon 2004) or the United
Nations’ Millennium Goal (Gilhooly 2005) vision of eradicating poverty. It is also
guided by conceptual models of transformations happening in the contemporary
world that necessitate ICT infrastructures, such as Castells’ ideas of society and
economy as networks (Braa, Monteiro, and Sahay 2004). But beyond these very
general premisses and aspirations, every ISDC study also makes assumptions about
the way IS innovation happens in the context of developing countries and about the
notion and process of ‘development’ towards which IS innovation is intended to
contribute.
The existence of alternative assumptions and theoretical perspectives regarding IS
innovation are a feature of the epistemological state of IS research in general, and has
been extensively discussed in the IS literature (Hirschheim and Klein 1989; Orlikowski
and Baroudi 1991; Robey and Boudreau 1999). To some, this state of diversity of
research questions, theoretical foundations, and research method is a weakness that
needs to be corrected with stricter ‘disciplinary’ mechanisms (Banville and Landry
1992; Benbasat and Weber 1996; Benbasat and Zmud 2003). But others have argued
that that plurality in IS research stems from the nature of IS innovation as a social
endeavour, and reﬂects deeper epistemological perspectives within the social sciences.
Rather than seeking to eliminate alternative perspectives, IS research can strengthen its
contributions by making explicit their underlying conceptual and theoretical differ-
ences (Hirschheim and Klein 1989; Robey 1996). I take this latter view and in this
chapter I seek to explore the different underlying perspectives regarding IS innovation
within the broader socio-economic context of developing countries.
Development is a contested notion too, and it has been subject to a long theoretical
debate. Moreover, development policy and action are entangled with the conﬂicting
interests and power relations in the contemporary global and national politics. The
international agencies’ policies for economic growth and institutional reform are
widely contested in developing countries. Most ISDC studies avoid engaging with
controversies on ‘development’ and tend not to discuss what constitutes development.
However, some ISDC authors addressed the question of development more explicitly.
For example, Thompson (2004) drew from Escobar’s Foucauldian critiques of the
discourse on development and voiced suspicion about the development policies IS
innovation interventions are intended to support (Thompson 2004). Some authors
have taken a critical stance to the currently prevailing development ideas that drive the
discourse on digital divide and justiﬁes IS innovation in terms of creating a country’s
competitiveness capabilities in a global free market (Warschauer 2003; Wade 2004a).
Others pointed out the ongoing controversies about the validity of this theoretical
position and suspicions on the motives of the agencies that promote them (Heeks and
Kenny 2002; Avgerou 2003b; Ciborra 2005; Westrup and Al-Jaghoub forthcoming).
648
CHRISANTHI AVGEROU

The combination of assumptions regarding the nature of IS innovation effort and
development as the aim for IS innovation gives rise to different discourses in ISDC
research. I use the term ‘discourses’ to refer to research approaches stemming from
these assumptions on the fundamental nature and consequences of IS innovation.
Approach is too vague a term, while ‘discourse’ indicates more speciﬁcally the research
language of concepts, theories, and methods, through which researchers form the
object of a research study and construct arguments about it.
My main literature sources for this chapter are the specialist journals on ISDC,
namely Information Technology for Development, Information Technologies and Inter-
national Development, and the Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing
Countries; and the proceedings of the series of conferences on ICT in developing
countries organized by the IFIP WG9.4, published in books and journal special issues
(Bhatnagar and Bjrn-Andersen 1990; Bhatnagar and Odedra 1992; Odedra-Straub
1996; Roche and Blaine 1996; Avgerou and Walsham 2000; Krishna and Madon 2002;
Sahay and Avgerou 2002; Krishna and Madon 2003). In addition, I reviewed articles on
developing countries published in the general IS journals, some of them in special
issues on ISDC research.2
In the next section I present two perspectives regarding the nature of the IS
innovation process: as transfer and diffusion and as socially embedded action; I draw
relevant examples from the literature on IS implementation and IS and culture to
demonstrate them. In the following section I distinguish between two perspectives on
the nature of development transformation towards which ICT is understood to con-
tribute: progressive transformation and disruptive transformation. I draw examples
from various research themes and, more speciﬁcally, from the literature on telecentres.
I then discuss the four discourses formed by combining the perspectives on the nature
of IS innovation process and on the nature of development transformation process, and
demonstrate them with examples from the literature on software industries in devel-
oping countries. Finally, in the conclusions, I argue for the need to develop theoretical
capabilities for studying IS innovation in relation to socio-economic contexts and to
increase awareness and use of socio-economic development theory.
IS INNOVATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
..................................................................................................................
ISDC research has been shaped with acute awareness of the relentless ICT and
organizational innovation taking place in advanced economies of the world—primarily
North America and Europe—and of the increasing socio-economic interconnectedness
of all countries and regions in the condition named globalization. With such awareness,
an assumption permeating most ISDC research is that developing countries are at a
disadvantage in relation to the IS innovation experiences in the context of the origin of
new technologies and related new organizational models. This sense of disadvantage is
manifested in various ways. To begin with, emphasis has been given to the limited
DISCOURSES ON INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
649

technology and skills available in developing countries or regions. This culminated in
the notion of ‘digital divide’ signifying a new form of inequality and source of socio-
economic disadvantage. Some research focused on the signiﬁcance of this problem and
sought to monitor progress in reducing it (Wresch 1998; Kenny 2000; Mbarika et al.
2003). Most ISDC research, though, tends to focus on the experiences and conse-
quences of IS innovation, rather than the limitations of technical resources that inhibit
it. Such research too tends to be grounded on the assumption that technological and
institutional trends are set elsewhere and conveys a sense of urgency to engage with
these trends. Difﬁculties met in following trends and standards of ICT-enabled global-
ization and in practising IS innovation effectively feature frequently in research ques-
tions and ﬁndings of ISDC research (see e.g. Heeks 2002).
Thus, invariably, research on how IS innovation happens in developing countries
and with what consequences acknowledges and addresses distinctions of context. The
context where a new technology artefact and business model ﬁrst took shape (usually in
an advanced economy) may be different from the context where this combined artefact
and model are implemented as part of IS innovation practice in a developing country.
Moreover, the socio-organizational settings of IS innovation within sectors, countries,
or regions may differ substantially from each other—for example e-government is
practised differently and with different results in countries with different public
administration sectors.
General IS research has rarely addressed explicitly questions of the socio-economic
context in IS innovation and is weak in relevant theoretical guidance. Nevertheless
two different orientations towards addressing issues of context are implied in the
universalistic and situated research traditions of general IS research and inﬂuenced
ISDC research (Avgerou 2002; Avgerou and Madon 2004). Universalistic perspectives
elaborate on the value of ICT and information and on the processes of IS innovation
through which such value can be realized in terms of general techno-economic
reasoning, independently from the particular circumstances of the social actors
involved. For example they look for ‘best practice’, or for the most suitable new
organizational form for the information age (Scott Morton 1991; Fulk and DeSanctis
1999). They often acknowledge contextual contingencies, but assume an overriding
rationality that determines universal goals of IS innovation and the logic of action
towards their satisfaction (Porter and Millar 1984). In contrast, situated perspectives
consider IS innovation as enacted by social actors and tend to place emphasis on
meaning making and practice within the power dynamics of the immediate setting of
the innovating organization (Suchman 1994; Orlikowski et al. 1996). These perspec-
tives are discernible in two different ways of addressing issues of context in ISDC
research, either in terms of transfer and diffusion processes or in terms of socially
embedded processes.
650
CHRISANTHI AVGEROU

Transfer and Diffusion
The transfer and diffusion perspective examines IS innovation as the diffusion of IS
knowledge transferred from advanced economies and adapted to the conditions of
developing countries. This perspective assumes that the material/cognitive entities
that comprise IS technologies and associated practices of organizing are adequately
independent from the social circumstances that give rise to their being transferable,
more or less intact, into any other society. Consequently, subject to suitable
adaptation, these entities can make a desirable impact. Such research, therefore,
traces the particular factors that capture the differences of the recipient country and
organization that are likely to affect the innovation process—such as economic
conditions, technology competences, people’s attitudes to IT, institutionalized work
place habits. Consequently it designs modiﬁcations of the technologies and inter-
ventions in the recipient institutions to make them hospitable to the intended
innovation.
In studies of IS development and implementation, authors following the transfer
and diffusion approach assume and endeavour to show the relevance of general IS
research knowledge and good practice models (methods, analytical approaches, or
theories) in particular developing countries or regions and to work out adaptations
appropriate for them. They often shape their research in the conceptual terms of
the theories of technology diffusion and technology acceptance (Davis 1989; Rogers
1995). For example Rose and Straub (1998) and Al-Gahtani (2003) use Davis’s
technology acceptance model to study IT use in the Arab world, and identify
empirically the particular factors of the social and organizational context of the
Arab countries that affect their take-up of ICT (Rose and Straub 1998; Al-Gahtani
2003).
Many studies have sought to transfer and adapt systems development methodologies
to accommodate analyses of the socio-organizational conditions of developing
countries (Bell and Wood-Harper 1990; Korpela 1996; Korpela et al. 2000; Mursu,
Soriyan, and Korpela 2003). Similar method adaptation efforts have addressed the
implementation of ERP technologies and IS-driven organizational change (Jarvenpaa
and Leidner 1998; He 2004). Such studies enrich IS implementation knowledge and
professional practice by working out modiﬁcations appropriate to accommodate vari-
ous local circumstances. They avoid an a-contextual ‘best practice’ view and adopt a
notion of ‘appropriate’, context-speciﬁc practice (Avgerou and Land 1992; Bada 2002).
They challenge the feasibility of ‘transferring’ generic technical know-how into devel-
oping countries organizations with the expectation of the same organizational practices
and outcomes as in their context of origin (Avgerou 1996). Yet, they retain the general
assumptions on the validity of purpose of the attempted innovation as well as the
validity of the underlying objectives and rationality of the transferred methods in their
new context of practice.
DISCOURSES ON INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
651

Social Embeddedness
The social embeddedness perspective takes the view that IS innovation in developing
countries is about constructing new techno-organizational structures within a given local
social context. It focuses attention on the embeddedness of IS innovation in the social
context of various organizational settings of developing countries. The socially embed-
ded innovation research approach ﬁnds the assumption of the transfer and diffusion
perspective about the nature of information systems oversimplifying and misleading. It
has developed more elaborate ontologies of IS innovation as socially constructed entities,
and therefore contingent in their perceived signiﬁcance and their interplay with human
actors and their social institutions. The focal point of the research is the process of
innovation in situ, thus tracing the cognitive, emotional, and political capacities that
individuals nurtured in their local social institutions bring to bear on unfolding innova-
tion attempts. Through this approach the socially embedded innovation discourse sheds
light on what, regarding an attempted innovation, is locally meaningful, desirable, or
controversial, and therefore how innovation emerges (or is retarded) from the local social
dynamics. With attention to local concerns, situated meanings of ICT, and courses of
reasonable action that often differ from the taken-for-granted rationality of IS innova-
tion, ISDC studies reveal a much more complex picture of the IS innovation effort than
the general IS ﬁeld has constructed (see e.g. Miscione 2007).
Studies of IS implementation that follow the social embeddedness approach see the
purpose of innovation as arising from local problematizations and its course as being
determined by the way local actors make sense of it and accommodate it in their lives
(Avgerou 2002). To that end, this perspective found theoretical grounding in contem-
porary social theory, such as Actor Network Theory, structuration theory, organiza-
tional institutionalism. (See Part II for a discussion of such theories as these, as applied
to the ﬁeld of IS.) These provided insights and vocabularies to address conceptual
relationships such as technology/society, agency/structure, technical reasoning/institu-
tional dynamics. The main objective of contextualist ISDC studies has been the
development of theoretical capacity for addressing questions concerning the way
speciﬁc categories of technologies and social actors clusters are formed, shape each
other, and construct particular socio-economic effects.
In comparison to situated studies in the general IS ﬁeld, ISDC studies following the
social embeddedness approach broadens research perspective beyond the particular
circumstances of work within an organization—see for example (Orlikowski 1996;
Ciborra and Associates 2000; Orlikowski 2000). Early efforts to account for IS innova-
tion in relation to its context built on Pettigrew’s contextualist theory, which views
particular instances of organizational interventions as processes unfolding through
time in relation to layers of context: typically, the organizational setting and its national
environment (Pettigrew 1985; Walsham 1993). Madon, for example, followed Petti-
grew’s contextualist analysis to study the introduction of computers for the manage-
ment of a rural development programme in India’s local administration districts. Her
652
CHRISANTHI AVGEROU

analysis encompassed work norms within the district bureaucracies as well as cultural
aspects of the Indian rural setting within which the rural development initiative and its
administration was embedded (Madon 1993). While Pettigrew’s contextualist ap-
proach continues to be followed in ISDC studies (Braa et al. 2007a), several other
theoretical approaches have been introduced to explore IS innovation in the developing
countries’ context, including neo-institutionalist and social constructionist analyses
(Avgerou 2001; Avgerou 2003a; Miscione 2007; Silva 2007).
An example of research that takes such a socially embedded view of IS innovation is
the series of publications on an extensive action research programme aiming to
contribute to the development and implementation of healthcare information systems
(HISP) in African, Asian, and Latin American countries (Braa et al. 2007a; Braa,
Monteiro, and Sahay 2004). (See also Chapter 24.) Authors analysing the HISP efforts
have used a variety of complementary socio-theoretical approaches—structuration,
ANT, Castells’ networks of action model, complexity theory. They have not attempted
to capture the healthcare context of developing countries in a ‘best practice’ general
model. Instead, they have aimed to develop a conceptual analytical capacity to guide
context-speciﬁc sense making and practice in countries with different healthcare
systems and practices. This has led them to consider a range of issues, including
standards that are sensitive to the local context (Braa et al. 2007a), and multiple
country collaboration across north (technologically and economically advanced) and
south (developing) regions (Braa et al. 2007b).
Another example of the social embeddedness perspective is a study of a ten-year
effort to implement a data infrastructure for land administration in Guatemala by Silva
(2007). His study traces the unfolding of power dynamics within the institutional
context of the country and focuses on the historically formed lack of inter-institutional
cooperation in the country that created conditions unfavourable to sharing data.
Transfer and Diffusion and Social Embeddedness
Perspectives in Research on IS and Culture
In ISDC studies of culture the transfer and diffusion approach frames the relationship
of IS and culture in terms of transferring ICT applications into a non-Western national
culture, which is usually seen as posing obstacles to innovation and as being a source of
resistance (Straub, Loch, and Hill 2001). Hofstede’s model of national culture variables
and cultural difference (Hofstede 1984) is often used to analyse conﬂicts between
values embedded into and behaviours required by ICT and the national culture of
developing countries (Leidner and Kayworth 2006).
Such studies have been criticized as oversimplifying cultural difference (see e.g.
Myers and Tan 2002); they ‘sweep the subtleties of cultural difference under the
universal carpet’ as Walsham put it in his extensive discussion of examples of ISDC
studies of IS innovation and culture (Walsham 2001). In contrast, research taking the
DISCOURSES ON INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
653

socially embedded and transformative perspective has led many authors to highlight
distinct features of historically formed collective behaviour that require attention when
designing appropriate ICT systems, or when organizing the innovation process, such as
attitude to hierarchy, arranging action in time, sense of space and geography (Sahay
1998; Rohitratana 2000; Zakaria, Stanton, and Sarker-Barney 2003). It has also drawn
attention to cross-cultural interactions. In effect, such studies avoid the juxtaposition of
IS innovation—assumed to be inscribed with Western culture—with DC culture—
assumed to be bent to accommodate it (Walsham 2002).
Particularly promising is the research that suggests a concept of culture which is
dynamic and emergent, ‘constantly being maintained and changing’, an ongoing
accomplishment (Westrup et al. 2003). Such research transcends the ICT/culture ﬁt
or conﬂict. Neither ICT nor culture are taken to be uni-dimensional determinants of
values and behaviours. ICT, seen as a hybrid network of artefacts, people, and institu-
tions, is subject to negotiation and local IS innovation shaping. Cultural inﬂuence on IS
innovation, seen as a historically formed disposition for a particular behaviour, may
stem from the innovating organization, its national or regional environment, or the
social class of individual actors. And rather than IS innovation ﬁtting in or conﬂicting
with the culture of its social context, of particular interest is the mutual reconstitution
of IS innovation and the cultures that inﬂuence it.
THE QUESTION OF DEVELOPMENT
IN ISDC RESEARCH
..................................................................................................................
The main motivation for ISDC research is the belief that ICT has, potentially, the
capacity to contribute towards the improvement of many different aspects of life, from
alleviating poverty to strengthening the democratic polity. But not all IS research in
developing countries engages explicitly with questions of ‘development’ as action to
transform the socio-economic conditions that have been historically formed in the so-
called ‘developing countries’. In this chapter I am interested in the research that
concerns developing countries and is conscious of development as a purposeful and
contested endeavour. Therefore, I examine that part of the literature that goes beyond a
declaration of an assumption that ICT may serve good causes—e.g. the elimination of
poverty—and at least implicitly takes a position regarding the socio-economic trans-
formation process through which ICT will deliver its potential beneﬁt.
Such transformative ISDC research often focuses on speciﬁc developmental aims,
such as enhancement of livelihoods in rural areas (Duncombe and Heeks 2002), or
improved government services (Krishna and Walsham 2005), and seeks to understand
the effort it takes for IS innovation to take place successfully and deliver expected
beneﬁts. More often than not, though, ISDC research, confronted with the complex
and highly political challenges of development endeavours, takes a critical stance to the
654
CHRISANTHI AVGEROU

role of ICT and development. I distinguish two perspectives of ICT-enabled develop-
ment. The progressive perspective considers ICT as enabling transformations in multi-
ple domains of human activities, but they can be accommodated within the existing
international and local social order. The disruptive perspective is premissed on the
highly political and controversial nature of development, both as a concept and as an
area of policy for international and local action, and reveal conﬂicts of interest and
struggles of power as a necessary part of IS innovation in developing countries.
Progressive Transformation
The progressive transformation perspective in ISDC research reﬂects a much more
widespread understanding of ICT as an instrument for economic and social gains that
has been promoted since the mid-1990s by major international development agencies,
including the World Bank (World Bank 1999), the United Nations Development
Programme (United Nations Development Programme 2001), the World Economic
Forum (Dutta and Mia 2009). UNDP’s 2001 Human Development Report (United
Nations Development Programme 2001: 29) is a good example of the association
international organizations make between ICT and development, not least because
this series of UNDP reports takes a broad view of development as a socio-economic
condition that goes beyond a narrow consideration of economic growth. The 2001
UNDP report seeks to present a clear association between technology and desirable
development effects, giving special attention to ICT—particularly the Internet. Indica-
tively, it quotes a World Bank study (Wang et al. 1999) that showed ‘technical progress
accounted for 40–50% of mortality reductions between 1960 and 1990—making
technology a more important source of gains than higher incomes or higher education
levels among women’ (United Nations Development Programme 2001: 29). It asserts
that ‘[c]ross-country studies suggest that technological change accounts for a large
portion of differences in growth rates’ (ibid.).
Central in this perspective is the view that ‘investment in ICT and effective use do
matter for the economic development of a country’ (Mann 2004: 67). It is acknowl-
edged that other changes matter too, particularly because ICT needs to be accompanied
by organizational restructuring to deliver productivity gains (Dedrick, Gurbaxani, and
Kraemer 2003; Draca, Sadun, and Van Reenen 2007). Moreover, development requires
effective government, and e-government is considered to be an important tool for
achieving efﬁciency, transparency, and responsiveness. International development
agencies have emphasized also the potential of ICT to improve the performance of
state institutions, the delivery of health and education services, as well as democratic
participation (United Nations Development Programme 2001).
Some ISDC research has sought to corroborate this thesis on the economic signiﬁ-
cance of ICT for development (Ngwenyama et al. 2006; Mbarika et al. 2007), addressing
concerns of sceptics who doubt the appropriateness of ICT for poor countries and point
DISCOURSES ON INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
655

out their pressing necessity to provide for the basic life needs of a large part of their
population, alleviate extreme poverty, and ﬁght endemic diseases and illiteracy. But on
the whole ISDC research in the progressive transformation perspective tends to accept
without testing the assumption that ICT potentially contributes to economic growth and
to investigate the features of the ICT-based economy in particular countries or regions
(Molla 2000) or the way ICT contributes to the competitiveness of organizations or
regions (La Rovere 1996; Jarvenpaa and Leidner 1998; Goonatilake, Maizza-Neto,
and Jayawardene 2000; La Rovere and Pereira 2000; Munkvold and Tundui 2005).
Some research from the progressive transformation perspective elaborated on the
conditions under which ICT-mediated business models and practices, which are con-
sidered necessary for participating in the global economy, are diffused or the conditions
under which IT-enabled niche industries are fostered (Davis, McMaster, and Nowak
2002).
The progressive transformation perspective is discernible also in research studying
IS innovation in non-commercial organizations, such as in the development of national
health data infrastructures (Braa et al. 2007a). The fundamental assumption is that IS
innovation in the institutions responsible for the provision of social services can
empower them to improve their services and work conditions (Puri 2007).
Disruptive Transformation
The disruptive transformation perspective considers development, including ICT-
enabled development, as a contested endeavour or as involving action that affects
differently different populations, and thus laden with conﬂict. Research taking this
perspective often expresses doubts about the effectiveness and even the intentions of
international or national policies regarding ICT and development. At the international
level, analysis manifests suspicion of the developmental intentions of the so-called
Washington Consensus as well as the effectiveness of the policies for development that
comply with the institutions that comprise it—World Bank, IMF, WTO. At the local
level they see the established social order as harbouring inequalities of wealth and
power—for example in relation to castes, gender, or ethnic origin—and the ICT-
enabled interventions as affecting differently categories of citizens. This approach
tends to draw from heterodox economic ideas and critics of globalization (Wade
2004b) and often applies critical theoretical analyses (Kanungo 2003). The researcher
is not a neutral observer of the way IS innovation contributes to socio-economic
transformations; he or she takes the side of a particular category of people (e.g. the
poor, women, children of the world or of a particular developing region) who are weak
and vulnerable in the socio-economic regimes of their milieu, and who are at risk to
lose out (or at least not beneﬁt) from IS innovation initiatives. Research from the
disruptive transformation perspective reveals hidden intentions and power dynamics
656
CHRISANTHI AVGEROU

which maintain or worsens current unevenness of wealth and opportunities for fulﬁlled
lives among countries and categories of people.
A good example of the disruptive transformation perspective is Ciborra’s study of
the computerization of driving licences in Jordan (2005). In his analysis, Ciborra
identiﬁes an international socio-political signiﬁcance of e-government interventions.
Although the declared objectives of e-government projects, such as the computeriza-
tion of the issuing of driving licences, are improvements of efﬁciency of citizen services,
Ciborra’s study shows that such an innovation stumbles upon the complex network of
state government controlling mechanisms. Indeed Ciborra, drawing from Heidegger’s
treatise on technology, points out the ordering character of information technology.
The order sought in this case study, he argues, does not concern only the Jordanian
government, but the world order at large. He traces the origin of the rationale of e-
government in developing countries in the Washington Consensus and the security
interests of the US government (Ciborra 2005), thus critically revealing a disruptive
logic of IS innovation.
Progressive vs Disruptive Transformation Perspectives
in Research on Telecentres
The difference between these two perspectives is manifested in the research on tele-
centres, most of which acknowledges and discusses developmental aims. The rationale
for the creation of telecentres is that countries or regions which do not have access to
internet-based services are ‘excluded’ not only from global economic opportunities but
also from modern society’s information channels for education, health, and democratic
participation. Poverty in many developing country areas, particularly the rural regions,
prohibits the diffusion of ICT and telecommunication connectivity to any extent
comparable to that of advanced economies. A solution appeared to be the development
of community information services, often called telecentres, equipped with computers,
Internet connection, as well as fax machines. Many initiatives to introduce telecentres
in poor rural communities in developing countries have been taken by international
NGOs, such as the Canadian IDRC’s Acacia3 programme in Africa, or by country
governments. Although their services vary, most of them run software applications of
local interest, such as providing information on health, agricultural product prices,
educational material, or the issuing of government certiﬁcates.
Early research in the 1990s presented promising initiatives, highlighting the per-
ceived potential of local empowerment through information and communication.
Authors that heralded the developmental opportunities of telecentres gave examples
of possibilities of overcoming extreme poverty or bureaucratic obstacles, of participat-
ing in public sector decisions and actions, and of overcoming corruption (Beilur 2007).
Later, research indicated a more nuanced picture of some impressive cases of economic
gain and social empowerment, widespread failure and closure, and increasing
DISCOURSES ON INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
657

frustration among key actors such as the entrepreneurs who owned the telecentres,
users/customers, and donors (Beilur 2007; Madon et al. 2007). Of interest to the
discussion in this chapter is the researchers’ assumptions about the way telecentres
are expected to contribute their developmental promise.
Much of the research on telecentres assumes that they are introduced in the existing
socio-economic structures and practices of disadvantaged communities and can have a
positive impact on lessening the gap between them and the advanced industrialized
societies. A common expectation in the telecentres initiatives by many NGOs and
governments, even in very poor communities, has been that, after investing some seed
money, telecentres would form viable enterprises, able to cover the costs of their
operations and to sustain a proﬁtable business for local entrepreneurs (Harris,
Kumar, and Balaji 2003). Consequently, research on telecentres attempts to ﬁt and
adapt the economic rationality of proﬁtable business, even though, as research shows,
there is not much potential for proﬁt making from telecentre ‘customers’ who live in
extreme poverty and most of whom have little appreciation of the beneﬁts they may
gain from using ICT services (Madon et al. 2007).
Some research that attempted to explain why so often telecentres prove unsustain-
able raised fundamental questions of effective mechanisms for development, such as
public/private partnership mechanism of governance for development (Madon 2005).
Kanungo’s (2003) analysis of the sustainability of an initiative that uses IT to create
‘knowledge centers’ in Indian villages places emphasis on the value of these centres ‘in
terms of a better informed and liberated society’. His Habermasian approach focuses
on the disruptive mechanisms enabled by IT that may form a basis for empowerment
for the rural poor.
FOUR DISCOURSES ON IS INNOVATION
AND DEVELOPMENT
..................................................................................................................
The combination of the two perspectives regarding the nature of the IS innovation
process and the nature of the development transformation process give rise to distinc-
tive discourses about ICT and development, see Figure 25.1. I don’t mean that ISDC
publications can be classiﬁed unambiguously on the four squares of a matrix. Indeed,
some of the examples I draw from the ISDC literature could be positioned elsewhere on
the plane of the matrix if a discussant chose to focus on some line of argument of a
research article other than the one I chose to bring to the readers’ attention. But my aim
is not to classify existing research in rigid categories. It is to show the streams of
argumentation about ICT and development that result from taking—most often in an
unacknowledged way—these particular views about IS innovation and about develop-
ment.
658
CHRISANTHI AVGEROU

I ﬁnd it easier to distinguish between the transfer and diffusion from the social
embeddedness perspective of IS innovation and more difﬁcult to do so for authors’
perspectives regarding development. This is because ISDC research rarely adequately
deﬁnes and discusses development perspectives and rarely draws from socio-economic
development theory in its analysis. Moreover, quite frequently authors mix progressive
transformation and disruptive transformation perspectives. For example, they may
adopt the progressive transformation view of ICT and development at the global
context by grounding their analysis on publications of indicator tables and policies of
international agencies that follow neoclassical economic reasoning, and they may
include a disruptive transformation view in their arguments that challenge existing
power orders in domestic efforts of harnessing ICT (Brown and Brown 2009). Differ-
ences of perspective on the development process at different levels of context may
indicate either complementarities or inconsistencies in the argumentation of an author.
A point I wish to make in this chapter is that ISDC research can improve its contribu-
tions if authors extend the theoretical grounding of their research to draw from debates
on development theory and policy.
Progressive
transformation
Disruptive
transformation
Innovation
by transfer
and
diffusion
Socially
embedded
innovation
ICT and development as 
socio-economic
improvements through 
locally situated action
ICT and development as 
socio-economic
improvements through 
transfer and 
diffusion
ICT does not necessarily 
result in development for 
all: it is subject to the 
power dynamics of IS 
innovation action
ICT does not necessarily 
result in development 
for all: the transfer and 
diffusion of ICT leads to 
uneven development
FIGURE 25.1 Four discourses on ICT and development
DISCOURSES ON INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
659

ICT and Development as Socio-economic Improvements
through the Transfer and Diffusion of ICT and Required
Institutions
This discourse is formed by intertwining the transfer and diffusion perspective of IS
innovation with the progressive transformation perspective of development. It tends to
take the form of technical rational techno-economic argumentation, presenting the
adoption of ICT-based practices pioneered in advanced economies as a necessity for
improving life conditions in developing countries. A great deal of emphasis is given to
efﬁciency gains resulting from ICT. The discourse uses the ‘catch up’ metaphor:
developing countries should adopt the technologies and institutions through which
developed countries are understood to have achieved prosperity and improvements in
health, education, and political participation to close the gap that separates them. It is
recognized that existing institutional conditions in most developing countries are not
adequate to support such a vision, and therefore, the argument goes, adaptation is
needed (Straub, Loch, and Hill 2001; Bada 2002). One size of ICT and organizational
models does not ﬁt all, but the same shape is thought to work for all and local
institutions should be bent to match it.
ICT and Development as Socio-economic Improvements
through Locally Situated Action
This discourse is formed by the social embeddedness perspective of IS innovation
with the progressive transformation perspective of development. It assumes the
capacity of ICT to contribute towards improving life conditions, but sees the form
and processes of improvements as primarily locally decided in accordance with
historically shaped meanings and power relations. Its core argument is that socio-
economic change should make sense to the local people, who should be comfortable
with the processes of change. There may be obstacles in the harnessing of the
developmental potential, stemming from historically developed social orders, such
as overcentralized public administration and authoritarian hierarchies, but the belief
expressed in this discourse is that these can be addressed with empowering demo-
cratic ICT policies and appropriate professional practices, such as allowing for user
participation (Braa, Monteiro, and Sahay 2004; Sahay and Walsham 2005; Puri 2007).
This discourse acknowledges inﬂuences from global actors. It is cautious, but not
confrontational about prevailing development ideologies and policies of international
organizations. It often has a pragmatic character: technologies and methods trans-
ferred from technologically advanced societies do not work. Local improvisations are
necessary to close the gap between theory and actual developing countries conditions.
An example is Heeks’s paper which suggests improvisations in systems development
660
CHRISANTHI AVGEROU

to avoid failure seen as caused by the inappropriateness of general IS design methods
(Heeks 2002).
ICT does not Necessarily Result in Development for
All: The Transfer and Diffusion of ICT Leads to
Uneven Development
This discourse combines the transfer and diffusion perspective of IS innovation with
the disruptive transformation perspective of development. Its argumentation accepts
the logic of ICT as a force for socio-economic change, but ﬁnds that it entails risks of
reinforcing domination and inequality. Thus, it uncovers distorting effects of ICT and
institutional transfer and diffusion, and interests in preserving historically formed
privileges (Wade 2004a; Ciborra 2005). It tends to be confrontational, challenging
the evidence on the generally seen as beneﬁcial effects of development policies such as
globalization, liberalization, ICT, and productivity gains (Wade 2004b), and doubting
the motives of powerful actors, such as the international development agencies,
national policy makers, and corporate managers.
ICT does not Necessarily Result in Development for All: It is
Subject to the Power Dynamics of IS Innovation Action
This discourse intertwines the social embeddedness perspective of IS innovation with
the progressive transformation perspective of development. It is a critical discourse in
the sociological sense of critical theory, and is concerned with particular biases of
power and inequalities in speciﬁc socio-economic conditions of a country or a com-
munity. The starting position is the local context, with its historically formed patterns
of privileges, and may extend its analysis to the biased inﬂuences exerted from the
power-laden inscriptions carried by particular technologies or institutional reform
models and policies. In a study of the potential use of ICT by Egyptian craftswomen,
Hassanin points out various structural challenges that inhibit their capacity to trade in
global markets (Hassanin 2008). In effect, the socially embedded and disruptive
discourse deconstructs the dominant view about ICT and development, juxtaposing
it to the local interests and imaginaries of a better life. Its critiques question not only the
effectiveness of ICT and development to lead to life improvements, but also the
desirability of their projected visions (Thompson 2004; Stahl 2008).
DISCOURSES ON INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
661

The Four Discourses in ISDC Research on the Software
Industry
Prominent amidst the ISDC literature is a stream of studies focusing on the software
industries that emerged in a number of developing countries and compete at the global
market, thus forming a substantial part of the ‘global outsourcing’ or ‘offshore out-
sourcing’ phenomenon (Carmel and Agarwal 2002). India is the most successful
country in this business, and the efforts of its software ﬁrms have been studied within
the ISDC subﬁeld since its early days nearly twenty years ago (Heeks 1990; Sahay,
Nicholson, and Krishna 2003; Nicholson and Sahay 2004).
Most research on developing countries’ software industries argue about ICT and
development as socio-economic improvements through the transfer and diffusion of
ICT capabilities and required institutions. They see the developmental potential of
these industries in their capability to compete in global markets. Their achievement lies
in being able to master software production techniques and business models that allow
them to compete. Thus, many such studies examined the factors that account for
software industry success within the global market of services and products of IS
innovation (Carmel 2003a; Adelakum 2005). Success factors include technology and
project management skills, labour costs, telecommunications infrastructures, English
language skills, copyright legislation, and government industrial policy. There are also
ongoing studies that assess and compare the relative advantages among developing
countries competing for the lucrative markets of industrialized countries (Carmel
2003c). For example, while India is so far considered the most successful DC software
exporter, competition from China on the basis of lower salaries may erode its advan-
tage in some important markets, such as Japan.
Some research has focused on the micro-societal processes that constitute the
practices of global outsourcing services, highlighted the difﬁculties of cross-cultural
collaboration and the surfacing of multiple political conﬂicts (Barrett and Walsham
1995; Nicholson and Sahay 2001), and emphasized the signiﬁcance of organizational
identity and the intrinsically tacit nature of the knowledge of software developers
(Sahay, Nicholson, and Krishna 2003; Nicholson and Sahay 2004). For example,
Nicholson and Sahay’s study of the policy efforts of the Costa Rican government to
promote an export-oriented industry highlighted the implications of historically
formed vested interests in the country, power structures, and attitudes towards
development (Nicholson and Sahay 2007). Nevertheless the discourse of such
research does not challenge an implicit progressive transformation view of ICT as
an enabler of economic development by participating competitively in the global
free market.
Both these discourses—stemming from the transfer of skills and socially embedded
practice perspectives—on the software industry in developing countries tend to focus
on their capacity for export of software products and services, taking such exports to
be an important source of income and of national prestige. Some comparative
662
CHRISANTHI AVGEROU

analyses of the software industries of major developing countries suggest that there
may be trade-offs between efforts to foster an export-oriented software industry and
IS innovation in domestic organizations (Carmel 2003b; Commander 2005). For
example, although successful in exporting software products and services, India’s
software industry is much less successful in contributing to domestic organizations’
IS innovation. The ‘trickle down’ effect is too slow to make a difference for the rest of
the economy so far.
Indeed there is research from the transfer and diffusion and disruptive transfor-
mation perspectives that engages in a critical discourse about the developmental
role of the developing countries’ software industry. D’Costa discusses the Indian
software sector as a case of ‘uneven and combined development’, that is, as
coexisting with stagnating sectors such as heavy industry and giving rise to tensions
that stem from competing modes of production, inequality, and differential growth
rates among different regions (D’Costa 2002). D’Costa’s argumentation leads to the
suggestion of state action for a balanced development of the economy, by assisting
the development of other sectors and thus minimizing the social problems of
uneven development.
Madon and Sahay focused on changes in the social fabric of the city of Bangalore
caused by its booming software industry, and formed arguments from the social
embeddedness and disruptive transformation perspectives (Madon and Sahay 2000).
They point out that the city has not attracted only afﬂuent professionals but also the
very poor, seeking works at the margins of the ofﬁcial economy and living in slums at
the borders of the city, and their research concern is how the lives of this section of the
population can be improved.
CONCLUSIONS
..................................................................................................................
ISDC has a lot to contribute by engaging with the ongoing research and debate
regarding development that produce theoretical views about the role of ICT and
underpin policy action, such as international political economy and institutional
economics. To that end, empirical ISDC research needs to develop epistemological
capacity to associate the study of IS innovation with the particular socio-economic
rationale and policies of development that provide its underlying justiﬁcation and
targets. If it does so, ISDC research faces two major challenges as a subﬁeld of
information systems. The ﬁrst is methodological/theoretical and is related with its
recognition of the signiﬁcance of contextual contingency, that both the diffusion and
the social embeddedness discourses share. ISDC studies need to identify the context
that matters and develop theory capable of addressing the interrelationship of context
with IS innovation. To my judgement the social embeddedness discourse is in a better
position to do so. As it has been developed in close association with contemporary
DISCOURSES ON INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
663

social theory, its elaborate socio-technical concepts address more effectively the dy-
namic interplay between the artefacts/cognitive constructs of IS innovation and the
multiple and changing social dimensions in developing countries.
The second challenge is related with the legitimacy of discourses that openly
address contemporary political issues. In particular, the disruptive transformation
discourses of ISDC research have a kind of criticality that is unprecedented in the
IS ﬁeld. The literature that discusses the developmental potential of ICT and
associates IS innovation initiatives with social, political, and economic change
articulates critical views about the power relations within speciﬁc developing
countries and the world at large. The IS ﬁeld, though familiar with critical dis-
courses, mainly regarding the organizational level politics of the work place (How-
croft and Trauth 2005), has rarely engaged with macro-political analyses regarding
ICT and institutional change. ISDC studies that concern the role of ICT in the
struggle for the transformation of the life conditions of the billions of poor—with
implications for the lives of the afﬂuent—inevitably come to refer to political
ideologies of development (such as the ‘Washington consensus’ or ‘basic needs’
views), and to policies and actions of development institutions (such as the World
Bank, the aid agencies of ‘Western’ countries, international NGOs). Analyses of the
IS innovation context include controversial government policies, such as liberaliza-
tion of telecommunications for extending connectivity, or the ﬁltering of Internet
information by national governments.
This is where, I believe, theoretical strengthening is mostly needed. Without diligent
theoretical grounding critical discourses on ICT and development run the risk of
having a polemic character, unworthy of scholarly attention and unconvincing in
policy circles. ISDC research has a great deal to gain from studying theories pertaining
to argumentation of development in economics and political sciences, in a similar way
that IS research gained strength in its argumentation about the nature of IS innovation
from studying theories of technology in sociology.
NOTES
1. For a review, see Avgerou (2008).
2. See The Information Society, 19(1), 2003; Information Technology and People, 16(1), 2003;
MISQ, 31(2), 2006.
3. For information about IDRC’s telecentre initiative, see <http:www.idrc.ca/acacia/index.
html>. Other initiatives for the creation of community telecentres by international devel-
opment organizations include ITU’s <http:www.itu.int/ITU-D/index.html>; UNESCO’s
<http:www.unesco.org/websowlr/iip/#funding>, and the World Bank’s <http:worldbank.
org/html/fpd/telecoms/subtelecom/selected_projects.htm>.
664
CHRISANTHI AVGEROU

REFERENCES
Adelakum, O. (2005). ‘Offshore IT Outsourcing to Emerging Economies: Analysis of Readi-
ness vs Attractiveness’, in A. O. Bada and A. Okunoye (eds.), Proceedings of the 8th
International Working Conference of IFIP WG9.4: Enhancing Human Resource Develop-
ment through IC. Abuja.
Al-Gahtani, S. S. (2003). ‘Computer Technology Adoption in Saudi Arabia: Correlates of
Perceived Innovation Attributes’, Information Technology for Development, 10(1): 57–69.
Avgerou, C. (1996). ‘Transferability of Information Technology and Organisational Practices’,
in M. Odedra-Straub (ed.), Global Information Technology and Socio-Economic Develop-
ment. Nashua, NH: Ivy League, 106–15.
——(2001). ‘The Signiﬁcance of Context in Information Systems and Organisational Change’,
Information Systems Journal, 11: 43–63.
——(2002). Information Systems and Global Diversity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——(2003a). ‘IT as an Institutional Actor in Developing Countries’, in S. Krishna and
S. Madon (eds.), The Digital Challenge: Information Technology in the Development
Context. Aldershot: Ashgate, 46–62.
——(2003b). ‘The Link between ICT and Economic Growth in the Discourse of Develop-
ment’, in M. Korpela, R. Montealegro, and A. Poulymenakou (eds.), Organizational
Information Systems in the Context of Globalization. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 373–86.
——(2008). ‘Information Systems in Developing Countries: A Critical Research Review’,
Journal of Information Technology, 23(3): 133–46.
——and Land, F. (1992). ‘Examining the Appropriateness of Information Technology’, in
S. Bhatnagar and M. Odedra (eds.), Social Implications of Computers in Developing
Countries. New Delhi: Tata McGraw-Hill, 26–42.
——and Madon, S. (2004). ‘Framing IS Studies: Understanding the Social Context of IS
Innovation’, in C. Avgerou, C. Ciborra, and F. Land (eds.), The Social Study of Information
and Communication Technology: Innovation, Actors, and Contexts. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 162–82.
——and Walsham, G. (eds.) (2000). Information Technology in Context: Studies from the
Perspective of Developing Countries. London: Ashgate.
Bada, A. O. (2002). ‘Local Adaptations to Global Trends: A Study of an IT-Based Organiza-
tional Change Programme in a Nigerian Bank’, Information Society, 18(2): 77–86.
Banville, C., and Landry, M. (1992). ‘Can the Field of MIS be Disciplined?’, in R. Galliers (ed.),
Information Systems Research. Oxford: Blackwell, 61–88.
Barrett, M., and Walsham, G. (1995). ‘Managing IT for Business Innovation: Issues of
Culture, Learning, and Leadership in a Jamaican Insurance Company’, Journal of Global
Information Management, 3(3): 25–33.
Beilur, S. (2007). ‘Using Stakeholder Theory to Analyze Telecenter Projects’, Information
Technologies and International Development, 3(3): 61–80.
Bell, S., and Wood-Harper, A. T. (1990). ‘Information Systems Development for Developing
Countries’, in S. C. Bhatnagar and N. Bjrn-Andersen (eds.), Information Technology in
Developing Countries. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 23–40.
Benbasat, I., and Weber, R. (1996). ‘Rethinking “Diversity” in Information Systems Research’,
Information Systems Research, 7(4): 369–99.
——and Zmud, R. W. (2003). ‘The Identity Crisis within the IS Discipline: Deﬁning and
Communicating the Discipline’s Core Properties’, MIS Quarterly, 27(2): 183–94.
DISCOURSES ON INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
665

Bhatnagar, S. C., and Bjrn-Andersen, N. (eds.) (1990). Information Technology in Developing
Countries. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
——and Odedra, M. (eds.) (1992). Social Implications of Computers in Developing Countries.
New Delhi: Tata McGraw-Hill.
Braa, J., Monteiro, E., and Sahay, S. (2004). ‘Networks of Action: Sustainable Health Infor-
mation Systems across Developing Countries’, MIS Quarterly, 28(3): 337–62.
——Hanseth, O., Heywood, A., Mohammed, W., and Shaw, V. (2007a). ‘Developing Health
Information Systems in Developing Countries: The Flexible Standards Strategy’, MIS
Quarterly, 31(2): 381–402.
——Monteiro, E., Sahay, S., Staring, K., and Titlestad, O. (2007b). ‘Scaling up Local Learning:
Experiences from South–North Networks of Shared Software Development’, IFIP WG9.4
9th international conference ‘Taking Stock of E-Development’, São Paulo.
Brown, W., and Brown, I. (2009). Towards a Research Framework for a Human Development-
Based ‘Bottom of the Pyramid’ ICT Development Strategy in South Africa. Verona, Italy:
ECIS Proceedings.
Carmel, E. (2003a). ‘The Globalization of Software Outsourcing to Dozens of Nations: A
Preliminary Analysis of the Emergence of 3rd and 4th Tier Software Exporting Nations’, in
S. Krishna and S. Madon (eds.), The Digital Challenge: Information Technology in the
Development Context. Aldershot: Ashgate, 359–67.
——(2003b). ‘The New Software Exporting Nations: Impacts on National Well Being Result-
ing from their Software Exporting Industries’, Electronic Journal on Information Systems in
Developing Countries, 13(3).
——(2003c). ‘Taxonomy of New Software Exporting Nations’, Electronic Journal on Informa-
tion Systems in Developing Countries, 13(2).
—— and Agarwal, R. (2002). ‘The Maturation of Offshore Sourcing of Information Technol-
ogy Work’, MIS Quarterly Executive, 1(2).
Ciborra, C. (2005). ‘Interpreting e-Government and Development: Efﬁciency, Transparency
or Governance at a Distance?’, Information Technology & People, 18(3): 260–79.
——et al. (eds.) (2000). From Control to Drift. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Commander, S. (2005). The Software Industry in Emerging Markets. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Davis, C., McMaster, J., and Nowak, J. (2002). ‘IT-Enabled Services as Development Drivers
in Low-Income Countries: The Case of Fiji’, Electronic Journal on Information Systems in
Developing Countries, 9.
Davis, F. D. (1989). ‘Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use, and User Acceptance of
Information Technology’, MIS Quarterly, 13(3): 319–40.
D’Costa, A. P. (2002). ‘Uneven and Combined Development: Understanding India’s Software
Exports’, World Development, 31(1): 211–26.
Dedrick, J., Gurbaxani, V., and Kraemer, K. L. (2003). ‘Information Technology and Economic
Performance: A Critical Review of the Empirical Evidence’, ACM Computing Surveys,
35(1): 1–28.
Draca, M., Sadun, R., and Van Reenen, J. (2007). ‘Productivity and ICTs: A Review of the
Evidence’, in R. Mansell, C. Avgerou, D. Quah, and R. Silverstone (eds.), The Oxford
Handbook of Information and Communication Technologies. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 100–47.
Duncombe, R. A., and Heeks, R. B. (2002). ‘Entreprise across the Digital Divide: Information
Systems and Rural Micro-enterprise in Botswana’, Journal of International Development, 14
(1): 61–74.
666
CHRISANTHI AVGEROU

Dutta, S., and Mia, I. (2009).‘The Global Information Technology Report 2008–2009: Mobili-
ty in a Networked World’. World Economic Forum, Geneva, Switzerland.
Fulk, J., and DeSanctis, G. (1999). ‘Articulation of Communication Technology and Organi-
zational Form’, in G. DeSanctis and J. Fulk (eds.), Shaping Organization Form: Communi-
cation, Connection, and Community. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 5–32.
Gilhooly, D. (2005). ‘Innovation and Investment: Information and Communication Tech-
nologies and the Millennium Development Goals’. Report prepared for the United Nations
ICT Task Force in Support of the Science, Technology & Innovation Task Force of the
United Nations Millennnium Project.
Goonatilake, L., Maizza-Neto, O., and Jayawardene, P. (2000). ‘Enhancing Enterprise Com-
petitiveness in Developing Countries through the Promotion of Management Information
and Benchmarking Tools’, in S. Sahay, J. Miller, and D. Roode (eds.), Proceedings of the 6th
International Working Conference of IFIP WG 9.4: Information Flows, Local Improvisations
and Work Practices. Cape Town: STS Conferences.
Harris, R. W., Kumar, A., and Balaji, V. (2003). ‘Sustainable Telecentres? Two Cases from
India’, in S. Krishna and S. Madon (eds.), The Digital Challenge: Information Technology in
the Development Context. Aldershot: Ashgate, 124–35.
Hassanin, L. (2008). ‘Egyptian Women Artisans: ICTs are Not the Entry to Modern Markets’,
in C. Avgerou, M. L. Smith, and P. Van den Besselaar (eds.), Social Dimensions of
Information and Communication Technology Policy. New York: Springer.
He, X. (2004). ‘The ERP Challenge in China: A Resource-Based Perspective’, Information
Systems Journal, 14: 153–67.
Heeks, R. (1990). ‘Fourth Generation Languages (4GLs) and the Indian Software Industry’, in
S. C. Bhatnagar and N. Bjrn-Andersen (eds.), Information Technology in Developing
Countries. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 251–64.
——(2002). ‘Information Systems and Developing Countries: Failure, Success and Local
Improvisations’, Information Society, 18(2): 101–12.
——and Kenny, C. (2002). ‘ICTs and Development: Convergence or Divergence for Devel-
oping Countries?’ Bangalore: Information and Communication Technologies and Develop-
ment: New Opportunities, Perspectives and Challenges, 29–44.
Hirschheim, R., and Klein, H. K. (1989). ‘Four Paradigms of Information Systems Develop-
ment’, Communications of the ACM, 32(10): 1199–216.
Hofstede, G. (1984). Culture’s Consequences: International Differences in Work Related
Values. London: Sage.
Howcroft, D., and Trauth, E. M. (eds.) (2005). Handbook of Critical Information Systems
Research. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Jarvenpaa, S. L., and Leidner, D. E. (1998). ‘An Information Company in Mexico: Extending
the Resource-Based View of the Firm to a Developing Country Context’, Information
Systems Research, 9(4): 342–61.
Kanungo, S. (2003). ‘Information Village: Bridging the Digital Divide in Rural India’, in
S. Krishna and S. Madon (eds.), The Digital Challenge: Information Technology in the
Development Context. Aldershot: Ashgate, 104–23.
Kenny, C. J. (2000). ‘Expanding Internet Access to the Rural Poor in Africa’, Information
Technology for Development, 9(1): 25–32.
Korpela, M. (1996). ‘Computer Systems Development for “Delinking” in Nigeria’, in M.
Odedra-Straub (ed.), Global Information Technology and Socio-Economic Development.
Nashua, NH: Ivy League, 116–29.
DISCOURSES ON INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
667

Korpela, M., Soriyan, H. A., Olufokunbi, K. C., and Mursu, A. (2000). ‘Made-in-Nigeria
Systems Development Methodologies: An Action Research Project in the Health Sector’, in
C. Avgerou and G. Walsham (eds.), Information Technology in Context: Studies from the
Perspective of Developing Countries. Aldershot: Ashgate, 113–33.
Krishna, S., and Madon, S. (2002). ‘Information & Communication Technologies and Devel-
opment: New Opportunities, Perspectives & Challenges’, Seventh International Working
Conference of IFIP WG 9.4, Bangalore: Indian Institute of Management Bangalore.
————(eds.) (2003). The Digital Challenge: Information Technology in the Development
Context. Aldershot: Ashgate.
——and Walsham, G. (2005). ‘Implementing Public Information Systems in Developing
Countries: Learning from a Success Story’, Information Technology for Development, 11
(2): 1–18.
La Rovere, R. (1996). ‘Diffusion of IT and the Competitiveness of Brazilian Banking’, in E. M.
Roche and M. J. Blaine (eds.), Information Technology, Development and Policy. Aldershot:
Avebury, 95–112.
——and Pereira, M. V. R. (2000). ‘Adoption of ICT and Competitiveness in the Tourism
Sector: The Case of Brazilian Travel Agencies’, in S. Sahay, J. Miller, and D. Roode (eds.),
Proceedings of the 6th International Working Conference of IFIP WG 9.4: Information
Flows, Local Improvisations and Work Practices. Cape Town: SBS Conferences.
Leidner, D. E., and Kayworth, T. (2006). ‘A Review of Culture in Information Systems
Research: Toward a Theory of Information Technology Culture’, MIS Quarterly,
30(2): 357–99.
Madon, S. (1993). ‘Introducing Administrative Reform through the Application of Comput-
er-Based Information Systems: A Case Study in India’, Public Administration and Devel-
opment, 13: 37–48.
——(2004). ‘Evaluating the Developmental Impact of e-Governance Initiatives: An Explor-
atory Framework’ Electronic Journal on Information Systems in Developing Countries, 20
(5): 1–13.
——(2005). ‘Governance Lessons from the Experience of Telecentres in Kerala’, European
Journal of Information Systems, 14(4): 401–16.
——and Sahay, S. (2000). ‘Democratic Governance and Information Flows: A Case Study in
Bangalore’, Information Communication and Society, 3(2).
——Reinhard, N., Roode, D., and Walsham, G. (2007). ‘Digital Inclusion Projects in Devel-
oping Countries: Processes of Institutionalisation’, IFIP WG9.4 9th international confer-
ence ‘Taking Stock of E-Development’, São Paulo, Brazil.
Mann, C. L. (2004). ‘Information Technologies and International Development: Conceptual
Clarity in the Search for Commonality and Diversity’, Information Technologies and
International Development, 1(2): 67–79.
Mbarika, V. W., Kah, M. M. O., Musa, P. H., Meso, P., and Warren, J. (2003). ‘Predictors of
Growth of Teledensity in Developing Countries: A Focus on Middle and Low-Income
Countries’, Electronic Journal on Information Systems in Developing Countries, 12(1): 1–16.
——Payton, F. C., Kvasny, L., and Amadi, A. (2007). ‘IT Education and Workforce Participa-
tion: A New Era for Women in Kenya?’, Information Society, 23(1): 1–18.
Miscione, G. (2007). ‘Telemedicine in the Upper Amazon: Interplay with Local Health Care
Practices’, MIS Quarterly, 31(2): 403–25.
Molla, A. (2000). ‘Downloading or Uploading? The Information Economy and Africa’s
Current Status’, Information Technology for Development, 9: 205–21.
668
CHRISANTHI AVGEROU

Munkvold, B. E., and Tundui, H. P. (2005). ‘The Role of IT in Supporting Women Entrepre-
neurs in Urban Tanzania’, in A. O. Bada and A. Okunoye (eds.), Proceedings of the 8th
International Working Conference of IFIP WG9.4: Enhancing Human Resource Develop-
ment through ICT. Abuja, Nigeria.
Mursu, A., Soriyan, H. A., and Korpela, M. (2003). ‘Risky Business: A Case Study on
Information Systems Development in Nigeria’, in S. Krishna and S. Madon (eds.), The
Digital Challenge: Information Technology in the Development Context. Aldershot: Ashgate,
318–39.
Myers, M. D., and Tan, F. B. (2002). ‘Beyond Models of National Culture in Information
Systems Research’, Journal of Global Information Management, 10(1): 24–32.
Ngwenyama, O., Andoh-Baidoo, F. K., Bollou, F., and Morawczynski, O. (2006). ‘Is there a
Relationship between ICT, Health, Education and Development? An Empirical Analysis of
Five West African Countries from 1997–2003’, Electronic Journal on Information Systems
in Developing Countries, 23(5).
Nicholson, B., and Sahay, S. (2001). ‘Some Political and Cultural Issues in the Globalisation of
Software Development: Case Experience from Britain and India’, Information and Organi-
zation, 11: 25–43.
————(2004). ‘Embedded Knowledge and Offshore Software Development’, Information
and Organization, 14: 329–65.
————(2007). ‘Software Exports Development in Costa Rica: Contradictions and
the Potential for Change’, IFIP WG9.4 9th international conference ‘Taking Stock of
E-Development’, São Paulo, Brazil.
Odedra-Straub, M. (ed.) (1996). Global Information Technology and Socio-economic Develop-
ment. Nashua, NH: Ivy League,.
Orlikowski, W. J. (1996). ‘Improvising Organizational Transformation over Time: A Situated
Change Perspective’, Information Systems Research, 7(1): 63–92.
——(2000). ‘Using Technology and Constituting Structures: A Practice Lens for Studying
Technology in Organizations’, Organization Science, 11(4): 404–28.
——and Baroudi, J. J. (1991). ‘Studying Information Technology in Organizations: Research
Approaches and Assumptions’, Information Systems Research, 2(1): 1–28.
——Walsham, G., Jones, M. R., and DeGross, J. I. (eds.) (1996). Information Technology and
Changes in Organizational Work. London: Chapman & Hall.
Pettigrew, A. M. (1985). ‘Contextualist Research and the Study of Organisational Change
Processes’, in E. Mumford, R. Hirschheim, G. Fitzgerald, and A. T. Wood-Harper (eds.),
Research Methods in Information Systems. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 53–78.
Porter, M., and Millar, V. (1984). ‘How Information Gives you Competitive Advantage’,
Harvard Business Review, 63(4): 149–60.
Puri, S. K. (2007). ‘Integrating Scientiﬁc with Indigenous Knowledge: Constructing Knowl-
edge Alliances for Land Management in India’, MIS Quarterly, 31(2): 355–79.
Robey, D. (1996). ‘Diversity in Information Systems Research: Threat, Promise and Respon-
sibility’, Information Systems Research, 7(4): 400–8.
——and Boudreau, M. C. (1999). ‘Accounting for the Contradictory Organizational Con-
sequences of Information Technology: Theoretical Directions and Methodological Impli-
cations’, Information Systems Research, 10(2): 167–85.
Roche, E. M., and Blaine, M. J. (eds.) (1996). Information Technology, Development and
Policy. Aldershot: Avebury.
Rogers, E. M. (1995). Diffusion of Innovations, 4th edn. New York: The Free Press.
DISCOURSES ON INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
669

Rohitratana, K. (2000). ‘The Role of Thai Values in Managing Information Systems: A Case
Study of Implementing an MRP System’, in C. Avgerou and G. Walsham (eds.), Informa-
tion Technology in Context: Implementing Systems in the Developing World. Aldershot:
Ashgate, 23–39.
Rose, G., and Straub, D. (1998). ‘Predicting General IT Use: Applying TAM to the Arabic
World’, Journal of Global Information Management, 6: 39–46.
Sahay, S. (1998). ‘Implementing GIS Technology in India: Some Issues of Time and Space’,
Accounting, Management and Information Technologies, 8: 147–88.
——(2001). ‘Introduction to the Special Issue on “IT and Health Care in Developing
Countries” ’, Electronic Journal on Information Systems in Developing Countries, 5: 1–6.
——and Avgerou, C. (2002). ‘Special Issue on IS in Developing Countries’, Information
Society.
——Nicholson, B., and Krishna, S. (2003). Global IT Outsourcing: Software Development
across Borders Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——and Walsham, G. (2005). ‘Scaling of Health Information Systems in India: Challenges
and Approaches’, Enhancing Human Resource Development through ICT, IFIP WG9.4.
Abuja, Nigeria.
Scott Morton, M. S. (1991). The Corporation of the 1990s: Information Technology and
Organizational Transformation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Silva, L. (2007). ‘Institutionalization does not Occur by Decree: Institutional Obstacles in
Implementing a Land Administration System in a Developing Country’, Information
Technology for Development.
Stahl, B. C. (2008). ‘Empowerment through ICT: A Critical Discourse Analysis of the
Egyptian ICT Policy’, in C. Avgerou, M. L. Smith, and P. Van den Besselaar (eds.), Social
Dimensions of Information and Communication Technology Policy. New York: Springer.
Straub, D., Loch, K. D., and Hill, C. E. (2001). ‘Transfer of Information Technology to the
Arab World: A Test of Cultural Inﬂuence Modeling’, Journal of Global Information
Management, 9(4): 6–48.
Suchman, L. (1994). ‘Working Relations of Technology Production and Use’, Computer
Supported Cooperative Work, 2: 21–39.
Thompson, M. P. A. (2004). ‘ICT, Power, and Developmental Discourse: A Critical Analysis’,
Electronic Journal on Information Systems in Developing Countries, 20(4): 1–26.
United Nations Development Programme (2001). ‘Making New Technologies Work for
Human Development’. New York: UNDP.
Wade, R. (2004a). ‘Bridging the Digital Divide: New Route to Development or New Form of
Dependency?’, in C. Avgerou, C. Ciborra, and F. Land (eds.), The Social Study of Informa-
tion and Communication Technology: Innovation, Actions, and Contexts. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 185–206.
——(2004b). ‘Is Globalization Reducing Poverty and Inequality?’, World Development,
32(4): 567–89.
Walsham, G. (1993). Interpreting Information Systems in Organizations. Chichester: John
Wiley.
——(2001). Making a World of Difference: IT in a Global Context. Chichester: John Wiley.
——(2002). ‘Cross-cultural Software Production and Use: A Structurational Analysis’, MIS
Quarterly, 26(4): 359–80.
——Robey, D., and Sahay, S. (2007). ‘Foreword: Special Issue on Information Systems in
Developing Countries’, MIS Quarterly, 31(2): 317–26.
670
CHRISANTHI AVGEROU

Wang, J., Jamison, D. T., Bos, E., Preker, A., and Peabody, J. (1999). ‘Measuring Country
Performance on Health: Selected Indicators for 115 Countries’. Washington, DC: World
Bank.
Warschauer, M. (2003). ‘Dissecting the “Digital Divide”: A Case Study in Egypt’, Information
Society, 19(4): 297–304.
Westrup, C., and Al-Jaghoub, S. (forthcoming). ‘Nation States and Networks of Flows: The
Role of the State in Jordan’s ICT Enabled Development’.
——Liu, W., El Sayed, H., and Al Jaghoub, S. (2003). ‘Taking Culture Seriously: ICTs,
Cultures and Development’, in S. Madon and S. Krishna (eds.), The Digital Challenge:
Information Technology in the Development Context. Aldershot: Ashgate.
World Bank (1999). World Bank Development Report: Knowledge for Development.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Wresch, W. (1998). ‘Information Access in Africa: Problems with Every Channel’, Informa-
tion Society, 14(4): 295–300.
Zakaria, N., Stanton, J. M., and Sarker-Barney, S. T. M. (2003). ‘Designing and Implementing
Culturally-Sensitive IT Applications: The Interaction of Culture Values and Privacy Issues
in the Middle East’, Information Technology & People, 16(1): 49–75.
DISCOURSES ON INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
671

c h a p t e r 2 6
...............................................................................................
FROM INSTRUMENTALITY
TO EMERGENCE IN
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
...............................................................................................
RICHARD T. WATSON,* PIERRE BERTHON,
AND LEYLAND F. PITT
THE NATURE OF INNOVATION
..................................................................................................................
Frameworks that explain the dispersion of technological innovations are useful navi-
gational aids for mapping future directions and understanding roadblocks and diver-
sions. There are two aspects to techne, the term from which the word technology stems.
First, techne is the Greek word for the activities and skills of the craftsperson, and also
describes the art of the mind; techne is a ‘bringing forth’, a ‘revealing’. Second, from early
Greek times, the word techne is linked with episteme. Both words are essential parts of
knowing. Aristotle unites and differentiates thus: episteme (the what) and techne (the
how) of the emergence of new thoughts, or the revelation of fresh insights. This review
of the origin of the term technology proposes an alternative to the instrumental view of
technology as a means to an end: technology is also a mode of emergence (Berthon, Pitt,
and Watson 2008). Organizations frequently think of technology as a means to achiev-
ing corporate strategies, and the IS ﬁeld has concerned itself with aligning corporate and
IS strategy. In many instances, however, information systems result in emergent
organizational strategies. (See also Chapter 12.) The classic case of American Hospital
Supplies (Vitale 1988) exempliﬁes this phenomenon. AHS set out to solve a data entry
problem by placing terminals in hospitals for on-line order entry. It emerged that
its easy to use system generated additional sales without an increase in the sales force.
As a result, Information Systems were rebadged as competitive weapons (Ives and
Learmonth 1984). (See also Chapter 14.) This creative, emergent nature of IS is not
limited to the organizational arena, but can occur with any IS product, such as an iPod.

Organizations don’t only use information systems to implement strategies, in many
instances information systems create new emergent strategies for ﬁrms. Similarly, while
information systems may be used to satisfy the needs and wants of organizational
customers, just as frequently they create new needs and wants, maybe even more.
IS research on emergent phenomena has been almost exclusively conﬁned to the
hierarchical environment of the organization. Yet the hierarchy is only one of four
domains of economic activity. Transaction cost economics’s original identiﬁcation of
ﬁrms and markets as two approaches to organizing economic activity (Arrow 1974)
was extended to embrace networks (Uzzi 1996). More recently, as a result of the
emergence of open source, a fourth sector has been identiﬁed, which is variously
labelled bazaar, peer production, or community (Watson et al. 2005). The three
other domains (i.e. markets, networks, and communities) are not subject to the same
intensity of control that exists within the bureaucratic conﬁnes of a hierarchy. The
greater freedom means that they are potentially much richer environs for reinvention
and studying the technology diaspora from genesis to revelations (Berthon, Pitt, and
Watson 2008).
THE EVOLUTION
..................................................................................................................
In order to better understand the trajectories that an IS might assume in and beyond
the conﬁnes of the organization, we propose the model shown in Figure 26.1. The
possible categories of how technology relates to the developer’s original intentions are:
extension, conversion, subversion, diversion, emersion, and aspersion (Berthon, Hul-
bert, and Pitt 2005). Our choice is to focus on intentions, because actions in a social
setting are guided by an individual’s goals. Inventors have a purpose and those who
repurpose a technology also have intentions, even if they are at variance with those of
the original designer.
Information system
Genesis
Means to speciific end
Revelation
Emergent phenomenon
Intentional
Unintentional
Extension
Conversion
Subversion
Diversion
Emersion
Aspersion
FIGURE 26.1 Information system evolution (adapted from Berthon, Hulbert, and Pitt 2005)
FROM INSTRUMENTALITY TO EMERGENCE IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
673

Genesis
From an instrumentality perspective, innovation is inspired by a perceived need. The
invention is designed to solve a speciﬁc need, and the innovators typically have a
particular goal in mind. Generally, the goal is highly speciﬁc and the potential con-
sequences thus myopically constrained. In contrast is the contextual design approach
epitomized by the Finnish architect, Eliel Saarinen, who averred,1
Always design a thing by considering it in its next larger context—a chair in a room,
a room in a house, a house in an environment, an environment in a city plan.
However, the shift from design for a speciﬁc task to contextual design is, we argue, only
partially illuminating. We suggest that there are three dimensions to Information
Systems design. Design for goal, design for context, and design for emergence (see
Figure 26.1). Design for goal is the classic design paradigm: an information system is
design to accomplish a speciﬁc task, meet a speciﬁc need, or reach a speciﬁc goal—the
design criterion ‘efﬁciency’. Design for context is thinking about the system in its
operational context; this goes beyond the speciﬁc design goal, to consider the context or
contexts of use; this includes such factors as ergonomics, experiential frame, social
milieu, and so forth. The design criterion is ‘ﬁt’. Design for emergence is the realization
that no a priori technology can be entirely pre-speciﬁed in its task or context. It is
design by being cognizant of the emergent trajectories that a technology can and will
take once it is released into a larger social, economic, and environmental system with
which it interacts—changing and being changed in unpredictable ways. Here the
design criterion is: to what extent should emergent ﬂexibility be designed into the
system? The characteristics of emergent ﬂexibility are discussed later.
Emergence
Design for Possibility
‘Flexibility’
Goal
Design for Purpose
‘Efficiency’
Context
Design for Context
‘Fit’
FIGURE 26.2 The three dimensions of Information Systems design
674
RICHARD T. WATSON, PIERRE BERTHON, AND LEYLAND F. PITT

Whilst most information systems are designed with a speciﬁc goal in mind, relatively
few take into account the context. The One Laptop Per Child (OLPC) project is an
exception. It was designed with a speciﬁc goal in mind (to provide a laptop to children
in developing countries), and designed with its wider operational context in mind.
Where it failed was in the design for emergence. Its mission: ‘To create educational
opportunities for the world’s poorest children by providing each child with a rugged,
low-cost, low-power, connected laptop with content and software designed for collab-
orative, joyful, self-empowered learning. When children have access to this type of tool
they get engaged in their own education. They learn, share, create, and collaborate.
They become connected to each other, to the world and to a brighter future.’2 This
noble project identiﬁes education as the major problem of children in the developing
economies. The proposed solution is to provide each child with a laptop computer. The
problem with laptop computers is that they are costly—expensive components and
expensive operating systems. So the innovator’s goal is to design and manufacture an
inexpensive laptop, with a free, open source operating system. Initially the aim was to
be able to sell the product at a price of US$100. The OLPC designers were conceptually
expansive, and saw their product as ﬁtting in a classroom, within a school, and as part
of a national education system (Markoff 2005). As we will see, while the vision had
distance, it did not embrace all the potential outcomes, which is not surprising. What is
surprising is that the initial vision was so expansive, and our observations suggest that
most innovators do not see the larger space they potentially inﬂuence. The root cause of
this myopia is that information technologies are typically ﬂexible and can usually be
hacked to create further opportunities for retargeting. The more a system can be
reprogrammed, the more it can be reinvented and drift from serving its original
purpose. In Figure 26.1, we specify a conceptual framework for thinking about what
happens to technology beyond its genesis. Thus, to paraphrase Saarinen, we would
proclaim: always design an information technology by considering how it might
change its larger context—reﬂect on the possibilities for conversion, subversion,
diversion, emersion, and aspersion.
We now discuss each of these possibilities and explain the ideas illustrated by Figure
26.1 by drawing upon the One Laptop Per Child (OLPC) project to illustrate the
conceptual foundations of our thinking.
Extension
In May 2008, OLPC announced plans for a second-generation device, which is an
extension of the original design. The XO-23 is now presented foremost as a device
following the format of a book. It is described as a notebook or a book reader. In
addition, while still described as a laptop, it is also put forward as a tablet. In essence,
XO-2 has been extended from a laptop to a multifunctional information appliance. In
line with this rethinking, one alternative discussed is the provision of a piano keyboard,
so that XO-2 can also be a musical instrument.
FROM INSTRUMENTALITY TO EMERGENCE IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
675

Conversion
Conversion describes the process by which an information technology is reconceived
to meet different goals. The OLPC was originally conceived as a platform for freely
available open source software with Sugar, the operating system, based on Linux.
Microsoft opposed the concept of the OLPC and open source software for some
years, but by mid-2008 Microsoft had modiﬁed Windows XP to run on the OLPC and
support its ebook reader, writing pad, and camera (Lohr 2008). The Ministries of
Education who purchased the laptops believe that Windows-based skills would im-
prove job prospects, an outlook that Microsoft undoubtedly encouraged. Thus, the
original notion of a machine for learning had been converted to a tool for training in
Microsoft software.
Revelation—Intentional
Consumers and other social actors through their interaction with new technologies
envisage new opportunities. New applications emerge because of the deliberate acts of
ﬁrms, competitors, and consumers. A technology can be complemented, imitated, and
reinvented. In our terms, consumers subvert and third parties divert the innovator’s
plans for the use of the technology. Intentional revelations result from people changing
the technology.
Subversion
San Francisco’s Good Hotel is slated as a hotel with a conscience. Its philanthropic and
positive outlook is meant to surface the ‘good in all of us’.4 Not surprisingly, it has a
green OLPC computer in its business centre because of the ‘goodness’ aura of the
OLPC project. Through the ‘Give One, Get One’ programme,5 citizens in advanced
economies who purchase one laptop also pay for another for a child in a developing
economy. Thus, owning an OLPC laptop is a symbol of one’s principles and can evoke
the similar good feelings to driving a Prius. It has been diverted to become a conspicu-
ous sign that one cares about the education of the less privileged.
Diversion
Information technologies because of their designed ﬂexibility can be consciously
diverted to meet other goals. Third parties can repurpose the use of a technology
through political, social, technological, or legal interventions. The openness of the
OLPC makes it a hacker’s dream (Fogie 2008a, 2008b). The instructions are readily
available (Fogie 2008b) to install a range of tools that most hackers ﬁnd necessary, such
as network mapping and application vulnerability scanning. These tools can be used by
security experts for checking the shortcomings of corporate systems, as well as by those
676
RICHARD T. WATSON, PIERRE BERTHON, AND LEYLAND F. PITT

with sinister goals, who can use it to crack a corporation’s electronic security. The size
and friendly green of the OLPC gives it an appearance of innocence, but it can be easily
diverted into a powerful tool for intrusion, for both good and bad. (See also Chapter 17.)
Revelation—Unintentional
The designer of any technology cannot foresee all the potential outcomes of a new
product, and some of these outcomes can have a signiﬁcant impact on society and
human behaviour. Unintentional revelation changes roles and structures in a way the
original inventor had not conceived. Emersion occurs when a technology is widely
adopted and produces primary positive changes for consumers and society.
On the other hand, some emergent reinventions create negative societal effects.
Aspersion,6 our term for these outcomes, results in undesirable consequences and
even in some cases the opposite of the designer’s larger purpose. For example, we
will shortly report evidence that laptops for students result in lower grades.
Emersion
Emersion describes the degree to which a technology morphs into a different form that
inﬂuences economic and social life. The OLPC concept of a small and highly portable
computer of limited processing power but with connectivity has spawned the netbook
computer (Thompson 2009). The design speciﬁcations presented to Mary Lou Jepsen
by OLPC forced an innovative approach. The result was a computer with ﬂash
memory, an open source operating system, a low-power low-speed processor, and an
energy-efﬁcient LCD panel—all for less than US$200.
The design of the OLPC inspired traditional laptop makers because these low-cost,
low-performance computers were a potential threat to their laptop market. The
manufacturers soon discovered there was a market for such a product among the
middle class in Western Europe and the USA. Over 10 million netbooks have been sold
and it is estimated that in 2010, netbooks will be 12 per cent of the laptop market
(Thompson 2009). Netbooks align with the move to cloud computing in which all
data and applications are stored on servers and accessed via networks (e.g. WiFi,
WiMax, G4). There is no need for a powerful computer when it need only run a
browser to give a high level of functionality. The OLPC has given rise through the
process of emersion to a highly portable, low-cost, simple machine that serves the
middle class in the developed economies, who are a far cry from the classroom in a
poor country.
Aspersion
Aspersion occurs when a technology produces undesirable social outcomes. The
central belief of the founders and funders of the OLPC is that laptops improve
FROM INSTRUMENTALITY TO EMERGENCE IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
677

education. However, there is considerable evidence, which was available at the time
the project commenced, that computers in the classroom have not transformed
education (Cuban 2001). Recent research shows no evidence that computers in the
home lead to better educational outcomes. Indeed, it appears that computers result in
students doing less homework, with a consequent impact on learning (Malamud and
Pop-Eleches 2008). Computers are a distraction for many children because they
provide access to much more than educational material, in particular games (Fisman
2008). Thus, when developing economies divert very scarce resources into laptop
programmes there is a strong likelihood that they get no educational gains. Further-
more, funding for other educational needs (e.g. textbooks) or infrastructure projects
(e.g. sewage and electriﬁcation) is likely to be reduced so that beneﬁcial gains from
proven investments are lost. For example, the World Bank reports that the return on
basic educational materials, such as textbooks, is very high (Filmer and Pritchett
1997). The net effect is that a country loses rather than gains from a large-scale
investment in laptops. As one critic noted: ‘I’ve thought for a while that sending
laptops to developing countries is simply the 21st century equivalent of sending
bibles to the colonies.’7
FACTORS AFFECTING THE
EMERGENT FLEXIBILITY
..................................................................................................................
Technologies vary in their degree of emergent ﬂexibility. Some technologies stray little
from their intended goal (e.g. the disk drive). Others drift slowly from the inventor’s
original purpose (e.g. the cellphone). Finally, some technologies morph in ways that
their designers never imagined (e.g. the Internet). Three factors—openness, program-
mability, and self-organization—can help us understand emergent ﬂexibility (Berthon,
Pitt, and Watson 2008).
Openness
Technologies are frequently the playthings of technologists, nerds, and hackers. The
more they can learn about the technology, the more likely that we will reinvent. The
open source software movement typiﬁes the power of openness. Releasing a program’s
code is one of the highest levels of openness. The success of Linux, augmented by many
programmers, is one of the most powerful demonstrations of openness on emergent
ﬂexibility.
Proposition 1: The more open a technology the faster and more expansive will be
the level of emergent ﬂexibility.
678
RICHARD T. WATSON, PIERRE BERTHON, AND LEYLAND F. PITT

Programmability
Customization and reinvention are facilitated by programmability. Computers are in
many ways the ultimate demonstration of the power of emergent ﬂexibility because the
notion of what you can do with a computer has been reinvented over and over again—
from the computer as a calculator to the computer as a social networking tool.
Proposition 2: The ease of programming a technology determines its emergent
ﬂexibility.
Self-organizing Mechanisms
Emergence ﬂexibility requires mechanisms that support self-organizing. The spread of
reinvention of a new technology depends on an infrastructure that allows talented
consumers, who might be globally distributed, to collaborate collectively. The Internet
and associated cooperative technologies (e.g. cloud computing, websites, Skype) enable
those with a common interest to participate in the reinvention of a technology and the
dispersion of innovative applications. Global communication networks facilitate self-
organizing groups to emerge among a technology’s aﬁcionados no matter where
individual participants might live provided they have an Internet connection with
sufﬁcient bandwidth. Self-organization is one of the emergent outcomes of the Internet
and cellphones. We can organize in ways that were inconceivable a few decades ago.
Proposition 3: Technologies that support self-organizing mechanisms will support
emergent ﬂexibility.
Proposition 4: Technologies that support self-organizing mechanisms will support
emergent technologies for increased self-organization.
CONCLUSION
..................................................................................................................
Information systems have existed since the emergence of modern humans. As our
distant ancestors learned how to use simple technologies (e.g. hammerstones), they
also developed techniques to transmit their skills and knowledge within and across
generations. Humans have a long history of building highly ﬂexible information
technologies to support their need to share information. Speech, writing, printing,
and algebraic symbols are all examples of technologies that have high emergent
ﬂexibility because of their openness, programmability (in the sense of supporting
inﬁnite combinations), and an ability to enable self-organizing mechanisms.
If one reﬂects on the historical development of information technology, and the
information systems they enable, the predominant pattern is emergence. Our forebears
FROM INSTRUMENTALITY TO EMERGENCE IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
679

did not plan speech, grammar, writing, alphabets, and ideograms. These fundamental
elements of information technology emerged and generated a myriad of emergent
information systems. The idiosyncrasies of many of our fundamental technologies,
grammar for example, are abundant evidence of the lack of planning or control driving
these technologies.
For a short period, when information systems were primarily the product of
mainframe computers and corporate bureaucracies, the great majority of computer-
based information systems were planned and controlled. They were developed in a
systematic manner following the principles of systems analysis and design and project
management. This is no longer the case. Personal computers, browsers, and smart
cellphones have broken the dyke of corporate control. Personal computers breached
the wall, web browsers overwhelmed it, and who knows at this point what smart
cellphones will do. What we do know is that the level of innovation and creativity
has exploded recently with Apple’s release of a software development kit for the
cellphone. In a little over six months, 30,000 apps have been released.8 Who would
have expected that the iPhone could be a level or panoramic camera, let alone a
seismometer?9 (See also Chapter 18.)
The dominance of emergence in the landscape means that IS researchers will need to
widen their approaches to studying IS phenomena. First, the traditional focus has been
on corporate domains but now so much more happens in personal spaces and
information systems are the fabric of everyday life. In many ways, we are returning
to the status quo as information systems have always been integrated into the texture of
civilization (e.g. books, newspapers, and television), and now it is Facebook, iPods,
smart phones, and the web as advances in information technologies have enabled
computers to be embedded in consumer appliances.
Second, technological change has made so many new sources of data available to
study. When the vast majority of data are borne digital, huge repositories of data are
created. So the trusted and traditional approaches, like surveys, experiments, and
qualitative approaches will now need to be expanded to things like text analysis, social
network analysis, ethnography in virtual environments, and data mining. The logged
interactions of the open source community alone, in their never-ending search for
perfection through continuous modiﬁcation, could provide sufﬁcient data for a team of
researchers over entire careers (cf. Pitt et al. 2006). In the old world of research, small n
and unrepresentative samples are often a problem. In the new world, these problems
can disappear. Imagine when you have all the data for transactions with a hotel website
for a year, then large n becomes the problem because you might lack the computing
power to process these data.
Third, much of our theory base was built in the industrial era (e.g. Porter’s ﬁve forces
model) of planning and control. We might need to build new theory for the informa-
tion age of emergence. Is the e-consumer the same as the traditional consumer? Are
e-relationships the same? Should we build theory in the same way when we no longer
have a paucity of data? Should we be so focused on theory when we have vast amounts
680
RICHARD T. WATSON, PIERRE BERTHON, AND LEYLAND F. PITT

of data to explore? Maybe this is a time to put theory development aside for a while,
and just focus on reporting ﬁndings revealed from innovative exploration of massive
data sets. The straitjacket of applying old theories to a new environment might be
limiting creative thinking. Force ﬁtting the old to explain the new constrains new
thinking. Of course, our traditional publication outlets will have to forsake some of
their prior era practices to nurture the new, though it is more likely we will need an
entirely new knowledge management system to emerge (e.g. Social Science Research
Network) to really break away from our slavish attachment to a system that can’t shake
its paper and postal system inheritance.
One can argue that global warming is the most important emergence-related
research issue. A phenomenon that threatens the survival of our species and many
others should dominate the research agenda of many scholars, including those in
information systems. Critically, we need to address the issue of how do we harness
our understanding of emergence to change human behaviour in an ecologically and
sustainable direction. Emergence is a different diffusion mechanism in its speed and
effect than traditional plan and control. When you don’t have a lot of time, and we
might be too late already, then you need to ﬁnd the fastest methods of change. Is it
ethical for the majority of IS researchers to ignore global warming as an IS research
issue? We don’t believe it is, but if action is a sign of agreement, then few are in
accordance with us. (But see also Chapter 22.) Waves of generations of innovators have
given successive generations a legacy of technologies. An expansive understanding of
these technologies, one that spans eons, sees the development of technology as a vast
diverging tree of instrumentality and emergence that in many ways mirrors the tree of
species’s emergence. If we want this tree to continue to branch, rather than wither, then
we need to understand how emergence can help us solve civilization’s most pressing
problem of today.
NOTES
* Corresponding author, <rwatson@terry.uga.edu>.
1. Time, 2 July 1956.
2. <http://laptop.org/en/vision/index.shtml>.
3. <http://wiki.laptop.org/go/XO-2>.
4. <http://www.jdvhotels.com/hotels/sanfrancisco/good>.
5. <http://laptop.org/en/participate/give-one-get-one.shtml>.
6. Aspersion stems from the Latin ‘aspergere’, meaning to spread or scatter, typically in a
negative sense.
7. <http://www.humanitarian.info/2008/05/19/olpc-a-different-type-of-disaster/>.
8. <http://148apps.com/10000/>.
9. <mac.blogdig.net/archives/articles/September2008/01/Seismometer_iPhone_app.html>.
FROM INSTRUMENTALITY TO EMERGENCE IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
681

REFERENCES
Arrow, K. J. (1974). The Limits of Organization. 1st edn., New York: Norton.
Berthon, P., Hulbert, J., and Pitt, L. F. (2005). ‘Consumers and Technology: Why Marketers
Sometimes Get it Wrong’, California Management Review, 48(1): 1–19.
——Pitt, L. F., and Watson, R. T. (2008). ‘From Genesis to Revelations: The Technology
Diaspora’, Communications of the ACM, 51(12): 151–4.
Chandler, A. D. J. (1962). Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the History of the American
Industrial Enterprise. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cuban, L. (2001). Oversold and Underused: Computers in the Classroom. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Filmer, D., and Pritchett, L. (1997). ‘What Educational Production Functions Really Show: A
Positive Theory of Education Funding’, World Bank Policy Research Paper 1795.
Fisman, R. (2008). ‘The $100 Distraction Device: Why Giving Poor Kids Laptops Doesn’t
Improve their Scholastic Performance’, Slate, 5 June.
Fogie, S. (2008a). ‘Turning the OLPC into a Hacker’s Toolkit: Give One, Get Owned, Part 1’,
InformIT, 19 May.
——(2008b). ‘Turning the OLPC into a Hacker’s Toolkit: Give One, Get Owned, Part 2’,
InformIT, 26 May.
Ives, B., and Learmonth, G. P. (1984). ‘The Information Systems as a Competitive Weapon’,
Communications of the ACM, 27(12): 1193–201.
Keoner, B. I. (2006). ‘Geeks in Toyland’, Wired, 14(2).
Lohr, S. (2008). ‘Microsoft Joins Effort for Laptops for Children’, New York Times, 16 May,
from <http://www.nytimes.com/2008/05/16/technology/16laptop.html?_r=2&ref=techno-
logy&oref=slogin&oref=slogin>.
Malamud, O., and Pop-Eleches, C. (2008). The Effect of Computer Use on Child Outcomes.
Chicago, IL: Harris School of Public Policy Studies, University of Chicago.
Markoff, J. (2005). ‘Taking the Pulse of Technology at Davos’, New York Times, 31 January,
from
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/01/31/technology/31newcon.html?_r=1&scp=1&sq=
%24100+laptop+negroponte&st=nyt>.
Pitt, L. F., Watson, R. T., Berthon, P. R., Wynne, D., and Zinkhan, G. (2006). ‘The Penguin’s
Window: Corporate Brands from an OS Perspective’, Journal of the Academy of Marketing
Science, 34: 115–27.
Thompson, C. (2009). ‘The Netbook Effect’, Wired, 60–70.
Uzzi, B. (1996). ‘The Sources and Consequences of Embeddedness for the Economic Perfor-
mance of Organizations: The Network Effect’, American Sociological Review, 61: 674–98.
Vitale, M. R. (1988). American Hospital Supply Corp.: ASAP System (A) (No. 9-186-005).
Boston, MA: Harvard Business School.
Watson, R. T., Boudreau, M.-C., Greiner, M., Wynn, D., York, P., and Gul, R. (2005).
‘Governance and Global Communities’, Journal of International Management, 11(2):
125–42.
682
RICHARD T. WATSON, PIERRE BERTHON, AND LEYLAND F. PITT

Index
.......................
Aakhus, M. 475
Aalborg 43
AARs (Average Abnormal Returns) 504
Abbott, P. 497
ABI/INFORM database 497
Abraham, G. A. 248
Abraham, R. 641
abstracts 497
Acacia3 programme 657
academic constituencies 398–9
Academy of Management 30
Academy of Management Journal 35, 48 n.
Accenture 7
Accor Group 381
accountability 362, 365, 422
Accounting Information Systems 19
accounting scandals 7
ACIS (Australasian Conference on
Information Systems) 40
Ackerman, P. L. 566
Ackoff, R. 24, 27, 106, 207
ACM (Association for Computing
Machinery) 4, 21, 28–30, 34, 44,
561, 609
Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
(1992 version) 606
see also CACM
ACM/IEEE Software Engineering Code of
Ethics and Professional Practice
(1999) 606
ACM SIGMIS conference (1961–2005) 563,
567–8, 579 n.
ACS (Australian Computer Society) 609
action research 97, 213
Actual domain 69
Adam, A. 292, 364, 564, 566–570,
575, 635
Adams, P. 276
Adorno, Theodor 74
Adya, M. P. 574–5
Aeschylus 243
aesthetics of existence 182
afﬂuence 586
Afghanistan 634
Agar, J. 468, 475, 485
Agarwal, R. 335, 458–9, 506, 662
age 576
agency 123–4, 131, 177, 186
consumer 182
ﬂexibility and 129
institutions and 142, 145, 150–5, 159
structure and 114, 118, 126–7, 296
agency theory 146, 150, 153, 159
and the alignment problem 419–20, 423–5
aggressive electronic marketing 601
agnosis 589
Agrawal, M. 503
AHS (American Hospital Supplies) 672
Ahuja, M. K. 336, 566
AI (artiﬁcial intelligence) 23, 281
AIDS (American Institute for Decision
Sciences) 30, 48 n.
aircraft black boxes 460
AIS (Association for Information
Systems) 36, 39–40, 46
ISWorld Net and 49 n.
Social Inclusion SIG 578
see also CAIS; JAIS
AITP (Association of Information
Technology Professionals) 44
AJIS (Australian Journal of Information
Systems) 41
see also Australasian Journal of Information
Systems
Akrich, M. 301
Akshaya telecentre project 640
Alavi, M. 551
Alberta 149
Alchian, A. 17
Alders, B. 347

aletheia 592
alethic truth 77, 79
Alford, R. R. 143, 146
Al-Gahtani, S. S. 651
algorithmic problem-solving 28
alienation 201–3, 205–6, 208,
212, 421
helping to eliminate the bases of 635,
638, 643
understanding 204
alignment 329, 333, 336, 346–72, 423–8
and commitment 423, 435–7
differing cultural traditions 613
see also strategic alignment; structural
alignment
all-electronic mortgages 9
Allen, M. W. 575
Al-Qirim, N. A. 498, 514
Al-Taitoon, A. 477, 482–3, 490 n.
Alter, S. 17, 72
Alvarez, R. 207, 212
Alvesson, M. 201–2, 293, 311, 313
Amazon.com 6, 42, 182
ambidexterity 330, 333, 336, 427
AMCIS (Americas Conference on
Information Systems) 39–40
American Airlines SABRE System 383
American Football 546–7
American imperialism 630–1
American inner-city ghettos 631
Americanization 626
Americas Conference on Information
Systems 561
Americas database online 49 n.
amino-acid sequences 92
Amish people 595
Analyser strategy 356
Andersen Consulting, see Accenture
Anderson, D. & L. A. 337
Andhra Pradesh 641–2
Ang, J. S. K. 353
Ang, S. 155, 500, 508
ANT (actor-network theory) 74, 128, 292–3,
296, 298–9, 310–14, 652–3
difﬁculties with 305–9
important concepts 301–4
IS and 304–5
anthropological approaches 153, 214,
298
Antill, L. 73
antisocial behaviour 601
antitrust proceedings 6
apartheid 636, 638
Appadurai, A. 626–7, 630
Apple Computer 384, 471
Applegate, L. 42, 45
application hosting 6
application programs 263
appropriation 235, 239–41
reﬂexive 121
Apte, U. 498, 500, 505
Archer, M. 118, 120, 130–1
archetypes 364
cultural 353
architects 472
Argyris, C. D. 17, 210, 418
Aris, J. 47 n.
Aristotle 241, 279, 592, 606, 672
Metaphysics 275
arms-length ideal patterns 510
Armstrong, D. J. 574
Armstrong, Russell 29
Arnold, M. 474
Aron, R. 505
Arrow, K. J. 673
art 231, 236–7, 239–40
Ashenhurst, Robert 29
Ashkenas, R. 337
Asian shanty towns 631
ASM (Association for Systems
Management) 30
ASP (application service provision) 156,
505–6, 515–17, 519
Assembler language 21
asset remoteness 450–1
Association for Information Technology
Professionals 4
AST (Adaptive Structuration Theory) 37,
125–7
Athena Factor, The (USA 2008) 562
Atkinson, C. 73
ATMs (Automatic Teller Machines) 272–4
attention 267, 274–5, 282
calling for 268–72, 276
684
INDEX

attitude:
natural 261, 264, 267, 277,
279, 284
phenomenological 264, 267, 279
Aubert, B. A. 505
Audit Commission (UK) 109–10
Augustine, Saint 275
Aum Shinrikyo 631
Australasian Journal of Information
Systems 41
Australia 34, 41, 508, 551
authenticity 214
authoritative resources 116
autocratic management 353–4
automated care planning 571
automatic intelligence 188
automation 21–3, 588
autonomy 129
occupational 140
autopoiesis 128
Avgerou, C. 19, 43, 46, 182, 208, 648–53
Avison, David 25, 28, 39, 73, 202, 349, 353,
405–8, 420, 431
axiology 70, 73, 75
Aycock, A. 193
Baase, S. 616
Babich, B. 195 n.
baby boomers 562
background antecedents 353
Backhouse, J. 292, 335
backsourcing 38
BAE Systems 98
Baets, W. 349, 354, 358–9
Bahli, B. 505
Balaji, S. 514, 516
Balaji, V. 658
Ball, K. 185
Baltic languages 287 n.
bandwidth 456
Bank of England 433
banlieues 631
Banville, C. 18–19, 648
Barbalet, J. M. 118
Bardach, E. 17
Bardhan, I. 518
Barley, S. R. 124, 130, 151, 153,
157–9, 541
Barnes, B. 297, 548
Baroudi, J. 43, 200, 203–4, 209, 217, 295, 566,
635–6, 638, 648
Barratt, E. 193
Barrett, M. 662
Barry, A. 304
Barthélemy, J. 500, 506
Bartlett, C. A. 9
Barua, A. 517
Baskerville, R. 45–6, 301, 407, 420, 453–4
Bass, B. 385, 387
Bauman, Z. 174–5, 192
BCS (British Computer Society) 21, 29, 34,
38, 609
see also IFIP
Beath, C. M. 347, 349, 354, 357, 380, 405,
503, 514
Beck, U. 624–6, 628–9, 631–3,
636
Beer, S. 106
behavioural technology 194
beings-in-the-world 239, 243–7, 255, 277–9,
285, 286 n.
characteristic of humans as 244
intentionality as 262–4
possibilities for action 250
Bell, D. 537
Bell, E. 67, 75
Bell, G. 476
Bell, S. 651
Bell Telephones 93, 95, 105
Benbasat, I. 17–19, 22, 28, 33–4, 42,
44–5, 155, 218, 285, 349–50,
352–4, 648
Benjamin, Robert 29
Bennett, John 27
Bentham, Jeremy 604
Berg, M. 128, 304
Berger, P. L. 113, 546, 568
Bergeron, F. 350, 356–7
Bernstein, R. J. 114, 240
Bertalanffy, Ludwig von 90–1
Berthon, P. 592, 672–3, 678
Best, J. 306, 310
Best, M. L. 639–40
INDEX
685

Best, S. 175, 192
best practice 329, 382, 395, 399–401, 404, 409,
515, 650–1, 653
qualitative 608
Beulen, E. 334, 514
Bhalla, A. 504
Bharti Airtel 8
Bhaskar, Roy 68–70, 73, 77, 79, 81, 113
Biagioli, M. 314
biblical studies 232
Bigelow, J. 90
Bijker, W. E. 295, 298–9, 544
biodiversity 586
biology 89–90
biotechnologies 191, 193
Bjorn-Andersen, N. 19, 39, 46, 49 n.
Black, L. J. 541
black-box analytic engines 4
Black Hat Conference (2004) 449
Blackberries 456
Bleicher, J. 231
Bleistein, S. J. 351
blogs 553, 616
Bloomﬁeld, B. 175, 186–7, 207,
302, 304
Bloor, D. 297
Bluetooth technology 467, 469
Blumenthal, S. 18, 23–4, 26, 48
bodily-embedded technology 471
Boland, R. J. 123, 229–31, 285 n., 304, 329,
333, 335, 338
Bonache, J. 334
books 618
Boolean operations 460–1
Borgmann, Albert 280–1
Borman, M. 518
Bostrom, Robert 32, 37
Boudreau, M.-C. 153, 336, 394–5, 402–3, 410,
648
Boulding, K. E. 91
boundary spanning individuals 331, 334, 336
bounded rationality 146–7
Bourdieu, P. 113, 122, 292, 310, 548
Bowker, G. C. 304
Boyle, J. 193
BPO (business process outsourcing) 497, 503,
515, 517–18
Braa, J. 128, 636–9, 648, 653, 656
Braa, K. 470
Bradford, M. 503
Brandt, P. 72
Braudel, F. 119
breakdown 237–9, 243, 250
interpretation and 231, 233–4, 236
Brentano, F. 256
Brente, N. 400
Brey, P. 613, 614
Breyman, S. 310
bricolage 213, 237, 330, 336–7
bridge 349
Brier, T. 349, 354
Brigham, M. 217, 285 n.
Bristol 87, 96
British Aircraft Corporation 24, 87–8,
98, 100
see also BAE Systems
Brooke, C. 202, 209–11, 217–18, 309
Brooker, W. 27
Brower, R. S. 157, 160
Brown, A. 215
Brown, B. 475
Brown, C. 333
Brown, C. V. 350, 353
Brown, J. S. 160, 330, 335, 400, 455, 539–41,
544, 546, 548
Brown, W. 423, 425–7
browsers 680
Brundtland, G. H. 590
Brunsson, N. 404
Bryan, R. W. 355
Bryant, C. G. A. 120– 1, 126
Bryman, A. 67, 75
Bucchi, M. 296, 299
Bulkeley, H. 185
Bullen, Chris 40–1
bureaucratization 140
Burke, C. S. 334
Burn, J. M. 348, 355, 360
Burrell, G. 174, 183, 472–3, 545
Burt, R. S. 359
business intelligence systems 362
business units 12, 38
competition among 10
global 11
686
INDEX

managers need to control all activities 9–10
synergies across/proﬁtability of 9
Bustard, D. 73
Bynum, Terrell Ward 602–5
Byrd, A. 355
cab drivers 476, 481–2, 488
CACM (Communications of the ACM) 35,
44, 561
CAIS (Communications of the AIS) 39, 44–5
California Management Review 44
call centres 185, 516
life of workers 635, 643
Callinicos, A. 118
Callon, M. 74, 298, 301–3, 308–9
Caminer, D. 47 n.
Campbell, B. 348, 350–4, 363
Canada 10, 34, 149, 614, 657
Cannella, A. 419–20, 432, 437–8
Cannon-Bowers, J. A. 334
capabilities theory 634, 648
capability for change 332
capacity-building 332
Cape Town 636–7
capital and labour struggle 208–9
capital transfers 624–5
capitalism 208–9, 625, 632
capta-processing systems 108–9
captive centres 516, 519
Carayon, P. 566
CARD (Computer-Aided Administration of
Registration Department) system 641–2
Carlile, P. 541, 548–9
Carlson, E. D. 27
Carmel, E. 335, 497, 506, 515, 662–3
Carr, N. G. 8, 329, 362, 374, 379, 382, 387, 415
Carter, C. 186
Cartesian dualism 236, 244, 262
CASE (Computer-Aided Software
Engineering) tools 23, 126
Caseley, J. 642
Cash, James 38, 43–4
Castells, M. 475, 477, 537, 629–33,
648, 653
CATWOE mnemonic 102–3
causal ambiguity 375
causal analysis 126
causal mapping 575
causality 186, 298
event 120
Humean 70
CCTV (closed-circuit television) 610
CDA (critical discourse analysis) 212
Cecchini, S. 643
Cecez-Kecmanovic, D. 201–3, 205, 210–11,
213, 215–18
cellphones, see mobile phones
censorship 193
central administration 398–9
CEO-CIO relationships 350, 354
Cerbone, D. R. 253
certiﬁcation PMI 5
Chae, B. 73
Champion, D. 73
Champy, J. 180
Chan, Yolande E. 10, 13, 347, 349–51, 353–7,
423, 430–1
change management strategy 336–8
change perspective 37
channel technologies 551
chaos theory 72
check-in kiosks 382
Checkland, Peter 18, 24–6, 33, 68, 72–3,
89, 91, 95, 97, 100, 104, 107–8, 110,
408
chemistry 92
Chen, M. 35, 37
Cheon, M. 17, 38, 497–8, 500, 508, 510
Chernobyl 301
Chervany, N. L. 25–6
Chiasson, M. W. 154, 214
Chicago Police Force 485
Chin, W. W. 33
China 44, 662
see also Shanghai
Choe, J. 357
choice(s):
bounded 353
customer 381–2
determinism vs. 536
irrational 145
social 208, 301
strategic 152
INDEX
687

choice(s) (cont.)
technical 301
see also rational choice
Chomsky, Noam 79
Choudhury, V. 512, 515
Chouliarki, L. 212
Chung, S. H. 365
Churchman, C. W. 12, 21–2, 24, 26, 28, 47 n.,
72
Ciborra, C. U. 128, 213, 281, 285 n., 310, 330,
336–7, 347, 349, 363, 455, 481, 486, 648,
652, 657, 661
Cicourel, A. V. 302
CIO Insight 353
CIO magazine 5
CIOs (Chief Information Ofﬁcers) 365–6,
418, 424, 426, 432, 578
critical responsibilities 359
multiple 427
proactive 351
relationship between CEO and 350, 354
CISR (MIT Center for Information Systems
Research) 29–30
Citigroup 516
Civil Aviation Authority 88
civil liberties 615
Clark, I. 628
Clark, J. 130
Clark, P. 546
class 206, 208, 576
class struggle 294
Classical Greek 287 n.
classical school 358
cleanliness 587–8
Clear, T. 607–9
Clegg, S. 174, 182, 186, 293, 314
Clemons, E. 505
CLIC (Client-Led Information System
Creation) 73
clients and suppliers 512–19
balance of power between 511
climate change 589
cloning 191
CMM (Capability Maturity Model) 5
COBIT (Control Objectives for Business and
Related Information Technology) 5, 444
COBOL 21
Cochran, P. L. 418, 429
codes of conduct 606, 609
Códoba, J.-R. 331, 334
cognition 275
bounded and shallow 589
representationalist approach to 281
shared 352
cognitive psychology 101
Cohen, S. 314
coherence theories 76
Cole, S. 310
Coleman, R. J. 26
collaboration 214, 350, 359, 366, 434, 436
cross-cultural 662
facilitated 362
Internet a tool for 553
mobility in 473
multiple country 653
need for among nation states 628
negative implications on governance 433
transparency in 484–6
collectivism 613
Collins, H. 295, 300, 308, 314
Collste, G. 610, 613, 617–18
Colyvas, J. A. 159, 418
combinatorial effects 387–8
command-and-control processes 484, 486
commerce 617
commitment 179, 404, 420, 426, 429–30
alignment and 423, 435–7
high 419, 435–7
low 418–19, 431–6
commodiﬁcation 209
communication 191, 427, 631
cellular 468
control and 603
cultural differences 613
disturbed 234
face-to-face 351
high 356
high-context 613
horizontal 631
instant 177, 589
interorganizational 454
low-context 613
need for 260
processes of 92
688
INDEX

strategic and frequent 353
techniques of 176
three principles of 183–4
traditional functionalist model of 233
understanding and 350
see also TCA
communities of practice 331, 335–6, 547
competition 10, 148
competitive advantage 329, 347
impact of IT on 32
IT-enabled 374–86
sustained 373–93
competitive effects 148
competitiveness 18, 38, 648, 656
improved 535, 538
complementarity 380–1
complex systems 453–7
rethinking secure management of 458–62
complex theory 153
complexity 72, 107
contractual 509
social 376
complexity theory 653
compliance culture 419
comprehensibility 79
Computer Economics 415
computer (and information) ethics 602–6,
610–11, 613, 618
computers 5–7, 210, 267–8, 538
advances during Second World War 602
development of information processing
systems 22
ethnographic study of 571
gender differences in measures of
playfulness 566
improperly secured 457
Internet-connected 452
large and powerful 445
management oversold on advantages and
capabilities of 27
materials used in production of 588
miniaturization of 468–9
mobile capabilities of 452
new processing options 31
personal information on 611
police patrol vehicle 484
potential risk for networks of 457
predictions of total social control by 188
Qwerty keyboard 549
role in nuclear war 603
third-generation 20–1
see also ACM; hardware; software
Concorde project 87–8, 96, 98, 100
conferencing technology 127
conﬁdence tricks 615
conﬁdentiality 462
offences against 614, 616
conﬂicts of interest 435–7
conformity 145, 430–1
conglomerate ﬁrms 148
consciousness 137, 233, 263, 265, 271, 277,
284–5
embodied 117, 258
historical 285 n.
intensiﬁcation of 624
intentionality of 259–60
meaning-giving 260
practical 117, 132
puriﬁed 262, 278
structural unity of 261
transcendental 262
consensus 402, 404
consensus theories 77
consequences:
cultural 614
innovation 649
long-term 631
social 629
social and cultural 614
unforeseen 589
unintended 117, 145, 147, 336
constraints 117, 124, 129, 153, 159, 179
institutional 146
pseudo-natural 201
structural 117–18, 122
time-space 192
constructionism 202, 212
constructivism:
post-structuralism and 293–6
weak 310
see also social constructivism
consulting ﬁrms 7
contextualist theory 652–3
contingencies 355–7
INDEX
689

contingency theory 364, 419–20, 425–8
contract issues 37
Contractor, N. S. 130
contracts:
customized service 517
ﬁxed-fee 509
higher-valued 509, 511
longer-term 509
shorter-term 509, 511
sound 518
time and materials 509
control 92, 294
absence of 601
bad/good 179
communication and 603
continuous 177
externally imposed 434
ﬂow of information between people
and 359
intensive 193–4
negative implications on governance 433
outsourcing 380
panopticon-like 186, 189, 192
paradox of 433
power and 107–8, 118, 206–7
surveillance and 207, 538
see also social control
controversy 303, 307–8, 410
convergence 303, 308
Cook, S. D. N. 329–30, 335, 400, 455, 539,
541, 544, 546, 548
Cooper, R. 37, 186–7, 207
cooperative/conﬂictual arrangements 333
coordination costs 377, 508
Copenhagen 38
coping strategies 482–3, 485, 554
copyright:
infringements 612, 615
legislation 662
Cordoba, J. 182
Cornford, D. 47 n.
Cornford, T. 571
correspondence theories 76–7
corruption 642–3, 657
opportunities for 640
overcoming 657
cost-beneﬁt analysis 421
cost savings 503, 508, 516, 518
Costa Rica 662
Cougar, Daniel 29
Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime
(2001) 614–15
counter-surveillance 471
Cousins, K. C. 155, 480
Cox, K. 351
Coyne, R. 282
CPSR (Computer Professionals for Social
Responsibility) 603
CPU-intensive applications 21
Cragg, P. 354–5
Craib, I. 120
credit cards 189
crime 485, 614–16
critical analysis 210, 212, 311, 313
critical engagement 637–9
critical intention 200–2
critical realism 73–5, 77, 128, 292, 313
critical research 74, 199, 201, 204–6,
212, 215
approaches and validity of 203
central concern of 208
core deﬁning feature of 202
deﬁning feature of 216
epistemological and ontological
assumptions of 218
Habermasian conception of 217
important and sometimes necessary aspect
of 207
intrinsic problems related to 217
ongoing and central theme within 200
practice-oriented 213
self-application of 219–20
signiﬁcant problems for 202
social constructivist view of 211
critical social theory 635
critical theory 73, 199, 214, 217–18, 313
action research and links to 213
applying 182
CRM (Customer Relationship Management)
systems 362, 384
Cross, J. 496, 514
Cross, R. 547
cross-functional projects 337
Crossan, M. 332, 336
690
INDEX

Croteau, A. 357
crowding effects 148
CSISR (critical social information systems
research) 199–228
see also CDA
Cuban, L. 588, 678
Cuff, D. 379
Cullen, S. 501, 508
Culnan, M. 17, 31
cultural barriers 563
cultural-cognitive factors 152, 155–6
cultural differences 613, 653
cultural diversity 625–6
cultural persistence 140
cultural studies 304
culture 351, 613–14, 617, 653–4
see also multiculturalism
Cummings, L. L. 155
Currie, Wendy L. 4, 156, 334, 505, 537
Cussins, C. 304
customer satisfaction 589
customer service 381–2
customization 335, 381, 383, 385, 395, 399,
403, 405–11
cyberfeminism 577
cybernetics 72, 90–1, 602
cyberspace 174, 193, 282
cyborgs 177, 471
Dabla, A. 642
Dahlbom, B. 470
Daily, C. 419–20, 422, 432, 437–8
Dale, K. 472–3
Dalton, D. 419–20, 432, 437–8
Dandeker, C. 188, 190
Dankbarr, B. 537–8
Darfur 634
DASDs (direct-access storage devices) 22
Dasein 244–5, 263
data breaches 416, 431
data cleaning 408–9
data collection 417, 460–1, 477, 610
empirical 480
health 636–8
language-oriented 212
data corruption 447
data entry 672
errors 452
data matching 610
data-mining 19
data processing 22–3, 25
need to extend the notion of 26
skills and education required for entry-level
position 34
data-sharing processes 462
data storage 22, 451, 463
email as backup for 456
greater capacity 450
data transfer 380
data types 451–2
Database (journal) 44
Database for Advances in Information
Systems, The (journal) 561
databases 49 n., 176, 188, 409, 444, 483, 485,
497, 499
breaking into 462
integrated 454
networked 189
sabotage of 191
shared 394
datalogical problem 23
Datamation (periodical) 48 n.
Davenport, T. H. 6, 43, 381, 513,
517–18, 552
David, R. J. 148
Davies, L. 183, 184
Davis, F. D. 651
Davis, G. 404
Davis, G. B. 12, 16, 18–21, 25–7, 29, 31,
33–4, 38–9, 41, 48
Davis, G. F. 148
Day, G. S. 589
D’Costa, A. P. 663
Dearden, J. 27
Dearnley, P. A. 406, 408
DeCecco, J. P. 567
decentralized approach 427–8, 636, 638
decision-making 27–8, 178, 362, 402–3,
419, 426, 435, 437
collaborative, trust-based 436
command-and-control processes 484
delegating responsibility for 420
efﬁcient and effective 456
INDEX
691

decision-making (cont.)
ethical 418
governance structures and 425
outsourcing 507–8
paradoxical 359
research on IT support for 48 n.
self-interested 417, 424–5, 430, 436
sustainable 428
Decision Support Systems, see DSS
Decision Support Systems (journal) 41
DeCock, C. 120
deconstruction 213, 279–80, 294
decoupling 420, 430–2, 435–7
Dedrick, J. 655
deduction 70
Deetz, S. 179, 190, 201, 293, 311, 313
Defender strategy 356
Defert, D. 194
deﬂationary theories 77
deforestation 587, 594
DeGross, Janice 33, 43–4, 49 n.
deinstitutionalization 139, 142, 147–8,
156, 159–61
causes of 150
jolts which precipitate 149
potential for 150
De Jong, B. 353, 358, 364
De Laat, P. B. 612
De Landa, M. 188
Deleuze, G. 177–8, 191
Dell Online 380
DeLone, W. H. 32
De Loof, L. A. 505
Delta Airlines 503
DeMarco, T. 17
demographics 561–2, 576, 617
De Moor, A. 74
Demsetz, H. 17
‘denaturalization’ 312
Denford, J. S. 352, 355
Denmark 34
Dennis, Alan 37
density-dependency model 148
Dent-Micalleff, A. D. 376, 379, 387
dependent variables 141, 498–9, 510–11
Derrida, J. 279–80
DeSanctis, G. 33, 37, 45, 113,
125–6, 128–32, 153, 429,
455, 650
desertiﬁcation 594
Desouza, K. C. 329, 335, 337
determinism 118, 120, 203
choice vs. 536
objections to 130
social 310
technological 301–2, 304, 314, 335
Dexter, A. S. 42
DfA (Design for All) approach 608
diagramming techniques 459
dialogue 242, 248–51
Diana, Princess of Wales 266
Dibbern, J. 47 n., 515
Dickson, Gary 21, 25–6, 34–5, 38, 48 n.
Diekmann, K. A. 148
differentiations 308–9, 380
competitive 381
digital convergence 469–70
digital divides 209–10, 561, 634–5, 640–1, 650
Digital Equipment Corporation 469
digital libertarianism 193
digital rights management 206
Dilthey, Wilhelm 232–3
DiMaggio, P. 138–45, 149, 151–2, 154,
160, 430
dimensions of structure 114–15
see also domination; legitimation;
signiﬁcation
Direct Line 538
DiRomualdo, A. 503
disciplinary technologies 184
discourse analysis 153, 191
critical 212
discourse ethics 214–16, 248
discursive closure 213
discursive justiﬁcation 79
discursive practice 237
discursive production 293–4
discursive theories 77
disembedding mechanisms 121, 124,
132
disruptive transformation 649, 656–7, 659,
661, 663–4
692
INDEX

distancing/distanciation 229–31, 235, 244,
249, 255, 280
see also breakdown
diversiﬁed ﬁrms 148
D-N (deductive-nomological) method 70
DNA structure 89, 92
Dobson, P. J. 128
dogmatism 243, 297
Doherty, N. F. 337
dollar billionaires 628
domains 71
intransitive 77, 79
moral 78
normative 78
ontological 75, 302
propositional truth 78
reﬂective action 69–70
transcendental consciousness 262
transitive 77
Domberger, S. 509
domination 115, 125–6, 143, 190, 200–1,
248, 307–8
helping to eliminate the bases of 635, 638, 643
informatics of 193
reproduction through discourses 294
Donner, J. 474–5, 641
Doolin, B. 153, 184–5, 205–7, 211,
310, 314
Doremus, P. N. 625
dot-com crash (2000) 7, 42
Dourish, P. 476
Dovey, K. 337
Dow Chemical Company 12
DPMA (Data Processing Management
Association) 30, 33–4
see also AITP
Dretske, F. 79
Dreyfus, H. 175, 177, 244, 259, 262–3, 277,
281–2, 311, 547
driving licences 191, 657
Drori, I. 358–9
Drucker, P. 537
Drummond, H. 292, 433
DSS (Decision Support Systems) 18–19, 21,
25, 27–8, 37, 41, 72
mathematical framework for 48 n.
see also GDSS
duality of structure 116–17, 309
Duguid, P. 160, 540, 548
Duncombe, R. A. 654
durée 119
Durkheim, Emile 114, 139
Duster, T. 309
Dynabook 469
dynamic affordance 455
dynamic capabilities 334, 374, 376–8,
538
Earl, Michael 330–2, 335, 350, 352,
505–6
East Asia 625
Eastman Kodak 6
eBay 42
EBSCOHost database 497
e-business 72
ECIS (European Conference on Information
Systems) 39–40, 578
ecofeminism 577
ecology 304, 587, 590
e-commerce 19, 42, 44
economic downturn 361, 518
economic growth 634
economic performance:
applying knowledge to work tasks crucial
for 536
IT effect on 32
economies of scale 427, 508
ecosystems 586
Edelman, L. F. 334, 336, 338
edge of chaos 72
Edinburgh 297
education 28–30, 33–4, 38, 44, 588
computer 639
continuing 191
higher, gender equity issues in 562
IS-intensive 588
laptops improve 677–8
promise of 587
Edwards, B. R. 350, 354
Edwards, J. R. 349
effect timing 388
efﬁciency 154, 307, 333, 445, 449, 452, 594–5,
627, 674
INDEX
693

efﬁciency (cont.)
alignment between knowledge, truth
and 312
attempts to coordinate and control activity
to promote 145
best practices emphasize 400
citizen services 657
cooperation and 146
cost 504, 510
development of 335
important tool for achieving 655
managing mobile workers 486–9
maximizing 109
optimum 590
organizational concern for 468
outsourcing promises 380
promise of 587
security and 450
e-government services 639, 641–3,
655, 657
Egyptian craftswomen 661
EHR (electronic health record) systems
453–4
EID Parry 640
eidetic reduction 261–2, 273
Ein-Dor, Philip 39
Einsteinian physics 89
Eisenberg, E. M. 130
Eisenhardt, K. M. 417, 423
EJIS (European Journal on Information
Systems 40–1, 46
EJISDC (E-Journal on Information
Systems in Developing
Countries) 44, 649
Eklin, M. 509
El Sawy, Omar 41
Elam, M. 304
electro-mechanical cases 90–1
electronic journals 39
see also EJIS; EJISDC
electronic readers 618
electronic snooping 601
electronic tagging 191
electronic voting 610
Elgesem, D. 610
Elia, J. P. 567
Eliot, S. 420
Elkington, John 417, 590
email 127, 351, 467, 481–2, 538, 543, 551,
616, 639
creative uses of 456
ﬁlters 483
mobile access to 456
overused 552
spoof 615
widespread diffusion of 545
emancipation 203–5, 207–9, 211, 220
goals conducive to 201
issue of norms and rules deemed supportive
of 216
lack of 206, 210, 218
obstacles to 212
promoting 199–202, 213, 215, 217
emergent properties 92, 98, 454
emergent use 445, 453, 456
intended 454–5
unintended 455
Emery, F. E. 21, 24, 32–3
Emery, J. 27
empirical research 124, 183, 211,
217, 219
apparent lack of 218
role of theory and its relationship to
119–21
empiricism 71, 73–4, 76–7, 284, 294
major relativistic implications for 70
EMS model 37
encryption 444, 450, 453
end-to-end alignment 362
energy consumption 587–8
England:
North West 563
South 484
ENIAC computer 12
Enlightenment 594–5
Enron 7, 418–20, 429–30
Enterprise 2.0 technologies 552–4
Enterprise Systems 335, 394–414
entrepreneurship 151, 156, 159
environment and technology 586–7
environmental jolts 148–9
environmental problems 588
EOQ (economic order quantity) 4
EPC (Electronic Product Code) 449–50
694
INDEX

epistemology 67, 70–1, 73–7, 79, 81,
90, 107, 203, 214, 218, 539–43,
546, 571
critical 572, 574
hermeneutic 313
interpretive 569
rethinking 572–3
Epplerm M. 334, 337
equity argument 562
Erden, Z. 331, 334
Ericsson, Lars Magnus 468
Erlebnis 233, 242–3, 250
ERP (enterprise resource planning)
systems 7, 334–5, 384, 454, 516, 651
Escobar, A. 648
e-Seva project 642
Ess, C. 613–4
essentialism 278–9, 293–5, 300,
302, 312
gender 567–8, 575, 577
social or political 305
Ethernet 22
ethics 390 n., 429, 601–22, 635
discourse 214–16, 248
health 304
identity card schemes 643–4
see also computer (and information)
ethics
ethnicity 574, 576
ethnocentricity 294
ethnography 121, 157, 159, 193, 570–1
ethnomethodology 114, 147, 154, 279, 281,
298, 306, 548
ETICA (FP7 European-funded project) 616
etymology 264–5, 268–71
Euro currency launch (2002) 7
European Commission-Information Society
and Media 608, 618
European Common Market 96
European Conference on e-Government 40
European Conference on Information
Systems 561
European Journal of Information Systems 561
European Union (Commission on Women’s
Rights and Equal Opportunities) 563
Evans, R. 314
Evaristo, J. R. 335
event causality 120
Everest, G. 26
Ewald, F. 194
excessive transformations 359
exclusion 631, 638
existential phenomenology 264, 279, 284,
285 n.
expert systems 17, 121, 132
explicit knowledge 79, 540–6
Exploitative paradigm 595
exploration and exploitation 330–8
external reality 78, 202
externalization 3, 5–9, 11–13
extranets 42
Facebook 553, 680
factor-based view 37, 477
factor models 352
facts 589
see also social facts
Fairclough, N. 212
Fairweather, N. B. 614
fallibilism 77
falsiﬁcation 70
FAOR (Functional Analysis of Ofﬁce
Requirements) 25
fax machines 657
Fäy, L. E. 253
feedback systems 90–1
Feenberg, A. 175, 192, 206–7, 215,
310–11
Feeny, D. F. 350, 354, 379–80, 384, 497, 503,
514–15, 517–18
Feldman, M. S. 335
feminism 571, 576–7, 631, 633
Fernandez, P. 509
Ferry, G. 47 n.
Feyerabend, P. 241
Fiebig, D. G. 509
ﬁnancial attributes 499–500
ﬁnancial services sector 156
Finland 34
Finnegan, P. 332
Fisher, J. 503
Fiss, P. C. 431
ﬁt 349, 350, 674
INDEX
695

Fitzgerald, G. 28, 33, 37–8, 405–8, 420, 431,
496, 514
ﬁxed-line telephones 475
ﬂexible project teams 331
Flores, F. 230–1, 281–2, 285 n.
Florida, R. 562
Florin, J. 503
Floyd, S. W. 351, 355
folksonomies 553
Foods International 487
foreground/leadership behaviours 353–4
foreign exchange trading 482–3
Forrester, J. 24, 106
Forrester Report (2009) 594
formative contexts 128
FORTRAN 21
Fortunati, L. 475
Foucault, Michel 71, 74, 174–98, 207, 214,
217, 247, 292–3, 310, 314, 334, 545, 648
Fournier, V. 311–12
Fourth World 631, 633
France 96
Frankfurt School 213–14
fraudulent websites 615
freelance outsourcing 497, 519
Frenkel, K. A. 566
Friedland, R. 143, 146
Friedman, A. 47 n.
Fried, C. 610
Fry, T. 276
FST (feminist standpoint theory) 575–7
Fulk, J. 650
Fuller, L. L. 401–2
functionalism 106–7, 114, 123, 145,
147, 216
rational 158
fusion 349
Gable, G. 46, 49 n.
Gadamer, H.-G. 231, 233–4, 238–44,
247, 249
Galbraith, J. R. 9–10
Galletta, Dennis 39
Galliers, R. 10, 18–19, 21–2, 39–40, 43, 45–6,
329–30, 332–8, 352, 358, 364, 381–2, 408,
420, 537
Gallivan, M. 500, 503–4, 567
Gallupe, B. 351–2
Galvin, J. E. 336
game theorists 146
Gandhi, M. K. (Mahatma) 633
Gane, C. 17
Garﬁnkel, H. 114, 147, 298, 408, 548
Garud, R. 151
Gates, Bill 6, 469
GDSS (Group Decision Support Systems)
36–7, 45, 125
Ge, L. 518
GE (General Electric) 10
Gefen, D. 566
Geisteswissenschaften 232–3
gender 292, 560–85
gender discrimination 312, 635, 643
laws about 576
gender stereotypes 205, 567, 570, 574
generalization 286 n.
genetics 89, 92
data advances 611
proﬁles 611
screening 191
geography 304
George, J. 39, 47 n.
Gerard, R. W. 91
Germanic languages 287 n.
Germany 517, 625
Gerstein, M. 337
Gerstner, Lou 6
Gestalt 19
Gestell 280, 592
gesture 262
Geyer, D. 500
Gherardi, S. 540
Giacomazzi, F. 333
Gibbons, M. 537, 539
Gibbs, M. R. 331
Giddens, A. 113–32, 176, 188–9, 207, 216,
249, 258, 278, 295–6, 309, 429, 624–6,
630, 632
Gill, A. 75
Ginzberg, M. J. 17
Gioia, D. A. 120
Giuliani, Rudy 474
Glendinning, S. 253, 255–6
696
INDEX

global account management 10
global ﬁnancial crisis (2009) 625
Global Village concept 613, 616–18
global warming 589, 597, 632, 681
globalization 9, 22, 42–3, 332, 578, 595,
602, 616
and human development 623–46
knowledge 537
goals 145–6, 208, 402, 422
ambiguous 140
common 545
conducive to emancipation 201
conscious 176
higher-level 351
human development 636
key 154
noble 219
parties identifying with each other’s 510
sinister 677
strategic 351, 519
universal 650
Goffman, E. 472
Goles, T. 336, 360
Gollakota, K. 640
Goo, J. 510–11, 518
Goodhue, D. L. 380
Google 383
Gopal, A. 33, 214, 498, 509, 511, 514–16
Gordon, C. 181
Gorry, G. 18, 26, 31
Gotterbarn, D. 605–9
Gourlay, S. 543–4
governance 11
contractual 185, 507–12, 518
decision making and 425
democratic forms 210
multi-theoretic approach to 415–43
need for standardization of 185
relational 185, 507, 509–12, 518
shared 365
solid 362
governmentality 185, 188
Govindarajan, V. 332, 335
GPS (global positioning systems) 451–2,
459–60, 463, 471, 487
Graeser, V. 337
Gramsci, Antonio 206
Granovetter, M. 432
Greece 182
Green, N. 475
green issues 362, 586–600, 635,
676–7
Greenaway, K. E. 423, 430–1
Greenhill, A. 564, 566, 571
Greenwood, R. 122, 145, 147, 149,
157–9
Gregor, S. 46, 49 n.
Gregory, R. 26
Gregson, N. 119
Grey, C. 311–12, 644
Grey, S. 513–14
Grifﬁn, R. 73
Grifﬁths, P. 332
Grint, K. 175, 180, 300
groupthink 433–4
Grover, V. 17, 37–8, 335, 337, 497–8,
500, 508, 510
GSM (Global System for Mobile
Communications) 468–9
GST (General Systems Theory)
71–2
Gu, B. 424, 428
Guatemala 653
Gupta, A. 515
Gupta, A. K. 332, 335
Gupta, Y. P. 357
Gurbaxani, V. 378–9, 503, 655
Gurwitsch, A. 286 n.
Gutenberg Bible 107
Guynes, C. S. 356
Guzzini, S. 312
Gwillim, D. 337
Gyandoot project 642–3
Habermas, Jürgen 74–5, 77–9, 81, 176,
182, 193–4, 199–200, 214–17, 248,
311, 314, 658
Habib, L. 571
habitualization 141, 159
habitus 292, 310
hackers 447, 449, 451, 615
potential rewards for 450
random 462
INDEX
697

hackers (cont.)
software company response when
uncovered 445
systems attractive to 452
see also malware; spyware; Trojan horses;
viruses
Hacking, I. 311–12
Hall, Arthur 93, 95, 105
Hall, H. 264
Hall, J. 500
Hall, T. 515
Hamilton, S. 16, 18, 31
Hammer, Michael 6, 180
Hammond, M. 273
Han, H. 508
handheld scanners 450–1
Handy, C. 337
Hansen, M. 379
Hansen, M. T. 331, 336, 546
Hanseth, O. 128–9, 292, 296, 304, 310,
330, 336
harassment 601, 615
Haraway, D. 175, 177, 193
hardware 26, 36, 263, 376
decrease in cost of 22
incompatible 20
standardized software and 382
see also ATMs; laptops; mainframes;
minicomputers; microprocessors;
notebooks; palmtops; PCs; PDAs;
scanners
Hardy, C. 143, 151, 186
harmony 349
ethical 613–14
Harper, R. 475
Harré, R. 118, 309
Harris, M. 300–1
Harris, R. W. 658
Harris, S. 304
Hart, S. L. 586, 593
Harvard Business Review 8, 10
Harvard Business School 32, 38, 179
Harvey, L. 184, 199, 206
Harvey, L. J. 306
Hassanin, L. 661
Hassard, J. 304, 313–15
Hasselbladh, H. 152–3, 158
Hatﬁeld Polytechnic 29
Hatt, G. 304
Hawken, P. 594
Hayles, K. 175, 192
Haynes, M. 89
HCI (Human-Computer Interaction) 28,
476–7
He, Z. 73
He, Z.-L. 336
healthcare 148–9, 448–9, 453, 457, 500, 608,
618, 653
Heath, C. 473
Hedberg, C. 128, 636–9
Heeks, R. 640–1, 648, 650, 654, 660–2
Hegel, G. W. F. 22, 242–3
hegemony:
commodiﬁcation serves as means of 209
ideology and 205–6, 208, 212
Heidegger, M. 119, 176–7, 195 n., 204, 231,
233, 239, 243–7, 250, 254–6, 259, 262–8,
271–5, 277–83, 285 n., 286 n., 310, 586,
592–3, 597
Heikkila, J. 18
Heim, M. 266
Heinen, S. 37
Heinzl, A. 515
Heiskanen, A. 17, 509
Hellens, L. A. von 568
Henderson, J. C. 333, 346, 349, 352, 354–5,
358, 365
Heng, M. 74
Henley Management College 40
Henshall, D. 215
hereditary traits 611
hermeneutic circle 241–3, 249
hermeneutics 71, 117, 120, 229–52, 280,
283, 311
critical 73, 247
Hess, D. 310
Hewitt 517
HICSS (Hawaiian International Conference
on System Sciences) 48 n.
hidden costs 505
Hill, C. E. 653, 660
Hilmer, F. 503
Hinings, B. 122
Hinings, C. R. 144–5, 147, 149, 159
698
INDEX

Hippel, E. von 334
Hirschheim, R. 3, 12, 18–19, 24, 32–3, 36–8,
44, 46, 47 n., 72–4, 201, 212, 215, 314,
336, 359–60, 496, 503, 505, 608, 648
Hirst, P. 628
HISP (Health Information Systems
Programme) 636–9, 643, 653
historicity 233, 254, 261, 279, 311
totality and 204
history 304
Hjorth, L. 475
HM Revenue and Customs (UK) 416
Hoffer Gittell, J. 484
Hofstede, G. 653
holistic thinking 71–3, 89–90
Holmer-Nadesan, M. 128
Holmström, J. 296, 310
Holwell, S. 18, 73, 95, 97, 107–8, 110
homogeneity of organizations 140, 144, 148
homogenization/homogeneity 381, 552,
567–8, 577
cultural 613
global 617, 626–7
inevitability of 625
Hongladarom, S. 613–14
Horst, H. 475, 477
Howard, J. 310
Howarth, J. 273
Howcroft, D. A. 74, 200–1, 203, 205,
210, 216, 218, 292, 310, 335, 404,
406, 430, 564, 566–70, 570, 572–3,
575, 635, 664
HP (Hewlett-Packard) 517
Hu, Q. 156
Huang, H. 563, 567–8, 576, 578
Huang, J. 454
Huber, George 27, 32, 41
Hudson, R. 185
Hughes, T. P. 298–9, 544
Hulbert, J. 592, 673
Hulland, J. 374, 377, 379, 381
human development 623–4, 632–6,
643–4
human error 416, 447
Human Genome project 191, 209
human movement 472–3
Human Resources Management Journal 561
humanism 294
Hume, David 70
Humphreys, A. 182
Hunt, G. E. 353
Hussein, H. 354–5
Husserl, Edmund 24, 107, 254, 256–64, 266,
273, 277–9, 285–6
Huynh, M. 73–4, 201, 210
Huyskens, C. 517
Hyatt Hotels 381
Hyderabad 641
hypothetico-deductive method 70
Iacono, C. S. 202, 387
Iacovou, C. L. 505, 508, 515
IBM 5–6, 8, 346, 469, 517
introduction of PCs 30–1
organizational dimensions 10
services science 7
IBM 360 series computers 20–2
IBM Global Business Systems 6
ICEX 358–9
Ichijo, K. 330, 334
ICI Ltd 94
Petrochemical Division 103
ICIS (International Conference on
Information Systems) 30, 34–5, 39–41,
44–5, 48 n.
doctoral consortia 34
ICOIS (International Conference on
Outsourcing of Information Services) 40
ICTs (information and communication
technologies) 209, 335, 337, 551–3, 561,
624
central role in societal transformations 629
deeply implicated in global changes 633
ethics and 601–22
hiring personnel 335
mobile 312
social study of 174–98
standardization of 334–5
strategic impact and use of 329
under-representations of women in the
sector 563
unintended consequences arising from
implementations 336
INDEX
699

ideal patterns 510
idealism 73, 278
transcendental 262
identity 189
caller 483
class 577
communal 631
compromising 416
cultural 577
gender 568, 572–3
national 577
identity card schemes 635, 643–4
identity theft 601, 607
ideology 184, 193, 207, 209–11, 213, 589
critique of 212
hegemony and 205–6, 208, 212
libertarian 613
neoliberal 625–6
oppressive 217
political 613
IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers) 449, 606
IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force) 449
IFIP (International Federation for
Information Processing) 21, 29, 34,
38, 578
Administrative Data Processing Group
(IAG) 29
8th International Working Conference
(WG9.4) 649
Technical Committee for Education
(TC3) 29
Technical Committee of Information
Systems (TC8) 23, 30, 39, 48 n.
Working Group (8.2) 33, 43–5, 48 n.
Igbaria, M. 566
Ihde, Don 266, 282–3
Iivari, J. 23, 33–4, 46, 73
IKEA mission statement 101, 103
Ilharco, F. M. 253, 285 n., 286 n., 287 n.
illegality 418
imagination 627
diversity of 630
IMIS (Institute for the Management of
Information Systems) 609
imitability and rarity 376
improvisation 332, 336, 455, 474, 487
incentive alignment 428
inclusion 578, 618–19
incommensurability 70–1, 238
apparent 313
independent variables 141, 152, 498, 510
India 8, 516, 634, 636, 653, 662–3
e-government programmes 641–3
offshoring of IS jobs 44
telecentre projects 639–40
individualism 297, 613, 627
and acceptability 608
individuation 182
Indo-Aryan languages 287 n.
induction 70
industrial waste containers 485–6
industrialization 593
industry 356, 500, 594
infological approach 21, 23, 26
information age 629–32
Information and Management (journal) 35
Information & Organization (journal) 41, 46
information asymmetry 424, 428, 436
information integrity 462
information management 3–15, 330
information overload 362
Information Society 602, 611, 613–5,
619
potential beneﬁts 601
Information Systems Audit 444
Information Systems Frontiers (journal) 44
Information Systems Journal 49 n., 635
Information Technologies and International
Development (journal) 649
Information Technology for Development
(journal) 649
Information Technology & People
(journal) 570, 578
information theory 108
informational politics 631
INFORMS (Institute for Operations Research
and the Management Sciences) 39, 41,
49 n.
infrared radiation 188
infrastructure advancements:
conferences 34–5, 40
journals 35, 40–1, 44
professional societies 30, 38–40
700
INDEX

infrastructure costs 516
Ingarden, R. 283
innovation 22, 144, 301–4, 333, 336, 427,
455, 546, 647–71
conceptualizing as a process 142
continuous 339, 363, 562
cycle of 383
diagnosis or decision about unrealism
of 307
diffusion of 33, 142–3, 156
efforts to improve 535
improvisation 332
interorganizational 470
knowledge and 538–9
mindless 155
nature of 672–3
radical 598
role of governmental institutions in 155
technical rationality underpinning 182
inquiry systems 22
insourcing 37, 519
highly speciﬁc assets 505
institutional change 147–51
institutional economics 17, 146
institutional entrepreneurship 151,
156, 159
institutional logics 144
institutional theory 137
foundations of 138–51
information systems research
and 153–7
understanding the commitment
problem 429–32
institutionalism 123, 137–73, 652
institutionalization 292, 401, 404
of science 296
instrumentalism 77
integrated circuits 20, 22
integrated data processing 26
integration 333, 349
automated 400
social 119
supply-chain 380
system 119
technology and organizations 28
Intel 11, 22
intellectual property 539, 611–12
intentionality 259–60, 262–4, 271
political 310
interaction:
cross-cultural 654
face-to-face 119, 121, 309
human-nature 595
institutions and globalized economic
agents 629
mediated 589
mobilization of 473–4
unmediated 589
see also HCI
interactional burden 484
interactionist approach 33
interconnectivity 468
intéressement 303
interestedness 297
intermediaries 302, 308, 643
International Conference on Electronic
Commerce 40
International Conference on Information
Systems 561
International Society for the Systems
Sciences 91
international trade 630
Internet 108, 155, 178, 182, 191, 193, 469,
590, 613, 678
advances in shopping 618
attacks on applications 452
browsing 640
commercialization of 41–3
connection 657
cultural clashes on 617
medical services and activities via 617–18
positive view of 613
rural access to 619
software for 151
standard applications hosted and rented
over 516
tool for collaboration 553
used to liberate and oppress women 577
wireless access 467
interoperability 384, 469–70
interorganizational systems 453–5
agreement on security measures 448
information-sharing 446
innovation 470
INDEX
701

interorganizational systems (cont.)
relevant data 457
interpretation 235, 269, 280, 305
as appropriation of meaning 239–41
breakdown and 231, 233–4, 236
Erlebnis and 242–3
language and 237–9
grammatical 232
obscure texts 236–7
phenomenological 285
psychological 232
shared 613
understanding and 245–9, 254
interpretive ﬂexibility 299–300
interpretivism 68, 70, 73, 75, 157,
211–12, 294
criticism often levelled at 285
structuration theory and 295
intersubjectivity 278–9, 311–12
intranets 42, 552
Introna, L. D. 175, 181–2, 208–10,
217, 230–1, 253, 281–2, 285 n.,
286 n., 287 n.
inventory tags 445–6, 448
I/O-intensive operations 21
iPhones 471, 538, 680
iPods 672, 680
Irani, Z. 347
Iraq 634
IRIS (Information Systems Research in
Scandinavia) 34, 48 n.
irrationality 404
ISCOL Ltd 94–5, 98
ISD (IS development) process 28, 46, 72
ISDC (Information Systems in Developing
Countries) 647–71
ISDOS project 22–3, 48 n.
ISI Web of Knowledge 76
ISO (International Standards
Organization) 444
isomorphism 144, 148, 154, 157, 161
institutional 140, 430
mimetic 140
structural 152
ISR (Information Systems Research)
journal 41, 46
Israeli-Arab conﬂict 634
ISWorld Net 40, 46, 49 n.
IT (information technology) 23, 30, 72, 210,
330, 346–93
advancement in 21
best-of-breed applications 4
challenges for managers 42
competitive implications of 17
cross-cultural research in 43
cultural barriers of women in 563
diffusion of 33, 156
ecology of 586–600
effect on economic performance 32
experiments to develop a knowledge base
about 25
externalization of 3, 5–9, 11–13
gender and 563
globalization and human
development 623–46
hermeneutics and failed
implementations 231
history of 4
in-house services 3, 7–13
information services become emphasized
over 562
institutional theory of 137–73
local shortages of skilled labour 7
management function 10
mobile 467–95
monitoring the deliverability of systems 31
multi-theoretic approach to
governance 415–43
NHS use of 302
organizational application of 41
organizational impact of 32
outsourcing 6–8, 36–7, 47 n., 379–80, 438,
496–528
paradoxes of 587–91
problems in implementation 37
professionalism of 4–5, 11–12, 609–10
role in changing temporal and spatial
character of organizations 119
role of governmental institutions in
innovation 155
shared provision of services 10
socially shaped as ‘men’s work’ 568
sophisticated 111
see also ICTs
702
INDEX

IT Financial Management Association 5
IT Governance Institute 5
Italic language family 287 n.
ITIL (IT Infrastructure Library) 5, 10–11
Ives, Blake 13, 16, 18, 31–2, 39–40, 45, 202,
332, 347, 349, 354, 357, 373–4, 378–81,
384–5, 387–8, 434, 672
Jacobs, R. 503
Jagun, A. 640–1
Jain, S. 151
JAIS (Journal of the AIS) 39, 44–5
Janson, M. 210, 215
Japan 127, 613–14, 625–6
Yoseba quarters 631
see also Tokyo
Jarvenpaa, S. L. 332, 336, 377, 434, 474, 482,
516, 651, 656
Jary, D. 120–1, 126
Java technology 151
Jenkin, T. A. 351
Jenkins, Gwilym 94
Jensen, R. 641
Jepperson, R. L. 139, 146
Jepsen, Mary Lou 677
Jessup, L. 569
Jeyaraj, A. 498
JGIM (Journal of Global Information
Management) 41
Jia, R. Q. 352
JIS (Journal of Information Systems) 41
JIT (just-in-time) manufacturing 186–7
Johansson, Jesper 49 n.
Johnson, Deborah 601, 604, 609, 611–12
joint ventures 12
Jones, M. 292
Jones, M. R. 122, 124, 126, 128–9, 131
Jordan 657
Joshi, K. D. 567, 574
Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 153
Journal of Electronic Commerce Research 44
Journal of Information, Communication &
Ethics in Society 578
Journal of Information Technology 41, 46, 539
Journal of Management Information
Systems 35, 566
Journal of Management Studies 539
Journal of Mixed Methods Research 75
Journal of Systems Management 48 n.
JSIS (Journal of Strategic Information
Systems) 41, 46
JSTOR database 497
judgements 274
conﬂicting 237
Junglas, I. 19
Jurison, J. 505
justiﬁcation 76–8
discursive 79
Kaarst-Brown, M. L. 212, 353
Kahn, S. A. 48 n.
Kaiser, K. M. 574–5
Kallinikos J. 152–3, 158
Kanawattanachai, P. 334
Kang, J. 379
Kant, Immanuel 22, 73–4, 216, 255, 257,
604, 607
Kanungo, S. 640, 656, 658
Karahanna, E. 477
Karimi, J. 357, 426
Karsten, H. 122, 124, 126, 128–9, 131
Kashmeery, A. 613–14
Katz, J. E. 473, 475
Katz, N. 484
Katz, S. 567
Kawalek, P. 407
Kay, Alan 469
Kay, R. 353
Kayworth, T. 653
KCI (knowledge-constitutive interests)
theory 77
Kearns, G. S. 337, 347
Keat, R. 273
Keen, Peter 17, 27, 31, 34–5
Kellner, D. 175, 192
Kemerer, C. 18
Kerala 640–1
Kern, T. 505–6, 508, 516–17
Kim, J. 500, 503–4
Kim, Y. 500, 508, 510–11
King, Bill 39, 41
King, J. 18, 34, 45, 47 n.
INDEX
703

King, J. L. 154–5, 157
King, M. 286 n., 354–5
King, W. R. 346, 349
kiosk technology 382, 386, 640, 642
Kishore, R. 503, 514
Klein, H. K. 3, 12, 18–19, 33, 38, 44, 46, 73,
199–202, 208, 210, 215, 217–18, 231, 314,
407, 453, 608, 648
Kleinknecht, A. 336
Kling, R. 23, 33, 300
Knights, D. 123, 175, 186–7, 189, 292,
305, 310
Knorr-Cetina, K. 298–9, 302, 305,
308–9, 549
know-how 542, 545, 651
knowledge:
capture and transfer of 329–30
construction of 312
consumer as an object of 182
efﬁciency and 312
epistemological 74, 79, 81
experiential 79, 82
exploitation/exploration of 333–6
impossible to separate power from 294
information ubiquity can be
accompanied by decrease
in 589
intransitive object of 77
knowing and 546–7
major IS journals and 181
objective 71, 295
organizational 28–9
performative 78–9, 82
power and 177–9, 182–3, 292
professional 4, 185, 536
propositional 79, 81–2
reﬂexive appropriation of 121
repressions and distortions in 78
scientiﬁc 298
situated 330, 577
social theory of 311
sociology of 71
specialized 609
structural perspectives on 542–3
truth and 68, 77–81, 312
valid 70, 76, 400
see also explicit knowledge; tacit knowledge;
also under following entries preﬁxed
‘knowledge’
knowledge acquisition 187
knowledge-based theory of the ﬁrm 330, 537
knowledge creation 338, 538, 542–3, 546,
549–51
knowing and 329
role of communities of practice crucial
in 336
knowledge-intensive organizations 180, 537
knowledge management 67–8, 72, 76, 329,
334–5, 362, 535–59, 681
knowledge process outsourcing 519
knowledge sharing 330, 332–6, 338, 350,
352–3, 361, 542, 545, 554
across specialist functions or
disciplines 548
barriers to 548
improved 354, 535
individuals who are relatively
homogeneous 552
organizations lose opportunities for 539
social and cultural conditions necessary
for 536
ways to achieve 365
knowledge transfer 536, 546, 551
knowledgeability 117–18, 130, 536, 538
Kockelmans, J. J. 244, 262
Kodak 6, 37
Kogut, B. 625
Koh, C. 508
Kolb, D. 17
Konana, P. 518
Konno, N. 543
Konsynski, B. 37
Korpela, M. 651
Kotlarsky, J. 332, 334–5, 514–16
Kotnour, T. 334, 338
Kozar, K. 26
Kraemer, K. 378–9, 655
Kreijger, J. 505, 516
Kriebel, Charles 41
Krishnan, M. 498, 509
Krishna, S. 641–2, 649, 654, 662
Krogh, G. von 330–1, 334
Kroon, V. 356
Kuhn, K. 574
704
INDEX

Kuhn, T. S. 70, 297
Kumar, A. 658
Kumar, K. 45, 337
Kumar, R. 639–40
Kumaraswamy, A. 151
Kuriyan, R. 640
Kvasny, L. 205, 292, 564, 566, 571, 576
Kwan, C. 607–9
labour force:
gender and 562–3, 566, 578
interdependence of 630
labour process theory 186
Lacity, Mary C. 5, 37, 47 n., 48 n., 331,
335, 380, 496–8, 501, 503, 505–10,
512–19
Lacroux, F. 72
Lagrange, J. 194
Lancaster University 24, 87, 94–5, 98
Land, Frank 12, 21, 24, 32, 40, 43,
47 n., 651
Landry, M. 18–19, 648
Lands End Custom initiative 385
Lang, K. R. 474, 482
Langefors, B. 12, 18, 21, 23–4, 26, 48 n.
Langer, Monika 286 n.
language 94, 262, 269, 536–7, 642
abstract 139
common 353, 428
competent-speaker notion 79
constitutive powers emphasized 293
everyday 88–90, 106, 108, 237–9, 246
interdependence of action and 191
meaning and 71
mobile phones and development of 475
referent and 77
language-based research 213
language-games 247
incommensurability of 238
very primitive 237, 246
language-oriented methodologies 212–13
Lanzara, G. F. 128
Lapp reindeer 301
laptops 42, 263–4, 424, 678
one-per-child initiative 588, 675–7
LAS (location aware systems) 459, 463
Latin (language) 287 n.
Latin America 631, 653
Latour, Bruno 74, 295, 298, 300–3, 306–10,
314, 401, 548
Lave, J. 331, 335–6, 408, 540
Law, J. 295, 298, 304–5, 314–15
Lawlor, L. 280
Lawrence, P. 44
Lawrence, T. B. 143, 151, 159, 161
Layder, D. 117–18
layered structure 92
layoffs 6, 499
lead-lag models 360, 364
leadership:
autocratic 353–4
indecisive 354
Learmonth, G. 32, 672
learning 338, 476, 678
action 17
cross-project 334, 336
initiatives detrimental to 588
rote 410
situated 406
Lederer, A. L. 332, 335, 347, 349, 354
Lee, A. 33, 43–5, 496
Lee, A. S. 201, 203, 230–1, 311
Lee, C. 17
Lee, J. 508, 510–11
Lee, N. 67, 314–15
Leede, J. 347
Leedy, P. D. 254
Lefebvre, H. 473
legacy systems 7
legacy thinking 405, 408–9
legitimacy 145, 153–4, 207, 218–20
appearance of conformity presumed to be
sufﬁcient for 430
effort to obtain as a discipline 568–9
problem-solving 205
legitimation 115, 125–6, 148, 156, 186
Lehoux, P. 304
Leiba-O’Sullivan, S. 186
Leibniz, G. W. 22, 261
Leidner, D. E. 332, 334–5, 377, 501, 512, 651,
653, 656
leisure 588
LEO (Lyons Electronic Ofﬁce) 6, 12, 20, 39
INDEX
705

Lévi-Strauss, C. 330, 336–7
Levina, N. 511, 513–15
Levinas, E. 256, 280
Levy, D. L. 348
Lewin, K. 17
Lewis, B. R. 355, 365
Lewis, M. 433–4
Li, D. 26
Liang, H. 155–6
Licoppe, C. 475
Liebenau, J. 33, 43–4
Liedtka, S. 500
Lientz, B. P. 337
lifestyle 611
Light, B. 577
Lightfoot, G. 313
Likert scale 230
Lilley, S. 313
Lindblom, C. 336–7
Linder, J. 503
Ling, R. 468, 472–5
Lings, I. 67
linguistics 70, 212, 269
linkage 349
LinkedIn 553
Linstone, H. 73
Linux 676, 678
Lioliou, Eleni 185, 195 n.
listening 259–60
living standards 634
LL Bean website 385
loan associations 148
local mobility 473
location information 448–9, 451–2
explicit, derivable or implied 460
periodic transmission of 463
see also LAS
Loch, K. D. 653, 660
Locke, John 22
Loebbecke, C. 39, 517
logical models 445–6, 457–9, 462–4
logistics technology 487
Loh, L. 496, 499–500, 503
London:
ambulance system 109
black cabs 481–2, 488
ﬁnancial markets 482
Longaigh, S. N. 332
longue durée 119
Looise, J. C. de 347
Lotus Notes 127, 455
Lounsbury, M. 158, 431
Lovins, A. B. & L. H. 594
Lowe, A. 310
LSE (London School of Economics) 21, 29
Lubin, John 29
Lucas, H. 19, 44
Lucas, H. C. 26
Luckmann, T. 113, 278, 546, 568
Luff, P. 473
Luftman, J. 349, 351–2, 354, 359
Luhmann, N. 128
Lukes, Steven 186
Lynch, M. 310
Lyon, D. 175–6, 188–90
Lyotard, J. F. 548
Lyytinen, K. 16–19, 23, 33–4, 42, 45–6, 47 n.,
201, 208, 215, 337, 400, 469–71, 489
McAfee, A. 551–4
Macann, C. 286 n.
McBride, N. 72
McDonald, M. 519
McFarlan, W. 18, 32, 38, 42, 358
McGrath, Kathy 208
McGrath, R. G. 375
Macintosh, N. W. 123
McKeen, J. D. 349, 508, 515
McKenney, James 29, 38, 42
MacKenzie, D. 299, 310
McKiernan, P. 333
McKinley, A. 175, 186–7
McKinney, V. R. 566
McLean, C. 313
McLean, E. R. 32, 346
McLeod, L. 205, 211
McLoughlin, I. 300–1
McLuhan, M. 266, 275
McMaster, T. 304
MacMillan, I. C. 375
Madhya Pradesh (Dhar district) 642
Madon, S. 640, 648–50, 652–3,
658, 663
706
INDEX

Magill, S. L. 350, 353
Maguire, S. 143, 151, 210
mainframes 6, 21–2, 30, 93, 469, 680
reliance on 31
Makimoto, T. 472, 476, 480
Malamud, O. 588, 678
malicious activities 447, 450, 464
see also malware
Maller, V. 47 n.
Malone, T. W. 9
malware 445, 453, 456
Management Datamatics/Management
Informatics (journal) 35
management science 22, 97, 99
see also TIMS
Management Science (journal) 35,
49 n., 566
Management Studies 185–93
managerialism 210, 293, 305, 311–13
Manchester 44, 483
Manchester Business School 33
Mandela, Nelson 633, 636
Maner, Walter 604
Mann, C. L. 655
Mann, Steve 471
Manners, D. 472, 476, 480
Manovich, L. 266
Mao, J. 516
Marcon, T. 214
Marcuse, H. 212
Marini, M. M. 568
market entry rates 148
market share 32
Marketing Science (journal) 49 n.
Markus, M. L. 9, 18, 32, 37, 43–5,
295, 355, 383, 404, 416
Marples, C. G. 337
Marriott International 381
Marshall, J. D. 590
Martocchio, J. 566
Marx, Karl 73, 114, 189, 213
Marxism 17, 74, 208, 294
Mason, R. 16, 18, 26, 31, 38
Mason, R. M. 157, 160
material technology 194
Matta, N. 337
Mayhew, P. J. 406, 408
Mazmanian, M. 476
meaning-making 229–52, 285
meaningfulness 229, 233, 246–7, 259
meanings 260, 262
already inscribed 284
attribution system 25
ﬁxed 294
fundamental, attempt to uncover 273
hidden 311
precise 88
shared 88, 254, 613
speciﬁc and non-standard 116
subjective 254
medicine 617–18
megacities 631
Melville, N. 378–9
men and masculinity 577
Mendelow, A. L. 349, 354
Mensch, J. R. 279–80
mentoring 575
Merali, Y. 333
mergers and acquisitions 9, 12, 333
Merleau-Ponty, M. 256, 261–2, 264,
266, 269, 286 n.
Merriam Webster Dictionary 269–70
MERS (mortgage loans organization) 9
Merton, Robert 296–7
meta-level theory 91
metaphors 212–13, 248, 269, 300, 472, 548,
637, 639, 660
metaphysics 279–80
methodological dualism 301–2
Mexico 630–1
Meyer, J. W. 139, 142–5, 147, 149,
400, 430, 434
Michell, V. 514
micro-macro events 303, 305–10, 313
micro-mobility 473
microprocessors 20, 22
Microsoft 6, 445, 469
desktop-centric view rendered
obsolete 151
European pressure on 384
Windows 384, 676
microwave technology 188
Middle Ages 232, 269
middlemen 516
INDEX
707

Miles, R. E. 356
Mill, John Stuart 604
Millar, V. 18, 32
Millennium Development Goals (UN 2009)
634, 648
Miller, A. 610
Miller, D. 375, 475, 477
Miller, G. 101
Miller, K. 609
Miller, P. 175, 185
Mingers, J. 18, 68, 70, 72–76, 78, 154, 176,
216, 286 n., 292
minicomputers 31
Ministries of Education 676
Mintzberg, H. 230, 335, 337, 347, 484
Miranda, S. 500, 510–11
mirrors 273–4
misalignment 351–2, 361, 420, 423, 428–9,
435
incentive 424
Miscione, G. 652–3
MISQ (MIS Quarterly) 30, 35, 39, 45–6, 48
n., 181, 566
MISQ Executive (journal) 44
MISQ Review 374
MISRC (University of Minnesota
Management Information Systems
Research 25, 29, 35
MIT (Massachusetts Institute of
Technology) 29–30, 349, 449, 602–3
Mitchell, G. 183–4
Mitev, N. 74, 203, 210, 292, 306, 310, 313
Mithas, S. 518
Mitroff, I. 16, 18, 20, 26, 31, 47–8
nn., 73, 297
Mobile Data Terminal (police vehicles) 484–5
mobile phones 42, 266, 450, 460, 471, 473–4,
476, 487, 489, 538
convergence of PDAs and 469–70
customized 481–2
display of caller’s identity 483
ﬁrst-generation networks 468
GPS-enabled 451
harassment using 615
Internet-enabled 480
number globally 467, 640–1
RFID-reader-enabled 485
role played in customer acquisition and
retention 641
social aspects of use 475
see also GSM
mobile systems 42, 446–7, 449, 452, 464,
467–95
dynamic storage capacity 450
wireless devices 457
mobility 472–4
enterprise 467–8, 476–7, 480, 486,
488–9
model building 101
modelling techniques 459
Modgil, C. & J. 130
modularity 383
Mohanty, J. 257–8, 287 n.
Mojsilovic, A. 499–500, 504
Montealegre, R. 155
Monteiro, E. 128–9, 292, 296, 304, 310,
636–7, 648, 653, 660
Moor, James 602, 604–5, 610–11, 613–14, 616
Moore, Gordon 22, 33
Moore, J. E. 574
moral norms 604
moral relativism 307
Moran, Dermot 253, 256, 262–3, 278
Morgan, A. 576
Morgan, G. 175, 186, 545
Morgan, Howard 29
Morgan (J.P.) 503
Morpheus movie swapping 612
morphogenetic approach 118, 130
Morris, M. 566
Mortgage Bankers Association of
America 9
motherhood 576
motivation 37, 404–7
lack of 409
movie ﬁles 612
Mowshowitz, A. 189
Mozambique 636
‘muddling through’ 336–7
Mukhopadhyay, T. 498, 509
Mulkay, M. 297
multiculturalism 630, 633
multidimensional organizations 10–11
multidivisional form 9–10
708
INDEX

multifunctional information appliances 675–6
multimethodology 75
multinational corporations 359, 381, 625, 631
global employment in 630
multi-stage models 152
Multiview 25, 73
Mumford, Enid 12, 20, 24, 32–3, 215, 404,
406, 408–9, 421, 427, 430
Munir, K. 292
Munro, I. 175, 191–2
Murdoch, J. 304
Murray, F. 175, 187, 189, 292, 305, 310
Mursu, A. 651
music 231, 237, 239–40
illicit copying/downloads of 612, 615
listening to 259–60
Myers, G. 304
Myers, M. D. 39, 44–6, 200, 202, 230–1, 295,
306, 311, 420, 653
MySpace 553
Nadler, D. 332, 337
Naidu, Chandrababu 642
Nakatsu, R. 505, 508, 515
Nam, K. 500
Nance, K. L. 613
Nandhakumar, J. 124, 306, 472
Napster 612
nation-state role 627–9
National Academy of Sciences (US) 562–3
National Audit Ofﬁce (UK) 416
National Science Foundation (US) 563
nationality 576
natural step 590
naturalist view 71
Naumann, David 49 n.
nearshoring 497, 519
neo-institutionalism 144–8, 154–5, 158–9,
161, 168
limitations of 151–3
Nestlé 11–13
net effect 385–6
Netherlands 34
netsourcing 516–17
network society 175, 192
network spanners 359
network technologies 551
networks 22, 303, 307, 310, 629, 673, 677
cross-border 630
electronic 615
global 630
greased data that can easily slip across 611
mobile 468
public 452–3
social 547
society and economy as 648
stabilized 308
networks of action model 653
Nevo, D. 335
New, C. 117
new technologies 42, 93, 192, 455
application of 357
evaluating the competitive potential
of 378
most socially pervasive question raised
by 189
new world order 633
New York 272, 482
New York University 30
Newell, A. 48 n.
Newell, S. 4, 7, 10, 330, 334–8, 381, 401,
405–6, 411, 427, 431, 453–4, 545
Newkirk, H. E. 332, 335
Newman, M. 17, 212, 509
Newtonian physics 70, 89
NGOs (nongovernmental
organizations) 657–8, 664
Ngwenyama, O. K. 201, 203, 211, 306, 311,
505, 655
NHS (UK National Health Service) 105, 302
work-integrated training of
professionals 478
Nicholson, B. 662
Nicolini, D. 400, 540
Niedzviecki, H. 471
Nielsen, S. H. 568, 575
Nietzsche, F. W. 175, 195 n.
Nishida, Kitaro 543
Nissen, H. E. 38, 44
noema 258, 261, 278, 286 n.
noesis and 259–60
Nohria, N. 331, 336
Nolan, R. L. 18, 31, 48 n.
INDEX
709

Nonaka, I. 329–31, 334, 538, 540,
542–3
non-linearity 454, 474
non-substitutability 375
importance as barrier to erosion 389
Norris, G. 337
North Africans 631
North Staffordshire Polytechnic 29
Norwegian health sector 304
notebooks 450, 467, 469, 471, 473
Nowotny, H. 537–9
nuclear war 603
Nunamaker, J. 29, 37–8
nursing work/nurses 304, 571
Nygaard, K. 17
objectiﬁcation 141
objectivism 234–5
objectivity 211
judgement of 297
obscurantism 277
observation 70–1, 297–8
anthropological 214
O’Callaghan, A. 73
O’Donnell, S. W. 332
off-premises trading 482–3
off-the-shelf packages/services 4, 383, 404
offshore outsourcing 8, 44, 497, 504–5,
515–16, 518
OGC (Open Geospatial Consortium) 449
Oh, W. 500, 503–4
Oklahoma bombing (1995) 631
Oliver, C. 139, 143, 149–50, 430
OLPC (One Laptop Per Child) project 588,
675–7
Olsen, Ken 469
Olsen, M. H. 32
Olson, D. L. 73
Olson, M. 16, 32, 404
OMA (Open Mobile Alliance) 449
one-dimensionality 257, 259
one-to-one alignment 362
ontological phenomenology 283
ontological security 119
ontology 70–1, 73, 75–6, 78, 81, 90, 107,
274–5, 543
constructionist 202–3
Heideggerian 283
inconsistent 117
objectivist 202, 311
social science 294
OPDT (Oxford Paperback Dictionary &
Thesaurus) 269
open architectures 31
open communications 511
standards-based 449–50
open programming environments 383
openness 678
operating systems 263
Operational Research Society 40
operations research 16–17, 24, 26–7, 48 n.,
93, 106, 180
oppression 201, 203, 205, 207–10, 212, 215,
217, 219, 577
acquiescence to 206
Oracle 444, 516
O’Reilly, C. 330, 332–3, 336–7
organisms 89
self-reproduction 90
Organization Science (journal) 49 n.
organizational change 32, 158, 182, 305,
410–11, 537, 567, 647, 651
ES implementations as major form
of 401
important norm in facilitating 402
managing 12, 17
political processual model of 187
organizational size 356
organizational structure 144–7
organizational value chain 366
Orlikowski, W. 43, 125–8, 130, 157–9, 200,
202–4, 209, 217, 292, 295, 304, 347, 387,
395, 405–7, 455, 476, 540–1, 547–8, 550,
635–6, 638, 648, 650, 652
Orlitzky, M. 422
Orthodox Judaism 613
OS (Organization Studies) 157, 174,
180, 472
IS and 153, 158, 180–1
MS and 185–93
Osborne, Harold S. 468
Osei-Bryson, K.-M. 505
Oshri, I. 332, 334–5, 514–16
710
INDEX

outsourcing 5–8, 36–7, 185, 438,
496–516, 539
growth of 47 n., 379–80
non-essential services 362
see also ASP; BPO
Oxford Handbook of Information and
Communications Technologies,
The 561
Oza, N. 513–15
Paciﬁc Asia Conference on Information
Systems 561
PACIS (Paciﬁc-Asia Conference on
Information Systems) 39–40, 49 n.
Pagach, D. 503
Palen, L. 475
Palmer, J. W. 355
Palmer, R. E. 231–3
palmtops 266, 268
Panopticon concept 176, 186, 188–93
PANs (Personal Area Networks) 467, 469
paperless ofﬁce promise 587
Papp, R. 349, 354
paradigms 71–3, 75, 297, 595, 598, 629
coexisting 70
embodied 281
paradoxical decisions 359
Pare, G. 356
parenthood 576
Pareto principle 366
Parks, M. 72
Parliamentary Ofﬁce of Science and
Technology 615
Parmenides 275
Parsons, Talcott 114
particularism 297
partnership 37
passwords:
management techniques 444
stealing or hacking 462
pathology 348
patriarchy/patriarchalism 577, 631
Paulo Amaral, M. N. 313
PCs (personal computers) 36, 42, 266, 272,
380, 680
introduction of 30–1
PDAs (personal digital assistants) 42, 450,
471, 487–8
convergence of mobile phones and 469–70
Peak, D. 356
Pearson, J. M. 352
Peirce, C. S. 77
Pennsylvania 34, 40
Penrose, E. T. 338
Peppard, J. 332, 334
perception 260
objective 70
performance monitoring 185
performativity 77–9, 82, 312–13
Perlow, L. A. 484
Perrow, C. 141, 454
personal characteristics 576
personal information 189
ability to restrict access to or control 610
control of 610
digitized 611
Pettigrew, A. M. 652–3
Pfeffer, J. 401–3, 420, 545
phenomenology 71, 107, 114, 154, 179, 211,
214, 253–91
existential 204
genetic 285 n.
neo-institutional theorists sympathetic
to 147
Philadelphia 34, 43
philosophy 106
and IS research 68–71
language 114
philosophy of science 73, 77, 297
Philosophy of Science (journal) 91
philosophy of technology 175
particularistic 177
phishing 615
phonetic alphabet 275
physics 70, 89, 241
Piccoli, Gabriele 13, 373–4, 378–81, 384–5,
387–8, 405
Pickering, A. 297
Pierson, C. 128–9
Pinch, T. 295, 298–9, 544
Pingry, D. 587–8
Pinsonneault, A. 123–4, 357
piracy 212
INDEX
711

Pisano, G. 332, 542
Pitt, L. 592, 672–3, 678, 680
Pittsburgh 40
planned change models 17
platform technologies 552
Plato 91, 273, 278
plug-and-play systems 458
PMI (Project Management Institute) 5
Polanyi, M. 542–4
police 483–6, 631
political activism 207, 213
political power 186, 310
major dimension of 311
political theory 215
politics 17, 37, 187, 210
Polt, R. 254–5, 286 n.
Pondicherry 640
Pool, I. D. S. 475
Poole, M. S. 33, 37, 113, 125–6, 128–32, 153,
429, 455
poor people 588, 624, 639–43
Pop-Eleches, C. 588, 678
Popper, Karl 70
Poppo, L. 509–11, 518
population increase 586
pornography 615, 617
Porpora, D. 117–18
Porra, J. 72, 210, 213
Porter, M. E. 18, 32, 330, 333, 680
positivism 68, 70–1, 73, 75, 106–7, 157, 232,
258, 260, 284, 295, 309
critique by qualitative researchers 230
dominance of 230
naive truth theories implied in 211
objections/opposition to 130, 218
rejected 233, 293
post-colonialism 209, 213
post-structuralism 71, 114, 292, 297, 577
and constructivism 293–6
as social critique 311–13
Poster, M. 176, 188–91
postmodernism 71, 178, 189, 191, 213, 217,
292, 294, 311, 313
esoteric 312
feminism and 577
Poulter, J. 89, 100, 107
poverty 634
extreme 657
vision of eradicating 648
Powell, T. C. 376, 379, 387
Powell, W. W. 138–41, 143–5, 149, 151–4,
158–60, 418, 430
power 248, 293, 308–9, 359
asymmetries of 635
control and 107–8, 118, 206–7
disciplinary 192
impossible to separate knowledge from 294
inﬂuence and 402
knowledge and 177–9, 182–3, 292, 400
military 188
panoptic 189–91
power shared 631
social 642–3
technologies of 176
see also political power
power relations 177, 180, 184–5, 191–2
intensiﬁcation of 176, 193
oppressive 206
Pozzebon, M. 123–4, 211
PQR formula 102–4
practice lens 127–8
practice-oriented methodologies 213
practice perspectives 541, 546–9, 552, 554
see also communities of practice
prejudices 240–1, 247–51
present-at-handness 254–5
Price, A. 594
prisons 191
privacy 212, 435, 603
compromising 416
impact of RFID technology on 476
right to 421, 610–11, 613
serious issues of 471
threat to 191
problem of order 119
problem-solving 205
algorithmic 28
problématisation 303, 314
problem-solving ethical 604
process-based view 37
process models 141, 156, 352
common problem identiﬁed in 152
712
INDEX

ﬁrm foundation for designing 158
immature 151
processual approach 358
Procter & Gamble 12–13
Global Business Services 11
Proctor, R. 589
productivity 18, 32, 36, 589
professional associations 4, 609–10
professionalization/professionalism 3–5,
11–12, 607, 609–10
normative pressures stem largely from 140
scientiﬁc work 296
programmability 678–9
programmable tags 450
programming languages 21
buffer overloading 615–16
progressive transformation 649, 655–62
Prohibition (US 1930s) 485
property ownership 611–12
offences related to infringements of 615
property rights 615
propositions 76–9, 82
Prospector strategy 356
Proto-Indo-European language 287 n.
Prusack, L. 43
PSA (professional services automation) 156
PSL/PSA (Problem Statement Language/
Problem Statement Analyzer) 23
public-choice theory 146
public networks 452–3
publication 617–18
pull systems 460–1, 463
punctuated equilibrium models 360–1, 364
push systems 460–1, 463, 484
Pyburn, P. J. 350–1
Quaddus, M. 551
Quan, J. 156
Quesenberry, J. 563, 567–8, 576
Quick Response technology 355
Quinby, L. 193
Quinn, J. B. 503, 508
Rabinow, P. 175–6, 311
race 205–6, 574, 576
discrimination 312
racism 601
radar 188
radical insight 254
radio 188, 484
two-way 468, 485
Rafaeli, A. 335
Raina, M. 643
Rainer, A. 513–14
Rainer, R. K. 365
Ramanujam, V. 337
Ramiller, N. 17–18, 155–6
RAND Corporation 93, 106
Ranganathan, C. 514, 516
Ranson, S. 122
Rao, H. R. 503, 514
Rao, S. S. 640
Rapoport, A. 91
rational-actor models 152
rational choice 137, 145–7, 150
rationalist ethics 604
rationality 137, 292, 298
institutional isomorphism and 140
managerial 218
modernist 71
neo-institutionalism and 145
privileging 294
purposive 208–9, 211, 217
technical 182
see also bounded rationality
rationalization 139–40, 144, 153, 176
social construction of 152
rationalized beliefs 152–3
Ray, Amy W. 453
Ray, I. 640
Ray, R. 424, 428
Raymond, L. 337, 349–50, 356
RBV (resource-based view) 348, 364,
374–89
Rea, K. P. 337
Reactor strategy 356
Reagan, Ronald 603
Real domain 69–70
realism:
critical 73–5, 77, 128, 292, 313
idealism and 278
objectivist 311
INDEX
713

realism (cont.)
ontological 73
scientiﬁc 73
reality 70, 72, 76, 311
ability to construct and reconstruct 202
augmented 471
construction of 311
correct descriptions of 205
deﬁning what is perceived to be 400
implied value judgement about 211
rhetoric not matching 420
social construction of 306
source of 278
subjective 570
see also external reality; social reality
Reay, T. 144
recession 7, 9, 518
Reckwitz, A. 132
recovery process 234–6, 248
Reddi, S. 505
reductionism:
empirical 284
idealistic theoretical 284
psychological 284–5
redundancy theories 77
re-engineering efforts 6–7, 13, 42
referential whole 255, 260, 262–4, 272, 274,
278–9
unravelling/unfolding of 282, 286 n.
referents 17–18, 77
three categories of 31
reﬂexivity 204–6, 210, 216, 313
REGiNET (website) 642
Reich, B. H. 10, 13, 349–50, 352–4, 365
Reich, S. 146
reinstitutionalization 139, 147, 149
relativism 70, 234–5
epistemological 73
moral 307
relativity
epistemic 77
theory of 70
relevance 211, 218–19, 271–2, 274, 282, 284,
293–4, 387, 431
empirical 276
ethical 216
potential 333
rigour vs. 45, 210
Remenyi, Dan 40
remote mobility 473
Renaissance 232
Renwick, J. 333
Repenning, N. P. 541
repository technologies 551
representation hypothesis 308
repression 573
reproduction 140
research 97, 153–7, 386–7
action 97, 213
cross-cultural 42–3
economics-based 36
ethnographic 570
gender 563–5, 568–72, 574, 578
high-quality 67–86
implicit-theoretical 575
institutional agenda for 157–60
insufﬁcient-theoretical 575
interpretivist 212, 569–70
language-based 213
longitudinal 588
new approaches 365
operations 16–17, 24, 26–7, 48 n., 93,
106, 180
political activism and 207
positivist 211, 218, 566, 569, 574
qualitative 230–1, 569–70
quantitative 566, 574
structuration in 122–3
see also CISR; critical research; empirical
research; INFORMS; IRIS; ISR; MISQ
research themes 25–8, 31–3, 36–8, 42–4
resistance and indeterminacy 294
resistance movements 630–1
resistance to change 140
dismissal of 180
resource allocation 116, 407,
408–9, 425
implied 419
resource dependency theory 420
retailing sector 355
compensation policies 150
Revay, P. 72
714
INDEX

RFDump tool 449
RFID (radio-frequency identiﬁcation)
446–51, 459–63, 471, 483, 485
impact on consumer privacy 476
Ribbers, P. 514
Riccini, R. 475
Richardson, H. 204, 210, 218, 292, 564,
566–70, 575, 635
Rickards, T. 120
Ricoeur, P. 231, 235, 239, 247–8, 251, 280
Riemenschneider, C. 574
Riley, M. J. 26
Riley, P. 123
risk analysis 608
risk management 452
risk mitigation 505–7
rituals 472, 475
Rivard, S. 337, 349–50, 505
Rivett, P. 106
Roach, S. S. 32
Roberts, J. 123
Robertson, R. 595, 625–7
Robey, D. 18–19, 27, 32, 37, 45, 126, 153, 155,
212, 295, 336–7, 353, 394–5, 402–3, 410,
480, 635, 648
Robins, K. 186–7, 192
Robinson, B. 204, 209–10, 218
robots 588
Robson, W. 182
Rockart, Jack 38
Roe, P. R. 608, 617–18
Rogers, E. 33
Rogers, E. M. 651
Rogers, M. F. 279
Rogerson, S. 601, 604, 606, 608–10, 613–14,
616
rogue devices 447
ROI (return on investment) 32
Romantic paradigm 595, 597–8
Rondinelli, D. 358–9
Root Deﬁnitions 100–3
Rose, G. 651
Rose, N. 175, 185
Rosemann, M. 44–6
Rosen, B. 358–9
Rosen, C. 589
Rosenberg, D. 17
Rosenblueth, A. 90
Rosenstand, N. 597
Ross, A. 154
Ross, J. 334, 417, 422, 427, 431, 503, 511,
513–15
Ross, J. W. 380, 394, 410
Rosser, S. V. 576
rote learning 410
Rottman, J. 380, 497–8, 505–6, 513–16,
519
Rotvold, G. 434
Rouse, Robert 41
routinization 119, 132
Rowan, B. 139, 144–5, 400, 430, 434
Rowe, F. 218
Rowlinson, M. 186
Royal Institute of Technology (Sweden) 21
Royal Military College of Science,
Shrivenham 29
RSS (really simple syndication) 553
rugby 546–7
Ruhleder, K. 330, 334, 336
rules 147, 181, 219, 232, 419
alternatives to 180
breaking 421
codiﬁed interpretations of 116
compliance undermined 433
conformity to 430
decisions which completely disregarded the
spirit of 418
formal and informal 143
formulated 116
high engagement with 429
institutional(ized) 139, 142, 144–5, 150
intersubjective 312
legitimated 137, 430
moral 216
particular meaning of 116
people usually able to subvert 434
rationalized 139, 144
resources and 117, 127
social 118
rural sourcing 497, 519
Russia 44
Rynes, S. 422
INDEX
715

Saarinen, Eliel 674–5
Sabherwal, R. 336, 347, 353–7, 359–60,
509–12, 515, 518
Sagasti, F. 47–8 nn.
Sahay, S. 43, 304, 306, 635–7, 648, 653, 660,
662–3
Sakthivel, S. 505–6
Salancik, G. 420
Salas, E. 334
Salesforce.com 6, 516
Salisbury, W. D. 33
Sambamurphy, V. 336, 417, 427, 458–9
Samoilenko, S. 72
San Francisco:
Bay Area 148
Good Hotel 676
sanctions 419
Sandberg, A. 17
Sanders, D. 26
Sanskrit 269, 287 n.
Santayana, G. 16
SAP (System Application & Products) 7,
11–12, 516
Saravanamuthu, K. 206–7, 209
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (US 2002) 7, 416
SARI (Sustainable Access in Rural India) 639
Sarker, S. & S. 309
Sarson, T. 17
Sartre, J.-P. 256, 262, 264
satellite observations 188
Sauer, C. 348, 355
Scacchi, W. 23
Scandinavia 23, 41
see also IRIS; SJIS
Scanlan, T. 331–2, 334, 336
scanners:
bar 462
computer tomography 124
handheld 450–1
RFID 461
UPC 462
Scapens, R. W. 123
Scarbrough, H. 334, 336, 338, 358, 536–7,
541, 545, 548, 561
Schäfer, G. 25
Schaffer, S. 297
Schatzki, T. 547–9
Scheepers, R. 331
Schein, E. 337
Schein, E. H. 17
Schindler, M. 334, 337
Schleiermacher, F. 232
Schmidt, F. 422
Schmidt, L. K. 231
Schmidt, N. L. 567
scholasticism 277
Scholes, J. 25, 89, 104
Schon, D. 17, 418
schools of thought 21–5, 90
classic vs. processual 358–9
inﬂuential 20
Schultze, U. 304, 541
Schütz, Alfred 107, 114, 147, 278
Schwaig, K. 507
science 70, 91
anthropology of 314
critical 77–8
cultural studies of 314
general approach that applies to all
domains 71
microsociological approaches to 299
see also STS
SCOT (social construction of
technology) 203, 292, 298–300
Scott, P. 537–9
Scott, S. V. 381–2, 395
Scott, W. R. 138–9, 141–4, 147–50, 159
Scott-Morton, M. S. 17–18, 26–7, 31, 179–80,
349, 355, 650
screens 253–91
SDI (US Strategic Defence Initiative) 603
SDLC (Systems Development Life
Cycle) 28
SECI model 542–3
Second World War 93, 602
security 212, 434–5, 615, 676–7
rethinking 444–66
Seddon, P. 337, 394, 501, 507–8, 512
sedimentation 141
Segars, A. H. 335, 337
selective engagement 407–8
self 191
technologies of 176–7
world and 261, 279, 286 n.
716
INDEX

self-interest 417, 424–5, 430, 436
individualism emphasizes 613
self-interpretation 280
self-organization 678–9
self-presence 279–80
self-subjectiﬁcation 177, 194
Selznick, P. 139, 141
Sen, A. K. 634, 648
Senge’s Fifth Discipline 73
Senn, J. A. 25
sensations:
acoustical 259
confusing 258
unordered 257–9
Seo, Y. 508
service sector 537
Sethi, V. 335
Sewell, G. 186
Sewell, William H. 117
sexually explicit materials 617
Shamsie, J. 375
Shanghai 34
Shanks, G. 394
Shannon, C. E. 108
Shapin, S. 297
Sharpe, W. 26
Shaw, R. 337
Shefﬁeld, J. 74, 76
Shell Group 104
Sheth, J. N. 332
Shpilberg, D. 348
Shuen, A. 332, 542
Sia, S. 428, 432
SIC (Standard Industry Classiﬁcation)
codes 500
Sidorova, A. 309
Siemens 9
Siemer, J. 19, 46
Sifonis, J. G. 346
signal jamming 450–1
signiﬁcation 114–15, 125–6, 190, 234, 269
Silva, L. 292, 310, 653
Simon, Herbert A. 48 n., 146–7
simpliﬁcation 594–5
Simpson, C. 606
Simpson, K. M. 350, 354
simulation 294
Sine, W. D. 148
Singer, E. A. 22, 72
Siponen, M. 453–4
Sisodia, R. S. 332
SISTeM (Soft Information Systems and
Technologies Methodology) 73
size attributes 500
SJIS (Scandinavian Journal of Information
Systems) 41
Slaughter, S. A. 500
Slavic languages 287 n.
Sledgianowski, D. 351–2, 359
Sloan Management Review 8, 44
Smaczny, T. 349
small manufacturers 354
smartphones 469, 680
SMIS (Society for Management Information
Systems) 30, 34–5
Smith, C. W. 123
Smith, H. 349
Smith, H. A. 508, 515
SMS (short message service) 475
Smyth, R. 46, 49 n.
Snow, C. C. 356
Snyder, W. M. 547
Sobchack, V. 266, 283
Sobol, M. 498, 500
social alignment 362
social construction theory 567–8, 570,
573, 577
social constructivism 71, 202, 294–6, 306,
310, 312–13
denial of a radical form of 311
strong 307
see also SCOT
social control 188
databases promoting endogenous forms
of 189
electronic surveillance contributes
to 190
social embeddedness 652–4, 659–61, 663
social engagement 472
social facts 139–40
legitimated 137
social insurance numbers 189
social networks 142, 362, 553, 616
social pressures 149
INDEX
717

social reality 311
abstraction of 309
intention to change 199–203,
205, 211
projecting a desirable description of 208
taken-for-granted assumptions about 142
transformations of 309
social reproduction 117–18
Social Science Research Network 681
social security 182, 191
social system view 37
Social Taylorism 187
social-technical system 21, 24, 32–3
social technology 194
socialization 214, 336
Society for General Systems Research 91
Society for Information Management 5, 348
socio-cultural factors 568
socio-economic class 576
sociology 71, 106, 113, 472, 474
interpretive 107, 114
naturalistic 114
science and technology 314
see also SSK
sociology of science 296–7, 301
sociology of translation 302–4
socio-technical thinking 21
Socratic philosophers 232
SODA (Systems Optimization and Design
Algorithm) 23
Soden, J. V. 346
Soderstrom, O. 304
Sodhi, M. S. 504
SoDIS (Software Development Impact
Statement) process 608, 610
Soe, L. 575
software 22–3, 26, 36, 151, 306, 376, 396, 400
bespoke 405
challenges of building applications 12–13
compatible across different platforms 21
competitive relevance of 517
cost of 456
customer support 455
enterprise 7, 516
functionality added by vendors 454
hefty licence fees 516
incompatible 20
ISDC research on the industry 662–3
modular design 383
number one critical success factor for
projects 404
off-the-shelf packages/services 4, 383, 404
open source 676
option to purchase 405
packaged 13, 458
peer-to-peer 612
projects classiﬁed as successful 416
relentless process of releasing upgrades 4
standardized hardware and 382
widely adopted suites 381
see also hackers; user participation/
acceptance
software-as-a-service 6, 362
software development 13, 31
locational and spatial aspects 472
outsourced 5
ownership in terms of 612
problem not traditionally experienced
in 405
Software Engineering Code of Ethics and
Professional Practice 609
Soh, C. 428, 432
Sokolowski, R. 253, 256, 260–1, 278
Somers, T. M. 357
Somogyi, E. 22
Son, B.-G. 504
Srensen, Carsten 13, 470, 477, 480, 483,
490 n.
Sorensen, K. 310
Soriyan, H. A. 651
Sorrenti, M. 332, 336
sourcing arrangements 334
Sousa, R. D. 19
South Africa 578, 636–8, 643
South Korean ﬁrms 510
Spain 34
spam 456, 601
Special Interest Groups 39, 578
Spender, J.-C. 543
Spiegelberg, H. 253, 256, 264–5, 273, 286 n.
Spinello, R. A. 612, 615
Sprague, C. 27
Sprague, R. 27
Sproull, L. 547
718
INDEX

spyware 450
Sreekumar, T. T. 642–3
Srinavasan, C. 332, 335
SSK (Sociology of Scientiﬁc Knowledge)
297–9
SSM (Soft Systems Methodology) 24–5, 33,
73, 408
dialectical systems in developing 72
Habermas and 74
systems thinking and 87–112
SST (social shaping of technology) 203,
292–3, 299–300, 314
feminist theory and 571, 577
stage model 48 n.
stages of growth 360
Stahl, B. C. 201, 209, 212, 215–18, 613–14,
616, 661
stakeholders 362, 421, 423, 425, 427,
434–7, 608
consideration of 607
multiple groups 642
Stalder, F. 296, 306, 310
Stallman, R. 612
standardization 4, 185, 334–5, 362, 380, 427,
484, 486, 538
development tools and methodologies 383
hardware/software bundles 382
work practices 395
Standish Group 415–16
Stanford University 603
Star, S. L. 304, 307, 330, 334, 336
STAR project 642
Starkey, K. 175, 186–7
state subsidies 628
Steffen, A. 595
STEM (science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics) 563
stereotypes 205, 567, 570, 574
stewardship theory 432–5
Stewart, G. 44–6
stock prices 503–4, 507
Stoelhorst, J. W. 9
Stones, R. 117
Storper, M. 118
Stowell, F. 18, 25, 73
Strang, D. 142–3, 147, 149
strange attractors 72
Strassmann, Paul 499
strategic alignment 348–9, 353–5
CIO critical in achieving 359
social dimension of 350
strategic orientation 356–7
Straub, D. 477, 507–8, 566, 651, 653, 660
Street, C. T. 359–60, 364–5
Strikwerda, J. 9
Strohmaier, M. 613
structural alignment 349–50, 418–19, 428–9,
436
structural functionalists 294
structural holes 359
structural perspectives 541–6
structuration theory 292, 113–36, 292, 295–6,
652–3
see also AST
structured systems design 73
STS (Science and Technology Studies) 292–3,
296–301, 577
theoretical traditions within 314
subject formation 193
subjectivism 240, 250, 254
subjectivity 194, 242, 261, 278, 294
sub-Saharan Africa 631
subsidiaries 332
substitution 307, 375
imperfect 376
repeated 279–80
threat of 388–9
Suchman, L. 281, 405–6, 429, 455, 540, 650
Suddaby, R. 147, 149, 151, 159, 161
Sugar 676
Suhaimi, A. 337
Sun Microsystems 151
Sundaramurthy, C. 433–4
Supplier Management Capability 514
suppliers, see clients and suppliers
support costs 516
surveillance 176, 182, 184, 186, 190–1,
193, 634
authoritative 185
comparative 184
computerized 185, 192
control and 207, 538
electronic, constant 187
military 188
INDEX
719

surveillance (cont.)
panoptic 189
Susarla, A. 517
suspicion 248
Sutherland, A. R. 338
Sutton, R. I. 545
Swan, J. 338, 536–7, 541, 545, 548
Swanson, E. B. 17–18, 41, 155–6
Sweden 21, 72
Swiss Bank 503
switching costs 377, 384–5, 501
Symantec 445
symmetry 305–7
system dynamics 106
systemicity 107
systemness 119
systems analysis 26, 47 n., 93
systems approach 71–3
systems assemblers 151
Systems Engineering 93–7, 105–6
systems thinking:
core concepts 91–4
hard 24, 28, 87
origins 89–91
SSM and 87–112
Szulanski, G. 334
tacit knowledge 540–1, 543–6
association with personal skills or
know-how 542
codiﬁcation of 554
tagged products 451
Tai, J. C. F. 349, 354
Takeuchi, H. 329
Tallon, P. P. 351, 355, 357, 359
TAM (Technology Acceptance Model) 33,
566, 651
Tamil Nadu 639–40, 642
Tan, Bernard 39
Tan, F. B. 351–2, 356, 653
Tanis, C. 416
Tanriverdi, H. 518
Tansley, C. 454
Tashakkori, A. 75
Tattersall, A. 563
Taurus project (London Stock Exchange) 109
Tavani, H. T. 610
Tavistock Institute 404
tax obligations 628
Taxén, L. A. 363
Taylor, A. 475
TCA (Theory of Communicative Action) 74,
78, 213–15
TCEs (transaction cost economics) 146,
181, 673
TCS (Tata Consultancy Services) Ltd 516
team collaboration transparency 484–6
technical alignment 362
technical implementation 17
technical progress 655
technicity 177
techno-biopower 193
Technocratic paradigm 595, 597
technofeminism 577
technological artefacts 202–3
technological change 589, 655, 680
technological dystopias 188
technological innovation 301, 304, 314
technology 21–2, 30–1, 36, 204, 208, 220, 275,
462–4, 468–71
appropriate and timely use of 349
appropriated in a unique way 37
changing features 446–53
characteristics of 212, 446–53
constructivist views of 203
deterministic view of 209
domestication, gender and 571
drift theory 310
duality of 125–8
environment and 586–7
Heidegger’s critique of 280–1
ideological quality of 206
impact on stakeholders 423
integration between organizations
and 28
major development and advancements 20
materiality of 128–9, 131
medical 304
mobile 42, 446
ontological nature of 202–3
oppressive uses of 210
paradoxes and contrary performances 474
pervasiveness of 42
720
INDEX

power and control structures affected
by 207
re-viewing 592
social 194
social construction of 314
sociology of 301
structurational model of 295
techne and 174–8, 592, 672
work that doubts the beneﬁcial nature
of 218
see also ASP; ICTs; IT; new technologies;
SCOT; SST; STS
‘technoppression’ 193
Teddlie, C. 75
Teece, D. J. 332, 542
Teichroew, Daniel 21–3, 26, 29, 48 n.
telecentres 639–40, 657–8
telecommunications 8, 36, 657, 662
converging IT and 470
interceptions 188
mobile 469–70
outsourcing 508
telephones 468
see also mobile phones
temporality 119–20, 124, 128, 130, 203,
279, 286 n.
Teng, J. 497–8, 500, 508, 510
Teng, J. T. C. 38
Tenkasi, R. 329, 333, 335, 338
Teo, H. H. 155
Teo, T. S. H. 353
terrorists 462, 634
Texaco 72
text 229, 231–43, 246–51
obscure 280
very difﬁcult to access 277
Thatcher, J. B. 157, 160, 347, 353–7, 566
Thatcher, M. 587–8
theft:
data 447–8
identity 601, 607
property 607, 612
Thevenaz, P. 262
Third Generation Partnership
Project 449
Third World 624
Thompson, G. 628
Thompson, M. 212
Thompson, M. P. A. 637, 648, 661
thrifts 148
thrownness notion 282
Tierney, T. 331, 336
Tilson, D. 470
time 119, 124, 141
separation of space and 121
time-geography techniques 472
time-phased budgeting 398–9, 407, 410
time-space compression 624–5
Timmermans, S. 304
TIMS (The Institute of Management
Science) 30, 34, 41, 48 n.
see also INFORMS
TIMS College on IS 40
tinkering 213, 330, 336–7, 455
Tinsley, C. H. 148
Tiwana, A. 551
TJB (true justiﬁed belief) 76
Tjia, P. 515
TJX Companies 416
TNCs (transnational corporations) 624
Todd, P. 28
Toffel, M. W. 590
Tokyo 468, 480–2, 486
subway nerve gas attack (1995) 631
Tolbert, P. S. 141–3, 151, 153, 159
Tolliver, E. M. 27
Tonge, Frederic 29
Törenli, N. 618–19
Total Quality Control 186
total systems approach 26–7
totality:
anthropological 314
historical 314
historicity and 204
Toulouse 87, 96
Townley, B. 179–80, 186
toxic materials 588
Toyama, K. 640
Toyama, R. 334
tracking systems 446, 448
embedding devices 471
GPS-enabled 451–2
transaction costs 187, 509, 515–16, 518
see also TCEs
INDEX
721

transcendental phenomenology 264, 277,
285 n.
transepistemic networks 298
transfer and diffusion process 649, 651, 653,
659–63
transformation model 595–7
transformation perspective:
disruptive 656–7
progressive 655–8
transformational leaders 337
Transformative paradigm 595, 597–8
translations 277, 302–4, 307, 314
transmission standards 449
transnational federalism 628
transponders 460
Trauth, E. M. 43–4, 74, 200–1, 203, 205, 216,
218, 310, 561, 563–4, 566, 567–9, 571–6,
635, 664
Treacy, Michael 41
Trevino, L. K. 418, 429
triple bottom line 417, 590
Trist, E. L. 24
Trojan horses 450
Truex, D. P. 301, 407, 453
Truman, G. E. 566
trust 332, 334, 336, 433
building 434
identiﬁcation-based 510
knowledge-based 510
performance-based 510
truth 214, 298, 307
commonsense understanding of 203
critical and alternative regimes
of 219
efﬁciency and 312
forms of 76–8
knowledge and 68, 77–81, 312
mechanisms used to produce 181
seeing as access to 275
utterance carries claims to 214
Tsoukas, H. 536, 541, 544, 546
turbulence 357
turnarounds 359
Tushman, M. 330–4, 336–7
TV (television) screens 266, 268–70, 276
UK Probation Service 72
UKAIS (UK Academy for Information
Systems) 40
ultraviolet radiation 188
UN Council on Trade and Development 8
uncertainty 145, 150, 375, 430
endemic 505
environmental 357
ontological 194
symbolic 140
technical 517
turnaround 359
uncontrollable oscillation 90
under-theorization 575
undergraduate computer science 567
understanding 212, 233–4, 236, 295, 312, 353
common 363
commonsense 203
communication often associated with 350
critical 182
cultural 140
essentialist approach to 278
hermeneutic 239–43
interpretation and 245–9, 254
postmodernist 294
prior 244
relativist approach to 240
shared 362, 433–4, 484, 541, 552
transcendental approach to 256
transmuting what is beyond 232
UNDP (UN Development Programme) 655
Unger, R. 128
universal laws 70
University of Arizona 37
University of California:
Berkeley 22
Los Angeles 30
University of Colorado, Colorado Springs 30
University of Michigan 22, 30
University of Minnesota 21, 27–8, 30, 37
AST framework 37
see also MISRC
University of Pennsylvania 30
University of Stockholm 21
University of the Western Cape 637
722
INDEX

Uni-Vision strategic partnership 396–403,
408, 410
UNIX 444
UPCs (universal product codes) 462
urban planning 304
urbanization 593–4
Urbanspoon (Apple iPhone app) 471
Urry, John 113, 474
US Department of Justice 6
USB hard drives 450
user participation/acceptance 404–7, 409, 427
utilitarianism 604, 607, 612
Valacich, J. 37, 47 n.
validity claims 214
Valor, J. 47 n.
value propositions 374, 378–80, 382,
385–6
solid 516
substituting 388–9
uniqueness of 384, 387
Van Beers, C. 336
Van der Gerben, P. 336
Van Der Zee, J. T. M. 353, 358, 364
Van Fenema, P. C. 332, 334–5, 416, 515
Van Horn, R. 26
Van Luijk, H. 603
vanilla implementation 404–6, 408
Varey, R. J. 201
variance models 141, 152, 155, 352
ﬁrm foundation for designing 158
Vasudevan, R. 642
Vaswani, R. 426
Vaughn, J. R. 618
Venkataraman, S. 375
Venkatesh, V. 33, 566
Venkatraman, N. 333, 337, 349, 352, 354–5,
358, 365, 496, 499–500, 503
Venkitachalam, K. 331
Ventresca, M. 158
Vera, D. 332, 336
veriﬁcation 70
Verner, J. 351
Verreault, D. 337
vertical processes 470, 484, 486
viable systems model 106
Vidal, P. 72
videoconferencing 351, 389
Vidgen, R. 304, 306
Vincent, J. 475
Viridian Design 595
Virilio, P. 176, 192
virtual communities 332–3
virtualization process 238
viruses 191, 212, 450, 601, 615
Vision Corporation, see Uni-Vision
visual cues 451
Vitale, M. R. 39, 347, 349, 354, 357, 672
Vladimirou, E. 536, 541, 546
Vo, H. V. 73
Voepel, S. 334
Vogel, Doug 37
Vorurteil 240
Vurdubakis, T. 186, 302, 304
Wade, Michael 13, 374, 377, 379, 381
Wagner, E. 4, 7, 10, 335, 337, 381–2, 395, 401,
405–6, 411, 427, 431
Wajcman J. 299, 568, 577
Wakeﬁeld, R. 505
Wal-Mart 9
Walsham, G. 8, 43–44, 74, 153, 200, 208–11,
216, 219, 292, 295, 304–7, 332, 337, 395,
455, 535, 545, 623, 635, 638, 641–2,
648–9, 652–4, 660, 662
Walton, R. 179
Wand, Y. 335
Wang, E. T. G. 349, 354
Wang, L. 504
Wang, P. 156
Ward, J. 332, 334
Wardell, M. 566
Waring, T. 201
Warren, M. F. 619
Washington Consensus 657
waterfall model 28
Waters, J. A. 335, 337
Watjatrakul, B. 505
Watson, E. 44–6
Watson, H. 213
INDEX
723

Watson, M. 185
Watson, R. 39, 379, 388
Watson, R. T. 672–3, 678
Watson, Thomas 469
wearable computing 471
Weaver, G. R. 120, 418, 429
Weaver, Warren 108
Web 2.0 technologies 552–3
Weber, Max 24, 114, 146, 176, 189–90
Weber, R. 17–19, 34, 39, 47 n. 218, 648
Webster, F. 186–8, 192
Webster, J. 333, 566, 568
Weckert, J. 606
Wei, K. K. 39, 155
Weick, K. E. 330, 338, 429, 432, 544, 546
Weill, P. 334, 417, 422, 427–8, 431–2, 507
Weir, D. 404
Weiser, Mark 469
Weizenbaum, Joseph 603
Wenger, E. 331, 335–6, 408, 540, 547
Wennberg, L. 72
Western Cape 636
Westfall, R. 496
Westin, A. 610
Westphal, J. 430
Wetherbe, J. C. 18, 31
Whinston, A. B. 517
Whitaker, J. 518
Whitley, E. 21, 40, 46, 281, 285 n., 635
Whittaker, L. 210, 285 n.
Whitten, D. 501, 505, 512
Whittington, R. 123–4, 130, 132, 358
Wieder, B. 337
Wiener, Norbert 90–1, 602–3
WiFi 469, 677
Wijnhoven, T. 333
Wilensky, H. 17
Wilkie, F. 73
Wilkinson, B. 186
Willcocks, L. P. 5, 37–8, 48 n., 74, 175–6, 180,
185, 195 n., 214, 292, 300, 331, 335, 337,
380, 496–8, 501, 503, 505–10, 512,
514–19
Williams, Cynthia Clark 10
Williamson, O. E. 17, 146, 504
Willmott, H. 122–3, 175, 186–7, 202, 310–11,
334, 644
Wilson, D. 185
Wilson, F. 337
Wilson, M. 74, 203, 210, 292, 313, 404, 406,
430, 571
Winkler, J. 515
Winograd, T. 230–1, 281–2, 285 n.
Winokur, M. 193
Winter, S. 334
Winter, S. G. 538, 542
wireless communications 447, 457, 468–70,
475, 482, 488
Wittgenstein, L. 236–9, 246–7, 273,
287, 547
women 562–3, 567
illiterate 634
low participation in IS 570
recruitment/retention in IT
workforce 575–6, 579
variation in career motivations 576
see also feminism; gender
Wong, P.-K. 336
Wood, B. 201
Wood-Harper, A. T. 25, 73, 201,
213, 407
Woodﬁeld, R. 571, 635
Woodger, J. H. 90
Woodhouse, E. 310
Wood-Harper, A. T. 651
Woolgar, S. 295, 298, 300
Woolridge, B. 351, 355
work 480–9, 535–59
working conditions 563
World Bank 634, 655–6, 664, 678
World Economic Forum 655
world income 628
World Wide Web 282, 380, 538
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) 449
WorldCom 7
Wüllenweber, K. 518
Xchanging 517
Xerox 503
724
INDEX

Xerox/PARC 469, 603
XO-2 device 675–6
Xu, J. 551
Xu, L. 72
Xue, L. 424, 428
Y2K risks 7
Yakura, E. K. 575
Yang, H. 470
Yanow, D. 540
Yates, J. 476, 486
Yates, J. A. 541
Yearley, S. 308
Yeo, B. 576
Yetton, P. W. 355
Yoo, Y. 42, 334, 400, 467, 469–71, 489
Young, S. 26–7
Yourdon, E. 48 n.
YouTube 553
Zahavi, D. 261–2, 278
Zaheer, A. & S. 375
Zajac, E. 430–1
Zapatistas 630–1
Zárraga, C. 334
Zeitgeist 20
Zenger, T. 509–11, 518
Zmud, R. 18, 27, 37, 44–5, 218, 285, 417,
427, 648
Zollo, M. 334, 538, 542
Zuboff, S. 74, 175–6, 178–80, 184, 189, 193,
285 n., 535
Zucker, L. G. 138–43, 145, 147, 150, 160
Zureik, E. 189
INDEX
725

