
GAME WORLDS GET 
REAL


GAME WORLDS GET 
REAL
How Who We Are Online
Became Who We Are Offline
ZEK VALKYRIE

Copyright © 2017 by Zek Valkyrie
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in 
a review, without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Control Number: 2017008541
ISBN:	 978-1-4408-5128-5
EISBN:	978-1-4408-5129-2
21 20 19 18 17   1 2 3 4 5
This book is also available as an eBook.
Praeger
An Imprint of ABC-CLIO, LLC
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
www.abc-clio.com
This book is printed on acid-free paper 
Manufactured in the United States of America

Contents
Acknowledgments	
vii
	 1	 Frameworks and Realities	
1
	 2	 Gamer Identity Politics	
19
	 3	 Rationalization of Play	
37
	 4	 Stigma and Gamer Communities	
59
	 5	 Digital Consumption	
81
	 6	 Pixel Profiteers	
101
	 7	 Gender Authenticity	
127
	 8	 Goddess Paradox	
147
	 9	 Cybersexuality	
163
	10	 Gamer Masculinity	
187
Epilogue	
211
Notes	
215
Index	
243


Acknowledgments
S
omething strange happened when it came time to write this little 
piece of the book. I realized that despite having spent multiple years 
in higher education (as a student and as a teacher), when I looked back 
at the people who ultimately helped this book project take shape, I real­
ized there was no one. Typically, acknowledgment sections for academic 
types read a bit like an award acceptance speech, making note of every 
graduate or undergraduate student who had been exploited, research 
assistants who were woefully underpaid (if paid at all), and colleagues 
who begrudgingly read your drafts (but gave you their full support as 
you casually ate away their free time). Unfortunately for me (and for 
you as the reader, possibly), I had no such help. Any failures in this book 
are mine to own, which I suppose can be a bit liberating in its own way. 
So, here’s to tackling a project I may have been completely unprepared 
for by myself! However, I do want to sincerely thank Marina Gutierrez-
Harsh (though her code name is Necronomiconopoly) for the wonderful 
illustrations that accompany the chapters, as well as the cover art. The 
book is far more aesthetically appealing due to both, and her art saves it 
from the “wall of text” feel of similar works.
I do, however, have a couple more distantly related appreciative ges­
tures and comments to make, and I might as well seize this opportunity 
to do just that. First, I would like to extend my appreciation to the gam­
ers who participated in this project, and those who inhabited the many 
virtual game worlds I spent years studying. Their insights and passions 
continued to embolden me throughout the difficulties of this project. 
Many of them, despite their differences, were kind enough to tell me 
why they do the things they do and why they enjoy doing them. In a way, 
we collectively experienced many changes in our lives; some of them left 

viii  Acknowledgments
games for “adult life,” some reached milestones in their own lives (grad­
uations, having children, getting married), and some struggled with life 
in general (emotional turmoil, tragedy, joblessness). Although portions 
of this book can be rather critical of gaming culture, it is by no means 
a criticism of any individual player (in any of the game worlds) that I 
observed, or with whom I crossed paths or teamed up. I owe them for 
sharing their lives with me, and I thank them for the healing, the damage 
mitigation, the adventures, the triumphs, the heartbreaks, the good-byes, 
and the fun times. I thank them for their willingness to participate, their 
reflective responses, and their excitement and interest in my work. May 
their journeys (no matter where they take place) never end.
Next up, I would like to blame my high school sociology and psychol­
ogy teacher Abraham Eisenstein (or “Mr. X,” as we called him then) 
for his arcane will and (dis)enchanting (dis)ease. Yes, that phrasing is 
intentional, and Mr. X is as mad as a hatter in the best possible way. He 
made me become much the same (the being “mad” part, at least), though 
I will never possess even an iota of his intellect or insight (and yes, I am 
unequivocally envious of that fact). There have been many times when I 
have fought with myself over the change caused by Mr. X and whether 
I should despise him or thank him. Mr. X is a testament to the potential 
impact of the teacher’s role on the life of any student. This one teacher 
made my life more difficult than it ever would have been, and for that 
I will always remember and respect him. He taught me to spend time 
with monsters and shadows, to plant pots of gold, and to quest . . . ion 
whether I believe what I believe. He did not tell me I was gifted, special, 
or intelligent (as I am none of those things), but he did call me a “beauti­
ful freak” and the “heart of the spring full moon.” Wherever he is, he is 
far more than just that.
Finally (and most important), I would like to thank my grandmother 
Valeria Joan Muse. Grandma Joan has been nothing less than an abso­
lute saint my entire life, from buying groceries when my family had no 
money, to bailing my parents out of jail, to providing me with clothing 
and school supplies, to simply alleviating every crisis life could throw my 
way. As I grew older, she would help me buy video games and consoles. 
She would drive me to the mall when they were released or pick them up 
herself, even at midnight. She quietly supported this hobby-turned-life­
long pursuit without criticism for many years. She made a space for me 
in her home, paid for school, and pushed me far beyond where I would 
have stopped without her unconditional love. Although she would never 
ask for anything, I owe her the world. This, and everything else I do in 
life, is for her.

T
his book is written for the casual social observer and not for the 
highbrow academic. With that in mind, there are a few basic 
assumptions that I am making about the public and the general knowl­
edge of sociology as a discipline, which is to say that sociology is not 
really understood by the broader population (no hard feelings), nor does 
anyone really think anything of sociologists.1 For the sake of clarity, I 
wanted to use this chapter to highlight some of the aspects of the field 
of study, or at least some of my own perspective as it pertains to social 
behaviors. This will help draw connections between systems and struc­
tures that we find abound in society and point out how examining them 
in the same ways can help us understand how game worlds function. 
Additionally, I want to spend a brief moment discussing how far shared 
or online “game worlds”2 have come since their beginnings, as well as 
to note how our ideas about digital spaces have changed. Finally, I will 
give some attention to a few concepts that are pretty important for the 
bulk of this book, and those are the “reality of everyday life”3 and the 
“magic circle of play”4 and how they are framed within what we call a 
“game.” I do want this book to be as enjoyable as possible, though still 
descriptive and explanatory in some fashion. Here’s hoping I fare all 
right in that task.
Sociology is, to borrow from Allan Johnson, the study of the (social) 
systems we participate in, as well as how we participate in them.5 What 
separates sociology from other behavioral sciences (in my estimate) is 
that it’s important to pay attention to the people who are participating 
(and how they participate), as well as the systems that those people are 
CHAPTER 1
Frameworks and Realities

2  Game Worlds Get Real
operating in (and the particulars of those systems). Sociology folks don’t 
just concentrate on individuals doing individual things. We focus on how 
social systems connect us together, position us, or cast us into roles that 
we may or may not fully internalize. This definition, which I personally 
prefer (though someone else can use another definition and argue that 
it fits just as well), will make our leap in this book to discussing game 
worlds all that much easier. I could use a number of illustrations from 
societies in the modern world to demonstrate this approach, but we may 
as well start by jumping into a video game to teach the same idea.
Games are systems we participate in. They have rules and goals, roles 
and rewards, punishments and feedback systems.6 Games are built 
assuming that you are going to participate in a certain way, given certain 
structural limitations and some latitude for your behaviors. For the most 
part, the structure of the game remains intact and unquestioned. As a 
player, you really can’t mess with it much, or else the game doesn’t func­
tion. Instead, you play the game largely how it was meant to be played, 
making a handful of small decisions along the way that truly change 
nothing grand about the system itself, but those decisions give you the 
impression that you are exercising agency; that is, you have some control 
over your actions and participation in this system.
For example (and because I’m old school), when I play Chrono Trig­
ger (CT),7 I play as a time-traveling swordsman on a mission to stop the 
end of the world (which was supposed to take place in 1999 and was 
going to be caused by an alien life form called “Lavos”—luckily, I was 
there to care of it, so you can thank me for that later). However, when 
I play CT, I can’t just pick exactly where I want to go and what I want 
to do to reach my goal. The game has a structure, or a complicated set 
of rules, events, and controls that I cannot change. So for example, in 
this game I can go into the past, but only at a few distinct junctures, and 
none of the events at those points in time can be “undone” after com­
pleting them. I can’t rewind time by 15 minutes and choose not to steal 
that man’s lunch at the fair because I’m having second thoughts about 
being a deviant. I could load another save file, sure, but the game doesn’t 
give me a “15-minute rewind” ability to undo the theft. It does allow 
me to go into the past, but the nearest calendar date from the present 
moment is 400 years ago, which is a fair bit before I stole the lunch. This 
is a simplistic example, but a game, no matter its complexity, has a set of 
rules that governs how it functions, and players (without attempting to 
reprogram the game itself) abide by that structure when they play.
In sum, there is a push and pull between me as player and the structure 
of the game. I still have some agency and control over my actions. I can 
go into the forest and kill imps for six hours if I want to, or I can travel 

Frameworks and Realities 
3
exclusively with Frog and Robo because they are super awesome, or I 
can follow the main narrative arc while disregarding all the other events, 
side stories, and cool monster battles the game has to offer. But that’s 
just it—I am participating in a system; it has limitations and boundaries, 
and it also has expectations for how I participate. Games are systems 
we participate in, and by design they have “paths of least resistance”8 
for us to take. In other words, the game expects that you are going to 
participate in a certain way, and the game structure is going to convince 
you that doing so is in your best interest.
Societies are arguably rather similar to games. The versions vary 
throughout history (the “game” in the United States today is quite dif­
ferent than it was during the Civil War) and across cultures (the “game” 
in the United States is a little different from that in Japan, Central Africa, 
Syria, or even in the United Kingdom). We learn the rules and expecta­
tions of these “games” from various sources, some of them really big, 
like religious ideology, the law, or the institution of education, and some 
of them really small, like a group of friends from high school, close fam­
ily members, or a romantic partner. How we choose to participate is also 
part of the equation. This means that there is some room for agency as 
well, like making choices and exercising free will.
But we might also make the argument that the system we are partici­
pating in is not entirely our choice to begin with. If you were born in the 
United States, for example, you may realize that the rules and structures 
were in place when you got here, so now you have to “play the game” as 
it is. Opting out of a system as big and important as the society you live 
in is not exactly easy . . . or even feasible for most of us.9 We could argue 
that each of us makes do with the system as it is running when we get 
here. Enjoying its many virtues (free speech is pretty great as a part of the 
U.S. system) and knocking against its limitations (we segregate sports, 
bathrooms, and much else by gender for tenuous reasons) are part of the 
participation relationship. Yet as “players” in this game, we might also 
take issue with the “gameplay,” or discuss fairness, equality, morality, 
and much else to support or refute the system (calling for social change, 
revolution, and so on) and how we participate in it.
Game worlds, in contrast to the societies we are stuck in, are systems 
we voluntarily participate in. We don’t have to sit down in the evening 
and try to save the world of Filgaia, Azeroth, or Eos.10 It’s going to take 
a lot of effort to do that, but many of us might invest in those games 
anyway. We opt in to game worlds, but our agency can be rather limited 
once we do (though opting out, which means to quit playing the game, 
is at least an available and easy enough option; when it comes to opting 
out of the society you live in, the choices are rather bleak and unsavory). 

4  Game Worlds Get Real
And any issues you may have to deal with in the game world are prob­
ably not under your control. You may have volunteered to dive in, but 
you didn’t write the rules inside the world itself.
From a structural and mechanical level, the game worlds you partici­
pate in are constructed and dismantled quite readily by a handful of peo­
ple. Society and culture are very large and unwieldy constructs that may 
take years or generations to forge, change, or overthrow, but video game 
worlds are a little bit less intimidating. There are a few dozen (or a few 
hundred) people responsible for building a game world, and they exer­
cise a great deal of choice in its construction.11 These designers, creators, 
directors, and producers are still limited in important ways by market 
forces—that is, what is likely to sell well, which may influence the game 
worlds they build—and, probably most importantly, by the society and 
culture they operate in. They may choose to include or not include cer­
tain concepts in the game based on the cultural or global politics sur­
rounding the issue; for example, same-sex marriage,12 sexual coercion,13 
or body shape and form by gender.14 Despite these limitations, it is much 
easier to tweak a game design choice than to change the broader cultural 
climate. This means that the players can rally for change more readily (if 
they want it), though we might also argue that the stakes in game worlds 
are much lower for any number of situations than the stakes in the realm 
of human rights in the solid world.15
Given all this, I have a couple of cautions for you, as a reader, and 
possibly as a gamer yourself. One point of tension to avoid (and part 
of the perspective of being a sociologist) is that of blaming individuals 
for social problems. As a sociology teacher and a scholar, I see that peo­
ple learning about problems that exist within communities, cultures, 
and societies (particularly westerners like myself) tend to frame the 
problem, whatever it may be, as being about individual people. This is 
popularized in media and Western psychology as a sort of “bad apple” 
theory.16 From this perspective, “bad things happen because of bad 
apples” (i.e., individuals). While not entirely untrue, as surely some bad 
things are caused by less than morally or ethically stellar individuals, 
this sort of thought framework is very limiting. If you, as the reader, 
approach this book with this mindset, you will be convinced that game 
worlds are problematic solely because gamers are bad people. You 
might extend that idea to believe that game worlds attract bad-apple 
types and propose that the solution to game world problems is to deal 
with the bad apples in them—to “cure” social ills by looking at indi­
viduals and “fixing” them somehow. It’s overly simplistic and reduc­
tionist, and I just spent a few paragraphs outlining how participating 
in a game world limits the player’s autonomy in some important ways 

Frameworks and Realities 
5
(and I will continue to speak to structural and social barriers through­
out this book).
This individual-focused perspective also tends to lead to the unin­
tended consequence of people who occupy any system prone to criticism 
feeling personally attacked by a book like this. Because I am saying that 
game worlds have a few issues to deal with, you, as a gamer (for the sake 
of my point) may feel I am pointing a finger at you as a person. Or maybe 
you, as a reader, would like to point a finger at a certain gamer you know. 
In a sense, you may think I am blaming you for these problems. And that 
is why frameworks focusing on individuals are not entirely appropriate 
for looking at big (or broad, or systemic) issues. If we stick to a “bad 
apples” theory, then nothing beyond fixing a handful of individuals can 
be done. Such fixes are shortsighted and fail to account for numerous 
variables, because they ignore factors more pressing than the motivations 
of the individual actor.17 So, while I do admit that there is some scath­
ing criticism of game worlds in this book, it is not criticism of gamers as 
individuals. I also don’t want any reader to think that the solution is as 
simple as removing a handful of “bad apples” from the equation.
Let me also say at the outset that gaming culture has become a mon­
strous thing. When I began examining game worlds critically, the scope 
and population of such worlds were far more measurable and com­
prehensible. Today, the industry is enormous, mobile, ubiquitous, and 
dynamic.18 The discussions within this book attempt to capture some 
fragment of a massive portrait, and this is largely how works like this 
one are done (i.e., academia is about piling lots of little stones on top of 
one another to create a mountain). No single book can hope to possibly 
explain all the ins and outs of gaming culture, and this one is no differ­
ent in that way. I do what I can with the knowledge and data19 I possess, 
addressing some other areas where further exploration will be or has been 
completed. I still believe there is much value within this book, but I also 
hope, whether you are a novice or a veteran, that my work here can help 
inform some portion of the greater picture for you. I believe that learn­
ing is best when something (such as a text, class, or teacher) provides a 
catalyst, after which the learners themselves go on to explore alternatives 
and research with specificity and depth within their own interests. If I can 
accomplish that much here, I will feel more than gratified.
A Brief History
Creating time milestones of any kind is largely a subjective undertaking. 
What I view as incredibly important may be viewed by another party as 
rather minor, but that is also the stuff of academic debate. There are no 

6  Game Worlds Get Real
perfect answers here, nor irrefutable milestones of gaming, but given that 
the focus of this work is about how large online gaming communities 
and cultures have changed notably since their inception, I think we can 
begin the conversation by pointing at the phase that first allowed these 
digital spaces to take shape. From there, we can move through a few 
developments, showing that online game worlds have traversed a couple 
of important perceptual shifts to make it to where they are today. This 
will give some foundation to the main thrust of this book, which is to 
explain how and why spaces of “play” in these game worlds have been 
flattened, rationalized, and demystified, and how gamers themselves 
expend considerable energy delineating the boundary between those 
who belong in these worlds and in this culture and those who do not.
It seems reasonable to begin with the first “massive” (measured here 
in thousands of players simultaneously playing) online game world, 
Ultima Online (UO, 1997).20 Other, arguably similar games came along 
earlier (Habitat,21 for example) and allowed several dozen players to 
interact as never before, but the scale and impact of UO and the games 
that would shortly follow—EverQuest (1999), Dark Age of Camelot 
(2001), Final Fantasy XI (2002), Eve Online (2003)22—came to define 
this early period, in which social norms in online spaces were unwrit­
ten23 and the virtual landscape was considered to operate like an “unset­
tled frontier.”24 In many ways, it was the beginning of a new standard 
of gaming, one that allowed for greater access to more players than ever, 
and a huge, shared game world to occupy and populate. Game culture 
before this period was far more fractured, with many individuals sharing 
their pastime only with neighbors and people at the local arcade. Tom 
Chatfield wrote that the broader culture perceived gaming as being “like 
an especially pernicious kind of masturbation: something that turned 
you in on yourself in the worst possible way.”25 Gamers were suppos­
edly rather isolated loners, dwelling in their dungeons somewhere while 
playing with plastic toys.
The Internet and new connective technologies, in addition to large per­
sistent game worlds, changed this social reality, bringing people together 
from all walks of life . . . mostly to kill dragons26 and the like. The 
social rules were unknown, and very few standards for how and why 
to play existed in these worlds. It was during these years that the social 
landscape was highly volatile, filled with strange stories and imagined 
possibilities.27 It is in these early years that we saw the greatest amount 
of social latitude allowed for players; experimenting with gender, iden­
tity, sexuality, game mechanics, and discovery were all taken-for-granted 

Frameworks and Realities 
7
assumptions of the unsettled frontier. Players were seeing where the 
boundaries were, and like many novel social spheres, they weren’t 
many at first. The term “cultural lag”28 is often thrown around in these 
instances, explaining that it sometimes takes time for cultural or social 
norms to adapt to a new social space (or new technology), and in that 
way, online game worlds were no different.
I remember during my UO days I would lie constantly to people. I 
would offer to teleport them somewhere, but instead, I would send 
them [deep in a dungeon] where they would end up dying. I’d wait 
a little while, then I would go down there and take all their stuff 
off their body. There wasn’t anything to stop me from doing it. You 
could freely screw over people and have fun doing it. Not to say 
you can’t screw people over now, but it’s more difficult and comes 
with more punishment. Back then, it was a free-for-all.29
During this period of open experimentation, deception, and explora­
tion, a set of standards began to develop for the smaller populations 
that were involved in these worlds. However, it can also be argued that 
early online game worlds maintained their differing rule sets and social 
norms because in many ways they were still isolated from the broader 
cultural norms that these players belonged to. Many of these early 
games “only” had several thousand players at the peak of their lifes­
pan (Final Fantasy XI [FFXI] reached over 500,000 subscribers at its 
height),30 which in some ways indicated that gaming had yet to succeed 
in the dominant (and global) culture, but this would begin to change 
with World of Warcraft (WoW) and the era often labeled the “casual 
revolution.”31
It is difficult to argue against the cataclysmic evolution in online game 
worlds that WoW (2004) represented, given how it changed many things, 
not only within the genre of online role-playing games, but even within 
game culture itself. World of Warcraft punctuated a period of time when 
the public’s interest in gaming grew exponentially,32 and when many 
online social norms had begun to solidify, heralded by social network­
ing on Facebook and other digital communities as they took root in 
the dominant culture and become compulsory in many people’s lives.33 
Most of “Web 2.0” was still in its infancy, and media-sharing tools like 
YouTube and Twitter were just out of the gate.34 Meanwhile, what is 
usually called the “casual revolution” of gaming was happening. The 
explosive popularity of the Nintendo Wii, early motion-based games, 

8  Game Worlds Get Real
family and social gaming like Farmville, Guitar Hero, and Rock Band, 
and many others broadened the population of gamers.
Those were exciting times. You felt like everyone was in on this big 
inside joke. Wearing some WoW gear around my college campus, 
I would see other people wearing the exact same thing or shouting 
out to me, or giving me a high-five as I walked by. My professors 
were playing, the whole dorm was a LAN party, even my mom 
got into it for a couple years. As a long-time gamer, I felt under­
stood, maybe for the first time, by people who I didn’t really think 
could ever understand. It’s like we all were speaking the same lan­
guage after years of talking in tongues. Maybe I’m giving my youth 
a rose-tint like other people do, but I think that time was pretty 
amazing.35
Suddenly it seemed like the word “gamer” applied to everyone and 
anybody. Your mom could be playing WoW, people in your college dorm 
were practicing Guitar Hero, and people were desperate to find a Wii, 
PlayStation 3, or Xbox 360 to gift for the holiday season. It was argu­
ably gaming culture’s most transparent mainstream debut, and players 
largely embraced it as a moment when the dominant culture was allow­
ing itself to understand what this rancorous little subculture of gaming 
was all about, why it was so appealing, and why so many people had 
dedicated their every free moment to leveling up an Orc in the Barrens. 
Years (maybe decades) of being cast as misfits of society slowly began 
to evaporate.
Gaming as an “everyone” pastime appeared inevitable, and many writ­
ers and scholars happily declared that those who embodied the “gamer” 
label were not your (stereotyped) basement-dwelling young males. More 
women were playing than ever before, as were older populations, and 
communities were on a global scale.36 Relationships forged in game 
worlds began to become palatable, believable, and legitimate.37 The dis­
course of “game addiction”38 was still in full swing, and many popular 
shows (South Park,39 Big Bang Theory,40 etc.) gave crass caricatures of 
such lifestyles; but the march of technology was unstoppable, and online 
connectivity played an integral role in many people’s lives. Game worlds 
were just another space for people to meet each other, hang out, and kill 
some dragons.
Where things went from here is the tale of this book. The virtual 
worlds had been settled, and the dominant (global) culture had moved 
in. These spaces of play and games did not belong to a small subculture 

Frameworks and Realities 
9
but to a massive network attached to an even greater organism called the 
Internet. “Share culture” became the norm, and people were now hyper­
connected, posting detailed intimacies of their real lives for the (online) 
public to see.41 The walls between the “virtual world” and the “real 
world” are as porous as Swiss cheese, and what Edward Castronova 
once called the “membrane”42 that separated the two worlds has nearly 
vanished. The worlds now overlap in many ways, and whether they are 
playing a game or not, people find themselves sharing personal details 
about their lives with strangers across the globe, as though that is how 
things have always been. The norm of social and information transpar­
ency has taken root, and who we are online has become who we are 
offline.
The Language of World Resonance
Spaces of play, or game worlds like those discussed in this book, often 
vie for separation from “reality” to be enlivened. Our reality, which I 
will often refer to as “the reality of everyday life,” is, for most of us, 
the dominant and “most real” reality.43 This reality truly competes with 
nothing, as we all are investing in it through our everyday interactions, 
thoughts, and experiences (and to some degree our physical bodies, as 
they belong to the solid world, which is part of what defines our concept 
of the “real”). This energy is spent to actively construct and to believe 
that this reality is the “real” one, the important one, and the one that 
truly matters. Who I am and what I do in the reality of everyday life 
are more or “better” than who I am or what I do in spaces of play, or in 
games, where the rules are different, and where (supposedly) less is at 
stake—despite the fact that entire game worlds might rely on my actions 
or yours, whereas our actions in the reality of everyday life are often 
inconsequential, and even meaningless on a grand scale.
This means that because we all become invested in seeing the reality 
of everyday life as the most important plane of existence (that is, it’s 
where our focus and energy should always be located), we must always 
use it as a sort of “checks and balances” system for any excursions into 
other (or alternate) realities. Ideally, at some level, we may even seek to 
completely dismantle other realities, or to chain them back to the values 
and framework of the reality of everyday life, ensuring that it and only it 
remains the most important reality, and also that there is truly no escape 
for us from it. This may sound bleak, but we labor in this way to feel as 
though our actions in “real life” have meaning, so it’s important in many 
ways to help us continue participating in the system of the “real world.”

10  Game Worlds Get Real
Subverting other realities can take very minimal effort, sometimes just 
using language itself to craft these other spaces as “fantasy” or “playful” 
or “imagined” or “virtual” or “synthetic” is just enough effort to allow 
us to conceptualize them as less than the reality of everyday life.44 How­
ever, our efforts may be far brasher in attempting to discredit these other 
worlds and realities. We may brand them outright as “not real” in order 
to erode a person’s claims to the authenticity of their experiences in 
these other spaces. Let’s say a friend of yours falls in love with an avatar 
(controlled by a player—that is, another human being with a physical 
body and mind and so on). This friend is enthralled by this avatar, and 
maybe he even notes that some of the characteristics of his new love are 
actually in reference to the avatar itself (maybe her ears wiggle cutely 
when she is being shy).
Confused by his gushing emotional state, you respond by questioning 
the bond between him and this other player. “Are you sure you know 
this person?” you ask, or you make some discrediting, though likely 
genuine, comment about the formation of a bond with another person 
as mediated by an alternate reality space. We may do this because we 
are traditionalist, or we worry about Internet predation, or we just care 
about our friend, but we also do this because it’s uncomfortable on some 
level to consider that an experience in another reality or world can be 
entirely authentic. If these experiences are authentic, if they are meaning­
ful, if they are believable, then that may force us to question whether an 
experience must be attached to the reality of everyday life to truly mat­
ter. Does he have to know this person in the “real world”? Are her physi­
cal body and mind indisputable parts of the formation of this bond? Can 
we connect with other people (or even non-people) in alternate real­
ity spaces in genuinely meaningful ways? These questions are not very 
comforting, because they open a can of worms with no end, and they 
threaten the gravity of this reality (the everyday one of the solid world) 
as the dominant and all-important one. And oh my, how our worldview 
begins to unravel if this reality is not as meaningful as we want (that is, 
need) to believe it is.
Faced with this dilemma, the close-at-hand solution for us (as defend­
ers of the “real world”) is to allow the reality of everyday life to infect 
other realities, especially if we cannot hope to destroy them entirely. 
Instead of believing that a virtual space of play can operate by different 
rules and be just as valuable and meaningful, we simply reinsert the rules 
of the reality of the solid world. Thus our understanding of what is real 
is maintained. These other worlds and spaces are just extensions of the 
“real world,” so why not bring all the baggage of the real world with us 

Frameworks and Realities 
11
when we go there? Then we don’t have to think of these places as truly 
separate from the one reality that we need to feel is so important. These 
spaces are really just the same, with an oddball rule here and there, but 
the people are still people, and we can even get to know them as they 
are attached to the reality of everyday life. Problem solved. You are no 
longer running through a forest of elves and fighting monsters; you are 
playing a game, and that elf next to you is really just a schoolteacher. 
She could never be an elf. Elves are fiction. Just like this world they 
belong to.
In this sense, it’s not surprising that earlier writers about the Internet 
thought of digital spaces as liberating. The Internet and the game worlds 
connected through it represented an alternate reality, a space we could 
travel to where the rules were different, and a portion of the popula­
tion felt this was a great thing. It was a place where you could be any­
body. This view has since been discredited, but I think for the wrong 
reasons. It’s not that early “cyberspace” was somehow more liberating 
than later versions; it’s that our social reality, the reality of everyday life, 
was threatened by the plausibility of an alternative set of rules. Digital 
spaces had to be put to heel, and we all wanted that to happen. People 
are just not allowed to live by varying rules and norms. We sometimes 
(begrudgingly) accept this of cultural diversity, in that different societies 
produce different perspectives on people’s lives, but to have an alternate 
reality existing in parallel with the reality of everyday life must be non­
sense. People can’t just go off to a space they prefer! They have to belong 
to the solid world. Only the real world matters.
But it was obvious that the Internet and all the wonders it would 
provide were not just going to go up in smoke. The Internet became an 
integral part of many cultures, though clearly not all, given that more 
privileged societies are more connected—and dependent on connection—
than those without it.45 To allow the relationship between the growing 
realm of digital spaces and the solid world, we had to adapt. I believe 
that what was born from this tension is what I call the language of 
“world resonance.”
World resonance is quite simply the “slippage” between the solid 
world (that is, the reality of everyday life) and the virtual or game world 
(the so-labeled alternate reality). World resonance frames how players 
negotiate and control information about who they are in terms of their 
identities, social categories,46 and bodies as they are understood in the 
solid world, and whether that information is shared, known, or distrib­
uted in the game world (or in any alternate reality). In short, those who 
treat game worlds as the same as or less than the reality of everyday life, 

12  Game Worlds Get Real
approach alternate realities and worlds as they are, meaning they adhere 
to a norm of social and informational transparency. In other words, “I 
am no different here from what I am in the real world.” This is what 
makes an elf in the forest into a schoolteacher.
Forced resonance47 players (“forcers”) believe that the reality of eve­
ryday life is all-important and that it cannot (and should not) be shed 
in favor of an alternative reality, which would come with an alternative 
set of rules and norms. They also tend to hold all other people to the 
same standard, believing that “knowing who you really are” will allow 
for social interactions to be smooth (that is, no mistaken pronouns, hon­
orifics, or misused identifiers), will reduce or eliminate “fake” identities 
(because everyone should just be “authentic”), and will also ensure that 
we can continue treating each other as we should be treated (skating 
over the likely imbalances in this dynamic, and assuming that the way 
this treatment takes shape in the solid world is already the best form, 
and thus there should be no change). Forcers seek to shatter the idea 
that the alternate reality is somehow different, returning it to the same 
motions of the reality of everyday life. This is the “be yourself” approach 
that has become an almost inarguable standard in online game worlds, 
and it is now the dominant model for participating in these systems 
and communities. The “real you” exists in the solid world, and forced 
resonance imposes that “you” upon the alternate reality. It automatically 
discredits an alternate reality space as somehow less real, questionable, 
while situating alternative approaches to the alternate reality (say, ones 
that might allow proclamations of identities that differ from their solid-
world counterparts) as deviant.
On the other side of the spectrum are those who approach the alter­
nate realities with a dampened resonance,48 or “dampeners.” Dampeners 
seek to maintain the “membrane” between the worlds (in the simplest 
case, a buffer between the solid world and the one game world they 
participate in). In other words, they wish to operate as though the two 
realities were not intimately connected or in conflict, and as though their 
time and energy spent in the game world reflects little (or not at all) on 
who they are in the solid world. These players believe in the mantra of 
play; that is, that a playful experience must exist outside of the rules 
and structures of everyday life, or else it is not play and, by extension, 
possibly not fun.49 If the solid world and who you are in it were to 
filter into the game world, then the latitude for play (and the release 
from the social controls of everyday life) would be forfeit. It is impera­
tive, then, to maintain a boundary between the worlds, where perhaps 
small bits of information can filter through if necessary, but where the 

Frameworks and Realities 
13
rules and structures are entirely separate. Dampeners can see the elf in 
the forest as an elf, or at least they do not think the social category of 
being a schoolteacher in the solid world is needed information for how 
to interact with an elf. The rules and norms of the game world are para­
mount and distinct. I treat you as you are in this world, and whether you 
are young, old, woman, man, transgender, longtime gamer, novice, stu­
dent, wage laborer, POTUS, gay, straight, asexual, black, white, Eastern, 
Western, console gamer, or PC gamer does not matter. This approach is 
aligned with the promise of spaces of play (and the concept of the magic 
circle), as well as the propaganda that says everyone can be a gamer. 
And in many ways, as this book will argue, dampening resonance is a 
dying practice.
It is my assessment that forced resonance has become the dominant 
model, and for several valuable reasons, though I will dispute some of 
them in the chapters ahead. Forcers, from one perspective, are trying to 
add gravity to the game world. Seeing the game world as “serious stuff 
with real people” means to value gaming above “just play.” Play smacks 
of immaturity. It’s kid stuff. It’s unimportant. Why pretend to play with 
elves in a fictional world? Well, you aren’t, from the forcers’ perspective. 
You are on a mission with a dozen people across the globe to achieve 
an objective that no one else has. Yes, you are killing a virtual dragon, 
but it’s about teamwork, communication, calculation, hard work, and 
lining up the busy schedules of dozens of real people to get the job done. 
That’s not play. It’s bigger and more important, and it has more gravity 
than play. Forcers make gaming about something else besides play, and 
in many ways, a global culture looking to discredit gaming as “wasteful” 
is going to require that gaming be about something “more” than play. If 
gaming is about real people working hard, if gaming is about forming 
bonds with people, if gaming is about authentic representations of self, 
if gaming is a grand stage for competition, then gaming is not wasteful. 
Forced resonance is the reaction to, and the synthesis of, a digital culture 
that wants full access to information about people, and a leisure activity 
vying for cultural validity on a massive scale.
But that’s part of the problem. Gaming is now fraught with these ten­
sions. To be at play is to be uprooted from the rules that govern the 
reality of everyday life. Play transports us to another world. We suspend 
our disbelief and open ourselves up to new options and ways of think­
ing.50 One cannot play video games while holding aloft the ideals of 
hard work, productivity, and rational thought. You cannot play if you 
are considering how the people who participate in your culture and your 
society think about your playing. Games are systems, just as a society is 

14  Game Worlds Get Real
a system, but they are systems that operate differently from those of eve­
ryday life. Without the division between the system of the game and the 
system of your everyday life, a game is nothing more than a husk to be 
filled with the same rules, social controls, and structures from the solid 
world. Games are attractive when they release us from the achievements 
of the reality of everyday life and let us live by different standards.51 Why 
do I want to play a game that requires me to show off to other players 
how productive I have been on a particular evening? Do I not live under 
the same constraints at my day job? Why must I put on a social display 
of my level of achievement to the broader gaming community? What is 
“freeing” about being measured by other players’ standards? Why must 
I consider ideal paths for “progress” in every gaming session? Why must 
playing a game be considered a waste of time?
This quagmire of issues is where gaming finds itself within the cur­
rent epoch of digital connectivity. Gamers are seeking play for varied 
and possibly maligned reasons, and gaming culture itself stands at an 
important turn. These game worlds, perhaps once a little too unsettled 
and norm-less, have lost the promise of their inception. If games are no 
longer able to provide players with experiences that deviate from or 
transcend the reality of everyday life, if they are mere shadows of the 
solid world, then we are trapped, in our minds and in our bodies. If all 
the possibilities of our imagination and its conjuring lead us back to 
the reality of everyday life, then we have dead-ended in our capacity to 
create. If how we are measured and judged in the solid world is all that 
matters, then we have no reason to dream. Twisting gaming and play 
into “important” activities, as assessed by the rules and standards of 
everyday life, robs us of their expansive potential.
This book explores how the promise of game worlds (within their 
social and structural elements) has been gutted by such forces. Far from 
nostalgic (“It used to be better”) reverie, the focus here is on whether 
we can imagine how else gaming could be. At its heart, this book is 
an acknowledgment of the converging ways in which technology, con­
nectivity, and digital norms have interacted with the normalization and 
rationalization of play and gaming. Game worlds “got real” because they 
had to—because they were forced to do so—and they struggle to find 
their position in a historical moment that questions their grander value.
For those of you considering what lies ahead and whether you are 
interested, chapter 2 discusses the entrenched divide of gamer identity 
politics. There is a schism between “hardcore” and “casual” gamers that 
is both misleading and utterly unhelpful in allowing gamers and non-
gamers alike to understand motivations for play. Instead, I introduce 

Frameworks and Realities 
15
a simple matrix for considering why gamers might play for different, 
but overlapping, reasons. My hope is that the false binary of the casual-
versus-hardcore debate might be destabilized by this endeavor, and 
that adding new language to the (lack of) identity categories (as they 
exist at this time) could be of service to the formation of a novel set of 
gamer types.
Chapter 3 is fundamental to one of my overall goals in this book, as it 
explores the rationalization of play and games. Using the classic, though 
slightly adjusted, concepts of rationalism in Western society, I explain 
how certain aspects of gaming have been pushed toward upholding effi­
ciency, predictability, quantification, mechanization, and full control as 
ideal outcomes. In short, the “good” or “ideal” form of gaming is that 
which produces the above outcomes, pushing “lesser” forms to the mar­
gins, which flattens the way that players can participate in game worlds 
without experiencing social or structural consequences.
Chapter 4 is inextricably linked to the previous chapter, in that it 
shows the negative effects of playing in a rationalized system from a non­
conformist standpoint. I outline a number of prevalent stigmas within 
game communities, ones that have taken shape in response to gaming 
and players becoming more rationalized. This discussion is integrally 
related to the current norms of digital cultures, as broad access to the 
knowledge communities of the Internet has helped usher in the stigmas 
spoken of in this chapter. The purpose here is to recognize how rational­
ized systems can produce unintended outcomes, which in this case can 
fundamentally shift what types of players are welcome in game worlds.
Chapter 5 is about the rise of digital consumption. As each chapter 
begins to outline the “ideal gamer” (in many ways the “real gamer”), 
chapter 5 does so by highlighting gamers as consumers. Many gamers 
deploy a set of justifications to explain why they consume, or why con­
sumption is simply a part of being a gamer. In doing so, they indicate 
their relative social class and attempt to justify why game companies 
should continue offering more things to consume. Importantly, many of 
these digital goods have lost almost all functional value, in that they are 
consumed largely for their symbolic value rather than on a needs-based 
ethic. The symbolic nature of consumption practices is easily captured in 
how gamers rationalize their buying habits.
Chapter 6 extends the previous chapter’s discussion of virtual eco­
nomics in an important way, showing how gamers distinguish them­
selves from people, and programs, that play the game as a job or for 
profit (so called real-money traders, as well as the various “bot” pro­
grams that occupy game worlds). Gamers, though workers themselves 

16  Game Worlds Get Real
in many ways, choose to rhetorically cast real-money traders as non-
gamers, and they develop a process for identifying them in the game 
world, and for punishing their behaviors. A smaller population of gam­
ers chooses to ignore the supposed transgressions of real-money trad­
ers by justifying their activities in relation to their solid-world realities. 
When looking at a game as a society with a governing body, police, and 
(in this case) a form of digital profiling with a racial element, the paral­
lels are quite striking.
Chapter 7 deals with the issue of gender “authenticity” in game 
worlds. Instead of allowing players to actively construct genders suited 
for them within these alternative realities, the game communities insist 
that players should be consistent, or at least transparent, about their 
solid-world genders and bodies. This norm disproportionately affects 
women gamers, as the paranoia over gender authenticity is really about 
claims to being a woman (whereas men are rarely questioned). Gam­
ers (mostly men) develop a process for vetting and confirming the iden­
tity of “woman gamer” in an effort to reinstall gender norms into the 
game world.
Chapter 8 builds on chapter 7, showing how the purpose of “proving” 
to be a women is about the general gamer community (of men) adher­
ing to differential treatment by gender of player. In other words, women 
who are “confirmed” to be women are then treated by men in the game 
world as women, including being infantilized, catered to, and romanti­
cally and sexually pursued. The consequence of this resurgence of gender 
in the game world is that players disrupt the unifying potential of the 
“gamer” label, showing it to be a gendered label and one that denotes 
maleness. Women are treated differently because they are seen as excep­
tions within the category of “gamer.”
Chapter 9 details the mechanics and social controls in game worlds 
in respect to cybersex, or virtual sex. Game worlds provide players with 
a set of tools and novel bodies, and exploring sexuality is one of the 
creative ways such tools can be utilized. Players operate within the con­
straints of the game design to create believable and fun sexual experi­
ences. However, social norms for sexual behavior are instilled within 
these game communities, attempting to control the exploration of these 
behaviors and the expansion of sexual identities. In a notable turn, gam­
ers have begun discarding the tools within the game and resituating the 
attention and focus of erotic scripts on their own solid-world bodies 
through the wider availability of webcams and voice chat programs.
Chapter 10 is the culmination of the aforementioned chapters, as it 
explains that the “ideal gamer” is a masculinized construct. The tenets 

Frameworks and Realities 
17
of rationalism, consumption, maleness, and more converge to formulate 
what is seen within gaming culture as a “real gamer.” The celebration of 
this masculine construct is not entirely lamentable, as much potential 
within gaming motivations, accomplishments, and community is why 
gaming can be great. However, the rigidity and dominance by which this 
construct dictates the broader culture can have deleterious effects for 
many social categories and groups, and this may dissuade some popula­
tions from participating in these worlds—which in fact is somewhat the 
goal of those trumpeting the “ideal gamer” concept.
Finally, I will attempt to make a handful of conclusive statements 
about how important the previously addressed issues are for the future 
of gaming. Games and play are powerful things with life-changing and 
liberating potential, and to sacrifice these possibilities to the reality of 
everyday life and the construct of the “ideal gamer” is to disbar gaming 
from enriching us all.

(Doodles invented by Necronomiconopoly [Marina Gutierrez-Harsh])

There’s lots of different gamers if you think about it. People play 
games for different reasons. Some love the intensity of [shooting 
games] and competitive play, and some like slow, turn-based fan­
tasy games. There are people who like hanging out with friends 
and [playing] games, and other people who do the solo thing. I do 
feel like there’s a problem though, that some people think one kind 
of gaming is the best kind, and are more than vocal about pressur­
ing other players into that type of thinking. I really just think we 
should all play for whatever reasons we want to, and some games 
are good at letting us do that.1
I 
would like to explore a rather tired debate within game culture. I know 
that is not the greatest pitch for an opening chapter, but maybe I label 
it that way because I too am tired of this debate. I am referring to the 
bickering (and downright trench warfare) between self-identified “hard­
core” gamers and the so-labeled “casual” gamers. There remains much 
discussion over this arena of game culture, arguing over everything from 
the meaning of the terms themselves, to what aggregate elements make 
up each category, to whether one or the other label should be rightly 
vilified, to whether the desires of each camp are “ruining” gaming, and 
so very much more. As ridiculous as the discussion can often seem, there 
is always value in these efforts. Identity politics2 are key to social valida­
tion, and they put on display the particulars of the identities in dispute. 
These debates teach us something about a social group or culture. They 
highlight value systems of the groups involved, their markers of prestige, 
and their calls for social change.
CHAPTER 2
Gamer Identity Politics

20  Game Worlds Get Real
It is general practice that we make use of the terms and language as 
they are used within the culture or group; that is, if a group of people are 
calling themselves one thing, we should avoid calling them something 
else. Unfortunately, this is one of those cases whereby trying to make use 
of preexisting terms (“hardcore” and “casual”) will only throw salt on 
the wounds, as it were. The existing categories are overburdened and, in 
some cases, inflammatory. While I have seen some rather persuasive dis­
cussions of what positions players in each category, many of these argu­
ments are so volatile that other gamers seethe at any conclusions drawn 
therein. In an attempt to develop a middle ground, players have created 
the label of the “mid-core” gamer, which is theoretically someone who 
is caught between the polarizing sides of the hardcore and the casual. 
What these labels (and identities) often fail to capture is the insectional­
ity3 of different motivations of play. Reasons for gaming vary immensely, 
and while it is a nice thought to have a couple of terms that in some 
way describe a player’s “commitment” to gaming, such terms often meld 
several aspects of play into a blanket label, which can be quite uncom­
fortable for some.
Of course, this doesn’t mean that such categories are completely inap­
propriate. People sometimes find labels to be a source of identity, or 
something that can become a shared community language to aid in bet­
ter understanding one another, or for communicating complex ideas 
quickly.4 Yet I believe it is important to jettison the terms currently in 
distribution in favor of something different. There is a lack of clarity 
within the current lingo that has none of the benefits of smoothing com­
munication or providing a go-to source of identity. Additionally, both 
the “hardcore” and “casual” labels smack of negativity when discussed 
in broader groups (or among the opposing “faction”).
Hardcore players are typically lambasted as having “no lives” and 
drawing their only meaning in this world through overcoming difficult 
challenges in gaming content. In popular culture, they are the caricatures 
often seen as representing “gaming addiction.” They are also often cast as 
elitist scum who treat the larger gaming population with disdain, telling 
them to “git gud,” which is akin to a “put up or shut up” mentality; that is, 
“real” gamers overcome content through hard work and skill. They may 
see non-hardcore players as “invaders” or, at best, inauthentic gamers.
On the other hand, those identified as casual gamers are often berated 
as “neutering” gaming itself, making it “easy-mode bullshit” that no self-
respecting gamer would consider worth playing. Casuals are, in a sense, 
seen as not “real” gamers because they might be anybody (grandmas, 
little babies, or a disembodied hand smashing on a keyboard). A classic 

Gamer Identity Politics 
21
caricature of a “filthy casual” is someone playing games on a smart­
phone and complaining about the difficulty. Casuals supposedly attempt 
to undermine gaming as “serious stuff” (calling someone a “tryhard” to 
mock them for working at playing a game) and want everything in the 
game just handed to them.
This discourse is important, and in many ways it is central to this book, 
as I will outline these exclusionary debates over to whom the game world 
belongs in the chapters to come. However, deploying “hardcore” and 
“casual” as terms to reference player motivations largely treads water 
and will not win me any readers in either camp. Instead, I would like 
to augment the perception of gamer identity slightly, while still using a 
couple of simplistic terms to describe an individual player’s motivations 
for play. The categories are far from perfect, as they are what thinkers 
in sociology call “ideal types,”5 meaning they don’t exactly exist in the 
social world completely intact, but instead they are guidelines to help 
us understand, in this case, the diversity of motivations for play. I also 
believe that adding some new language to the discussion of gamer types 
is sorely needed, as gamers themselves continue to struggle with the false 
binary of the hardcore/casual (and “mid-core,” to some degree, which 
is difficult to self-apply, as it is nebulous and fence-sitting by nature). 
Whether my attempts to create a few novel terms will change anything is 
debatable, but this was one of the many goals of this project, and I hope 
gamers and readers alike find it to be of some use.
Two Dimensions
The typology I am providing is based on two dimensions. The first is the 
level of adherence and investment in a game’s goals (as a structure); that 
is, whether players desire to accomplish the various milestones within 
the game by design. In other words, does a player play to win? Does 
a player play to make progress defined by the game mechanics, such 
as clearing levels, defeating bosses, collecting valuables, or increasing 
one’s abilities and powers? This dimension is about players being “pro­
ductive” (again, as defined by the game’s structure) and whether that 
sense of productivity provides motivation for play. Those players who 
are highly productive care about meeting objectives, and they may take 
gaming more seriously, as something akin to work or voluntary labor. 
Work and time spent in games for productive players tends to be valor­
ized. It only makes sense that certain goals must be earned with hard 
work and dedication. They may voice disapproval for how “lazy and 
entitled” other players are today (whether it’s reflective of their veteran 

22  Game Worlds Get Real
status or simply distaste for more sporadic players). They appreciate 
being able to quantify and measure their progress through achievements, 
hard numbers, or other evidence. This is structurally defined productiv­
ity; that is, the mechanisms of the game lead a player down a particular 
path in order to experience achievement. Societies have their own sets of 
goals by which they define citizens’ actions as being “productive” or not 
(could be work, having a family, supporting capitalism, etc.), and games 
are much the same.
The second dimension is about players’ emotional and social invest­
ment in the game. I condensed the two because not all games involve 
social elements, but the concept of “engagement” captures a player’s con­
nection to the game world and the people in it, whether they are humans 
or characters in the game itself. In other words, how much do players 
care about the narrative structure of the game? Do they engage emotion­
ally with their own character or others? Or, in socially oriented games, 
do they invest in the social landscape of the game? Do they build rapport 
with other players or care about maintaining relationships? Players who 
are highly engaged tend to focus on the expansive emotional and social 
landscapes of a game. This could mean that much of their playing time 
is about investing in the realms of emotional payoffs and social bonding. 
These players are more open to identity play and expression, as well as 
being moved by the emotional elements of play (gripping stories, char­
acter deaths, etc.). In socially oriented games, highly engaged players 
spend more time with friends rather than seeking out game milestones 
(i.e., completion of content), and they may even argue that hanging out 
with friends online is better than meeting any of the game’s objectives.
It is important to realize that even the two dimensions described 
above are rather basic for a very complex set of player motivations. I 
have reduced their complexity to a simple matrix whereby players can 
self-identify as being “high” or “low” on each dimension to position 
themselves within it.6 These new categories help bring into focus the 
rationale behind motivations to play. They are meant to be descriptive 
and explanatory, but they are not perfect (and we are also shelving for 
this discussion the language of world resonance, which frames how 
players approach alternate reality spaces and the magic circle of play as 
a whole). Additionally, the category labels may or may not feel entirely 
comfortable without any hint of negative connotations. It is not my inten­
tion to generate labels that are pejorative or problematic. It is also not 
my purpose here to create a false ranking system, or to argue that social 
and emotional imperatives are better or worse than goal-oriented play 
(or the other way around). The categories are meant to draw attention 

Gamer Identity Politics 
23
to the scope of player styles within the gaming community but to deliver 
the information in a digestible fashion, while also tossing aside the rigid 
dichotomy found in gamer communities (the casual/hardcore distinc­
tion) that has led to a rather overblown form of trench warfare between 
the two sides.
As researchers, we all make choices about what to consider important 
in our data and analyses. I have made such a decision here, choosing to 
focus on an intersection between “productivity” (defined as seeking to 
meet the structurally defined goals of the game, to achieve and “make 
progress” as gamers see it, which can, at some extreme, create moments 
of “flow”)7 and “engagement” (defined similarly to “seduction,”8 which 
means to allow the game world and the social environment to act upon 
you, to “lose yourself” in the emotional and social aspects of the game). 
Seeing yourself as invested in being productive or engaged, as defined 
here, positions you within a particular category. Even the exercise of 
attempting to see where you might fit helps you to recognize what part of 
the experience of gaming you invest in most. It allows players to become 
critical of their own dedication to the medium, to articulate why playing 
is important rather than to fall into the battle lines of hardcore versus 
casual and defend an identity that may not be attuned to them, but for 
which the fight has become largely symbolic of how gaming as a cul­
ture has undergone considerable change (which has threatened gamers’ 
identities and forced many to start drawing borders around what counts 
and what does not count as being a “gamer”). This is often an issue of 
Typology Matrix (Types of players matrix based on interview and observa­
tional data.)

24  Game Worlds Get Real
identity politics, whereby a social group, as it fights for validation, may 
forget what investment in the original identity it had in the first place.
This matrix I am offering creates four categories of player types, which 
can also be described as “motivations for playing games.” I will further 
explore these types in this chapter, noting that some are still seen as more 
ideal than others (that is, more welcomed or appreciated in game worlds 
and among the digital communities). By no means do I wish to infer that 
considering yourself “low” on a given dimension is somehow negative or 
should be interpreted that way. They are simply in reference to whether a 
player desires to meet or conform to the high measure of that dimension. 
For example, being in the “low productivity” column isn’t a bad thing, 
as it just means that a player doesn’t care as much for the structurally 
defined achievement markers of the game, like winning, beating dragons, 
or focusing on making their characters more powerful. It is also likely 
that this simple 2×2 model could be more complex, or even a spectrum 
of possibilities, but arguably most gamers tend to fit roughly into one of 
the block categories (though likely there will be minor misalignments, 
given contextual effects and so on—your motivations for play in one 
game may vary slightly from those in another game). In short, the cat­
egories are valuable in their current state, and I believe they are quite 
useful in describing motivations for playing games without falling back 
into hardcore/casual politics.
Productive and Engaged: The Faithful Gamers
To be highly productive and highly engaged means that players both 
accept the purpose-by-design facets of the game (the goals and various 
markers of progress) and allow for an investment in the game’s emo­
tional and social landscape. I call these players the “faithful” gamers. 
Faithful players tend to care about mechanical outcomes, as well as 
organizing their social ties and staying heavily connected to the game 
itself on an emotional level, invested in the story or desiring to see, col­
lect, or accomplish everything possible. Faithful players are those found 
embedded in social networks that are also dedicated to the achievements 
of game play. These players want to experience all, or at least most, of 
what the game has to offer. This includes the toughest of challenges and 
the most difficult content, as well as the keeping up with the achievement 
treadmills, storylines, and social bonds in the game.
Faithful players may find themselves nested in social groups, or they 
may be known for their consistent participation in social circles. They are 
counted on to contribute time and energy to their social groups, whether 

Gamer Identity Politics 
25
it comes in the form of sociality (being there to check in with friends and 
group members) or more practical support (helping with battles, donat­
ing money, or offering other forms of assistance). To draw a line back to 
my games-as-societies metaphor, faithful players are conformists,9 in that 
they believe both in the productive outcomes of the game structure and 
in the experiential payoffs of being a participant in the system: emotional 
highs, making friends, archiving fond memories of fun. Faithful players 
are pillars of any game community, as without them, it would be difficult 
for the community to flourish. Just as a structure or community would 
collapse without conformists (who believe in the product and process of 
the ideologies within), game communities and player bases would erode 
if they were not composed mostly of faithful players.
Faithful players are, in many ways, the type of player the game is 
meant for, or possibly the players that the game is meant to create. To 
extend the society metaphor, game worlds are built with the intention of 
creating a certain experience for the players and offering them a number 
of obstacles to overcome. To be engaged with the emotional and social 
landscape, narrative, and connectivity the game provides is to believe 
in the values of the game as a system, or as a society. To be productive 
and to seek progress and challenge within the game structure is to align 
oneself with the game’s value system of status and achievement. Faithful 
players do not feel disharmony or disconnect in either of these realms 
(engagement or productivity). They seek to be connected to the game 
itself, the people in it, and the challenges and growth it offers.
I play for many reasons. I enjoy the game itself. It could be the 
story that grips me, or my character, or the world is just amazing. It 
might even be all of those things plus the social atmosphere. I like 
playing with friends and strangers I meet online, who could always 
become friends later . . . I do a bit of everything in games. I like to 
see as much as I can, hard and easy content, don’t matter to me. 
I have some days I want to just wander around and help people 
out, and some days I get on with intentions to finish some goal I’ve 
wanted to finish. I wouldn’t say I’m a completionist, but if I really 
enjoy a game, I do try to play as much of it as I can.10
I love everything about my gaming. I like doing everything I can, 
hanging out with friends, and murdering them if the game calls for 
it, all in good fun though. I like epic boss battles, but I also like 
sitting around fishing for hours. Good games for me have a bit of 
everything, and let me do a bit of everything.11

26  Game Worlds Get Real
In terms of time and dedication, faithful players tend to lean toward 
spending more time in game than other player types. This is due to jug­
gling both the emotional/social and productive/progress realms, but 
faithful players do so with a notable amount of joy. If you are a faith­
ful player, gaming is fun for a multitude of reasons that are not easily 
categorized or recited. These players care about other players and their 
social relationships as much as they care about completing game content 
and enjoying themselves. Some faithful players may find themselves in 
leadership roles, attempting to organize the experience for other play­
ers and to increase the fun for everybody. They are what a governing 
body (like a game company) would consider ideal citizens, as they spend 
energy maintaining the system, increasing participation of other players, 
and internalizing the values of the structures within the game.
This category is also where the identity “gamer” is most easily (and 
without shame) self-applied. Faithful players enjoy gaming as a culture 
because it is a source of identity and pride. To be seen as gamers is 
important to them, and this may insulate them from feeling stigmatized 
by the broader culture. Gaming is something they make time for in their 
lives, and for a great deal of faithful players, gaming might be their pillar 
identity. At the structural level, faithful players are the ideal type for the 
game designers themselves. This is the category of player for which most 
games (and most game content) are made, as they want to participate in 
nearly everything a game has to offer. This means that both the mechani­
cal elements of the game and the aesthetic elements are to be enjoyed, 
because both have value to the faithful gamer.
Productive but Disengaged: The Progression Gamers
What Taylorism12 is to the workplace is what focusing on productivity 
and remaining disengaged (from the emotional and social landscape) is 
to spaces of play. These are the progression gamers. Progression play­
ers are hyperrational, focusing solely on the outcomes and goalposts of 
the game. They tend to lean toward efficient and calculable progress, 
producing a tone that often rings mechanical and robotic to some. They 
crunch numbers and may be brutally blunt or antagonistic to the social 
and emotional landscape of the game. They are less likely to value pur­
suits such as friendship, camaraderie, or immersion in story and identity 
play, as such activities are essentially a “waste of time” when pursuing 
the “true goals” of the game (most notably being “the best,” or the first 
to accomplish some task). In a sense, the true game for progression play­
ers exists outside of the game they play. The true game lies within the 

Gamer Identity Politics 
27
rules, puzzles, and calculations needed to achieve a specific outcome. 
This is to argue that the game structure only provides a set of goals to 
be accomplished within certain rules and limitations, and progression 
players will labor to optimize their paths to those goals.
Some progression players may express a great deal of creativity and 
strategic thinking, while others simply reduce the process to a path of 
least resistance. For example, the “best” way to overcome an obstacle 
is also sometimes the “easiest,” so to speak, which then might vie to 
become the only way to overcome said obstacle, from the progression 
players’ perspective (at least until the game structure changes, which 
requires a new set of calculations and again only one “optimal” choice 
to make). “Play,” for this group, is not about frivolity or release from the 
rules that govern the reality of everyday life, but instead about measur­
able progress. In many cases, this stands in stark contrast to some of the 
social pulls of the game. These players might see having to be forced to 
deal with other gamers (who are far less rational and therefore possibly 
inferior) as a drag on their own productivity. Other players are largely 
replaceable and may be shunned if they do not measure up to the ideal 
quantifiable outcomes as determined by the current meta13—basically, 
the mechanical laws that govern the game in its current state, which 
make certain ways of participating in the game calculably better than 
others; I will discuss this further in chapters 3 and 4.
A victory for progression players is not always a celebration or some­
thing to become jubilant over. Many of them may simply march on to 
the next milestone, or if there are no such milestones, they may take long 
breaks from a game until more goals are in place. Without the game-
provided structural goals, progression players are largely bored. This 
group can also be vocally annoyed with the lack of “challenging” content 
and threaten to move on to games that are far less “faceroll,” a hyperbolic 
term used to express that the game content can be beaten by any player, 
even if that player only invests enough effort to roll her or his face over 
the keyboard. Status and recognition of achievements is more important 
to progression players than to other groups. They may not play games to 
be sociable, but they do try to stand out in a crowd of gamers in terms 
of measurable achievements, and praise may come from doing just that.
I play to get shit done. I’m not a social butterfly and the story of 
most games is usually crap. I’m one of the better players in the games 
I’m working on currently. I want games to be challenging, and to 
have complex and difficult mechanics. I hate how companies these 
days are just handing things to these easy-mode crybabies. A bunch 

28  Game Worlds Get Real
of fucking entitled special snowflakes. It’s like a welfare program 
for gamers. Watered down content so “everyone can have fun” is 
bullshit. There are those of us that don’t need to be spoon-fed and 
who appreciate the hard work it takes to be one of the best.14
Without really challenging content in a game, I’m bored. I always 
play on the highest difficulty and welcome any “extreme” chal­
lenges the game creators think they can provide. I haven’t been 
playing this long for fun, I do it because I’m good at it, and far 
better than most players I’ve met.15
To some degree, progression players are flow seekers (searching for 
intensely stimulating content that forces them to train, respond, and per­
form at an elevated level) and are one group of gamers largely praised by 
research on gaming’s “good” qualities.16 Since progression players are 
highly productive, this allows for the argument that games can be seen 
as hard work, and progression players may attempt to explain that this 
is why gaming is not a “waste of time” or even a hobby, because games 
are much more serious and involved than that. Within this group, it is 
easy to highlight the sheer amount of skill, organization, and research 
required to complete a particular task in some game worlds.
When explaining why games are valuable to those critical of the con­
cept of play (that is, those who see play as something children do, or that 
emotionally and mentally stunted adults do), progression players’ “body 
of work” can stand up to such critique. They discursively reframe play 
as work, making it easier to sell to those wondering what possible ben­
efits killing dragons for hours on end could provide. Criticisms of play 
often come from cultural climates that value and even moralize “hard 
work,” seeing it as indicative of achievement and high moral character.17 
Whether work actually indicates moral character or time well spent is 
an interesting debate, but it is easier to see that within cultures that 
value work, explaining the value of gaming from a progression player’s 
perspective becomes considerably less difficult, so long as the evidence of 
labor can be detailed in comprehensible terms to a non-gamer audience.
At its highest level, progression gaming makes up the growing area 
of e-sports. Although clearly there is a gamer masculinity element in 
the competitive play market, divorced of gender (which nothing ever 
is, but we are speaking in broad terms here), video gaming as sport is 
entirely about progression play. The ever-important in-game goal is com­
petitive play, the same as winning is in nearly every modern competitive 
sport. When the goal supersedes all else of value in a game, idealized and 

Gamer Identity Politics 
29
efficient paths to reach said goal are preferred. Competitive players don’t 
play League of Legends, WoW, Catherine, Defense of the Ancients 2, 
Counterstrike,18 and so on for the immersive experience or for identity 
play, or even because playing is fun. They do it to showcase their skills, 
which have been polished through untold hours of hard work. Produc­
ing ideal outcomes like victories, kills, and perfectly timed runs is the 
stuff of progression players’ motivations. The growing arena of e-sports 
will continue to attract these gamers.
Unproductive yet Engaged: The Enamored Gamers
Players who focus on the emotional and social arena far more than the 
productive and goal-oriented aspects of playing games make up the next 
category, or what I call the “enamored” gamers. Again, let me stress that 
being “unproductive” (like being “disengaged”) is not meant to have a 
negative connotation; it simply means that these players are not as inter­
ested in the productivity and performance measures of a game. In other 
words, enamored players care more about what might be considered the 
opportunities that lie outside the mechanics of the game itself. Meeting 
the prescribed goals and milestones of the mechanical game structures 
are not as important as spending time with friends, or experiencing an 
“epic” or “awesome” moment during play, such as a great victory, a 
nail-biting story scene, or an aesthetically stunning set of visuals. The 
enamored gamers have their own reasons for play, and generally they 
don’t see the purpose in structural time-sinks within the game design 
(e.g., long “grinds” to obtain gear, or status-oriented goods for show­
ing off accomplishments). For these gamers play is about expression, 
intimacy, immersion, and serendipity. Whether enamored players meet 
the goals of the game as provided by its structure for funneling player 
behavior is inconsequential.
In online game worlds, many role-players (RPers) fit into this category, 
choosing to engage in self-designed or collectively designed narratives, 
and placing that above any pursuits within the game structure itself. Most 
tellingly, some RPers may even outright delete their progress and charac­
ter, or start the game over from scratch, just to stay in line with the narra­
tive they created (which shows how little the structural goals of the game 
mean to them). Enamored players may also focus narrowly on the core 
of the game for the emotional payoffs, by perhaps clearing certain game 
obstacles just to see what happens in the story. However, productivity is 
not the reason for their actions. Growing in strength, or gaining specific 
powers or items, is not the intention of enamored players, but some of 

30  Game Worlds Get Real
these aspects of the game are bound to happen when a player simply 
completes the obstacles needed to reach the more emotionally engaging 
parts of the game. Enamored players are in the game for the experi­
ence it provides—to lose control and be loosened from the restrictions of 
the reality of everyday life. They want their games to seduce them into 
another world, another life, and another way of existence.
I play because of the lack of challenge. Gaming is a relaxing thing 
for me. I play for the story, the exploration, the social aspect, etc. 
When they release new “hardcore” content, I don’t even bother with 
it. I wait until it’s not so difficult. It’s why I play easy mode for eve­
rything. If someone wants a challenge, that’s fine, but I don’t want 
those parts of the game forced on me and everyone else. It’s already 
a mess when you have a mix of speed runners, novice players, the 
hardcore assholes, and people who have Netflix on another screen, 
are playing another game, or are watching cat videos Grandma 
sent them on [social media] and not paying attention. If the game 
was made more difficult to please a certain crowd, I would simply 
play something else. I want to enjoy my time playing.19
Why do I play . . . um, I guess because it’s fun? That’s probably a 
terrible answer, but I want a game to be fun. I want it to hit me in a 
powerful way, to make me smile or laugh. I like games that punch 
me right in the gut . . . It’s about stories most of the time, but the 
experiences of being present in another place can also be that kind 
of powerful. [I’d] much rather get “lost” somewhere than spend 
eight hours shooting people in a capture the flag scenario.20
Enamored players define fun as not being about autotelic21 experiences 
or commanding tools to produce certain outcomes. They recognize that 
gaming is, at least to them, a pastime that does not have to be taken too 
seriously—as one that can produce incredibly interesting experiences 
(like wonder, awe, emotionality, and friendship). They do not feel as 
though completing “easy” content is a threat to their status as gamers, 
whereas it very much is a threat to the progression players. However, 
enamored players’ distaste for content that is “too challenging” is simi­
lar to progression players’ distaste for “faceroll” content, in that both 
groups often threaten that they will quit the game if the content does not 
meet their preferences.
In socially oriented games, enamored players may find themselves 
more invested in forging bonds with other players than in the game 

Gamer Identity Politics 
31
itself. They might spend time creating their own sense of fun, gathering 
people together for ad hoc naked races or designing contests, puzzles, 
or challenges to reward players for being “believable” or simply having 
fun. They might also idle around in the game world, people-watching or 
admiring the way the virtual sunset reflects on the forgotten rural hamlet 
on the hill. This is indicative of enamored players’ desire to be seduced 
by the game world (and the people in it), rather than to experience flow 
or stressful “victories.”
At the extreme, games like Journey, The Last Guardian, Dear Esther, 
or Everyone’s Gone to Rapture22 have playing styles almost entirely 
suited to enamored gamers. Numbers, levels, and calculations are nearly 
vacant from these experiences, as the game worlds are about emotion, 
discovery, communication, and mystery. The value of gaming for the 
enamored players lies in thinking of a game as an immersive space or like 
an epic novel that draws you in, plays with your emotions, forces you 
to tangle with ethical questions, or makes you reconsider your choices 
in the game as a reflection of something about who you are as a person. 
The “highs” for enamored players are when this seduction is fully believ­
able, similar in some ways to entering a state of flow, but the focus is on 
an emotional and immersive plane rather than on the powers of mental 
and mechanical acuity.
Unproductive and Disengaged: The Novelty Gamers
The final category is for those more sporadic and uncommitted players. 
These players are less inclined both to pursue the goals in the game by 
design and to invest in the emotional and social landscape. They are the 
novelty gamers. The language of dedication has become very profound in 
game communities, as it attempts to weed out the “non-gamers” among 
them. The issue is that the more sporadic players are large in number and 
are more than likely a mobile population. They undeniably play games, 
but sticking with a game (like a subscription-based online game or any 
number of games that are meant to be played for multiple years) seems 
rather silly when there are so many games out there to enjoy. Under­
standably, novelty gamers are not bound to any single game world or 
community and are open to seeking out fun wherever it may be. In other 
words, both measures of being highly productive and highly engaged are 
seen as somewhat silly because both are “too serious” for novelty play­
ers. Gaming for them is about fun, and fun is a fickle and ephemeral bird.
As such, this category includes those who play games merely to kill 
time or as a sporadic hobby, even to the point that some may forget 

32  Game Worlds Get Real
entirely what games they’ve played and when they played them. Nov­
elty gamers might be roped into playing a socially oriented game with 
friends, but beyond a few fun nights of gaming, they are not likely to 
stick around. They care little about what the game structure wants them 
to accomplish, and they have about the same level of feeling toward 
the emotional and social landscape. Playing games is about filling some 
time with a mildly interesting activity, like a quick game of Candy Crush 
while waiting for a meeting, or tossing a couple Pokeballs at a Charizard 
(via Pokemon Go) on the way to work.23
Their commitment to the game and anyone else playing it with them 
is tenuous at best, and they are likely to jump into whatever the next 
new title in the genre will be as soon as it arrives. In the arena of persis­
tent game worlds, they may return after months, or even years, simply 
curious about what’s new. They might begin a short-lived “catching up” 
phase where they revel in the novel content until they become bored 
again, ghosting from their social groups after a couple of weekends. The 
question of fun can be simplified in their terms; if they are having fun, 
then they continue playing. Once the feeling subsides, it’s difficult for 
novelty gamers to care about continuing to play, and they do little to try 
to create fun for themselves.
I’ve been bouncing between games a lot the last couple years. Let 
my subs slide whenever I get bored, or when a new console game 
comes out. I don’t know, games are just games man. I play them 
when I have time and if I think they are fun. I can tell pretty early if 
I’m going to keep playing for longer than a night. I’ve turned some 
games on and then right back off again. There’s a lot of trash out 
there, and I don’t keep any games around much. Once I’m done 
playing, there’s really no reason for it to hang around. I’ve had to 
buy online games a couple times because I tossed them, but that’s 
nothing compared to what some people spend sitting around bored 
in those games for years.24
Novelty players are also a migrant population. They may not necessarily 
follow a particular series or game company, but they are interested in 
what is new, fun, and exciting. They rarely invest in gaming communities 
in any significant way, except possibly to lasso a few players into doing 
something with them right now before the charge wears off. Long-term 
goals or incentives built into a game structure are unlikely to influence 
novelty players’ reasons for staying or leaving. The concept of working 

Gamer Identity Politics 
33
toward something may even seem somewhat laughable to players who 
are just gaming to have a little fun.
These players are also far more likely to be stigmatized by other gamer 
types. Their indifferent attitude makes them unreliable as gaming part­
ners or as members of a social group, so the social landscape of some 
game worlds can become inhospitable to them (the idea being that the 
novelty players will wander off somewhere and will not be around when 
needed). They also may not “get” why people can be “so involved” with 
a fictional world or story, because it seems to be the antithesis of fun 
(and such discourse does not present them well to the enamored or faith­
ful types). Additionally, their disinterest in being productive or doing 
“hard work” makes them less palatable among the progression gamers, 
meaning that novelty players are seen as not taking the game seriously 
enough and as unable to develop the skills needed to clear certain con­
tent. Many self-branded “former gamers” fall into this catchall category, 
noting that they used to play more seriously, but given certain life events, 
they only pick up a smartphone game now and then to pass the time and 
give them a smile.
As I have mentioned before, these categories are “ideal types” and not 
one-for-one (self) applied identities. Each group captures an intersec­
tion of the dimensions of productivity and engagement, two arguably 
important aspects of the gaming experience. I also want to ensure that 
there remains no misinterpretation of certain pursuits in games as being 
somehow “good” or ideal. The discussion in this chapter has focused 
on whether players accept and internalize the game structures and goals 
as ideal and choose to pursue or ignore them (neither option should be 
framed as “better” than the other), as well as whether players believe in 
the expressive and emotional promises and impact of playing games. In 
constructing the aforementioned categories, I hoped to introduce some 
new language that would, even in some small way, defang the vitriol 
involved in current gamer identity politics. Gamer and non-gamer alike 
should recognize that what we might desire and what we might find in 
game worlds can vary considerably.
But as we will discuss throughout this book, there are significant influ­
ences on gamers to uphold certain idealized forms of play (which I will 
detail in chapter 3), or else be stigmatized by the broader community 
(which will be covered in chapter 4, and in some ways, all the chapters 
thereafter). This chapter sought to allow for a slightly broadened vocabu­
lary of player motivations, noting that not all players are drawn to game 
worlds for the same reasons. When we realize this, and when we realize 

34  Game Worlds Get Real
that not all games can possibly satisfy all types or styles of play, we can 
better understand how the community and interactional issues within 
gaming culture can seek to disqualify differing gaming styles, types, and 
motivations. And that, at least by my measure for what I am doing here, 
is why this book came to be. We need more awareness of these structural 
and social forces so that we can ensure that game worlds, and their many 
positives, are not lost in the formation and enforcement of a formulaic 
“ideal gamer” that excludes all who fall outside its boundaries.


(Doodles invented by Necronomiconopoly [Marina Gutierrez-Harsh])

Gaming today is just more efficient, like people don’t have time to 
spend 12 hours a day exploring some huge virtual world, or try­
ing to complete some piece of content. Gamers have lives, families, 
jobs, and all that shit. It’s a good thing, but it also means we aren’t 
kids anymore, so we aren’t sitting around in a basement playing 
three months straight through summer break. I want to be able to 
play a bit in the evening, or on weekends, but it’s like I have to plan 
to have fun by my schedule. It’s called adulting, I guess.1
A 
classic sociology piece by George Ritzer examines how Western 
cultures (Europe and the United States) have become more mecha­
nized, efficient, and controlled in the post-industrialization era. He uses 
the term “McDonaldization”2 to succinctly capture this phenomenon. 
In other words, fast-food and chain restaurants are key illustrations of 
“rational” ideals—mainly, that any logical system should uphold val­
ues such as efficiency, predictability, calculability, and control. When 
confronted with a problem (in Ritzer’s work, the primary illustration 
is that of food production, distribution, and consumption), “rational” 
systems tend to lean on these tenets to produce an “ideal” (according 
to those tenets) outcome. Ironically, this ideal outcome has some rather 
“irrational” consequences. For example, so-called pink slime3 is one of 
the many oddities created by a food production system that relies on 
efficiency and mechanized components and cares less about quality than 
maybe it should. In simple terms, while seeking a particular outcome, 
we can end up with some things or events that seem a bit off from that 
CHAPTER 3
Rationalization of Play

38  Game Worlds Get Real
original goal. We just might create new problems when we seek quick 
solutions.
There is a similar issue of growing importance within gaming culture, 
and at some level, it is one of the main theses of this book. I am speak­
ing about the hyper-rationalization of fun and play. Gaming has become 
focused on producing fun, as though it were a predictable outcome based 
on a handful of mathematical equations. In so doing, fun and the expe­
rience of play are reduced to what are seen as key elements, and these 
elements have to negotiate within the framework of living in the modern 
world. This means that the promise of modern games is that you, as the 
player, get to experience a predictable amount of “fun” that will fit into 
your busy life. It is “fun” as it occurs within the time constraints of a 
digital society4 and all the pushes and pulls of modern living.
We still desire fun and leisure activities, but we must also make sure 
they strike a balance with work, family, friends, school, military service, 
social media, and the social treadmill of consumption and achievement 
culture. It’s a tall order, and so the gaming industry, including many 
independent game companies, is forced to promise that during the few 
hours you may have to dedicate to gaming during the average week, you 
will be guaranteed a fun time if you play these new games. They are built 
with your busy schedule in mind, to make sure you can keep up with the 
rest of the players out there, so everyone gets to have a good time . . . and 
pretty much the exact same good time, at that.
At a glance, this is a net benefit because gamers get to keep their iden­
tity as gamers somewhat intact by being able to continue playing, even 
well into adulthood. From a business perspective, this is about an indus­
try adjusting to market needs. Adults have less time, and there are more 
games out there vying for their attention than ever before, so promis­
ing that you can deliver fun into a busy life is an appealing pitch. At a 
social and cultural level, creating bite-sized fun for the modern adult 
attempts to deflect any criticism that gamers might receive for spend­
ing “too much time” on leisure. That is, wasted time, or time that is not 
spent being productive in the ways society deems appropriate (making 
money, raising a family, etc.), is stigmatized. (This is discussed further in 
chapter 4.) For the purposes of this chapter, this promise and the deliv­
ery of “theme park fun” within games has greatly affected the nature of 
games and the social interactions within them. It has reframed the mean­
ing and purpose of “fun” within the box of logical consistency. Now fun, 
as it is experienced in the modern game, is the product of an efficient, 
predictable, quantifiable, mechanical, and controlled set of elements.

Rationalization of Play 
39
Efficiency: The Value of Playing Less
There will always be an optimized route to victory, a best way to 
play, or an ideal path. Gamers are really about taking a whole lot of 
data, crunching it, and then telling everyone the most efficient way 
to play. Are there other ways to play the game? Of course. Does 
that mean you are “doing it wrong”? To many people, yes.5
As of this writing , there is debate across the Internet about the “best” 
ways to grind credits in No Man’s Sky.6 No Man’s Sky is a game about 
space exploration, with arguably infinite destinations and environments 
to explore (produced by some fancy math). However, one of the goals—
the main goal, really—of the game is reach the center of the universe. 
A mighty task indeed, but one that can be boiled down to buying new 
ships, upgrades, and the like to travel farther and faster. At its core, a 
rationalized system and the people who participate in it see only the 
most efficient path to a known outcome. Such paths become ideals, and 
all others are framed as somehow lesser than the gold standard once it is 
enshrined in the palace of efficiency.
Though the process of information distribution and retrieval can be 
multilayered, ideal paths generally become known through “knowl­
edge communities”7 (Reddit, message boards, gaming blogs, YouTube 
channels, and so on expedite this process in a digital society). Players 
contribute their strategies to the knowledge community and detail their 
arguments for the “best way to [insert goal here]” in a particular game. 
In reference to No Man’s Sky, the focus was primarily on the best ways 
to make money, which came down to debates about time investment and 
output vis-à-vis money over time. The grand goal of the game (remem­
ber, reaching the center of a vast universe!) then is reduced to making 
as much money as a player can, as efficiently as possible. It’s no longer 
about the journey to the center of the universe, or about exploration, or 
about awe and wonder. The equation is simple: Make money, buy stuff, 
and reach the goal as soon as possible. Game over.
The experience of this game, as well as all others, being reduced to 
even less than its nuts and bolts is a ubiquitous gaming phenomenon. As 
mentioned in chapter 2, this style of gameplay fits the progression gamer 
type to the letter, but this formulaic playing style vies to become the 
only style of play, not just the motivation for one segment of the player 
population. Gaming has been reduced to being productive, but not 
only is it “hard work,” it is also framed as smart work, efficient work. 

40  Game Worlds Get Real
Taylorism8 is often criticized as reducing human beings to mechanical, 
cog-like objects, while controlling their various freedoms and reducing 
their individualism to attain the goal of the greatest level of efficiency in 
the workplace. All independent thought and innovational flourishes are 
the enemies of efficiency and thus are non-ideal paths to achieve goals 
within games through less efficient means.
It’s 2016. Gamers nowadays do not care to take a great amount 
of time to do something in the game. No way in hell will the com­
munity grind out content like they had to in the “old days” . . . 
that is by far too time consuming. Gamers today won’t tolerate 
artificial barriers which impede their progress. They’ll find a way 
around them, or bitch about them on the [message boards] until 
the designers change it, or worse, they just won’t play games with 
time sinks. Everything has to be now, now, now.9
Gamers who have been playing for several years often note the change 
over time between games “back in the day” and now, explaining that 
certain game design choices are no longer tolerable in the market of 
today. As mentioned earlier, this is partly due to the dynamics of the 
gaming industry attempting to cater to a changing demographic (i.e., 
adults with “lives” rather than young boys and teens with free time). The 
problem isn’t so much with the general contempt for “wasting time” on 
the non-optimized path; the problem is that such ideals frame an entire 
gaming community’s perception of how to play correctly.
Taking an example from Final Fantasy XIV (FFXIV),10 the message 
boards are often populated with various threads involving these so-
called ideals (and some of the threads point to other sections of the 
knowledge community, such as subreddits and YouTube channels). For 
this particular example, there is a post on the official message boards 
detailing the current state of getting a high-tier weapon for any par­
ticular job (like a badass staff for a mage). However, this discussion, 
and many others like them, centers on these weapon choices in respect 
to their time investment (that is, how long it will likely take a player to 
obtain said weapon). In this conversation, players detail which weapons 
from three or four choices are the “best” in terms of output over time. 
Players articulate, given the options for weapons obtained through dif­
ferent means, which one is likely to be obtained in the fastest and most 
efficient way (that is, avoiding deaths, frustrations with other players, 
and boring aspects of gameplay). In a sense, players want to know how 
to reach a particular goal in the game (in this case, upgrading their gear, 
but just like reaching the center of the universe, or defeating an epic 

Rationalization of Play 
41
boss, or any number of other examples) by doing the least amount of 
playing possible.
I find this terribly paradoxical, in that play and fun often denote 
unstructured wasting of time. Games attempt to create fun through 
allowing players to operate outside of the rules and structures of every­
day life (and consciousness of time would be one such societal control), 
but here we see that the pressure of everyday life is omnipresent. When 
you play a game, you think about the fact that you are playing, and 
that playing is wasteful, and thus it must be minimized if it cannot be 
eliminated. To minimize play is to transform it into work, but not hard 
work, smart work, efficient work geared toward a particular outcome. 
In pursuing these outcomes through efficient means, players get to have 
“fun” as it fits within the business of their everyday lives, from which 
they never truly escape to find refuge in game worlds. Players are trying 
to play games without play.
When these efficiently manifested outcomes are accomplished, the behav­
ior is lauded. Take for example the launch of WoW’s Legion expansion 
pack. One of the goals of many role-playing games involves reaching “level 
cap” (the default numerical maximum for your character’s powers, barring 
further augmentation like equipment), and expansion packs (which add 
large portions of content to an online game) usually raise that maximum 
when they are released. Getting to cap then becomes a goal, but not one that 
is gently walked toward. It’s a race to cap. With global communities playing 
in game worlds, the race to reach milestones (i.e., to be the most efficient) 
supersedes the enjoyment or seduction elements of playing an immersive 
game. A player claimed “world first” to the level cap (which was 110 at this 
time) within 5 hours and 28 minutes of the game being playable.11 Receiv­
ing congratulations for this achievement is more common than concern 
that the player somehow missed out on the concept of play being a refuge 
from pressure of the social world. In fact, these accomplishments are often 
thrust before the social world in hopes of garnering such praise by broad­
casting over Twitch, or posting “brags” in digital communities about how 
swiftly a player was able to complete some goal within the game.
There is indeed some awe to be expressed over the ingenuity of these 
players and their ability to distill the ideal paths of progress within the 
game. In a sense, the “game” part of gaming occurs outside the game 
itself (as I previously mentioned in talking about progression gamers). 
Instead, the research and troubleshooting involved in finding efficient 
routes are the puzzles they remain engaged with, and the output of their 
actual playing time is just the payoff for solving the puzzle. This is as 
true as it is laudable, but these players are often only a small segment of 
the gamer population. They create and distribute the ideal forms of play 

42  Game Worlds Get Real
to the broader community, and that population does not get to try to 
solve the “efficiency puzzle” in the same (and possibly incredibly stimu­
lating) way; other players only model the ideal path after what was writ­
ten by those who did and those who came before. That is, most players 
are largely not testing their own strategies or theories as much as relying 
on the knowledge community to produce the most efficient routes only so 
that the rest of the players can follow, much like lemmings or sheep. This 
is usually called the current “meta,” or the absolute (by hard calculations) 
best (read: most efficient) way to produce the desired outcome, given the 
current state of the game and its limitations (the math behind the game, 
the player economy, etc.). Arguably, producing the evidence for the cur­
rent meta is a game in and of itself, and one perhaps as engaging as the 
actual game that the meta is produced for, but this only creates a puzzle 
for some, while by far the majority of players use the meta to achieve the 
goal of efficiency. This means that efficiency tends to dominate how gam­
ers play, and it becomes a goal itself. And efficient play merits the benefit 
of fitting into the pressures of modern life, though the players neither seek 
to play nor to operate outside the rules of their everyday realities. They 
are trapped on treadmills, while Frederick Taylor readies his stopwatch.
Predictability: The Value of Playing for Known Outcomes
Most players are aware that going into a fight (particularly with a large 
boss monster, dragon king, or overlord of the underworld) could produce 
unfavorable results, such as dying in a burst of flames. And according to 
some, players spend a great deal of their time mitigating failures.12 How­
ever, failure is to be avoided at all costs, as the goal of many games is to 
overcome an obstacle by design and not to ram your head into a brick wall 
until you give up and quit. Players labor intensely to produce a predictable 
result, the one where they save the princess, or the prince, or the world, or 
the timeline, and most positive outcomes involve triumph, or they at least 
reward the player with a sense of progress and accomplishment. This is 
part and parcel of why people play games; they get to win, to move for­
ward, or to reach a milestone or goal. This also means that failure is to be 
avoided (just like in real life), and taking steps to reduce the chances of an 
unfavorable outcome has become the modus operandi of many gamers.
Raiding is so prohibitive because everyone must be perfect. For 
most people, the rapid-succession death train just isn’t fun, and 
actually learning the fights is incredibly difficult without a set 
group of people, and most players don’t have the time or patience 
to deal with failing over and over before beating the floor or boss.13

Rationalization of Play 
43
More difficult content in games is scrutinized by players who carefully 
weigh their chances of success, or in some cases, broadly dismiss all 
content that would require an above-minimal level of dedication. It’s 
not that players do not want to experience this type of content. It’s that 
the time investment—which would involve more failure than success—is 
unappealing at best. In balancing the equation of where gaming time 
and fun fit into their lives, setting aside extra time for failing and being 
frustrated is not a luxury that many gamers prefer (or necessarily have). 
Instead, players opt to avoid failure as often as possible and arguably, in 
doing so, are less tolerant when failures do occur.
There has been a significant change in some game design choices 
over the last decade, as many game mechanics from not that long ago 
were quite off-putting. Consider that in EverQuest, which embodied 
a massive virtual game world that took hours to traverse, when your 
character died, your body remained where it fell. You would then take 
control of your spirit and be forced to travel from where you originally 
started in the game (however far that might be) to where your corpse 
now lay. The journey could take hours in some unfortunate cases, and 
this was all just to get back to the point of being able to play the game 
again (as in, to return to making progress and being alive). Final Fan­
tasy XI had similar punishments for failure, including your character 
losing experience points for dying (as though dying were not painful 
enough); if no one resurrected your character, you would be sent back 
to a binding point in the game world, which could again be a signifi­
cant distance away from where you were and what you were trying to 
accomplish. Moreover, fast travel options in both of these games were 
very limited. Generally, you were slowly walking back to where you 
were trying to get something done. These punishments within the genre 
began to be lifted with WoW, which also became a huge success and 
arguably changed a good portion of what game companies considered 
the pillars of design philosophy at the time. Failures were still rela­
tively harsh during the “vanilla” era (before the first expansion pack, 
Burning Crusade),14 but they continued to be lightened over time. The 
experience in these games became more predictable, timelier, and less 
frustrating.
You have to experience mistakes and failures to be able to improve 
on them. I’ve only done some content a few times because every­
one in the community wants to get it done on the first shot and 
is very impatient. They tell everyone to watch a video to see how 
the content is done, and videos help but it’s still not the same as 
actual experience. The only way to learn is through trial and error, 

44  Game Worlds Get Real
practice, adjust, and go again. But everyone is too impatient. They 
don’t stick around through wipes or minor mistakes. If it’s not a 
quick clear, they abandon everyone else.15
One dynamic that is probably most telling about players’ attempts to 
guarantee predictability in play is that of watching videos of the game 
they are playing. Social media such as Twitch and YouTube has cre­
ated numerous archives and channels to follow. Many of them show­
case gamers playing a particular game and posting their play session 
for a virtual audience. In respect to changing play dynamics in game 
worlds, these streamed or static videos are akin to a library of infor­
mation about events and battles within games, and watching them has 
become an expectation for those unfamiliar with how a particular part 
of the game unfolds.
For example, when players are attempting a new piece of content (say, 
a battle with a golden dragon), many of them now rely on watching a 
video of the battle—complete with tips, strategy, positioning, and much 
more—before they play the content. This reality is reinforced by many 
players in the game world, who insist that those who have not com­
pleted the battle with the golden dragon must first watch videos about 
the battle with the golden dragon, before ever being allowed to join a 
group and fight the golden dragon themselves. While some may resist 
this particular norm, watching before playing content is about predict­
ability. Players want to make sure that everyone on their team has a 
good idea about just what to do during every phase of the battle with 
the golden dragon—not from firsthand experience, but instead through 
passive viewing of gaming videos online.
And gamer communities, despite some resistance from a portion of 
what could be considered the “old guard” (veterans who may idolize par­
ticular points in gaming history), have become accustomed to this type of 
experience. This is to say that players expect that their time spent gaming 
will result in predictable and measurable outcomes. And in the same way 
that they balance their time at play in respect to efficiency, they also want 
such (speedy) breaks from everyday life in the game world to produce a 
predictable experience, which could be called “fun.” This means that the 
expectation of playing a video game is, at some level, about producing a 
fun experience, in the same way as going to a theme park is supposed to 
produce a fun experience. The expectation precedes the experience itself, 
and the focus is often upon the outcomes in measurable terms, since the 
concept of “having fun” is rather difficult to articulate.

Rationalization of Play 
45
I’m fucking sick of spending time playing and not getting any damn 
progress. No drops. No wins (on some content). Nothing. And it’s 
even worse when the “reward” system is tied to [random number 
generators]. So maybe you do spend hours and effort beating [the 
dragon] and maybe you beat him several times, but he drops crap 
for everyone but you. I want some sort of guarantee that I’m going 
to be working toward something. Not rolling the goddamn dice 
every fucking time in hopes of getting something to make all the 
time worth it. As boring as grind mechanics are in games, I much 
prefer knowing that if I just do 500 dungeons or whatever, I’m 
going to get something for it.16
This isn’t to say that some players don’t appreciate the “rush” that they 
experience when a randomized reward system does tilt in their favor or 
when something unpredictable occurs. But there is growing consensus 
that if people are going to spend their time (given its limitations) playing 
a game, they want to have something to show for it. This means design­
ing more predictable outcomes (and avoidance of failures) in games, to 
reward a player base that needs to see visible evidence of their time spent 
playing. These predictable goals attained through game play may serve 
as evidence of “stuff I did or got done,” which can stand in as proxy for 
“fun I had while playing.”
In my assessment, games have tilted toward guaranteeing “fun,” or 
producing predictable outcomes so players can exchange their time for 
the promise of “fun.” Unpredictability is to be avoided because it too 
wastes time, further highlighting that when gamers are engaged in play, 
they are still aware (if not hyperaware) of play being judged as unpro­
ductive, and calls for more predictable mechanics help them deliver the 
fruits of their time spent playing, as though they were laborers showing 
off the successfully constructed widgets they had processed by the end 
of the day.
Quantification: The Value of Playing for Numbers
At their core, many games are about numbers. Scrupulous players know 
this, and game creators promote this; it is an attempt to quantify fun. 
Games today are often touted for their “hours of gameplay,” or in the 
case of the earlier mentioned No Man’s Sky, their “infinite number of 
planets to explore.” What is lost in the push to promote games and gam­
ing experiences is the quality of the experience itself. Obviously, stating 

46  Game Worlds Get Real
“This game is fun” is not exactly a prime marketing blurb, but “Over 
100 hours of gameplay” does not tell players anything about the game 
either. It’s a form of anti-information. Players learn nothing about the 
game except that time is involved (lots of it).
The problem stems from several cultural sources, one of which is sim­
ply that most of the modern world has a number fetish (or bias).17 Num­
bers appear to be more real and more concrete in relaying information 
about an experience, or at least we largely think they are. This is because 
the other option is, of course, to rely on subjective and qualitative meas­
ures, like actually playing a game and deciding it is fun. That may sound 
reasonable in an ideal world, but gamers, who are really just consumers 
of entertainment media, are trying to weigh their gaming options against 
their wallets, and relying on any quantifiable measure of a game gives 
them a quick cost–benefit analysis. One hundred hours of gameplay for 
50 or 60 bucks is a pretty decent deal, at least when comparing it directly 
to games offering only 20 hours of gameplay.
A long time ago I bought a game, can’t even remember what it was, 
some platformer. It took me exactly one evening to play through 
it. That was it. Game was 60 dollars and it gave me one play ses­
sion after dinner. “Fuck that bullshit,” I thought. And after that I’ve 
become more dickish about my game choices . . . Playing MMOs, 
even subscription based ones, is a good investment. You literally 
get hundreds upon hundreds of hours of game play for a fistful of 
dollars a month. I actually know several people who quit console 
gaming because of the price tag, and they are just playing the one 
game because they can get lots of game time for minimal money.18
While the reduction of the entire experience a game has to offer to a sin­
gle number for purposes of cost analysis (that is, gamers balancing their 
entertainment budget) is one indicator of this process, the quantification 
of play and fun within game worlds does not end there. Perhaps more 
interesting is how numbers and “hard math” are used to denote not 
only the feeling of progress within games but also the value of a player’s 
contribution and skill. This is easy to see in “kill totals,” “achievement 
points,” or the “damage per second”19 calculations that are integral to 
many cooperative games. Although some may disagree, many aspects of 
the human experience (in this case “fun” or “play”) probably should not 
be quantified. Maybe we shouldn’t pretend that a number (or a set of 
them) somehow allows us to easily comprehend competence, joy, altru­
ism, or intelligence.

Rationalization of Play 
47
But the modern world’s fetish for quantification and its reliance on 
what Neil Postman20 dubbed “tech machinery” to measure and calcu­
late our abilities is nearly ubiquitous. The pressure to make this a more 
palatable means of measuring us all can be seen in the growth of rating 
systems for everything from intelligence (using scores like IQ, SATs, and 
GREs) to social media platforms (rating friends, meals, consumer goods, 
music, art, and love). There have even been rather obtuse attempts to 
rate people themselves (the Peeple app21 allows you to rate your interac­
tions with everyday people on a numerical scale, as though translating 
a human interaction into a quantifiable measure can capture the quality 
of that person’s character).
If a capacity like intelligence, which is arguably one of the most com­
plex bastions of humanness, is sought to be quantified in the modern 
world, then simpler yet just as immeasurable concepts like fun and 
play are destined to receive the same service. And defensible arguments 
against these processes are actually held in more contempt than the pro­
cess that makes them calculable to begin with. In other words, gaming 
worlds are hyper-rationalized to the extent that players often assume 
that measuring everything in numbers just makes sense. After all, high 
scores22 have been around since nearly the beginning of the medium, and 
they surely signal at least one reason why people play games.
Again, we have to remember that games are designed systems in which 
we participate. They were built to function a particular way. This means 
that there truly are numbers behind any aspect of gameplay, and many 
far more qualitative concepts are often converted into raw numbers to 
allow them to fit into what is really a set of equations for the game 
(inputs, outputs, scales, and so on). For example, the quality of relation­
ships with characters in games is often indicated with a simple numerical 
measure such as sections of a filling heart, or a social bond level, or a 
simple scale ranging from “barely acquainted” to “best buds.” Here all of 
the aspects of a complicated relationship between two people (although 
they are obviously characters in a game) are reduced to a score, or a rat­
ing, to denote the “closeness” or synergy these two characters share (and 
one of them is usually the player).
It’s as appealing as it should be unsettling. Many of us would enjoy 
it if the complexity of human relationships were reduced to a couple of 
clear choices and a number, but social reality is not that easily meas­
ured, nor should it be. Human relationships are messy and largely out 
of our individual control, but games create the illusion that racking up 
points on an “intimacy” meter will guarantee closeness, affection, and 
even love. Consider also the many “dating simulations” available now, 

48  Game Worlds Get Real
including Love Plus, which is famously known for a man “marrying” a 
non-player character in the game in 2009.23
Beyond attempting to quantify nebulous concepts of human life to 
insert into game structures, games often, by design, create idealized 
forms of play through raw calculations. This is easy to see in many role-
playing games, or in games that use role-playing elements, as sometimes 
strategy is reduced to a simple mathematical output; that is, do enough 
damage to kill something, and you win. In online game worlds, where 
the knowledge community creates, distributes, and enforces these ideal­
ized paths, playing as you feel like playing can be close to impossible (at 
least without severe social consequences). Under the pretty colors of the 
game you are playing, there exist one or two formulas for what some 
players call “min/maxing”24 your character (or role, or style of play) to 
produce the highest quantifiable outcome. In doing so, play is robbed of 
its diversity of styles, as well as any sense of agency the players may have.
It’s hilarious to see how bad players are these days. Just faceroll­
ing through content because someone is carrying them. My back is 
tired from all these bads. Seriously, I’m hurting. All games should 
have parsers so these idiots understand just how bad they really are 
at their job. It’s partly [the game company’s] fault for not letting 
people use programs to see performance, but it’s also all the bads 
out there and their inability to research how to play in a halfway 
passable manner. Because if you suck ass, you’re a drag on the rest 
of the group, and no one has fun.25
It can be argued that a player could simply ignore these measures (“I’m 
going to play my way, and no one can say otherwise!”), but there are 
structural and social barriers to deciding to play the game the way you 
may want to play it. First, structurally speaking, certain obstacles in the 
game are never going to be cleared without following the rule of math. 
For example, let’s pretend a red dragon is charging his fire breath. You 
and your team have 20 seconds to hurt the red dragon enough to stop 
him from breathing all over your face. The game designers have made 
it so that the fire breath will kill your team instantly if it’s not stopped. 
Each of your team members (including you), at their maximum output, 
should be able to do enough damage in 15 seconds. But you are playing 
“your way,” and you’re operating outside the meta (which is basically a 
path of least resistance that will allow you to have the highest damage 
output possible, which you were supposed to learn from the knowl­
edge community, or through watching videos, or through hard work to 
become more efficient). “Your way” means your required contribution 

Rationalization of Play 
49
to the team effort is going to take much longer than it would if you were 
following the meta. Your freedom of playing style means that you might 
be having fun, but you cannot clear this obstacle given your less-than-
ideal output. So what happens? Well, you all die in a fire. Maybe you 
have more fun playing your way, but the structures of the game bar you 
from participating in (or completing) certain content if you continue to 
do so.
This brings up the second point: the social and interactional issues 
within game communities with respect to quantification. Other players 
have something to say about your idea of fun. The meta is pushed as the 
best way to play, if not the only way. It is the conformist standard, and 
the pressure from the structure of the game is so great that the social 
communities of the game end up policing those who do not conform. 
This is because not conforming to the standard disrupts the “ideal expe­
rience of fun,” which is more or less everything I have discussed thus 
far, meaning efficiently clearing game content for predictable outcomes 
using quantifiable measures.
So maybe you, as a player of this game, don’t care about numbers. 
And you enjoy casting ice spells rather than fire spells, even though fire 
clearly does more damage in the game by a measurable margin. You 
fancy yourself an ice mage. That’s great, and it might even be an expres­
sion of an identity that you have always wanted to play out; maybe you 
ride around in the game atop a giant white wolf and pretend to puff 
icy mist into the air from your frozen lungs. However, to participate in 
perhaps most of the game content, you have to conform to calculable 
standards. Refusing to do so will mean that fewer and fewer people will 
decide to play with you, or willingly help you clear obstacles (like drag­
ons). Again, similar to a society with set rules and norms, if you do not 
conform to the current meta, you will eventually be excluded from much 
of the game, although at first you will likely be called out, harassed, and 
trolled, because other players will attempt to goad you into conform­
ing through different means. In a way, numbers are everything in game 
worlds, and they act to limit the diversity of playing styles, either solely 
by design or as reinforced by an occasionally myopic but clearly hyper-
rationalized gamer community.
Mechanization: The Value of Playing without People
In line with trying to control all the “randomness” of any human inter­
action, it often “helps” to reduce their individual human qualities and 
characteristics—or, in a hyper-rationalized system, to simply subtract 
the humans altogether. The irony of this becomes rather apparent when 

50  Game Worlds Get Real
playing games that are designed for multiple players. Gaming, at least 
in its “at home” form from early console successes like the 8-bit Nin­
tendo Entertainment System (NES) through the fifth generation of con­
soles (PlayStation, Nintendo 64, Sega Saturn)26 was hobbled by a lack 
of connective technologies to create more social (or cooperative) gaming 
opportunities. Many games were played solo, and so players only needed 
to contend with the obstacles provided within the structure of the game 
itself. There were no humans in the game to mess up their progress. 
In fact, entire generations of gamers were almost completely insulated 
from playing together. Outside of the arcade and a handful of two-player 
games (maybe four, at max), games were largely enjoyed without people.
Many games today have online multiplayer capacities, and some are 
entirely online affairs, meaning that vast virtual worlds with thousands 
of other players are a pillar of the industry. You have the opportunity to 
(or are forced to, depending on your perspective) interact with people 
all over the world and ideally to team up to accomplish the goals of the 
game. The drawback to this is that you have to rely on each other, build 
rapport, cooperate, and (shocker!) be civil in the majority of your social 
interactions. For some, this can be seen as an unfortunate situation.
I like this game a lot, but the people, I swear, the people are ruin­
ing it. Farmers, trolls, just plain assholes, it’s becoming harder to 
want to log on these days. I actually stopped using [player match] 
because there’s too much anxiety in it for me. I don’t want to end 
up with some [random players] who are not going to give a shit if 
they treat me like garbage, or yell at me for “playing wrong,” or 
just in general, be jerks about anything.27
The problem is not that gamers may fall into the stereotype of being 
social misfits but that playing with other people means that you inevita­
bly surrender some aspects of the game to those other people. In short, 
you cannot control their behavior, their skill level, or their thought pro­
cesses. This can be unfortunate on a practical level, in that mistakes by 
other players can cost you the match or battle, or can hinder your pro­
gress in other ways. The game is not yours alone.
For example, let’s pretend a monster uses a skill that chains you and 
another player together. If you stay chained, both you and the other 
player will take severe damage and will eventually die from it. To break 
free, you must both run away from each other, and at a certain length, 
the chain will snap. However, if the other player ignores the chain, or 
perhaps the other player is too focused on stabbing a dragon with a 

Rationalization of Play 
51
mighty spear and does not see the chain, well, then you and the spear-
wielding player both get to die. It’s a typical mechanic in team or group-
play games that is meant to keep players aware while challenging them 
to juggle multiple tasks such as fighting a dragon, avoiding standing in 
fire, and (in this case), keeping distance between your allies.
These mechanics can become very complex, and at their height, they 
can be the sole challenge for players focused on creating moments of 
flow (like the progression gamers). But again to my point about human 
beings being framed as a problem: What if the other player “sucks”? 
What if our spear-wielding player from before will never be able to iden­
tify and react to this mechanic, or maybe the player sees it happening 
but doesn’t care, or thinks another player should keep him alive through 
the mechanic (say, by healing him constantly), so that he doesn’t have 
to move from his epic spear-poking stance. In fact, there may be zero 
chance the fight can be cleared with this person on the team, particularly 
because said player is getting other people killed.
In the past, players may have been at an impasse. Game communities 
were smaller, and access to other players may have been limited. Modern 
games are different, in a way similar to the change brought about by 
online dating sites and apps28—that is, the pool of potential replacements 
is larger and far more accessible than it ever has been. These days, your 
team is no longer stuck with a subpar member; they can simply boot the 
hapless spear-wielding player from the group (and in many cases allow 
a sort of “player match algorithm” built into the game to find a suitable 
replacement). The spear-wielding player is entirely replaceable, and the 
game system will just add a new player who is looking for a group to 
complete the dungeon, field mission, or boss battle. You don’t have to 
deal with the noncompliant spear-wielding player if you don’t want to. 
That player, as well as every other player, is replaceable.
These systems, meant to rationalize the process and difficulties 
involved in forming a team of players and overcoming a set of obstacles, 
serve to significantly dehumanize the players. At best, they flatten their 
individuality, and at worst they may vie to replace them with nonhumans 
altogether. As an example, in many game worlds (e.g., FFXIV, WoW, 
Overwatch, and Destiny), players are simply reduced to their “role” 
(what purpose they primarily serve in group play) as the only meaning­
ful piece of information about them. Role systems (like the “holy trin­
ity,”29 which includes “tanks” to soak up enemy attacks, “healers” to 
keep players alive, and “dps” [damage per second] to focus on killing 
monsters), are common in game worlds (and debating why they are used 
is beyond the scope of this book).

52  Game Worlds Get Real
But just like workers in the solid world operating in what are deemed 
low-skill, easily replaceable jobs, players in game worlds have become 
cogs; that is, replaceable parts in an equation with a particular outcome 
in mind. Who they are as people, or who they are as players, is almost 
completely irrelevant. Common banter in these games, such as “dps slots 
fill in seconds, so it shouldn’t be long,” shows that the primary concern 
in continuing to progress in the game is reduced to just plugging in a new 
drone (who is a player) to fill the role and to play at some passable level 
to continue the game.
Unlike the labor market of the solid world, in game worlds the play­
ers themselves get to shuffle the deck, as well as be shuffled themselves. 
There are no CEOs, corporate managers, or store heads deciding to hire 
and fire at will and rotating people through the entry positions in cus­
tomer service and the like. Instead, the players on the team or in the 
group can toss one player out in favor of someone (or even something) 
similarly capable. This process is intended to speed up players’ ability to 
find a set of cogs decent enough to clear an obstacle, but we could argue 
that there is a cost at the social and community level within these game 
worlds, as well as a cost in respect to seeing players as human beings. 
Of course, it is also likely that indifference to seeing people as people 
and instead focusing on their ability to adequately produce a particular 
outcome in a hyper-rationalized system is why there’s no point in giving 
any thought to the emotional capacities or the humanness of the player 
you just kicked from the team. You have to defeat the dragon, right? And 
that player simply wasn’t getting the job done, so roll in the next cog!
It would be even better (from the perspective of some players) if, even 
in games that are built to be social affairs, the other human beings could 
be removed from the equation completely. Group-matching mechanics 
are helpful for the reasons mentioned above, but swapping one cog for 
another could produce an even more disagreeable cog. Maybe your team 
kicked a “bad” player, and the replacement is a troll. He’s here to make 
your gaming experience hell, and you may be forced to kick him and go 
through the process again, or your group might become demoralized 
enough to quit and try later, meaning no one got to finish the content. 
This leads to the next logical extension: from flattening humans into de-
individualized and homogenous objects to removing humans altogether. 
Some players (again in social, multiplayer games) may call for content 
to be clearable without playing in groups (that is, gaming “solo”), or by 
one player using NPCs (non-player characters, or AI-controlled char­
acters) to complete the content. So the team would be one human and 
some bots. It’s the “ultimate solution” for dealing with the unfortunate 

Rationalization of Play 
53
randomness of interacting with human beings. Just remove them. Prob­
lem solved.
I just want to be able to skip [player match] and take [non-player 
characters] into dungeons together with me. I know this is still a 
multiplayer game, and they want us socializing with other players. 
Still, it would be nice if maybe we just have to group with players 
once for content, just to get the first clear maybe. That’s what good 
friends are for anyways. After that, we should be able to go alone 
with NPCs. It’d be more fun than being forced to group up with 
strangers through the [player match] system. There’s nothing social 
or interesting about being forced to play with people you don’t 
know.30
When players long to displace human-controlled avatars and charac­
ters with those controlled by programs and computers, this speaks to 
the desire to avoid the many pitfalls of human relationships. In game 
worlds, these pitfalls are largely pragmatic, meaning some players may 
inhibit your goals in the game through poor performance or lack of 
communication, or that having to rely on “other people” should be 
treated with a certain level of hesitance simply because it may extend 
your socializing beyond your comfort zone. Perhaps you enjoy playing 
games with close friends, but strangers are full of unknown variables. 
What if they suck? What if they express a point of view you disagree 
with? What if they are elitist pricks or filthy casuals? Many bad things 
are possible while interacting with humans, but programs, technology, 
and machines provide some players the reassurance of total compliance. 
Some AI programming may still “suck” (say, your NPCs are prone to 
standing in dragon fire), but rebuking a computer program has no emo­
tional or interactional consequences. You can scream at AI until you’re 
red in the face, and no one gets hurt. Machines don’t hold grudges or 
spread rumors about your abusive vitriol. Programs don’t feel anxious 
to team up with you for the next battle. They more or less do exactly 
what you want them to do.
If the cry for a more palatable experience in game worlds requires 
removing people, we may very well one day play massively multiplayer 
games without other players. Even currently, role-playing games like Per­
sona and Tokyo Mirage Sessions (these are “single-player” titles)31 give 
players the impression that they are interacting with complex personali­
ties and people (in the latter game, your “friends” even text you on the 
Wii U pad when they want to hang out). The question may soon be, why 

54  Game Worlds Get Real
should you subject yourself to the messiness of dealing with solid-world 
humans who may not even agree to your gameplay goals and plans? You 
may soon opt to have a totally compliant crew of AI buddies who are 
dying to help you out, sing your praises, or even express romantic inter­
est in you. What a wonderful world that would be!
This is not to say that AI-controlled elements or characters are bad 
or problematic for the goals of a game; however, calls for using AI in 
place of having to “deal with people” herald the (likely false) promise 
that technology will solve all the world’s problems,32 including those 
having to do with the humans who inhabit the world. They also reassert 
the illustrations made by Edward Castronova33 (among other writers), 
who detailed a chilling vision of the future of game worlds. In his story, 
we have all been playing a massive simulation, and machines have been 
swapping out human players as they break (i.e., when our physical bod­
ies die), so seamlessly that no one will recognize when all the humans 
are eventually gone. We play with programs in worlds that function like 
echo chambers, similarly to how we use social media today, but minus 
the homogeny of social groups,34 and instead using programs to rein­
force our sense of self-worth and worldview. We die in isolation, not 
from social interaction, but from human-to-human contact. We recon­
struct the meaning of “real social interaction” to include human-to-
program interaction. And we don’t do this because we believe it to be an 
issue of AI rights or identity politics, but instead because we are enamo­
red with these programs that heed our every desire. We think they fulfill 
us in ways that other human beings cannot. Removing human beings 
from the equation seems to be the easiest way to “true” fulfillment of all 
your needs, and we may well do so without considering what is lost in 
the process.
Full Control: The Value of Playing without Messiness
It is fair to see games sometimes as escapist; for some, this might actually 
be the case. However, I have largely argued that players do not necessar­
ily desire escape from anything, nor are they truly able to escape from 
the solid world and its social controls. Instead, they are attempting to 
assert more control over their time, activities, and identities. Games are 
a great way of providing players with agency to exercise choices that 
will clearly change the (game) world around them (or just their imme­
diate space and selves). Agency is, at some level, about having control 
over the decision-making process and having enough power to act upon 
those choices.

Rationalization of Play 
55
Games are quite good at this, and we have more control over our 
gaming experiences now than we did in the earlier years. For example, 
many early-generation console games (that classic 8-bit NES) offered no 
control over where to pick up the game after a playing session. In many 
cases, you begin the game at the beginning of the game every single time 
you want to play. There were few games outside of the RPG genre, in 
particular, that offered any form of progress saving. Consoles during the 
later 1990s and early 2000s (PlayStation, Xbox, etc.) generally offered 
checkpoints of various types, or a certain number of “slots” for saving 
your progress. At the time, the data storage space was limited, and games 
only allowed you to save in specific locations. Modern systems, given 
technology upgrades and vocal demands from the players themselves, 
allow for players to pick up and put down games at almost any time. 
Many games allow you to stop right in the middle of a life-or-death mis­
sion, save, and quit. Or the game may even save for you every so often, 
making sure you don’t lose any of your progress. This example falls in 
line with the amount of control we now have over our play experiences, 
as game companies and designers are trying to make their games fit into 
the chaos of modern living.
I know they are and are not the same. The virtual world and the 
real one overlap more than maybe some people would like, but 
there’s also things in the virtual world I wish were transferable to 
the real one. I get to be a better version of me, to some extent, in 
the game . . . I know for certain I get to have more control over 
my social connections. If people are rude, and there’s too many to 
count online, they can be “shut off” or erased from my life in the 
game. I’d like to be able to do the same with my boss, my stupid 
uncle, or even my wife from time to time in the real world.35
Control is also about dealing with other people. A rather basic exam­
ple is the blacklist in many socially geared, community, or shared-world 
games. As players, we can filter the gaming community and cross out 
the chance to play with people we don’t like, or maybe people we have 
biases about, or people with whom we have had a bad experience in 
the past. This is rather appealing to many players who are well versed 
in the difficulties of some online interactions with trolls, griefers,36 and 
the like. This also means we are tempted to simply delete the inputs 
and interactions of people that we find disagreeable. It’s appealing in 
its own way, but it stands in stark contrast with how the solid world 
operates and how we operate within it. Few of us have the power and 

56  Game Worlds Get Real
control to stamp out dissenting voices in the broader public (or even just 
to delete people we don’t like), and those few who do are probably not 
the most laudable of people (say, dictators and those types). Interacting 
with humans is messy business, but digital communities, technology, and 
game worlds give us the tools to attempt to control our experiences. We 
get to clean things up a bit for our pleasure and enjoyment.
This is not to argue that these tools make playing games ethically 
wrong, but to draw attention to the disparity between the two stages: 
one digital, controlled, appealing, and designed for the user’s enjoyment, 
and the other, the messy solid world, filled with people you don’t like 
and can’t make shut up, doing things you also don’t like, and where 
fun seems to be at a premium. It’s not that players escape to the game 
worlds; they just may prefer how those worlds operate and the power 
they have over them. If we were offered the same powers in the solid 
world, an entire generation of digital-born youth would likely find that 
just as appealing as spending the evening as a Nightelf demon hunter.
Ultimately, the rationalization of modern society is underscored by 
attempts to control the human experience. In each of this chapter’s 
topics exists a background desire for control. Efficiency is about con­
trolling time and duration, predictability is about controlling for bad 
outcomes, quantifiability is about controlling measurement and assess­
ment, and mechanization is about controlling radical human elements 
of all types. Perhaps most of all, modern technology, from video games 
to social media to robotics, relies on the promise of full control over 
our lives. We can present ourselves how we want online, edit and tweak 
photos, carefully craft text communications, block people we don’t like, 
and pay attention to the things we like (and give them “likes”), and 
there are digital algorithms at work to keep the “good” things flowing 
our way.37 Games have many of the same aspects and tend to sell the 
same promise. One of the original pitches for creating an avatar was “Be 
exactly who you want to be” or “Be anything you want to be,” which 
thinkers in this field have refuted as paradoxical at best, and patently 
false at worst.38 This idea that a game world is, in some respects, your 
fantasy life alludes to the promise of full control over the existential cri­
sis of being a bug on a rock in a void.
Yet gamers never do escape the solid world or gain the control they 
may desire. As this chapter has argued, if anything, the social controls 
of the solid world continue to assert their pressing importance in game 
worlds. Seeking refuge in these worlds is reflective of a cultural need and 
the elevation of logical systems, and gamers are simply trying to balance 
and justify “play” through a rationalized lens. More games are mirroring 

Rationalization of Play 
57
these needs, promising a “fun” (in the sense of being efficient, predicta­
ble, measurable, and controlled) experience, and in doing so, they create 
vacuums for diversity of play and innovative design. If we yearn for one 
set of experiences, and technology and the game industry gives us only 
those experiences, we may not know what else we desire. To argue that 
the benefit of playing games is to have more control over your choices 
and a visible impact on the world around you is to value systems and 
tools that promise more control over the human experience. This will 
not allow players (and people) to break free of the need for such systems 
of thought and their lofty perch in the reality of everyday life.

(Doodles invented by Necronomiconopoly [Marina Gutierrez-Harsh])

I find it all too striking, when asked about my best experiences and 
memories, that most of them were when shit went completely awry. 
There was beauty and pleasure in the complete chaos of the circus 
some of our carefully laid plans became. . . . When I look back on 
years of playing online games, the moments I find the most incred­
ible were those when nothing was going right, and I was laughing 
my whole way through it. Those times, to me, were far more fun 
than any of our planned or scheduled progress.1
A
ny hyper-rationalized structure, culture, or set of processes can pro­
duce some unintended or “irrational” outcomes. As I mentioned in 
the previous chapter (paraphrasing George Ritzer), you can build an effi­
cient system for mass food production, breeding, growing, slaughtering, 
and distributing millions of animals for consumption, but sometimes 
you end up with “pink slime” or questionable fillers in your taco meat.2 
These consequences are the irrational outcomes of a rational system, 
and there are many such issues with gaming culture leaning toward a 
hyper-rationalized ideal. If game designers and gamer communities 
actively construct the most efficient, predictable, measurable, and fully 
controlled gaming experience to be the “ideal” one, then several other 
reasons for play will be cast as less than ideal, and strange things may be 
born of a system based on such values.
The next several chapters seek to explain how and why certain forms 
of play are marginalized as the enemy (or the antithesis) of the “ideal 
gamer.” Games are often propped up as “awesome” because they allow 
CHAPTER 4
Stigma and Gamer Communities

60  Game Worlds Get Real
us to break away from rigidly structured ways of participating in a 
social circle or activity (though I have begun to dismantle this thought 
in the previous chapters). Players enjoy gaming because it allows for 
autonomy, identity expression, and dignity, and because at its very best, 
it can allow us to critically examine certain assumptions about human 
behavior and ethics. However, when gaming is reduced to a set of calcu­
lations, or to an ideal outcome that oversimplifies our engagement and 
commitment to the game, or when we follow the meta like an instruc­
tion manual, gamers are robbed of the aforementioned benefits. In turn, 
generally a single way of playing a particular game is placed on a socially 
reinforced pedestal, and all other forms of play are labeled deviant, igno­
rant, or just bad. The stigmatization of other forms of play is reinforced 
in gamer communities and in the production and distribution of knowl­
edge about these games (that is, how players come to know the ideal 
playing style).
Many of these stigmas are formulated due to the installation of a 
hyper-rationalized system in a game world, yet some are more of a hybrid 
of multiple rationalized values. Stigmas, as they appear in this space, are 
social afflictions that can change how the game world treats a player. 
Most of those discussed in this chapter are “discreditable” (stigmas that 
can remain unknown or unseen, situationally, until further information 
is given or discovered), with very few discredited (stigmas that are imme­
diately visible or known, thus eliminating the chance to establish a non-
stigmatized identity).3 In other words, information exchange of some 
kind usually has to take place between players to learn that someone is a 
novice, a non-ideal player, or another marginalized social category. In a 
few cases, the structure of the game itself may highlight a player’s status 
through use of some tool (like being a “new player” might be shown 
with a special symbol next to your name in-game, which broadcasts to 
the social world your novice status), which could be stigmatizing. How­
ever, as I have highlighted previously, information transparency (that 
is, “forced resonance” between the solid world and the game world) is 
standard practice and a digital norm, so whether a stigma is discredit­
able or not, the unknown information will likely only be unknown for 
a short period of time; that is, there is very little chance of keeping your 
secret, both structurally and socially.
As this book continues, I will detail how more assumptions are layered 
upon players who may have come to the game world for refuge, explo­
ration, expression, and autonomy. Instead, many of them will find (and 
even more importantly, will come to enforce) values from the opposite 

Stigma and Gamer Communities 
61
end of the spectrum—primarily those that delineate to whom the game 
world belongs, and just how those people should behave and play.
The Stigma of Ignorance: The Affliction of Not Knowing
Connective technologies and the Internet itself have vastly changed the 
level of available information to those with access to both. It has become 
more difficult to be uninformed about anything, which has the odd effect 
of allowing for many people to treat not knowing something with utter 
contempt.4 This plays out quite strangely in game worlds, as there is 
an overabundance of information available about each and every game, 
and those who play are in some respect held to the standard of knowing 
everything there is to know about a game, even before experiencing it 
themselves.
The collective information about a game can be found within numer­
ous sources, including game-specific wikis, databases, fan sites, message 
boards, subreddits, and Twitch and YouTube videos. This abundance of 
information allows players to access and resolve any query they might 
have, but it also removes a number of social freedoms, given how the 
knowledge community dominates the discourse of play. There was a con­
siderably drier well of information in the earlier years of game worlds. 
Prior to the mass availability of the Internet and game-specific informa­
tion sources, gamers may have relied on print strategy guides, word of 
mouth, or small gamer cliques to share information. Some players even 
may have sought advice from employees at game stores (I speak from 
personal experience, having worked at one of the largest chains from 
2000 to 2006). Newer technologies obviously changed this dynamic and 
reduced the need for gamers to rely directly on other humans, as well as 
on dated (and completely static) print guides.
When early Web sites began compiling information in easily search­
able and accessible spaces, the need for direct questions aimed at another 
human being was dramatically reduced. These sites, and the aggregate of 
their archives of information, make up the knowledge base. It is a collec­
tive, crowdsourced product created with the intention of making access 
to information more efficient and therefore making playing any game 
more predictable. The knowledge community details the state of the cur­
rent meta. The meta is, as explained earlier, the collective consensus of 
the ideal forms of play, which are game-specific, though there are some 
broader rules that may apply to an entire genre or series, or to all games 
in general. This process is only dynamic in that some game structures or 

62  Game Worlds Get Real
calculations change over time (that is, an update to the game may add 
content or augment content, which could change the ideal form of play). 
Outside these sporadic structural changes, the meta is a static force that 
directs the broader game community to conform to the dictated paths of 
least resistance, and to press other players to conform as well.
It is important to note that these ideals are, as I previously argued, 
fostered around the elements of rationalization. An “ideal” in this sense 
is the formula for the “best” measurable (and efficient, and predictable, 
etc.) outcome, style, or strategy. The meta offers no insight into how to 
have the most fun, or how to use a game world to better understand 
yourself, or how to become deeply immersed in a narrative. The meta is 
the mechanical equivalent of the best route. It’s robotic. It reflects hours 
upon hours of research to produce a mechanically “superior” answer. 
It’s procedurally generated by humans who want to be like or think like 
machines. But remember, in a “rational” system, this is the ideal—to 
avoid the irrationality of human beings, with all of their random attrib­
utes and issues. The meta then becomes the dominant ideology, and it 
presses upon all players who participate in any game, particularly those 
games with social components, but even those without them.
One of the interesting effects of having access to an abundance of 
information is that not utilizing that access has become a social faux pas 
(what I am calling the stigma of ignorance). Players working together, 
willingly or unwillingly, to achieve goals in socially oriented or virtual-
world games are expected (sometimes to an extreme degree) to carry 
with them (or be able to freely access) preexisting knowledge of all 
things within the game world. In other words, if any player has expe­
rienced something in the game and shared it with the knowledge com­
munity, then every player should possess knowledge of that very thing, 
or at least they should be aware that they are expected to readily access 
said knowledge and use it.
This stems from conceptualizing the Internet as a massive organism to 
which we are all connected.5 If I know something I found online, I may 
believe then that everyone likely already knows of that something, or 
could know of it after a simple search. Knowledge is no longer held by 
“experts” in a particular field, given that the “sharing culture” and the 
Internet mark the accessibility of all information.6 This is a paradoxical 
state, of course, in that the flattening of experts in any one thing forces us 
all to be experts on everything. It should not be surprising, then, that for 
practical reasons, even when only speaking of the archive of knowledge 
about a single video game, such a task is nearly impossible. This issue 
is circumvented by the “accessibility” state of the archived knowledge 

Stigma and Gamer Communities 
63
on the Internet for any one game. You may not know how to kill this 
dragon yet, but you can know in short order. Indeed, you should already 
know that knowing is a requirement for participation. Not knowing 
something before you experience it, given that the knowledge is already 
available, is no longer viable or socially palatable to many.
Catching people up on the current state of the game—or, even more 
outrageous, teaching someone that knowledge firsthand—is an affront 
to what the knowledge community stands for. The knowledge commu­
nity is there to eliminate ignorance, and it is every player’s choice (if not 
duty) to use that grand wealth of knowledge to alleviate the need for 
people to rely on direct information exchange. After all, who knows if 
a specific human being will be any good at instructing another how to 
fight a dragon? And why should they have to, since there are already 
dozens of digital videos detailing the same fight to anyone who needs 
the information? It’s absurd to think that people would not jump at the 
chance to consume all of the information out there and educate them­
selves about the dragon fight. And the general distaste for being asked by 
another human being for direct instruction has become a social standard 
in game worlds.
This argument about players needing to “be patient” with new 
players in content is bullshit and one-sided. Think about it this 
way, why should I have to waste my time teaching you how to do 
a fight? Why is that my burden, as someone who has done the fight 
a hundred times before? People says it’s selfish that I don’t spend 
time trying to coach this noob through the encounter, but it’s just as 
selfish to be a noob, jump into something you’ve never done before, 
and then just expect players are going to graciously teach you to 
wipe your own ass. There’s information out there about everything 
in the game. Want to know the best gear build? Want to know how 
to clear this battle? Want to know how to not stand in fire? Go 
fucking look it up and learn something. Don’t expect other players 
to teach you.7
Jane McGonigal argued that one of the benefits that gamers can experi­
ence through play is the thrill of teaching someone how to play some­
thing you have learned (called “naches,” or vicarious pride).8 While 
surely this is the case for some gamers, perhaps the context (say, in their 
living room with a good friend or a romantic partner) provides the 
proper framework for a welcomed teaching moment to unfold. In online 
game worlds, many players find being “forced” to teach other players to 

64  Game Worlds Get Real
be obnoxious at best, and at worst, something that ruins the game and 
its promise of fun. While tightly knit groups may have to coordinate and 
communicate strategy in real time (such as players involved in competi­
tive matches or highly complicated cooperative play), the larger gamer 
population readily assumes that the information is already available 
online (and a subpopulation of gamers have built those digital archives), 
so why must anyone be forced to teach a player how to play, even if the 
outcome of the content at hand (e.g., whether the dragon is going to be 
defeated or not) relies on informing this novice player how to perform 
their part?
There’s nothing inherently problematic about using the knowledge 
community to better understand a game (though I will discuss some of its 
effects below) or about reducing expectations that other players should 
“teach content.” However, this marks another shift in line with those 
mentioned previously in this work, in that it has reduced the need for 
people to rely directly on other people. Yes, people generate the content 
for the knowledge community and may even have open discussions with 
other players about the content itself (honing strategies, mechanics, and 
so on). Yet most players consume this content indirectly, usually through 
watching videos, which is the likely choice for complicated content—so 
much so that “If you don’t know the fight, go watch a video” has become 
a common saying.
This is reflective of a culture that uses screens to teach and that has 
lost purpose and direction in education.9 The value of human educators 
and mentors is sizably reduced when technology has vowed to fill those 
gaps. It is also reflective of a particular ideology in the modern world, 
and that is one of self-reliance, being self-made, and the rhetoric of will­
power.10 Players in online game worlds have become individualistic, but­
tressed by the call for more independence and autonomy in gameplay. 
Whereas before, players relied on each other to see them through diffi­
cult encounters, to communicate openly, and to teach willingly, much of 
what makes up an online gaming community now is individuals seeking 
individual goals, while being held responsible for their individual roles 
and strategic acumen. Failures, therefore, lie with the individual and that 
person’s unwillingness to educate himself or herself through the vast 
information network called the Internet. Add to this that each player 
is largely replaceable (as I spoke to in chapter 3 about mechanization), 
and you have a climate of hyper-rationalized, individualistic gamers who 
have very tenuous ties to any form of community or social welfare.
Another issue that emerges within this framework is that many play­
ers lose the skill to think for themselves, or to be open to the possibility 

Stigma and Gamer Communities 
65
of being wrong. With the knowledge community running amok, eve­
ryone loses the right to not know, as well as the ability to play with­
out knowing. Players may find themselves idling when they are without 
instructions about how to proceed, and thus, on their own, they don’t 
move at all.
It was patch night. The worlds had just come back up and there was 
a rush, like there always is, on the new raid content. About 4am, 
maybe an hour after we could log on, I was in the new raid with a 
couple dozen other players. We got to the first boss, and we died. 
We tried again, wipe. Instead of discussing the problems amongst 
our group, one of the players announced that he was watching a 
Twitch stream of another group fighting the same boss and told us 
to wait. We sat there, boss in front of us, just waiting for this guy 
and a couple others who decided to tune in to watch how the fight 
was done. They didn’t want to learn for themselves, or try the fight 
again even though we had made some decent progress between the 
two attempts. They wanted the answers now . . . and that’s how 
things go these days. As soon as one group in the entire world has 
done something, we all just march on that content the same way, 
like a bunch of lemmings.11
To avoid failures, a group of a couple dozen players stopped to wait 
for the knowledge community to update during their own playing time. 
No one knew what the entire strategy was, or how to “best” go about 
defeating the creature, and because they didn’t know everything, they 
decided not to do anything until the “right way” could be confirmed. 
In a way, players are more reliant on each other through the knowledge 
community than ever before, as they rely on indirect or passively con­
sumed coaching to avoid the social stigma of not knowing. However, 
this connection has to remain tenuous enough (and in the background) 
so that it can be called “individual efforts to learn how to play.” This 
way, it can appear as though it is the individual player who comes to 
master a role or battle through “research” (i.e., watching videos that 
other players have made about the content).
I’m not saying everyone acts like the gamer elite. But I also know 
a lot of people who stay out of specific content because they have 
been treated poorly and are afraid to try again. Making mistakes 
in games is not a life-threatening situation and people need to chill 
out. I know players don’t want to waste their time, but learning 

66  Game Worlds Get Real
through mistakes is one of the best, if not the best way to learn new 
things, in games and in real life. But some people want you to know 
everything about the game beforehand, never make a mistake, and 
if you do, they are going to bully you so much that you won’t play 
that content again.12
“Not knowing” can be vilified in online games, as you are cast as “hold­
ing the group back” due to your lack of experience or, more aptly, due 
to your not relying on the experiences of others (that is, consuming 
experiences indirectly through passive video watching) to guide your 
play. An ideal player is fully informed about the content or at least 
can learn quickly without any direct instruction from other players. 
This troublesome formation can bar many players from even attempt­
ing to enjoy certain content in the game, given the harsh social afflic­
tions they may be forced to deal with, and given that the general rule 
for playing a game is to know everything without having experienced 
anything.
The Stigma of Serendipity: The Affliction of Unanticipated 
Outcomes
Related to the stigma of ignorance is the stigma of serendipity. In the 
same way that being fully informed about a game or a piece of content 
within that game is demanded and reinforced by the gamer community, 
a reduction in the overall sense of wonder and discovery is the “rational” 
outcome of a predictable and fully informed culture. So-called discovery 
work is hailed as one of the sources of fun and excitement in games.13 
Players enjoy the feeling of exploration, of not knowing what exactly 
will happen next, of being unsure about their preparedness until they are 
immersed in a battle, dungeon, or epic event. This form of play (or work) 
is quite the opposite of relying on predictability; it is also the lifeblood of 
the knowledge community.
Additionally, the social landscape within a game world is often con­
strained by the goals and schedules of other players. That is, when you 
are alone playing a game that has no connection to the social world, 
you might very well enjoy the fruits of discovery by meandering across 
the mountains of Skyrim, soaring on a dragon in Ni no Kuni: Wrath of 
the White Witch, or creeping around the gothic architecture of Blood­
bourne.14 But in online game worlds, your goals for fun intersect with 
other players’ goals for the same. If one thing is clear about connective 
technologies, it’s that we are giving in to more of what other people 

Stigma and Gamer Communities 
67
think we want (and what algorithms and tech machinery think we want) 
and given fewer chances to stumble about things blindly.
Games anymore are all on rails. There are exceptions to this rule, 
but really they are few and far between. Gamers, or game design­
ers, or some combination, basically make the same thing over and 
over, and these designs get cloned. So, WoW made questing hubs 
into a standard, and everyone did that because it was the thing to 
do. Players complained about getting lost or slow travel, and then 
we got teleporting and mounts and fast travel. . . . What happened 
to the spirit in walking outside a safe zone and just seeing how far 
you can get before you die? Where’s the fun in the same goddamn 
“hallway” dungeons over and over again? God forbid anyone finds 
something interesting to do that isn’t a part of the designers’ for­
mula or that doesn’t give you some epic gear . . . It feels like games 
today are as boring as theme parks, you buy the game to punch 
your ticket, and you get to ride the same damn rides as everyone 
else. That’s fun for you.15
Many aspects of gameplay in online worlds have become linear, with few 
options off the beaten path. Part of this is justified through technology 
and infrastructure: certain “open world”16 elements, where players can 
just wander about, are simply not feasible or affordable. But this again 
means that discovery work is pushed aside in favor of clear objectives 
(run down this hall, fight a dragon, run down this hall, fight a bigger 
dragon), and it’s not surprising that many players approach the entire 
game from such a standpoint, given that the system embodies avoidance 
of discovery and unplanned events. This folds back into the knowledge 
community, justifying its existence and its work, while moving away 
from anything deemed “wasteful” because the objective is unclear or 
unknown. Players are not supposed to experience the game for them­
selves; the game is “on rails,” and just like a roller coaster, the other 
passengers will yell out to let you know when the “fun” is happening.
The issue with this social reality, aside from the flattening of the game 
experience for everyone participating, is that procedural play (that is, 
when things all go as planned) does not generally end up being the high­
light of time spent gaming. Instead, players tend to remember (or at least 
find it easier to recognize) that many of their “epic moments” came from 
surprise and discovery, or when a game hit them with a sense of awe 
and wonder. In other words, while serendipity is not held as a value of 
the gamer community, the “buzz” of fun, as far as players tend to recall, 

68  Game Worlds Get Real
runs parallel to these moments of happenstance. Being awestruck by a 
game, a narrative, or the outcome of a battle is where players tended 
to gravitate when asked to recall their most memorable and enjoyable 
moments of play.
We were sneaking through one of the maps to get to the designated 
area, and out of nowhere this monster spawns on top of one of 
us. The [magic] we had on couldn’t hide us, and BAM! One dead 
player. Then another. People started screaming in the chat box and 
on voice as the monster started wrecking the rest of the group. It 
was massive, and probably un-killable. Some of us got bold any­
way and charged in swinging. There wasn’t any point of trying to 
hide when it could see you, and others found some crevice to duck 
into and hope for the best. I had never seen that [monster] before 
that day. Heard about it a lot. And I will always remember the 
way it destroyed everyone, people laughing and crying and yelling. 
Stands out from a lot of the other stuff I did.17
Unanticipated outcomes can pay dividends in fun when allowed for by 
game designers and communities. For better or worse, many of these ele­
ments and opportunities have become less important when juggling the 
perceptions and pressures of modern game culture. Instead, we tend to 
see favor for heavily planned “epic moments” in games, as though fun 
can be conjured from a careful, methodical, and logical design. This is 
not to say that all games that use planned events fail to create fun; it is 
to again draw attention to how serendipity has become marginalized in 
game design and play. Yet, as I will continue to note through the remain­
ing sections, these stigmas are almost certain to generate the concept 
of “fun” in its unstructured and playful form, but that “fun” as a con­
cept has been augmented and judged through a rationalized system and 
recast as a (by-)product of logical, rigidly controlled design philosophy 
and social community.
The Stigma of False Choice: The Affliction of Choosing 
Calculable Negatives
Interestingly, one of the newer social consequences in games is that of 
disbelief in and disregard for player freedom and autonomy in respect to 
decision-making and playing style. As with the stigmas of ignorance and 
serendipity, the stigma of false choice serves multiple functions and pro­
duces questionable outcomes for the social game world. Arguably, many 

Stigma and Gamer Communities 
69
forms of “choice” have been depleted in the modern games. Part of this 
has to do with the specter of “game balance” that plagues all games, but 
particularly those that are multiplayer and immersive. The game system 
and structure often dictates a certain form, or route, by which to play at 
the calculable maximum, and this is reinforced in the gamer community 
to deplete choices in the game, or to reveal them as not really choices at 
all since there is only one calculable “best” choice.
A simple example pertains to character or class “builds”18 in dozens of 
games, which allow you, as the player, to choose what skills (or magic, or 
stats) you would like to make more powerful. On paper, this is a fun and 
engaging part of playing a game. You have a particular style of play, and 
you want your character to reflect that style. The game gives you the auton­
omy to be able to do that, and you may feel a little buzz of “fun” from 
making your selections and strategizing your future milestones. Let’s say 
you are playing a game as a magic-wielding character, often some kind 
of “mage” or wizard. While playing this game, you spend a great deal of 
time on your mage character fighting solo (taking on monsters by yourself 
and reducing them to ash and smoke), so maybe you think some extra HP 
(health/hit points: life!) would be nice to help you endure when you are 
being overwhelmed by monsters. Knowing this, you spend a few talent 
points, or you upgrade some items, or you enhance your equipment in 
a particular direction to give you this bonus. Nothing really seems to be 
problematic about you doing so in just that way.
But remember that you could be playing this game with other people, 
and that the game, by design, has specific systems that limit your choices. 
To start, there is probably some upper limit on how many upgrades your 
character can have, and those upgrades must be shared across all of the 
options. So maybe you can upgrade your HP, your intelligence (INT), 
your conjuring speed (for faster spellcasting), and your mana pool (a 
resource to cast more spells). Here is your first limit, and it’s a structural 
one that you can’t control. It’s in the game design, and it’s fixed. You 
upgraded your HP because it suits you, and that’s your choice, and it is 
completely allowed within the structure of the game. However, this will 
mean that upgrades for the other options are now limited because of 
your personal selection. This is compounded by the social landscape and 
knowledge community of the game you are playing. In other words, they 
have decreed that for any “difficult content” like group battles against 
big bad dragons, mages should have fully upgraded INT and conjuring 
speed. With these upgrades, your character will do more damage to the 
dragon than any other combination of upgrades. Your extra HP in this 
scenario is arguably of much less value. It is a calculable negative.

70  Game Worlds Get Real
Furthermore, social groups in the game will require that to participate 
in the big bad dragon fight, all mages must conform to the “all INT and 
conjuring speed” standard, and mages who don’t are not welcome in 
the fight. This was discussed earlier as the current “meta” of the game 
system’s structure, and since it is a calculable outcome (that is, someone 
crunches the numbers to see what the highest damage output would 
be), it becomes the socially (and structurally) defined ideal. When it is 
enshrined as the ideal form of upgrades, it eliminates individual player 
choices. In fact, many players will claim that the choice was never a 
choice to begin with—it was an illusion, and there was only ever one 
right answer. Even more damning, all choices outside the golden stand­
ard are framed as the choice to “be a bad” or, in the mind of the rational 
gamer, to “suck,” and that choice will ultimately leave the player out of 
certain content.
Players have the right to be bad. They have the right to shoot them­
selves in the foot. And “more player choice” is all very well and 
good, but a reality check is needed here—it is an illusion of choice, 
where there will always be a “best way” of playing a character and 
thus the meta will highlight that at the expense of all alternatives. 
All [game companies] have done is eliminated the smoke and mir­
rors. Players make choices that are really not there to begin with. 
The only real choice they are making in the end is being sidelined 
by the community because they didn’t choose wisely. So, they have 
the right to “choose” to be bad, and we have the right to leave them 
out of our groups.19
The choice is still arguably present within the game design, but it is 
seen as false choice, meaning that there is a “best” answer when gaming 
culture believes in the rationalization of all forms of play. The choice is 
reduced to a calculation, and for its part, the math behind the game itself 
supports this conclusion. Mages will do more damage with INT and 
conjuring speed. Yet this calculation is really a path of least resistance. 
It is the measurable “best” to make your playing time more efficient 
(more damage, quicker and easier battles, less time “wasted”), and you 
are expected to follow suit or be ostracized from certain (if not many . . . 
or all) social groups desiring to fight the big bad dragon. You could pick 
other upgrades, and you may even be able to complete content with your 
different upgrades (the structure of the game might be more flexible than 
the gamer community believes), but the community banks on the path 
of least resistance.

Stigma and Gamer Communities 
71
Rather than risk taking an “inferior” mage into battle, gamers stack 
the deck, using calculations to produce the ideal outcome (victory) at the 
cost of choice and autonomy. Gamers are invested in casting any choice 
as false if there is a mathematical advantage involved, not because the 
choice isn’t a choice, but instead because gamers fetishize quantification. 
It’s not a choice to the rational mind, because the rational mind only 
believes in rational and measurable outcomes and advantages. There are 
no other benefits to systems of choice if they are not quantifiably meas­
urable. The rational gamer is blind and deaf to the depth and breadth of 
a player’s experiences.
The social landscape executes this ideology with near-zealotry. This is 
akin to saying that within a tribal community, you have the choice to fol­
low the morals and rules of that group, or to not do so and die alone in 
the forest. It’s nearly the same as stating that you have a choice as a U.S. 
citizen to participate in the glory of capitalism and spend your entire life 
working extremely hard for money to afford a decent living, or you can 
opt out of the system, have no money, and huddle on the streets as you 
are stigmatized by an entire society. The choice is partly an illusion. You 
can have a fully HP-upgraded mage, but no one will play with you. The 
system will let you “choose” the options you like, but there’s already an 
underlying ideal that you will be expected to meet, and the community 
will expend every effort to enforce that ideal.
This stigma is supported by both the structure of the game and the 
social landscape. Operating on your own principles and desires and 
expressing your freedom to choose your character’s “build” is an affront 
to the larger community. In fact, you are the bane of the game world, 
often characterized as “a bad” and someone who inflicts suffering on 
everyone else, in the form of non-ideal styles of play. This also means, as 
expressed throughout this book, that many forms of experimentation in 
terms of gameplay are largely discouraged. Once the knowledge commu­
nity details the current meta (and minor adjustments during the game’s 
life cycle will tweak the meta, generally in phases), all must conform to 
the dictated ideals of play. To do otherwise—to experiment, discover, or 
express less than full knowledge of various aspects of the game—is to 
risk social exile.
To be clear, social exile is not about people “liking” you. It’s not even 
about forming bonds with the community. It’s about being able to par­
ticipate in much of the game’s content (meaning, to play the game itself), 
a good portion of which requires players to work together. Without con­
forming to the ideals of play, you will be left out of groups (or booted 
from them), and you will not be able to experience much of what the 

72  Game Worlds Get Real
game has to offer . . . which is partly why people play games. You know, 
to do fun stuff.
The Stigma of Wasted Time: The Affliction of Playing Too Much
Many of the stigmas surrounding types of play within game worlds can 
in some way be traced back to the problem of conceptualizing leisure 
activities as “wasted time.” One of the “sins” of leisure is that it takes 
otherwise “productive” hours (as in, those destined for work, menial 
labor, or certainly something very unfun) and spends (“wastes”) them 
on unproductive activities, like slaying virtual dragons or saving a world 
that doesn’t exist. Moral condemnation of leisure is a reflection of cul­
tural ideals. In modern industrialized and now digitized societies, “hard 
work” is elevated to a nearly deific status.
This is easily understood within the United States, where entire gener­
ations are often assessed by whether they are working as hard (or desire 
to work as hard) as their predecessors (for example, the current genera­
tional politics over the “scourge” of millennials).20 With each innova­
tion in the realm of leisure (TV, games, Internet, etc.), the subject of 
“wasting time” has circulated in the public discourse. On the one hand, 
westerners are supposed to work hard and succeed in the competitive 
market (so-called capitalism), but on the other hand, we juggle the pulls 
of mass consumption culture, which begs us to waste time and money 
on one frivolous thing after another. Assessing this whirlwind of con­
flicting messages is beyond to scope of this work, but drawing attention 
to the critique of leisure—in this case, playing games—is important in 
understanding how game culture attempts to justify itself and to avoid 
criticism from the broader public.
The stigma of wasted time is deployed against leisure to reduce con­
tact hours with fun activities. Gaming suffers this stigma on several 
levels, from oddly out-of-tune claims that children’s minds and morals 
are being corrupted by games, to overly dramatic depictions of “game 
addiction” that read something like a zombie movie—a virus of fun has 
spread throughout the population, and now everyone just sits at their 
computer all day, pretending they’re elves.21 The stigma is reflective of 
a cultural value system; that is, we are not supposed to have too much 
fun, and we are supposed to value hard work in the solid world (which 
is mostly about participating in the game of capitalism) over pretending 
we are elves in a virtual world.
“Play” and “fun” are to be thoroughly controlled and are only con­
sidered acceptable in small doses, and even then, there are “better” and 

Stigma and Gamer Communities 
73
“worse” types of fun. While it may be culturally appropriate to dress 
up in your favorite football jersey and spend an entire day (Sunday, of 
course) drinking, eating questionable foods, and yelling loudly at a screen 
depicting millionaires violently crashing into each other on a field, dress­
ing up like a knight from medieval times (or an anime character, or a 
robot assassin), drinking and eating questionable foods, and yelling at a 
screen depicting orcs and elves violently crashing into each other is not 
culturally appropriate and largely invites criticism for one’s life choices. 
Despite game culture’s gains over the last decade in breaking into the 
mainstream, spending time playing games, or being involved in the land­
scapes of other worlds (virtual, imaginary, and so on), does not get a 
cultural pass from broader society. In some cases, there might even be a 
demand for some sort of intervention for “people who can’t grow up.”
It’s a stock excuse, but it’s kind of true. I got a “real job” a couple 
years after finishing school, got married not long after, she was 
not a gamer at the time. There’s been some conflict over that, and 
there’s also the practical issues with being unable to play all night 
and get up for work the next day. I never had an intervention in 
the formal sense, but there was a lot of chatter about when I was 
going to “hang it up” and prepare for being a father and whatever. 
It’s true in that sense, I did cut back because of pressures, but it’s 
also something that wasn’t very fun to do. I truly love gaming, and 
I think many people feel the same.22
Efforts to conform to the standard of “maturity” (which often involves 
not only the perception that life is brutish and unfun, but also the act 
of embodying these ideals in attempting to suffer along with the rest of 
the “adults”) are often lauded by groups experiencing the same phase of 
life, or who have already internalized the same construct of adulthood. 
“Time to grow up and stop playing” is an infectious cultural mental­
ity that demarcates the arbitrary lines between childishness and adult­
hood. To be an adult largely means to stop having fun, or at least to 
reduce instances of fun to the handful of socially appropriate options 
(watching football, for example). I confront this mentality all too often 
in my teaching. I have deployed game mechanics in many of my sociol­
ogy courses (attempting to convince students that we will be fighting 
monsters and casting magic, rather than studying for tests). As college 
students, they are desperately trying to consolidate the “adult” label and 
self-apply it, and here I am trying to tell them that learning should be 
fun and that it’s perfectly awesome to show up for class in a wizard robe 

74  Game Worlds Get Real
and hat. That’s not the right kind of fun, even for college kids, and it’s a 
waste of time. They should be working on their butt chugging instead, 
or experiencing drug culture, or exploring their sexuality. The time for 
wizardry has passed.
It’s these standards of “useful” and “acceptable” fun activities, as 
they intersect with age and societal structures, that delineate proper 
and improper fun. For my students, using their imagination, or being 
involved in anything labeled “play,” is in tension with their coveted adult 
identity. This same issue is often lobbed at gamers on a broader level; 
that is, the public still largely believes gaming to be an adolescent pas­
time, and those still playing games (or playing “too often”) as adults are 
seen as not adults at all but some form of “man-child” (yes, the gender 
bias regarding who plays games is still alive and well). Gamers who 
decide (or, more accurately, are pressured) to reduce their engagement 
with play, fun, and games in general are doing so in part to avoid criti­
cism of their claim to being adults. The other facets of adulthood may 
be present in their lives: a job or career, a life partner, perhaps the begin­
nings of a family, property ownership, and maybe even a “fur baby” or 
two, but the continued presence of games becomes unwelcome. It erodes 
claims to adult identity and threatens to waste time with every button 
pressed. Wasting time on “childish” activities is a conflict that requires a 
resolution, and many other non-fun-having adults are eager to provide 
the solution: “Stop playing. It’s a waste of time.”
The scorn for leisure has its own impact on players who remain semi-
committed to playing games. The expectations for their out-of-game lives 
are omnipresent (the reality of everyday life), and consequently many 
players demand that games do not “suck away” more than the necessary 
time investment. Juggling so much in their everyday lives, and dealing 
with the stigma of wasted time, means that any fun that adult players are 
going to have must be manageable and in smaller doses, to avoid further 
tension with their personal networks or the general public. The stigma 
must be managed or concealed well enough to avoid increased criticism, 
which may well lead to an end to gaming for certain players.
An overabundance of games is another modern dilemma. There are 
too many blinking screens competing for our attention, each one is likely 
to get less of our time, and we’re demanding that they take less of our 
lives. We are living in intensely stimulating times, with more games as 
options for our leisure time. Games today have to offer a reliable “good 
time,” to be consumed in a short window. Gaming time has to com­
pete with every other entertainment pull in a digital society, including 
streaming media, smartphone apps, social networks, and cat videos. This 

Stigma and Gamer Communities 
75
means that there are significant pushes to package the “fun experience” 
into bite-size chunks.
We’re no longer in the age when the average player is 15–25 and 
is in high school or college and has no job. We’re in the age when 
the average gamer is in their thirties. This is why games these days 
are shooting for easy exit points and the ability to feel like you’ve 
accomplished something in every 30–45 minutes of playing—
because if it takes an hour or two to accomplish something in a 
game, and you’ve only got 45 minutes of free time after you’ve got­
ten off work, brought the kids home, had dinner, spent an evening 
with the family, and finally put the children to bed before you need 
to get up for work again the next day . . . guess what? You aren’t 
going to be playing that game.23
There’s a bit of irony in framing gaming as wasting time while still 
attempting to define and plan for a “wasted time budget” within adult 
modern life, but that is the goal for many games today. The “fun” has 
to be consumable in short order, allowing players to feel as though they 
have accomplished something of merit without taking too much time 
to play. At the other extreme, some games (particularly in South Korea, 
China, and Japan) have set limits on playing time, with certain games 
ending progress after so much play. For example, “fatigue” systems exist 
in a handful of games to discourage players from “playing too much.”24 
Essentially, after so much time spent, say, killing monsters to level up, 
you will experience diminished returns and rewards for your work done 
in the game. This is built into the structure of the game, in hopes of con­
vincing you to quit playing and go do something else; it doesn’t neces­
sarily stop you from playing another game, though. These systems were 
created in part to stop the rash of gaming deaths and health-related 
issues caused by extreme play, but they function more as demotivators 
to reduce time that players spend on gaming.
A less direct method is often found in games, one in which you can 
only make so much progress in relation to a duration of time, such as 
only gaining 10 points in 24 hours, or 70 points over the course of a 
week. These systems serve the function of dissuading players from play­
ing too much, while also preserving game content by stopping very dedi­
cated players from completing all of the content in the course of a week, 
or even less. These time barriers reflect the limited resources of some 
companies; if players burn through all of the content, then there will be 
nothing left to keep them playing; time barriers also make people play 

76  Game Worlds Get Real
less over longer periods of time. The goal is to reel players into a man­
ageable long-term relationship with games, allowing players to avoid 
the stigma of wasting too much time, while also remaining engaged with 
the content of the game for a long duration, which is often monetized in 
some fashion, or players may also pay additional fees to skip time-sinks 
and barriers.
This stigma is also found in the styles of play within the game itself, 
along with the preferred outcome of efficiently consuming content. Being 
able to market a game for prepackaged, short-term “fun” means that 
“everyone” can be a gamer (even with your ridiculously busy modern 
life). It also speaks to an appealing egalitarian ethic. With time traps and 
barriers, no single player will gain more ground over a specified duration 
than any other player just because one of them might have “tons of time 
to burn.” But similar to how false choice reduces (true) player autonomy, 
controlling time and designing for “efficient fun” is an affront to human 
dignity. It’s a form of structural “babysitting” that embodies the belief 
that gamers cannot be responsible with their time, and it shows how the 
leisure activity is perceived as immature.
To return to the American football metaphor from earlier, this is akin 
to limiting a football fan to watching only the highlight reel of one game 
a week, just so that this fan didn’t go overboard and waste an entire day 
eating up football news, games, and analyses. Just watching the high­
lights ensures a nice “drip” of fun for the fan, but not enough to disrupt 
“responsible” adult life. While executed with some good intentions (the 
prolonging of the relationship with a game to drain money from the 
players is not one of them), these systems rob players of their dignity 
and autonomy to choose when and how much to play. It is a tech-driven 
solution to a far more complicated issue. It’s reductionist and geared 
toward efficiency. We let machinery (game structures) attempt to con­
trol people.
The Stigma of Chaotic Fun: The Affliction of Play without 
Purpose
Although the stigma of wasted time underscores all the negatively attrib­
uted aspects of modern gameplay, perhaps most telling is that all of the 
effort and energy expended (from game design decisions to the social 
spheres reinforcing rationalized play) avoids what I call moments of 
“chaotic fun.” This may well be an unintentional (irrational) outcome of 
attempts to gain full control over the experience of fun. That is, players 
and game designers don’t intend to avoid chaotic fun; but fun that is a 

Stigma and Gamer Communities 
77
product of efficiency, predictability, measurability, and so on, is the fun 
that is designed for. It is the promise of the theme park.
We go to the theme park because we are convinced that fun lies some­
where inside, and that’s why the entire set of structures, people, and 
events are housed within: to produce fun. We can argue that by offering 
a variety of rides, characters, and options, inevitably there will be some­
thing for everyone to enjoy in the theme park. The process of creating 
fun is purposeful, just as it is in game design, and just as it is within the 
rationalized structures and communities of these game worlds. If you 
play as instructed, fun is supposedly the by-product of participating in 
that system. We build the roller coaster believing that when people ride 
it, they will have fun. That is our intention. Fun by design.
Again, I must stress that this is not entirely off the mark. I have stated 
many times that players do indeed experience a sort of fun “buzz” from 
playing all different forms of games, whether it’s from conquering intense 
obstacles, playing with identity expressions, or allowing themselves to 
become seduced by a game world and its story. However, chaotic fun 
exists at the intersection of the unstructured and the unintended, and in 
many ways, it is the antithesis of the rationalized structures of gaming. 
Chaotic fun is play in its purer form. It is pleasure from the release of 
the structures and controls of everyday life—and, in this case, from the 
structures of the game world itself. Chaotic fun is joy without design, 
without information, and without goals. It makes no progress, measures 
no outcomes, and is unpredictable and uncontrolled.
It is also the enemy of the rational structure and culture of gaming. 
To believe in chaotic fun is to rely less upon the ideology that games 
can produce fun via the theme-park or assembly-line philosophy. If fun 
is not produced but is arbitrary and uncontrollable, then building sys­
tems of fun holds less value, and so too does defending the rational­
ized gamer community and its mantra of carefully controlled gaming 
experiences. Gaming as a culture has vied for “seriousness” for many 
years, attempting to reframe itself as “more than child’s play” and rely­
ing on casting itself as “serious business” (this can be captured almost 
in its entirety by examining the culture of e-sports, but such a task is 
beyond my goals here). Cultural spaces, academic disciplines, and most 
businesses tend to lean toward “seriousness” to garner cultural respect­
ability. For example, Western psychology has become increasingly more 
rationalized, biological, and quantitative, partly in hopes of being seen 
as a “real science” by the “hard sciences.” The focus has shifted from 
“Gaming is fun” to “Gaming helps people learn” and “Gaming makes 
people social” and “Gaming is about productivity” and “Gaming helps 

78  Game Worlds Get Real
people do chores” and “Gaming will motivate you to get super better,” 
and so on.25 Gaming can’t just be about something as simple as fun, and 
academics, researchers, and opportunistic business types are grasping 
for something more serious and more complex to explain it.
This infectious ideology has convinced many gamers that the purpose 
of playing lies in the game structure and the social mandates of the game 
world, and not in the arbitrariness of chaotic fun. Players labor tirelessly 
in games to rationalized ends, and this has also created a sourness for the 
concept of fun itself. In other words, “playing for fun” has become a less 
than ideal reason for gaming. In some cases, playing for fun is almost 
offensive to those laboring for gaming to be taken more seriously, or for 
those working very hard in the game worlds themselves.
I don’t play for fun. Kids play games for fun. Gaming is real work, 
with goals, research, and very different levels of skill among the 
populace. People who play for fun are usually casuals who have 
no real hope of ever meeting even the watered-down thresholds for 
player skill. Games are about more than fun. And it’s infuriating 
to see companies catering to the lowest denominator, making the 
game easy to play or taking the effort out of it. People who play for 
fun kind of piss me off.26
In chapter 2, I addressed different motivations for play, noting that the 
productivity dimension was the socially insulated one (that is, being pro­
ductive in the game will allow players to avoid being stigmatized). One 
reason for this is that chaotic fun is seen as unproductive and wasteful. 
Having fun is vilified as refuting the gains that gaming culture has made 
in becoming part of (or adjacent to) the dominant culture and in making 
gaming at least mildly more respectable as a pastime; we are going to see 
more gains in this direction in the near future, as e-sports and competi­
tive gaming are poised to continue to grow. The issue with this approach 
to play is that it repudiates the promise of refuge from the structures 
of everyday life. We spend our solid-world lives laboring intensely in a 
game we did not design, following rules we may or may not believe in, 
and all for the promise of outcomes we may not truly desire. Games, 
play, and fun should be without these pressures, or with different or 
unique rules, or no rules at all. They are purposeless (in the pragmatic 
sense) yet meaningful and immersive.
It’s funny, but when I think about all the years I’ve spent gaming, 
a lot of the stand-out moments are just chaos. Like carefully lay­
ing out a strategy for a battle, and then something crazy happens, 

Stigma and Gamer Communities 
79
and everyone dies. Or some random events in online games where 
a couple players start something weird, like I remember this glitch 
where our avatar bodies got locked up, and we looked messed 
up (laughs). Everyone was doing it on purpose and just running 
around laughing and talking and being fools. It’s that kind of stuff 
that I look back at and think I had fun.27
Players and designers cannot plan for chaotic fun. By its nature it is 
unstructured and unanticipated, and the machinery of game worlds can­
not be built for it specifically, though it can allow for it to take shape. The 
issue then lies with the social communities, as do many of the aforemen­
tioned stigmas, meaning that the ideology of the rationalized structure 
creates the boundaries for socially acceptable playing styles. The new 
standards of framing games as “serious stuff” and the hyper-rationalized 
structures within them have cast many players’ experiences as non-ideal 
or unwelcome, including those who enjoy having less than full informa­
tion about the game, those who enjoy unanticipated events, those who 
exercise their choices for less than quantitatively superior outcomes, 
those who enjoy wasting time, and those who revel in chaotic fun.

(Doodles invented by Necronomiconopoly [Marina Gutierrez-Harsh])

I used to be against [purchased content] for many years, but then 
I eventually realized that the most fun part of most of the games 
these days is the dressing up and showing off part. It’s not the bat­
tles or the epic story or an open world, all of that is pretty boring. 
Buying stuff is fun, and I’m fine with buying stuff in the game. As 
long as it’s fun, I say we need more stuff to buy.1
C
onsumption of goods and services in the solid world has long under­
gone criticism. In the social sciences, writers and teachers tend to 
criticize how consumption flattens the experience and purpose of our 
lives, making it one-dimensional and devoid of any real meaning.2 Many 
others have pointed out that consumption does not lead to any pro­
longed sense of happiness or fulfillment, noting that we get more from 
our lives when we spend our time and energy with family and friends, 
pursuing our passions rather than competing in the social treadmill of 
consumer goods consumption.3 And still others would note that con­
sumption practices are incredibly harmful to our (shared) solid world, 
meaning there should be some hesitance in pursuing activities that may 
well contribute to snuffing out future generations.4
Technology has become the new currency of these cultural forces, 
as sizable portions of the population seek to upgrade phones, comput­
ers, and various other “life-hacking” tech items on an annual basis (if 
not more often). Perhaps, then, it is not surprising that within game 
worlds, the buying and selling of goods has been an institution for dec­
ades. More recently, there has been a significant turn from the in-game 
CHAPTER 5
Digital Consumption

82  Game Worlds Get Real
economic forces of game worlds (buying, trading, and so forth within 
the game, using the in-game currency) to the exchange of goods and ser­
vices between worlds (primarily using solid-world currency to purchase 
in-game goods and services).
This sort of “gray economy” has been around since the early days 
of online game worlds,5 but there are a number of notable differences 
between the early virtual marketplace and the current state of digital 
consumption. In the early days, you could participate in “real-money 
trading,” which usually denotes the exchange of solid-world and game-
world currencies and goods in one direction or the other (this is dis­
cussed in more detail in chapter 6), but if you did so, you were at odds 
with the game companies, and you might draw ire from the game com­
munity at large. It was truer to the concept of a “gray market” than it 
is today.
There was also no participation from the game companies themselves. 
Buying and selling in-game goods was against the philosophy of play—
and to some degree, against the business model of early subscription-
based games. Game companies wanted you to stick around and pay fees 
over a long period of time, so anything that might reduce that commit­
ment was to be abolished.6 This is no longer the state of the gaming 
business. In fact, game companies themselves are almost entirely in on 
the model of selling additional goods and services to players. An obvious 
example is how very few games today are released and shipped in “com­
plete” form, opening the door to a new structure of post-purchase con­
sumables, including downloadable content (DLC), season passes, and 
miscellaneous goods and services. Gamers buy partly finished or mostly 
finished products and then pay additional fees to get something closer 
to a complete product, though some games will keep the door open for 
more fee-tagged content to be released as long as it is feasible.
Shifts within the business model of the gaming industry have paved 
the way for digital consumption to become commonplace and even 
heavily encouraged. Digital consumption is much like its solid-world 
counterpart, but perhaps with even less emphasis on the functionality of 
items, goods, and services. In other words, consumer culture is alive and 
well within game worlds and is often leveraged as somehow increasing 
the “fun” factor of the game (just as many solid-world ads attempt to 
frame shopping as a form of fun or a road to happiness). Many of the 
rationales for digital consumption are similar to those in the solid world, 
in that players want access to certain goods, players are loyal to a game 
company (sometimes bordering on zealotry), or players consume as a 

Digital Consumption 
83
posture of status to reinforce their gamer identity, as well as their rela­
tive social class.
Digital Hedonism
Gameplay itself, even in its infancy, has been closely related to consump­
tion practices as a form of digital hedonism. In a certain sense, aspects 
of many games train gamers to consume, collect, or hoard digital goods. 
The interfaces of classic games like Illusion of Gaia7 place shiny baubles 
you collect during the game on a literal pedestal. Of course, these bau­
bles are purposeful, in that they will help you complete a quest or unlock 
some secret, but collecting them is a compulsive aspect of playing the 
game. For a more glaring example, the parallels between The Sims8 and 
solid-world consumer culture are too easy to detail, given that the entire 
game is about consumption, dream houses, shopping, and combating the 
fact that your sim will never be happy. The game won’t let your sim be 
happy. It’s a reflection of mass consumption culture that should be more 
startling for many gamers than it is. At this juncture, it is important to 
note that there is no “end goal” in mind for consumerism, as it is a per­
petual cycle of desiring goods, obtaining them, and then moving to the 
next desire. There is also no end goal to an “infinite game” (i.e., a game 
meant to be played as long as possible, sometimes for multiple years), 
aside from continued participation. Game worlds are “dreams”9 that do 
not end, with goods and services that do not need to be physically made; 
instead, creating a new bauble out of ones and zeros is much less costly 
in terms of time and resources.
Digital consumption is often used to prop up the longevity of infinite 
games. Without falling into a robust discussion of progression mechan­
ics within game worlds,10 collecting stuff is vital to playing most games, 
whether it’s an epic sword in WoW or a unique voice pack in Over­
watch. However, as most discussions about the purpose of consumption 
go, actually obtaining (possibly through buying, receiving, or winning) 
an item is generally less important than the stage of desiring the item. 
The dream of “If only I had that, then . . .” propels the consumption cycle 
of games as much as it does in the reality of everyday life.11 This can be 
compounded in game worlds, where materials for new goods are, in a 
way, conjured from thin air. This means that there can always be more 
stuff to desire and collect, prolonging the cycle of attainment. Consump­
tion has become central to gaming, regardless of goods being of lesser 
(practical or functional) value and easily replaceable. The collection and 

84  Game Worlds Get Real
purchase of nearly useless goods is a hallmark of playing games in the 
modern era.
From this standpoint, we can see how gaming has been training 
consumers for decades, whether it be on the side of just recognizing 
that video games themselves are consumer products, or that gameplay 
is often connected to consumption practices like collecting, shopping, 
and displaying goods. For example, players note that in many early-
generation (fourth through sixth) RPGs, there was considerable excite­
ment involved in reaching the next landmark or town. This was partly 
because the adventure would continue, but also because the town likely 
housed multiple shops (e.g., armor and weapons stores, magic guilds, 
potables), which would offer the player opportunities to buy goods . . . 
goods they were anticipating, were saving for, and saw as part and par­
cel of the “fun” in these games. But now the focus has turned to digital 
goods located outside the game structure, which must be purchased with 
solid-world currency to be made available in the game.
Why do people prefer buying stuff through [downloadable content 
or a cash-shop] rather than in-game items or money? Is it more fun 
if you have to spend real money on outfits instead of getting them 
through some in-game means? Are cash-shops more “fun” than 
finding nice looking clothes in-game? Playing dress-up is great, but 
why, oh why, do you want to throw real money out for that? If I’m 
not mistaken most people could have bought another game with 
the money they spend on outfits and mounts and whatever in this 
game . . . or maybe they could have done something useful with 
their cash. I know, to each their own, but every time I see this stuff 
and the people so fired-up to jump on board, I cringe knowing that 
people have that much money to waste and don’t go and donate it 
or something.12
It is not my purpose here to consider whether consumption practices 
within a game are problematic. I have noted that they likely contribute 
to training players to be consumers, but this is not the focus of this chap­
ter. Instead, as mentioned above, the question of concern is why gamers 
would defend the practice of removing (or withholding) items from the 
game itself, only to place a “paywall” in front of them. Why would play­
ers feel it is appropriate to pay for parts of a game they already own and 
are currently playing? Why might they prefer additional (solid-world 
money) fees as opposed to the items just being placed, patched, or found 
in the game content without the fee? Like consumers in the solid world, 

Digital Consumption 
85
gamers often defend these additional purchases as part of an effective 
way to access content (that is, it’s easier and quicker to buy something 
than to sink game time into it), as about loyalty to a company or game 
series (buying extra stuff will “help” the brand), or, most notably, as 
marking their own status and identity as gamers.
Access: Practical Justifications for Consumption
On the more practical side of the consumption cycle is the justification 
that players offer that consumption of digital goods is about access to 
the content. In virtual game worlds, some game content may be “locked” 
behind a set of obstacles. This is by design, and generally speaking, the 
content is ideally accessible to all players. For example, let’s say there 
is a Laser Sword available in a particular online game. To obtain the 
sword in this game, your character would have to defeat a set of bosses 
(in order) and overcome some prohibitively difficult encounters, requir­
ing a great deal of skill, patience, and several other players willing to 
work toward the same end (that is, they offer their labor to you, and you 
offer yours to them, in hopes that you all gain cool stuff from the efforts 
involved). The goods leashed to this type of content have great market 
value if they can be sold or traded, because of their “gated” status (i.e., 
there are barriers to getting them, and these barriers generally aren’t 
simple to overcome). This means that the player community assigns a 
certain value to this Laser Sword that is supposedly reflective of the 
effort involved in obtaining it, and that sometimes reflects its usefulness 
(maybe the sword is rather powerful and allows your character to do 
significantly more damage when you fight with it).
Strangely enough, in the modern gaming era, whether the item is func­
tional or “good” in any way is unimportant, more often than not. Let’s use 
a similar example. Perhaps there’s a purple dragon in the game that your 
social group can kill, and it drops an item used to make a chair (yes, a 
chair). The chair is arguably useless. You can sit on it, but it does not help 
you fight other dragons. It’s a chair. Yet, because of its rarity (given that 
only so many groups can kill the purple dragon to get the item to make 
the chair), you and your social group are among the few players who have 
access to this portion of the market. You are rich in chairs, and being able to 
kill the purple dragon gives you an economic advantage in this game world. 
The majority of the player base will likely never have access to this chair by 
the same means (that is, actually defeating the purple dragon themselves), 
so if they want the completely nonfunctional and maybe even super-ugly 
chair, they will have to resort to buying it from the player market.

86  Game Worlds Get Real
But there is another way to gain the chair through market forces. Now 
let’s pretend you and your social group are not as skilled or as dedi­
cated to the game, and beating the purple dragon is out of your reach. 
Maybe you and your friends have conflicting schedules, or maybe you 
have a couple of members on the team who are just not playing at a high 
enough level, or maybe they like to stand in fire too often. It’s unlikely 
that you will ever beat the purple dragon with your group. For this, 
the player community has developed a workaround. You may have the 
option to pay players (who can kill the purple dragon) to defeat it for 
you, and you will go along with them only to reap the reward of that 
sweet, sweet chair. This means a group of players will drag you along 
to the fight and consider you to be “dead weight”; in fact, many groups 
may ask that you purposely kill your character when the fight begins, to 
avoid screwing things up for them. This is usually called “mercing” (like 
mercenaries) and is a polarizing topic within game communities.
Mercs are the lowest of the low. They’ve turned the game’s con­
tent into a fucking marketplace. [Low-skilled] players are now just 
shelling out money to have their corpses dragged through fights 
and to have the rewards literally handed over to them for putting 
ZERO effort into learning how to play the game or how to do the 
fight. I’m just as upset with the mercs as I am at the morons that 
pay them. This is where we are now, too fucking lazy to play a 
game we paid for, and other players more than happy to make a 
buck off every lazy fool out there.13
Yet mercing is more or less a rationalized extension of a digital consump­
tion culture. When everything in the game becomes (or can be framed 
as) a commodity, a good, or something to be purchased and enjoyed 
momentarily before moving on to another purchase, then even the expe­
riences of play can be bought and sold. The players who ardently defend 
or lambast mercing are, in effect, debating the right to reduce all experi­
ences within a game to a price—an amount of gold, or the swipe of a 
credit card. Buyers of mercenary services are often attempting to ration­
alize the “waste of time” that would be involved in trying to defeat the 
dragons themselves, or they point to not having a strong enough social 
network to overcome the trial, or they may even admit to not having the 
skill necessary to beat the dragons. Solving this issue with money deval­
ues the achievement of clearing game content, but through the player 
market, it opens access to the rewards leashed to content. Not everyone 
can kill the purple dragon for the chair, but ideally anyone can pay for 

Digital Consumption 
87
the purple dragon to be killed (buying the kill, or the chair, or some com­
bination thereof). This philosophy has been further anchored in certain 
kinds of games, where it has been translated into the business model of 
the game itself: so-called pay-to-win”14 games. It also should remind us 
of the earlier discussion of efficiency, and how players, as odd as it may 
seem, are searching for ways to play less by paying more.
The “access to content” justification extends to digital consumption 
practices that involve solid-world money as well, such as download­
able content (DLC) and cash shops. Many games offer bonuses of sorts 
through add-on content, and this is a common (and somewhat lucrative) 
practice for the current era of games. For example, on the PlayStation 
Network (PSN),15 I can log in and purchase a variety of things for Dis­
gaea 5 (a game I happen to own, though the amount of DLC content 
available makes me wonder how much of the game I actually do own). 
There is around $45 of “additional content” for purchase on the PSN for 
this particular game—and the game already cost $60 to purchase new 
when it was released. Downloadable content for modern games may be 
purely aesthetic (avatars, outfits, wallpapers); some of it is new things to 
do in the game (extra levels, dungeons, bosses), and some of it is more 
akin to purchased assistance (level-ups, powerful items, stat upgrades).
One supposed reason that game companies deploy DLC is to curb 
the used-game market. The workers and company who make a game do 
not benefit from their game being resold by game stores, players, and so 
forth, and game sellers like GameStop have for many years made almost 
their entire profit margin on used-game sales.16 Released intermittently 
after a game is made available, downloadable content is supposedly a 
deterrent to gamers completing the game quickly and moving it into 
resale. As someone playing a game, you may feel that you want to expe­
rience everything the game has to offer, but that line itself has become 
blurry under the banner of DLC. You could complete everything the 
game has to offer when it arrives (in physical or digital form) after its 
release. But new content for that game could be on the horizon, and you 
may be forced to wait around, according to the DLC marketing plan of 
the game company, in order to see the rest of the content (and you’ll be 
shelling out a good chunk of extra cash to do just that). Some DLC is 
perfectly rational, even if frustrating. Due to tight shipment schedules 
or missed deadlines, some games may have “day one” patches or con­
tent releases, whereby content meant to ship with the game is updated 
digitally (through an online network), and often this is at no additional 
cost. It’s a decent workaround for problems during development and 
distribution.

88  Game Worlds Get Real
Most DLC remains behind a paywall, and whether the plan to gut 
the used-game market is the reason for producing this content, or 
whether it’s more about bleeding gamers’ wallets, this is where play­
ers being trained as digital consumers merges with disallowing access 
to content without additional payment. Decisions to lock certain con­
tent behind price tags can exclude large portions of the player base. 
Often players who are willing to purchase these goods deploy the “you 
don’t have to buy it” (or “freedom of choice”) defense, but when the 
content is only available through purchase, that argument doesn’t stand 
so solidly.
I’m so sick of people complaining about [DLC]. If you don’t like it, 
don’t buy it. Other people want it. Other people like these things. 
It’s not ruining your game experience just because that guy over 
there bought a robe for 15 bucks. Just shut the fuck up already. 
This is how companies make money. You bought the game, just 
play it and let other people play it their way. No one, NO ONE, is 
forcing you to buy the robe.17
If there is no other avenue to obtaining the content, you could deprive 
yourself of it, but calling that “freedom of choice” is inaccurate at best. 
It’s not a choice. It’s closer to an ultimatum: “Buy it, or you lose out on 
the content.” This is where the “access” justification develops for many 
gamers. Players neutralize the business model and possibly exploitive 
game company practices by just simplifying the equation to “If I want 
this part of the game, I have to pay extra.” Any further analysis of the 
situation is deemed unnecessary. If they want it, they pay, and if they 
don’t want it, they don’t pay. It maintains the illusion of their freedom to 
choose, allowing them not to feel conflicted when purchasing fee-tagged 
content. They want it, or they don’t. You pay, or you don’t. This is just 
the way things are with modern games.
Another relatable example, from Final Fantasy XIV (FFXIV), is the 
“Eternal Bond Ceremony” (basically, having your character marry 
another character in the game). The “standard service” is available for 
free, but there are multiple “upgraded” services (costs ranging from $20 
to $40, split between partners—the high end is the “platinum pack­
age”).18 This means that if you want to get married in the game “in 
style” (more outfits available for the wedding, more music options, gifts 
for your guests, and so on), then you will have to pull out the credit card. 
These pieces of content are locked behind a paywall. You are excluded if 
you don’t pay to access them.

Digital Consumption 
89
There is a small workaround to this particular example that some 
players have used. The purchase of the upgraded packages grants you 
an in-game item that can be traded to other characters, so a secondary 
market has developed whereby players sell the item for in-game currency 
to other players who perhaps cannot afford spending the real money; 
but even so, those selling the items have bought them with real money. 
Does getting married actually give you anything of value for your $40? 
It’s subjective and debatable, but you get to enjoy a short ceremony with 
your in-game friends, and you are given a few digital items (wedding 
outfits, some fireworks, and a special mount19 for two). Without paying 
for the upgrades, this content is not accessible, despite the fact that you 
have already purchased the game itself and, in this case, are paying a 
monthly fee to continue to play the game.
There was a flood of people getting married when it got announced. 
All the time slots were like at some ungodly hour for most [of] 
my friends, and I was online to attend so many those first couple 
months. People were excited, and it was awesome to share some­
thing with all your friends like that. I actually know a couple who 
got married in real life after marrying in the game, wait, I guess I 
did that too, lol. It was very fun though, and I’m glad we finally 
got the option after the community had been begging for it for so 
long.20
Many players have indeed gotten married in FFXIV (over 110,000 at the 
time of writing this), so this is no small “extra fee for content” market, 
though it is difficult to determine how many couples paid and how much 
they paid, particularly given the gray market workaround I mentioned 
earlier. But players felt that the content, even with the paywall involved, 
was exciting enough to purchase. It is important to recognize, however, 
that pay-to-access content does disproportionately bar players without 
income to burn from being able to play portions of the game (I will 
address this in more detail in the section below about social class and 
status), and so discussions of fairness and equal access are bound to take 
place regarding pay-to-access content, given that it ties the experiences 
of the game world to the economic reality of a player’s solid world.
Players who can afford the various additional price tags that many 
modern games have attached to content may well purchase said content 
if only to be able to access the “full experience” of the game. This means 
that some players have internalized the notion that modern games are, 
in effect, destined to be only part of an experience by default, with fees 

90  Game Worlds Get Real
connected to additional content. They may rationalize spending more 
money in order to “complete” the game experience. These players are 
concerned more about the practical and experiential elements of this 
fee-tagged content, seeing lack of access as a problem to be solved with 
money, while avoiding the debate about whether content should be with­
held behind paywalls or not.
Loyalty: Ideological Reasons for Consumption
Perhaps most unsurprisingly after years of incubation, consumption of 
games, associated products, and digital goods within said games has 
been framed by players as being “loyal and supportive” of those game 
titles and the companies that make them. In other words, brand loyalty 
to a title or a series signifies “being a gamer.” Gamers are consumers, 
and being loyal promises more products to consume, thus allowing some 
players to justify additional expenses as being about purchasing a future 
for that brand. If they spend now, even on content and items they may 
not necessarily want, they may get what they really want somewhere 
down the road.
For example, take the emergence of several different versions of “col­
lector’s editions” of games over the last decade. Many games now launch 
in several different forms, including standard (typically a physical copy 
of the game with no extras or bonuses), digital (a digital download of 
the game), first-day (this can be digital or physical, but it is somehow 
unique in being the “first printing” of the game, maybe because there 
is some limited-time bonus attached to it), collector’s edition (bundled 
with extras, usually basic stuff like art books and soundtracks), and even 
deluxe/legendary/ultimate editions (some trumped-up brand to note 
that it is the priciest version, and including one or two items more than 
the collector’s edition, and some of those items might simply be digi­
tal goods). In addition to this, there may be “exclusive” game bonuses 
attached to different stores or online retailers, meaning that if a player 
wanted every single game bonus, item, or piece of content, several copies 
of the game might have to be purchased (and this is before all the DLC 
comes into the picture).
Players purchase these products to obtain the goodies within them (a 
rare item, or a figure of a character, or maybe just a digital symbol to 
identify to the broader community that they spent extra money, in the 
same way that someone might wear name-brand shoes that were a lim­
ited release), but they also do it to show loyalty to (or even zealotry over) 
a company, brand, or series. My discussion here is not meant to debate 

Digital Consumption 
91
the business decisions or profiteering of game companies but instead to 
acknowledge that consumption, in its various forms, has become central 
to gamers’ identities. In fact, the buying of goods may be just as impor­
tant as playing the game itself.
I bought them all, every [digital bonus] there is, every extra piece 
of content, and that includes several physical items like plush toys, 
posters, shirts, and figures. And I’ll continue to do so with new stuff 
if they keep releasing things. I’m kind of balls deep, but I really do 
love the game, and I want the game to stay alive and get new stuff 
as often as possible. If you don’t support them, the game could die, 
or we could get less and less content. You never know what kind of 
budget limits they are working under, so I like supporting them.21
Players sometimes believe that supporting the game through additional 
purchases, bonus editions, or extra fees will somehow convert into bet­
ter game content in the future, or specific games and other projects, or 
even the longevity of the current game they are playing (despite no clear 
connection between the money they spend on bonuses and how the com­
pany distributes those funds to current or future projects). I spoke to this 
element of consumerism earlier, in that obtaining the immediate item is 
not the entire goal for the consumer, or even an important step in the 
process of consumption. Players desire to continue to desire. They want 
to continue to want. Satisfaction must be avoided in a consumer culture, 
whether that is physical and functional attainment or mental and emo­
tional attainment. There must always be something to want, to dream 
of, to desire to purchase . . . an endless cycle of shopping and dreaming 
of shopping.
The fascinating reality of digital goods is that, arguably, they can be 
produced infinitely. There are few limitations as to what items can be 
conjured into a game world—and usually those limitations are about 
aesthetics and whether certain items “fit” in the game world, though 
that doesn’t always stop them from coming, like the Pizza Hut–inspired 
sword and shield in Phantasy Star Portable 2.22 While there isn’t artistic 
purity by any means, it does mean that outright branding of the type 
we see painting our solid-world streets, neighborhoods, and downtown 
areas is far less prominent in games than it could be . . . well, almost.23
This type of branding or in-game advertising may serve some alliance 
between corporate superpowers, but what might serve game companies 
better would be for players to want more of their products. You could 
do a promo with a famous soft drink brand and set up some bonuses 

92  Game Worlds Get Real
for playing the latest and greatest first-person shooter game and buy­
ing soda, but you could instead push players to want digital products 
that only you (the game company) can provide. Charge them more to 
get content for the game they are already playing (such as some outfits 
and doodads that can be conjured up with little effort), and promise 
them that more cool games or content for the current game could hap­
pen in the near future if everything goes well with sales (and DLC fees). 
Some players believe in such a promise and will continue to spend out 
of loyalty.
Given that nearly anything can be introduced into the game world, 
players could, with few limitations, desire any kind of digital good. 
And when those appetites are sated, they can want something more. 
Even when a long-coveted item is made available, and even after players 
obtain said item for themselves, they may recast their desires and decide 
that the item is missing something, just to keep the dream of shopping 
alive.
I have waited years for them to release this outfit in the cash-shop 
and it’s finally mine! I love the style and the boots go perfectly with 
my healer jobs. Thank you so much [company name] for mak­
ing this available for us! I’m glad to know they are listening to 
the things we want. The only thing I wish is that the outfit could 
be dyed.24
This desire for goods has also been leveraged by the game companies to 
reinforce customer loyalty in the form of “veteran” rewards. Simply put, 
instead of offering discounts or tangible bonuses for supporting a game 
for a certain amount of time (perhaps through an ongoing subscription, 
or through spending money on DLC goods), the game company can dole 
out digital rewards of all types, increasing the symbolic value of digital 
goods, even if their functional value is low (or nonexistent). Why waste 
all the labor, shipping, and physical materials when they can send your 
avatar a “Flaming Hat of Consumer Pride,” so that you can wear it in-
game to show off just how much money and dedication you have given 
to the game? You should be proud to wear your hat. You sure earned it.
It’s even more intriguing that many of these items are functionally use­
less, leaving their only value in their symbolic meaning. In the past (and 
still some today, though there is a mixture now) all in-game items could 
be judged almost entirely on their usefulness to the player. “I need this 
Fire Gem because it will help me survive certain fire-based attacks in the 
game” was sound reasoning for saving up to buy the gem from the shop. 
In the current gaming era, months of labor cobbling together in-game 

Digital Consumption 
93
money and expending energy to complete dozens of obstacles may be 
completely exhausted on items that have zero functional purpose, or 
have a very short shelf life. For example, the new “Artifact Weapons” 
in WoW will be useful for this phase of the game’s life (until the next 
obligatory expansion pack), but after that time they will serve no other 
function except as badges of prestige. Basically, they will be no more 
than something to show other players that you were a part of the WoW 
Legion storyline, and to highlight your (slightly) more veteran status25 
(because Legion is new at this moment, it’s hard to think of WoW’s cur­
rent content as “veteran” until much later in the game’s life cycle, which 
is already at more than 12 years and will likely go on for as long as the 
game is profitable). All the effort put into the weapon will simply be for 
vanity.
Loyalty, as an ideological formation for consumption, can be seen 
through how gamers justify their longevity and commitment to a game 
or a company. They want to believe that their consumption practices are 
more than just satisfying their desires for goods and services, and they 
elevate the practice as a gesture of fealty to a brand. This also allows the 
consumption process to become largely involuntary, because it is com­
pulsory. They buy because they are loyal, and the purchases may lead to 
greater goods in the future. Their consumption isn’t practical as much 
as it is ideological. Some may not even prefer or desire the goods and 
services at hand, but they buy them anyway, as it is a part of what sup­
portive players who “truly care” about a game or company would do.
This also means that regardless of the audacity of charging players 
$24 for a virtual horse,26 those who are loyal will buy the horse because 
they are loyal. They believe that the company is good, or that there is 
good reason for the price tag—the game staff might be underfunded, and 
they need every virtual-horse dollar they can get. The players largely do 
this without any evidence that this is the case. Whether it is true or not 
that the virtual-horse money flows back into the game they are support­
ing, or into future projects that the players who bought the horse want, 
is disputable. But there’s also no proof to the contrary (from the loyal 
gamers’ perspective), meaning the money could be destined for things 
the players want. Thus, buying the virtual horse can be about loyalty and 
the belief that good things come to those who buy.
Status: Symbolic Postures for Consumption
Unsurprisingly, in a consumption culture the act of consuming goods 
is often linked to social status (and even self-worth and identity). This 
is par for the course in virtual game worlds; that is, the attainment of 

94  Game Worlds Get Real
certain goods can be a symbol of achievement. Those of us in digital 
societies now occupy a moment in time that some call the “tyranny of 
the social.”27 Many of us have been convinced, to varying degrees, that 
all is better when it is shared. Thus, sharing our every minor milestone, 
even those as banal as “I killed this virtual monster,” has become a stand­
ard of nearly every game arriving on the market today. The accomplish­
ment is largely only valued by players when it can be shared. In other 
words, the achievement’s meaning is nearly absent in isolation.
Few players force themselves beyond a certain level of play solely to 
experience an “epic win” (i.e., the buzz of clearing a high-tier obstacle). 
The larger payoff comes from the denouement, or the period after the 
climax, where players can share stories of their glorious battles through 
streamed media, social network posts, or simply “peacocking” their 
character through populated areas in the game. While not as high in 
terms of impact as the clearing of the obstacle itself, the sharing of the 
accomplishment can be prolonged, carrying waves of residual buzz over 
a longer period of time and measuring it in relation to other players in 
the community.
The in-game items themselves (obtained from such epic battles, or 
casually purchased via a credit card) are generally only useful for their 
symbolic value. They are needed or desired because they are seen as say­
ing something about the player. “This item means I’m hardcore (read: 
a badass) because I completed the giant, angry dragon fight,” and so 
on. Identities are hardly stable without social recognition and reinforce­
ment,28 meaning that game worlds can offer a steady stream of reaffir­
mation through achievement-oriented play, which is leveraged socially. 
Back in 1991, if you managed somehow to complete Battletoads29 on 
NES (a laudable accomplishment in its own right), there were very few 
avenues available for you to gain recognition for your accomplishment. 
You did something amazing (and amazingly difficult), but the payoff for 
that accomplishment remained only with you and maybe the neighbor­
hood kids. Could you make any reliable deduction that you were indeed 
a “good gamer”? It’s hard to say for certain. “Sharing culture” and social 
media have changed this, but they have also changed intentions within 
game design and the behavior of game communities.
A common occurrence in shared game worlds for players who are 
seeking social recognition outside their immediate friendship network 
is for them to occupy the current most popular hangout in the game 
world. Strikingly similar to “where the cool kids hang out” in earlier 
generations (an area of the schoolyard, the local mall, a particular cor­
ner of the neighborhood), these virtual hubs are where players seeking 

Digital Consumption 
95
reinforcement (direct and indirect) will place their characters. In earlier 
game worlds (EQ, FFXI), players would receive a small message every 
time another player “examined” them, which meant simply that another 
player was looking at your equipment, likely checking out what you 
were wearing and how admirable your digital “stuff” might be. This 
message provided an indication of how much interest the community 
had in your character. To some at the time, it was seen as invasive, as 
our privacy norms in that day were not aligned with sharing every detail 
of ourselves online, even if it was just our avatar, and for a while play­
ers would express annoyance at being examined. However, this began 
to crumble as social media began to run amok and “sharing culture” 
took root. Later games didn’t even include the message itself, assumedly 
because everyone was checking you out, and seeing the text indicator 
every time an avatar did check you out would be obnoxious. But again, 
it was a measure of admiration, of a kind, and many were known to find 
it flattering.
Players use to put up bazaars [in the field] outside [a popular city]. 
They might not even have been selling anything at all. It wasn’t 
about that. They either had on some super rare equipment that 
everyone was going to stare at, or they had a few rare items in 
their bazaar. Not for sale though, they were up for [the maximum 
amount of money], meaning no one could buy them. It was just for 
show. They would stand there just so people would “check” them, 
and they could come back the next day or in the morning after 
[being away] all night, and they had all these “checks.” It was a 
status thing. Made them feel good.30
Seeking social acknowledgment of their “coolness” (in gamer terms), 
players left their characters online for long periods of time just so 
the community could ogle them, and so they could count those ogles. 
Although the counting aspect was stricken from the game structure of 
newer titles, the social behavior of finding a popular player hub to hang 
out and bolster one’s gamer status is still very common (and I will men­
tion it again in chapter 10). While not about the “cool” factor (as in 
recognizing players’ skill as gamers through their digital goods), this 
behavior is also embraced for digital consumption behaviors. In other 
words, players who purchase items through cash shops or special DLC 
deals tend to gravitate to these virtual hubs to, in a sense, gain social 
recognition for their consumption activities. When buying digital items, 
particularly newly released goods, players gather together to give their 

96  Game Worlds Get Real
social approval to other players doing the same. It is important that they 
not feel foolish for spending $24 on a virtual horse, and seeing that doz­
ens of other players have also done it reinforces and supports their con­
sumer behavior. Additionally, the players can gather together, as though 
they were all wearing the same name-brand shoes, and celebrate their 
new purchase, perhaps by jumping up and down, or lining up their vir­
tual horses for photo ops.
Just about anytime they put something in the cash-shop one of the 
in-game hang-outs becomes a show-all, with a few dozen players 
dancing around. I’ve been in a few, I have to admit, but not for 
anything I purchased directly, just some veteran rewards. Still, it 
can be fun to participate. It helps you see the community you are a 
part of and it’s just like a big party of silliness.31
Similar to consumption in the solid world, the buying of goods and ser­
vices is a practice with increased meaning when put on display in social 
interaction. It’s a social status pose, but one that also seeks reinforce­
ment from a community engaged in this relatively new area of consump­
tion. While digital goods and services are clearly on the rise, they remain 
somewhat stigmatized given their complete lack of functionality. With 
solid goods, you may not necessarily need a new smartphone (particu­
larly because you have a perfectly functional one), and you might know 
that buying a new one is not going to gain you anything significant in 
terms of functionality (maybe one or two new features, which might go 
unused). You may secretly acknowledge that buying the phone is really 
just about having the “newest and greatest” thing, while also display­
ing to others that you are participating in consumer culture or have the 
means to participate, as it were. Yet your new phone does in fact still 
serve a functional purpose. You can make calls and text with it, and it 
allows access to social media, dozens of apps, and likely much more. 
However, the virtual horse in the game has nearly zero functional value. 
It is completely interchangeable with all other “mounts” (some are even 
other horses, and available for free), and it adds no new features or gim­
micks. The difference is purely aesthetic—and symbolic, in that you had 
to pay money to obtain it. This draws ire from some in the community 
(rightly so or not), because you effectively wasted money on ones and 
zeros to gain nothing. Your money went into a digital hole.
But here’s the catch. Many of those who buy the horse know full well 
that it is nonfunctional and not worth the cost. Instead, the buying of 
the horse symbolically casts them into a position where they can claim 

Digital Consumption 
97
that throwing money away is no big deal. So you spent $24 on a use­
less virtual horse with zero new functions, one probably spit out by the 
least creative department within the game company that made it, but 
so what? You have the ability to waste that money. Blowing money is, 
if nothing else, a reflection of your social class in the solid world (or at 
least your dedication to consumption and leisure). People who complain 
about too many digital goods being sold these days are just those who 
can’t afford them. Maybe they should focus on other things in life rather 
than being upset about pleasures that people with spending cash get 
to enjoy. People who blow money on stuff have earned the right to do 
just that.
It’s $30 bucks [sic]. Really, if you have a problem with that, maybe 
you should reconsider playing the game altogether. You are likely 
spending that in just a couple months on a subscription. Why the 
hell are you complaining about this then? I don’t get these people. 
They just want to ruin it for the rest of us. I don’t mind the extra 
charges. Shit, I spent $200 on a bunch of DLC for another game 
I’m playing. I like getting things I want, and if people have such a 
problem with it, well, maybe they shouldn’t be playing games in 
the first place.32
The sobering aspect of this perspective, and one that has so far been and 
will continue to be highlighted by this book, is that game worlds are 
exclusive pleasures. They are built for a certain segment of the popula­
tion, though this may not be reflected explicitly in game culture or in 
the discourse of game companies. Game worlds are seen as belonging 
to, or meant for, a population of consumers (as this chapter has focused 
on). These players must be of certain means, with disposable income, 
not to mention a certain threshold of “buy-in” just to access the game 
worlds themselves (through purchase of the hardware, software, Inter­
net access, and adequate leisure time). Digital consumption is a reflec­
tion of social class.
There is nothing wrong with this in itself. Some companies have made 
attempts to deliver gaming to wider audiences (particularly those less 
tech-savvy, or lacking certain equipment), and there are some obvious 
solid-world realities that allow for some regions to have access to lei­
sure but exclude others (these may be structural, as in lack of access to 
the Internet and digital technologies, or they may be cultural—certain 
activities are not deemed appropriate by prevailing ideologies in those 
regions).33 But setting those issues aside, the problem we’re focused on 

98  Game Worlds Get Real
here is that communities within game worlds uphold a belief structure 
that says that only they (the particulars of the “they” I will work to 
define through the book) belong in (or own) game worlds, and that other 
groups simply don’t belong there, or will never be comfortable there, so 
maybe they should leave. This ideology can proceed somewhat unchal­
lenged, given that even when more marginalized groups do manage to 
scrape together some playing time and develop a community within 
game worlds, they may already feel that they do not belong there (and 
this will only be reinforced in their interactions with players who do feel 
that the game world is made for them).
In respect to the goals of this chapter, game worlds are vehicles for 
consumption activities, often assuming that players have money to burn 
or can be convinced to burn it. Posturing for status among a digital 
community already bespeaks a certain social class of player, as such 
activities exclude far more populations than they include. Still, players 
with spare time and money seek to frame their consumption activities 
in several ways, whether it’s leaning on practicality and efficiency (it’s 
the only way, or the quickest way, to get access to content), valorizing 
game loyalty (buying stuff to support the brand and their hopes for more 
goods), or posturing for status to reinforce their identities (buying goods 
because they have the cash to be able to do so, and commiserating with 
others who do the same). This means that the climate in game worlds 
tends to lean positively toward consumption, and latitude for differing 
perspectives on said activities is negligible at best, and at the extreme, 
completely exclusionary.


(Doodles invented by Necronomiconopoly [Marina Gutierrez-Harsh])

Ah, farmers. I have some stories about them. We used to watch 
them struggle to make progress in the game. Watching a [group 
of monsters] wreck them in the open world, or seeing them attack 
something they had no hopes of defeating. I know I would cheer on 
the [monsters] killing them off. Our hatred for them was . . . raw? I 
guess. I mean, they aren’t like other players. If they are playing the 
game to make money, then it’s a job and they don’t belong there. 
The [game companies] don’t want them there. It’s illegal. And the 
players don’t want them there because they ruin the game. They 
won’t just go away though. Some players are always going to be 
too lazy to make their own money in-game, so the farmers aren’t 
going to quit.1
O
ne of the most intriguing intersections of the rationalization of play 
and the various identity clashes over who are the “real” (or ideal) 
gamers is that which singles out so-called real-money traders (RMTs) or 
“gold farmers” for blame in many online game worlds. A gold farmer 
is a sort of digital laborer. Their goal in playing any particular game is 
generally to acquire goods that have cash money value and that can 
be exchanged on the gray market, which is the economy that oper­
ates around the game, stitching game-world and solid-world markets 
together. In a strange way, this economy is branded an illegitimate form 
of trade by the companies who created the game worlds, though as I 
detailed in chapter 5, these companies are vastly expanding digital con­
sumption opportunities, so long as the goods and services profit them 
directly. Real-money trading (RMT) is not one of the “acceptable” forms 
CHAPTER 6
Pixel Profiteers

102  Game Worlds Get Real
of goods exchange, and it shapes game worlds in several ways because 
of that fact.
Many scholars and writers have thoroughly examined virtual-world 
economics and led the charge in discussions about intellectual property 
rights, game-world underground markets, and virtual loot.2 Edward 
Castronova argued that “synthetic worlds” are not separate economi­
cally from the solid world, using the membrane metaphor, which I have 
referenced often, as a useful tool in understanding their relationship.
The membrane can be considered a shield of sorts, protecting the 
fantasy world from the outside world . . . however this membrane 
is actually quite porous. Indeed it cannot be sealed completely . . . 
as a result the value of things in cyberspace becomes enmeshed in 
the valuation of things outside cyberspace.3
Additionally, T. L. Taylor calls attention to the vested interests of the 
players and the game creators in respect to real-money trading activi­
ties.4 She argues that players who purchase virtual goods or avatars 
bypass spending a certain amount of time playing the game. Since this 
possibly reduces the time a player keeps an active account, it opposes the 
game creators’ interests (who profit from monthly subscription fees) and 
creates unbalance between the players in the game itself, which may lead 
to antagonism over fairness and in-game performance. While this was 
once quite true, game companies now offer many of these “time skip” 
chances themselves, selling items like “jump potions”5 or ready-leveled 
characters, which skips over a great deal of the gaming experience but 
does so for a price (one from which the game companies benefit and not 
third parties like RMTs).
There is obviously a market for selling digital goods, and many play­
ers defend their right to spend liberally on bytes of data, but gold farm­
ers occupy a nebulous position in the rhetoric and regulation of digital 
consumption and labor. They are reprimanded and condemned as “bad 
for the game” by the companies who create the worlds and the “regu­
lar” (non-RMT) players who occupy said worlds. However, RMTs fill 
a market niche, in that they provide players with the opportunity to 
buy certain goods and services (like a pile of virtual gold, or a power-
leveling service, or even a fully equipped avatar). Given the importance 
and legitimacy of digital consumption (whereas in the past this debate 
was centered on why people were spending money on virtual gold at 
all, such criticisms have decreased as digital goods have become more 
normalized), the new rhetorical dance is how players position RMTs’ 

Pixel Profiteers 
103
place in the game world. Most players believe that real-money trading 
should be identified and harshly punished, while others may attempt to 
dissuade the community from treating RMTs poorly, or even argue for 
the value of their labor.
This issue can be difficult to grasp for the non-gamer, so let me provide 
a small illustration. You recently began playing Awesome Game World 
(which I’m making up to keep things simple). Playing for the first time, 
you lead your avatar outside the city for some adventure. On a hill near 
the city gate, you see two avatars mining. The next day you go back to 
the hill, and you see the same two avatars mining. The day after that, 
your curiosity piqued, you go back to the hill to see the same two miners 
gathering their ore. They are actually doing something pretty normal for 
these games: collecting goods that have some sort of value in the game 
world, with the intention to use those goods (maybe to craft weapons 
and armor) or to sell them (on the in-game player market, like an auction 
house or a personal bazaar). But what if one of the mining avatars was 
selling his ore on the auction house and making 200 game-world gold, 
while the other avatar was selling his ore on a Web site outside the game 
(which the game company that made Awesome Game World strictly 
forbids) and making two solid-world dollars for the same amount of 
ore? Does this change your interpretation of what these two avatars 
are doing? Does it matter to you that one miner is profiting in the solid 
world? Does it demand that one of them be barred from playing the 
game altogether, while the other one returns to the hill to continue min­
ing? How would you ever know if one of them was indeed making $2 
for a pile of ore? Does this take a form of digital sleuthing? And are you 
supposed to play that role? Do the actions of these miners change the 
way you experience the game in any significant way?
These are the questions that enliven the great debate over the presence 
of RMTs in game worlds. Whether their actions actually have a measur­
able and significant effect on the economy of the game world itself is 
largely irrelevant to the discussion.6 The perception that RMTs harm the 
game world is taken as a given in gaming communities. Thus, the focus 
of the discourse surrounding them is on identifying the “problem” (that 
is, ferreting out who the RMTs are) and then punishing them using vari­
ous methods. On the other side of the debate, a subpopulation of play­
ers scrambles to justify the presence of RMTs in the game world, seeing 
their activities as possibility harmful but situationally beneficial; also, 
the RMTs’ solid-world lives might be very unfortunate, so denying them 
a chance to make money is going to do more harm to their solid-world 
reality, which is the only one that really matters.

104  Game Worlds Get Real
Racializing Game Worlds
In respect to the larger discussion about how the solid world, and who 
we are in it, becomes relevant information to decide how to treat each 
other in the game world, the social category of race is not often put on 
display. In game worlds, skin color is simply an auxiliary trait, some­
thing that is toggled during the creation of an avatar. Without the visual 
cues that (often poorly) categorize solid-world races, it may be possible 
to disregard preconceived notions about race in these worlds.7 How­
ever, it seems more likely that the ideologies and worldview structures 
that are tilted by perceptions of race as a social category permeate the 
game world and continue the very antagonism that could have been left 
behind.8 After all, game worlds are far from visions of utopia.
Lori Kendall, in her study of Multi-User Dungeons,9 was interested 
in how race would or would not play a role in online interactions that 
took place without bodies (that is, in text-based chat groups). The ideal 
that digital spaces “transcend ethnicity” was unfounded, and instead, 
race online manifested as a “white unless stated otherwise” norm. She 
explained that the more people learn about another person’s solid-world 
status, the less likely it is that they will allow that person to claim an 
identity incongruent with that status. This is aligned with a broader 
argument in this book: When the membrane becomes more porous, or 
when players adhere to the forced-resonance approach to game worlds, 
we cannot escape the constructs of the solid world. Those constructs 
and rules of interaction are held aloft as too important to be discarded, 
and they continue to frame how we treat one another, even when we are 
provided with opportunities to circumvent those controls.
In game worlds, race tends not to be as important as other social cat­
egories such as gender, which will be discussed in the chapters to come. 
It is very rare for players to openly claim a solid-world racial identity 
or to attempt to provide “proof” of said identity, as they often do with 
gender. Discourse surrounding race may enter the conversation in a few 
ways in game worlds. First, there exist perceptions of “gaming skill,” 
which often highlight Korean and Japanese players as being “better” at 
games than other racial or ethnic groups. Again, whether this is backed 
up empirically doesn’t much matter to the player base; it is often taken 
as an established fact, in the same way that many assumptions about 
human capacities are framed as “just the way things are,” whether they 
truly are that way or not. Some players may justify the difference in skill 
as cultural, while others rely on more essentialist assumptions.
Second, race is sometimes discussed by proxy of native language in 
global community games (which will come into play with RMT as well). 

Pixel Profiteers 
105
Since text and voice communication can be highly important to aspects 
of play in these game worlds, discussions about skill, cooperation, and 
cultural and racial stereotyping may emerge when groups are mixed in 
terms of native language. This more or less amounts to banter about 
what players think players of other racial and ethnic groups might think 
of their racial or ethnic group, along with a few attempts to commu­
nicate such perceptions between groups. So long as the goals at hand 
can still be accomplished, any tension experienced in these situations is 
relatively short-lived, though region-specific social media sites attached 
to these games may extend these tensions to some degree.
Third, when a solid-world event that is inextricably linked to racial 
politics occurs, it reverberates into the game world. For example, when 
Barack Obama won the presidency in 2008, several servers in WoW had 
chat logs filled with racist rhetoric.
Player A: Fucking black people are celebrating in the street
Player B: Probably going to riot all night
Player C: Can take the ape out of the jungle . . .
Player D: This country is so stupid10
Similarly, but more recently, when Donald Trump won in 2016, the chat 
logs and message boards of some game worlds were populated with 
“Build a wall” or “Get your green card ready” or “Make America white 
again” rhetoric. It’s important to note that these behaviors are heavily 
policed by game moderators,11 as their inflammatory sentiment often 
invites players in game worlds to report such “announcements” as har­
assment, which often leads these troll-types to be removed from the 
game (usually temporarily, with a small suspension or a warning to cease 
the behavior lest they end up with a formal ban from the game).
Finally, discussions of race emerge in reference to gold farming and 
other RMT activities. Race is often reinserted in the RMT debate when 
crystallizing the perceptions of “who the farmers are” within any par­
ticular gaming community. At one end, RMT players are perceived to be, 
or at least operate, in certain sections of the solid world (China, Russia, 
Mexico).12 This means that players who are associated with those places 
are more likely to be labeled “farmers” or RMTs. Again, whether such 
claims are accurate is unimportant; it is the perception that creates the 
social reality within the game world. In many ways, tropes about immi­
grant workers are pulled from the cultural consciousness to discriminate 
against players believed to be farmers.13 In other words, farmers rep­
resent an “invasive” (from a nativist standpoint) population that will 

106  Game Worlds Get Real
“ruin” the game economy; thus they must be forced out (identified and 
punished).
Additionally, there is increasingly more focus on the fact that many 
RMTs are not really players (that is, human beings) at all, but instead 
are programs or “bots.” The social “remedy” is still the same and fol­
lows the same nativist logic and rhetoric: “The game world belongs 
to real players.” So-called real players are not digital laborers, in the 
sense that they are not playing for profit, though you can begin to 
see the cognitive dissonance that must be deployed to delineate the 
border between real-money trading and “mercing.” While playing the 
game is considered “hard work,” the game should not become a place 
of work. This is not because such possibilities further blur the line 
between play and work; it’s because when this “invasive population” 
turns the game into a job, it “ruins” in-game opportunities such as 
profiting and being able to control a portion of the in-game market for 
“real gamers.” In other words, the farmers and RMTs are to be driven 
out because they ruin the game for the only population that mat­
ters: the “real gamers,” who are, at least as this chapter explores, not 
farmers or RMT. These realities encourage regular players to express 
their resentment for farmers, which manifests in everything from rac­
ist language to virtual harassment to exclusion from the game-world 
community.
Identifying Real-Money Traders
Discussion of the farmers and bots quickly dissolved any attempt by 
“dampeners” (those who tried to maintain the separation between 
worlds) to preserve the play bubble and immediately began a process 
through which solid-world realities were reconstructed in the game 
world. When discussing RMT, it became incredibly important to know 
“who was behind the screen”; that is, who was controlling a character 
or avatar. This was necessary for the gaming community in order to cast 
that person in the “real player” category or in the farmer or bot category, 
the latter of which “did not belong” in the game world. Players used a 
handful of “common-sense” assumptions in order to stratify the player 
base into RMTs and “normal” players.
Identifying RMTs relied largely on avatar traits, “suspicious” gaming 
behavior, and native language. It is important to note here that in certain 
situations, some avatars or accounts, like those used to advertise for 
game currency–selling Web sites, did not need to be identified, due to 
essentially outing themselves as ad bots. However, such accounts were 

Pixel Profiteers 
107
sacrificial by nature and never intended to move about the game world 
in the same way as other players. Whereas Julian Dibbell’s14 exploration 
of the sophisticated quandaries of bot programs and players who were 
tinkering with a form of Turing test to fool the game moderators into 
thinking a program could be a player, the game communities discussed 
here and the supposed farmers and bots they identify are less innovative, 
and the process is far more crass and sloppy.
Avatar Traits
Players attempting to vet the population of avatars to discover “non-
players” (i.e., those involved in “botting” or RMT) would often point 
to certain traits of a given avatar in question as indicants of possible 
RMT activity. The first of these traits often had to do with the name 
of the avatar. Players can, with a few limitations, select any name that 
suits them when making an avatar. Some games have filters for “explicit 
language” (naming your avatar “Cock Sucker” is barred in some games 
by design, and it would net you a quick account suspension if you did 
manage to enter the community with such a name), as well as names that 
may reflect the “lore” or a character in the game story or world itself; 
often you are not allowed to name your avatar after a character that 
appears in the game. Despite the expressive freedom to choose most any 
name, some name choices might more readily label you (whether you 
are involved in RMT or not) as a “suspicious” avatar. Players claimed 
that “weird names,” “nonsense names,” “ethnic names,” and “Oriental 
names” were suspect and indicatory of RMT.
They are all weird like a jumble of letters that are almost a word but 
not, like someone just mashed a bunch of keys on the keyboard.15
Real players care enough to name their character something mean­
ingful. Yeah, there are tons of “bad names” chosen by players out 
there, or basic fantasy clones, but RMTs are almost all gibberish 
names.16
You can spot them a mile away. Some avatar named “Xhfaejjo­
qfesdjka Ujdnaqq” is not a real player. I see them in packs as well, 
all with very small variations on the original face-smash on the 
keyboard name.17
The assumption that players held about lackluster avatar names was 
congruent with the idea that “real players” would care enough to name 

108  Game Worlds Get Real
their avatar something more than just a random patchwork of letters. 
“Jumbled” names were seen as evidence that the players controlling said 
avatars did not care for and did not identify with their avatars, or that 
they might simply be using the avatars as a means to an end, assumedly 
for RMT. Interestingly, players not only overlooked the possibility of a 
weak bond between avatar and player (i.e., that a non-RMT player may 
not “care enough” to name an avatar anything special), but they also 
ignored the presence of the “random name generator” in several online 
game worlds. Selecting the random name generator during avatar crea­
tion often granted a newly created avatar some unpronounceable phrase 
as a name. Yet players insisted that nonsense names were important in 
identifying farmers and bots, and that even if a random name generator 
was used, it certainly would not be used for a “real player’s” character.
In addition to names, players often recognized certain aesthetic qual­
ities of avatars in the game worlds that helped them identify RMTs. 
Firstly, many avatar creation sequences have a default aggregate of ava­
tar traits when the creation screen loads. For example, when you decide 
to make a new avatar in one of these game worlds, you may pick a 
couple of important options up front like gender and fantasy race (trolls, 
orcs, humanoids, robots, and so on).18 These selections will funnel you 
into a default model of that gender and race; perhaps the default setting 
for a male humanoid character has him appearing with short sandy hair, 
a thin frame of facial hair, a medium build, and dark eyes. If you made 
no selections on your own and started the game, this is what your char­
acter would look like (that is, if you spent no time customizing19 your 
avatar).
These default models, if they were found roaming around in the game 
world, were seen as highly suspicious because they were, in a way, indic­
ative that the players who created them took no time to customize their 
looks. It’s almost as though they didn’t care what the avatar looked like 
but simply needed the avatar to get into the game world as quickly as 
possible. This is more suspicious if, say, several identical avatars (all the 
default model) are traveling together in-game. They just all happen to 
look exactly alike by default. Moreover, suspicions toward these ava­
tars would only increase depending on the gear and clothing they were 
wearing.
I’ve seen them standing in a cluster, all wearing the same gear. They 
look like clones of each other with maybe one of them, whichever 
one the rest are following around, having maybe one feature differ­
ent, or a slightly better set of gear.20

Pixel Profiteers 
109
Packs of them standing about, or all logging in or off together. They 
just appear in the corner of the city . . . five or six of them wearing 
the same damn robe and hat.21
Clones spamming the chat log. They are easy to spot because they 
all have the same fucking face and clothes on.22
Well, RMT, they are in a party, all same outfits, almost always anon, 
crappy gear usually or missing some important pieces or gear that 
anybody on that job would want.23
It’s not whether the players attempting to identify these supposed RMTs 
(and bots) are accurate in their assessment, as outside of cases where 
the accused avatars are “spamming” (sending out repeated messages 
into chat) ads for selling virtual gold,24 there is no certainty that these 
avatars are involved in RMT. However, players use these visual clues—
those having to do with certain avatar traits like nonsense names, default 
models, and identical gear—to hasten labeling RMTs within these game 
worlds. This is a form of digital profiling that in some ways is similar to 
profiling as it exists in the solid world (that is, when authorities increase 
their vigilance around people of color or people with certain cultural 
identifiers, believing that said people are somehow more likely to be 
involved in deviant or criminal activity).25 Players see these avatars as 
likely to be involved in deviant activity—in most cases, without any evi­
dence of RMT.
“Suspicious” Play
The second factor used to sift through the player base and label possible 
RMTs can be linked back to my earlier illustration about the two avatars 
mining on the hill. Defining an avatar (or group of them) as embodying 
some form of “suspicious” playing behavior is part of this identifica­
tion process. In many ways, the vagueness of such a concept can serve 
as a catchall to hold just about anyone suspect in the game world, but 
it can also make demands for action to be taken against the suspected 
RMTs difficult to execute. Some of the behavior noted by players as 
“suspicious” included extended play hours (the avatar was logged in 
almost every hour of every day), methodical farming (the avatar was 
seen playing, working, or waiting in a particular area consistently), lack­
luster game performance (the avatar had failed to complete certain game 
milestones that most players covet), and robotic behavior (the avatar 
or group responded mechanically, or as if part of a hive mind), along 

110  Game Worlds Get Real
with the more obvious: the avatar directly solicited players to buy game 
goods and currency (spam bots, unwanted invitations from the avatar).
How to identify one . . . I can’t give you an exact formula. It’s how 
they act, what they do and do not have, how they move with other 
[RMTs], how they kill, where they kill. After playing for as long 
as I have, the patterns have stuck in my mind to a point where I 
can spot them instantly. Human players can do things repetitively 
like they do but [RMTs] are very methodical, almost robotic, and 
human players can be as well but it’s different. I can’t explain it, I 
just know.26
An avatar always in a certain area and never leaves. They do the 
same thing, or few things, over and over again. Most of them are 
robots probably, but I still think there’s maybe one person control­
ling or running the programs and moving the bots into position so 
they can repeat whatever tasks.27
This “robotic” behavior—sometimes described as “excessive farming,” 
where an avatar is seen doing a monotonous task over and over again, 
like mining—may lead players to categorize other players as RMTs. The 
purpose of this identity game is to create a distinction, using whatever 
common criteria are available to the gamer community at the time, 
between the “real players” and the RMTs. Obviously, what qualifies as 
“suspicious” play varies. As with the illustration with the miners on the 
hill, both of them are performing a monotonous task, gathering ore for 
hours on end and moving it to the market or to storage. But for the sake 
of my point, I mentioned that one of them could be a RMT and one could 
be just an average player, yet they both engage in “suspicious” activity. In 
cases like this, where the behavior is simply part of what gameplay looks 
like in these worlds (however boring), using avatar behavior as indica­
tive of RMT is problematic.
There are obvious cases of botting, even if the [game company] 
won’t act against those accounts. The problem is many players 
jump to conclusions about other people acting even a little bit 
“suspicious.” Like one time some guy reported me in the game 
for being RMT because I wasn’t responding to his messages when 
he was harassing me. . . . [T]he truth was I didn’t have the key­
board plugged in and was too damn lazy to give a shit about that 
asshole.28

Pixel Profiteers 
111
The label of “RMT” may be deployed liberally, at least in part because 
“real players” believe that the game world was built for them. This 
means that the ore in the hills “belongs” to players who are here to play 
the game, not to profit from it. Protecting these virtual resources and the 
in-game economy—along with the claim of who belongs in the game 
world and who doesn’t—becomes the driving force behind identifying 
and punishing (with hopes of “deporting,” so to speak) the RMT pres­
ence. In their fervor to protect what they see as theirs, “real players” may 
turn on each other, pointing fingers at anyone they believe (without sub­
stantial evidence) is harming the game world, which “rightfully” belongs 
to the players. The similarities to nativism and immigration tropes are 
striking.
Language and Communication
Because the previous identifiers relied solely on in-game status, there 
remained the possibility that a suspected RMT could actually be a regu­
lar player that had a weird avatar name, was wearing non-ideal gear, and 
enjoyed monotonous activities. This is the point where information from 
the solid world, in this case racial and ethnic stereotyping, came into 
focus. Whether myth or reality—and perhaps it’s a mix of both29—many 
players believed that the majority of RMT activity was performed by 
“Chinese farmers.” When a stereotype takes root in a population, many 
people who are completely unassociated with the activities in question 
are bundled together using this assumption, despite its inaccuracy.30 So 
the fact that many English-speaking players believe that “Chinese gold 
farmers” are an epidemic leads them to assume that Chinese players are 
highly likely to be RMTs. And in game worlds where solid-world bodies 
are mostly veiled, players use native or spoken language as a proxy for 
race and ethnicity. In short, players who speak Chinese are more likely 
to be labeled RMTs, and this is despite the fact that China has a very 
healthy gamer market. The pervasive assumption was that not all RMTs 
are Chinese players but most Chinese players are RMTs.31
Farmers are mostly from China, and it’s like a big sweatshop for 
making money through the game. I don’t ever see any Chinese 
players just, you know, playing the game.32
Anytime I saw a character doing something questionable in-game, 
I’d send them a [message] saying “Ni hao” and if they replied in 
Mandarin, I would know they are RMT.33

112  Game Worlds Get Real
Dirty rotten cheaters. From my understanding they’re mostly Chi­
nese, and from my experience with them they speak Chinese mostly 
and some English, which I attribute to the game and contact with 
players.34
Interestingly, speaking Mandarin was not seen as the product of liv­
ing in China, or as a part of racial, ethnic, or regional identity, or even 
simply as an attribute of a Chinese player. The ability to speak Man­
darin was “proof” to many English-speaking gamers that a player was 
RMT. While it may be true that there are populations of Chinese players 
(as well as many other players of varying race and nationality) that are 
involved in RMT, assuming that all Chinese players are RMT based on 
being Chinese (or in this case, based on speaking Mandarin) is myopic at 
best, and may pit gaming communities against an entire ethnic group.35
Ironically, many of these game worlds are global in scope. These 
games unite multiple solid-world regions, allowing players from around 
the globe to participate in collaborative adventures. Obviously, native 
languages vary, and in FFXI and FFXIV the “auto-translate” function 
(and dictionary) was designed to encourage players across cultures 
to group together efficiently despite linguistic differences. The auto-
translator allowed players to type in certain phrases and search through 
a dictionary of terms translatable through the game in several languages, 
helping players from different parts of the world communicate and team 
up. However, the stereotype of the Mandarin-speaking RMT is so per­
vasive, even making it the subject of Internet parody videos,36 that it 
undermines the original intention of allowing a diverse group of play­
ers to enjoy the virtual world together. In many online games, though 
largely justified as being about Internet connection speed and “ease of 
communication,” servers that host the game are largely divided up by 
region. Though not often explicitly stated, players then decide to play 
with other people from “their region,” segregating themselves and avoid­
ing the possibility of playing with a more diverse community.37 Com­
pounding the issue, some nations have their own version of a game (one 
that is slightly different from the globally accessible one) and now disal­
low cross-regional play.38
Players also sought to identify RMTs that were not players but bots, 
by engaging in communication exercises with suspected avatars. It has 
become more common in recent years to believe that most RMT activi­
ties are the product of a growing population of sophisticated bot pro­
grams, regardless of who the mastermind behind them may or may 
not be. This grants players and moderators the opportunity to perform 

Pixel Profiteers 
113
their own sort of ad hoc Turing test on these suspected bots.39 The 
assumption is that the bot, whether its goal is to produce real money 
or whether it is being used to “cheat” at some part of the game, is not 
a human player. That is, the avatar is being controlled by a program, 
walking around the game world and blending in with the other avatars. 
Given this space and the absence of the solid-world body, can players 
ferret out bots from human players? It sounds quite thrilling on one 
hand, but the unfortunate reality is that bots designed to cheat at some 
part of a game world are not very sophisticated software at their cur­
rent point in development. They are simplistic and can be rather easy 
to spot.
I walked into the city and there was a circle of avatars, all kneeling 
to craft some lumber with saws in hand. They moved in unison, 
every single one of them sawing at the same moment. Then, they’d 
stop. Wait two seconds, then saw again. Repeat. I tried sending a 
few of them a [private message]. No response. A few other players 
came to watch, and several of them commented out loud how this 
was clearly bot activity. A few people filed a report to the [game 
moderators].40
I’ve run a dungeon with a bot or two. Sometimes I’m impressed at 
their ability to run an exact path through the dungeon, stop at cer­
tain points, like when [monsters] are being fought. But their com­
munication is pretty much zero, and they often stand in things they 
shouldn’t, like eating fire until they die. I think there are people out 
there trying to get the bots good enough to run dungeons together 
on their own, so they can just do that all day and make money.41
The classic bot is the avatar that just stands in the city and shouts 
the same message over and over again until enough people report 
it. It’s about as basic as they come.42
Though most bots seem to be created explicitly for advantaging certain 
players or producing goods and money at an expedient rate, the game 
of sorting out bots from human players is still in its infancy. We are 
nowhere near seeing fully believable software standing in for human 
players in these game worlds (or the more sophisticated programs avail­
able today are being used for something more interesting than trying 
to cheat a game), though in chapter 3 I spoke about mechanization of 
gameplay as an enticing pull within technology and game culture. The 
use of bots to make RMT slightly more efficient is a drop in a very large 

114  Game Worlds Get Real
ocean of possibility, and the attempt to discover bots is a social defense 
process that walks a tightrope of gaming ethics. By the current logic, it is 
perfectly fine to want to have computer-controlled company to help you 
meet the goals of the game by design; for example, a group of AI char­
acters that would help you clear a dungeon but are present in the game 
because the game company and designers placed them there. However, 
the same characters, when used to assist certain players and to exclude 
others, and when they are alien to the game system . . . those ones must 
be exposed and exiled because they are not “real players” and the game 
world does not belong to them. At least not yet.
Condemning Real-Money Trading
Players’ reactions to and treatment of suspected real-money traders run 
the gamut from open punishment, to mild irritation, to more or less 
ignoring their existence. On the condemnation side of these approaches, 
players, emboldened by the discourse from the official enforcers (i.e., the 
game moderators, producers, and community leaders), sought to pun­
ish RMTs and extract them from the game world. In some ways, their 
actions were a reflection of how they viewed the relationship between 
solid-world and game-world economies and realities.
Creator Discourse and Official Enforcers
The game creators themselves actively participate in and generate the 
discourse surrounding real-money trading through reporting on the per­
sistence of the behavior and the measures being taken to eliminate the 
“nefarious” actions of the RMTs. Initially, these efforts take shape in the 
form of the terms of service (ToS) agreement, usually displayed when 
a player begins in any of these games, as well as the particulars of any 
documentation or announcements regarding RMT. Square Enix’s agree­
ment stated,
YOU ACQUIRE NO OWNERSHIP OR PROPERTY RIGHTS IN 
ANY CHARACTER OR OTHER IN-GAME VIRTUAL GOOD, 
AND ARE ONLY LICENSED TO USE SUCH CHARACTERS 
AND ASSETS ASSOCIATED WITH YOUR FFXIV SERVICE 
ACCOUNT SUBJECT TO THE CONDITIONS SET FORTH IN 
THE AGREEMENTS. YOU AGREE THAT YOUR FFXIV SER­
VICE ACCOUNT AND ANY VIRTUAL GOODS AND CHAR­
ACTERS DO NOT HAVE ANY MONETARY VALUE. SQUARE 

Pixel Profiteers 
115
ENIX MAY SUSPEND, TERMINATE, MODIFY, OR DELETE 
FFXIV SERVICE ACCOUNTS, CHARACTERS, VIRTUAL 
GOODS, OR THE SERVICE ALTOGETHER, AT ANY TIME 
FOR ANY REASON OR FOR NO REASON, WITH OR WITH­
OUT NOTICE OR LIABILITY TO YOU.43
By agreeing to the aforementioned terms, a player can gain access to 
the game world (declining the terms denies one from playing at all). 
The game creators clearly forbid players from using the game to make 
money. Some game companies, like Square Enix, have a “special task 
force” (STF)44 charged solely with ferreting out RMT and banning all 
accounts involved in such activities.
RMT and other illicit activities upset the balance of the game and, 
as such, are prohibited under the Terms of Service. Because we have 
confirmed the existence of players who are engaging in these illicit 
activities, we have taken the actions listed below.
Time Period: Dec. 15, 2016 to Dec. 21, 2016
Accounts receiving disciplinary action for RMT advertising: 
17,594
Accounts receiving disciplinary action for RMT/illicit activity: 8
Action Details: Permanent ban from FINAL FANTASY XIV
Accounts receiving disciplinary action for participation in RMT/
illegal activity: 394
Action Details: Temporary ban from FINAL FANTASY XIV
Players who discover any confirmed cheats should, under no 
circumstances, exploit or disseminate such information. Instead, 
we ask that players file a report by using the in-game command 
[System Menu] -> [Support Desk] -> [Contact Us] -> [Report 
Cheating].
We will continue to take stringent disciplinary action against any 
accounts with confirmed involvement in RMT/illicit activity; 
players should take care to steer clear of any activity that 
violates the Terms of Service.45
To return to the games-as-systems metaphor from chapter 1, game mod­
erators, posts by designers and producers, and special task forces oper­
ate as a governing body with a policing arm for the game-world society. 
Players in this sense are like private citizens, largely conforming to the 
norms of the society, internalizing its values, and protecting those values 
in their communities. The governing body is framed as fully legitimate, 

116  Game Worlds Get Real
as its members did quite literally create the game world and its rules, and 
they so generously allow the players to access the game world if they 
adhere to such rules.
To take things a step further, players see any actions taken against 
RMTs as legitimate policing, and so the citizens may even be tempted to 
deputize themselves to “protect” the game world from the RMTs (and 
they do so knowing that the game company’s interests are aligned with 
such efforts). In a way, the governing body has labeled a segment of the 
population a “menace to society,” and though the official enforcers will 
do as much as possible to remove the RMTs from the world, private 
citizens (players) might well take matters into their own hands. The con­
sensus between the creators of the game and its players illustrates an 
attempt to establish legitimate and illegitimate forms of economic syn­
thesis between the solid world and the game world. Players who believe 
in consumption, gamer identity, and the discourse of the game creators 
may value and defend digital consumption practices (“It’s okay to spend 
solid-world money on digital goods when it helps support the game, 
company, or game world”), but it is “unacceptable” to allow the exact 
same exchange of currency and goods (solid for virtual) if it is done 
through the “gray market,” because RMT has been discursively cast as 
“ruining” the game.
As an official form of policing, players who were concerned with the 
activity of suspected RMTs had the option to report to the GMs (game 
moderators). The GMs are primarily responsible for ensuring the contin­
ued functionality of the game world. They are charged with menial tasks 
(such as avatars getting “stuck” in the virtual environment and needing 
to be moved) and dealing with charges of harassment, verbal abuse, and 
behavior that violates the ToS agreement. Since RMT was one such vio­
lation, some players chose to bring a GM’s attention to possible RMT 
when they “identified” it (and they relied on many of the previously 
discussed elements to identify said activities).
I will take any action I can to harass, kill or otherwise disturb those 
individuals. Furthermore, in the recent release of statistics, I had 
something around 100 GM calls . . . all but two of which were in 
regards to RMT activity . . . One of my prouder moments was get­
ting two bots with [a very valuable item] . . . banned. At that time, I 
also made a point of making at least one GM call per day to report 
these activities. At one point, when a GM refused to do anything, I 
got in a 15 minute argument, ultimately asking him if he believed 
that 20 characters of the same model, names like “Adssekhfge,” 

Pixel Profiteers 
117
same gear, same level . . . all performing the same activity 24/7 
could possibly represent some sort of legitimate activity . . . With 
all of that said, I think that [game company] has done a very good 
job in the last year or two in severely damaging the RMT market.46
GMs are hard to report [RMT] to, you have to be really careful 
with how you report it, like make it look as if the [RMT] was bot­
ting . . . I have found that if I mention that a character has very rigid 
or robotic movement like a program was running the character 
and not a human, they’re more likely to investigate the actions of 
the character. But now since the STF was launched, a GM is more 
likely to shove your opinion dildo up your ass, log out and contact 
the STF.47
Players who identified suspected RMTs and felt compelled to do some­
thing about them could take a number of actions, the least aggressive 
of which was reporting them to a GM. Reports were, as one can imag­
ine, difficult to substantiate, given that the reporting player had no evi­
dence that any exchange of solid-world money for game-world money 
had taken place. The reports were based on the identification process I 
wrote of earlier, noting avatars that were suspicious, had strange names, 
or dressed similarly. Casting these avatars as behaving “robotically” 
often helped the report gain traction, because from the GMs’ perspec­
tive, there is no real gray area when it comes to bots; that is, bots don’t 
belong in the game world. Reporting that an avatar might be using a 
hack or might be a bot encouraged the GM to monitor said avatar and 
allowed for the accumulation of evidence that might merit a ban. Simply 
reporting suspicions of RMT provided nothing substantial to the claim, 
since the assumptions were based on the players’ general understanding 
of how to identify RMT, which, as I have argued, often neglected alter­
native explanations and were at best unsubstantiated when not dealing 
with something overt like an RMT ad bot.
Informal Sanctions and Player Killing
When GM negotiations, reports, and sometimes outright pleas failed, 
some players decided to take action on their own. Their actions could 
involve harassing the suspected RMTs in the game by stealing the mon­
sters they were trying to kill, or gathering the goods they were gathering 
(thereby depleting the virtual resources they were turning around for 
profit), or undercutting their pricing of goods in game-world markets 

118  Game Worlds Get Real
(though the RMTs might do the same in return), or openly berating 
them in chat (shouting to the rest of the game world that certain ava­
tars are RMTs and should suffer harassment at the hands of the player 
community), or perhaps attempting to “player kill” (PK)48 their avatars 
(for example, by “training” or dragging a group of monsters on top of 
suspected RMTs or by attacking them directly in player-versus-player 
spaces).
I had great pleasure in making their lives miserable. [PKing] use 
[sic] to be so easy . . . and [RMTs] were very easy to spot targets. 
One player controlling six results in a very large, slow-responding 
target.49
I kill them when I can. Or otherwise just generally screw with 
them. Just annoyances like they’ve plagued me with through the 
years. Granted it’s a lot harder to PK anymore. But just things like 
camping on top of them, or killing their [monsters] . . . They’re not 
too bright.50
Shout them down. Show the world who they are and flood the 
GMs with reports. I stay away from GMs myself mostly because 
they are impotent. Mob rule is best.51
While most of these actions could themselves qualify as ToS violations 
worthy of a ban, players worked within the limitations of the game 
structure (as with PKing) to sometimes mete out a form of vigilante 
justice. Obviously, there is palpable danger in this perspective, as players 
are upholding an ideology that sees the RMTs as less than players and, 
by extension, possibly less than human, which is always the first step in 
justifying unethical treatment of individuals or social groups. And argu­
ably, turning players against each other had little effect on the problems 
that players purportedly had with the RMT “menace.”
Perceptually speaking, RMTs were functional demons. They were a 
manifestation of certain frustrations players felt about the game system 
itself. Game worlds have living, breathing economies that suffer from all 
the same things as solid-world economies do, including inflation, runs on 
the market, and an overabundance of certain goods. Many of these aspects 
of the economy were not directly controlled by the players, as the game 
creators could, with a few button presses, make a rare and valuable item 
nearly worthless; for example, they might make a previously hard-to-get 
gem easier to obtain, and the market for that gem falls through the floor.

Pixel Profiteers 
119
Warring with the game creators’ choices, given that they are the gov­
erning body with legitimacy and the guards who let players into the 
world in the first place, just was not a fruitful exercise, even if frustra­
tion was present among the player base. Waging war against the RMTs, 
who in some ways reflected many of the uncontrollable aspects of the 
economy (for example, too many RMTs farming a certain item could 
drive prices down, meaning “regular players” who were using that item 
to earn money were forced to work elsewhere or stomach low returns 
on their labor), was a much more tangible and gratifying effort. Players 
could (whether we deem their actions ethical or not) harass RMTs to 
play out their frustration about economic “fairness.”
Real-money traders played proxy for frustration over game crea­
tors’ decisions, as well as frustrations over other “real players” who 
purchased virtual goods through RMT. That is, the other population 
involved in doing “harm” to the game world was the group of “real 
players” who used solid-world money to purchase game-world cur­
rency through the gray market. Players may have felt rightfully upset 
with those who compounded the issue of in-game inflation, but identi­
fying and reporting “buyers” just was not common practice. This also 
shows how a dominant group (the “real players”) can control the con­
tingent social peace over a marginalized group (the RMTs). The “real 
players” bought currency from the gray market, which helped them buy 
virtual goods and things they wanted or needed, yet that game money 
was produced on the backs of a labor force of RMTs, and so the RMTs 
could be used for these benefits and then condemned and expelled for 
doing just that.
Excusing Real-Money Trading
Not all players declared that farmers and RMTs were problematic 
or deserved such condemnation. Interestingly, those who chose to 
ignore both the discourse presented by the game creators and the 
game world’s distaste for RMTs attempted to promote an understand­
ing that the solid-world lives of farmers were harsh (meaning they 
were forced to work in sweatshops or were making very little money 
as RMTs), that the buying and selling of virtual loot was inevita­
ble in any online game and could be advantageous in some contexts, 
and that the perception of RMTs was somewhat misguided (as in, 
more than just “Chinese gold farmers” were participating in selling 
virtual goods).

120  Game Worlds Get Real
Harsh Economic Reality
Players who were especially sympathetic toward RMTs often drew fur­
ther attention to the reality of the everyday lives and situations that 
these people found themselves in. Players tried to balance the negative 
perception of “RMTs ruin the game” with the contextual understanding 
that the solid-world lives of RMTs were to be pitied, or at least peo­
ple who complained about the “first-world problem” of having a video 
game “ruined” should understand that some RMTs were doing what 
they could with what options they had available to them.
Most of these people in China are not wanted. They are people on 
the streets and their families disown them . . . I feel bad for them 
and I help a few of my RMT friends if they need it. There is this 
one Chinese lady, she lives on the street. She plays to make money 
to eat. Their work gives them food and a place to stay while work­
ing, that’s why they like it. I feel bad for them, the players, but 
not for the corporation that makes them do that. I have mixed 
feelings about it. I can’t be a savior to all of them and get them 
[in-game money], and I don’t want to waste all my time helping 
them to make all their lives better, but I feel bad for them and try 
to help when I can. The one lady RMT, she needed my help with 
an illness she has because I worked in pharmacy, and she asked me 
for advice . . . I helped her teleport people for a bit. I don’t believe 
in giving handouts, but I helped . . . In the end, I gave her all the 
[money] we made. I even got a picture of her.52
Some players felt that the solid-world conditions of farmers (who, again, 
were largely assumed to be Chinese) had to be considered in deciding 
whether RMT was permissible. They negotiated mixed feelings; they 
were conscious of farmers’ living and economic conditions, but they also 
desired to preserve the gaming experience and the in-game economy. 
Taking into account the solid-world conditions of social class, poverty, 
and exploitive labor practices is yet another illustration of how play in 
game worlds is reflective (or elevates the importance) of the reality of 
everyday life (forced resonance). Players who saw the reality of the solid 
world as important in understanding the RMT situation were lifting the 
reality of everyday life above the “magic circle” of the game world. They 
cared more about who the RMTs were in the solid world than about 
what they did in the game world.

Pixel Profiteers 
121
Hmm, well I’m against them for sure. They spoil the game for 
others. But on the other hand, it’s like a sweatshop business in 
China . . . people trying to provide for themselves and their family, 
so while I’m against the principles of their work, their reasons for 
doing so are good.53
You have to understand who these people are. The average RMT 
is not some business executive or couch-surfing lowlife. They are 
people struggling in poverty like situations. As much as I may want 
to say “stop ruining the game,” my problems are not more impor­
tant than them trying to make it in the real world by doing RMT.54
Players noted similar discord between their desire to ensure that their 
game experience remained pleasurable and their misgivings about the 
RMT business model, which may well have been exploiting hardwork­
ing people. Within this framework, RMTs were not seen as some sort of 
“scourge” on the game world, despite their actions contributing to some 
imbalance in game-world economies. In fact, the actions of RMTs were 
purely rational, like those of migrant workers who seek out opportuni­
ties in any place (country, or in this case, virtual world) that may provide 
a better life.55 Players who held these perceptions were less likely to 
report RMTs to GMs, and they more often chose to ignore or assist them 
rather than harass or PK them.
Utility and Assimilation
Some players were more proactive and decided to establish mutually ben­
eficial relationships with known RMTs. These quid pro quo approaches 
sought to discursively establish farmers as simply a reality of online 
game worlds. In other words, trying to rid the game world society of 
this “criminalized” population was ridiculous. Players rationalized that 
there would always be a gray market for goods and money procured by 
RMTs, so why work against the factors that created this willing labor 
force? Instead, why not think of them as necessary to the health of the 
game-world economy?
In many ways, the cognitive framing of players within this group 
saw RMTs like an immigrant workforce, to some a necessary evil that 
could be quite advantageous, in that the fruits of their labors were to 
be enjoyed by players of a higher social class (i.e., those playing the 
game for leisure and not for a wage).56 They argued that RMTs could 

122  Game Worlds Get Real
mitigate some of the more arduous tasks in these game worlds, reduc­
ing monotonous activities, saving time, and allowing greater access to 
in-game resources.
It’s an interesting job, all you do is exploit a resource in the game 
for money and then move on or completely monopolize it and con­
trol it as you see fit. It was interesting to watch them get better and 
better at the game dynamics. We joked about this one person being 
involved with them. They were almost our middle man on some 
stuff . . . you could coordinate a purchase with them. That was 
kind of nice.57
There will never be an online game without RMT. Trying to get rid 
of them is useless. Yes, they are annoying as hell, but they are here 
to stay. I tend to just recognize that because they are out farming all 
day and night, I’m going to be able to buy stuff on the market for 
cheap. And I don’t have to farm the stuff myself, which saves time 
for more fun parts of the game.58
This perceptional framework of RMT as destiny in game worlds was 
painted with a sense of futility, even if “real players” stood to benefit 
from the RMT presence in some ways. There exists very little upbeat dis­
course about RMT and far more begrudging acceptance. Still, those who 
excused RMTs attempted to explain away the negative impacts with 
positive outcomes, such as being able to buy cheap virtual goods on the 
market (the same way large industrialized nations with lively consumer 
cultures tend to enjoy low pricing because it enables consumption, all 
but ignoring the processes by which the goods were put on the shelf 
and the people and resources that may have been exploited to make the 
goods cheap)59 and not having to do the labor themselves to obtain the 
goods and enjoy them. (As I explored in chapter 3, the push to reduce 
time spent playing and make gaming more efficient often seeks short­
cuts, and in that way, RMTs do lend a hand.)
To stave off increasing RMT activity, many game creators attempted 
to make virtual goods “untradeable,”60 or unable to be put on sale. For 
example, a group of players once could kill a big blue dragon and it 
would drop a couple weapons, maybe some scales, and an enchanted 
ring. After beating the dragon several times, if the group members had 
no use for any of these dragon goods, they might have decided to sell 
them directly on the player market. This big blue dragon became a 
tempting way to make game money, because people who did not have a 

Pixel Profiteers 
123
group that could kill the dragon might buy the stuff they wanted at the 
market.
The big blue dragon started to attract RMTs, who were only there to 
make a few bucks selling the goods (sell the goods for game money, then 
sell game money for “real” money). In response, some game companies 
made the dragon’s items unsellable or untradeable, meaning only those 
players present when the dragon was killed were able to get the items. 
Many other decisions about virtual loot began to be considered with 
RMTs in mind, and many items became unable to trade by any means. 
Even so, mercing (as mentioned in chapter 5) was taken up by RMTs 
and “real players” alike. Players who took the quid pro quo approach 
with RMTs thought this exchange was highly beneficial, since it made 
access to some goods possible, or easier, for a price.
Player A: Did you get the drop?
Player B: they’re killin him now
Player C: u r paying for this?
Player B: aye
Player D: wait paying for what?
Player B: [game item], 20 [million]
Player A: [Holy] . . .
Player B: better than waiting for us to do [it] again61
These sorts of exchanges, whereby “real players” decided to trade game 
money for the assistance of RMTs, leaned again on the rationale that 
without RMTs, access to the coveted goods might be difficult. Accepting 
that RMTs provided access to goods (at a price) was aligned with the 
commodification of gameplay, and they were increasingly acknowledged 
as perhaps being necessary to reach certain goals within the game world. 
Moreover, a handful of players recognized that real-money trading did 
not have to be a sort of lifestyle or job, and that “real players” could also 
dabble in it to benefit themselves individually.
I’m kind of neutral about it. When I quit FFXI for the first time, I 
sold my [gear] on the [auction house] and then sold the four mil 
[game money] for about $850 US dollars, so I’ve benefitted from 
it . . . I went on the site and got a quote and then pressed a submit 
button saying I’d like to sell . . . and they said to be online for the 
next half hour and wait for a message from somebody, and then 
they come on and asked me to mail it to someone . . . a couple 
hours later they paypal’d me the money.62

124  Game Worlds Get Real
I actually spent some time leveling up different accounts and selling 
them through college. I can’t say it was really great money, but you 
could make a few hundred dollars per account if you knew what 
people wanted and were efficient with how you played.63
Recognizing that really anyone could be a real-money trader allowed 
a subpopulation of gamers not only to avoid vilifying the RMTs as the 
broader community did, but also to participate in the great game of capi­
talism themselves, selling their own game money, accounts, or virtual 
loot to make a profit on the side while still continuing to play the game. 
This minimized the categorical differences between “us” (the “real play­
ers”) and “them” (the RMTs), blurring them enough so that the players 
who dabbled in RMT saw the stigmatization and witch hunts of RMTs 
as overzealous and unnecessary.
The Phantom of “Game Balance”
The discourse about real-money trading—from the structural layer 
of the game creators, to the policing arm of the GMs, to the percep­
tions of “real players” in game communities—often boiled down to an 
almost phantom ideal, one that evoked “game balance” as the battle cry 
against gray markets. Edward Castronova argues that part of the fun 
in online games results from competition under equal opportunity.64 As 
I addressed earlier, some players’ material realities (that is, where they 
find themselves in the solid world) often do not allow them to start 
on an equal footing, even in the best-designed game worlds. However, 
this disparity is only exaggerated by the gray market that RMT creates, 
meaning that the game truly does become “unbalanced.”
I think the line is drawn when you actually start selling your 
resources outside of the game itself. Well, part of it is just that out­
side influence of that nature upsets a natural economy. If everyone 
played the game “the way it was meant to be played,” then eventu­
ally we would reach equilibrium of sorts. There would be economic 
growth in the sense that people eventually acquire more money, 
and there would be inflation, since people have more money to 
spend or can demand more money for items or services. Not dis­
similar to the real world. Having people that buy or sell gold for 
cash upsets that balance dramatically. You’re effectively creating 
money out of thin air, and driving inflation up faster than it ought 
to go.65

Pixel Profiteers 
125
Players often lament that the in-game economy has been “broken” by 
real-money trading, or that it has at least suffered from dramatic infla­
tion. Decrying that RMTs ruin the game and its “natural” economy is 
aligned with the argument of this book; that is, some players would like 
to enjoy the game as a game isolated from the rules and economics of the 
solid world (meaning less or no RMT), but this simply is not possible. 
Real-money trading has become a fixture of game worlds, just as digi­
tal consumption has become a mirror of its solid-world equivalent. The 
activities granted meaning in the reality of everyday life are inescapable 
even in worlds of play. Capitalism seeps into the game world through 
the “membrane,” and the economies are interconnected so intimately 
that there is no separation of the world of play and the world of work 
and profit.
Interestingly, game creators might be faced with more pressing ques­
tions as to who owns virtual goods, or whether the players own the time 
they spend playing, given a strong shift toward forced-resonance politics. 
In some ways, I have reiterated the RMT division as detailed in earlier 
works, and not much seems to have changed.66 There is little doubt that 
virtual loot has value (and virtual services as well), but game companies 
now quite often use this to profit through sale of digital goods. The 
rise of “valid” digital consumption practices (DLC, cash shops, etc.) in 
parallel with the persistence of the perception and discourse surround­
ing RMT is a novel combination. It will be interesting to see whether 
game creators continue to ardently uphold the rhetoric of the ToS (i.e., 
this is a fantasy game, nothing here belongs to the players)—or if they 
will relinquish their monopoly on pixel profiteering, at least in part, to 
the players themselves, including those involved in RMT. So long as a 
game creator retains the power of the governing body of its world and 
that power is seen as legitimate, its monopoly will remain unquestioned. 
There is interesting discursive interplay afoot: The game companies 
must continue to position players as consumers and not profiteers, and 
to position themselves as the legitimate rulers whose actions are in the 
best interests of the game worlds. Only within this ideological paradigm 
does the warfare between the “real players” and “invasive” populations 
persist. Perhaps the players might want to question their leaders instead.

(Doodles invented by Necronomiconopoly [Marina Gutierrez-Harsh])

I went to the guild website to sign up, join the forum discussions, 
post my crafting levels and participate as any active member is 
required. A post there read “Straight up all the ladies who say they 
are ladies and yet to prove it . . . only missing the KFC bucket 
chillin on the rubadub dub” and the message was coupled with a 
picture of a very obese, bearded, white man who was sitting at a 
computer wearing large glasses and no clothing.1
T
he transformation of virtual spaces from relatively unbound social 
spheres of identity play to ones that are far more rigid did not hap­
pen overnight. Many behaviors were afforded some latitude in these new 
online spaces that were constrained over a period of time. Some of this 
change coincided with shifts in the population of players; for example, 
women now play games significantly more than they did in the earlier 
years of virtual game worlds.2 But I began this book by explaining that 
game worlds today, from a structural and mechanical level, don’t really 
have more restrictions on identity play; if anything, players have more 
options for self-expression. Since little has changed about what you can 
do in game worlds, it’s more about the social controls of the reality of 
everyday life, particularly those that see gender as inflexible and static, 
those that attempt to rigidly dictate what you should and shouldn’t do.
It seems unimpressive that fantasy worlds of all types (games, comics, 
fiction) largely fail to formulate anything dramatically different from 
“real life,” especially in relation to gender. You don’t have to be some 
kind of social radical to think that with all this creativity, all this imagi­
nation, and in every strange world these innovative people dream up, 
CHAPTER 7
Gender Authenticity

128  Game Worlds Get Real
can we not think of a few things other than women and men? Or a 
female alien and a male version of the same alien? There are some exam­
ples, including a recent update to The Sims 4,3 but the majority of game 
worlds, especially those that ask players to play together, seem lacking 
in this area. When you go to play online in a “fictional” game world, a 
great deal of it will be more familiar than alien in respect to gender.
So the avatars that players control are largely built within certain gen­
der category limits, and game researchers have argued that avatars have 
relatively few options in respect to gender to begin with (usually just a 
dichotomy, with “ideal body types”).4 The virtual bodies of these ava­
tars are built to cater to cultural gender expectations, and though it is 
tempting to highlight the game industry as the sole source of these issues, 
the players themselves often demand gender-conformist constructs and 
balk at any novel creations.5 That is, the gamer populace wants to see 
the reality of everyday life, particularly in respect to gender, reinserted 
into the game world. In other words, the virtual bodies that gamers have 
as options are limited in scope, as many of them reflect the culturally 
defined standards of flawlessly beautiful, cute, petite, or elegant women, 
and equally muscled, imposing, or dark and brooding men. There are 
few exceptions to these common currents across the game worlds, and 
there are no “third gender” or alternative categories to the gender binary 
in avatar selection. For my purposes, I will refer to avatars as “virtual 
men” and “virtual women” when referencing gender, because avatars do 
not possess sex. They have none of the biological or physical indicators 
of sex, and thus they are only gendered constructs.
Additionally, emphasizing the differences of virtual men and virtual 
women is still seen in gender-locked equipment6 or differential presenta­
tions of the same outfit (by gender), which is done under the veil of “aes­
thetic appeal.” Not surprisingly, virtual women show considerably more 
skin than virtual men, even while wearing the exact same piece of equip­
ment. Although a notable amount of community outcry does clamor 
for gear that isn’t gender-locked and more similar presentation, there is 
about equal social backlash to such requests, saying that “women should 
be women and men should be men.” Avatars, in this respect, become 
conduits of culturally defined gender ideals.7 Their presentation, bodies, 
dress, and emotes (gestures) all reinforce assumed differences between 
men and women, and in doing so they are seen as proxies for the play­
ers controlling them. This means that gender is omnipresent (i.e., it is 
always being performed and displayed, and we are always being held 
accountable for our gendered behaviors) when interacting with play­
ers in game worlds. You may be in a fictional and digital space, but the 

Gender Authenticity 
129
players know you can’t escape your body, your gender, and what society 
expects of you.
Most players throughout the life cycle of online games have oper­
ated on the assumption that gaming is what men do, and that women 
gamers are rare. Because gaming continues to be presented as a male-
dominated space, the search for gender in online game worlds is actually 
a search for “real women.” This leads to a process (spearheaded by men) 
of vetting the avatar population for women gamers. This process, which 
has adopted new elements over the last several years, has become an 
automatic component of the game world, and it uses the sharing of cau­
tionary tales as a means of social control. Players discuss and recall the 
“gender faker” (now more of a myth than a reality) through sharing sto­
ries of romantic debacles, stolen accounts, and cybersex regrets. These 
tales are shared as a reminder that men (who are assumed to be hetero­
sexual) should remain vigilant and critical of any player’s claim to be a 
woman. The message to players in game worlds is clear: social transpar­
ency online is preferable for smooth interactions, any “woman” claiming 
to be such will have to prove it, and gender fakers will be punished and 
their spoiled identities spread throughout the game community.
Seeking Women Gamers
In the early years of online game worlds, there was an ongoing debate 
over the existence, nonexistence, or general rarity of women gamers. 
Men who played these games typically assumed that women were “out 
there somewhere,” but claims to the gender category “woman” were 
often met with skepticism. There was an expectation that because game 
worlds and digital spaces in general allowed for the creation of multiple 
identities, gender switching (or fluidity) would be common and perhaps 
normalized. Furthermore, it was assumed that the importance of solid-
world gender would lessen, considering that players interacted predomi­
nantly using avatars and could easily cloak their solid-world statuses.8
But unless specifically acknowledged as permissible (for example, 
within role-playing9 circles, where the practice is more or less granted 
social validity and where most players are overtly of the dampened-
resonance type), players tend toward a gender authenticity norm that 
demands either that player-to-avatar gender remain consistent, or that 
players controlling opposite-gendered avatars openly disclose their 
“deviance” so as not to be mistakenly identified. This social standard 
rose in parallel to other online realms (social networking sites and the 
like), moving toward greater social transparency across the nexus of 

130  Game Worlds Get Real
digital spaces. In fact, attempting to maintain some form of privacy or 
anonymity in any online network, including game worlds, is often a par­
adoxical and suspicious standpoint to hold. The assumption that props 
up this transparency and authenticity norm is that if you are online to 
be social with other people, why would you avoid telling those people 
about who you are?
Being conscious of and cautious of the “gender fakers,” players began 
sifting through the game communities and assessing claims to gender. 
Players used their assumptions about gaming culture, avatar choice, in-
game behavior, and solid-world “proof” to award (and celebrate) the 
confirmed “woman gamer.” Conversely, male players who “faked gen­
der” and were exposed during this process were reviled. These “fakers” 
were treated with open hostility, questioned about their sexuality, and 
ostracized from the gaming community.
Only Men Play Games, and Women Rarely Play as Men
Game worlds have largely been constructed by men and young men, and 
they were assumed to be populated by them. Because of this, during the 
early years of online game worlds, most players (if not all) were assumed 
to be men. Although the number of women gamers has increased over 
the last decade, players bring the broader cultural assumption about 
“who typical gamers are” in respect to gender into the game worlds 
they populate, framing their expectations of the people they are likely to 
be interacting with and what avatar gender choices certain players will 
make, given their own gender category.
The initial phase in the gender vetting process operated on the assump­
tion that gaming online was a male-dominated arena. Since gaming as a 
subculture has had a much larger male following, many players in these 
game worlds felt as though “90 percent of the people playing online are 
guys” and often expressed that this would always remain the case.
I doubt there will ever be anything near one-to-one ratio of guys to 
girls on any [online game] . . . I don’t think [women] find games like 
this as interesting. It does take a certain personality to like [these 
games] and you see it more in guys . . . I just think it’s going to be 
that way for a long time.10
By default, both men and women assumed that most online game worlds 
were disproportionately filled with men. To believe in this perception 
meant that any given avatar in the game world was most likely controlled 

Gender Authenticity 
131
by a man or boy, so there was no need for anyone in the community to 
prove that they were male-bodied in the solid world (e.g., there was no 
need to offer pictures or voice chat invitations to prove yourself to be 
male). The act of playing the game alone gave any player, regardless 
of gender, a sort of cultural “male currency,” which in many cases was 
evidence enough of being male. This means that gaming (just like the 
Internet)11 is perceived to be so male-dominated that simply playing a 
game may be indicative of maleness (until proven otherwise).
This is a classic conflation that is highlighted in sociology and gen­
der studies: the public equates culturally defined gendered behavior, like 
gaming, as evidence of sex—that is, femaleness or maleness.12 Playing a 
video game does not mean that someone has a penis (in this example), 
but it is used as evidence to support the assumption that the person 
behind the screen is male. In a sense, our cultural beliefs about what 
activities are “gender-appropriate” for men and women serve as (some­
times grossly inaccurate) proxies for identifying unseen bodies. This 
was indicated also by how some female gamers decided to purposefully, 
though without much effort, label themselves as men (that is, if someone 
asked them about gender). They could simply claim to be men, and when 
they did, they were not asked to prove it.
I usually pick characters that are the same gender as me since then 
it is easier to get involved in the game I am playing. I figure that . . . 
you’d want to put yourself out there so why not choose the right 
gender? I was kind of naive about that though when I started to 
play [online games] and didn’t see myself becoming the object of 
many a mouth-breathing-moron’s desires, but ho-hum! The beauty 
of the internet is that you can just say you’re a guy and they’ll run 
away thinking that it is so.13
Women who played in game worlds often commented on how simple 
claiming to be a man was, and none could recall being asked to “prove” 
in any way that they were in fact a man or male-bodied. Because the 
player base believed that a man was probably behind any given avatar, 
the gender interrogation process instead focused on determining who 
the “true women” were in these worlds. As several players put it (in 
varying terms), “People should know that the first rule of online gaming 
is ‘male until proven female.’”
This means that women’s “femaleness” was scrutinized, similar to 
how professional athletics and gender segregation in sports is about 
defining the boundaries of “female” and guarding that construct from 

132  Game Worlds Get Real
any “male” infiltrators.14 Without tumbling down the rabbit hole of 
deconstructing the categories of male and female, and explaining how 
the criteria for each is largely contingent on the current thought struc­
tures within the medical, scientific, and cultural fields, let’s pay attention 
to the purpose of this process as we continue. In athletics, we all too 
readily assume that “male” needs to be kept outside the “female” cat­
egory because of assumptions about fairness, capability, and how much 
faster and stronger a person becomes when they have extra testoster­
one and a penis (because reasons).15 In online game worlds, claiming 
a particular sex category is not about physicality. Instead, being denied 
“woman” as a gender category (and the corresponding female body) is 
about maintaining a clearly defined regimen of heteronormative behav­
iors. It’s about players being treated differently based on gender, and 
it’s about a gamer community, just like in the solid world, laboring to 
reinstate these social differences in a fantasy world that could have cir­
cumvented them.
In addition to assuming that most players in the game were men, it 
was generally understood that if a player was a woman, she would not 
be controlling a virtual man (i.e., avatar). This was in part due to the 
growing expectation that demanded gender authenticity in game worlds, 
meaning there was a social push to select an avatar congruent with your 
own gender identity—which, just as a reminder, is obviously quite prob­
lematic for those who do not identify as men or women.16 However, as 
research in this area has pointed out, women players are more consist­
ent than men in creating avatars that are congruent with their solid-
world gender.17
I’m always female because I am in real life, haha, and I like cats 
so in FFXI I love the [cat girls], on WoW I’m all different toons. I 
had a [alternate character] that was male, but didn’t like it much, I 
mean I don’t like to pretend I’m a different gender than I really am, 
even though I’m really not a cat woman, ha.18
Many players share the same sentiment as that above, noting that play­
ers should not “pretend” to be a different gender. Despite being in a 
“fantasy world” where players could frolic about as orcs, elves, or cat­
like humanoids, choosing a character that was not the gender we would 
consider your body as belonging to in the “real world” was, in some 
respects, seen as deceitful. Even so, some players did “switch gender” 
in terms of picking an “opposite-gender” avatar, but those players were 
usually men and not women.

Gender Authenticity 
133
Hmm, that is an interesting question! Not sure, I guess I think it’s 
interesting with regards to the genders people choose. I see a lot of 
guys playing female characters but not vice versa. I guess I choose 
female characters because I can relate to them more? That sounds 
silly, ha. I don’t play in the role-playing sense. My characters are 
just an avatar for me playing the game, so I guess I naturally gravi­
tate towards making one that is my own gender.19
I’ve never been asked while playing a male character. Most people 
assume that anyone playing a male avatar, and damn near most 
female characters, are all men. I assume that any female character 
is still being played by a male until I’m told otherwise. Like the say­
ing goes, “GIRL” means “guy in real life.”20
Given that women were far more “gender-consistent” in their avatar 
selections, most of the communities in these games decidedly eliminated 
all virtual men from indicating women gamers. When players who were 
usually men themselves attempted to filter through the avatars in the 
game world seeking “real women,” all virtual men (avatars consider to 
be “male”) were disqualified because women so rarely played as men.
Claiming to Be a Woman, and Then Having to Prove It
Because all virtual men were patently eliminated from being seen as any 
indication of “real women,” players instead focused on the virtual women 
(avatars) of the game world to find “real” women gamers. Players con­
trolling virtual women were often pressed into conversations about their 
solid-world gender identity and body. That is, selecting a female avatar 
with which to play the game meant that a player was far more likely to 
have to address the question “Who are you, really?” This question was 
sometimes thinly veiled and in some cases completely direct. Frequently, 
players decided to openly and preemptively claim their solid-world gen­
der identity. That is, men controlling virtual women usually announced 
it to be so, in order to demonstrate that they were not trying to trick 
anyone in the game world, whereas women controlling virtual women 
claimed to be solid-world women because they desired for other players 
to believe they were “real women.”
[They ask] because they don’t believe I’m really a girl and when I 
state I am, they still don’t [believe it] . . . like I’m some perv with a 
chick char . . . or I’m some kid.21

134  Game Worlds Get Real
I felt like we weren’t as trusted because there was always that pos­
sibility of me being a guy playing a girl.22
They want to know so they can act a certain way around you. I 
can go into that more, but it boils down to being treated differently 
based on whether I’m a man or a woman.23
Assholes, mostly. Can’t play the game knowing there could be some 
girl in the party. It can get worse when they invite you to chat with 
them privately, which pretty much means they are going to treat 
you like anything but just another player.24
Women were treated very differently in the game world (I will discuss 
this more in chapter 8), and because they were, and maybe even more 
so because players wanted to ensure that gender differences from the 
solid world were carefully reconstructed in the game world, establishing 
whether a player was truly a particular gender (in this case, whether a 
player was a woman) allowed the cycle of differential treatment by gen­
der to continue. This meant that women players who controlled virtual 
women not only had to openly declare to be women when asked, but 
they were also continually scrutinized for their gender behavior as they 
played.
Strangely enough, I remember confusing girls with guys and guys 
with girls because they weren’t playing the “correct gender.” I guess 
I tried to evaluate their behavior online. Sometimes I feel like I can 
tell if they’re a girl (not all the time) with the way they use their 
smiley faces, or, I don’t know. The name is a hint sometimes.25
I think it’s easy enough to tell when someone is a woman. Women 
are more talkative, more interested in the social aspects of the game. 
They like dressing up their avatars and what not, but I’ve only seen 
a few involved in hardcore content. It makes it pretty easy.26
Women are more casual. They care more about the social realm, 
like making other players happy than they are about getting things 
done or clearing difficult content.27
Women players were constantly being held accountable for their gen­
der behavior, while virtual men were granted a default “male gamer” 
status without much proof (not like they should have to prove male­
ness, but then, femaleness should not have to be proven in the game 
world either). In part, this meant that simply choosing a virtual man 

Gender Authenticity 
135
as one’s avatar was evidence enough of being a solid-world man, and 
the choice reflected the efforts of “doing gender.”28 On the other hand, 
those who played as virtual women were expected either to openly dis­
close that they were men (in which case their gender would not neces­
sarily be questioned, but the motivations for their avatar selection were 
scrutinized) or to prove to the virtual community that they were “real” 
women (both through doing femininity and providing solid-world evi­
dence of being female-bodied).
Much of the liberating promise of early game worlds, particularly 
before “verifying gender” was as simple a process as it is now, has 
largely dissipated as the reality of everyday life has been firmly instilled 
in game-world culture and identity claims. Players are expected to be 
transparent about their solid-world bodies and identities to avoid “con­
fusing” the online gamer community. Forced world resonance is the 
ideology that dictates gender presentation in game worlds, in that peo­
ple should not try to be anything other than who they already are in 
the “real world.” This means that despite being in a game world, we are 
pressured to “just be ourselves” and not operate under a unique set of 
rules, as one would think a game would provide us for identity play and 
performance.
Furthering the digital sleuthing imperative against virtual women 
claiming to be solid-world women, some players believed that “feminine 
performance” (i.e., emphasizing behaviors believed to indicate feminin­
ity) could be faked, and they shared grand stories of performances that 
had deceived everyone, including romantic partners, guild29 members, 
and friends. The script of what appeared to be emphasized femininity30 
was, after all, something anyone could attempt in a game using a virtual 
woman (avatar). Women were continually treated as suspect until they 
produced more suitable “proof” that they were really women.
Yeah, a couple of times I got, “Oh you’re a girl?” in response to 
things I said, and then I got questions about it. But maybe only 
once had somebody ask, “Who in here is a girl IRL [in real life]?” 
But I think for me, I kind of felt like people automatically thought 
girl characters were boys, and I didn’t want to be a boy in people’s 
minds so I was pretty verbal about being a woman. Blatantly, when 
I saw an opportunity in conversation to say I had a boyfriend, 
therefore provoking questions, or simply saying, “Hey I’m a girl 
also” . . . I pretty much had to “prove” I was female. I put my pic­
ture on ffxiplayers.com [where people have their picture with their 
avatar name on their server option] so people could see.31

136  Game Worlds Get Real
All the time and I tell them I’m female, I even made a [social net­
working profile] just to prove it . . . there was this one kid . . . she 
kept telling me that I was a guy, and that bothered me for some 
reason so I decided to make a [social networking profile] and told 
her to go look and there I am. It was silly but at the time I liked it.32
In the earlier years before ubiquitous voice chat and social media, two 
believable pieces of evidence of being a “real” woman were open claims 
of desire for men (demonstrations of their assumed heterosexuality) and 
producing a verifiable picture (which indicated the reality of their solid-
world bodies). The conflation of gender and sexuality is a cognitive entan­
glement that befuddles most social realities of the solid world. “Doing 
femininity” or being a solid-world woman was assumed to be connected 
with desiring men. However, your gender need not indicate anything 
about your sexuality at all. People often think they are really good at 
identifying a person’s sexuality based on gender performance, when really 
there are no such indicants. For example, just because someone scribbles 
outside the “man box” in terms of the culturally defined gender behav­
iors of masculinity does not necessarily give any hints about with whom 
that person wants to have sex or fall in love. This mistake is reflective of 
how rigid our constructs for gender truly can be, meaning that even small 
deviations in behavior cause the public to assume a cascade of misleading 
theories. It also means that women seeking to be seen as women in-game 
had to emphasize their heterosexuality to gain their gender.
Additionally, photographic evidence was often “proof enough” of 
being a woman, though it could still be disputed. Before it was shut 
down, FFXIPlayers.com33 displayed hundreds of players’ “real-world 
faces” by encouraging them to take pictures of themselves with the 
phrase “rpgfaces” in the picture. Even back then the phrase could be 
photoshopped (and some photos were indeed argued over, and those 
photos were usually of women trying to prove to the virtual community 
that they were women), but these pictures were seen as more believable 
than a picture with no proof of date.
Player A: Nice pic on the site there [Player B]
Player B: thnx
Player C: [Player B] when the hell was that pic taken? That coke 
label is way old, you have to be like what 40 or 50 now?
Player D: yea I don’t think you’re that hot
Player E: Guys leave [Player B] alone
Player C: w/e she prolly isn’t even a girl34

Gender Authenticity 
137
Players in guilds were often encouraged to share their “real-life identi­
ties” on guild-specific Web sites. This included submitting photos, creat­
ing profiles, and sharing updates about your life outside the game as well 
as your accomplishments in the game. Some players attempting to fabri­
cate their identities as women (like Player B, who was eventually booted 
from the guild for “pretending to be a woman”) produced pictures as 
evidence because their gender performance in the game world was not 
enough to convince players. But this evidence was also scrutinized, as 
with Player B, who had copied a photo from an old yearbook, which 
was later discovered by a guild member.
Another route to providing “proof” was a simple phone call. Before the 
use of voice chat programs (discussed below), calling someone you met 
online was a common path to furthering a social bond. In cases of possible 
“gender fakers,” phone calls were, for a few years, the definitive “proof” 
that a person claiming to be a woman was actually a woman. However, 
several players also avoided phone calls due to safety concerns, as giving 
out a home number to a stranger on the Internet was seen as a rather dan­
gerous gamble, even if your social reputation within the game was at stake.
A few asked for my home phone when I was a little young to be 
getting calls from strange men. I made that mistake, and once he 
was sure about who I was, it just got worse. I started getting gifts in 
the mail, and there was talk about getting married. You can imag­
ine that my parents were none too pleased.35
This possibly dangerous issue was later circumvented with the use of 
voice chat programs such as Skype, Ventrilo, Mumble, and Discord.36 
Voice chat is still largely considered the gold standard for confirming 
gender, though with the ubiquity of social media and “oversharing cul­
ture,” players in the game share much more about “who they really are” 
now than ever before. That is, many questions about gender eventually 
end with players becoming connected through other digital communities 
outside the game (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and so on). In doing so, 
players’ solid-world lives, instead of their game-world selves, become 
entwined, and a myriad of pictures and post histories within the subse­
quent digital communities or social networks stand in as proof of being 
a woman (or proof of being anything, really, as the reality of everyday 
life and the solid world overwrite any alternative identity construction 
taking place in the game world).
While many players (mostly men) felt the scrutiny was justifiable 
because “you should just be authentic and not try to pretend or fake 

138  Game Worlds Get Real
anything online,” many women felt incredibly frustrated because they 
were not trusted by other players. Game worlds demanded that “female­
ness” be proven and femininity emphasized. But this was not because 
women experienced their own femininity as unstable (although some 
experienced this erosion after repeated inquiries and criticism); it was 
because men attempted to perform masculinity predicated upon reify­
ing differences between men and women, while reinforcing heterosexual 
desire. In other words, men were compulsive about ensuring that they 
were not “fooled” into assisting, dating, or having cybersex with “fake” 
women, because it threatened their own gender and sexuality.
Anytime I hear a “woman” in game talking like that [speaking of 
a guild member] it reminds me of this dude who played as a chick. 
He cybered with guys to get gear, stole his roommate’s picture to 
send to guys, sent it to everyone, and by the way she [speaking of 
the roommate] was hot lol. So then, he had this girl that was a 
lesbian in our [guild] believing he was a dyke to get stuff from her, 
but she started to get suspicious like he just didn’t know enough to 
fool her I guess. Well, the roommate eventually caught on when she 
found her picture somewhere online. He had basically stolen her 
identity, used her credit card to pay for his account. Like this guy 
went all out to pretend to be a chick. When she started putting the 
pieces together this guy had been doing this shit for years.37
Stories like this one were used as cautionary tales and were spread across 
the social groups in these game worlds. Players routinely told outrageous 
stories and joked about them with other players, especially when virtual 
women in the game were claiming their identity as solid-world women. 
The sharing of such elaborate hoaxes convinced men to remain unnatu­
rally suspicious. Although some women met the ridiculous standards 
imposed upon them to prove they were female, the practice of sharing 
these phenomenal narratives of deceit informed women, and reminded 
men, that attaining the status of a solid-world woman was never truly 
possible. After all, there was a chance that the player could really be a 
man who had stolen credit cards, created fake accounts, used someone 
else’s photos, and performed this charade for years without being caught.
Even as voice chat became the gold standard (and phone calls before 
that), stories of players using their sisters, roommates, and even girl­
friends as their “female voice” to pass as women online were common. 
Everyone knew someone who had been duped with an incredible level 
of effort, and the stories were liberally spread among the community. 
Men in game worlds were constantly being reminded that the nefarious 

Gender Authenticity 
139
“gender faker” was out there somewhere, and that even hypervigilance 
in vetting “women gamers” was sometimes not enough. This fed men’s 
fears about being mistakenly intimate with other men who were attempt­
ing to pass as women, highlighting that without social controls, straight 
men’s self-identified sexuality was in constant peril.
Rejecting the “Solid-World Woman” and Searching for 
Gender Fluidity
Those playing virtual women who self-identified as solid-world men jus­
tified their avatar choice largely by reinforcing heterosexuality through 
objectifying virtual women (e.g., they saw their avatars as “hot” and said 
that it was “better to stare at a woman’s ass all day rather than a man’s”). 
Their reasons for doing so are often cliché, and they largely see their 
avatars as sexual objects rather than characters that reflect on their own 
identities in a novel or gender-nonconformist way. I discuss eroticizing 
avatars in chapter 9, but these men are not the focus of the remainder of 
this chapter. Instead, the last group to discuss is solid-world men (though 
some latitude in this identity does exist) who attempt to pass as women 
in game worlds (or as gender-fluid, nonconformist, etc.) and are in many 
cases rejected by segments of the game world for doing so.
Due to players carefully monitoring and filtering the avatar popula­
tion for “real women,” men attempting to pass as women had to prove 
themselves to be women, and when they failed to do so, they had to deal 
with the social consequences. These men marshaled different reasons for 
desiring to play virtual women and to be treated as women in the game. 
Some claimed they enjoyed taking on a gender or personality differ­
ent from their solid-world reality, while others claimed to enjoy deceiv­
ing players and reaping the “benefits” (loosely applied, and discussed 
at length in chapter 8) of being treated like a woman. However, conse­
quences for deceit were rather high, and characters were often publicly 
chastised in the game and sometimes forced to quit or migrate elsewhere.
At the center of this search for “real women” were men who feared 
the possibility of consummating an in-game relationship with another 
solid-world man who was playing a virtual woman. Cautionary tales 
were shared throughout social circles and guilds to remind men to be 
vigilant in their assessments of all players claiming to be women, and 
they did so mostly to protect men’s rather fragile heterosexuality.
I remember [Velvet], the one who dated a few people in the guild. 
“She” was pretty good at avoiding any kind of contact outside the 
game. Friend of mine dated her for 6 months. Six months . . . and 

140  Game Worlds Get Real
still never talked to on the phone or anything. He got fed up and 
broke it off. “She” moved onto another guy in the guild, and later 
another, in a different guild, once everyone stopped believing her. 
I’m pretty sure one of her many boyfriends said she’s really a boy, a 
young one at that. Everyone got duped by him and started calling 
him out in shout and whatever, warning people about it. I think he 
eventually switched servers to go find some other fools.38
When players were “caught” faking gender, or being less than completely 
transparent about who they were in the solid world, the larger commu­
nity (mostly men) took it upon themselves to “correct” the behavior by 
ostracizing the “faker” or removing the “faker” from the world. In other 
words, men were invested in protecting the gender identity and heter­
osexuality of each other (identities that they held in the solid world), 
rather than acknowledging that when information from the solid world 
is left out, different forms of romance can flourish; men, even straight-
identified men, can feel romantically attracted to players whose gender 
is simply a feminine construct but whose solid-world body is unknown. 
Players instead chose to chastise “gender fakers” openly in general or 
public chat, which is basically like informing an entire community, or a 
very large city filled with players. This occasionally led to players having 
to switch servers, change avatar names, or quit the game entirely.
[On] a few occasions there was a man posing as a female and when 
people found out it was disturbing and they were pretty much out­
cast and forced to quit haha . . . another poser was discovered 
when another girl was questioning them one day and asked about 
periods and other girl stuff, which they knew nothing about. They 
closed up and disappeared haha, embarrassed no doubt, there 
was ridicule, mostly just bringing it up over and over constantly 
reminding everyone about it.39
Although players found fakers “disturbing,” both men and women 
noted that some fakers were in it for the benefits of being treated like 
women, including being given virtual money, being offered assistance, 
and being allowed access to bigger battles and better equipment (again, 
this is discussed in chapter 8). This means that continuing to uphold sep­
arate standards in the treatment of women and men contributed at least 
partially to the prevalence of those attempting to pass as virtual women.
Furthermore, by attempting to police gender authenticity, men were 
subtly acknowledging that romantic relationships between two men 

Gender Authenticity 
141
(though scripted as “heterosexual” relationships between a virtual man 
and a virtual woman) were common, believable, and, to some, enjoyable. 
In other words, straight men were assuming that gender behavior (e.g., 
femininity in the game world) was congruent with sex category (being 
a solid-world woman) and acting on their gender behavior–dependent 
desire. They were attracted to the behaviors of a player (femininity as a 
performance) and not the player’s actual body. This is not surprising, as 
much of our sexual and romantic desire is predicated on ideas we have 
about what we can find attractive given the social rules for our sexual­
ity (e.g., if you are a straight man, you can only find feminine attributes 
attractive). Yet we often assume that those attributes are perfectly con­
gruent with a corresponding body, but this is not always the case in the 
solid world, and in the game world it is much easier to see the inconsist­
ency here.
Men who exposed their in-game romantic partners as solid-world men 
quickly scrambled to reaffirm their own gender and sexuality through 
labeling their former romantic partners as gender deviants (and as sick, 
perverted, or otherwise) while simultaneously attempting to recoup their 
own threatened heterosexuality. Implicit in this vetting process for “real 
women” is the reality that online relationships (and ideally, any relation­
ship) can circumvent the power of the body, even if only temporarily. 
The compulsive labeling of “real women gamers” based on solid-world 
“proof” serves as evidence of how game worlds did, for a brief moment 
in history, blur gender and sexuality and allow anyone to pursue any­
one romantically. This reality is acknowledged, in that men could be 
“fooled” into relationships with other men presenting themselves as 
women. However, this potential remains largely an artifact of the past 
(or in spaces where technology still lags considerably), as the compul­
sion to vet women gamers has been met with technological advances 
that reduce the process to a swift demand for a voice chat conversation.
Still, there were other players who enjoyed experimenting with gender 
boundaries in these game worlds, given that opportunities in the solid 
world may have been more limited, or dangerous. They were search­
ing for something novel, enriching, or perhaps more fluid than the rigid 
structures and rules that govern gender in the solid world. Some men 
switched gender in game worlds to challenge themselves.
From a role-playing perspective, well, I have better names for 
female characters . . . and there’s something I find interesting about 
assuming the role of a female. Not, mind you, with the intention 
of trying to fool anyone, but just the idea of assuming a feminine 

142  Game Worlds Get Real
mentality. I would probably liken that to say, writing a story with 
a protagonist of opposite gender. Trying to get into someone else’s 
head that is clearly quite different than yourself.40
And some men played with gender in order to deceive others for fun and 
novelty:
Yeah, a couple of times just for the hell of it. It’s cruel, I know, but 
letting some little teenager think he’s hitting on a girl is so much 
fun up until they start stalking you. But then there is the whole 
role-play factor, sometimes it is just more fun to play the innocent 
kitty healer. I suppose there is no way to tell. If people do it, then 
that’s their choice.41
I’ve suckered a few guys in the past. I’m not exactly proud of it per 
se, sometimes that just sort of happens. I remember being asked 
if I was “really a girl” once and I just said “yes” without thinking 
about it. It felt like it was none of their business anyway, so I just 
went with it.42
While admitting that playing with gender was fun and that it could be 
part of the online gaming experience, gender switching for men was 
sometimes difficult and required a great amount of effort because other 
players were constantly assessing claims to the “woman gamer” status. 
This meant that even if men saw some benefit (whether it was expressive, 
practical, or deceitful) in renegotiating their own gender behavior and 
identity in game worlds, the online communities and the push toward 
forced resonance between worlds might not allow them to do so. It was 
difficult to keep up the pose that they were someone different in the 
game world when calls for “authenticity” led back to the reality of eve­
ryday life.
Roger Lancaster wrote, “A rule is best preserved in its infractions. And 
a structure, a system of practices, is most readily defined, not by what 
is central to it, but by what is apparently marginal to it.”43 Over time, 
“exceptional spaces” were created as pockets within the game worlds. 
By some measures, these spaces and social groups provided a place of 
acceptance for those operating outside of the social controls and rules 
that had bled into the game world from the reality of everyday life, but 
by another measure, they did nothing more than highlight marginalized 
groups within these worlds, as they were often set aside from the core of 
these communities and spoken of by the more dominant groups as being 

Gender Authenticity 
143
spaces of deviance. However, these small pockets did embrace less nor­
malized identity expressions and provided a ready group of supportive 
figures.
In the real world, I am a big guy, big features, and muscles. But I 
have never felt “manly.” I enjoyed things like painting my finger­
nails, and playing with my hair growing up. Joining the [guild] 
was great because everyone seems fairly open-minded. I just hate 
“manly” and I don’t feel I could dress feminine because I’m a big 
dude, big boned, broad build, but I feel so beautiful when I have 
fingernail polish on, especially colors like metallic blue, and smell­
ing girly makes me feel good.44
For a long time, I did what I was supposed to do, even in game. I 
actually got “married” in game three different times, all to women, 
which was “correct” for me as a “man.” Then I met someone a bit 
different. He connected me with this group, more people kind of 
lost between the lines like me. Yeah, some of them are into very 
odd things, and the rest of the players see you in not the greatest 
light since you are with them . . . but they are far more accepting 
of things I’ve felt about myself for a long time than anyone else I 
know in real life.45
Several “QUILTBAG-friendly”46 spaces have developed in game worlds 
over the last few years, though many of these social groups have high­
lighted that they are often harassed just for their presence in the game. In 
fact, a leader of one of these groups dodged my own questions because 
she had suffered years of abuse from the player base and felt the need to 
be constantly on guard. While these spaces are much needed for under­
represented identities, it is important to note that they do not create 
anything novel in the game world. They are simply extensions of solid-
world identity politics, offering refuge for players who already uphold 
these identities and, again, putting more stress on the reality of everyday 
life being unimpeachable, even in spaces of play.
Those who afford themselves gender flexibility still face bifurcation in 
the game design (i.e., there are only women and men as avatar options) 
as well as segregation into “exceptional” social spaces such as RP (role-
playing) guilds or guilds oriented toward marginalized identities (e.g., 
QUILTBAG). Players largely deny the possibilities of fluid gender play 
and cite a consistency and authenticity norm that curtails our collective 
imagination and has more or less attempted to snuff out any alternate 

144  Game Worlds Get Real
reality constructs. Even so, gender authenticity issues in game worlds 
vividly highlight the (temporary) potential that new technologies create 
that allows for disruption of the social tapestry within windows of cul­
tural lag. While social latitude appears operable during these historical 
epochs, the larger, more structural milieu of gender power and essen­
tialist assumptions of sex and sexuality will continue to erode any true 
potential for change promised by technology and digitalization. The 
future will likely see many more closing doors as new digital technolo­
gies are produced (virtual reality47 likely being the first candidate on 
the horizon). These technologies will briefly open the collective social 
imagination, only to have it shut down once more as belief in the power 
and meaning of the reality of everyday life and its gender and sexuality 
constructs will follow shortly behind, erasing all novel possibilities like 
so many bytes of data.


(Doodles invented by Necronomiconopoly [Marina Gutierrez-Harsh])

Any woman knows what it’s like. There’s a captive audience in 
some ways. I’m not saying all the men out there are desperate, or 
that they are bad guys, or worse. But being a woman in the game is, 
at times, uncomfortable. They don’t even know you, but they think 
they want you. They treat you like a pseudo-girlfriend, and less like 
just another character killing monsters and clearing dungeons.1
T
he classic role-playing game Lunar: Silver Star Story2 weaves the 
tale of the reincarnation of the goddess Althena into the talented, 
beautiful songstress Luna, and the quest of (Dragon Master hopeful) 
Alex’s journey to save her. Goddesses in the fantasy genre have been 
both idolized and infantilized. Despite Luna’s latent omnipotence, she is 
merely a fragile girl who is kidnapped by the Magic Emperor and used 
as a rather sexualized pawn. Only Alex’s heroic quest (and his assumedly 
chaste love) will save Luna and allow her to live life as a normal girl. 
She is all-powerful and radiant, yet she is helpless and manipulated, and 
catered to, by men in a struggle for power.
Studying gender often yields such paradoxical attributes, or sometimes, 
contradictions between what we, as researchers or as people, may want 
to believe is an ideal outcome and what is held in tension by competing 
forces. For example, arguments over whether women’s sexual power is a 
net positive or negative can be very difficult to parse and may lead some 
people to conclude that women, when connected to sexuality, are always 
at a disadvantage, given the current gendered power structure;3 while 
others may argue that women can use sexual empowerment and agency 
as a vehicle to increased autonomy.4 It is my personal and professional 
CHAPTER 8
Goddess Paradox

148  Game Worlds Get Real
preference not to necessarily argue for or against a particular set of con­
sequences, but instead to draw attention to areas of concern, raise the 
general level of critical thinking about a particular issue, and more or 
less allow informed citizens to determine their paths forward rather than 
suggesting an ideal path from my own standpoint.
Still, it is rather concerning (as with previous chapters in this book) 
that many efforts within game communities and virtual worlds are pre­
occupied with drawing lines between gamers and non-gamers; that is, 
those who are seen as accepted and appreciated within the culture, and 
those who are not as much. Given that concern, turning our attention to 
how women are treated in these spaces is as important as studying those 
who play for varying motivations, or those who play as a form of work, 
or those who play to consume, and so on (and in chapter 9, those who 
play with sexual gratification in mind).
As previously discussed in chapter 7, players believe that gender is one 
of the most important factors in determining how a person is treated 
within the game, and they reason that the process of identifying “real 
women” is in order to be able to treat the respective genders as they 
should be treated (in a sense, dragging the constructs for gendered treat­
ment from the solid world into the game world). If women “prove” they 
are female-bodied, ironically this grants them sexual and romantic power 
over men, while allowing (if not encouraging) men to infantilize women 
within the game as inferior players (thus the “goddess paradox”).5 This 
concept not only requires that women’s (proclaimed) solid-world bodies 
be the conduit of both their empowerment and disempowerment, but 
also that both come as consequences of a form of masculinity that man­
dates heterosexuality as standard.
Rewarding Solid-World Women
Players who “proved” that they were women (that is, they were believed 
to be women and accepted as women after resorting to any of the paths 
mentioned in chapter 7) were confronted with gaming experiences that 
were significantly different from those of the players who were assumed 
to be men. Women continue to be treated as welcome “exceptions” in 
game worlds (they are sometimes called “unicorns” or other infantilizing 
labels meant to highlight their rarity yet which still smack of suspicion 
in respect to their “gamer” identity), and they are treated as exceptions 
are generally treated: differently. Part of this exceptional treatment spe­
cifically undermines their identity claims to the “gamer” title. In other 
words, men often interact with women gamers in ways that erode their 
accreditation as gamers, instead treating them as romantic or sexual 

Goddess Paradox 
149
objects, as invalid or incompetent players, or by simply not letting them 
express their own autonomy and game mastery. This is not to say that all 
men interact with women in games (or women who play games) in such 
a way, but instead that women, even after establishing their gender iden­
tity as a believable fact (at the request of men who fear being “duped”), 
do so only to be denied the same treatment as men in the game world—
that is, to be just one of the gamers, and not to be seen as “special” or 
“exceptional” for their gender alone.
By the same token, men participating in the differentiation of interac­
tions between known female gamers and the rest of the gaming com­
munity serve to reinforce the idea that gender matters (perhaps more 
than it should) in framing how people interact with one another. That 
is, social transparency norms place pressure on players to disclose their 
solid-world selves only so that the broader community can treat them 
the way they would treat any other woman, or man, or young kid, or 
whatever. Instead of interacting with the person as an individual, play­
ers go back to using social categories from the solid world to frame 
their interactions. Yet again, this dashes any interactional latitude that 
may be afforded to the game world when strangers meet one another. 
Instead of basing the interaction on the qualities of the two individuals 
themselves as they meet in a strange new setting, we refer back to infor­
mation from the solid world (gender, age, race, language, sexuality, and 
so forth) to help us decide what to say and how to act. In a sense, we 
can’t get out of our own way (or our societal norms can’t get out of our 
heads) when we play, and thus women in the game world are treated as 
women in the solid world, propping up some problematic issues within 
gaming culture.
Reaping the “Benefits” of Being Treated as a Woman in a 
World of Men
At first blush, it can appear as though women gamers experience a certain 
set of benefits when they participate in online game worlds as women. 
Having jumped through the hoops of “proving” they are women, they 
“earn the right to be treated as women” (I’m being facetious here, clearly). 
This means that their gender becomes a “master status,”6 as it usually is 
in the solid world. “Being a woman” becomes the lens through which 
their actions are judged and frames how other players interact with them.
Superficially, it may appear to men, who are not treated in the same 
way, that women are given “special treatment” that is wholly to their 
benefit. While not entirely inaccurate at a practical level (for example, 
players gifting you valuable items is indeed a helpful outcome for your 

150  Game Worlds Get Real
pocketbook), this difference in treatment has latent functions and del­
eterious consequences as well, primarily in respect to women’s inclusion 
in gaming communities on an equal footing with all other gamers. Men 
and women are aware of differential treatment by gender, whether or 
not they agree with it themselves.
In guilds or other groups, you see it a lot. It doesn’t really matter 
to me why it is that way. I suppose there’s a number of reasons 
for it, but men can sometimes be openly ignored, say when asking 
for help, or when they need a favor, but women, players jump at 
chances to help them, buy them stuff, do whatever it takes.7
Without a doubt. If a female player lets on that she is, she’ll tend to 
get more attention. I know of some female players that make male 
characters to avoid that. Other players may come to them more 
readily to help them or will come on to them more often.8
It’s unfortunate, but I know I’m treated better than some of the 
guild members. I don’t like to think about it being because I’m a 
girl, but it is pretty obvious.9
Gaming, despite more recent changes in overall demographics, is still 
cited as a male-dominated pastime. But the accuracy of this claim 
is not as important as how the perception of that reality (believing 
women are rare) framed the experiences of women who chose to 
participate in online game worlds. Perceived as exceptions, women 
accessed a novelty status that granted them “special” treatment. Due 
to this, some women invested in proving themselves to be women; that 
is, they wanted to be treated as women for identity-related reasons, or 
to experience these so-called advantages of being part of the “special” 
population.
To be honest I think I was way better off being female in people’s 
eyes because men are taught to always help women and be chiv­
alrous that was so apparent in game. I mean as long as I was nice 
to male characters in game, if I said I really needed help or I really 
had no money, they would take me places and help me or buy 
me things. Sounds devious, but it was awesome. Meanwhile, my 
boyfriend was always having to beg people for help, so I felt lucky 
but it’s not like it was exploitive to me, I was fine with having pic 
up (posted online) and people being super nice to me and the guy 
players got to feel helpful win-win right?10

Goddess Paradox 
151
While the issue is more complicated than it looks, examining it one step 
at a time will help the discussion. First, women and men both express 
that, for whatever reasons, women are “treated better” in game worlds. 
This assessment is generally related to the more practical elements of 
these games and the concept of “progress” within them. In other words, 
women seeking assistance or favors to complete various parts of the game 
(or to obtain certain items) were given that help more readily. In doing 
so, other players (mostly men) instilled a sort of hierarchy of need within 
the game world based on gender (i.e., women get help first, everyone else 
gets help after). While superficially this can be taken as a gesture of kind­
ness (as helping other players is usually part of the game, and in some 
games it is heavily encouraged), instilling such differential treatment has 
a number of latent effects. Women were “empowered” over men with (if 
nothing else) the ability to obtain more help in-game from other players, 
in being provided gifts, and in having captive audiences accompany them 
in their virtual exploits (killing monsters, questing, and so on).
Anytime. All I have to do is say “oh, it’d be nice to have [insert 
item here]” into a group chat, and I’ll have players jumping at the 
chance to spend their money to buy me things or make items I 
want. Whenever they add new [items] to the game, I have a couple 
guys who just send them my way because they know I will want 
them . . . before I even ask. Some people say I should feel uncom­
fortable about it, but I just ignore them or toss cold water on the 
situation if they get the wrong idea. Who knows where they got the 
idea from, maybe they’re pining for a girlfriend, but I’m already 
taken and also not interested.11
Some women in game worlds perform this sort of submissive femininity 
in order to solicit assistance. They may unabashedly ask for help with 
obtaining goods or clearing content, or they may take the (not very) sub­
tle approach of just mentioning “off the cuff” that there are things they 
want or need in the game. Many men happily—or even competitively—
take this bait. Some of these men may desire to be romantically closer 
to the player they are helping, while others are in a sense performing a 
“sugar daddy”12 role in order to feel competent and powerful (economi­
cally speaking) themselves.
Yeah, I’ve been caught up in that a few times. There’s something 
about meeting someone in game, it used to be a real fantasy, guy 
meets girl in the virtual forest, but people have been getting married 

152  Game Worlds Get Real
in real life who met in game. Some have kids and teach their kids 
to play. I kind of think about that. Not saying that’s why I help all 
girls in the game out. I’m sure a couple might still be fakes, and oth­
ers are using me, but someone real can be happy about me helping 
them out. Maybe that’s the key.13
Men were using these “helpful” behaviors to seek out possible romantic 
partners as well as to perform a more traditional masculine role (e.g., 
as a provider, leader, and pursuer). Treating women players differently, 
similar to how women are traditionally treated in the solid world, rein­
stated the gender landscape14 of the reality of everyday life. This also 
meant that men in game worlds were expected to be proficient or to have 
completely mastered the game, as their ability to readily ask for help was 
in some ways constrained by the belief that they (as men) should be com­
petent in all game-related content, and also that men in both the solid 
and game worlds are expected to be largely independent. This did not 
disqualify women from more active and even powerful roles, but it pre­
sented the performance of and adherence to a submissive form of femi­
ninity as a path of least resistance, and it offered a similar beaten path 
to men desiring to occupy forms of masculinity that embodied a brand 
of “virtual chivalry” or a marketplace manhood15 (e.g., sugar daddies).
Arguably, the treatment of women in game worlds is not easily framed 
as positive, but given that progress and status in game worlds are almost 
unavoidably linked to forming relationships and cooperative play, being 
a woman who was treated as woman was often advantageous in respect 
to progressing in the game. In other words, being able to obtain more 
assistance in-game allowed women to excel at meeting their in-game 
goals. This meant that women were encouraged (even more pressingly 
in such a rationalized system) to perform a submissive femininity in 
the game world. Most players, regardless of gender, cite their virtual 
accomplishments as evidence of their “game mastery”16 (e.g., possess­
ing certain items or equipment, participation in difficult battles, defeat­
ing a certain number of players in competitive play, gaining titles or 
achievements, and the level of their crafts, classes, or skills). Because the 
perception among players was that women were helped more often, men 
tended to lambast this approach to playing the game and to discount 
women’s progress in-game.
I’ve worked hard for my stuff (drops, gear, etc.), and then I’ll see 
some guild member swoon her way into groups and get carried 
through content. She bends over enough and these morons just 

Goddess Paradox 
153
drag her along, fork over whatever, and try to score points with 
her. It’s pathetic because they are pathetic, but it’s stupid because 
the rest of us have to work for our shit.17
I know not all women do it, but I have seen some hos in-game wea­
sel their way into groups and battles. They dupe dudes into giving 
them hand-outs and whatever they want really. I eye roll every time 
I see a woman ask for help with something and then a barrage of 
responses burst into chat.18
Feeling threatened, some men and even women lash out at women 
for “using” male players to meet their in-game goals. These “benefits” 
allowed women to make faster and easier progress, but there was a con­
siderable social cost. However, men who felt that women received more 
assistance attacked the men who were providing the assistance, and they 
largely ignored that part of the problem was that men were less likely 
to provide similar levels of assistance to other men (and sometimes even 
asked for payment when they did, like with mercing). On the other hand, 
some of the women who did not actively seek out differential treatment 
felt that the problem was due to these women performing the submissive 
feminine role. Instead of accusing the men who were helping them, they 
chose to blame the women for accepting such help.
I do believe that men and women are treated differently in-game. 
Usually mentioning the fact you are female will give you a huge 
advantage with guys looking for a bit of E-pussy. For the record: I 
have not and never will exploit this, it’s probably one of the most 
degrading and sickening things a woman can do and makes her no 
better than a street corner whore . . . A lot of the women in game 
do exploit this for items . . . and it sickens me that a person would 
lower themselves to such levels for pixels. . . . I would say it’s an 
unfair advantage over men, since some men are so besotted with 
“women” they meet in game that they’d get them through harder 
missions, pretty much play the game for them if it got them some­
where . . . which is sad since it defeats the purpose of the game and 
dulls a lot of the finer points.19
This gender landscape railed against the meaning and promise of gam­
ing at a fundamental level. In other words, men attempting to pursue 
romantic partners (solid-world women) in a way attempted to play the 
game for these women, circumventing the challenge and engagement 

154  Game Worlds Get Real
that games should provide for all players. And just as problematic, some 
women used their romantic and sexual appeal (and a captive male audi­
ence) to focus only on the outcomes of gaming. In so doing, they avoided 
mastery of the game itself (that is, the labor required to obtain those 
goals). This connects with the earlier discussion of goal-oriented play 
and the rationalization of fun as formidable issues that have disrupted 
some of the more positive aspects of gaming itself. In this case, we see 
how gender and social transparency enable the process of rationalizing 
gaming down to outcomes (“I flirt with you a little to get the thing I 
want”). Women who were seen as “exploiting” men were subject to criti­
cism by other men (who struggled to obtain the same kind of support) 
and women (who accused them as “whoring for pixels”).
Deflecting the Detriments of Being Seen as Only a Woman 
in a World of Men
Despite being catered to by men in-game, women were often subjected to 
persistent and unwanted romantic and sexual advances. Furthering the 
argument that women are treated as exceptions in these game worlds, 
they are symbolically distanced from the label of “gamer” through the 
lens of romantic and sexual objectification. That is, women are routinely 
gauged for their romantic and sexual capital (basically, whether they 
are “datable” or “fuckable”), as those statuses often usurp their partici­
pation and identity claims within gaming culture. Additionally, if they 
do accept any overzealously given assistance from men (and sometimes 
even when they don’t accept), they are judged through the lens of being 
able to access such ready assistance at any time, often undermining per­
ceptions of their gaming prowess (that is, they are often disqualified 
from the status claims of their achievements in-game because of the pos­
sibility, accurate or not, that men helped them gain it). Having accepted 
assistance from men (or having to carry that perception), women’s gam­
ing prowess is often questioned, recreating divisions by gender within 
game worlds instead of allowing communities to rally under the united 
identity banner of being gamers.
The constant and often invisible maintenance of unwanted advances 
was expressed by several women interviewees, and even in casual ban­
ter within the game worlds themselves. Many women had come to the 
conclusion that “this is just the way it is” and that “you can’t change 
how people treat women,” despite expressing their overwhelming dis­
taste for being treated as romantic or sexual goalposts by the male 
population.

Goddess Paradox 
155
So I have a 12-year-old, a 14-year-old, two 16-year-olds, and a 
22-year-old who claim to be in love with me, cuz I’m “so amazing 
and beautiful.” Do you know how much of a headache it is to try 
and not hurt their feelings? What the hell am I doing wrong? Why 
can’t I play like anybody else without people falling in “love” with 
me? One kid told me he masturbated to the thought of me. He’s the 
12-year-old. I felt like a CHOMO (child molester). I told them I’m 
too old to be anything but a friend to them and I have a man in my 
life so it’s not gonna happen . . . what do I do? I don’t want to be 
mean about it, but it kind of creeps me out.20
Women had to balance the perception that they were potential romantic 
or sexual partners with their desire to meet gaming goals, while navi­
gating communities largely dominated by straight-identified men. This 
meant that if women accepted help (which could be offered innocuously 
at first), it could lead to unintended consequences (e.g., requests for 
more private conversations, sharing more intimate details, confessions 
of romantic and sexual feelings, or antagonizing other men who try to 
help them). And men were all too ready to offer such help; at first they 
might frame it as “being nice,” only to later become frustrated when the 
relationship with the woman they were assisting didn’t become romantic.
It sucks. You’ll have guys hand you items and gear like candy. 
“Here’s a whole set of gear! Yeah, I know it is worth a whole shit 
ton of gold, but it’s fine! Take it. My treat.” And then later, when 
they finally try to make things about an “us” that never existed, 
they get pissed. I’ve been called a bitch and a whore for accepting 
“gifts” and not “returning the favor” by being interested in them, 
or turning down their advances.21
Interestingly enough, on a structural level, games themselves have for 
some time been built on the assumption of straight men’s fantasies. 
Recently, the game RimWorld underwent some criticism because the 
code of the game itself (that is, how the characters are programmed by 
gender) reflected men as pursuers and women as the pursued. Basically, 
the male characters initiate romance far more often than female charac­
ters do, and more intriguingly, the male characters are often depressed 
when they are rebuffed (compelling the player to assuage the situation), 
whereas little to no attention is given to how female characters have to 
deal with the stress of constantly being “hit on” by men.22 These facets 
can be found in literally dozens of games (e.g., hentai games,23 dating 

156  Game Worlds Get Real
sims, and affection-building games like Persona and Ar Tonelico24), as 
much of the “romance simulation” genre is geared for straight men, and 
the games are set up for a male protagonist (controlled by the player) to 
pursue one or several female characters romantically or sexually.
This is not to say that all games are designed this way. Surely there 
are a handful constructed with the idea of a female player (and pursuer) 
in mind,25 but the vast majority are not. I am also not trying to cre­
ate the assumption of a causal relationship between video games about 
romance leading to male players being more aggressive in their pursuit 
of women (and it would take a great deal more research beyond the 
scope of this book to assess any connection). But it should be a logical 
step to see that game worlds are largely constructed by men, for men. 
And since this has been the historical norm, the culture within game 
worlds is not all that different from the culture outside of them; more 
importantly, the dominant discourse of how men treat women is found 
within the game structures themselves, as well as within the players who 
occupy these worlds and their social interactions. This does contribute 
to the possibility that women occupying game worlds are in some fash­
ion considered outsiders, even if their individual histories would easily 
reinforce their identities as gamers.
When a population is framed as out of the norm, the “public” (in this 
case the gamer men) attempts to reframe the rationale for that popula­
tion existing. If game worlds are made for men and the broader culture 
knows this, then women participating in game worlds must also know 
this, and therefore blame is shifted onto them for putting themselves 
in the position to become romantic and sexual objects. It’s an interest­
ing game of cognitive kung fu that men often are guilty of when the 
problem largely lies with them, or with a culture that serves their needs 
over other groups. It also falls in line with the “freedom of choice” argu­
ment we see all too commonly paraded about to excuse systemic issues 
in a society, institution, or organization.26 The goal of this cognitive 
(and ideological) game is simple enough. If we can pretend that people 
choose an outcome, and if we overinflate the importance of individual 
decisions, then the individual will always be held accountable. This 
means nothing else is at fault, nothing bigger, nothing far more rigid and 
problematic . . . just one person making “dumb” choices. And thus the 
problem of men making advances on women in game worlds becomes a 
women’s issue. They chose to play the game knowing full well that every 
mouthbreathing moron will be lusting after them. They must want to 
be in that position. They knew they would be treated like objects. It’s 
clearly their fault for participating.

Goddess Paradox 
157
The fascinatingly malicious outcome of this way of thinking is that it 
is self-perpetuating and cyclical. The only solution within this thought 
framework is for women to “choose” (when there are no real choices) 
not to participate; that is, to exile themselves,27 the logic being that they 
don’t belong in game worlds, and since they know it’s a men’s world, they 
should just avoid it. Unless, of course, they’re okay with being treated 
like crap—then they are welcome, but the boys will be boys around you, 
and there’s nothing you can do to change that. Oh, and there’s nothing 
the men will do to change that, because it’s their world, and you are 
here voluntarily. The same stance is often used against women who are 
victims of sexual assault (“She should have known better. Why was she 
there? Doesn’t she know that it could be dangerous?”). And the answer 
here is the same: Women should just avoid everything men get to enjoy. 
They can’t drink or go to parties. They can’t go out late at night. They 
can’t dress how they want to dress. And they can’t play video games with 
men unless they are willing to accept that men are going to treat them 
differently—and likely harass them.
I moved servers a couple times. Stalkers, mainly. Guys wouldn’t 
leave me alone. One of them was so bad I felt that I couldn’t play 
anymore. It was frightening to log on sometimes . . . and have to 
check to see if he was in the game. That’s not how gaming should 
make me, or anyone, feel.28
This is what blacklists are for, that and spammers, goldfarmers, 
and whatever else. Games are full of trash human beings, but being 
harassed just because I “could be” someone’s girlfriend, or they 
think they can just fall all over you until you give in. That’s not why 
I play. I’m here to have fun, and for the story, and for boss fights, 
not to be someone’s girlfriend.29
To be “like anybody else” and to circumvent such harassment has become 
nearly impossible for women in game worlds, as the social transparency 
norm is now standard, meaning their gender is often confirmed immedi­
ately, which enables, if not invites, such differential treatment. The issues 
become one of valid identity claims and the historical attributes of the 
gamer culture. Women’s claims to the gamer identity in isolation (that is, 
without being seen through the lens of their gender) are complicated by 
the stereotype of the male gamer, the promises of technology providing 
ready access to romantic and sexual partners, and the defense mecha­
nisms that have men guarding the boundary of the “gamer” identity. 

158  Game Worlds Get Real
Furthermore, because men were so ready to “assist” women players, it 
often reinforced the perception that women were not skilled gamers. The 
men who populate game worlds have internalized (whether accurate or 
not) belief structures about women being helpless or in constant need of 
help from men. This spills over into interactions within the game, where 
there are numerous tasks to complete, battles to win, and places to map. 
Using this gender framework, men come to believe that women simply 
need more help, maybe because they’re women, or maybe because they 
aren’t really gamers.
I’ve done some nice things for girls, probably too nice. I’ve dragged 
new players through stuff they have no business doing, just to give 
them a step-up on other people. I’ve given them lots of money, gear, 
you know, things to help them make the game a bit easier.30
I try to avoid doing that, but I’ve seen some guys do outrageous 
stuff for women. Getting them through harder content, filling up 
their bags with rare drops, giving them money, all the above. I 
wonder if they ever think about how the game is quite different if 
you are given everything rather than earning it through work. You 
don’t appreciate it for one. And I’ve seen some spoiled bitches who 
are great examples of that. Basically like welfare queens.31
It can be argued that some of this “extra help” was done with good 
intentions. Helping other players is in line with the spirit of cooperative 
games, and altruism, cited as a benefit of playing games, is a worthy goal 
and outcome of play.32 It would be misleading to present all beneficent 
deeds toward women in game worlds as sexist, lustful, or infantilizing. 
However, there is considerable merit in illuminating this differential 
treatment as part of the problem with women being excluded from 
gaming culture as “true gamers.” When women are treated foremost as 
women, and the ideologies that inform “proper treatment” have their 
roots in cultural practices of treating women as incapable, then yes, pur­
suing the same level of treatment in game worlds serves to deny women 
autonomy as well as to justify the broader perception that women are 
not “really” gamers (because they don’t have to “work hard” like men 
do, or because their accomplishments were handed to them by men).
I don’t really expect women in games to play all that well. Yeah, 
yeah, it’s probably not politically correct to say that, but it’s true. 
With guys, you just expect them to know what the hell to do, or at 

Goddess Paradox 
159
least they’ve put the work in to try and know ahead of time. I feel 
fine getting upset with men too if they fuck up. With women, eh, I 
just don’t have those expectations. They’re just having fun.33
This issue has been further complicated by women who are involved in 
streaming media outlets (Twitch, “Let’s Play” YouTube videos, etc.) and 
attempt to cater to the “male gaze,”34 while softly claiming the gamer 
identity. In other words, young women gamers using streaming media 
to enrapture followers (just as men do) may prominently display their 
bodies (as they have every right to do), which unfortunately refocuses 
the conversation on their female bodies and attributes rather than their 
claims to the gamer identity or their skill set. That is, though they may 
create videos to demonstrate their playing ability, or even just to share 
the experience of play (which is a popular pastime for the digital-born 
population), the production of this media becomes a sort of voyeuristic 
activity for other men (and some women). They tune in not to watch the 
video game, but instead to watch the woman and her body. These few 
examples often erode all women’s claims to being gamers, as the discus­
sion of these women on streaming media feeds the cultural discourse 
that casts women as objects to be viewed. By contrast, the legions of men 
involved in the same process35 are not so readily judged for their appear­
ance, choice of clothing, or body shape, and their claims to being gamers 
are less likely to be challenged. In fact, they may spend hours simply 
broadcasting their reactions to jump-scares in Five Nights at Freddy’s,36 
and very few people, if any, will question their identities as gamers, when 
really they’ve demonstrated zero skill except the ability to scream loudly 
into a microphone or headset.
It’s from these caricatures that the more modern “myth of the female 
gamer” has developed new life. The Internet is filled with pictures of 
these “false women gamers” who are playing for attention from men, the 
common example being a women in makeup and a low-cut shirt using 
a controller in a way that demonstrates her lack of skill or complete 
ignorance about gaming. While these images certainly come from some­
where, and while young women surely use social media (as young men 
do) to gain attention from peers and potential romantic partners, they 
are damaging to the idea that gaming culture should (and has to some 
degree) evolve over time to include a more diverse population than ever 
before. The proliferation of such caricatures and the differential treat­
ment of women in games serve as attempts to redraw the boundaries 
between “gamers” and “non-gamers.” It is identity politics at work, with 
people inside the circle (men in particular) attempting to discursively 

160  Game Worlds Get Real
separate themselves from people who would “falsely” claim the gamer 
label. These forces also attempt to erase any evidence of the counter­
argument. That is, when men step in to do women “favors” in the game 
world, they bar women from completing the work for themselves, some­
times even forcing them to accept help whether they need it or not.
This guy kept giving me stuff. Expensive things. Mailing them to me 
or forcing a trade. I didn’t want the gifts. They made me felt indebted 
to him, and I don’t want to owe him anything, so I kept sending 
them back, or insisting that I pay for them, but he just said “no, no, 
just take them” and I wouldn’t, and that made him really upset.37
The treatment of women gamers by men demonstrates that men and 
women are indeed perceived differently in game worlds; sometimes 
players may even enforce these differences regardless of other players’ 
wishes (like gifting items whether someone wants gifts or not). Although 
these “benefits” can be interpreted negatively, in-game success is often 
predicated on accomplishing tasks that require the help of other players, 
in-game currency, and equipment. As has been discussed earlier in this 
book, many players’ goals are aligned with progression and achievement. 
They want to have the strongest gear, be in the best guilds, and fight the 
most awesome battles. Arguably, women can accomplish this more eas­
ily when they are treated as women (that is, when they are catered to by 
men), but this has the damning effect of casting them as inferior players 
and may impede any chance of them being seen as “legitimate” gamers.
Although women experiencing success in game worlds is important 
and may indeed entice other women to explore more gaming experi­
ences, platforms, and spaces, gaining this success through submissive 
femininity does little to change the gender landscape of the solid world, 
and it defeats the promise that the game world can somehow be differ­
ent or even better. Women are then stereotyped as “gold diggers” who 
invite “sugar daddies” to cater to their mere existence in game worlds. 
When these interactional norms are not resisted, women are treated 
more as potential partners for men to woo with gifts and assistance 
than as actual players. It is important to note that this consequence is 
not founded on individual gaming ability but on gender alone. Women 
are often perfectly capable, but their abilities may be overlooked by men 
attempting to reinforce traditional gender roles, as men’s assistance is 
indicative of their competence, which helps to stabilize their masculinity 
(this is further discussed in chapter 10). The stereotype that gaming is 
a male domain reinforces the belief that women cannot play, or cannot 

Goddess Paradox 
161
play well. This in turn contributes to men assisting women in-game. The 
assumed difference is then recreated and marshaled as evidence to deny 
women their identity as real gamers.
But the continued success and enjoyment that women experience in 
game worlds is important for changing the practices that reproduce tech­
nology and gaming as a male arena. If women want to play and enjoy 
playing, more games and spaces will be made for women, or at least ones 
not specifically geared for men. This is not to argue that women and 
men desire significantly different gaming experiences but to highlight 
that these spaces have embodied male fantasies and male standards. And 
despite sounding redundant at this point, I imagine that we can create a 
far greater breadth of gaming experiences than those we have now . . . 
but this might require leaving the reality of everyday life behind.

(Doodles invented by Necronomiconopoly [Marina Gutierrez-Harsh])

Actually, the first time I remember understanding cybersex was a 
thing in these games was the day I walked in on my girlfriend in the 
middle of doing just that. She had a group of guys interested in her, 
and I guess they were a little more interested than I thought. She 
did what she could to hide it, minimizing the chat log in the game 
and covering up below the waist, but since the guy she was talking 
to didn’t know I had walked in, and more tells came through . . . it 
was uncomfortable.1
N
ot long ago the Internet provided a new space for a developing 
and novel form of sexual behavior. Cybersex has its origins in 
text-based communications as mediated by the technology of that day 
(generally instant-message programs and the like). For a time, sexuality 
online was treated with disbelief rather than suspicion, a stigma that has 
not completely dispersed. Questioning the behavior focused on whether 
the details of any sexual interaction must require physical touch and 
body proximity.2 Cybersex, as with phone sex before it, raised inter­
esting ideas about sexual behaviors in virtual spaces, and soon, with 
the advent of game worlds, a new set of systems and tools would be 
available.
The rules and beliefs around “cybersexual”3 behaviors were more 
flexible in early game worlds. While sexuality was not exactly embraced 
within gamer communities, there was a growing sense that it was des­
tined to be a part of the game worlds. It was the Internet, and the Inter­
net supposedly allowed for the strange and mysterious to run rampant 
CHAPTER 9
Cybersexuality

164  Game Worlds Get Real
without the social controls of everyday life. But “terror talk”4 was com­
monplace, and the guidelines for cybersexual behavior largely reflected 
concerns, whether appropriate or not, that “deviants” and “perverts” 
were (as “common-sense” cultural logic dictates) somehow dangerous in 
real life. Again, online worlds were given (temporary) latitude as “excep­
tional spaces” where strange things happen, and so we were warned 
about the creeps who spent time there. This propped up the discourse 
about the early Internet that sought to detail what these “creeps” were 
doing, given the lack of social controls, and, of course, how to protect 
yourself and your kids from these dangers.5
But things are not always as simple as “deviant people doing deviant 
things whenever they aren’t being policed.” In fact, many social behav­
ioral scientists recognize that certain contexts, situations, and systems 
allow your everyday normal person to behave quite a bit differently 
than usual, and such contexts may even encourage deviance.6 This early 
moment for cybersex, one with few normative guidelines and new tech­
nological tools, gave your average gamer (or online wanderer) a chance 
to “fuck freely,” as some may put it, and in some cases to have sexual 
interactions that were completely novel, including gender swapping, 
multiple roles, strange virtual locales, and with a combination of differ­
ent technologies.7
Gayle Rubin,8 a vocal sex-positive writer, has argued that overall there 
are more demonized, yet completely innocuous, forms of sexual expression 
and behavior than those afforded “normalcy,” which are also then granted 
social validity, mental health, and moral superiority. In short, there’s a 
great deal of sexual activity that is perfectly benign (and super fun) that 
society seeks to condemn, control, and invalidate. Nonphysical (or non-
solid world) sexual behaviors would be one such activity, and despite the 
promise of the Internet being overrun with unleashed opportunities for 
sexual exploration, these behaviors would soon be put back in line.
And scholars were quick to note that some of this early flowering 
of sexuality online began to be beaten back into submission by a sex-
negative culture.9 Over time, a set of norms began to seep into the game 
worlds, seeking to constrain their rather lively sexual landscape. Many 
early adopters found the novelty to wear thin or desired a return to the 
physical elements of sexual behaviors. Structural and social restrictions 
were soon set in place in game worlds, heralded by more people logging 
into these games and being somewhat concerned about sexuality being 
bandied about in every game-world city and hangout.
Formal sanctions from game moderators and companies became more 
standard, while informal “shouting down” of the behaviors became the 

Cybersexuality 
165
path of least resistance due to aligning with sex-negative culture. New 
gains on the technology front eliminated the line between game world 
and solid, as voice chat and live cam feeds cut the virtual world right out 
of the picture. Where sexuality remains less restrained today is within 
virtual “sexual ghettos” like cybersex work or in erotic role-playing 
(ERP) communities. In this chapter,10 the above framework is explored 
in more depth, and some futuristic musings about where cybersexuality 
will go from here are discussed.
The Value of Novel Sexual Spaces
Cybersex and other novel sexual behaviors have many benefits to the 
average participant, and they provide us all with a chance to critique 
the cultural discourse surrounding sexuality. When a new form of sexual 
behavior or expression comes under the academic or public microscope, 
it can (as with many other marginalized aspects of social reality) allow 
us to turn back to the established “normal” form and question it. In 
other words, when people get off using a computer and a virtual body, 
we can ask the question, “Is this sex?”11 And this leads to the question, 
“Well, what is sex?” If I think something is not sex, then surely I must 
know what sex is. And how did I come to understand what this thing 
called “sex” is? Where did that knowledge come from? Can this concep­
tualization be challenged?
With cybersex as the “this is not sex” example, we begin to explore 
our ideas about what counts as sex. Assumptions about the elements 
required for a sexual experience are quickly brought into the conversa­
tion. Physical bodies must be involved; there is supposed to be some 
genital contact; some might think penetration is required (revealing 
how heteronormative our idea of sex generally is); some may disqualify 
anal or oral sex based on some technicality (“It’s not the real thing”), 
while some might think that any activity with another person leading to 
orgasm should “count” (but too many have had “bad ends,” so to speak, 
and were they not sex just because they weren’t “good sex”?). Like­
wise, for moral and ethical reasons, certain non-consensual acts (sexual 
assault) may fit the physical contact requirements but should never be 
thought of as sex. Okay, now I’m confused. But you know what sex 
is, right?
The purpose of such thought exercises is not necessarily to come to 
a concrete conclusion about what sex truly is, but instead to realize 
that defining sex is open to cultural and subjective interpretation. The 
measure of what counts is flexible, and particularly as new methods are 

166  Game Worlds Get Real
adopted, the measures may change. As these new behaviors and spaces 
are brought forth by technology in particular (e.g., online worlds, robot­
ics, virtual reality), we can again question our assumptions about what 
sex is and what sexual opportunities and experiences are, or will be, 
made available for people to participate in through such innovations. 
Furthermore, understanding how such behaviors are controlled, both 
structurally and socially, helps shed light on how a culture views sexual­
ity on a broader scale, as the deployment of many cultural justifications 
for the social control of sexuality are laid bare (pun intended) in the 
process.
In line with the overall theme of this book, much of the exploration 
and experimentation regarding sexuality in the virtual world has lost 
its fire, so to speak. Whereas players in the earlier days of game worlds 
were rather creative in going about their sexual lives (explored below), 
gamers are less interested now in sexual activities mediated by the game 
world, and have attempted to cut the virtual world (and all its tools and 
possibilities) out of the act entirely.
Cybersex Basics
It is important to note that with few exceptions, cybersex and sexuality 
itself have not been central to many digital communities in game worlds. 
Cybersex was, by many accounts, forced to find some relatively safe 
space for play within the virtual world. In the earlier days, the behavior 
was merely met with collective eyerolling and mockery; most pointed 
out that no one really took cybersex seriously. But as these game worlds 
became more popular, many social communities established rules of 
conduct, many of which excluded sexuality as even a topic of conver­
sation. In doing so, the gaming communities validated the behavior as 
serious, or at least as something deemed non-normative that should be 
controlled or silenced.
Back then, you would see someone shout or use the general chat 
logs to advertise, I guess, for cybersex. For a while, it was like a kind 
of trolling. No one took it too seriously. It was also awkward in the 
IM [instant message] days, basically just jerking it at the desk. Later 
on, you would see players shouting for it and other players would 
shout back. Like “shut the fuck up” or “you’re a fag” or some other 
insults, usual gamer stuff. It was pretty common though, I think, 
at least, people talked about it, or made fun of people who did it 
enough that you thought it was kind of everywhere.12

Cybersexuality 
167
While early on, the belief that the Internet and virtual worlds provided 
a “new frontier” for developing digital communities was quite relevant, 
many players, and the game worlds themselves, could not escape a cul­
ture of sex negativity and the reality of everyday life in which it was 
situated. This restricted where and in what context cybersex could take 
place, but even so, players had to craft the experience for themselves. 
There was no manual for having sex with an avatar, nor a long history of 
cultural traditions and medical expertise to access. Players had to adapt 
the tools provided to them by the game to create the experience, and 
they were rather innovative in that pursuit.
Broadening Sex for Game Worlds
I think that the concept of “bricolage”13 applies quite well to those play­
ers involved in developing their own cybersex experiences. They took 
the tools handed to them within the game and used them to broaden 
their sexual palettes, to rut up (another pun) against the limitations of 
the physical body, and to figure out how to conjure a sexual experience 
from a keyboard, a screen, and an avatar. In doing so, they expanded 
upon the origins of text-based sexual experiences in IM chat boxes and 
the like, utilizing the virtual body as a focal point and source of sexual 
power, as well as for objectification. Their mastery over these tools and 
new bodies gave them sexual capital and allowed for the adaptation of 
these elements to broaden the spectrum of sexual experiences.
Sexualized Text: Learning to Communicate Erotically
Communication in most game worlds was, and arguably remains, pri­
marily text-based. Voice chat is preferred in some cases, but structurally 
and mechanically, many game worlds limit its use, and gamers largely 
have to use third-party programs14 as a workaround. So “talking” in 
most games involves some simple commands to be typed in to generate 
your verbal contributions to a particular audience. For example, let’s 
pretend I want to have a conversation with you in a game world, and 
this conversation is going to be just between us. I would type in a com­
mand (a common one is “/tell”) followed by your avatar name (let’s call 
you “Awesome Reader”). Our chat might look like this:
[Zek Valkyrie]: Hey, are you enjoying the book?
[Awesome Reader]: I don’t know. It’s a book, I guess.
[Zek Valkyrie]: That’s . . . kind of harsh.

168  Game Worlds Get Real
[Awesome Reader]: What did you expect? Need a pat on the back 
for writing it?
[Zek Valkyrie]: Sometimes . . . it’s not exactly my skill set, clearly.
And so on. We could talk about our mutual distaste of elves, or about 
how we plan to murder a bunch of dragons on Friday night, or you 
could insult me some more about the book, but our conversation would 
be just between us, so long as we kept up the proper input sequence of 
commands and responses. There are, however, many other options for 
text communication.15 Players can talk to entire groups of people, like 
their guild, sharing whatever they feel the need to express in a contained 
space (only guild members would see the text). They can also “shout” or 
“yell” into a large area within the game world, communicating (loosely 
applied) with dozens of people, or just populating every player’s chat 
box for giggles. Or maybe several players are involved in a shouting 
match, which is always highly productive. You can also use a command 
to speak to your immediate area (the avatars currently standing near 
your avatar) using “say” chat.
The purpose in outlining these various levels of text communication 
is to highlight the complexity of juggling multiple audiences during one 
immersive experience. You might be talking to two or three friends in 
a private chat, while contributing to your guild chat, while also yelling 
down someone in shout chat, and so on. This can complicate the effort 
to keep certain “deviant” behaviors under wraps, such as a cybersex 
encounter, since the chances of miscommunication are arguably high—
and if you are engaged in a sexualized act, you might be a little dis­
tracted. It is also important to recognize that text-based communications 
largely build the “believability” factor of cybersex, and this was still true 
in game worlds.
It’s not just the screen and the act of watching that makes me feel 
good, it’s the other person typing to me. Some people are good at it 
and some are not. Some players are immature, or have no idea how 
to do it, and that can ruin the whole thing.16
Textual communication skills largely contributed to a player’s sexual 
capital. In other words, players who wanted to have cybersex had to “get 
good at” being erotic in text. This skill set has been echoed in many areas 
outside of gaming, including dating sites and apps in which people are 
seen as better romantic prospects based on their ability to craft attractive 
profiles or to exude “controlled casualness” in text messages,17 meaning 

Cybersexuality 
169
that mastering this form of communication could increase your chances 
to “get laid” in a game world, and perhaps in the solid world as well.
But let’s remind ourselves that these messages do not exist in a con­
tained channel between two consenting partners; they are coming from 
avatars who are occupying a virtual space with other avatars, and being 
controlled by players who are juggling dozens of inputs to cultivate, in 
this case, a sexual experience. In other words, accidents happen, and a 
“mistell” (or “mistype”) is emblematic of a functional error that can 
become a social stigma. A mistell is nothing more than a screwup (minor 
or major) in which a player sends a text communication to the wrong 
audience, like a super-sensual tidbit about oral sex intended for your 
cyber partner that ends up populating the guild chat instead. Most mis­
tells are innocuous (e.g., you meant to ask someone a question, but you 
sent the question to someone you weren’t talking to). But when sexuality 
is involved, those mistells escalate from “Oops” to “What the hell are 
you doing? Who are you doing it with? And why are you even doing that 
at all?” Your behavior becomes highly suspect, and people may even try 
to expose you further.
I got caught once. I messed up and sent something dirty to my 
guild. A few players wouldn’t talk to me after that, pretty shallow, 
but meh. Others tried to bug me by, I guess, checking up on me. If 
I wasn’t talking or just standing around, they thought I was cyber­
ing, so they’d send tells to see if I would get annoyed or if I would 
mistell them something else.18
Unlike IM chat or webcam cybersex, where the audience is purposeful 
and the transmission is arguably contained, avatars exist in virtual space 
with other avatars and have to be vigilant about their command inputs, 
while possibly avoiding the community’s attempts to derail or stigma­
tize their behavior . . . all while trying to cultivate a believable sexual 
experience.
Eroticizing Virtual Bodies: Constructing Novel Sexual Scripts
Nearly all modern games involve the use of avatars or virtual bodies; 
that is, characters that the players control as they wander about game 
worlds. In respect to cybersex, objectification and focus on the avatar 
as a sexual fantasy aid is par for the course. Given significant graphical 
advancements, the rendering of virtual bodies has nearly reached the 
“uncanny valley”19 position of realism. Avatars, even cartoonish ones, 

170  Game Worlds Get Real
are believable in their aesthetic quality, visual fidelity, and even move­
ment physics. Some game developers may focus exclusively on certain 
character or avatar body parts, such as “jiggle physics” for breasts, or 
increasing cup size for female avatars so that they can “fill out certain 
outfits” (and likely cater to an assumed male audience). A stock exam­
ple is in Final Fantasy XIII-3, when the main character, “Lightning,” a 
rather strong and powerful female protagonist, was made more “robust” 
(the game designers increased her cup size) to allow some of the more 
sexualized outfits they were designing for her character to “fit better.”20
It is important to recognize that most of the concern about gamers 
eroticizing avatars pertains to an assumed audience of straight men 
interested in sexy virtual women (i.e., avatars and characters). Calls for 
customization and increased ability to eroticize virtual men are met with 
rather dismissive responses. Putting aside whether objectifying virtual 
women is problematic, and who is involved in that process, it is just as 
interesting to see a lack of attention to augmenting virtual men’s bodies 
within the realm of the erotic.
Outside of games like Second Life (SL),21 where players can actually 
purchase different male genitalia to increase the avatar’s sexual capital 
(basically, a male avatar is only “fuckable” in SL if he has a nice cock), 
calls to eroticize men are less pressing. For example, in FFXIV (like in 
many games) there is a “bust slider” for virtual women, which is a scale 
to increase or decrease the breast size of the avatar at the player’s behest. 
But the community has continually asked for more customization in this 
realm, including a “butt slider” to make avatars have more diverse but­
tocks, which may cater to certain sexual tastes, though this too largely 
remains a female avatar issue. Yet a similar request for a “bulge slider” 
for virtual men is treated with either mockery or outright disdain:
Why would anyone think that a bulge slider would be a good idea 
in the game? Who the fuck needs to see big naked ass men with 
bulging underwear fighting dragons and casting fire spells? This 
isn’t a [sex game] and I sure as hell don’t want to be stacked for 
some mechanic with a dick in my face.22
The obvious double standard in the eroticization of avatars runs paral­
lel to most dominant cultural forces and continues the objectification 
of women in the game world, even if they are just pixels, polygons, and 
shaders. Game worlds still operate as a male landscape, and a heter­
onormative one at that. This means that creating “jiggly boobs” is a 
perfectly expected practice, and one lauded by (male) gamers as increas­
ing their interest in certain games or characters, but to sexualize virtual 

Cybersexuality 
171
men beyond some arbitrary line is “going too far” and turning the game 
into a “sex game.” This is not to say that the solution to such a disparity 
is to have giant polygon penises permeating game worlds; I am simply 
drawing further attention to the simple fact that avatars are a newer 
site of gender and sexuality debates. In other words, avatars and their 
attributes become involved in discussions about gender and sexuality as 
they pertain to players and their choices to select and eroticize certain 
virtual bodies.
As mentioned previously, avatar gender selection as correlated to 
player gender identity has certain patterns; mainly, women players tend 
to be gender-consistent and men tend to gender-bend more often,23 but 
for “masculine” reasons, like virtual women are “hot” and therefore fun 
to look at. Attention to the erotic components of avatars has been a driv­
ing force behind individual innovations and digital community outcry. 
In the earlier days of online game worlds, certain players would go to 
great lengths to create more erotic avatar variation. For example, some­
times an avatar’s default in-game display was customized using a player-
created “skin.”24 In other words, a customized (and often highly sexual) 
overlay was presented as the avatar from the player’s perspective. But 
this was limited in scope, as other players did not see these customized 
skins, because they essentially existed in only the one player’s computer. 
Broader changes were called for, many of them about “freedom to cus­
tomize,” and this meant, more or less, that players wanted to be able to 
look exactly how they wanted to look. But “looking good” is a social 
comparison. If I tweak the data files of my own game to present a sexy 
avatar when I play, I’m the only one who sees how sexy I am; other play­
ers see me as the game would normally render me. This was a problem 
for many.
To turn my avatar from an object I use as a sexy fantasy aid into an 
object that others can use, I need to be able to project my sexiness to the 
community at large. One such innovation that did this for many game 
worlds was the “vanity”25 (or glamour, or transmogrification, etc.) sys­
tem. The look of an avatar is now a commodity, and some players will 
spend extra cash to look the way they want. There are multiple justifica­
tions for why vanity systems have become a pillar of any online game, 
but one theme underlining many of them is the ability to project sexual­
ity and to be seen as desirable. I want to be sexy when I play, so there is 
no longer a need to fight a dragon with a full set of plate mail, sword, 
and shield. Now I can fight a dragon while wearing a bikini over my jig­
gling breasts, with French braids, flip-flops, and a Popsicle.
Limitations and superficiality aside, eroticizing and utilizing virtual 
bodies did for some time allow for an expansion of the sexual landscape. 

172  Game Worlds Get Real
Cybersex involved a multiplicity of (arguably) diverse ranges of avatar 
and human bodies creating unique combinations that questioned the 
foundational assumptions of gender and sexuality. For example, a male-
identified player could control a virtual woman and have cybersex with 
another virtual woman controlled by a female player. With the two addi­
tional virtual bodies in the equation, the sexual script utilized is different 
than one would expect of the two players and their corresponding bod­
ies in the solid world.
The male player in this case does not typically talk about his “hard 
cock,” given that the messages would be transmitted through a virtual 
woman (avatar) and in some cases could be quite confusing. Instead, it’s 
more likely that the sexual script is between the two avatars and their 
corresponding genders, but even then, the impact of such an experience 
is quite illuminating. Imagine placing yourself in another gender cat­
egory for a moment, and then conceptualize how you would perform 
any sexual act (even holding aside the body of your expected partner 
or partners for a moment). It’s an imaginative process that forces you 
to consider how someone with a body different from your own would 
garner sexual pleasure. You might have to research how the experience 
might feel, and you may begin to consider the sexual needs and desires 
of other genders and other bodies.
Additionally, these interactions fail to conform to the rather rigid sex­
ual orientations and identities we often deploy to box in certain behav­
iors or desires. Are these sexual interactions straight? Gay? Lesbian? Are 
they some form of “play” that doesn’t count as sex? Does the lack of 
physical contact with another person matter in defining one’s sexuality? 
Could these interactions occupy a category of their own? Of course the 
answers to these questions, and even the need to be concerned about 
the answers at all, speak to how we largely conceptualize sexual identi­
ties, behaviors, and desires. Cybersex allows us to question assumptions 
of physical contact, of gendered and sexed bodies, of what counts as 
sexual, and it calls on us to consider how technologies (many of which 
are entirely unforeseen at this moment in time) may change the sexual 
landscape of many cultures.
Emotes and Custom Macros: Preparing for Believable 
Sexual Experiences
Lastly, in terms of broadening sexuality, players utilize emotes and cus­
tomized macros26 to create cybersex scenes and interactions. Emotes 
exist in most online game worlds as a set of default gestures a character 

Cybersexuality 
173
can use. They range from the simplistic, such as having an avatar bow 
or wave to another avatar, to the complex, such as looping dances, flips, 
and poses. Some encompass the whole body, while others may just use 
the avatar’s face to express an emotion or feeling. A handful of emotes 
are accompanied by a sound effect, such as a character making noises to 
express pain or anger, or even speaking a line or two of dialogue (games 
developed by Blizzard, like Overwatch and WoW, are good examples of 
voice-accompanied emotes).
Emotes allow for fine-tuned control of virtual bodies, and in cybersex 
interactions, the more control over the virtual body, the more erotic the 
experience can be. This means that players can text naughty messages 
to each other while their avatars are in various states of undress, and 
their avatars can mime specific sexual actions depending on the emo­
tive capabilities of said avatar (and the creativity of the player control­
ling the avatar). In a game world like Second Life, the mechanics allow 
for player-generated content and highly sexualized objects (e.g., genitals, 
outfits, poseballs,27 and the like). However, in many other immersive 
game worlds, the players have to reframe the default gestures made by 
an avatar into something erotic.
I’ve seen some creative stuff. People spamming an emote over and 
over to basically interrupt the animation and make it look like 
something else. They can take a wave or a welcome greeting and 
turn it into a butt shaking motion or hip thrusting. I see a lot of [cat 
girls] doing the angry emote, but stopping it by hitting the com­
mand again. Makes them look like they’re bouncing on someone’s 
dick.28
Players who want to have more suggestive emotes simply use the tools at 
hand to create something new. There is no “dick bouncing” emote in the 
game, but certain emotes involve use of the avatar’s hips or buttocks (in 
this example), and those frames of the original animation for the avatar 
can be the focus of the new macro script. This also means that the player 
desiring to turn this emote into an erotic one likely will have to create 
some customized text to populate the chat with something other than 
“Player A is angry,” which would be the default text for the associated 
emote. They may write “Player A slams her ass onto your crotch” into 
a macro, assigning the original emote (which will also be interrupted 
during the animation to make the suggestive gesture complete) and the 
new text to a single button. Now, perhaps when the player is involved 
in some cybersex scene at a later time, the macro can be pressed during 

174  Game Worlds Get Real
the interaction, producing a relatively believable sexual act with its own 
text. In other words, players labor to control their virtual bodies in ways 
that produce a better or more believable sexual interaction.
Some players might put so much effort into creating believable experi­
ences that many of these sexualized actions will be created long before 
the actual cybersex takes place. For example, players may make a couple 
dozen sexual emotes that use a kind of “fill in the blank” name system, 
so that they can utilize erotic gestures with different partners. To be 
specific, their emotes and sexualized text would have spaces for their 
“current target”29 (that is, the avatar their own avatar is currently look­
ing at and targeting), and that space would be populated with the tar­
get’s name to make it seem as though the sexual act was intended for 
that avatar directly (even though the command would function the same 
with anyone).
Restraining Sex in Game Worlds
It would be inaccurate to represent cybersex in game worlds as a foun­
tain of creativity and unrestrained by social conventions. At the struc­
tural and interactional levels, the very same types of attempts to control 
sexuality in the reality of everyday life also exist in game worlds. Many 
of the norms and limitations of sexuality have been reconstructed in 
game worlds, operating in ways that reduce opportunities for sexual 
expression, particularly by threatening their solid-world counter­
parts. In other words, because social transparency and authenticity 
have become the standard practice for straddling multiple digital and 
solid-world communities, many players don’t consider the game world 
to be an exceptional space; thus it is “just more of the same,” and the 
societal rules of the solid world are kept largely intact within any virtual 
overlay.
Gendered Desire: The Fragility of Sexuality, Even without 
Solid Bodies
It is common to hear people associate their gender with their sexual­
ity in various ways. In fact, people may need constant reassurance of 
their normative behaviors, and they may labor intensely to maintain the 
belief that they are (for example) exclusively “masculine” or exclusively 
“straight.” This hyper-accountability of everyday interactions demon­
strates the depth of societal internalization, in particular of gender and 
sexuality. The stock example for this, in respect to this book’s content, 

Cybersexuality 
175
is how straight-identified men take steps to preserve their “straightness” 
in the game world, even while seeking out cybersex with other avatars.
The simple fact is that for many years, players didn’t necessarily know 
the people they played the game with (i.e., the “dampened resonance” 
approach). Whether someone’s age, gender, race, or sexuality was known 
largely relied on disclosure and textual communication. Verifying the 
accuracy of any claim to a social category was in itself subject to debate. 
Did it matter if this tall, purple elf guy was in fact male in the solid 
world? He probably wasn’t purple, but that didn’t matter, so did his 
gender category? Or his age? Or his sexuality? As I have mentioned in 
the chapters about gender, those questions did come to matter, but only 
through the lens of believing that people needed to be treated differently 
depending on their social category.
In essence, many of us perform difference (“do difference”)30 as a 
path to maintaining and reinforcing our own identities, which rely on 
such maintenance and reproduction. For straight-identified men seeking 
cybersex, they implicitly know that any sexual interaction with another 
man could implode their claim to being straight. It’s not about whether 
the cybersex would be pleasurable, or whether it was believable, and 
it’s not even about touching another man’s body, because the two male 
solid-world bodies will never touch. Instead, straight men have to be 
overly vigilant about their sexual pursuits in game worlds because their 
sexuality is based on a very rigidly enforced social standard. Any vari­
ation, even one occurring in the game world, threatens the validity of 
their sexuality. Because of this, many men were very concerned about 
having to prove their potential partners to be “real women.”
It’s threatening to them, not knowing if it’s a woman on the other 
side. In ERP [erotic role-play] groups or guilds, sometimes that’s 
fine, though you may still know who it is you are talking to. Most 
guys though, they want to know if it’s a real woman because if it’s 
not, well, they won’t be happy about it. That’s for sure.31
Currently, many players are aware of “exceptional” spaces or communi­
ties where the generally accepted social norms don’t always apply. But 
those exceptions themselves serve as reminders, in their own labeling 
and acknowledgment that they are different, that the rules and norms 
of many game worlds are well established. One such rule relates to gen­
der transparency as a funnel of (and shackles for) sexual desire. And 
the great secret is that many of us are in fact limiting and controlling 
ourselves by rules and norms we have internalized. If you identify as a 

176  Game Worlds Get Real
straight man, we believe that you should only have sexual interactions 
with women, and that you should only think or fantasize about women. 
You internalize that thought structure, and to preserve your sexual­
ity, you have to distance yourself from anything that might tell you (or 
the social world) otherwise. Seeking to confirm whether there are “real 
women” playing the game and looking for cybersex allows men to play 
into all the beliefs that broader society has about men’s desire for sex, 
but it also keeps up the illusion of mutually exclusive sexual identities. 
The fact is, cybersex is not gay or straight or anything else. It’s sexual, 
surely, but how players frame the meaning of their actions more high­
lights their efforts to reinforce their preexisting identities (the stuff they 
are hauling into the fantasy world from the solid one) than allows them 
to be unshackled from such cultural constructs and find or create some­
thing truly novel.
Harassment and Discomfort: The Fear of Sexual Predation
For women playing and enjoying game worlds, the issue of sexual iden­
tity being threatened by cybersex is not central to why they restrain their 
own interests in it. Although millions of people use the Internet on a daily 
basis and connect with close friends and cross-cultural strangers alike, 
fear that someone we meet online may be too aggressive or obsessive, 
or perhaps even seek us out in the solid world without our consent, still 
rattles around inside our minds as we connect. Strangers can, with little 
effort, find a sizable amount of information about someone with only a 
name and location.32 And with large populations of gamers online who 
are open to disclosing details of their personal lives, it’s perfectly reason­
able to expect that someone you meet could turn a casual social chat in 
a game world into a possibly dangerous solid-world situation.
Men often enjoy the privilege of not thinking about such issues in 
the solid world. For example, men experience the night differently than 
do women, largely due to rape culture.33 Men are allowed to explore 
the world at night without having to think about sexual assault, and if 
something happens to them, no one will question why they were out in 
the middle of the night; we often see the opposite happens to women, 
even when they are victims of a crime. Men also get to wander the vir­
tual landscape without having to consider the possibility of stalkers or 
predators.34 Women have to think about such issues, and having to do 
so frames how women might approach invitations for cybersex. It’s not 
that women are necessarily less interested in a couple of virtual bodies 
doing nasty emotes; it’s the concern that casual sexual play online with 

Cybersexuality 
177
another player (and in most cases, a male player) will transform into 
something more problematic.
They can start with “your character is really beautiful” or “you’re 
sexy” or something slightly flattering, but mostly harmless. I put 
some work into how I look, so it’s not like I expect no one to say 
a thing about it. But, then they try to learn more about me, and if 
we are on [voice chat] they might say a couple things that make me 
cringe. It’s very casual at first, but you have this nagging thought 
that they want more from you, even when you’ve been clear about 
where the lines are.35
As mentioned earlier in this book, men’s treatment of women in game 
worlds suffers from the same ideological and gender power issues as 
many solid-world spaces and organizations do (e.g., sugar daddy com­
plex, infantalization, sexual harassment). Though desirability can be a 
valued component of game-world experiences (after all, players spend 
time and money making themselves look good), harassment of women 
gamers by (largely) straight men in game worlds constricts women’s abil­
ity to enjoy, or even seek out, cybersex. This means that when men are 
socialized to be aggressors and then play out that role in this space, they 
can actually reduce the likelihood that they will find female partners. If 
the fear of harassment, sexual violence, and stalking were not something 
that women had to battle in every social interaction with men (even in a 
game world), then the routes for women’s sexual and emotional expres­
sion might broaden considerably. That is, women’s sexual empowerment 
is at least partly linked to the issue of rape culture and the part that 
many men play in maintaining that particular gender power structure. 
This fact is further reinforced by the multiple examples of women hav­
ing cybersex with partners who were seen as safe and respectful; usually 
they were in a romantic relationship with them in the solid world.
We use the game sometimes. When he’s away, it can be fun. I think of 
it like phone sex, which I have some experience with. You want to be 
close to the person you care about, but the long-distance issue means 
there’s no sex for a while, so the game just gives us a chance to do 
that. Plus, he can be a hulking piece of man in the game, and that’s 
kind of fun for me. I know he thinks my character is attractive too.36
Women tended to be comfortable with cybersex when they were com­
fortable and felt safe. This kind of conclusion should make perfect sense 

178  Game Worlds Get Real
for many of us in our own sexual lives. When we feel safe, we tend to 
be more open. When the boundaries and intentions are clear and no 
one steps over them, we tend to have fun. If anything, men’s harassment 
of women in online spaces regarding cybersex is just another piece of 
evidence for the need to have more discussions about sexual consent, 
its paramount importance, and how many of the barriers to a culture of 
consent (male socialization, sex-shaming women, and myths about non­
verbal communication)37 have been transposed upon the game worlds 
we have seen—and likely those we have yet to create.
Proper Space: The Ways in Which Sexuality Is Rendered Invisible
Interestingly, while concerns regarding personal identity and safety inter­
sected with gender in different ways, nearly all players interested in cyber­
sex had to confront rules and norms about “proper” sexual space. One 
might assume that a game world with a fantasy overlay would at least 
allow the exploration of sexuality in a relatively public sphere. In other 
words, there are many spaces in the solid world where sex is prohibited 
by law, morality, or cultural definitions of proper behavior, and the game 
world could, for example, allow players to “have sex” in a public place, 
like a park, an open road, or a crowded city. However, the norms that 
regulate where sex can occur in the solid world are often reinforced in the 
game world, meaning that all “public” areas (city streets, populated spaces, 
and so on) are off limits for cybersex, and this standard is maintained by 
enforcers both official (game moderators) and unofficial (other players).
I knew someone, and I never tried this myself, but in WoW he 
would drink an underwater breathing potion, and I guess him and 
whoever he was cybering with would go out into the ocean some­
where or in a big lake and sink down below to do it. It was out of 
sight that way. I thought he was creative (laughs).38
From an outsider’s perspective, one could imagine these rules as being 
somewhat strange. Why, given the chance to fuck freely in the game 
world, would players end up having to hide their sexuality in some pri­
vate corner, or in this case, under the sea? This reality demonstrates how 
norms about the proper sexual space were instilled in the game world in 
the same way they are maintained in the solid world. The players eventu­
ally learn to self-monitor, to purposefully select “private” space in order 
to keep sexuality out of the public’s view, and in so doing, to cement the 
place for sex as the private sphere. There is no confusion about where 

Cybersexuality 
179
sex is relegated to in the game world, because if it is ever found where it 
shouldn’t be, the players and the game’s moderators play a part in pun­
ishing those involved in such “improper” displays.
On the social and community side, players attempt to control or erase 
sexuality from the game world through digital humiliation or game 
mechanisms. In the more direct sense, players who saw other players 
having cybersex could “shout down” the behavior to the broader gam­
ing public (essentially, acting like a sort of virtual town crier, yelling 
“PERVS OVER HERE!”). They might also report the behavior to the 
game moderators, expressing that sexuality is a violation of the purpose 
of the game and can be considered harassment. More indirectly, players 
might use the functions of the game structure to “erase” the presence of 
sexuality from the virtual world, such as “blacklisting”39 any avatars 
they see having cybersex, ensuring that all text connected to said avatars 
will never again populate the offended player’s monitor. In some cases, 
players tried to further humiliate (and thus drive underground) cybersex 
by taking screenshots40 of the “offenders” and posting them on Web 
sites, Reddit, Facebook groups, and so on. The posts were a form of 
social control, identifying “deviant” avatars to the larger gamer com­
munity, and in a way, confirming their “pervert” label.
They kind of deserve it though. I mean, they’re just doing those 
things wherever, and people can see them. Parents and kids can see 
them. I don’t think they’re playing the game the way it’s supposed 
to be played. I don’t want to see that. If someone doesn’t want to 
play with some pervs, that’s their right.41
The larger population, those who would be seen as holding the status of 
“normative sexual behaviors” in the solid world, rebuilt the same ideo­
logical structures in the game world and policed any players who did 
not abide by those rules. Sex is often an easy target, and breaking a rule 
may result in an unfair punishment just because it is sexual (and sexual 
acts are framed as “more dangerous” than other forms of deviance).42 
Being branded as a “pervert” has deleterious consequences for people’s 
solid-world lives. And while the stakes are arguably less important in 
game worlds, being heavily stigmatized based on one’s sexual behaviors 
(even when they are consensual, respectful, and fun) can have a num­
ber of negative effects on a player’s gaming experience, including being 
openly harassed, blocked from or left out of social groups and interac­
tions, or reported to the game moderators (and possibly punished with 
suspension from the game or a ban).

180  Game Worlds Get Real
This seems doubly strange given that (for games unlike Second Life) 
there is very little nudity involved, there are no genitals exposed, there 
are no solid-world bodies on display, and there are no health risks. The 
panic over cybersex is almost entirely about language and the idea of 
sex (and the meaning that certain social groups bestow upon it). To be 
outraged over a couple of avatars grinding it out by the Auction House 
in Stormwind43 is to place a culture and ideology of sex negativity on 
full display. It is to acknowledge that sex is shameful, deviant, and to be 
hidden away from all people, even when the people are not people . . . 
just text and polygons.
Justifying and Commoditizing Cybersex
Given how interesting and creative cybersex could be, and considering 
the social and ideological chains linking it with the solid world, play­
ers often felt it necessary to justify their reasons for engaging in cyber­
sex, perhaps as much for themselves as for others. Whereas cybersex 
was once explained as being an expressional or experimental pursuit, it 
seems to require more rationalized justification than do other behaviors 
in these categories. Players rely largely on connections to the reality of 
everyday life to neutralize criticism of their engagement in cybersex.
Maintaining Romance
The go-to justification for many players involved in cybersex is that they 
are prolonging a solid-world relationship, or trying to create a new one. 
Several players who found themselves in long-distance relationships, or 
who were in the military, or who had met someone in the game and were 
trying to deepen that bond, would use cybersex to maintain those con­
nections. On the more trivial side, players who may have gotten involved 
in cybersex because the game itself was boring (and the social dimen­
sion of cybersex was appealing in its own right) chose to continue using 
cybersex to deepen these newly formed bonds.
Yes, we did that before we met in real life. It was fun, and we were 
into it for a couple months, basically before I flew out to meet him. 
After we became close outside the game, the in game stuff kind of 
seemed less important.44
While some partners may have begun their intimacy in the game world 
or even gotten involved in cybersex for flippant reasons, if the behaviors 

Cybersexuality 
181
could be transferred to the solid world, there was little need to keep 
pursuing cybersex. The underlying idea that cybersex was the “lesser” of 
the two options (versus “real,” as in solid-world or physical, sex) rein­
forced the understanding (correct or not) that cybersex was less real, or 
less important, and sometimes easily discarded when something “more 
real” came along. In some cases, it was a temporary fix for a proximity 
issue, as when partners found themselves separated due to jobs, mili­
tary, travel, and so on, and would use the game world to maintain their 
intimate bond. In this way, technology serves as a surrogate for the pre­
ferred bond, a temporary fix until things can return to the way things 
“should be” (the same can be said of phone sex and other “filler” sexual 
behaviors).
It is also important to recognize that couples use technology (if not 
rely on technology) to help them maintain their relationships, to keep 
them feeling close, and even to assist with sex. In this way, cybersex 
cannot be dismissed so easily as completely trivial or meaningless. In 
fact, most players (and the public in general) feel that cybersex would 
be cheating (as in the breach of a monogamous contract with a partner, 
though some might frame it as both emotional and sexual cheating). 
This means cybersex is acknowledged as being sexual, at least enough 
so that it would “count” as cheating, even though physical bodies do 
not touch.
It appears that the inclusion or exclusion of cybersex in the category 
of “real sex” is highly situational, as participants are constantly com­
paring it to other measures in order to define its meaning (e.g., in com­
parisons to “real sex” it may not be seen as that important, but when 
maintaining a relationship, it can be very important, and when trying to 
draw lines in the sand about what qualifies as sexual cheating, cybersex 
may also count, and therefore must be close enough to “real sex” in 
order to be counted).
Erotic Role-Play Communities
In terms of finding acceptable spaces and social groups with whom to 
perform cybersexual activities, erotic role-players (ERP) are one such 
group. Erotic role-playing guilds and communities are not very common 
across the game worlds, but they do provide “exceptional spaces” (also 
to be interpreted as marginalized spaces) for players interested in explor­
ing sexuality in the virtual world. Erotic role-players focus somewhat 
on the role-play (RP) factor, allowing the solid-world identities of the 
players to return to an opaque and unimportant state (i.e., RP is a form 

182  Game Worlds Get Real
of overt dampened resonance that restores the buffer between worlds). 
Role-play is a preemptive move against the solid-world social categories 
of the players, as it renders them unimportant to interaction and conver­
sation (and in some cases, cybersex). But ERPers are a heavily stigma­
tized group, and thus they only serve to reinforce the standard of casting 
sexuality in the virtual world as a lesser and problematized pursuit, one 
perhaps specifically for weirdos and perverts.
Clubs and islands created for marginalized sexualities in games like 
Second Life serve the same purpose.45 They move sexual minorities out 
of the public eye, rendering them less visible and driving the behaviors 
underground, or in this case, into small communities and niches of the 
game world. In part, this happens because players marginalize them­
selves, preferring to be surrounded by people like themselves and using 
the promises and tools of these game worlds to hide the more (depend­
ing on your perspective) unfortunate elements of the larger community 
(in this example, the trolls, homophobes, etc.).
Yet homophily46 is a double-edged sword. While we may prefer peo­
ple like ourselves and want to spend more time with them (because they 
reinforce identities we already have), insulating ourselves from other 
people, no matter what sexuality or social group we belong to, only 
serves to entrench ideological warfare between (superficially) dissimilar 
groups. It is difficult to witness people taking part in the sexual per­
secution of erotic variation, surely, but no matter how or with whom 
you enjoy your sex, to wall yourself off from all people who don’t share 
your sexual philosophy is short-sighted at best. And the growing prob­
lem (as explored throughout this book) is that technology promises to 
allow us to do just that: to drown out dissenting voices and surround 
ourselves with only the people who already agree with everything we do 
or say.
Discarding the Virtual Body and World
Over time, new technologies tend to usurp older standards. In the case of 
cybersex, the recent availability of streaming video calls and voice chat 
programs has, in some ways, returned the arguably innovative aspects of 
cybersex to a more basic approach to “getting off online.” Several years 
ago, shouts for in-game cybersex were just that: players looking for 
cybersex involving virtual bodies, emotes, and dirty messages. But while 
those behaviors are not completely gone, other sexual advertisements 
populate the virtual game worlds of today. Here are a few examples:

Cybersexuality 
183
•	 Lonely and bored. 18+ Skype cam.
•	 Cat maid looking for a master. I’ll do anything you want me too. 
Video available.
•	 Looking for elven servant. Let’s chat. Skype/Discord.
•	 Cute catgirl selling walks on the beach, candlelight dinners, and 
-girlfriend- experience roleplay. Voice chat.47
Many of these ads attempt to take the virtual body and the game world 
itself out of the cybersex equation. That is, they just happen to be webcam 
sex ads placed in a game world, which could be considered just another 
space for advertising. However, many of these players are also playing 
the game itself (i.e., leveling up their avatars, going into dungeons, killing 
dragons, and so on), but they just find cybersex a bit too cumbersome. 
In other words, the tools and bodies of the game world are discarded for 
more “intimate” connections via technology (a webcam session, in this 
respect, is seen as more erotic than cybersex using virtual bodies).
Framing cybersex as lesser than solid-world sex (or even webcam sex) 
may well implicate a certain ideology of what players feel should be 
granted the state of “real,” but it also may be a criticism of the current 
state of the technology itself. For all the interesting and creative ways 
players have attempted to increase the believability of cybersex, the act 
remains rather archaic and stilted. There has been minimal incorporation 
of other senses in video game experiences (touch, smell, etc.), and even 
motion games and the advent of virtual reality have yet to market sexual 
experiences (though there are some awkward attempts, certainly).48 In 
other words, perhaps cybersex is more easily discarded for physical sex 
not only because players have internalized that physical sex is “more 
real,” but also because cybersex just isn’t real enough, at least not yet.
We do not currently have the technology for more fully immersive 
experiences, such as those of The Matrix,49 or in Ready Player One,50 or 
Sword Art Online.51 We are still very much aware of our physical bodies 
as they exist in the solid world, even as we play in game worlds or labor 
at our desks. Right now, I am sitting at my computer, typing these words. 
My leg hurts from sitting in the chair (it’s a chronic issue), and the room 
smells like Red Bull (it’s my coffee for the morning). I know my feet are 
on the floor (at least partially) and my fingers are tapping the keys. My 
eyes are straining as they look at the screen, whose wallpaper is the cover 
of this book (I think of it as motivation to finish writing the darn thing). 
It’s hard to imagine myself as anywhere else but right here, especially in 
reference to how my body feels.

184  Game Worlds Get Real
The physical reality of the solid world is difficult to dislodge, even 
when entering a state of flow, or when engaging in cybersex. You have 
to return to your physical body as it becomes aroused, or as you write 
naughty messages to your partner in the game world using the keyboard. 
It’s a limit that is rather jarring, but perhaps it will not be as much of a 
hurdle as sexuality becomes part of newer developing technologies. One 
day, in your fully immersive bodysuit and headgear, inside which you feel 
texture and pressure, see sights as you would outside your front door, 
taste and smell food that you do not consume, and likely much more . . . 
maybe then the appeal of a virtual body grinding upon your hips will be 
so inviting, so appealing, and so safe (at least in terms of health) that the 
line between solid-world sex and cybersex will be much harder to draw, 
and generations of technologically savvy gamers (and everyday citizens) 
will experience sex in ways we can’t quite fathom now.


(Doodles invented by Necronomiconopoly [Marina Gutierrez-Harsh])

There’s a certain mentality that dominates gaming. Players take 
things seriously, and that means when you game you are constantly 
being measured by them. If you are skilled and willing to put in 
the time, you can be very good at gaming, but I don’t think the 
people who do that are in it for the enjoyment. It’s more like a 
dick-measuring contest. Gamers have a lot in common with jocks 
and other douche bag types. They berate each other and start piss­
ing wars over trivial shit. It’s kind of embarrassing to carry the 
“gamer” label around with me sometimes knowing that.1
I
n his seminal work, Elijah Anderson wrote about how impoverished 
inner-city youths “campaigned for respect” as a response to their 
structurally disadvantaged position.2 Inability to gain power through 
conformity within a system, for some social groups, frames alternatives 
to that system as ways of meeting the goals that would be unavailable 
otherwise. In a system that was created with more obstacles than oppor­
tunities for these young men, taking control and establishing oneself as 
powerful in a different realm may be the only way to feel the way you 
believe you should feel. For these men, controlling their interpersonal 
realm and seizing the opportunity to jockey for status among their peers 
granted them respectability. Respectability was in short supply at the 
broader cultural level, and so the importance of obtaining it during inter­
actions with other youth in these communities became all-important.
An alternative path to meeting certain “masculinity” criteria can in 
turn create a new social order within the social spaces of its origins. 
CHAPTER 10
Gamer Masculinity

188  Game Worlds Get Real
Basically, the alternative becomes the new touchstone for that social 
space, and those who adhere to the norms and values of the broader 
culture may feel conflicted. This is largely the case with the “decent fami­
lies” in Elijah Anderson’s work, who were socialized to adhere to a more 
mainstream set of cultural values (e.g., respect authority, rely on faith, 
work hard) and were forced to “shape-shift” (code-switch) and take on 
the values of the street in order to move through community spaces 
safely. This was doubly problematic because campaigning for respect 
often put these young men in danger, or required that they do violence 
to others to gain respect.
Several social-behavioral scholars have claimed that modern masculin­
ity, particularly in the Western world is at best dysfunctional, tracing the 
evolution of masculinity over the last two centuries to that of the ideal 
form of “marketplace manhood.”3 They also highlight the many pos­
sibilities for, and inevitability of, men failing to meet the ideal and thus 
failing to be seen as masculine. Part of the problem is connected to the 
ephemeral state of being considered masculine. “Manhood” is socially 
bestowed, typically by other men, rather than intrinsically attained or 
generated through other means. Additionally, there is no sense of perma­
nence of manhood. Men constantly struggle to be granted masculinity 
by their social groups, and such efforts (for the well-socialized) may con­
tinue throughout the life course. Because of this, men denied the power 
and respectability promised by the broader culture have developed many 
unfortunate strategies and proxies for accessing it, including intimate 
partner violence,4 racism,5 rape,6 terrorism,7 and drinking,8 as well as 
the illegal drug economy and violence against other men.9 Men formu­
late these strategies and operate in these ways largely because it makes 
them feel powerful (which they are supposed to feel) when they are spi­
raling into powerlessness, which is to be avoided at all costs.
Similarly, a study of men who were differently abled10 explained how 
men, even when faced with a lack of physicality (which is often associ­
ated with masculinity), still find ways to feel powerful. In other words, 
some men may choose to reformulate attributes of masculinity to fit 
their current realities. This approach attempts to tweak the rules of the 
masculine ideal so that they might still be applied, even if the paths to 
attaining certain masculine criteria are different. Studies of “nerd” men 
also show how they attempt to reinforce masculine ideals by creating 
skills more suitable to their area of competence, such as being computer 
savvy and possessing tech knowledge.11 Additionally, Bonnie Nardi12 
highlights how the game world of World of Warcraft (WoW) reinforces 
tenets of masculinity that often require men to cast other men as failures, 

Gamer Masculinity 
189
emasculating them through use of homophobic language. Since gamers 
assume that game worlds are populated by men, male players reinforce 
this by deploying homophobic and sexist banter as a way of labeling 
and controlling other players. In other words, men largely dictate the 
interactional rules of these virtual landscapes, and women are required 
either to play along (ignoring sexualized banter and aggressive romantic 
pursuers) or to opt out by quitting the game or avoiding a majority of 
social interactions.
I’ve already addressed some of these issues, but I would like to con­
tinue demonstrating how this form of “gamer masculinity” has taken 
root in game worlds and, as many of the chapters before have addressed, 
how the construct of the “ideal gamer” is guarded by those who fit a 
very narrow intersection of social categories.
Synthetically Masculine
From the perspective of male gamers, Jace Hall,13 a game and television 
producer, created a music video titled “I Play WoW” that illustrates how 
men who play games have attempted to push away from the cultural 
constraints of masculinity.
Call me a nerd, call me a geek, but I’m no longer embarrassed
I don’t live my life for money, fame, or chasing your carrots.14
The song sums up quite well the attributes of marketplace manhood 
that men appear to avoid by participating in game worlds. Men in the 
solid world, despite their largely dominant social position, find them­
selves under great social pressure to succeed (that is, to have economic 
power, to consume, and to control every aspect of their lives, including 
their emotions). This social pressure is unrelenting, even for older men, 
meaning that the race to outdo one another is unending. But instead of 
allowing the exodus from the solid world (into the game world) to create 
a non-normative set of standards (and new ideals) for what masculin­
ity might entail, a reformulated version of masculine ideals has been 
installed, in the same way that many other social solid-world values have 
been. Simply put, gamer men are not all that different from other men in 
trying to attain masculinity.
For a time, as I argued at the beginning of this book, online game 
worlds were lauded as doing just that, offering an alternative life where 
people could log in for a while and then log out and go back to their 
solid-world lives. But instead of explaining this as a window that has 

190  Game Worlds Get Real
closed, I argued that our continual need to define the “real,” as it is con­
nected to the solid world and the reality of everyday life, is the reason 
that alternative spaces become socially rigid over time. Alternatives to (in 
this case) the dominant script of what it means to be masculine can only 
fully transform the gender landscape when they adhere to the reality of 
everyday life. Norms for men do change over time, but only when they 
are situated within the solid world. The game world does not transform 
masculinity but is transformed by it. And this is important more than 
ever before, as these game worlds, and the nexus of online realities in 
general, will continue to be central to the identities of new generations.
Jane McGonigal15 argues that games are fun and engaging because 
they create clear goals and have rewarding feedback systems. Players 
have the digital tools to measure progress and success, and under the 
assumption of equal play, they can jockey for social status. Similar tools 
or quantifiers are nebulous at best in the solid world, and as I discussed 
in chapter 3, the quantification of all matters in game worlds is quite 
tangible, visual, and comprehensive. Players can, with few exceptions, 
measure themselves against other players using various methods, includ­
ing player-versus-player (PVP) battles, financial prowess (earning vir­
tual money), and ownership of consumables and digital-material goods 
(houses, equipment, and special items), as well as raw number outputs 
such as “damage per second” (DPS) parsing, which allow players to 
identify who among them is doing the greatest amount of damage to 
a monster. The tools for digital “dick measuring,” often called “epeen” 
(e-penis)16 by the gamer community, are multiple and easily assessed.
It is strangely common that what we might think of as alienated social 
groups (like gamers), who are shut out of social praise and reinforce­
ment from the dominant culture, rarely ever create a more egalitarian 
social system or group. Generally, we tend to see similar norms reemerge 
in favor of some segment of the subordinated group, while forcing a 
subpopulation within that group even lower on the hierarchy in order 
to secure power and status.17 In short, gamers who are “failing” at mas­
culinity in the broader culture (they aren’t superior athletes, they aren’t 
powerful businessmen, and so on) create favorable rules to denote who 
among them is worthy of praise and status, while denouncing other 
groups within gaming culture as less so. I have outlined many of these 
groups, as well as the creation of these rules, throughout this book, but 
here I will place more explicit focus on how gamer masculinity operates 
as a cultural paradigm among the (mostly) men to which it applies.
Games provide (male) gamers with more than adequate tools to have 
their own form of digital dick measuring. Instead of buying a huge SUV 

Gamer Masculinity 
191
and hanging a pair of “truck nuts” (go ahead, look it up) off the bumper 
in order to go drive aggressively on the highway, threatening smaller cars, 
men in games can wield powerful, glowing, massive swords, peacocking 
their epic weapons in front of the digital population for everyone to 
ogle and applaud. Same reason, different space. In game worlds, players 
can measure their masculine status (or epeen) through their accomplish­
ments, competitive play, acquisition of digital goods, and arguing that 
games are “serious work.” This is a dominant ideology in gaming, and 
as I have explained previously, it creates numerous divisions and stigmas 
within these game worlds.
Even more telling is that when judged by this standard (which is very 
much akin to the aspects of the solid-world masculinity construct), some 
players may push back against the meaning and value of “game” or 
“virtual accomplishments.” In other words, men vying for respectability 
using in-game accomplishments and attempting to control the discourse 
of what makes an “ideal gamer” are, to some degree, railed against by 
the framework of “the virtual isn’t real.” This produces divergent ways 
of thinking about the work and play done in game worlds. On one side 
you have gamers (mostly men) arguing that gaming is similar to “real 
life” and is serious stuff, meaning it’s not that different from the solid 
world (i.e., they need to frame their game accomplishments as “real”). 
On the other side, you have a subpopulation fighting against a masculine 
construct, which is all too similar to its solid-world version (e.g., domi­
nance, economic power, competence, etc.), and doing so by claiming that 
gaming accomplishments are not the real thing. Both groups are doing 
the same cognitive dance. They are both looking back to the reality of 
everyday life to be the judge of whether the activities in the game world 
matter.
Players used the measurability and visibility of their accomplishments 
in game worlds to reconstruct a form of gamer masculinity. These men 
supplanted solid-world masculinity for a virtual proxy that encouraged 
them to dedicate extreme amounts of time and energy to the game. The 
evidence of their dedication was largely symbolic, and it only held value 
when it was socially recognized by their smaller enclaves (i.e., their 
immediate social groups), the community within the game, or in some 
cases, the game designers themselves. The social aspects of play are gen­
erally hailed as a net positive in game worlds,18 and though these conclu­
sions served to erode the myth perpetuated in earlier work that gamers 
were isolated youths in social peril, somewhat glossed over are the more 
negative consequences of increasing social connectivity in games. In 
other words, players are all on display (and their activities are highly 

192  Game Worlds Get Real
visible) in game worlds, and the threshold at which social recognition 
in games becomes the template for “fun” often aligns itself with these 
masculine pursuits. When “fun” is framed as a by-product of “perform­
ing masculinity” within game worlds, it is no longer an equally acces­
sible concept and outcome. More damningly, when fun and masculinity 
are conflated so soundly, these game worlds become unappealing to the 
much greater and more diverse population of possible gamers. Those 
who are benefited by this attempt become the guardians of the “ideal 
gamer” construct, defining and delineating its limitations and possibili­
ties (as many previous chapters have detailed) and looking to oust those 
who “aren’t really gamers” from these worlds. As a backlash, players 
who do not want to adhere to these standards often attempt to use the 
very construct that male gamers are attempting to reformulate in their 
favor, that is, other players may cast male gamers as “failures” by the 
solid-world measures of masculinity.
Epeen as Gamer Masculinity
Most game worlds are structured around the completion of various 
forms of work, using a reinforcement system of one type or another to 
convince players to keep laboring. Their fantasy, science fiction, or oth­
erworldly settings and socially geared content attempt to veil this work 
and inscribe it within the “magic circle” of play. Players in the current 
era are less likely to see the labor in games as simply play (I spoke to 
productivity norms in chapters 2 and 3), and instead they see the “hard 
work” done in games as laudable activity (within certain thresholds). 
For the most part, doing “hard work” in games is a value that the domi­
nant discourse in these worlds holds sacred. Those who do not “work 
hard” in games, despite some of the obvious drudgery involved in said 
work, are framed as lesser players and called “filthy casuals,” “retards,” 
“gimps,” “noobs,” “bitches,” “wimps,” “babies,” and “welfare gamers.”
Masculine Attributes of Hard Work and Dedication
Gamer identities were varied and fluidly defined among players, often 
housing a number of contradictions in categories. However, “epeen” 
seemed to indicate and label gamers who self-identified as “hardcore” 
or “extreme” or “dedicated” (some of which may fall into the “progres­
sion” category from my own matrix of player motivations in chapter 2). 
These players were known to place playing the game above the major­
ity of other life activities, including sleep, family, friends, lovers, school, 
work, and so on, though they might still manage to juggle those things 

Gamer Masculinity 
193
as much as needed to continue dedicating time to the game world. These 
gamers spoke of their actual time played (usually listed in days if refer­
ring to one specific game, or referencing the number of years they’ve 
been gaming, so as to note one’s “career” as a gamer) as a badge of 
honor and a symbol of their gamer identity. These players were the most 
competitive and also (especially in their view) the most productive. They 
sought the newest challenges and boasted about their latest accomplish­
ments, the duels they had won, mobs slain, and equipment obtained. 
Despite game elements and mechanics that many might consider drudg­
ery, demonstrating dedication and “hard work,” even without positive 
results, was considered a positive attribute.
Player A: this is my 44 run
Player A: lost the [gear I want] 9 times
Player A: not fucking sleeping til i get it
Player B: damn man, that’s sick
Player C: >_<
Player D: you’ll get it, keep runnin
Player B: red bull ftw
Player A: damn right19
Social exchanges like this one, which served as announcements of a play­
er’s dedication to the game, were common. Players proclaimed their ded­
ication in chat, citing the consecutive hours they had played, the social 
obligations they had neglected, the sleep they had lost, or the amount 
of “grinding” they had effectively accomplished. In other words, being 
dedicated to “working” at an extreme level was seen as being an ideal 
player. Putting in the time and dedication to achieve certain in-game 
goals (whether they were about clearing a difficult obstacle, like dragon 
slaying, or obtaining a coveted item, like a piece of gear) was held above 
being less dedicated to these pursuits. In fact, those who complained that 
the game was “too much work” were often attacked and told to leave 
the game world if they couldn’t be more dedicated. These critiques often 
followed (at least in English-speaking communities) the cultural logic 
that “gamers these days” (similar to “youth these days”) were “enti­
tled crybabies” who were “allergic to hard work” and were probably a 
bunch of “lazy millennials.”
I swear to God these fucking whiney ass crybabies and their hand-
out entitlements. They just want to log on and BOOM! Game 
Complete! You win everything! Here’s a trophy and a blowjob! 
You are the best damn gamer ever, you worthless piece of shit! I 

194  Game Worlds Get Real
mean, seriously, can these babies even wipe their own asses? Did 
no one teach them you have to work for things you want? These 
people aren’t gamers. I don’t even know what I’d call them. Fuck­
ing shit stains on our community and on the game itself I guess 
sums it up.20
As mentioned earlier, instilling the value of hard work into play activities 
(a game or sport) is more reflective of the values of the broader culture 
(that is, the society in which the players or athletes find themselves situ­
ated) than of those within the game itself. In other words, game com­
munities that value hard work have carried those values over from the 
reality of everyday life, as many modern societies associated with large 
gaming populations (China, Japan, Korea, the United States, Germany, 
the United Kingdom, and so on) all attempt to instill the value of hard 
work in their youth.
This means that activities associated with “working hard” are given 
greater respect and complexity at a cultural level; thus gaming must be 
framed as hard work to be seen as valuable. It is also no secret that men 
in several of the cultures mentioned find the promise of their identity 
as men within the realm of work, and games offer another space for 
these standards to be reinstated, so that men can find themselves doing 
“work” in a still predominately male space, and they can garner some 
masculine dividend from such efforts (and demean those who don’t 
“work hard” in these spaces of play). While game communities played 
their role in constructing hard work and dedication as a value, the same 
value was often recognized and celebrated by those who designed the 
games.
The exceptional level of skill and teamwork they possess definitely 
deserves mention. They worked incredibly hard . . . to those play­
ers who practice vigorously every day, aspiring to be the world’s 
top players, as a gamer you have my utmost respect. I know how 
painstaking such an undertaking can be, and I thank you for taking 
such great interest in these challenging encounters.21
The producer of FFXIV occasionally pens a virtual letter to distribute 
to the community, promoting the latest developments in game content 
and acknowledging the virtual successes of the player base. In this exam­
ple, he highlighted the incredible level of hard work required to over­
come the most difficult content in the game at the time. His comments 
function on two levels. First, from a personal level, “as a gamer” he is 

Gamer Masculinity 
195
awarding the “top players” (i.e., those “who practice vigorously every 
day”) his respect. It’s a sort of gamer “bro fist” serving to acknowledge 
their achievement. However, there is also the acknowledgement from his 
position as part of the game designer realm. In other words, he knows 
that certain encounters in the game were built for the ideal player and 
that only those players would possibly be capable of conquering such 
content. This is not to argue that the rest of the community lacks objec­
tives and activities in these games, but that barrier of “hard work” as 
a requirement to access certain content does indeed create disparity in 
the breadth of content that can be accessed by those who do and those 
who do not fit the ideal player mold. On the other hand, no such barrier 
exists for the dedicated (“hardworking”) player.
This means that game designers intentionally create “gated content”22 
based on the concept of the “ideal player” (i.e., players willing to dedi­
cate an exceptional amount of time and energy to complete a task). Only 
these players will be able to clear this content, maybe even for months 
or years, while the larger community either will be unable to complete 
the content or will have to wait for a “nerf.”23 This allows extreme play­
ers economic and social control over the game world. Given that they 
are the only teams clearing certain content, they are the gateway for the 
rewards reaching the greater public. This set of design principles leads 
to a landscape shaped (at least in part) by this segment of the gamer 
population, and the rest of the community must adhere to the rules that 
they establish.
Masculine Attributes of Competence and Composure
Although it was alluded to earlier, all work in games is not equal. There 
is such a thing as “good work,” or being good at doing your job, both of 
which garner male players (and all players, indirectly) more status. Being 
competent at your job in-game, or displaying a high level of skill (how­
ever that might be measured in different situations), will elevate your 
status among other gamers. In many game worlds, this may be what 
is framed as the “true goal” of the game: to be extremely competent at 
your work (play?) and therefore to be “better” than all other gamers at 
said work.
The classic way that men generally measure themselves as men is by 
discursively casting other men (and other people in general) as “fail­
ures” within the realm of whatever masculine standard is being dis­
cussed.24 It is an indirect way of raising one’s own status, not just in the 
lowering of another’s, but also in distancing oneself from the attributes 

196  Game Worlds Get Real
associated with the person being labeled a “failure.” In game worlds, 
the current language for this technique is “Don’t be a bad.” “Bads” 
are, in many ways (as measured by the standards discussed here and 
throughout this book), not “real gamers.” They are fakers, players who 
don’t belong in the game, “incurably stupid,” and enemies to what 
gaming culture is attempting to stand for: “serious work,” done largely 
by men. Although “bads” may well be confronted directly, such verbal 
conflicts rarely produce the ideal outcome for those calling out the 
behavior.
For example, let’s say you and I are fighting a mighty fuchsia dragon 
with some other players. I’m not doing a very good job, and maybe 
I’ve gotten us all killed a couple rounds because I didn’t heal you. Or 
maybe you like to stand in fire, but you think that if I were “good at 
my job,” I would be able to keep you alive through the burning of your 
legs. You could call me out directly (“You suck as a healer! Kill your­
self!”), because some gamers most definitely do, but if you do this, then 
I may just fight back (“Stop standing in fire, you moron!”). While this 
conflict might be needed to help us communicate and work on beating 
the mighty fuchsia dragon, it doesn’t really let either of us claim to be 
better at doing our job than the other. You say you are awesome and I 
suck, and I say you suck and I’m awesome. Stalemate, at least without 
input from other players. And that’s just it—we will both be tempted to 
frame the other as the “bad” by relying on how we present each other’s 
abilities to other players, and in so doing, we frame our own skill set as 
not the problem. So you decide to talk to your social circle as an echo 
chamber:
Awesome Reader: Omg, this healer I’m with is so fucking stupid. 
He’s got no clue wtf he’s doing. I’m not getting healed at all. Died 
three times last fight.
Captive Audience Member #1: Shitty healers can really screw up 
your game time.
Captive Audience Member #2: They’re a bunch of self-important 
pricks too, I had this one guy just cast damage spells the whole 
fight. No one got healed. When we died, he said we shouldn’t get 
hit so much.
Awesome Reader: Yeah! That’s what this guy is saying. Doesn’t 
know how to do his job.
Captive Audience Member #3: Bad players being bad. Not your 
fault.

Gamer Masculinity 
197
You want to gain reinforcement that you are not the “bad” in this equa­
tion, so you, controlling what information you put out there to your 
social group, announce that I am bad for whatever set of reasons, and 
your social group helps you elevate your own sense of being “good” 
because you aren’t the “bad.” Men discursively claim masculine status 
through similar practices, such as calling someone unmanly using terms 
like “fag,” “queer,” “bitch,” or “pussy” in order to stake their own claims 
to being manly.25 In game worlds, if you make me seem like the bad 
player, that must mean you are a good player (or better than me, at 
least), and it also means that you are capable of identifying what behav­
iors label someone a “bad.” This means that you are ready to police 
other players’ behaviors as being “bad” and to call them out on it. You 
do this to help instill this value of competence in the broader community, 
as well as to elevate your own status as a (good) gamer.
Additionally, “good” gamers are pressed to be not only fully competent, 
but also emotionally in check (as are men in the solid world). The largely 
pejorative term “nerd rage”26 circles game worlds as a check for the 
threshold of emotional expression. Players must be competent (i.e., not 
“bads”), and when they experience less-than-ideal outcomes, even if they 
feel defeated, upset, or demoralized, they must not lose all control over 
their emotional state. “Nerd rage” is sometimes thrown into discussion 
as identifying a player who simply could not handle losing and may have 
“rage quit” as a result. For example, let’s say that during a battle between 
players, one player clearly has the upper hand and is on his way to victory. 
But before the victory is secured, or perhaps during the celebration of said 
victory, the opponent decides to disconnect from the game world, or for­
feit the match, or refuse participation, or some other form of obstruction.
One of the most annoying things about some players in the game is 
how quickly they run away from a challenge. It’s like something is 
not going their way and they fly off the handle and yell at everyone 
else, throw shit around, and quit the game. Everyone usually, and 
I’m included in that, hates that type of behavior, but you still see it. 
Players who can’t handle their anger, or are just really big babies 
about losing, need to suck it up. We all lose, or wipe, or fail. It’s 
better just to get over it or handle it with some dignity.27
Frustration while playing games is part of the experience; many of us 
lose, and we lose often. But being unable to deal with said outcomes 
with some measure of stoicism is seen as “lesser” behavior, particularly 

198  Game Worlds Get Real
in terms of gamer masculinity. Players may mockingly respond, “Nerd 
rage!” to identify a player who quit or ran away as behaving inappro­
priately. That is, when you experience bad outcomes, the “manly” way 
to handle it is by not succumbing to your emotions and running away 
or launching into a tirade. Again, remember that these aspects of play 
are not something I am attempting to frame as inherently problematic. 
However, they are very much aligned with elements of masculinity found 
in the reality of everyday life, which is not to say that they are somehow 
immovable or essential qualities of manhood, but instead to note how 
the same measures have found their way into what was once a marginal­
ized (or at least alienated and subordinate) culture. It is to demonstrate 
that gamers have not done much to revolutionize the rules of social 
engagement or identity construction, despite their mastery of novel tech­
nologies, imaginative spaces, and the veil of “play.”
Masculine Attributes of Economic Capital and Power
Perhaps more than other masculine attributes, possessing economic cap­
ital is most readily seen as increasing one’s power and status. Although 
I mentioned in chapter 5 that “ideal players” are ones with disposa­
ble income in the solid world, allowing them to be consumers, in the 
game world, having things and money are also indicative of status and 
seen by the larger populace as praiseworthy. The game world is a social 
treadmill. You will be measured by those who occupy the digital spaces 
within, as well as the value systems found there. Possessing “epic” or 
“rare” stuff is akin to the same form of “upscale emulation”28 in the 
larger consumer society, but it is also a pose of power within a masculine 
framework (and often there is some phallic imagery associated with it in 
games). Men who have wealth and capital are seen as more dominant, 
enviable, and idealized.
Well, having a big dick in real life is like a blessing and it makes 
you “elite” I guess lmao. Epeen is like having uber leet gear in the 
game to make yourself feel better about yourself. And to “stroke 
your epeen” is to do whatever it takes to get the best gear or stand 
out from the crowd.29
Games of all types have high-performance markers, and for those who 
complete them, there are usually visual ways of identifying the accom­
plishment. This could be a trophy or an achievement in your average con­
sole game (for instance, to “platinum” a PlayStation game is to complete 

Gamer Masculinity 
199
a set of challenges within it, some of which may be very difficult, and to 
earn a badge displaying this accomplishment), or it could be as simple as 
the high score in old arcade games. But since the visual fidelity of games 
today is quite appealing, status symbols of particular accomplishments 
are sometimes incredibly gaudy because they are intended for display to 
social groups and the gamer public. These symbols can also be rather 
phallic, and male players have taken this in stride to perfect their own 
form of digital-dick peacocking.
Let’s say you are one of the best players in your game world, and you 
and your group of friends are the very first to kill the Doom Dragon (I’m 
running out of dragons for us to murder here). The beast, once felled, 
drops a bastard sword. Let’s call it Doombane’s Bone. It’s a two-handed 
sword (because reasons), and you happen to be in need of the upgrade, 
so you get the big bone all to yourself. Now, your social group already 
livestreamed the first kill of the Doom Dragon, so a good portion of 
the game community knows how badass you are, but that might not 
be enough. Additionally, the window of time where you are the first 
guy with the big bone in the world is limited, so you want to make 
the most of it. So you decide to park your avatar in the most popu­
lar area in the game world, where dozens of players will be wandering 
through. Oh, but that’s not all! You not only want to have the big bone 
on your person, but you are also going to draw the big bone as though 
you were prepping for battle. There you will stand, perhaps on some 
elevated platform slightly above the plebeians30 who will never kill the 
Doom Dragon, with your big bone drawn before you, held tightly in 
both hands for all to see.
You will likely receive some praise for your accomplishment (but not 
necessarily for the pose you are making). People will congratulate you 
for killing the Doom Dragon, or for the luck you had in getting the 
sword. They might ask you how hard you thought the fight was, to 
which you will respond, “It wasn’t that hard” or “It was pretty faceroll,” 
glossing over all the failures involved in actually getting the kill, and 
exaggerating your skills to further raise you above the rest of the player 
base. You carefully craft yourself as powerful, skilled, wealthy, and, in 
some metaphoric sense, well-hung.
Many other players will pass by you and speak about you, some 
acknowledging how quickly some players can clear difficult fights, while 
others will roll their collective eyes at your lack of a “real life.” None of 
this changes the fact that you, and a handful of players who do complete 
this battle with the Doom Dragon, are going to have access to better 
stuff, such as the big bone. And you will also have access to new ways of 

200  Game Worlds Get Real
making money in-game, ways that the rest of the player population will 
not have, and that grants you a certain level of power within the game 
world.
I was always one of the best equipped players on the server. I’ve 
maxed out on [money] and had to move it around to other charac­
ters, or just give it away. Sometimes a piece of content might screw 
you over with [random number generators], but I would eventually 
get everything I wanted and then some. People admired me [and 
my social group] for being the best on the server. The skill differ­
ence between some players is so big there’s no chance most of the 
players will ever have the things I do, well, until stuff gets nerfed to 
the ground. Still, most [of] my stuff is rare as they come, and people 
wish they were me, or at least had all my stuff, ha. I’ve had more 
offers than I can count for “if you quit, will you give me all your 
[money and items]?” Lol, like they deserve it.31
Edward Castronova argues that this indicates that the player base is 
perfectly happy with unequal outcomes during play, saying, “When war­
riors acquire their priceless, epic, two-handed sword—usually a mas­
sive, glowing, singing pillar of shiny red steel that they carry around 
everywhere they go—they flaunt it.”32 This occurred quite frequently, 
in that players who had cleared the newest content (and were awarded 
with the newest items, weapons, armor, or mounts such as warhorses 
and dragons) would gravitate to one of the more populated areas 
in the game world simply to stand there for all to see. Some players 
would command their characters to strike an epic pose (e.g., draw 
their new pulsing lance and hold it at the ready) and leave the charac­
ter “AFK” (away from keyboard) for hours at a time so that passersby 
could stop for a moment and marvel at the virtual accomplishments 
of the well-equipped character. Certain players were known to have a 
special spot in populated towns where they would always leave their 
character for others to see their latest and greatest acquisitions and 
achievements. But showing off their goods did not capture entirely the 
parallels between gamer masculinity and “marketplace manhood” (i.e., 
masculinity as it is achieved in the capitalist arena).33 For this, play­
ers demonstrated their ability to control the realm of the game world 
economy, whether it was in the buzz they felt for obtaining a valuable 
item to sell, or from augmenting the value of an item with their own 
personal wealth.

Gamer Masculinity 
201
There was a point in the game where I had complete control over 
the value of [certain items]. Like, if someone wanted to sell it for 
cheaper, I would buy up all their stock and repost them for higher 
prices. I had more than enough money to do this with anything I 
felt needed an adjustment. I was fighting inflation really, trying to 
keep the markets where they should be, and making a killing in the 
process.34
Masculinity is often associated with power, violence, and physicality, 
and while these attributes do indeed formulate many cultural forms 
of the “ideal man,” capitalism and globalization has encapsulated eco­
nomic power as a masculine attribute as well. In game worlds, players 
have many opportunities to participate in virtual economies, and it is not 
surprising that achieving virtual wealth can be a powerful social position 
and can make players feel powerful when they hold sway over (as in the 
case above) the price of a particular item or set of items. Such power is 
difficult to attain in the reality of everyday life (controlling the price of, 
say, oil is not entirely feasible for one person to do, but in a game world, 
it could be), and thus players, particularly men, have many opportunities 
to reformulate masculinity within the game world to fit the attributes of 
the ideal form in the solid world.
Erosion of Epeen
At the beginning of this chapter, I mentioned that there are two under­
standings of game-world accomplishments, and that both of them rely 
on the reality of everyday life (the solid world) to inform them how to 
conceptualize gamer masculinity. First, I discussed how the dominant 
echelon (“extreme” or highly skilled gamers) attempts to install mascu­
linity norms taken from the solid world into the game world in order to 
feel more accomplished, competent, and powerful (that is, how men are 
supposed to feel). However, it is important to note that many men (and 
many players in general) are going to fail to feel powerful in this way. 
These failures may force them to participate in innovative (or deviant) 
behaviors to keep up this pose, or to defensively ignore shortcomings 
in their solid-world lives. The population of players who feel judged by 
these masculine standards may double down on the criticism that the 
game world and all that is accomplished within it will always be “lesser” 
than the reality of everyday life, meaning that everything players accom­
plish in the game is devoid of any real substance.

202  Game Worlds Get Real
Cheating and Neutralizing
Gaming allowed men to meet clearly defined goals in order to embody 
a feeling of success and achievement. Arguably, this can be considered 
in a positive light, as being burdened with rigid standards, exponential 
chances of failure, and nebulous goals in the solid world to meet mas­
culine ideals has been identified as incredibly problematic. Men should 
find gaming to be a great comfort with tangible and visible markers of 
progress and success. Yet access to such successes is not equal, and men 
thinking that the game world will allow them to feel this way may just 
find another route to failure. In the same way that competitive gaming as 
a sport (e-sports) gives the appearance of a lower bar for entry and the 
promise of glory (at least in comparison to physical sports), the reality is 
that those capable of reaching the heights of competitive play and reap­
ing the benefits are just as few as in other sports.35 What perhaps is more 
frustrating is that the promise of circumventing physical or biological 
realities makes in-game success widely appealing (whereas with sports, 
people can always fall back on “Well, I’m just not built like Michael 
Phelps, so I’m not going to be the best swimmer of all time”), and when 
that appeal doesn’t equal success, workarounds and ways to avoid being 
stigmatized by the gamer community are sought.
As I discussed in chapter 4, players were largely denied behavioral 
complexity and social permission to play the game the way they wanted 
to play. In respect to this chapter, this encouraged the exclusion practices 
of groups that upheld gamer (epeen) masculinity. Some social groups 
within game worlds had stipulations for recruitment that required mem­
bers to possess certain items, accomplishments, or evidence of a par­
ticular skill level or playing style. You could find yourself recruited to a 
group, only to be booted from said group after they sized you up and 
deemed you inadequate, whether it was a calculation, an assessment of 
skill, or based on your player history. Games have been lauded for pro­
viding players with a sense of agency and empowerment, yet the social 
demands and gender standards of the ideal player can largely gut the 
average player’s sense of agency in game worlds.
Meeting the standards upheld by the dominant players became an 
unavoidable obstacle to fulfilling a number of players’ personal goals 
(e.g., obtaining coveted gear, or defeating difficult monsters). Some play­
ers wanted to participate in parts of the game that were, in a sense, con­
trolled by the “epeen” players because the groups and guilds they had 
built provided the best (and sometimes only) means to access them. The 
situation often escalated, as players who could not dedicate the time and 

Gamer Masculinity 
203
effort, as well as players who did not want to be cast as failures, some­
times turned to different “cheats” to stay competitive.
There is the epeen factor, some people like to show off, and put 
others down because they are better, and always will be better than 
others, and they will pay any price to make sure that is always 
true. This could mean buying [virtual currency] to stay ahead, or 
using bots or hacks, or certain cheats to maintain their rank, like in 
[player-versus-player content].36
I know most considered them as sell outs, but in small quantities 
it didn’t seem like a big deal to me, but some people took it to the 
extreme and bought [millions] and other players’ accounts for the 
purpose of sacrificing with bots. When I first started it was just a 
time saver, but as the GMs cracked down more on that I did it less. 
As for claiming, it was also a time saver because you got the claims 
you waited and worked for, but also to combat other botters. If you 
didn’t bot in some places, you had no chance and it was a complete 
waste of time.37
Epeen was in part blamed for the virtual currency–buying “epidemic” in 
many game worlds (RMT and the gray market from chapter 6). Having 
money in games, just as in the reality of everyday life, allows players to 
access goods and services that can improve their social position (through 
gaining items that improve their calculable outputs, like better swords 
and guns to do more damage, or items that allow them to show off their 
spending power, like vanity goods).
To draw a parallel to the solid world, this is akin to taking out a loan 
to buy consumer goods in order to show off to the neighbors, or buying 
expensive suits in order to access a different social-class space (e.g., an 
exclusive restaurant), or hiring a private trainer and acquiring profes­
sional athletic gear in hopes of being able to make the local football 
team. But it is also similar to using more aggressive forms of deviance, 
like robbing the bank to be able to buy a nice car and drive around the 
neighborhood, or using the illegal drug economy to get that fancy suit, 
or perhaps “doping” to be able to get your body to react the way it needs 
to for competitive sports. It’s not that these innovative forms of deviance 
are any more or less problematic than they are in solid-world spaces and 
situations. It’s that they are nothing new. They are, in effect, attempts 
to meet socially imposed standards on a play space in order to measure 

204  Game Worlds Get Real
up—to be seen as “competent” (that is, masculine) and, in doing so, to 
feel as though you belong in that space.
Resurgence of “Virtual” As “Not Real”
For those players who continued to participate in these game worlds but 
did not internalize gamer masculinity as defining the “ideal player” or 
believe in the social hierarchies generated from such a construct, there 
developed a criticism that reinforced the dominant cultural view of gam­
ers as social misfits who chase ephemeral and unimportant goals. This 
means that those players who are arguably the majority today often 
reasserted the triviality of accomplishments in any game world, though 
they sought them as well. This allowed them to undermine the extreme 
dedication of the “ideal players” while also redirecting the discussion of 
the “real” back to the solid world.
Epeen masculinity continued to operate largely unchallenged by the 
majority of players, in part because the ideal gamers were considered 
to “know more about the game” than “regular players.” This habitual 
response attempted to naturalize these men’s reign in game worlds (and 
similar internalizations have built fundamental assumptions about the 
capacities and abilities of women and men, most notably in sports and 
other areas of technology, but also in divisions of labor in the household 
and the workplace).38 This response, which assumed that the current 
social reality and hierarchy was the correct one, allowed the discrimina­
tory practices to remain self-perpetuating.
Player A: lol what you gonna do hahahaha
Player B: Kick your ass you son of a bitch
Player A: do it
Player B: You and your little buddy for doing that bullshit.
Player A: yea well fuck you bitch its a video game and u got raped
Player B: You both are scammers and fucking cheats. This dude 
busted his ass making people armor.
Player A: wow its a game stfu, arrest me bitch
Player B: Lmao.
Player A: please please please
Player B: I’ll just report you.
Player A: seriously, you wanna report me, your a nerd
Player C: [Player A], if I may interrupt
Player C: Your balls need to drop before you may speak
Player D: lolz

Gamer Masculinity 
205
Player A: you guys are crying over a video game
Player A: Like its real life, get over it
Player A: oh no im selling armor someone made!
Player A: fucking nerds39
The tangle these players find themselves in is the crux of my discussion 
here. On one side of the argument, players are defending the value of this 
game item, which was sold without permission, and the effort it took 
to create it. They do this by attacking the lack of masculinity (“balls 
need to drop”) of the players who sold said item. Yet on the other side, 
the players who sold the item are arguing that the game is just a game, 
and the others are “nerds” for being so serious. They also attack them 
by questioning their masculinity (“you got raped”). This argument is 
one illustration of an ongoing debate over the amount of gravity with 
which games should be treated, as well as the interactions and accom­
plishments within them. The communities within even a single game are 
fractured over the perception of games as meaningful, and tensions on 
message boards, in virtual worlds, and among social gaming circles are 
sometimes palpable.
I hate people who take the game too seriously or get a god com­
plex, I also really hate the general attitude that it doesn’t matter 
how you treat people because it’s “just a game” or “just the inter­
net.” It makes no sense. I say “it’s just a game” plenty when it comes 
to people flipping out when someone screws up an instance, but I 
don’t think any kind of social interaction is a game. WoW can be 
an evil evil thing in that sense, people forget there are real people 
behind those screens.40
There’s a cognitive tightrope, which has been at the center of discussion 
throughout this book, whereby players want to preserve the game as a 
space of play (which could allow for things to not always be taken “too 
seriously” and for unstructured chaotic fun to be evoked) but realize 
that any space with robust social interactions is the stuff of reality (and 
therefore meaningful, or even harmful). Those outside the construct of 
the “ideal player” felt compelled to undermine extreme levels of dedica­
tion to the game, marshaling the belief that life is filled with more suit­
able pursuits; for example, why spend time working to achieve goals in 
the game world when that time could be spent in the solid world, doing 
the same thing? This tightrope is further complicated by the understand­
ing that for some, the game provided a necessary and quite positive sense 

206  Game Worlds Get Real
of achievement, particularly for those who could not so easily transfer 
their fervor to solid-world life. This was apparent most readily in young 
men who by some economic measures were failing (in their minds, or 
in the minds of their social links) to achieve culturally prescribed goals 
such as careers, material goods, and financial independence.
Player A: [Super dragon] DOWNED!! FUCK YEAH!
Player B: gratz!
Players C: that’s awesome man, gratz
Player D: holy shit, that was fast
Player D: how the hell did that happen?
Player A: been at it nonstop for days, so glad its done, hopefully can 
put it on farm soon
Player D: That’s insane, it’d be nice to get a clear, but you know, job 
and real life
Player A: ha
Player E: Amen.
Player F: and kids, and a wife, and etc.
Player D: you unemployed [Player A]?
Player A: eeehhh, now you’re making me depressed, over a year 
since graduation
Player D: ic, gives you time to grind all day i guess
Player A: killed my buzz!
Player D: sorry, didn’t mean to, just crazy how much people play if 
they can
Player D: glad it’s keeping you off the streets or something ha
Player A: its nice to have little goals each day, so yeah
Player D: that’s good41
Arguably, many players embraced epeen masculinity and attempts to 
dictate the dominant script for how to play the game, up to a certain 
threshold. To value characters, goods, and accomplishments was accept­
able and understandable in most contexts, but to boast about one’s 
epeen too much evoked reminders of such accomplishments being “only 
virtual” or that it was “only a game.” Cautionary reminders occasion­
ally appeared in group chat when players celebrated accomplishments of 
considerable dedication. Player A had just completed the most difficult 
battle in the game at that point in time, which took a level of dedication 
most players could not afford in terms of time and energy. Within spaces 
where epeen masculinity did not have to be proven through continuous 
boasting of accomplishments, players tempered their enthusiasm about 

Gamer Masculinity 
207
such virtual achievements, situating them in relation to solid-world cir­
cumstances (i.e., having a job, family, and social obligations outside 
the game).
Much-Needed Meaning by Proxy
Recently, more concern has been showered upon young men who are 
playing games rather than working.42 Obviously, game worlds provide 
players with innumerable benefits, including social groups, a sense of 
productivity, and expressive possibilities. The shift of our collective 
attention into these realms should be quite transparent. We are starved 
for meaning, and perhaps even more importantly, some of us are particu­
larly starved for meaning in our work and actions. Young people, and 
men likely more than women because of cultural pressures upon men to 
attain economic success, are attracted to games because they are well-
organized systems of production and meaning. They make the value of 
your labor clear and measurable.
I’ll use my work as a teacher as an example. I teach for a living. Writ­
ing is not my talent, and yes, you can take a quick dig at the irony of the 
author of the book saying that. I pour my heart and soul into my work 
as a teacher, believing that it is fundamentally important and can shape 
the lives of many of my students. In my personal assessment, teaching is 
perhaps one of the most transparent career paths in seeing the connections 
between the work I do and the impact I have on certain outcomes (e.g., a 
student decides to major in the discipline, or another student learns how 
to better communicate with future and current sexual partners, or another 
student avoids a mental breakdown, or another student is enlivened about 
life and understanding the people in it, and so on . . . all because I tell a 
few tales in a classroom and push students to think about human behavior 
critically). However, I can still make a decent argument that I don’t know 
for sure whether I changed any single life for the better—that is, whether 
my work has real meaning (and remember, I’m arguing that teaching has 
meaning—I believe in it and it is central to my identity—and I also just 
listed a handful of real scenarios that do appear to have had an impact).
But now let’s make it blurrier. I work in sales at a game store. I sell 
consumer goods to people. Maybe I dupe a few into buying more than 
they need, or maybe I tell a handful of untruths about some products I 
know to be shit. This is how I make my living, and I’m not too bad at 
my job. But to argue that my labor has meaning in the grand scheme of 
the world I live in is difficult. Maybe I made some kid’s holiday one year 
because I got his mom to buy the game he really wanted. I can’t really be 

208  Game Worlds Get Real
sure about that, but it’s possible. Maybe I didn’t screw over the nice old 
man with the wad of cash and only allowed him to buy the things his 
granddaughter actually needs to play her new console. Maybe I helped a 
guy find a game that suited his tastes quite well. Have I changed anyone’s 
life? I’m not sure.
Now, what if I’m unemployed? What if I’m retired and bored? What 
if I was recently immobilized in an accident, and I’m waiting to return 
to my life? What if I’m a college graduate still looking for a job, with a 
mountain of student debt? Where are the measurable, tangible, irrefuta­
ble outcomes of my hard labor, desire, energy, or education?
I know I play a lot, probably too much as it is. But I’ve got noth­
ing, literally nothing else going on in life right now. In a word, I’m 
depressed. I’ve done everything I was supposed to do. I went to col­
lege, majored in a field with low unemployment, kept borrowing 
money to a minimal, but now I’m stuck back at my parents’ house, 
jobless, killing dragons online to feel like there’s a reason to get up 
in the morning. It’s pathetic, and I’m not happy about it.43
I got through a lot of hard times playing games. When I was a kid, 
it was that my neighborhood was really rough and it was better 
than being out on the streets. When I was a young guy, I played 
through all kinds of turmoil, job loss, heartbreaks, you name it. 
Games gave me something to look forward to everyday. They gave, 
as stupid as this will sound, my life some meaning.44
Games do matter, and many gamers, especially young men, have adopted 
and will continue to adopt them as a central pillar for defining their sense 
of masculinity. It’s tempting to discredit the masculine standards as they 
exist in games and, in so doing, to ignore that they do serve a laudable 
purpose for a segment of the population of gamers who need something 
to work for, to achieve, and to find meaning in. To return to my illustra­
tion about work, there’s little to no confusion over whether your deeds 
in the game world have an effect. Yes, the work can be boring drudgery, 
but the work is often situated in the game world in a way that makes it 
feel important, or at least the changes caused by your deeds are transpar­
ent. If I am given a quest to stop a raging sea serpent from destroying 
the port town, those townspeople need me, maybe even desperately. If I 
don’t do the quest, maybe nothing will happen, or maybe they’ll all die. 
But if I do complete the quest, I sure will hear them sing my praises from 
now until the day I stop playing the game.

Gamer Masculinity 
209
Men in games do not seem to behave significantly different from other 
men in respect to conformity to idealized forms of masculinity. Argu­
ably cast as failures in many spheres of solid-world life (a reality they 
often self-proclaim), gamers link themselves to gender assumptions of 
male technological competence and the stereotype of the gaming indus­
try’s target demographic to shape a space in game worlds where they 
are perceived to be the ideal players. In a sense, these men are laying 
claim to a world that was built for them. This assumption supported by 
institutional practices that continue to produce these worlds for young 
men frames all other participants as outsiders as they enter these worlds. 
Although (arguably) disenfranchised identities such as “gamers” can 
be empowered by, and find solidarity in, communities that recognize 
their identity-specific needs, game worlds are increasingly becoming 
spaces occupied by anyone and everyone. Because of this, the traditional 
population of gamers can no longer hold the game-world experience to 
themselves, and they will be pressured to recognize that “gamers” are 
becoming more varied, host a multitude of identities, and run the gamut 
on dedication to play.
To enjoy game worlds and our successes in them is indeed valuable, 
but to express that success in a social pose that casts other players as 
“lesser” is an unfortunate process and outcome. If there is social and per­
sonal value in playing games, as many have argued, then the scaffolding 
of access to content and the construction of the ideal player-as-worker 
should be questioned. Valorizing players who accomplish extreme goals 
in games that are built on the assumptions of the ideal player serves only 
to reinforce the stigmatizations of the “gamer” as someone who sets 
aside all else to dedicate his time to playing games. This process con­
tinues at an institutional level (e.g., designers building content that can 
only be conquered by players who do nothing but play) and at an inter­
actional level, whereby players in the game pat each other on the back 
for accomplishing goals that consume extreme levels of time and energy.
Gamers hunger for reinforcement, and the more “ideal players” are 
praised, the more tempted other players are to explore shortcuts to such 
social recognition. Game worlds will continue to provide meaning and 
identity to a growing population of digital natives.45 And so it is impor­
tant to question the assumptions upon which these worlds have been 
built, particularly those that embody gender bias and are couched in the 
history of the gaming community. As the population of players continues 
to diversify, established communities and hierarchies of dedication to 
the gamer identity will be questioned. Young men whose core identity 
has internalized the construct of the “true gamer” as an extreme worker 

210  Game Worlds Get Real
who is dedicated to spending hours (days, months, years) laboring to 
achieve goals deemed worthy of praise by the gamer community (in an 
ever-shifting meta of sliding goalposts) will find that construct in limbo. 
This moment in time has seen pushback against the broadening of the 
identity, and while the “ideal player” construct continues to be ques­
tioned in terms of the value of virtual accomplishments, the very same 
construct organizes the social hierarchies of game worlds and dictates 
the design choices of the game creators. It also provides young men with 
feelings of competence, social recognition, and economic power, and 
these outcomes allow these men to weather alienation and feelings of 
uselessness in the solid world. The goal of designers and players alike 
should be to provide increasing levels of engagement and productivity 
that are equally accessible and empowering. Accomplishing this task is 
the pressing mission of an increasingly digital society.

Epilogue
G
athering a few final thoughts on a work of this size to send readers 
on their way is a daunting task, even more so than all the writing 
that came before this. I have spoken to many issues in game worlds, 
whether they were about how games operate as systems or structures 
that we participate in, or how and why gaming culture and gamer com­
munities may labor to frame certain forms of play as better, or how 
when we drag information and social interaction rules from the solid 
world into the game world, we lose the latitude to play by different rules.
I would like to think that I had some goals for this book, though 
admittedly part of the rationale for this project was to finally get the 
information out of my head and to the public. Maybe my work will 
go unappreciated, but it will sure be sweet not to have to think about 
writing for a bit. I find it fascinating that game worlds have more rules 
than they probably should, and learning about them has eaten almost 
a decade of my life. It is even more mind-boggling to think that I have 
missed so much, as gaming culture has ballooned since I became inter­
ested in pursuing this project. This could all have been meaningless; after 
all, I can’t measure what I’ve done here in terms of characters saved and 
dragons slain. This work belongs to the reality of everyday life, and thus 
I have to treat it with more gravity than any epic battle in a game world, 
and I will know very little of its impact.
I have tried to give us new language, to perhaps see the motivations 
of gamers and what brings them into the game world as more diverse, 
and as not about “casual” versus “hardcore” politics. I have tried to 
call attention to the rationalization of play in games, as we are all too 
tempted to install a logical system into a realm of irrationality. The same 
sentiment has been given to social stigma, as connective technologies 

212  Epilogue
and “sharing culture” have prohibited us from thinking and playing for 
ourselves, particularly when we wander away from strictly calculable 
“best” paths. We might remind ourselves that sometimes, fun is chaos. 
I have highlighted the exclusionary ideologies that have blossomed in 
game worlds, those that enshrine consumption as compulsory, and those 
that bring about racial caricatures, that create false gender hierarchies, 
and that disallow identity expression.
While I wouldn’t go so far as to pretend that this entire book cul­
minates in a discussion of gamer masculinity, the foundations for that 
particular construct have been evidenced throughout. In defining the 
concept “gamer” as an identity attached to a particular historical and 
cultural era; as taking part in a rationalized system of play that com­
pels players to stigmatize alternate forms of gaming; as a celebration 
of consumption and economic power; and as a population that does 
not include low social class digital laborers, bots, gender experimenters, 
women, or “sexual deviants,” it should be plain to see that gamer mas­
culinity and the “ideal gamer” are often conflated by those who identify 
and defend the behaviors analyzed in this work. This is not to say that 
“ideal gamers” are in fact men, or that they should ever be considered 
such, nor is it to argue that such a construct is to be maliciously vilified. 
But it’s curious . . . how does one particular intersection of social catego­
ries embody the “best” way to play games? Can anyone really believe 
that there is, or ever should be, such a thing?
I did want to argue, even if only softly, for reevaluation of the impor­
tance of the “membrane,” or the dampened resonance approach, as I 
framed it. We find ourselves mired in the reality of the solid world all 
too often. We are hounded by our work, our identities and roles, the 
pressures of our cultures, ideologies, and laws. We are forced to abandon 
our curiosity, our immaturity, and our pursuit of fun in order to become 
rational-minded, hardworking, and well-balanced “adults.” I believed, 
and maybe many others did as well, that game worlds and spaces of play 
were an exception to this process. They were supposed to be a place of 
refuge, or escape, or just a much-needed break from the pressures and 
social controls of our short-lived existence. Sometimes you just want to 
pretend you are an elf.
But it appears to me that we can’t have that either, at least not really, 
or not for very long, as we drag with us, and others bring with them, 
those stagnant and claustrophobic pressures from the other world . . . 
the so-called real world. We have been forcing game worlds to resonate 
with the reality of everyday life, and we have shattered their potential 
and promises. And so we go back to work, and we treat each other as 

Epilogue 
213
we would if we crossed paths on the street. We bring in our identity poli­
tics, evidence of our physical bodies, and our moral indignation, and we 
reinstate rules for who and who does not belong . . . in worlds of fiction, 
in places that had no such rules, where our time was to be about play, 
and fun, and joy.
Sociology is not about taking a moral stance on an issue, condemning 
certain parties or populations, or allying with social justice initiatives. 
While as individuals we do have our own allegiances, and I am no dif­
ferent in that sense, studying people is not about judging them. Instead, 
we walk toward a better understanding of what is happening and why. 
We open doors that many of us would rather not see opened. We do it 
because we are curious, because we hear something on the other side, or 
because we cannot accept that reality is exactly as it seems. We want to 
see and understand the void beyond the door. Only then, and only with 
the softest of gestures, can we possibly suggest that with or without cer­
tain elements, things might be quite different. Now, whether any player-
citizen feels that a particular game system and its routes of participation 
should be changed is something that will come after my role in this 
process has already been played.


Notes
Chapter 1
	
1.	 Peter Berger, Invitation to Sociology: A Humanistic Perspective 
(New York: Doubleday, 1963), 1–24. The author makes light of how the 
public doesn’t really understand sociology, which is perfectly believable.
	
2.	 “Game world” is a subjective and contestable concept. Gener­
ally, throughout this book I use it to refer to a shared virtual space that 
is controlled and mediated by game mechanics. Several types of games, 
including “massively multiplayer online role-playing games” (MMOR­
PGs), “shared world games,” “massively multiplayer online first-person 
shooters” (MMOFPSs), social games, and even some “multiplayer online 
battle arena” (MOBA) games, could be encompassed in the “game 
world” concept. Arguably, genres in modern gaming are blurry enough 
to call for a simpler concept, and that was my goal here.
	
3.	 Peter Berger and Thomas Luckman, The Social Construction of 
Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge (New York: Double­
day, 1967), 33–48. I reference the “reality of everyday life” throughout 
this book, as it is the touchstone of human existence. I argue that game 
worlds threaten this reality and thus must be undermined, if they cannot 
be destroyed, by reframing their meanings within the reality of everyday 
life to deny them a separateness and “realness” all their own.
	
4.	 The “magic circle” is a concept with several origins. I do not use 
it interchangeably with Edward Castronova’s “membrane” idea; instead 
it is deployed (loosely based on Johan Huizinga’s work Homo Ludens: 
A Study of the Play-Element in Culture) to denote the (often-penetrable) 
buffer between a space of play and, at least for my purposes here, the 
reality of everyday life.

216  Notes
	
5.	 Allan Johnson, The Forest and the Trees: Sociology as Life, Prac­
tice and Promise (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1997), 13–15. 
I use Johnson’s working definition of sociology as the study of systems 
and how we participate in them.
	
6.	 Jane McGonigal, Reality Is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better 
and How They Can Change the World (New York: Penguin Press, 2011), 
52–63.
	
7.	 Chrono Trigger is a Super Nintendo game published in 1995 by 
Square(soft), and it is one of my favorites.
	
8.	 Johnson, The Forest and the Trees, 17–20. A “path of least resist­
ance” is a common concept, but I draw on Johnson’s definition: It is 
what is expected of us in a given social context. It is not always the easi­
est thing to do or the easiest way to behave, but it is what creates the 
least amount of friction, given social conventions.
	
9.	 Robert Merton, “Social Structure and Anomie,” American Socio­
logical Review 3 (1938): 672–682.
	 10.	 The game worlds of Wild Arms, the Warcraft series, and Final 
Fantasy XV, respectively.
	 11.	 Tony Ponce, “AAA Game Development Teams Are Too Damn 
Big,” Destructoid, March 1, 2013, https://www.destructoid.com/aaa-game
-development-teams-are-too-damn-big-247366.phtml. For triple-A titles it 
can take a couple hundred people, covering dozens of positions. It is debat­
able whether this is a net positive or negative, but my point is really that 
it’s easier to build a game than it is the entire solid world and reality itself.
	 12.	 Yannick LeJacq, “Final Fantasy XIV Will Allow Same-Sex 
Marriage After All,” Kotaku, June 10, 2014, http://kotaku.com/final
-fantasy-xiv-will-allow-same-sex-marriage-after-al-1588933399.
	 13.	 Sherif Saed, “Fire Emblem: Fates Controversial Scene Removed 
from Western Release,” VG24/7, January 21, 2016, https://www.vg247
.com/2016/01/21/fire-emblem-fates-controversial-scene-removed-from
-western-release. Fire Emblem: Fates had a scene, censored in the North 
America and Europe versions, where a character who is attracted exclu­
sively to women is drugged, and the effects cause her to see men as 
women. She falls in love with a man, and when the drug wears off, she 
retains her attraction to him.
	 14.	 Annalee Newitz, “Sexual Dimorphism in World of Warcraft,” 
Wired, May 29, 2007, https://www.wired.com/2007/05/sexual_dimorphi.
	 15.	 Early on in this project, a guild I belonged to in WoW (circa 
2005–2007) used the term “solid world” to refer to what many play­
ers at the time called the “real world.” They did this to help reshape the 
discourse about “realness,” seeing the virtual world as real as any other 

Notes 
217
social space. I borrowed the term to help me discard “real world” when 
discussing in-game experiences and politics.
	 16.	 Philip Zimbardo, The Lucifer Effect: Understanding How Good 
People Turn Evil (New York: Random House, 2008), 195–228. See 
also his TED talk dismantling “bad apple” theory, https://www.ted.com
/talks/philip_zimbardo_on_the_psychology_of_evil.
	 17.	 Evgeny Morozov, To Save Everything, Click Here: The Folly of 
Technological Solutionism (New York: Public Affairs, 2013), 338–343.
	 18.	 “The Global Games Market Reaches $99.6 Billion in 2016, 
Mobile Generating 37%,” last modified April 21, 2016, https://newzoo
.com/insights/articles/global-games-market-reaches-99-6-billion-2016
-mobile-generating-37.
	 19.	 The data in this book come from interviews, observations, and 
discourse analyses that formally began in 2007 and should close with 
the completion of this book, probably (informally, I’ve been in game 
worlds since 2002). I have spent approximately 900 (real-time) days 
playing in virtual game worlds, asking questions of players, noting their 
behaviors and conversations, and having fun. I have also lurked for sev­
eral years on message boards, social media, and game Web sites to keep a 
finger on the pulse of game-world language and debate. For readability, 
some of the quotes appearing in this book have been modified in terms 
of the language used (brackets are used when this is done), particularly 
wording that was very game-specific or colloquial. For simplicity, I only 
report interviewees’ self-identified gender category and their age at the 
time of the interview in the notes sections.
	 20.	 Ultima Online (1997), by Origin Systems, was the first massively 
multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG) to reach 100,000 
subscribers, and thus it’s a good milestone for large immersive game 
worlds and the discussions in this book.
	 21.	 Habitat, beta version, 1986. One of the first attempts at a graphics-
based virtual community.
	 22.	 A short list of “first-generation” MMORPGs, which laid the 
foundation for WoW and predate the “casual revolution.” Many of the 
mechanics in these games were considerably more “punishing” than 
those in modern releases.
	 23.	 Sherry Turkle, Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Inter­
net (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995), 178–210.
	 24.	 Howard Rheingold, The Virtual Community: Homesteading on 
the Electronic Frontier (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2000), 29–56.
	 25.	 Tom Chatfield, Fun Inc.: Why Gaming Will Dominate the Twenty-
First Century (New York: Pegasus Books, 2010), 87.

218  Notes
	 26.	 Basically, this is my tongue-in-cheek example throughout the 
book. Killing dragons is such a common occurrence in most fantasy 
games, and the repetition arguably makes something incredible seem 
rather banal. I give several examples related to game content in the 
book. Most of these pit players against a dragon enemy, because there 
are always so very many dragons.
	 27.	 Annette Markham, Life Online: Researching Real Experiences in 
Virtual Space (Lanham, MD: Rowman Altamira, 1998), 169–200.
	 28.	 “Cultural lag” is a term to describe how culture (and social norms, 
rules, and laws) may take time to adapt to newer technologies. While I 
believe that this partially explains how game worlds went from “wild 
frontiers” to humdrum extensions of the solid world, I also think there 
is interplay between how we conceptualize the “magic circle” and the 
threat it represents to the reality of everyday life. Reality (and culture) 
moved into game worlds so that they did not create an exodus from 
reality.
	 29.	 First interviewee quote. Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 38.
	 30.	 Randy Olson, “MMORPG Popularity, 1998–2013,” last modified 
November 12, 2014, http://www.randalolson.com/2014/11/12/mmorpg
-popularity-1998-2013.
	 31.	 Jesper Juul, A Casual Revolution: Reinventing Video Games and 
Their Players (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2010), 3–5.
	 32.	 Ibid.
	 33.	 Nicholas Carr, The Shallows: What the Internet Is Doing to Our 
Brains (New York: W. W. Norton, 2010), 84–96.
	 34.	 Ibid.
	 35.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 29.
	 36.	 Juul, A Casual Revolution, 5–10.
	 37.	 Nick Yee, The Proteus Paradox: How Online Games and Virtual 
Worlds Change Us and How They Don’t (New Haven, CT: Yale Univer­
sity Press, 2014), 117–137.
	 38.	 Bonnie Nardi, My Life as a Nightelf Priest (Ann Arbor: University 
of Michigan Press, 2010), 123–136. I am rather critical of the liberal use 
of the word “addiction” to apply to leisure media, largely because it rep­
resents a process by which a society condemns certain behaviors seen as 
enemies to the moral, social, or ideological fabric of that space. Nardi’s 
work does much to address this.
	 39.	 South Park, Season 10, Episode 8, “Make Love, Not Warcraft.” 
The boys give up everything in their lives to become powerful enough in 
World of Warcraft to defeat a player with “no life” who has been harass­
ing the game world.

Notes 
219
	 40.	 Big Bang Theory, Season 2, Episode 3, “The Barbarian Sublima­
tion.” Penny becomes addicted to Age of Conan and neglects everything 
else in her life.
	 41.	 John Palfrey and Urs Gasser, Born Digital: Understanding the First 
Generation of Digital Natives (New York: Basic Books, 2008), 1–15.
	 42.	 Edward Castronova, Synthetic Worlds: The Business and Culture 
of Online Games (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005). His con­
ceptualization of the “membrane” is practically canon in game studies. I 
lean on his work throughout, citing the membrane, the meaning of play, 
and the concept of game worlds as a “refuge” on several occasions. His 
second book in this field is also indispensable: Edward Castronova, Exo­
dus to the Virtual World: How Online Fun Is Changing Reality (New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007).
	 43.	 Berger and Luckman, The Social Construction of Reality, 33–48.
	 44.	 Ibid.
	 45.	 Vincent Miller, Understanding Digital Culture (London: Sage, 
2011), 95–109.
	 46.	 I use the term “social category” to refer to any stratifying social 
variable that is given power and meaning in society, such as gender, sexu­
ality, age, race, social class, or education. Who we are as people is a com­
bination of our life experiences as they are generally filtered through the 
intersections of our social categories.
	 47.	 “Forced resonance” is my concept for players who approach 
spaces of play or digital realms with the perception that they are just 
like (or should be just like) the “real world.” Their participation in these 
spaces, through sharing information, ignoring different “play” rules, and 
so forth, serves to shatter the buffer between worlds (or to dissolve Cas­
tronova’s “membrane”). They essentially force the alternate reality to 
resonate with the reality of everyday life, until the two worlds are fully 
in tune with one another, or until the alternate is destroyed.
	 48.	 “Dampened resonance” is my concept for players who approach 
spaces of play or digital realms with the intention of preserving their 
differentness through erecting or maintaining a buffer between the space 
of play and the reality of everyday life (or keeping Castronova’s “mem­
brane” intact as much as possible). I believe this approach to be less 
common (though not extinct), given how alternate realities may threaten 
the sanctity and meaning of the reality of everyday life.
	 49.	 Berger and Luckman, The Social Construction of Reality, 38–40.
	 50.	 Ibid.
	 51.	 Torill Elvira Mortensen, “Mutual Fantasy Online: Playing with 
People,” in The Player’s Realm: Studies on the Culture of Video Games 

220  Notes
and Gaming, ed. Patrick Williams and Jonas Heide Smith (Jefferson, NC: 
McFarland, 2006), 188–202. The author explains that games are attrac­
tive because they release us from the achievements of other arenas (like 
“real life”) and set us free to measure ourselves by different standards.
Chapter 2
	
1.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 31.
	
2.	 “Identity politics” is sometimes used today as a divisive term; that 
is, how people attempt to reify differences between one another. I use 
“identity politics” as a broader term that captures the discourse, history, 
and social positioning involved in claiming a stake to a particular iden­
tity (no matter what it is or in what realm it exists).
	
3.	 “Intersectionality” is a concept in the social sciences for bring­
ing attention to how specific intersections of social categories (e.g., gen­
der, age, race) create experiences unique to those intersections. A young 
black lesbian will experience the world differently (and the world will 
see her differently) than an older straight white man.
	
4.	 Peter Conrad, The Medicalization of Society: On the Transformation 
of Human Conditions into Treatable Disorders (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 2007), 146–164. Examples in studying “medicalization” 
often show that labeling something (an affliction, disorder, or disease) can 
feel socially validating, even if the label does become stigmatizing.
	
5.	 “Ideal types,” a concept credited to Max Weber, are abstractions 
that hope to capture a collection of elements in social reality from what 
appears to be chaos. In a sense, they are the outcome of a process of data 
reduction to make phenomena more comprehensible, even if they are 
not perfect constructs.
	
6.	 The matrix was formulated through interview and observational 
data that I attempted to distill into a simplified set of categories after 
reaching theoretical saturation in respect to “motivations for playing 
games” as a line of investigation. The dimensions were informed by pre­
vious concepts in the field (i.e., flow and seduction, which are mentioned 
below) as well as the data collected.
	
7.	 Mortensen, Mutual Fantasy Online, 197–199. “Flow” is pleas­
ure through autotelic experiences, achievement, or bettering yourself. 
In game worlds, flow can be understood as “being in the zone,” or the 
headspace for competitive and challenging play.
	
8.	 Ibid. “Seduction” is delight experienced through “letting go” and 
losing control. In game worlds, it is akin to allowing the game to work 

Notes 
221
on you, to submerge you in its depths, to loosen your grip and be moved 
as it moves.
	
9.	 Merton, Social Structure and Anomie, 672–682.
	 10.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 28.
	 11.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 21.
	 12.	 “Taylorism” is the culturally reformulated concept for Frederick 
Taylor’s work in The Principles of Scientific Management. Through this 
particular lens, subjectivity is the enemy and efficiency is the ultimate 
goal of the workplace. Some gamers adhere to such a philosophy in 
order to play games.
	 13.	 The “meta” is the most current and “best” set of strategies or 
rulesets that, if followed, likely lead to the highest measurable outcomes 
(e.g., victories, numerical outputs, etc.). The meta in some games is con­
testable or dynamic; that is, the rules of the game may be changed over 
time, and thus a new meta would take shape and then be seen as law.
	 14.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 30.
	 15.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 26.
	 16.	 McGonigal, Reality Is Broken, 296–354. This book touts the 
many positive aspects of gaming, particularly when game mechanics are 
folded back on “real life” to improve the “real world.”
	 17.	 Max Weber, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, 
trans. Talcott Parsons (New York: Routledge, 1992), 3–38.
	 18.	 These are a handful of the current e-sports games that have been 
increasing in popularity. You can now watch livestreams of matches, just 
as you would any other sport, where announcers offer commentary and 
large audiences are in attendance.
	 19.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 52.
	 20.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 44.
	 21.	 Autotelic experiences in games are generally linked to “difficult” 
content that may enable moments of “flow,” which for gamers could be 
the sort of “buzz” or moment of joy they are seeking.
	 22.	 Journey, Last Guardian, Dear Esther, and Everyone’s Gone to 
Rapture are all games focused on the immersive and storytelling quali­
ties of games (some use very minimal interactivity, script, or dialogue).
	 23.	 Candy Crush is a popular mobile game that in gamer communi­
ties often serves as an icon of “casualness,” as does Pokemon Go. I was 
highlighting that many gamers play opportunistically, simply when they 
can or when they have a moment, and social and mobile games are good 
for those times.
	 24.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 33.

222  Notes
Chapter 3
	
1.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 41.
	
2.	 George Ritzer, The McDonaldization of Society (Newbury Park, 
CA: Pine Forge Press, 2011), 13–15.
	
3.	 Josh Sanburn, “One Year Later, the Makers of ‘Pink Slime’ Are 
Hanging On, and Fighting Back,” Time, March 6, 2013, http://time.com
/5978/one-year-later-the-makers-of-pink-slime-are-hanging-on-and-fighting
-back. Pink slime (or “lean beef product”) is an easy-to-highlight example 
of an “irrational outcome” in a rationalized system. It made headlines in 
2012 and has quietly been forgotten.
	
4.	 Miller, Understanding Digital Culture, 95–109. A “digital society” 
must have access to, sufficient skill and knowledge of, and practice and 
symbolic uses for new technologies (e.g., Internet, social media).
	
5.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 29.
	
6.	 Owen Good, “Gamer Who Bought No Man’s Sky Early Reaches 
Galaxy Center, Deflating Fans’ Anticipation,” Polygon, August 1, 2016, 
http://www.polygon.com/2016/8/1/12341236/no-mans-sky-how-big-
length-beaten-center-of-universe-galaxy. No Man’s Sky is a polarizing game, 
in part because of the story of one gamer reaching the center of the universe 
in under 30 hours, rendering the rationalization of gaming quite obvious.
	
7.	 Henry Jenkins, Convergence Culture (New York: NYU Press, 
2006), 25–31. “Knowledge communities” are affiliations in digital spaces 
that produce and share intelligence about many things—in this case, 
games and gaming. They are temporary and voluntary, and are spread 
across social media, gaming message boards, and wikis. Their collective 
knowledge about a game shapes how gamers play that game (e.g., the 
“best way to make money” in a game, as dictated by the knowledge com­
munity, will likely become the only way that most gamers go about mak­
ing money in that particular game).
	
8.	 Taylorism again applies quite readily, as gamers use its ethic to 
reduce every element of gaming to a set of efficient processes, calcula­
tions, and outcomes.
	
9.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 39.
	 10.	 Final Fantasy XIV is one game in particular in which I spent a 
good deal of time immersed. It, along with WoW and a few others, has 
remained high on the list of relatively popular shared gaming worlds.
	 11.	 Twitch capture (posted on Twitter) of “world first” player (Frag­
nance@Daddyfrag) to reach Level 110 (in under six hours) in World 
of Warcraft: Legion, last modified August 30, 2016, https://twitter.com
/Twitch/status/770734999272300544/photo/1.

Notes 
223
	 12.	 McGonigal, Reality Is Broken, 64–76.
	 13.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 21.
	 14.	 Online game worlds exist in a “vanilla” state before the release of 
the first major “expansion pack” (which can be considered like a very 
large patch of new content). Expansions generally change the rules of 
the game in such a significant way that they are seen as pushing out seg­
ments of the gamer population while drawing in different segments.
	 15.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 21.
	 16.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 24.
	 17.	 Neil Postman, Technopoly: The Surrender of Culture to Technol­
ogy (New York: Vintage Books, 1993), 71–91.
	 18.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 36.
	 19.	 Many games have raw number outputs, and a “damage per sec­
ond” calculation is one such measure. In short, your character outputs a 
damage number over time (e.g., shooting fireballs at a dragon), and that 
number is judged against the current meta of the game (the ideal range 
that number should fall within for you to be doing “well” when you play).
	 20.	 Postman, Technopoly, 89–91.
	 21.	 The Peeple app is really quite alarming, but it’s a great illustration 
of a culture with a number fetish. Found at https://itunes.apple.com/us
/app/peeple/id1008896593.
	 22.	 The first video game with a “high score” measure was Sea Wolf 
(1976). Today we have a multitude of quantified measures for claiming 
you are “good” at a game.
	 23.	 Kyung Lah, “Tokyo Man Marries Video Game Character,” CNN, 
December 17, 2009, http://www.cnn.com/2009/WORLD/asiapcf/12/16
/japan.virtual.wedding. Love Plus is a Nintendo DS “dating sim” game 
that made headlines when “Sal 9000” (a human player) decided to stage 
a “wedding” where he married a character in the game.
	 24.	 “Min/maxing” is augmenting the characteristics and mechanics 
of the game to produce the quantifiably ideal outcome. It means putting 
the desired outcome (or output) first, and reducing all other elements 
of playing the game to a minimum, including diversity in mathematical 
builds. It assumes that there is one ruleset for being the “best,” and the 
structure of the game does support this to some degree (although there 
can be contextual effects that question the ideal thought structure).
	 25.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 29.
	 26.	 Game consoles are divided by “generation,” each of which is more 
or less associated with the current technologies of the period. The cur­
rent (at the time of writing) console generation is the eighth and started 
in 2012.

224  Notes
	 27.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 28.
	 28.	 Christine Rosen, “New Technologies and Our Feelings: Romance 
on the Internet,” in Computers in Society, ed. Paul De Palma (Dubuque, 
IA: McGraw-Hill, 2006), 72–80.
	 29.	 The “holy trinity” in many online role-playing games (both mul­
tiplayer and single-player games) refers to three specific functions—
tanks (absorbing most of the incoming damage), heals (repairing players 
taking damage), and DPS (“damage per second,” dealing most of the 
damage)—and how they work together as a unit. This triad of character 
roles is seen as essential to any group, and though there can be a wealth 
of diversity within each role, such diversity is often flattened to the role 
itself. For example, there may be six different “dps” jobs or classes to 
pick from (fireball throwers, stealth assassin types, giant cudgel wielders, 
etc.), but they all essentially do the same thing—make enemies die. That 
is the role of DPS.
	 30.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 40.
	 31.	 Persona 3, Persona 4, and Persona 5, as well as Tokyo Mirage Ses­
sions, are all very similar role-playing games with “affection” systems 
between the player and the various characters in the game. Part of the 
appeal of these games is working to develop deeper relationships with 
the characters, solving their personal demons, hanging out and chatting, 
and in some cases, fostering romance.
	 32.	 Morozov, To Save Everything, Click Here, 1–16.
	 33.	 Castronova, Synthetic Worlds, 282–283.
	 34.	 Danah Boyd, “Friendship,” in Hanging Out, Messing Around, 
and Geeking Out: Kids Living and Learning with New Media, ed. Miz­
uko Ito et al. (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2009), 79–115.
	 35.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 39.
	 36.	 Karla Mantilla, Gendertrolling: How Misogyny Went Viral (Santa 
Barbara, CA: Praeger, 2015), 7–8. A “griefer” is a particular type of troll, 
one usually set on simply ruining other players’ enjoyment of the game.
	 37.	 Miller, Understanding Digital Culture, 111–133.
	 38.	 Yee, The Proteus Paradox, 1–8.
Chapter 4
	
1.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 34.
	
2.	 “Taco Bell ‘Mystery Beef’ Lawsuit Withdrawn,” CBS News, 
last modified April 19, 2011, http://www.cbsnews.com/news/taco-bell
-mystery-beef-lawsuit-withdrawn. A lawsuit was filed against Taco Bell, 

Notes 
225
questioning the quality of and ingredients in its “beef,” which arguably 
made the company more transparent about possible fillers in its meals.
	
3.	 Erving Goffman, Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled 
Identity (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1963), 41–51.
	
4.	 Jenkins, Convergence Culture, 55–58.
	
5.	 Kevin Kelly, “The Waking Dream,” in Is the Internet Changing 
the Way You Think? The Net’s Impact on Our Minds and Future, ed. 
John Brockman (New York: Harper Perennial, 2011), 18–23.
	
6.	 Jenkins, Convergence Culture, 50–54.
	
7.	 Observational data, discussion about “learning to play the game.”
	
8.	 McGonigal, Reality Is Broken, 132.
	
9.	 Neil Postman, The End of Education: Redefining the Value of 
School (New York: Vintage, 1996), 4–11.
	 10.	 Morozov, To Save Everything, Click Here, 338–343.
	 11.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 26.
	 12.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 35.
	 13.	 McGonigal, Reality Is Broken, 30.
	 14.	 Skyrim, Ni no Kuni: Wrath of the White Witch, and Bloodbourne 
are all spectacular games released within the last few years, all of which 
embody, to varying degrees, elements of discovery and unpredictability.
	 15.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 40.
	 16.	 “Open world” gameplay is about a lack of linearity; basically it 
means allowing players to explore a large area or world without much 
direction. While they are relatively popular, they are seen as being pro­
hibitively expensive, both financially and in development time.
	 17.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 37.
	 18.	 “Class builds,” “talent trees,” and other such terms relate to 
choices that players have about how to develop their characters in games 
(by increasing their skill levels or upgrading their powers). There’s heated 
debate over whether these elements have any value in games, because 
eventually the knowledge community will find the “optimized” build, 
and all other choices are then rendered meaningless after it becomes 
known.
	 19.	 Observational data, discussion about “character customization.”
	 20.	 Joel Stein, “Millennials: The Me Me Me Generation,” Time, May 
20, 2013, http://time.com/247/millennials-the-me-me-me-generation.
	 21.	 Patrick Williams and Jonas Smith, “From Moral Panics to Mature 
Game Research,” in The Player’s Realm: Studies on the Culture of Video 
Games and Gaming, ed. Patrick Williams and Jonas Smith (Jefferson, 
NC: McFarland, 2006), 1–16.

226  Notes
	 22.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 28.
	 23.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 38.
	 24.	 “Fatigue” systems are mechanics in games that begin to punish 
the player for playing too much, or for an extended period of time. The 
idea is that if the rewards for playing diminish, the player will be pushed 
to quit, or at least to take a break. Many Korean MMORPGs have 
fatigue systems, and the original release of FFXIV had one as well.
	 25.	 McGonigal, Reality Is Broken, 119–218.
	 26.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 27.
	 27.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 35.
Chapter 5
	
1.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 26.
	
2.	 Mike Molesworth and Janice Denegri-Knott, “Desire for Com­
modities and Fantastic Consumption,” in The Player’s Realm: Studies 
on the Culture of Video Games and Gaming, ed. Patrick Williams and 
Jonas Smith (Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2006), 255–275.
	
3.	 Ibid.
	
4.	 Ibid.
	
5.	 Richard Heeks, Current Analysis and Future Research Agenda on 
“Gold Farming”: Real-World Production in Developing Countries for 
Virtual Economies of Online Games (Manchester: Development Infor­
matics Group, 2008), 4–8.
	
6.	 T. L. Taylor, Play Between Worlds: Exploring Online Game Cul­
ture (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2006), 125–150.
	
7.	 Illusion of Gaia is a Super Nintendo game (1993).
	
8.	 The Sims is a hugely popular simulation game of modern life that 
involves recreation, shopping, property ownership, and much more.
	
9.	 John Berger, Ways of Seeing (New York: Penguin Books, 1972), 
129–155; see also the British Broadcasting Corporation television series 
by the same title. Berger’s concept of a “dream” in respect to “publicity” 
(i.e., advertisements and their promises) is readily applicable to the state 
in which gamers find themselves surrounded by things they can buy that 
promise to make players better and more enviable.
	 10.	 There are debates in gamer communities about “vertical progres­
sion” systems, which make most items that players obtain replaceable 
(and functionally useless) within a very small time frame, so players 
must continually seek out new stuff in a treadmill-like gaming experi­
ence, knowing full well that their efforts will lead to short-lived victories.
	 11.	 Molesworth and Denegri-Knott, Desire for Commodities and 
Fantastic Consumption, 255–275.

Notes 
227
	 12.	 Observational data, discussion about “the ethics of cash-shops 
and DLC in games.”
	 13.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 28.
	 14.	 The concept of “pay-to-win” games more or less refers to any 
game that allows you to gain a significant advantage over other players 
by spending solid-world money (to gain items or powers, skip levels, 
gain extra turns, increase or decrease time durations, etc.).
	 15.	 Playstation Network (PSN) is the online store for Sony PlaySta­
tion games and add-on content (DLC).
	 16.	 Trefis Team, “GameStop Earnings: Focus on Used Games and 
Digital Revenues,” Forbes, November 14, 2012, http://www.forbes.com
/sites/greatspeculations/2012/11/14/gamestop-earnings-focus-on-used
-game-sales-and-digital-revenues.
	 17.	 Observational data, discussion about “the ethics of cash shops 
and DLC in games.”
	 18.	 “Ceremony of Eternal Bonding, Applications and Fees,” Decem­
ber 9, 2014, http://www.finalfantasyxiv.com/eternalbond/eu/detail/fees
.html.
	 19.	 “Mounts” are generally ridable beasts (and objects, machinery, 
and the like) that assist players in traveling quickly around the virtual 
landscape. In many game worlds, they might be heavily symbolic of 
gaming accomplishments, or they might indicate solid-world money that 
the player willingly spent.
	 20.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 32.
	 21.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 28.
	 22.	 John Tanaka, “Phantasy Star Ties with Pizza Hut,” IGN, Octo­
ber 13, 2009, IGN, http://www.ign.com/articles/2009/10/13/phantasy
-star-ties-with-pizza-hut.
	 23.	 Giuseppe Nelva, “New Final Fantasy XV Real World Product Place­
ment Is Hilariously Weird: American Express Welcome,” DualShockers, 
July 28, 2016, http://www.dualshockers.com/2016/07/28/final-fantasy
-xv-real-world-product-placement-is-hilariously-weird-american-express
-cards-welcome.
	 24.	 Observational data, discussion about “customizing cash-shop 
purchases.”
	 25.	 Philip Kollar, “World of Warcraft: Legion’s Artifact Weapons 
Won’t Carry Over into the Next Expansion,” Polygon, August 15, 2016, 
http://www.polygon.com/2016/8/15/12494272/world-of-warcraft-legion
-artifact-weapons-next-expansion.
	 26.	 FFXIV’s mount Sleipnir is a $24 virtual horse. See image at http://
imgur.com/FImPQtU or video at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JT
19qO41i2g.

228  Notes
	 27.	 Morozov, To Save Everything, Click Here, 1–5.
	 28.	 Sheldon Stryker and Peter Burke, “The Past, Present and Future of 
an Identity Theory,” Sociological Social Psychology 63 (2000): 284–297.
	 29.	 Battletoads is known in gamer communities for being incredibly 
difficult, but now with social media, gamers can show off their expertise 
at this punishing game. “Speed run” video: https://www.youtube.com
/watch?v=sluYD0Hr3og.
	 30.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 34.
	 31.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 42.
	 32.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 36.
	 33.	 Miller, Understanding Digital Culture, 95–109.
Chapter 6
	
1.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 32.
	
2.	 Julian Dibbell, Play Money: Or How I Quit My Job and Made 
Millions Trading Virtual Loot (New York: Basic Books, 2006), 290–299.
	
3.	 Castronova, Synthetic Worlds, 147.
	
4.	 Taylor, Play Between Worlds, 125–150.
	
5.	 “Jump potions” are items that players can buy in some games 
to skip the leveling process (basically, you get to start the game with a 
powerful character, for a price). They are a divisive topic among gamers, 
some seeing them as an efficiency rationalization (pay more, spend less 
time), while others see them as flattening the game experience (invalida­
tion of in-game work through capitalism).
	
6.	 Heeks, Current Analysis and Future Research Agenda on “Gold 
Farming,” 19–28.
	
7.	 Michael Omi and Howard Winant, “Racial Formations,” in The 
Social Construction of Difference and Inequality: Race, Class, Gender 
and Sexuality, ed. T. E. Ore (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1986), 19–28.
	
8.	 David Grundy, “The Presence of Stigma among Users of the 
MMORPG RMT: A Hypothetical Case Approach,” Games and Culture 
3 (2008): 225–247.
	
9.	 Lori Kendall, Hanging Out in the Virtual Pub: Masculinities and 
Relationships Online (Oakland: University of California Press, 2002), 
180–216.
	 10.	 Observational data, in-game discussion about “election 2008.”
	 11.	 “Game moderators” are like virtual police in many ways, and 
also virtual locksmiths, engineers, and more. They help players with var­
ious issues, both social and mechanical, from helping an avatar recover 
lost property, to fielding reports of griefers in-game, to detaining and 

Notes 
229
removing avatars found to be using cheats or hacks, exploiting bugs, or 
involved in RMT.
	 12.	 Heeks, Current Analysis and Future Research Agenda on “Gold 
Farming,” 11–15.
	 13.	 Nick Yee, “Yi-Shan-Guan,” Daedalus Project 4 (2006): 1–18 
(http://www.nickyee.com/daedalus/archives/pdf/4-1.pdf).
	 14.	 Dibbell, Play Money, 88–134.
	 15.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 22.
	 16.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 39.
	 17.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 28.
	 18.	 A fantasy race is a construct wholly different from a solid-world 
race, though there are arguments that many fantasy races have cultural 
(or racial) influences (e.g., Tauren in WoW have a culture that is clearly 
influenced by the heritage and practices of Native Americans).
	 19.	 Customizing avatars can be quite complex, including clothing, 
build, gender, hair color and style, facial features, tattoos, piercings, and 
on and on.
	 20.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 21.
	 21.	 Observational data, in-game discussion, woman, 31.
	 22.	 Observational data, in-game discussion, woman, 25.
	 23.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 29.
	 24.	 Strangely enough, many real-money trading Web sites use “sacri­
ficial avatars” to spam in-game ads, usually through “shouting” the Web 
site’s address.
	 25.	 Elijah Anderson, “The Police and the Black Male,” in Construc­
tions of Deviance: Social Power, Context, and Interaction, ed. Patricia 
Adler and Peter Adler (Boston: Cengage Learning, 2007), 185–196.
	 26.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 23.
	 27.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 33.
	 28.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 20.
	 29.	 Dibbell, Play Money, 88–134.
	 30.	 Omi and Winant, “Racial Formations,” 19–28.
	 31.	 Heeks, Current Analysis and Future Research Agenda on “Gold 
Farming,” 49–53.
	 32.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 24.
	 33.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 27.
	 34.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 22.
	 35.	 Yee, “Yi-Shan-Guan,” 1–18.
	 36.	 Nyhm, “Ni Hao (A Gold Farmer’s Story),” parody song, last modi­
fied August 21, 2007, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7KLKj7ETsB0.
	 37.	 Taylor, Play Between Worlds, 125–150.

230  Notes
	 38.	 Nardi, My Life as a Nightelf Priest, 176–196.
	 39.	 Dibbell, Play Money, 88–134.
	 40.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 27.
	 41.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 33.
	 42.	 Observational data, in-game discussion, man, 24.
	 43.	 The user agreement for FFXIV can be found here: http://support
.na.square-enix.com/rule.php?id=5382&tag=users_en.
	 44.	 A special task force is a dedicated arm of a game company that 
attempts to gather data on behaviors that violate the terms of service 
agreement (like RMT) and issue bans from the game.
	 45.	 “Actions Taken Against In-Game RMT & Other Illicit Activi­
ties (Dec. 22),” Final Fantasy XIV, December 22, 2016, http://na.final
fantasyxiv.com/lodestone/news/detail/735669171fe1b4f8188e9b3f63c5
52059c64c771.
	 46.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 31.
	 47.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 22.
	 48.	 “Player killing” is a direct action by one player upon another 
resulting in death. In situations where such actions are forbidden, more 
creative measures might have to be taken, such as one player dragging a 
group of monsters onto another in order to get that player killed.
	 49.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 23.
	 50.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 24.
	 51.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 28.
	 52.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 29.
	 53.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 18.
	 54.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 32.
	 55.	 Heeks, Current Analysis and Future Research Agenda on “Gold 
Farming,” 54–57.
	 56.	 Yee, “Yi-Shan-Guan,” 1–18.
	 57.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 21.
	 58.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 45.
	 59.	 “Story of Stuff,” last modified December 1, 2007, http://storyof
stuff.org/movies/story-of-stuff.
	 60.	 “Untradeable” items cannot be moved from one avatar to another; 
neither can they be sold on the game-world markets. They are “bound” 
to the avatars who pick them up (or receive them as a drop from a mon­
ster) and cannot circulate in the economy.
	 61.	 Observational data, in-game discussion about “real-money traders’ 
services.”
	 62.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 18.
	 63.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 33.

Notes 
231
	 64.	 Castronova, Exodus to the Virtual World, 137–158.
	 65.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 31.
	 66.	 Heeks, Current Analysis and Future Research Agenda on “Gold 
Farming,” 57–63.
Chapter 7
	
1.	 Observational data, discussion on guild Web site about “real 
women.”
	
2.	 “Gaming and Gamers,” Pew Research Center, December 15, 
2015, http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/12/15/gaming-and-gamers.
	
3.	 Ethan Sacks, “Sims 4 Introduces Gender Fluid Options to Allow 
Creation of Transgender Characters,” New York Daily News, June 3, 
2016, http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/tv/sims-4-introduces
-gender-fluid-options-article-1.2659708.
	
4.	 Taylor, Play Between Worlds, 93–124.
	
5.	 Nardi, My Life as a Night Elf Priest, 156–175.
	
6.	 Some gear (or parts of outfits) in games is “gender locked,” which 
is a matter of heated debate in gamer communities. Basically, only those 
of one gender are able to use, equip, or visually modify themselves with 
any items considered to be gender locked.
	
7.	 Taylor, Play Between Worlds, 93–124.
	
8.	 Ibid.
	
9.	 “RP” (role-playing) spaces often adhere to an overt dampened-
resonance approach. In other words, they make up the rules of social 
interaction as native to the space of play and not to the reality of every­
day life. The rules can vary widely, as some players may perform scripted 
scenes or narratives that last for long durations, whereas others may 
serendipitously RP in a designated space within the game world (which 
invites anyone to join, and many non-RP players to watch and listen).
	 10.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 22.
	 11.	 Mantilla, Gendertrolling, 183–185.
	 12.	 “Sex” is a category characterized by the current paradigms within 
the medical and science fields, and largely it is a determination of socially 
agreed criteria that denote sex (female, male, intersex) but are still con­
testable and change over time (i.e., “sex” is not a static, irrefutable reality 
so much as a condition and outcome based on the measures given prec­
edence by the collective knowledge of medicine and science at a particu­
lar point in history). “Gender” is a product of human effort in response 
to social conventions within a particular time and place; thus it is more 
flexible, contestable, and less attached to physical reality. However, we 

232  Notes
are often judged by the continuity between how our bodies appear to 
be sexed (physical characteristics, body shape, etc.) and our (gendered) 
behaviors given those bodies.
	 13.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 22.
	 14.	 Ruth Padawer, “The Humiliating Practice of Sex-Testing Female 
Athletes,” New York Times, June 28, 2016, http://www.nytimes.com
/2016/07/03/magazine/the-humiliating-practice-of-sex-testing-female
-athletes.html.
	 15.	 Ibid.
	 16.	 Laura Dale, “For a Trans Person, Virtual Reality Can Be a 
Conflicting Experience,” Kotaku, August 27, 2015, http://www.kotaku
.co.uk/2015/08/27/for-a-trans-person-virtual-reality-can-be-a-conflicting
-experience.
	 17.	 Yee, The Proteus Paradox, 96–126.
	 18.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 41.
	 19.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 22.
	 20.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 35.
	 21.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 27.
	 22.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 22.
	 23.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, non-binary, 29.
	 24.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 28.
	 25.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 18.
	 26.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 25.
	 27.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 29.
	 28.	 Candace West and Don Zimmerman, “Doing Gender,” Gender & 
Society 1 (1987): 125–151.
	 29.	 A “guild” is a collection of players who come together (ideally) to 
accomplish in-game tasks (both short- and long-term goals), to socialize, 
and to have fun. Guilds or other collectives become a touchstone of your 
experience in some online game worlds, as you are usually expected to 
participate and support and communicate with the other members.
	 30.	 Connell Raewyn and James Messerschmidt, “Hegemonic Mascu­
linity: Rethinking the Concept,” Gender & Society 19 (2005): 829–859.
	 31.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 22.
	 32.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 41.
	 33.	 FFXIplayers.com is a now-defunct (and virus-infested) Web 
address for a social media site that largely predated the common staples 
of today (Facebook and the like). Players of FFXI would post photos of 
themselves to stake claim to their identities among the developing virtual 
community at the time (circa 2004–2006).

Notes 
233
	 34.	 Observation data, in-game discussion about “the validity of a 
photographs.”
	 35.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 25.
	 36.	 Robert Brookey and Kristopher Cannon, “Sex Lives in Second 
Life,” Critical Studies in Media Communication 26 (2009): 145–164.
	 37.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 35.
	 38.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 28.
	 39.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 21.
	 40.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 31.
	 41.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 23.
	 42.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 36.
	 43.	 Roger Lancaster, “That We Should All Turn Queer? Homosexual 
Stigma in the Making of Manhood and the Breaking of a Revolution 
in Nicaragua,” in Conceiving Sexuality: Approaches to Sex Research in 
a Postmodern World, ed. Richard Parker and John Gagnon (London: 
Routledge, 1995), 135–156.
	 44.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, non-binary, 22.
	 45.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, non-binary, 29.
	 46.	 “QUILTBAG” stands for Queer/Questioning, Undecided, Intersex, 
Lesbian, Trans, Bisexual, Asexual, Gay. While it is not in common circu­
lation, in pocket digital communities it is being used as an all-inclusive 
term.
	 47.	 “Virtual reality” (VR) “relaunched” in 2015 and 2016, and it is 
difficult to know what changes and issues the medium will bring. Par­
ticular to gender, finding yourself with a gendered body inside a VR 
headset, and perhaps one that does not match your own solid-world 
body, will offer some interesting opportunities, debates, and disconnects. 
Unfortunately, I believe that it may have a small moment of social lati­
tude within the “cultural lag” gap, but it will ultimately return to the 
reality of everyday life. In fact, the discourse of your solid-world body 
not “matching” your VR equivalent, and how that might be problematic 
for many people, comes from a forced-resonance attitude (no latitude, 
no play, no difference from the “real world” allowed).
Chapter 8
	
1.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 34.
	
2.	 Lunar: The Silver Star was originally released on Sega CD, then 
later on the Playstation, and even later on other handheld systems (all 
using slight variants of the original title).

234  Notes
	
3.	 “Anti-porn feminism” views sexuality as highly suspect in respect 
to women’s empowerment and is critical of sexual material, given women’s 
subordinate rank in a society run by men (thus the material is likely pro­
duced for men at the expense of women’s bodies, identities, and power).
	
4.	 “Sex-positive feminism” views sexuality as a possible vehicle to 
women’s (and everyone’s) sexual empowerment, with the stipulations 
of open communication and an absence of coercion (thus we all should 
rally against cultural structures that shame us for our sexual expression).
	
5.	 Zek Valkyrie, “The Goddess Paradox: Hyper-Resonance Shaping 
Gender Experiences in MMORPGs,” in Social Exclusion, Power and 
Video Game Play: New Research in Digital Media and Technology, ed. 
David Embrick, Talmadge J. Wright, and Andras Lukacs (Boulder, CO: 
Lexington Press, 2012), 155–174.
	
6.	 A “master status” is the primary characteristic of a person or indi­
vidual, which in some ways obscures all other identities. It is seen as 
defining a person more than any other identity or role.
	
7.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 34.
	
8.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 24.
	
9.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 19.
	 10.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 22.
	 11.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 20.
	 12.	 Cecilia D’Anastasio, “MMO Players Feel Conflicted about 
Online Sugar Daddies,” Kotaku, October 14, 2016, http://kotaku.com
/mmo-players-feel-conflicted-about-online-sugar-daddies-1787801187.
	 13.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 28.
	 14.	 Nardi, My Life as a Nightelf Priest, 152–175.
	 15.	 Michael Kimmel, “Masculinity as Homophobia,” in Privilege, ed. 
Michael Kimmel and Abby Ferber (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 2003), 
51–74.
	 16.	 Taylor, Play Between Worlds, 93–124.
	 17.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 26.
	 18.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 23.
	 19.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 22.
	 20.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 27.
	 21.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 28.
	 22.	 Zack Ford, “Game Developer Defends Programming Misogyny, 
Biphobia, and Ableism into Characters,” ThinkProgress, November 4, 
2016, https://thinkprogress.org/rimworld-biphobia-harassment-gamergate
-3af1a691e50.
	 23.	 “Hentai games” is a broad term for erotic or sexually oriented 
games (which often have animated characters). They run the gamut from 
softly romantic to brutally (and violently) sexual.

Notes 
235
	 24.	 Ar Tonelico is a series of games that largely focus on fostering 
romantic and sexual (mostly through innuendo) relationships with vari­
ous characters. Its relationship-building system allows you to dive into a 
character’s subconscious to tweak and resolve all of their deepest conflicts, 
as well as make them more intimate with you (i.e., the male protagonist).
	 25.	 Hakuoki: Kyoto Winds is an example of a romance simulation 
with 12 handsome bachelors available to pursue and woo using a female 
protagonist.
	 26.	 Mantilla, Gendertrolling, 180–185.
	 27.	 Nardi, My Life as a Nightelf Priest, 152–175.
	 28.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 21.
	 29.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 29.
	 30.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 29.
	 31.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 31.
	 32.	 McGonigal, Reality Is Broken, 77–94.
	 33.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 23.
	 34.	 “Male gaze” is a concept in which an assumed male audience is 
watching women. The men are the watchers; the women are the watched.
	 35.	 “PewDiePie” is the stock “Internet gaming celebrity” example.
	 36.	 Five Nights at Freddy’s is a rather simple game known for its 
“jump scares,” which has made it a popular game to watch other people 
play through streaming media sites like Twitch.
	 37.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 24.
Chapter 9
	
1.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 32.
	
2.	 Shannon McRae, “Coming Apart at the Seams: Sex, Text, and the 
Virtual Body,” in Wired Women: Gender and New Realities in Cyber­
space, ed. Lynn Cherny and Elizabeth Reba Weise (Berkeley: Seal Press, 
1996), 242–263.
	
3.	 “Cybersexuals,” as far as my work is concerned, do not yet exist in 
the way one might conceptualize the term. My original interest in cyber­
sex was to see if there was a subpopulation of players whose sexuality is 
defined by virtual or digital space alone; that is, they exclusively experience 
“sex” in the cyber realm, and have little to no interest in solid-world sex. 
To date, though I have talked with some avid erotic role-players, I have 
not found a vociferous pro-digital sex (but no solid-world sex) group.
	
4.	 Boyd, Friendship, 79–115.
	
5.	 Janis Wolak et al., “Online ‘Predators’ and Their Victims: Myths, 
Realities, and Implications for Prevention and Treatment,” American 
Psychologist 63 (2008), 111–128.

236  Notes
	
6.	 Zimbardo, The Lucifer Effect, 195–228.
	
7.	 McRae, Coming Apart at the Seams, 242–263.
	
8.	 Gayle Rubin, “Thinking Sex: Notes for a Radical Theory of the 
Politics of Sexuality,” in Social Construction of Sexuality, ed. Matthew 
Brown (Mason, GA: Thomson, 1984), 91–130.
	
9.	 Ibid.
	 10.	 Zek Valkyrie, “Cybersexuality in MMORPGs: Virtual Sexual 
Revolution Untapped,” Men and Masculinities 14 (2011): 76–96.
	 11.	 Greta Christina, “Are We Having Sex Now or What?” in The 
Erotic Impulse: Honoring the Sensual Self, ed. David Steinburg (New 
York: Putnam, 1992), 24–29.
	 12.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 38.
	 13.	 “Bricolage” in its simplest form means to take the tools at hand 
and use them to learn about yourself. It is sometimes used in reference 
to how gamers use games to learn about who they are as people.
	 14.	 A “third-party program” is any software, made by someone other 
than the game company, that a player uses to enhance a game. Some 
players may not use any at all, but other players, usually for perfor­
mance purposes, use additional programs to help them visualize, calcu­
late, or measure certain aspect of gameplay.
	 15.	 Most game worlds rely on text commands to communicate. There 
are voice chat–only games (on game consoles, in particular), but due to 
certain technical or structural limitations, players rely on mastering vari­
ous text commands to communicate effectively with multiple groups of 
people (and often all at once).
	 16.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 29.
	 17.	 C. J. Pascoe, “Intimacy,” in Hanging Out, Messing Around, and 
Geeking Out: Kids Living and Learning with New Media, ed. Mizuko 
Ito et al. (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2009), 117–148.
	 18.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 24.
	 19.	 Bobby Azarian, “Avoiding the Uncanny Valley,” Slate, October 
21, 2015, http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2015/10
/research_supports_the_uncanny_valley_theory_of_human_robot
_interaction.html. “Uncanny valley” is a term used when graphical rep­
resentation and visual fidelity of human beings (faces, in particular) 
becomes so close to “real” that it actually makes us freak out a bit and 
find it repulsive or creepy.
	 20.	 “Lightning Returns: Final Fantasy XIII,” Magicbox, last modi­
fied July 27, 2013, http://www.the-magicbox.com/1307/game130727a.
shtml. In Lightning Returns: Final Fantasy XIII-3, “Lightning’s bust size 

Notes 
237
[was] increased from C-cup to D-cup . . . to allow Lightning to wear the 
various costumes better, and showcase the outfits a bit more.”
	 21.	 Second Life is a perpetual-world game with nebulous game­
play elements. There are no dragons to slay or epic quests to complete. 
Instead, gameplay largely consists of the social and community aspects 
of play, as well as investing in consumer culture and economics (making 
and spending virtual money).
	 22.	 Observational data, discussion about “bulge sliders for virtual 
men.”
	 23.	 Yee, The Proteus Paradox, 117–137.
	 24.	 Players, before vanity systems, would swap around the data files of 
a game on the client (player) side to augment how their avatars appeared 
to them. This basically involved having a good understanding of how 
game data was stored on your computer, and putting in the energy to 
augment the files for your own viewing satisfaction. This wasn’t always 
sexualized, as it is pretty much a standard to be able to “mod” characters 
in other games (e.g., Skyrim has a rather healthy mod palette where in-
game enemy models can be swapped for several things, including Thomas 
the Tank Engine, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yNaTZV8qS1I; 
this is also done in Fallout 4 with few boundaries, https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=R-g5s4mZa68).
	 25.	 Vanity systems have been long coming in game culture. In short, 
they allow players’ characters or avatars to appear as they want them to 
appear. So you might have an avatar who would generally wear armor 
because they are fighting dragons, but maybe you think armor isn’t the 
look you are going for and want different options. A vanity system cre­
ates an “overlay” for the armor so that, functionally speaking, the avatar 
has armor on (and can take a hit from a dragon), but visually the avatar 
appears to be wearing a bra and underwear, or a miniskirt, or a French 
maid outfit, and so on.
	 26.	 “Macros” are pretty much like “hotkeys,” meaning that one or 
more commands can be assigned to a single button to streamline a num­
ber of activities (fighting, communication, or in this case, sexual play). 
At the extreme, players could program macros for a plethora of different 
sexual activities, positions, and reactions.
	 27.	 “Poseballs” in Second Life allow avatars to take “positions,” 
which can be used (or designed) for sexual play.
	 28.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 28.
	 29.	 A player’s “current target” simply means whatever the avatar is 
looking or aiming at. It could be in reference to battle (e.g., your current 

238  Notes
target is a monster), but it can also be other avatars, non-player charac­
ters, items on the ground, etc. Some commands in the game automati­
cally insert the name of your current target into the text box, which as I 
mentioned can be helpful for sexual play if you plan on having different 
partners.
	 30.	 Candance West and Sarah Fenstermaker, “Doing Difference,” 
Gender & Society 9 (1995): 8–37.
	 31.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 26.
	 32.	 Miller, Understanding Digital Culture, 111–133.
	 33.	 Joseph Weinberg and Michael Biernbaum, “Conversations of 
Consent: Sexual Intimacy without Sexual Assault,” in Social Construc­
tion of Sexuality, ed. Matthew Brown (Mason, GA: Thompson, 1993), 
287–294.
	 34.	 Mantilla, Gendertrolling, 53–63.
	 35.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 25.
	 36.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 32.
	 37.	 Weinberg and Biernbaum, “Conversations of Consent,” 287–294.
	 38.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 29.
	 39.	 “Blacklisting” is a function in most game worlds whereby a player 
can choose to block all messages, texts, and invitations from any player 
added to the list.
	 40.	 Screenshots are static images of a player’s desktop, which usually 
capture what is happening on the game screen. They are pictures, essen­
tially, which can then move visual information around (e.g., sharing fun 
photos of your characters, or in this case, offering visual evidence of a 
player’s sexual deviance).
	 41.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 36.
	 42.	 Rubin, Thinking Sex, 91–130.
	 43.	 Generally speaking, players gather near market hubs, which would 
make any “auction house” interface rather public. The one in Stormwind, 
a city in WoW, was a heavily populated area for a phase in the game’s 
lifespan, and thus it would be a poor choice to have cybersex near it.
	 44.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 30.
	 45.	 Brookey and Cannon, “Sex Lives in Second Life,” 145–164.
	 46.	 “Homophily” describes how we tend to associate with people 
who are similar to us (and avoid those dissimilar), particularly in respect 
to social categories. It also explains why we tend to avoid and distrust 
those we think are “too different” from us.
	 47.	 Observational data, in-game players searching for sexual play.
	 48.	 Kinect “breasts,” YouTube, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dx
RvRbPtmKo.

Notes 
239
	 49.	 The 1999 film The Matrix depicts a fully immersive and indistin­
guishable alternate reality, so much so that the entire plot of the movie is 
about trying to distinguish between the “real world” and the simulation.
	 50.	 Ready Player One (2011) is a fiction novel by Ernest Cline. In the 
story, most of human life intersects through “Oasis,” which is akin to a 
highly sophisticated virtual simulation and, in some contexts, a game 
world. The believability of the immersive experience is highlighted; some 
characters in the story are unable to afford or access the equipment nec­
essary for such experiences, as with the protagonist, who starts with a 
headset and gloves and ends up in a full bodysuit.
	 51.	 Sword Art Online (2012) is an anime series (and 2009 manga) 
that depicts an immersive game world that goes awry and ends up 
endangering all of its players. The characters in the story use headsets 
to log in but find themselves unable to log out, while the experience of 
death in the game is so “real” that is also causes the physical body in the 
solid world to die. An earlier anime, manga, and video game series, .hack 
(2002, read as “dot hack”), had a similar plot.
Chapter 10
	
1.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 35.
	
2.	 Elijah Anderson, Code of the Street: Decency, Violence and the 
Moral Life of the Inner City (New York: W. W. Norton, 1999), 66–106.
	
3.	 Kimmel, “Masculinity as Homophobia,” 51–74.
	
4.	 Adam Ashforth, “Weighing Manhood in Soweto,” Codesria Bul­
letin 3 & 4 (1999): 51–58.
	
5.	 Michelle Fine, Lois Weis, Judi Addelston, and Julia Marusza Hall, 
“(In) Secure Times: Constructing White Working Class Masculinities in 
the Late 20th Century,” Gender and Society 11 (1997): 52–68.
	
6.	 A. Ayres Boswell and Joan Z. Spade, “Fraternities and Rape Cul­
ture: Why Are Some Fraternities More Dangerous Places for Women?” 
Gender & Society 10 (1996): 133–147.
	
7.	 Michael Kimmel, “Gender, Class, and Terrorism,” The Chronicle 
Review, February 8, 2002.
	
8.	 Rocco Capraro, “Why College Men Drink: Alcohol, Adventure, 
and the Paradox of Masculinity,” in Men’s Lives, ed. Michael Kimmel 
and Michael Messner (Boston: Pearson Education, 2000), 182–195.
	
9.	 Anderson, Code of the Street, 107–141.
	 10.	 Thomas Gerschick and Adam Stephen Miller, “Coming to Terms: 
Masculinity and Physical Disability,” in Men’s Lives, ed. Michael Kim­
mel and Michael Messner (Boston: Pearson, 1994), 303–316.

240  Notes
	 11.	 Kendall, Hanging Out in the Virtual Pub, 71–108.
	 12.	 Nardi, My Life as a Nightelf Priest, 152–175.
	 13.	 Jace Hall had a show through IGN at http://www.ign.com/videos
/series/jace-hall-show and published “I Play WoW” in 2010.
	 14.	 Lyrics from “I Play WoW” found at https://www.youtube.com
/watch?v=ltM5jHIJFw4.
	 15.	 McGonigal, Reality Is Broken, 19–34.
	 16.	 “Epeen” was a term I first came across back in early days of FFXI 
(circa 2003–2005). While it has a slightly negative connation (i.e., an 
e-penis is not a real penis), it is a way of succinctly referencing gamer 
masculinity among the community.
	 17.	 Anne Roschelle and Peter Kaufman, “Fitting In and Fighting 
Back: Stigma Management Strategies among Homeless Kids,” Symbolic 
Interaction 27 (2004): 23–46.
	 18.	 McGonigal, Reality Is Broken, 77–94.
	 19.	 Observational data, in-game group chat about “grinding content.”
	 20.	 Observational data, discussion about “gamer entitlement.”
	 21.	 “Letter from the Producer, LIX (11/26/2014),” last modified 
November 26, 2014, http://forum.square-enix.com/ffxiv/threads/206031
-Letter-from-the-Producer-LIX-(11-26-2014).
	 22.	 “Gated content” is another catchall term used in gamer commu­
nities to denote game content that has some sort of barrier (social, eco­
nomic, time, etc.) obstructing access to it. In most cases, content being 
“gated” is perfectly natural to the game worlds (e.g., you have to beat level 
one before challenging level two), but some design decisions about these 
“gates” can cause community uproar over “fairness” and equal access.
	 23.	 “Nerfing,” like the Nerf brand of toys (foamy, mostly harmless 
objects), is when content in games becomes easier due to a change on the 
design end. For example, a battle could be “nerfed” in that perhaps the 
Dragon’s Fire Breath now only takes half of your health instead of all 
of it. This makes the content easier to complete, and it can be divisive in 
gamer communities, where it may be seen as making the game too easy 
or tuned for the lowest threshold of skill.
	 24.	 C. J. Pascoe, “‘Dude, You’re a Fag’: Adolescent Masculinity and 
the Fag Discourse,” Sexualities 8 (2005): 329–346.
	 25.	 Ibid.
	 26.	 “Nerd rage” is a semi-pejorative term that denotes when a nerd, 
geek, or gamer type experiences a well of emotion (usually anger or frus­
tration) in response to an unfortunate outcome (e.g., losing a match in a 
game, the servers crashing, an update to the game changing some aspect 
the player disagrees with, and so on).

Notes 
241
	 27.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 30.
	 28.	 Juliet Schor, “The New Politics of Consumption,” Boston Review, 
summer 1999.
	 29.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 22.
	 30.	 “Plebeians” is a pejorative term used sometimes in nerd, geek, or 
gamer circles to denote exceptional mediocrity. It’s a status pose, draw­
ing lines between “real” gamers and the rest of the population within 
game worlds. While it’s largely deployed as a tongue-in-cheek label, 
those who use it, even sarcastically, help to delineate the schism within 
game worlds.
	 31.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 24.
	 32.	 Castronova, Exodus to the Virtual World, 143.
	 33.	 Kimmel, Masculinity as Homophobia, 51–74.
	 34.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 36.
	 35.	 “eSports Ain’t Easy: Inside the Everyday Grind of Pro Gam­
ing,” Complex, last modified August 3, 2016, http://www.complex.com
/sports/2016/08/everyday-grind-of-being-an-esports-athlete.
	 36.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 28.
	 37.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 34.
	 38.	 Judith Lorber, Paradoxes of Gender (New Haven, CT: Yale Uni­
versity Press, 1994), 175–210.
	 39.	 Observational data, in-game group chat about “ethics and 
masculinity.”
	 40.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, woman, 31.
	 41.	 Observational data, in-game group chat about “clearing difficult 
content.”
	 42.	 “Study Finds Young Men Are Playing Video Games Instead of 
Getting Jobs,” Chicago Tribune, September 23, 2016, http://www.chica
gotribune.com/business/ct-video-games-jobs-emploment-20160923-story
.html.
	 43.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 26.
	 44.	 Author’s interviews with gamers, man, 35.
	 45.	 Palfrey and Gasser, Born Digital, 1–15. “Digital natives” is a term 
applied to the population (not necessarily the generation) of people who 
have never known the world without connective technologies and the 
Internet.


AI. See Artificial intelligence
Alternate reality spaces, 10–12, 22
Anderson, Elijah, 187–188
Ar Tonelico (video game), 156
Artificial intelligence, 52–54, 114
Autotelic, 30
Avatar, 10, 53, 103, 116, 130, 
140, 167, 173, 174, 183, 199; 
bot programs, 112, 113, 117; 
communication 167–169, 179; 
consumption activities, 87, 92, 
102, 103; customizing, 56, 104, 
107–109, 128, 134, 143; gender, 
108, 128–135, 143, 170–172; 
glitches 79; objectification, 139, 
169–171; privacy, 95; real-money 
trading, 106–111, 117, 118; sexual 
expression, 167, 169–175, 179, 180
Bad-apple theory, 4, 5
Battletoads (video game), 94
Big Bang Theory (television show), 8
Blacklist, 55, 157, 179
Blizzard (game company), 173
Bloodbourne (video game), 66
Bots, 15, 52, 203, 212; real-money 
trading 106–109, 112–114, 116, 
117
Brand loyalty, 90
Candy Crush (video game), 32
Capitalism, 22, 71, 72, 124, 125, 201
Cash shops, 84, 87, 92, 95, 96, 125
Castronova, Edward, artificial 
intelligence, 54, membrane, 9, 102; 
unequal outcomes, 124, 200
Casual identity, 14, 15, 19–21, 23, 24, 
211; labeling, 20, 21, 53, 78, 134, 
192; revolution 7
Catherine (video game), 29
Chatfield, Tom, 6
Chrono Trigger (video game), 2
Conformists, 25, 49; gender 128; 
nonconformists, 15, 139
Consumption culture and practices, 
15, 17, 37, 38, 59, 72, 81, 83–85, 
90, 91, 93, 95–98, 116, 122, 212
Counterstrike (video game), 29
Cultural lag, 7, 144
Cybersex, 16, 129, 163, 165–168, 
172–184
Cyberspace, 11, 102
Damage per second, 46, 190; role 51, 
52
Dark Age of Camelot (video game), 6
Dating simulations (sims), 47, 155, 
156
Dear Esther (video game), 31
Index

244  Index
Defense of the Ancients 2 (video 
game), 29
Destiny (video game), 51
Dibbell, Julian, 107
Digital, consumption, 15, 82, 83, 86, 
87, 95, 97, 101, 102, 116, 125; 
goods, 15, 83, 84, 85, 90–92, 
95–97, 102, 116, 125, 191; 
laborers, 101, 106, 212; natives, 
209; society, 38, 39, 74, 210
Discord, 137, 183
Disgaea 5 (video game), 87
DLC. See Downloadable content
Downloadable content, 82, 84, 87, 
88, 90, 92, 95, 97, 125
DPS. See Damage per second
Echo chambers, 54, 196
Emotes, 128, 172–174, 176, 182
Erotic role-play, 165, 175, 181, 182
ERP. See Erotic role-play
E-sports, 28, 29, 77, 78, 202
Eternal Bond Ceremony, 88
EQ. See Everquest
Eve Online (video game), 6
Everquest (video game), 6, 43, 95
Everyone’s Gone to Rapture (video 
game), 31
Facebook, 7, 137, 179
Faceroll, 27, 30, 48, 199
Farmers. See Gold farmers
Farmville (video game), 8
Fatigue systems, 75
Feedback systems, 2, 190
Femininity, 135, 136, 141; 
emphasized, 135, 138, 141; 
submissive, 151, 152, 160
FFXI. See Final Fantasy XI
FFXIV. See Final Fantasy XIV
Final Fantasy XI (video game), 6, 7, 
43, 95, 112, 123, 132,
Final Fantasy XIII-3 (video game), 
170
Final Fantasy XIV (video game), 40, 
51, 88, 89, 112, 114, 115, 170, 
194
Five Nights at Freddy’s (video game), 
159
Flow, 23, 28, 31, 51, 184
Game addiction, 8, 20, 72
Game mechanics, 6, 21, 43, 73
Game moderator, 105, 107, 113–118, 
121, 124, 164, 178, 179, 203
GameStop, 87
Gender, 3, 4, 28, 74, 104, 127–160; 
authenticity 16, 129, 132–135, 
140, 144, 149; binary, 128, 131; 
differential treatment, 131, 134, 
150–160; doing, 128, 131, 134–
137, 141; experimentation 6, 129, 
139, 141–143; fakers, 129, 130, 
132, 137, 139, 140
GM. See Game moderator
Gold farmers, 50, 101, 102, 105–108, 
119–121, 157; Chinese, 111, 119, 
120
Graduate Record Examination 
(GRE), 47
Gray economy, 82; market, 82, 89, 
101, 116, 119, 121, 124, 203
GRE. See Graduate Record 
Examination
Griefers, 55
Guilds, 84, 127, 135, 137–140, 143, 
150, 152, 160, 168, 169, 175, 181, 
202
Guitar Hero (video game), 8
Habitat (video game), 6
Hall, Jace, 189
Hardcore identity, 14, 15, 19–21, 23, 
24, 94, 192, 211; content, 30, 134; 
labeling, 20, 21, 30
Healer (role), 51, 92, 142, 196
Health, 75; mental, 164; risks, 180, 
184

Index 
245
Hentai games, 155
Holy Trinity (in games), 51,
Ideal types, 21, 26, 33
Identity politics, 14, 19, 24, 33, 54, 
143, 159, 213
Illusion of Gaia (video game), 83
IM. See Instant messaging
Immigrant workers, 105, 121
Instant messaging, 163, 166, 167, 169
Intelligence quotient, 47
Internet predation 10, 176
IQ. See Intelligence quotient
Johnson, Allan, 1
Journey (video game), 31
Kendall, Lori, 104
Knowledge community, 15, 39, 40, 
42, 48, 61–67, 69, 71
Lancaster, Roger, 142
Last Guardian (video game), 31
League of Legends (video game), 29
Love Plus (video game), 48
Lunar: Silver Star Story (video game), 
147
Macro, 172, 173
Magic circle, 1, 13, 22, 120, 192
Male gaze, 159
Marketplace manhood, 152, 188, 
189, 200
Masculinity, 136, 138, 148, 152, 160, 
187–209; epeen 202, 204, 206; 
gamer 28, 189–192, 198, 200, 
201, 204, 212
Master status, 149
Matrix (film), 183
McDonaldization, 37
McGonigal, Jane, 63, 190
Membrane, 9, 12, 102, 104, 125, 212
Meta, 27, 42, 48, 49, 60–62, 70, 71, 
210
Mid-core, 20, 21
Millennials, 72, 193
Min/maxing, 48
Mistell, 169
Mounts, 67, 84, 96, 200
Multi-User Dungeons, 104
Mumble, 137
Nardi, Bonnie, 188
NES. See Nintendo Entertainment 
System
Ni no Kuni: Wrath of the White 
Witch (video game), 66
Nintendo 64 (game console), 50
Nintendo Entertainment System 
(game console), 50, 55, 94
Nintendo Wii (game console), 7, 8
No Man’s Sky (video game), 39, 45
Non-player character, 48, 52, 53
NPC. See Non-player character
Online dating, 51
Overwatch (video game), 51, 83, 173
Path of least resistance, 3, 27, 48, 62, 
70, 152, 165
Pay-to-win games, 87
Paywall, 84, 88–90
Peeple app, 47
Persona (video game), 53, 156
Phantasy Star Portable 2 (video 
game), 91
Pink slime, 37, 59
Player kill, 117, 118, 121
PlayStation (game console), 50, 55, 
198
PlayStation 3 (game console), 8
PlayStation Network, 87
Pokemon Go (video game), 32
Poseballs, 173
Postman, Neil, 47
PSN. See PlayStation Network
QUILTBAG, 143

246  Index
Race, 104, 105, 111, 112, 149, 175
Rape culture, 176, 177
Rationalization, 14, 15, 38, 56, 62, 
70, 101, 154, 211
Ready Player One, 183
Real-money trading, 15, 16, 82, 
101–125, 203
Reddit, 39, 179; subreddits, 40, 61
RimWorld (video game), 155
Ritzer, George 37, 59
RMT. See Real-money trading
Rock Band (video game), 8
Role systems, 51
Role-players, 29, 129, 133, 141–143, 
181, 182
Role-playing games, 7, 41, 48, 53, 
55, 84
RP. See Role-players
RPGs. See Role-playing games
Rubin, Gayle, 164
Same-sex marriage, 4,
SAT, 47
Second Life (video game), 170, 173, 
180, 182
Seduction, 23, 31, 41
Sega Saturn (game console), 50
Sex negativity, 164, 165, 167, 180
Sexual assault, 157, 165, 176; 
coercion, 4; consent, 178
Sexuality, 6, 16, 74, 130, 136, 138, 
141, 144, 147, 149, 163–166, 
169–184; hetero, 136, 139, 140, 
141, 148
Sharing culture, 9, 62, 94, 95, 137, 
212
Sims (video game), 83
Sims 4 (video game), 128
Skype, 137, 183
Skyrim (video game), 66
Smart work, 39, 41
Social class, 15, 83, 89, 97, 98, 120, 
121, 203, 212
South Park (television show), 8
Special task force, 115, 117
Square Enix, 114, 115
STF. See Special task force
Stigma, 15, 26, 33, 38, 59–79, 96, 
124, 163, 169, 179, 182, 191, 202, 
209, 211, 212
Sword Art Online, 183
Tanks (role), 51
Taylor, Frederick, 42
Taylor, T. L., 102
Taylorism, 26, 40
Terms of service, 114–116, 118, 125
Tokyo Mirage Sessions (video game), 
53
ToS. See Terms of service
Trolling, 49, 50, 52, 55, 105, 166, 
182
Turing test, 107, 113
Twitch, 41, 44, 61, 65, 159
Twitter, 7, 137
Ultima Online (video game), 6
Ventrilo, 137
Virtual reality, 144, 166, 183
Virtual world, 8, 9, 37, 50, 55, 62, 72, 
102, 112, 121, 148, 165–167, 179, 
181, 182, 205
Web 2.0, 7
Wikis, 61
World of Warcraft (video game), 7, 8, 
29, 51, 67, 83, 105, 132, 173, 178, 
188, 189, 205; Burning Crusade, 
43; Legion, 41, 93
WoW. See World of Warcraft
Xbox (game console), 55
Xbox 360 (game console), 8
YouTube, 7, 39, 40, 44, 61, 137, 
159

About the Author
ZEK VALKYRIE, PhD, is an instructor in the Sociology Department at 
the University of Colorado, Colorado Springs. His research has focused 
on massively multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPGs) with 
attention to the maintenance of gender and sexuality boundaries within 
virtual worlds. More broadly, his interests include gaming culture, digi­
tal communities, gender, sexualities, and deviant behavior. Addition­
ally, he continues to operationalize gamification mechanics in his online 
and lecture courses. Within such systems, his students are challenged to 
reframe work as play and are encouraged to strategize paths to comple­
tion suited to their learning strengths.

