Cover-image not available

GAY AND LESBIAN ISSUES
A Reference Handbook

Other Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Courts and Trials, Christopher E. Smith
Environmental Activism, Jacqueline Vaughn Switzer
Espionage, Glenn Hastedt
Fresh Water Issues, Zachary A. Smith and Grenetta Thomassey
Media and Politics in America, Guido H. Stempell III
Ocean Politics and Policy, Peter Jacques and Zachary A. Smith
Racial Justice in America, David B. Mustard
Reproductive Issues in America, Janna C. Merrick 
and Robert H. Blank
Women in Prison, Cyndi Banks

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.


GAY AND 
LESBIAN ISSUES
A Reference Handbook
Chuck Stewart
Santa Barbara, California • Denver, Colorado • Oxford, England

Copyright © 2003 by Chuck Stewart
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, except for
the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior permission in
writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Stewart, Chuck, 1951–
Gay and lesbian issues: a reference handbook / Chuck Stewart.
p. cm. — (Contemporary world issues) 
Includes bibliographical rferences and index.
ISBN 1-85109-372-9 (hardcover: alk. paper)    ISBN 1-85109-373-7 (e-book)
1.  Gays—Social conditions.  2. Gay rights.  3. Homosexuality.  4.
Gays—Services for.  [1. Gay rights.  2. Homosexuality.  3. Gays—
Services for.]  I. Title.  II. Series.
HQ76.25.S748  2003
305.9'0664—dc21
2003006517
07 06 05 04 03
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an e-book. Visit
abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper I.
Manufactured in the United States of America

Contents
Preface and Acknowledgments, ix
1 History of the Gay Rights Movement, 1
The German Homosexual Emancipation Movement, 1
The U.S. Homosexual Emancipation Movement, 3
World War II and the Migration of Lesbians and 
Gays to the Cities, 4
The Homophile Movement, 5
The Stonewall Riots and Gay Liberation, 12
Equal Rights and Community-Building, 14
The Culture Wars, 25
Separate but Equal, 27
References, 30
2 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 33
Actual Causes of Homosexuality and Numbers of 
Homosexuals, 34
AIDS, 37
Antidiscrimination Statutes, 38
Child Custody and Adoption, 40
Domestic Partnership, 44
Employment and Housing, 45
Hate Crimes, 48
Marriage, 50
The Military, 52
Public Attitudes about Gays and Lesbians, 54
Reparative Therapy, 55
Schools, 58
Sodomy, 60
Speech and Association, 62
The Terrorist Attacks of September 11, 2001, 64
References, 66
3 Chronology, 73
Homosexuality Prior to the Nineteenth Century, 74
vii

The Homophile Movement, 78
The Modern Gay Movement, 82
The Birth of Gay Liberation, 86
AIDS and Coalition-Building, 92
Conservative Backlash, 103
References, 127
4 Biographical Sketches, 129
5 Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations, 175
Documents, 175
Case Summaries, 191
Laws, Statutes, and Executive Orders, 208
Quotations, 213
References, 218
6 Directory of National and International 
Organizations and Associations, 227
AIDS, 227
Educational, 229
Family, 232
Legal Support, 235
Libraries and Archives, 239
Media, 244
Military, 247
Minority Focus, 248
Political Action, 249
Professional Organizations, 256
Religious, 258
Schools, 269
Transgender (Transgender, Transsexual, Intersex), 272
Web Resources, 273
7 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources, 277
Books, 277
Bookstores, 318
Periodicals, 318
Publishers, 338
Radio and Television, 339
Video and DVD Resources, 340
Glossary, 375
Index, 381
About the Author, 403
viii
Contents

Preface and
Acknowledgments
T
he gay civil rights movement parallels the political and social
process experienced by African Americans, women, people
with disabilities, and other groups in overcoming discrimina-
tion against them. Unlike “visible” characteristics such as skin
color, sexual orientation can be easily hidden. Many societies do
not even have a name for same-sex behaviors or relationships, yet
they stigmatize those who are not heterosexual. In these societies,
homosexuals have the daunting task of finding each other. The
early German homosexual movement created language around
sexual orientation that allowed a public dialogue to begin. But the
Nazis crushed and exterminated the early gay movement. Not
until after World War II did the beginnings of the gay civil rights
movement appear in the United States.
A civil rights movement is composed of people. For the move-
ment to progress, its members must pass through stages of over-
coming oppression. A homosexual child who grows up in a het-
erosexist society quickly learns to be silent about his or her sexual
orientation and quickly experiences society’s animosity. This can
cause a sense of self-loathing and self-hatred, otherwise known as
internalized homophobia. The first stage of overcoming stigmati-
zation is to overcome internalized homophobia. We see this step in
the early stages of the gay rights movement in the 1950s and 1960s.
Gay men and lesbians were self-identifying, helping each other,
and forming a community. Academic researchers conducted objec-
tive investigations and found antigay stereotypes to be untrue.
With this new knowledge and increase in self-esteem, some homo-
sexuals became activists willing to stand up to an oppressive soci-
ety and say, “No more.” The 1970s and 1980s were characterized
by gay activism, including civil disobedience.
When gay men and lesbians began aspiring to equality with
heterosexuals (for example, by seeking the right to marry, adopt
ix

children, and bring their partners to social functions), heterosex-
uals had to reassess their position. For the first time, heterosexu-
als had to listen to the concerns of homosexuals. And that is the
real power behind a civil rights movement: not a handful of
activists willing to demonstrate or argue in courts, but many
people educating those in power to overcome their bias and
hatred. As lesbians and gay men overcame their internalized
homophobia, heterosexuals had to overcome their own homo-
phobia and heterosexism. It was heterosexuals who changed the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) to elim-
inate homosexuality as a mental illness. It was heterosexuals who
changed Vermont law to allow civil unions for same-sex couples.
It was heterosexuals who enacted hate crime laws to protect les-
bians and gay men. Ultimately, it will be heterosexuals who
change the law to ensure equal treatment for homosexuals.
Each year, lesbians and gay men gain more protections.
These are not additional rights, but specifications of the law to
ensure that it is applied equally to persons of differing sexual ori-
entations—a historically oppressed group. There has been a back-
lash from the religious right, but its tactics and hysteria reveal
how ineffective it is. Full rights for lesbians and gay men may be
achieved within two more generations.
Chapter 1 gives a broad analysis of the gay civil rights
movement, using specific events in the United States and the
world to illustrate the concepts. Chapter 2 discusses a number of
controversial issues as they apply to today’s political climate.
Chapter 3 is a fairly detailed chronology of the events surround-
ing lesbian and gay civil rights in the United States and else-
where. Chapter 4 contains more than forty biographic descrip-
tions of both pro- and antigay people. Chapter 5 contains primary
research materials, including the positions of a number of major
organizations, court decisions, laws and statues, and quotes.
Chapter 6 is a list of major organizations, with contact informa-
tion and a summary of their histories, goals, and accomplish-
ments. Chapter 7 is a detailed list of books, videos, periodicals,
television and radio programs, and curricula on lesbian and gay
topics, along with a history of homosexuality in the movies.
Finally, the book concludes with a Glossary that has a short list of
terms for which more details are given.
When I considered this writing assignment, I did not readily
see the need for such a reference volume. I believed the Internet
made this kind of book superfluous. But during the research
phase, I spent more than four months, eight to ten hours a day,
x
Preface and Acknowledgments

surfing the web with my high-speed DSL line, locating organiza-
tions, books, films, histories, and more. I now understand that
few people have the time or resources to conduct the research this
book represents. Reference books with links to the web are still
valuable, and I have attempted to bring you timely and accurate
information.
Parts of this book were emotionally difficult for me to write.
Although I have been a gay activist and academic for more than
twenty years, I was not prepared for the hate spewed forth from
the religious right. Researching sections of the book necessitated
my going to the website of every major antigay organization.
There I printed out hundreds of pages and downloaded reports.
Although I was aware of the position of these organizations it
was very disturbing to see them advocate death to homosexu-
als—that means me.
I also had a hard time reconciling their outright lies and
hypocrisy. For example, the leaders of the reparative therapy
movement have admitted in writing that they cannot change sexual
orientation. Yet they still hold seminars and place ads in newspa-
pers claiming that they can. How many lives have they destroyed
through reinforcement of self-hate in homosexuals who seek their
help? Documents from the legal counsel for the “no special rights”
campaigns reveal that the leaders of the religious right know the
slogan is mistaken. Their legal counsel has advised them not to use
the slogan in legislation. Yet they use it every chance they can to
raise money and defeat antidiscrimination statutes. Also, the reli-
gious right continues to claim homosexuals are child molesters
and are mentally ill. Both claims, and all similar stereotypes, are
false and have been known to be false for more than fifty years.
Most recently, the Family Research Council (FRC) issued a
“report” that sent chills down my back. It claimed in 2002 that gay
men account for one third of all child abuse cases. The article is
very formal looking, with many footnotes, and it gives the impres-
sion of being authoritative. Some of the quoted scientists have
written to the FRC and demanded that their names be taken off
the report because the FRC changed their findings. These scientists
reported that homosexuals are no more likely to be child molesters
than heterosexuals. The FRC lied and purposefully changed the
results of respected researchers. The FRC does not engage in sci-
ence, it engages in religious propaganda.
Which brings me to hypocrisy. The leaders of the religious
right know they are lying. Yet they present themselves as being
Preface and Acknowledgments
xi

morally pure and truthful. They are not ignorant. They actually
know what they are doing to promote their cause and raise
money. I think that is what disturbed me more than anything else.
Acknowledgments
I want to thank ABC-CLIO for having the confidence to let me
write a second book for them. I want to thank my dear friend and
dance partner Arline Keithe for her generous offer to edit the
original manuscript. I also thank Alicia Merritt at ABC-CLIO for
her insightful review. These editors form an integral part of my
writing process and help make the book as accurate as possible.
Thank you all.
Chuck Stewart
xii
Preface and Acknowledgments

1
History of the 
Gay Rights Movement
T
here always have been and always will be people who engage
in homosexual activities and relationships. But being “gay” is
a modern political concept. It reflects the efforts made by
homosexuals to fight against a heterosexist society that tells them
they are deviant and not deserving of full human rights. Gay
rights is the process of claiming the respect due all citizens.
The modern gay rights movement began in Germany during
the mid-1800s. The rise of Nazism crushed the fledgling move-
ment. But the idea of equal rights for homosexuals did not die
with World War II. Instead, it rose again in the United States, par-
alleling the civil rights movement that began in the 1950s.
The German Homosexual 
Emancipation Movement
Karl Heinrich Ulrich published many social and juridical stud-
ies in Germany concerning same-sex love between men. His
twelve books represented the largest body of work on homosex-
uality in the 1860s and were collectively known as Researches on
the Riddle of Love between Men. He used the term Uranian in ref-
erence to male homosexuality, a term taken from Plato’s
Symposium, which describes love between two men as a beauti-
ful love belonging to the heavenly muse “Urania.” Because of
1

his gay-supportive views, Ulrich is recognized as the “grandfa-
ther of gay liberation.”
The word homosexual was coined in 1869 by Hungarian doc-
tor Karoly Maria Benkert (who went by the pseudonym K. M.
Kertbeny). The term heterosexual was not used publicly until 1880.
Initially, heterosexuality meant obsessive sexual behaviors
toward the opposite gender and was categorized as sexual
deviancy. Some argued that same-sex love was more stable than
sexually compulsive heterosexuality. But the medical establish-
ment labeled overt homosexuality dysfunctional, and this opin-
ion influenced political authorities. In 1871, the newly united
Germany enacted the New Prussian Penal Code. Paragraph 175
of the code outlawed “unnatural sexual acts between men, and
men and beast” and specified imprisonment for up to four years
(Plant 1986, 33).
British doctor Havelock Ellis continued the medicalization of
homosexuality and coined the phrase sexual inversion to charac-
terize homosexual behavior. Sigmund Freud was influenced by
the work of Ellis and further characterized homosexuality as an
“immature” stage of development. It is important to realize that
Freud and other early psychologists did not base their theories on
any scientific evidence; they cast social and cultural norms and
prejudices into the new field of psychology. Unfortunately, these
theories would influence psychology for the next century.
Heterosexuality was medicalized and recast as the norm and
homosexuality as “deviant.” However, not everyone accepted
this assessment. Magnus Hirschfeld founded the Scientific
Humanitarian Committee in Germany in 1897 to overcome anti-
gay prejudice and to change the law. He worked tirelessly for
three decades for homosexual emancipation. The committee dis-
tributed more than 50,000 copies of the pamphlet “What People
Should Know about the Third Sex.” Although there were forty
gay bars in Berlin by World War I, he had little success organizing
the many homosexual groups in Germany. But a fledgling homo-
sexual reform movement took root.
Hirschfeld opened the Institute for Sexual Research in 1919.
Its library contained more than 20,000 volumes of rare anthropo-
logical, medical, legal, and social documents. It employed four
physicians and several assistants and included more than 35,000
photographs.
German brownshirts and police often physically beat
Hirschfeld. On January 30, 1933, Adolf Hitler was named chan-
2
History of the Gay Rights Movement

cellor of Germany, and all homosexual rights organizations and
pornography were banned. Four months later, on May 6, 1933,
approximately 100 students surrounded and entered the Institute
for Sexual Research. They smashed and then carried everything
out. A public ceremony was held four days later in which these
materials, along with a bust of Hirschfeld, were burned.
For the next two years, the Nazis staged a campaign against
homosexuals. Bars were closed, groups and meetings were
banned, and homosexuals were arrested by the thousands. The
SS, the elite soldiers selected from the brownshirts, acted to con-
solidate their power under Hitler. On July 3, 1934, the leader of
the brownshirts and a known homosexual, Ernst Roehm, was
executed, along with hundreds of other members (known as the
“Night of the Long Knives”). By 1935, the entire homosexual
reform movement had been extinguished, and thousands of
homosexuals were thrown into concentration camps, where at
least 50,000 of them died. They were identified with a lavender
triangle sewn onto their clothes. Tragically, some legal-minded
Allied commanders forced homosexuals who survived the camps
to return to prison to serve out their sentences as sexual deviants.
The U.S. Homosexual 
Emancipation Movement
There is very little evidence of efforts toward homosexual eman-
cipation in the United States in the nineteenth and early twenti-
eth centuries. The Chicago Society for Human Rights was the first
group in the United States to advocate for gay rights. Henry
Gerber, a German American immigrant, along with a number of
working-class homosexuals, launched the society in 1924, which
was granted nonprofit corporate status by the state of Illinois.
They created a newsletter and were able to distribute only two
issues before law enforcement arrested (without warrant) all
members of the board. The men were jailed, brought to trial, but
ultimately set free. Gerber lost his job with the post office, and the
society disbanded (Katz 1976).
The early 1920s saw an increase in the number of novels with
lesbian and gay themes published in the United States, although
not without great controversy. A growing underground devel-
oped in Harlem in New York and in other major cities, such as
The U.S. Homosexual Emancipation Movement
3

San Francisco and New Orleans. Homosexuals were fairly free to
associate with each other, yet still under the fear of police entrap-
ment and harassment.
World War II and the Migration of
Lesbians and Gays to the Cities
Family patterns, social networks, and entire cultural systems
were disrupted by World War II. Millions of men and women left
their homes to enter the military or to work in factories to help
make war supplies. Many of these settings were segregated by
race and sex. Soldiers often had to share bunks, and men were
often seen sleeping in each other’s arms at train depots while
waiting to ship out. Men often danced with each other at army
canteens. Women lived together in company-provided housing at
war factories. Homosexuality was a criminal act in the military in
the 1920s and 1930s, but the war provided an excuse for these
behaviors. Under these conditions, lesbians and gay men were
able to find each other without bringing undue attention to them-
selves (Blumenfeld and Raymond 1993, 291; D’Emilio and
Freedman 1988, 25–26).
An effort was made to reduce the number of personnel in the
military after the war. One way to do so was to enforce 1943 reg-
ulations banning homosexuals from all branches of the military.
Approximately 10,000 men and women were dishonorably dis-
charged from the military for homosexuality during the war and
immediately afterward (known as “blue discharges” because the
document was printed on blue paper). Many did not return
home, but rather flocked to New York, Los Angeles, and San
Francisco to form gay enclaves. The gay community found rela-
tive safety and, eventually, its identity within these enclaves.
A number of factors led to the development of the modern
gay movement after World War II. In 1948 Alfred Kinsey released
his study of male sexual habits, Sexual Behavior in the Human Male,
and in 1953 his corresponding study of female sexual habits,
Sexual Behavior in the Human Female. The reports sent shock waves
through U.S. culture, shattering stereotypes and myths concern-
ing American puritanical codes of sexual conduct. The reports
showed, among other things, that many people had sex out of
wedlock, had engaged in sex in their teens, and had participated
4
History of the Gay Rights Movement

in a variety of sexual behaviors, including bisexuality and homo-
sexuality.
Another factor was McCarthyism. Senator Joseph McCarthy
(R-WI) led a campaign to purge communists and homosexuals
from the federal government. Although many communists lost
their jobs, many more homosexuals (thousands) lost theirs.
(Interestingly, our history books constantly refer to McCarthyism
as the period in which communists were routed out with the
question “Are you now or have you ever been a Communist?” Yet
the plight of homosexuals is barely mentioned.) However, the
hearings gave unprecedented exposure to homosexuals and
homosexual oppression. Homosexuality was discussed and writ-
ten about in the press in new ways. Much of what was written
was negative, but it allowed closeted and isolated homosexuals to
know that there were many others like them.
The Homophile Movement
The homophile movement is a period in which people who
engaged in homosexual behavior and relationships begin to self-
identify and cast off the deficit label put on them by the early sex-
ologists. They began to overcome their own homophobia and
find love for themselves and other homosexuals. This is the
period of homo (same) phile (love) identity formation.
Harry Hay (previously known as Henry Hay) was one of the
key founders of the modern gay movement. He was a communist
organizer in Los Angeles and a sought-after teacher of communist
theory. In 1950, he assembled friends from the University of
Southern California and launched the International Bachelors
Fraternal Order for Peace and Social Dignity (sometimes referred
to as Bachelors Anonymous). The group was structured as a
secret society, with underground guilds separated so that no one
would know all other members—a method used by the Old Left
to keep members safe.
In 1951 Bachelors Anonymous incorporated in California as
the Mattachine Society. The name was inspired by the Société
Mattachine, a secret fraternal organization in thirteenth- and
fourteenth-century France and Spain of unmarried townsmen
who performed music, dances, and rituals while wearing masks,
sometimes in protest against oppression. The society wanted to
unify homosexuals and educate people about gay issues. At the
The Homophile Movement
5

same time, the Mattachine Foundation was established to provide
a legal front for the society.
In the same year the Mattachine Society was formed, Donald
Webster Cory published The Homosexual in America. He argued
that the problems experienced by homosexuals stemmed from
societal disapproval rather than from homosexuality itself. This
was an important perspective, but U.S. society was not ready for
it. The controversy caused the publisher to cease publishing
books with homosexual themes.
The United States was a very dangerous place for lesbians
and gay men during the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s. Bars were about
the only place gays and lesbians could meet, and often the bars
were unmarked and required patrons to enter through a back
door so that no one could see them entering from the street. With
no provocation or legitimacy, police regularly entrapped men for
lewd conduct, raided bars and baths, and suspended business
licenses of gay establishments. For example, in some cities and
states there were laws that required bar patrons to wear clothing
conforming to their gender. Police would enter a lesbian bar and
seek out the manliest looking patron. They would take her out-
side to the sidewalk and make her strip. They were making sure
that she was wearing at least three items of clothing that were
“feminine.” If she wore boxer shorts, she could be arrested.
In 1952, Dale Jennings, one of the members of the Mattachine
Society, was arrested and charged with lewd conduct. He claimed
that a man he was not overly interested in came home with him.
When Jennings went to make him coffee, the man moved to the
window and played with the blinds. Police immediately entered
the apartment and arrested Jennings. Jennings felt this was
entrapment, a very common practice by police at that time (and
unfortunately still a problem).
Most people charged with vagrancy and lewd conduct
pleaded guilty and paid the fine so as to avoid jail (where they
could be raped and beaten) and to prevent employers and fami-
lies from finding out. Jennings convinced the Mattachine Society
to help with the fight. At the trial, Jennings admitted being a
homosexual (probably the first time anyone stood in a court of
law and made that pronouncement) and insisted that he was nei-
ther lewd nor criminal. He helped educate the jury about the
process of entrapment and how homosexuals were targets of
police abuse. The defense attorney caught the arresting officer
lying on the witness stand. The jury was hung (eleven wanted
6
History of the Gay Rights Movement

acquittal; one wanted conviction), and the judge dismissed the
case. Although this was the first successful defense against police
entrapment, none of the mainstream media carried the story.
The Mattachine Society set up another organization to pub-
lish a newsletter—ONE, Incorporated. It began publication in
January 1953 and was the voice of the homophile movement. The
U.S. postmaster seized copies of ONE on the grounds that it was
“obscene, lewd, lascivious, and filthy” and refused to allow the
newsletter to be sent by U.S. mail. ONE sued, eventually winning
a U.S. Supreme Court decision (One, Inc. v. Olesen). The Court
ruled that homosexual materials were not automatically
“obscene” and could be sent via the mail. This was a very impor-
tant decision: without the right to send materials through the
mail, the fledging gay rights movement would have been signifi-
cantly hampered.
In 1953, Joseph McCarthy called Mattachine Foundation
legal adviser Fred M. Snyder to testify before the House Un-
American Activities Committee. McCarthy considered Snyder an
unfriendly witness and attempted to defame and humiliate him.
Snyder was open and professional, not at all conforming to the
antigay stereotype. This confused McCarthy and the committee.
At the same time, the Mattachine Society held a convention in Los
Angeles. With more than 500 representatives, it was the largest
such gathering of homosexuals in U.S. history. A power struggle
ensued between the founders, who were leftist, and those who
wanted a more moderate, liberal organization. The liberal faction
won out, and the old Mattachine Foundation board resigned.
Over the next forty years, the Mattachine Society/ONE, Inc.
evolved, changed names a number of times, floundered,
regrouped, but survived. Currently, it is mostly a library and
archive collection located on the campus of the University of
Southern California and is named ONE Institute and Archive. It
contains the largest collection of homosexual books, magazines,
articles, paintings, and memorabilia in the world, with more than
1 million items catalogued.
Soon after the formation of the Mattachine Society in
California, homosexuals in New York began meeting informally
in a group called The League. Two members of the group, Sam
Morford and Tony Segura, became frustrated by the flimsy nature
of The League and decided in December 1955 to launch the
Mattachine Review and Mattachine Society New York (MSNY).
Approximately thirty people attended the first meeting of MSNY
The Homophile Movement
7

at the Diplomat Hotel. The organizers had to work with extreme
caution because homosexuality was a felony in New York State
and punishable by up to twenty years in prison.
Women were always involved with the Mattachine Society,
although they constituted a very small percentage of the mem-
bership. However, inspired by its success, Del Martin and Phyllis
Lyon in 1955 transformed their lesbian social club into a lesbian
activist organization named the Daughters of Bilitis (DOB): the
first national lesbian organization in the United States. The name
came from Pierre Louÿs’s narrative “Song of Bilitis,” in which
Bilitis is a lesbian poet and disciple of Sappho, who lived in
ancient Greece on the isle of Lesbos. Chapters of DOB were estab-
lished in major cities around the country and in Australia. Martin
and Lyon produced a newsletter called The Ladder. DOB was well
connected with the Mattachine Society and other early gay rights
organizations.
The early 1960s was a turning point for the homophile
movement. The Mattachine Society and Daughters of Bilitis were
conservative in their actions and avoided direct politics. For
example, when involved in official business, members were
required to dress conservatively—suits and ties for men, dresses
and heels for women. Both organizations excluded members who
were overly effeminate or ultramasculine. They wrote polite let-
ters, planned scholarly publications, and invited experts to lec-
ture on “sexual variation” before serious audiences in respectable
halls. Most members were secretive, and even the leaders often
used pseudonyms. Because of the fears and inhibitions of these
organizations, few people joined. As a result, many homosexuals
felt left out and resented professionals who told them they were
deviant and immoral. They wanted an organization that would
take direct political action to reduce police harassment and to
change laws.
Frank Kameny, a Harvard astronomer, was an activist who
took direct political action. He was dismissed from his army post
in 1957 for being a homosexual. He contested the dismissal all the
way to the U.S. Supreme Court. The Court would not review the
case and let stand his dismissal. The betrayal he felt toward a
legal system that denied his right to employment led him to form
the Mattachine Society of Washington (MSW). He wanted the
group to take direct political action. He rejected the deviancy
label and coined the phrase “Gay Is Good,” a paraphrase of
African American militants whose motto was “Black Is
8
History of the Gay Rights Movement

Beautiful.” He argued “that discrimination was squarely to blame
for the homosexual’s problems and that boldly challenging dis-
criminatory policies was the most effective way to make
progress . . . [and we should take] a militant homophile approach
to gay political activity” (Marotta 1981, 25).
The activist approach for MSW threatened Mattachine lead-
ership in New York, San Francisco, and Los Angeles. The leaders
responded:
Mattachine cannot pursue any path but the educa-
tional and research. . . . Our charter is placed in jeop-
ardy whenever we try to influence legislation through
any other means publicly. . . . We can endorse the
action of other agencies working in this field, and
“ride on their shirttails,” so to speak, with relative
safety. But we cannot lobby on our own, and must be
careful how we recommend changes of law so that our
charter and the right to solicit funds through the mail
is not in danger. (Marotta 1981, 15)
Other groups formed outside of Mattachine were more
activist oriented. In 1964, ten participants from the Homosexual
League of New York and the League for Sexual Freedom picketed
in front of the U.S. Army Induction Center on Whitehall Street. In
this “first” gay demonstration, they protested the army’s dishon-
orable discharges of gay soldiers.
The next year, 1965, the Mattachine Society held its first pub-
lic demonstration in front of the White House to protest govern-
ment discriminatory employment practices. Before they went,
they agreed that the men would wear suits and ties and the
women would wear conservative dress. That same day, 20,000
antiwar protestors were at the Washington Monument. The coin-
cidence of media being there for the antiwar protesters got
national television coverage for this gay demonstration.
In spring 1966, the police began Operation New Broom in
New York City in which they “cleaned up” Times Square and
Greenwich Village. They raided and closed gay bars, restaurants,
bookstores, and taverns. Many men were entrapped and charged
with solicitation and lewd conduct. Seven members of the
Mattachine Society attended a public meeting at Judson
Memorial Church where the chief inspector for the police was
holding a community hearing. Randy Wicker and Craig Rodwell
from Mattachine spoke and explained how previous efforts by
The Homophile Movement
9

New York City police to “crack down” on gay bars had left
homosexuals with no social outlet and had led to underworld
elements opening illegal operations for homosexuals. The illegal
bars were sources of police corruption and bribery. The chief
inspector responded by saying that gay bars were illegal
because of “illicit activities.” Wicker pointed out that these illicit
activities were mostly undercover policemen soliciting bar
patrons for entrapment. The chief inspector denied the allega-
tions. Wicker was shocked by the naïveté of the chief inspector
and said, “It’s alarming to think that the Chief Inspector doesn’t
know that a large number of police spend their duty hours
dressed in tight pants, sneakers, and polo sweaters . . . to bring
about solicitations” (Marotta 1981, 36). The audience at the
meeting shouted out, “Bravo!” Soon after, the mayor of New
York issued a memorandum ordering the police to cease engag-
ing in entrapment.
It is important to understand the process of overcoming
stigmatization and oppression. Initially, those who engaged in
homosexual behaviors had no identity concerning their sexual
orientation. In much of history and in many cultures today, as
long as people meet their familial obligations by marrying and
having children, society does not care if they engage in homosex-
ual behaviors. In these cultures, homosexuality is not spoken of.
Only if the homosexual relationship interferes with the family or
becomes too “obvious” does the culture crack down, often seek-
ing the death of the offender.
As the science of psychology developed, homosexuality was
identified as a “sexual inversion” that was deviant. This charac-
terization was based not on science but on social and cultural
norms. Nevertheless, this labeling influenced psychologists, leg-
islators, judges, police, schools, universities, churches, and others
in power and enabled them to justify the persecution of homo-
sexuals. Those who engaged in homosexual behaviors began to
adopt this “identity,” even though it was negative and enforced
feelings of worthlessness.
But not all homosexuals felt they were mentally ill or
deviant. Instead, they recognized that society put this label on
them. It was society that expressed homophobia. The Mattachine
Society took an educational approach to this matter. It believed
that accurate information could dispel stereotypes and influence
society. The society issued newsletters and pamphlets, held edu-
cational seminars, and challenged the medical establishment.
10
History of the Gay Rights Movement

Society demonstrations were meant to bring attention to prob-
lems the media and society refused to face or even name.
The Mattachine Society was the right organization for its
time. If gay activists had engaged in direct political action in the
1950s, they would have been jailed and their message would have
been obliterated. But by the late 1960s, the Mattachine Society
was proving to be too conservative, and few outside the gay com-
munity heard its message. Many homosexuals did not accept the
negative stereotypes of society and wanted immediate relief from
the oppression of police and laws. They wanted to be able to keep
their jobs, homes, and families without having to stay in the
closet. Thus, they took more political action, such as the public
meeting at Judson Memorial Church. They wanted a public hear-
ing with the chief of police to bring the issue of entrapment to his
attention. As just described, the chief inspector denied entrap-
ment occurred, yet the gay community knew otherwise and
brought it to the attention of the media, the surrounding commu-
nity, and the mayor.
Bringing the problem to the attention of the community is the
first step toward overcoming oppression. Homosexuality was
hidden, but no more. Now the arrests, beatings, firings, and more
were brought to everyone’s attention. Homosexuals were over-
coming their internalized homophobia, and so were heterosexu-
als. The U.S. Constitution and contemporary social mores empha-
sized fair and equitable treatment. The entrapment of gay men by
New York City police was brought to the attention of the mayor
and the city council, who saw the unfairness of these actions and
stepped in to stop the abuse. It was heterosexuals who under-
stood the oppression of heterosexism and took action. Hetero-
sexuals were overcoming their homophobia.
The next thirty years of gay activism reflect this process.
Heterosexuals control the laws and institutions of the United
States. Gay activists, especially in the early years, were few in
numbers. Yet the truth of their message of equity between homo-
sexuals and heterosexuals was strong enough to convince hetero-
sexuals to intervene and change the power structure. We will see
this recurring pattern.
Another major change occurred during the 1950s and 1960s.
Psychologists engaged in academic research into homosexuality.
Their work changed the social and cultural norms that depicted
homosexuality as a mental illness.
The early investigations into homosexuality were performed
The Homophile Movement
11

on a skewed sample of people who visited gay bars, patients in
psychiatric hospital, and prison inmates. Not surprisingly, these
studies confirmed the societal beliefs and stereotypes that homo-
sexuals are alcoholic, crazed, and criminal. In the mid-1950s,
Evelyn Hooker at the University of California at Los Angeles car-
ried out the first rigorous studies using nonclinical gays and dis-
covered that psychiatrists could not identify lesbians and gay
men using psychological testing. Psychiatrists who made money
“curing” allegedly insane gays could not even identify them
(Hooker 1963). Hooker (who was heterosexual) and other
respected academic researchers showed every antigay stereotype
to be incorrect. With this evidence, the American Psychiatric
Association (APA) dropped homosexuality as a mental illness
from the DSM in 1973 (Bayer 1981).
The Stonewall Riots and Gay Liberation
There are junctions in history at which many forces come together
to create a major shift in the social paradigm. The riot at Stonewall
Inn in New York’s Greenwich Village was such an event.
On the night of June 27, 1969, officers from the Public Morals
Section of the New York City Police Department attempted to
shut down the Stonewall Inn—a small local bar. The bar was a
favorite place to meet for drag queens, street kids, dopeheads,
speed freaks, and other marginal people. As bar patrons were dis-
missed by the police and allowed to leave, they gathered across
the street. Each time someone appeared in the doorway whom
the crowd knew, it applauded, which encouraged the brassy indi-
vidual to pose and make some flippant remark. This infuriated
the police even more. When the paddy wagon came to take away
the drag queens, bar owner, and bartender, a cry went up from
the crowd to overturn the paddy wagon. The wagon drove off,
but then the crowd exploded by throwing bottles and stones at
the police. The police had to retreat into the bar. A battle cry was
heard throughout the Village, and hundreds came out to partici-
pate. A small fire began in the window of the Stonewall. Soon
after, more police arrived and the crowd scattered.
For the next couple of nights, there were street demonstra-
tions that were more political in nature. Groups of people milled
around the streets yelling, “Gay Power,” holding hands, and kiss-
ing in public. A group of gay cheerleaders was heard singing,
12
History of the Gay Rights Movement

“We are the Stonewall girls/We wear our hair in curls/We have
no underwear/We show our pubic hairs” (Marotta 1981, 75).
After the first two days of disturbances, the Mattachine Society of
New York handed out flyers in the village, capitalizing on the
“Christopher Street Riots” and is characterized as the “hairpin
drop heard around the world” (Marotta 1981, 77).
Michael Brown was a New Left homosexual who was
thrilled to see homosexuals fight against the police. Days after the
riots, he met with Dick Leitsch of MSNY to discuss sponsoring
more demonstrations. When Leitsch adamantly insisted that
MSNY could not engage in such activity, Michael Brown set up an
independent action committee that became the Gay Liberation
Front (GLF).
Before Stonewall, about a dozen gay organizations existed.
Within three months after the riot, more than fifty lesbian and gay
organizations formed throughout the United States. These orga-
nizations became more radical, with many cities hosting marches
and festivals in June to commemorate the anniversary of the
Stonewall Riots. It is these events, more than any other, that
helped bring unity to the gay community and influenced political
and legal progress.
GLF was composed of a series of small groups in the United
States and other Western countries. It never became a formal
organization. GLF represented an important transitional phase
for the homophile movement. It built coalitions with other disen-
franchised groups and attempted to dismantle oppressive eco-
nomic, political, and social structures. Many of its participants
had been members of New Left organizations, such as Students
for a Democratic Society; others, such as pacifists and “hippies,”
simply rejected strict social norms. The radical members of GLF
believed that a total transformation of society was needed to
obtain equality and freedom for all marginalized people. The
more moderate reformers attempted to change the system from
within. GLF was responsible for the beginnings of many college
lesbian and gay student groups.
Primarily, GLF groups engaged in consciousness-raising ses-
sions in people’s living rooms, church basements, and storefronts.
These groups were nonhierarchical in structure and often did not
have a leader. They built on the belief that the “personal is the
political” and launched a number of small newsletters and
engaged in demonstrations.
The ideological differences among the front’s revolutionar-
The Stonewall Riots and Gay Liberation
13

ies, social radicals, and reformers were too great to maintain,
however, and GLF soon broke apart. Many, if not most, of the
reformers felt alienated by the radical politics of GLF. Although
they had outgrown the conservative homophile groups, they did
not want to overthrow the entire political and social system.
Instead, they sought a more activist organization that would
bring about political change to eliminate discrimination against
homosexuals. It was these GLF reformers who created the Gay
Activists Alliance (GAA).
GAA engaged in petition drives, political zap actions, and
street theater. Zaps are demonstrations in which politicians are
directly confronted in public and asked pointed questions or chas-
tised for antigay statements. Street theater included gay-ins or
kiss-ins, in which members of the same sex would hold hands or
kiss in public, something that heterosexuals are able to do but was
(and still is) “shocking” when done by same-sex couples. GAA
was successful at obtaining media attention and brought gay
issues to the forefront of public discussion. In New York, these
actions informed Mayor John Lindsay and city council members,
all of whom were heterosexual, about gay issues. Seeing how gov-
ernment was unfair toward gay people, they ended entrapment,
police harassment, and public employment discrimination. GAA
was able to educate those in power about homophobia, and it was
heterosexuals who changed the power structure.
Many groups formed in the early 1970s. They reflected the
identity of their members. Separatism was advocated by some as
the solution to heterosexual oppression. The National Orga-
nization for Women (NOW) was challenged by lesbian feminists
over members’ fears of being identified as dykes. Bisexuals made
their needs known and became a voice within the lesbian and gay
liberation movement. The 1969 Eastern Regional Conference of
Homophile Organizations proposed a national celebration each
June 28 to commemorate the Stonewall Riots. Now, most major
cities and many smaller ones hold gay pride festivals and parades
that tens of thousands, and sometimes hundreds of thousands of
people attend.
Equal Rights and Community-Building
After Stonewall, there was a decline in radical activism. Gay
reformers aimed at community-building and political activism.
14
History of the Gay Rights Movement

They worked to educate and overcome oppressive laws, not to
overthrow the system. There were more than 1,100 organizations
nationwide devoted to lesbian and gay concerns by 1973. This
number would more than double by the 1980s and again more
than double by the 1990s. There are support organizations for
every conceivable group—businesses, students, schools, scien-
tists, lawyers, academics, artists, church members, and racial and
ethnic minorities. There was also a flood of publications, media,
and more devoted to lesbian and gay concerns.
Government agencies were made aware that homosexuals
underutilized government social services. Many cities developed
entire centers providing services for lesbians and gay men. Some
of the services included mental and physical health clinics, voca-
tional training, counseling, lesbian advocacy, telephone hotlines,
roommate referral, rap groups, medical services, and legal help.
Often these centers provided professional advice to cities and
government agencies about the needs, opinions, and concerns of
the gay community.
One of the most influential political groups formed in the
United States is the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force (NGLTF).
Founded in 1973 as the National Gay Task Force, it blended the old
homophile movement with the newer reformist strategies of GAA.
Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund is a national organiza-
tion that promotes the civil rights of lesbians, gay men, bisexuals,
transgender people, and people living with acquired immune defi-
ciency syndrome (AIDS) through litigation, education, and public
policy work. When its application for incorporation was rejected
by the secretary of state, Lambda took the case to the New York
Supreme Court, where the decision was overturned.
Again, we see the process of a handful of gay activists edu-
cating heterosexuals to overcome their homophobia. For exam-
ple, Lambda argued that the U.S. Constitution explicitly allows
people to come together to advocate for legal change (otherwise
known as the right of assembly guaranteed in the First
Amendment) and that this was Lambda’s goal concerning gay
rights. The New York Supreme Court agreed and rejected the
unfairness inherent in denying the application for incorporation.
It was heterosexual judges who changed the prohibition against
gay groups forming in the state of New York.
Later in 1974, similar arguments were made at the U.S.
Supreme Court level in Gay Students Organization v. Bonner. Here,
gay activists educated the Court about the right of lesbians and gay
Equal Rights and Community-Building
15

men to come together and form organizations qualifying for federal
tax-exempt status. Again, heterosexual judges found the arguments
convincing and ruled that homosexual groups were to receive the
same treatment by the IRS as any other qualifying group.
One of the most significant decisions came from the
American Psychiatric Association (APA) in 1973–1974. The APA
formed a committee in the early 1970s to review the research on
homosexuality as related to its classification as a mental illness.
The committee reviewed the works of Dr. Evelyn Hooker and
many other researchers, along with 1969 recommendations by the
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) Task Force on
Homosexuality, to repeal antisodomy laws and educate the pub-
lic about homosexuality (Thompson 1994, 69). The committee,
along with the APA’s Council on Research and Development,
Reference Committee, and Assembly, made recommendations to
remove homosexuality from its list of mental illness. The APA
board unanimously passed a resolution removing homosexuality
from the DSM. In response, a group of psychoanalysts filed a peti-
tion against the resolution. A referendum was held during which
more than 58 percent of the 10,000 voting members supported
(with 37.8 percent against) the board action. Future challenges to
the resolution have been rejected by even larger margins.
Conservatives and members of the religious right often con-
sidered that this change in the DSM was accomplished by a band
of scheming gay activists who pushed through their agenda. This
is not true. It was a multiyear review of academic and govern-
ment research combined with a clear presentation of the findings
to the members that convinced the APA to change its position.
The membership of the APA reflects society and is mostly hetero-
sexual. It was primarily heterosexuals who reviewed the research
and agreed that the change was needed. It was heterosexuals who
overcame their bias and homophobia and made a rational deci-
sion based on objective research. In the intervening thirty years,
no academic research has found any evidence suggesting that
homosexuality is a mental illness. If anything, the research has
affirmed that there are no differences in psychosocial measures
related to sexual orientation.
Gay rights grew nationwide during the 1970s, with individ-
ual cities and counties (but no states) adopting antidiscrimination
statutes. However, there was a conservative backlash. For exam-
ple, in 1977 the Miami-Dade County Commission passed an ordi-
nance making it illegal to discriminate on the basis of sexual ori-
16
History of the Gay Rights Movement

entation. This came about because local gay groups had brought
their concerns about employment and housing discrimination to
the commission. The commission, which was composed of het-
erosexuals, understood that it was not giving homosexuals addi-
tional rights, but rather was providing the city with the legal
power to enforce rights already enjoyed by all U.S. citizens but
denied homosexuals for historical and social reasons.
Upset by this development, singer and Florida orange juice
representative Anita Bryant organized a group called Save Our
Children. It used scare tactics, claiming that homosexuals molest
children and are mentally ill. It obtained sufficient signatures to
place a referendum on the ballot to overturn the ordinance. It was
passed overwhelmingly by the county citizens. The Save Our
Children campaign is an example of emotional hysteria, caused
by religious conservatives and based on false information and
stereotypes, overcoming decisions made by heterosexuals edu-
cated on the issue. Twenty years later, Dade County passed the
same ordinance, and this time religious conservatives were
unsuccessful in overturning it.
The very next year, 1978, a similar battle occurred in
California. Republican state Senator John Briggs collected signa-
tures and placed Proposition 6 on the ballot. It would have barred
homosexuals from teaching in public schools. The Save Our
Children slogan and methodology were used to promote the
proposition. Nevertheless, teachers, labor unions, Democrats,
and many Republicans, including Governor Ronald Reagan,
came out against the proposition. It failed to pass. It seems that
many people were not ready to give antidiscrimination protection
to lesbians and gay men (as happened in Dade County), but also
were not ready to discriminate against them outright (as in
California’s Briggs initiative).
Tragedy hit in 1978. Dan White gunned down Mayor George
Moscone and Supervisor Harvey Milk of San Francisco in City
Hall. White, a conservative supervisor on the San Francisco City
Council, held much animosity toward openly gay supervisor
Harvey Milk. In November 1978, White resigned his position on
the council. He changed his mind and asked the mayor for his
position back. The mayor refused. A week later, White entered
City Hall and shot Milk and Moscone to death. The murder of the
two men resulted in one of the most impressive memorial ser-
vices ever seen in San Francisco; more than 40,000 men, women,
and children marched by candlelight to City Hall.
Equal Rights and Community-Building
17

At the trial, White’s lawyers claimed that White was addicted
to junk food and the sugar affected his judgment (what has since
become known as the “Twinkie defense”). White was convicted
not of first-degree murder but of involuntary manslaughter and
was sentenced to seven years in prison. The gay community
exploded at the lenient sentence and took to the streets of San
Francisco. That night in 1979, known as White Night, police cars
were overturned, fires were set, and thousands of people
marched to City Hall. More than 150 people were injured, and
property damages in excess of $1 million resulted. White was
released after serving just five years of his sentence. He commit-
ted suicide in 1985.
Anita Bryant’s crusade, the Briggs effort, and the murder of
Harvey Milk and George Moscone galvanized the gay movement.
But it also galvanized conservative religious groups into forming
what today is known as the religious right. In 1979, Reverend Jerry
Falwell launched the Moral Majority (renamed the Liberty
Federation in 1989). In the same year, Beverly LaHaye founded
Concerned Women for America (CWA). Pat Robertson, who began
the Christian Broadcast Network (CBN) in 1961 and has hosted The
700 Club since 1968, opened CBN University in 1977, making his
operation one of the best-financed conservative religious organi-
zations in the nation. These three groups would become, and still
are, the most powerful antigay organizations in the United States.
Seeing the need to coordinate progay political efforts, the
Human Rights Campaign (HRC) was founded in 1980. It focuses
on fighting antigay ballot initiatives and supports candidates
who promote antidiscrimination policies based on sexual orienta-
tion. Its political action committee (PAC) provides financial sup-
port for candidates and typically raises and donates more than $1
million a year to candidates at the federal level. For example, in
1998, of the 200 political candidates to whom it contributed
money, 91 percent won their respective races.
The 1980s saw a continuation of the trend toward greater
recognition and equality for lesbians and gay men. For example,
more than 200,000 people participated in the first March on
Washington in 1979. In 1981, a court case in Dallas banned police
from discriminating against lesbians and gays in employment as
police officers (Childers v. Dallas Police Department). In 1982,
Wisconsin became the first state to pass a wide-reaching law pro-
hibiting discrimination against lesbians and gay men. A high
school support program for lesbian and gay children was estab-
18
History of the Gay Rights Movement

lished in 1984 (Project 10, Los Angeles). In 1987, the second March
on Washington took place, with more than 600,000 people attend-
ing. The National Education Association (NEA) in 1988 adopted
a resolution calling for every school district to provide counseling
for students struggling with their sexual orientation.
The U.S. Supreme Court handed down the most significant
antigay ruling in 1986 (Bowers v. Hardwick). Michael Hardwick
was charged with engaging in sodomy in Georgia. Hardwick
sued and the case reached the U.S. Supreme Court. The Court
ruled against Hardwick in a five to four decision stating that
claims for “homosexual sodomy” as a protected right to privacy
are “facetious, at best.” The Court established that lesbians and
gay men have no right to sexual expression under the U.S.
Constitution. Soon after retirement, Justice Lewis Powell con-
ceded that he “had made a mistake” and should have voted to
strike down Georgia’s sex statute (Marcus 1990).
The 1980s also marked the advent of AIDS. The first cases
were reported in 1981 in the United States and exclusively
involved gay men. Doctors were unsure what caused this “gay
plague” and called it gay-related immune deficiency. As more
nongays got the disease (Haitians, intravenous drug users, hemo-
philiacs, and heterosexuals), it became obvious that it was not
related to being gay, but rather was an immune deficiency caused
by a virus spread through bodily fluids. Bruce Voller, a biological
researcher, coined the term acquired immune deficiency syndrome
(AIDS) to better reflect the nature of the disease.
There was much hysteria about AIDS. People who devel-
oped AIDS were often fired from their jobs, forced out of their
apartments and housing, lost their health insurance, and more.
Children who were asymptomatic but infected with human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) were expelled from schools.
Public swimming pools were emptied, scrubbed, disinfected, and
refilled after a person with AIDS used the pool. Mortuaries
refused to handle the bodies of people who had died from AIDS.
Airlines refused to allow people with AIDS to fly. And even heath
professionals sometime refused to care for those with AIDS.
Massive discrimination resulted, and the government initially
ignored the severity of the problem.
The religious right used AIDS to reignite its antigay crusades.
Claiming that AIDS was “God’s punishment” for the “immoral”
gay “lifestyle,” religious right organizations called for a general
quarantine of people with AIDS, the firing of lesbian and gay
Equal Rights and Community-Building
19

teachers, and even more draconian measures. Even the main-
stream media refused to cover the AIDS epidemic until the first
heterosexuals were reported to be infected (Shilts 1987). It was
seven years into the epidemic before President Ronald Reagan
publicly mentioned AIDS. Yet Patrick Buchanan, Reagan’s chief of
communications, was very outspoken, claiming that AIDS was
“God’s awful retribution” for homosexual behavior and that
AIDS patients did not deserve help (“Buchanan Calls AIDS
‘Retribution’” 1992). AIDS, unfortunately, is still tied to antigay
sentiments in many people’s minds, even though it was never a
gay disease.
President Reagan appointed a thirteen-member AIDS panel
in July 1987. Although there was much in-fighting among the
members, it made remarkably progressive recommendations,
including a call for massive government funding for research and
care. The panel also recommended legislation to prevent discrim-
ination against people with AIDS (PWA) and people infected
with the virus. These recommendations impacted the 1990 adop-
tion by Congress of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
The frustration in the gay community over overt discrimina-
tion and government inaction compelled Larry Kramer and other
activists to form the AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power (ACT UP)
in 1987. ACT UP is a group of individuals united in anger and
committed to ending the AIDS crisis through direct action. The
slogan “Silence = Death” originated with ACT UP. It engaged in
a number of high-profile demonstrations that brought significant
media attention to the problem. For example, in 1989 more than
5,000 ACT UP members demonstrated in front and inside of New
York’s St. Patrick’s Cathedral, rallying against the Catholic
Church’s antigay stance and policies on AIDS.
AIDS made the media, government, and average citizen talk
about homosexuality and gay issues in ways they never had
before. For example, the New York Times used the word gay in ref-
erence to homosexuality for the first time in 1987. AIDS brought
more attention to gay rights than had the previous thirty years of
educational efforts and public demonstrations.
To counter the political progress lesbian and gay rights
advocates were making and the successes of the HRC, Pat
Robertson formed the Christian Coalition in 1989. It is a political
organization that works to elect conservative Christians to polit-
ical office. Formed as a nonprofit religious organization, it vio-
lated its tax-exempt status by issuing voters guides and engag-
20
History of the Gay Rights Movement

ing in other direct political action. By 1998, the IRS had revoked
its tax exemption.
The gay rights movement in Europe and elsewhere followed
a path similar to that of the U.S. movement. Some countries were
at the initial stages of simply trying to form support organiza-
tions. For example, when twenty gay Finnish citizens attempted
to host the first gay pride parade in Helsinki in 1981, all were
arrested for “encouraging lewd behavior.” In 1989, Nigeria
formed the Gentlemen’s Alliance and Poland formed its national
gay rights group, Lambda.
Other countries were much further along in the process of
affirming gay rights. For example, Canada gave postal workers
an antidiscrimination contract in 1980, yet conducted a massive
raid, arresting 300 gay men in Toronto the next year. The ensuing
riot has been called the Canadian Stonewall. Later, in 1988,
Canada repealed its antisodomy laws. Ireland was compelled in
1988 by the European Court of Human Rights to eliminate its life
imprisonment penalty for homosexual behavior. Britain elected
its first openly lesbian mayor in Manchester in 1985. And Israel
legalized homosexual acts between consenting adults in 1988.
Norway was further along, having enacted a national
antidiscrimination statute that included sexual orientation. In
1984, television evangelist Hans Bratterud was convicted of vio-
lating the law. Denmark enacted domestic partnership legislation
in 1988 that was just one step away from full marriage for same-
sex couples. Full marriage for same-sex couples was granted in
2001 in the Netherlands, placing it ahead of all other countries in
recognizing gay rights.
The end of the twentieth century and the beginning of the
twenty-first saw a continuation of this process: a forward march
toward greater equity for lesbians and gay men, with an occa-
sional step backward. Many more cities and states have enacted
hate crime statutes and antidiscrimination statues that include
sexual orientation. The U.S. military dropped homosexuality as a
trait identifying spies. President William Clinton signed an exec-
utive order banning discrimination based on sexual orientation in
the federal civilian workforce. And the third March on
Washington in 1993 attracted an estimated 1.2 million partici-
pants. The development of civil unions in Vermont, the reduction
in the number of states having antisodomy laws, and the Supreme
Court decision concerning Colorado’s Amendment 2 are illustra-
tive of society overcoming its homophobia and heterosexism.
Equal Rights and Community-Building
21

Lesbians and gay men want their relationships to be as val-
ued by society as heterosexual relationships are. A number of les-
bians and gay men have sued their states to obtain marriage
licenses. In states with constitutions containing a gender equality
clause, such as Hawaii and Vermont, lesbians and gay men have
successfully argued that denying them the right to marry is a
form of gender discrimination. In Vermont, the court handed the
problem back to the legislature to solve. The legislature, main-
taining its constitutional prohibition on gender discrimination,
came to understand that denying same-sex marriage was dis-
criminatory. However, instead of allowing lesbians and gay men
to marry, it created a separate category called “civil unions” in
2000. By law, civil unions are completely equal to marriage in
Vermont, but other states will not recognize them as such. It is
important to remember that the court and legislature are pre-
dominately heterosexual and they are the ones that changed the
law. It was heterosexuals who took action to overcome societal
discrimination against homosexuals.
However, many people were offended by the thought of
same-sex marriage. The religious right hooked onto the issue and
raised millions of dollars to fend it off. Religious right activists
took their antigay message to politicians who then passed legis-
lation defining marriage as the union of one man and one
woman. A number of states and the federal government enacted
Defense of Marriage Acts (DOMAs) to preempt the possibility of
their having to recognize same-sex marriage.
The number of states with antisodomy laws has dropped sig-
nificantly. Gay activists and attorneys have brought the unfair-
ness of these laws to the attention of state courts. Antisodomy
laws are a violation of privacy and result in the unequal applica-
tion of the law (a violation of the equal protection clause of the
U.S. Constitution). Many courts have revoked their states’ anti-
sodomy laws. By 2002, less than one third of the states still had
them on the books. Again, it is important to remember that it is
predominantly heterosexual judges who came to understand that
antisodomy laws are discriminatory and invasive and ruled them
invalid.
Colorado’s Amendment 2 was one of the watershed deci-
sions made by the U.S. Supreme Court concerning gay rights.
Early in the 1990s, a number of cities and counties in the state of
Colorado enacted antidiscrimination statutes that included sex-
ual orientation. This angered a number of conservative residents.
22
History of the Gay Rights Movement

Colorado for Family Values (CFV) was formed and successfully
placed an amendment to the Colorado Constitution on the ballot.
Amendment 2 sought to repeal any existing law or policy that
protected people with “homosexual, lesbian, or bisexual orienta-
tion” from discrimination in the state and to prohibit future adop-
tion or enforcement of any such law or policy. CFV claimed the
amendment provided “special rights” to lesbians, gay men, and
bisexuals that they neither “deserved” nor “needed.”
The special rights argument has a long history. Originally
used by opponents of laws prohibiting discrimination based on
race, the slogan implies that a particular class of people will be
given rights or privileges beyond what the majority have. “In
truth, the laws simply ensured that minorities would have the
same rights the majority already had, to participate in society
without fear of discrimination” (Keen and Goldberg 1999, 10).
Brian McCormick, staff counsel for Pat Robertson’s National
Legal Foundation, coached CFV to keep the term special rights out
of the initiative, but to use it in all campaign promotions. As
McCormick explained: “If language denying special privileges to
homosexuals is in the amendment it could possibly allow homo-
sexuals to argue that they are not asking for special privileges,
just those granted to everyone else. [However] I believe that ‘No
Special Privileges’ is a good motto for the amendment’s public
campaign” (Keen and Goldberg 1999, 11). It is important to real-
ize the religious right knows that the special rights argument is
not valid, but uses it anyway to influence voters and raise money.
On November 3, 1992, Colorado voters passed the amend-
ment, with 53 percent in favor and 46 percent against. A tempo-
rary injunction was granted, and six months later Judge Jeffrey
Bayless of the Colorado District Court for Denver heard the case.
He rejected all state claims. The state appealed to the state
supreme court, which upheld Judge Bayless’s decision.
In 1995, the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to review the
Colorado Supreme Court’s decision (Romer v. Evans). The Court
characterized Amendment 2 as “unprecedented in our jurispru-
dence” in that it identified “persons by a single trait and then
denies them protection across the board . . . . A law declaring in
general that it shall be more difficult for one group of citizens
than for all others to seek aid from government is itself a denial
of equal protection of the laws in the most literal sense.” Also,
Amendment 2 “inflicts on [gay people] immediate, continuing,
and real injuries that outrun and belie any legitimate justifications
Equal Rights and Community-Building
23

that may be claimed for it.”
The Court ruled 6–1 that Amendment 2 appeared to violate the
fundamental right of lesbians, gay men, and bisexuals to participate
in the political process on a basis equal to other Coloradans. Justice
Anthony Kennedy stated: “We conclude that Amendment 2 clas-
sifies homosexuals not to further a proper legislative end but to
make them unequal to everyone else. This Colorado cannot do. A
state cannot so deem a class of persons a stranger to its laws.”
The Court made a number of findings important to the rights
of lesbians and gay men. First, the Court agreed that homosexu-
als have a long history of being persecuted. Second, the Court
accepted the medical, psychological, social, and scientific evi-
dence that homosexuality is not a medical disorder and is equiv-
alent to heterosexuality. These two findings have significantly
impacted other courts and administrative decisions nationwide.
For example, at the trial of the two men who brutally murdered
Matthew Shepard in 1998, the judge refused to allow the “homo-
sexual panic” defense (see the Glossary for a further description),
a completely discredited stereotype. Likewise, fewer judges are
willing to allow antigay stereotypes to be used as the basis for
taking children away from gay and lesbian parents during child
custody and adoption proceedings.
Another major development occurred in the public schools.
Many schools faced having to accept a gay-straight alliance stu-
dent group on campus. A number of schools refused to accept
these groups, but the courts consistently upheld the Equal Access
Act, which requires schools to accept all noncurricular student
groups on an equal footing. This trend should continue with
many more, if not most, schools having gay-supportive programs
on campus.
Schools have traditionally been a dangerous place for gay
and lesbian students. One celebrated case has changed this situa-
tion. Jamie Nabozny experienced terrible abuse from other stu-
dents while attending an Ashland, Wisconsin, high school. He
was attacked by other students, mock-raped, urinated upon, and
kicked so badly he required surgery to stop internal bleeding. His
parents complained to school officials who told them he “had to
expect that kind of stuff” because he was a homosexual. He even-
tually sued the school administration, and a jury found that
school officials had violated Jamie’s rights under the Fourteenth
Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause. The district was forced to
pay $962,000 in damages (Nabozny v. Podlesny).
24
History of the Gay Rights Movement

The 1990s also brought to the forefront the potential conflict
between antidiscrimination statutes and the desires of private
organizations. Two U.S. Supreme Court decisions illustrate this
problem. Each year the Boston St. Patrick’s Day Parade is spon-
sored by the South Boston Allied War Veterans Council. They
refused to allow a gay marching group to participate. The gay
group sued, and the court initially sided with the gay group. The
parade organizers canceled the event and appealed to the U.S.
Supreme Court. In Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, and
Bisexual Group of Boston (1995), the Court upheld the First
Amendment right of the organizers to exclude gays from their
event because the “private” organizers of the event had the right
to control the message of the event.
Likewise, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the right of the Boy
Scouts to exclude openly gay men from serving as troop leaders
or participating as members (Boy Scouts of America v. Dale, 2000).
The Court held that requiring the Boy Scouts to include James
Dale in its ranks would violate the organization’s First
Amendment right of “expressive association” (see Chapter 5).
Although many lesbians and gay men saw the Boston St.
Patrick’s Day Parade and Boy Scout cases as losses, some civil lib-
ertarians believe they were the right decisions. Private organiza-
tions need to retain the right to select their members and promote
their cause. However, the dividing line between public and pri-
vate is not clear. The aftermath of the Boy Scouts case has been a
withdrawal of support for the Boy Scouts by many cities, school
districts, and local governments. They often have nondiscrimina-
tion conditions for use of facilities, and the Boy Scouts is open
about its discrimination. Many of these agencies have withdrawn
their support of the Boy Scouts in favor of organizations that do
not discriminate (such as the Camp Fire Girls, Girl Scouts, Indian
Guides, and Police Cadets).
The Culture Wars
Some political analysts believe lesbians and gay men have
already won the culture wars and that the complete elimination
of antisodomy laws, the right to marriage, and so forth are sim-
ply mopping-up activities, albeit ones that may take another gen-
eration or two to achieve. They point to the fact that more and
more cities, counties, and states are enacting antidiscrimination
The Culture Wars
25

statutes and hate crime reporting procedures and enforcement,
businesses are extending domestic partnership benefits to their
employees with same-sex partners, and more. Television has gay
characters on many programs, from MTV’s The Real World, to
NBC’s Will & Grace, to Showtime’s Queer as Folk. Most bookstores
have a gay and lesbian section. And schools nationwide are hav-
ing to accept gay-straight student groups on campus and are
incorporating lesbian and gay educational materials into their
curriculum from kindergarten to high school.
The knowledge that homosexuals are virtually indistinguish-
able from heterosexuals and that both orientations are equally
valid has gradually filtered into society. It was scientists in the
1950s to 1970s, most of whom were heterosexual, whose studies
influenced the APA to recognize that homosexuality is as valid as
heterosexuality. The predominately heterosexual membership of
APA supported removing homosexuality as a mental illness. This
knowledge spread to city councils, state legislatures, courts,
places of religious service, schools, and more. Public attitude has
shifted significantly, with most people in the United States accept-
ing the idea of gay adoption, gays in the military, and support for
nondiscrimination laws. Changes in laws and policies have come
about because heterosexuals understood that discrimination
against homosexuals was unfounded and unfair.
The religious right has always recognized homosexuality as
an issue that generates significant funds. For example, Robert
Billings, the first executive director of the Moral Majority, stated:
“I know what you feel about these queers, these fairies. We wish
we could get in our cars and run them down when they
march. . . . We need an emotionally charged issue to stir up
people. . . . I believe that the homosexual issue is the issue we
should use” (Young 1982, 78). Throughout the 1990s, the religious
right increased the use of homophobic rhetoric to raise money
and recruit followers (Berlet 1998; Mookas 1998).
By the late 1990s, there was a shift in tactics by the religious
right. Claiming that homosexuals are child molesters and men-
tally ill just does not have the impact that it used to have.
Likewise, “no special rights” is still used but, it, too, is losing
impact. Too many people, courts, and politicians know that these
stereotypes and slogans are inaccurate.
In July 1998, full-page paid advertisements were placed in
major national newspapers promoting the “ex-gay” movement.
The ads were purchased through a coalition of fifteen Christian
26
History of the Gay Rights Movement

right organizations. They condemned homosexuality as a sin but
emphasized curing homosexuality as a prolife act. They hoped to
plant the idea that homosexuality is a chosen “lifestyle” and is
therefore alterable. Logically, this assumption implies that homo-
sexuals “choose” to endure discrimination and pain. The move-
ment claims that all homosexuals need to do is choose heterosex-
uality to receive full rights. Acceptance of the ex-gay movement’s
position would undermine lesbians’ and gay men’s claim to civil
rights. “The ex-gay movement poses a significant new threat to
efforts to secure civil rights legal protections for gay/lesbian/
bisexual/transgender people. Potentially, it is the most damaging
manifestation of an ongoing backlash against this community. . . .
The long-term goal of the Christian Right in using the ex-gay
movement to convince people that lesbian, gay, and bisexual
people can become heterosexual is to create a restrictive legal
environment in which equal rights are only accorded to hetero-
sexual men and women” (Khan 1998, 17–18).
It is important to remember the religious right’s goal is to cre-
ate a theocratic state, a “nation whose laws are based on funda-
mentalist’s interpretation of the Bible” (“We’ve Come a Long
Way . . . Maybe” 2000). Founder and director of the Christian
Coalition Pat Robertson stated: “The country was founded by
Christians. It was founded as a Christian nation. They’re trying to
sell us this nonsense about separation of church and state. And
that’s what it is, it’s a fanatical interpretation of the First
Amendment. . . . We’re going to win this battle but we’ve got to
stand together, all the Christians in America need to join hands
together and say we’ve had enough of this utter nonsense” (White
1997). Similarly, Dean Wycoff, director of the Moral Majority of
Santa Clara County, California, stated: “I agree with capital pun-
ishment and I believe that homosexuality . . . could be coupled
with murder. . . . It would be the government that sits upon this
land who will be executing the homosexuals” (Young 1982, 77).
Thus, the agenda of the religious right is to take control of the
United States and use state power to discriminate, incarcerate, and
kill those who do not agree with it—particularly homosexuals.
Separate but Equal
The process of overcoming systemic discrimination is the same
whether the bias is race, gender, or sexual orientation. The gay
Separate but Equal
27

rights movement, like the civil rights movement, is a human rights
approach that deconstructs social bias. Comparing the gay rights
movement with the civil rights movement gives some insight as to
how the gay rights movement is progressing toward the future.
Initially, Africans were brought to the United States as slaves.
They were legally and socially treated as property. Many ques-
tioned this arrangement and argued that blacks were humans due
rights afforded all U.S. citizens. It took a civil war with a terrible
death toll to get the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution enacted, which recognized full citizenship for
African Americans. But there was a backlash by Christian conser-
vatives who influenced state and local authorities to enact Jim
Crow laws. These laws kept the races segregated. African
Americans could attend school, but they were separated from
whites—this was also true at restaurants, hotels, public trans-
portation systems, swimming pools, and more. For almost 100
years, separate-but-equal was the law of the land and terror per-
petrated by white supremacists was used to keep blacks “in their
place.” Slowly, state by state, city by city, Jim Crow laws were
overturned and replaced with laws recognizing full equality
regardless of race. This process culminated in 1954 when the U.S.
Supreme Court ruled in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka,
Kansas that separate was inherently unequal. Only then was the
United States faced with fully integrating African Americans into
all levels of society. Even still, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and
other legislative acts were required to ensure the equal participa-
tion of people of different races. This process deconstructed the
allocation of rights and privileges associated with race.
Lesbians and gay men are entering the separate-but-equal
stage of their legal status. Until recently, homosexual behavior
was illegal. Lesbians and gay men were often arrested, prose-
cuted, imprisoned, and killed. They were constantly at risk of los-
ing their jobs, homes, and children. Slowly, businesses and
schools included sexual orientation in their antidiscrimination
codes. Similarly, cities and states removed antigay laws and
replaced them with antidiscrimination statutes aimed at provid-
ing some protection in the areas of employment and housing.
Even with this progress, as of 2003, approximately one-third of
the states still had sodomy laws on the books that render homo-
sexuality illegal.
The possibility of same-sex marriages being recognized has
created a backlash by Christian conservatives. They have influ-
28
History of the Gay Rights Movement

enced federal and state governments to define marriage as an
exclusively heterosexual institution. By 2003, more than two-
thirds of the states and the federal government had enacted their
own Defense of Marriage Acts (DOMAs). However, some states
are attempting to ameliorate the situation by providing “super”
domestic partnership for same-sex couples. Vermont imple-
mented a program called civil unions, which confers all the same
legal rights and responsibilities associated with marriage to
same-sex couples. Civil unions are supposedly equal to “mar-
riage” without using the word marriage—a separate-but-equal
status for homosexuals.
But civil unions are not the full equivalent of marriage; other
states do not recognize them nor does the federal government. As
with segregated schools in the 1950s, civil unions are never equal.
The U.S. Supreme Court recognized that separate schools for
blacks do not confer all the same benefits that whites enjoy in seg-
regated schools. It is expected that the courts will eventually
come to a similar understanding about sexual orientation and
rule that any scheme attempting to give lesbians and gays
“equal” rights to those enjoyed by heterosexuals without giving
them exactly the same rights is inherently unequal. Ultimately,
gay liberation will deconstruct sexual orientation just as African
American liberation deconstructed race and the women’s move-
ment deconstructed gender.
The major impediment to African Americans gaining equal
rights has been white supremacists and Christian fundamental-
ists. The major impediment to women’s rights has been male
supremacists and Christian fundamentalists. The major impedi-
ment to gay rights has been heterosexist people and Christian
fundamentalists. The arguments used by bigots and Christian
fundamentalists are always the same—that blacks are inferior to
whites, that women are inferior to men, and that homosexuals are
inferior to heterosexuals. However, the stereotypes used to stig-
matize these classes of people as being inferior are false.
Discrimination against a class of people is never justified; the real
issue is not science or scripture, but a culture war involving those
in power and those who are stigmatized.
The way a culture is changed is through education and pos-
itive personal experiences. As more and more gay people come
out, more and more heterosexuals have the direct experience of
knowing someone gay. Many heterosexuals have learned that gay
people are just like them. They have learned that antigay stereo-
Separate but Equal
29

types are false. Although we sometimes forget, people in power—
judges, politicians, and religious leaders—are people too, and
they too are experiencing more contact with gay people. When
heterosexuals overcome their homophobia and heterosexism,
society becomes safer for people of differing sexual orientations
to coexist with them. Heterosexuals are an important and neces-
sary ally for lesbians, gay men, bisexuals, transgenders, transsex-
uals, and intersex people.
References
Bayer, R. 1981. Homosexuality and American Psychiatry. New York: Basic
Books.
Berlet, C. 1998. “Who Is Mediating the Storm? Right-Wing Alternative
Information Networks.” In L. Kintz and J. Lesage, eds., Media, Culture,
and the Religious Right. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp.
249–274.
Blumenfeld, W. J., and D. Raymond, eds. 1993. Looking at Gay and Lesbian
Life. Rev. ed. Boston: Beacon Press.
Bowers v. Hardwick, 106 S.Ct. 2841, 2843 (1986).
Boy Scouts of America v. Dale, No. 99–699 U.S. (2000).
“Buchanan Calls AIDS ‘Retribution.’” 1992. Boston Globe, February 28.
Childers v. Dallas Police Department, 513 F. Supp. 134 (N.D. Tex. 1981).
D’Emilio, J., and E. B. Freedman. 1988. Intimate Matters: A History of
Sexuality in America. New York: Harper & Row.
Gay Students Organization v. Bonner, 367 F. Supp. 1088 (D.N.H.), aff’d, 509
F.2d 652 (1st Cir. 1974).
Hooker, E. 1963. “The Adjustment of the Male Overt Homosexual.” In
H. M. Ruitenbeed, ed., The Problem of Homosexuality. New York: Dutton,
pp. 141–161. (Reprinted from Journal of Projective Techniques 21 [1959]:
18–31.)
Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Group of Boston, No.
94–749 (1995).
Katz, J. 1976. Gay American History: Lesbians and Gay Men in the U.S.A.
New York: Thomas Y. Crowell.
30
History of the Gay Rights Movement

Keen, L., and S. B. Goldberg. 1999. Strangers to the Law: Gay People on Trial.
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Khan, S. October 1998. Calculated Compassion: How the Ex-Gay Movement
Serves the Right’s Attack on Democracy. New York: Political Research
Associates, the Policy Institute of the National Gay and Lesbian Task
Force, and Equal Partners in Faith.
Kinsey, A. C., W. B. Pomeroy, and C. E. Martin. 1948. Sexual Behavior in
the Human Male. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co.
Kinsey, A. C., W. B. Pomeroy, C. E. Martin, and R. H. Gebhard. 1953.
Sexual Behavior in the Human Female. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co.
Marcus, R. 1990. “Powell Regrets Backing Sodomy Law.” Washington
Post, October 26, A3.
Marotta, T. 1981. The Politics of Homosexuality. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Mookas, I. 1998. “Faultlines: Homophobic Innovation in Gay Rights/
Special Rights.” In L. Kintz and J. Lesage, eds., Media, Culture, and the
Religious Right. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 319–328.
Nabozny v. Podlesny, 92 F.3d 446, 7th Cir. (1996).
One, Inc. v. Olesen, 355 U.S. 371 (1958).
Plant, R. 1986. The Pink Triangle: The Nazi War against Homosexuals. New
York: New Republic Books/Henry Holt.
Romer v. Evans, 517 U.S. S.Ct. 620 (1996).
Shilts, R. 1987. And the Band Played On: Politics, People, and the AIDS
Epidemic. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Stewart, C. K. 2001. Homosexuality and the Law: A Dictionary. Santa
Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Thompson, M., ed. 1994. Long Road to Freedom: The Advocate History of
the Gay and Lesbian Movement. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
“We’ve Come a Long Way . . . Maybe.” 2000. Frontiers 18, no. 22 (March
3): 12.
White, M. 1997. “Selected Quotes from the 700 Club.” In The Justice
Report. Special edition. Laguna Beach, CA: Soulforce.
Young, P. D. 1982. God’s Bullies: Native Reflections on Preachers and Politics.
New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
References
31


2
Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions
”B
ut I’m her partner,” screams Rose at the admitting nurse of
a large South Carolina hospital who has denied Rose the
right to visit her badly injured partner and their son. “I
want to see her and Justin now.” Rose shoves a copy of her
Vermont civil union certificate at the nurse. “We are married and
Ruth is my spouse and Justin is our son.”
“Is Justin your biological son?” asks the nurse.
“No, Ruth gave birth to him. But I’m legally his parent in
Vermont.”
“Do you have any legal documents showing that you have
the power of attorney over Ruth? Or adoption papers for Justin?”
the nurse continues. “If not, you cannot enter the hospital room,
and Justin will stay with Child Protective Services.”
“But we’re married,” cries Rose.
“Not in South Carolina,” retorts the nurse.
Although the names have been changed, this story is based
on an actual incident that occurred soon after Vermont adopted
its civil union for same-sex couples. A civil union confers most of
the rights and responsibilities for same-sex couples as does mar-
riage for opposite-sex couples, but only in Vermont. The specter
of same-sex marriage released a maelstrom of opposition in many
states, and the federal government enacted preemptive legisla-
tion otherwise known as Defense of Marriage Acts (DOMAs).
Gay marriages hit a nerve with many Americans, as do other
family issues, such as child adoption and child custody and gay
33

kids in school. However, for many lesbians, gay men, bisexuals,
and transgender people who face daily legal discrimination in
securing employment and a safe place to live, same-sex marriages
seem a far-off dream. In this chapter, we review some of these
controversies.
Actual Causes of Homosexuality 
and Numbers of Homosexuals
Two questions are repeatedly asked when the topic of homosexu-
ality is discussed: (1) What causes homosexuality, and (2) how
many people are gay or lesbian? These important questions are
often a source of conflict between gay activists and the religious
right, and are used to sway public opinion.
• What causes homosexuality?
Antigay: The National Association for Research and Therapy
of Homosexuality (NARTH), an organization committed to
changing sexual orientation, claims that homosexuality is caused
in males by poor relationships with their father, difficulty indi-
viduating from their mother, a sense of masculine deficit, and a
persistent belief of having been different from, and misunder-
stood by, same-sex childhood peers. NARTH does not give expla-
nations for lesbianism. The ex-gay movement of the religious
right claims that homosexuality is chosen as a sin against God.
Progay: The distant father, strong mother claim as the cause
of homosexuality has been discredited by psychoanalytic theory.
The American Psychiatric Association states:
No one knows what causes heterosexuality, homosex-
uality, or bisexuality. Homosexuality was once
thought to be the result of troubled family dynamics or
faulty psychological development. Those assumptions
are now understood to have been based on misinfor-
mation and prejudice . . . to date there are no repli-
cated scientific studies supporting any specific biolog-
ical etiology for homosexuality. Similarly, no specific
psychosocial or family dynamic cause for homosexu-
ality has been identified, including histories of child-
hood sexual abuse. Sexual abuse does not appear to be
more prevalent in children who grow up to identify as
34
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

gay, lesbian, or bisexual, than in children who identify
as heterosexual. (“APA Fact Sheet” 1994)
• How many people are homosexual?
Antigay: The number of gay people is very small, perhaps
less than 2 percent.
Progay: Estimating the number of lesbians, gay men, and
bisexuals is impossible. Many gay activists claim that approxi-
mately 6–10 percent of the population is homosexual. The pri-
mary estimation problems include underreporting, definition of
gay or homosexual, setting of studies, and ability of research to
construct an objective and representative sample.
Underreporting: “[Homosexuality] is one of the most difficult
things to measure,” says Tom Smith, director of General Social
Survey at the National Opinion Research Center (NORC). “It’s
personal and intimate, some people won’t admit to it, and its
practice is [legally] questionable in some states. Many people
won’t give a true response which leads to under-reporting”
(Giger 1991). Research by Clark and Tifft (1966) discovered
underreporting of homosexual behaviors by more than 200 per-
cent between what students stated on a written survey and what
they revealed during polygraph testing.
Definition: What is gay? What is homosexuality? Just exactly
what is being measured—the number of people who have a gay
identity or the number of people who engage in homosexual sex?
How many times does someone have to engage in homosexual
sex before she or he is considered homosexual? Do childhood
experiences count, or do only adult experiences result in a person
being categorized as gay? Is a gay identity the same as homosex-
ual behavior? What about feelings—are people who have homo-
sexual fantasies and feelings, yet never act on them, gay? Are
people who masturbate to same-sex images gay, even if they
engage only in opposite-sex sexual behaviors? As you can see,
how gay and homosexual are defined drastically changes
research results. Likewise, what is sex? The Bill Clinton/Monica
Lewinsky scandal demonstrated that there are varying views
about what constitutes sex and what does not. Thus, how one
defines sex also affects research results.
Kinsey, Pomeroy, and Martin’s (1948) famous study of sexu-
ality used a behavioral model for their definition—that is, they
defined sex as achieving orgasm and sexual orientation as the
ratio of heterosexual to homosexual behaviors. Although the
research was flawed, it represented an important milestone in sex
Actual Causes of Homosexuality and Numbers of Homosexuals
35

research and is where the infamous 10 percent figure representing
the number of people who were mostly homosexual came from.
The term gay is a modern word and reflects the politics of
people who identify with other homosexuals in their fight to obtain
equality with heterosexuals within a heterosexist society. Being gay
is not synonymous with engaging in homosexual behaviors, how-
ever. For example, the AIDS health community quickly faced the
situation of working with men who have sex with other men but
do not categorize themselves as gay. In fact, the health community
has created a special acronym, MSM (men who have sex with men)
for these men. Gay reflects the oppression of homosexuals. Most
people who engage in homosexual behaviors do not eventually
take on a gay identity. Thus, research that attempts to measure the
number of gay people is not reflective of the number of homosex-
uals or those who engage in homosexual behavior.
Setting: Our Western culture is heterosexist and homophobic.
Until recently, people accused of engaging in homosexual sexual
behavior faced prison terms or even death. Gay and fag bashings
are on the upswing. One third of the states still have sex statutes
that make homosexual behavior illegal. Very few cities or states
have laws that provide protection in employment, housing, child
custody, and other areas based on sexual orientation. Considering
these extremely negative environments, we can reasonably
assume that many, if not most, people who engage in homosexual
behavior will not be truthful to researchers.
Thus, measuring the incidence of homosexuality is depen-
dent on the definition of terms, the negativity of the environment
in which the research is conducted, and the truthfulness of the
respondents. Estimates as to the incidence of homosexuality (usu-
ally 10 percent or lower) should be suspected to be underesti-
mates (Friedman and Downey 1994; Michael, Gagnon, Laumann,
and Kolata 1995; Tremblay 1995).
The incidence of homosexuality is more than an item of
curiosity. Corporations, cities, counties, and states are considering
offering domestic partnership benefits to same-sex couples.
During planning for these extended benefits, the question of
additional cost comes up. So far, the experience of businesses and
governmental agencies that have granted these benefits has
shown the costs to be minimal. Very few same-sex couples take
advantage of the programs. In fact, often more opposite-sex cou-
ples avail themselves of the programs than same-sex couples.
Similarly, conservatives sometimes block research into lesbian
36
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

and gay concerns because they believe it may lead to affirmative
action and quotas in hiring. No national or major lesbian and gay
organization has called for affirmative action. Thus, the conserva-
tive concerns are unfounded, and this reason should not be used
to block legitimate research.
AIDS
AIDS is expected to surpass the Black Death as the world’s worst
pandemic. Since the early 1980s, at least 25 million people have
died from AIDS and 40 million people are HIV-positive. It is esti-
mated that 14,000 people become infected each day. In the United
States, approximately 900,000 residents are currently infected
with HIV, with an additional 40,000 people becoming infected
each year (“AIDS” 2002).
AIDS can be contracted only through the exchange of blood,
which includes blood transfusions; use of infected needles (pri-
marily sharing of needles between drug addicts); and sex.
Discussing AIDS transmission and drug use is controversial in
erotophobic (fear of sensuous feelings and behaviors) societies.
Fundamentalist Christians, Muslims, Jews, and many other con-
servative religions and cultures are erotophobic. Developing edu-
cational programs in these settings has been difficult.
The United States led the way in developing safe-sex pro-
grams. At first, educational pamphlets could not show the proper
use of condoms. Eventually, the pamphlets became more and
more sexually explicit. Still, there has been a conservative back-
lash. In 2002, federal inspectors embarked on a comprehensive
review of AIDS prevention grants. This occurred because a num-
ber of Republican politicians and religious right leaders felt some
of the prevention programs went too far. For example, a San
Francisco prevention agency sponsored two events called the
“Great Sex Workshop” and the “Booty Call.” Irate phone calls
were received in Washington claiming the programs promoted
promiscuity. Likewise, the mayor of St. Louis ordered the
removal of billboards that featured two bare-chested African
American men in an embrace, with the message “Before the love
begins, get tested. Know your HIV status” (Ornstein 2002, 1).
The AIDS groups claim that it is more effective to combine
prevention messages with positive images of sex. But critics are
uncomfortable with the explicit sex and would prefer messages
AIDS
37

that encouraged abstinence from anal intercourse. Dana Williams,
one of the people who developed the St. Louis campaign,
remarks, “People need to take their heads out of the sand and get
real about this issue” (Ornstein 2002, 1).
Iran, China, and other highly restrictive countries are in the
initial stages of developing their educational programs—and the
problems are daunting. In Iran, the word condom cannot be used.
The pamphlet designed by the Iranian Center for Disease Control
for adolescents says: “The best way to avoid AIDS is to be faithful
to moral and family obligations and to avoid loose sexual relations.
Trust in God in order to resist satanic temptations” (MacFarquhar
2002, 1).
China had a blood donation program that bought unscreened
blood, mixed together in vats, and resold it without testing. This
spread HIV quickly such that the city of Donghu has an infection
rate of 80 percent—the highest in the world. By late 2001, China
admitted having a “very serious” AIDS epidemic, with HIV cases
up by two thirds in one year. Experts expect that China will soon
be devastated by AIDS because of its large size, isolated commu-
nities, and culture that does not discuss sex or drug use.
Similar problems have stymied AIDS prevention programs
in Africa, Eastern Europe, the former Soviet Union (Maugh 2001),
and much of the Middle East, Mexico, and Latin America. Ninety-
five percent of new infections occur in the world’s poorest coun-
tries (“AIDS” 2002).
Antidiscrimination Statutes
Many cities and a few states have enacted antidiscrimination
statutes based on sexual orientation. The protections are often
limited to public employment, but some are more comprehensive
and extend to private employment and public accommodations.
As lesbians and gay men gained more protections, conservatives
and members of the religious right attempted to squash these
protections. A chilling example was the passage of Amendment 2
in the state of Colorado in 1992. This amendment rescinded all
existing antidiscrimination laws based on sexual orientation in
the state and precluded the adoption of future laws that would
provide protections against discrimination based on sexual orien-
tation. The U.S. Supreme Court reviewed the case in 1995 and
ruled that Amendment 2 violated the fundamental right of les-
38
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

bians, gay men, and bisexuals to participate in the political
process on an equal basis with other Coloradans.
This was an important ruling because similar attacks were
being mounted in other states. What was most revealing from the
entire process was the deeper understanding gained about the
motivation and strategies used by the religious right in mounting
its antigay campaigns. Correspondence between the lawyers and
leaders of the religious right showed that they understood that
antidiscrimination laws are meant to help stigmatized groups
attain status equal to the dominant group. These lawyers advised
against using the term special rights in the wording of the law
because it was obviously incorrect and would invalidate the law.
The term was therefore not used. However, the amendment spon-
sors purposely chose the motto “no special rights” in their adver-
tising campaign because of its impact on the minds of voters and
its ability to raise money (Keen and Goldberg 1998). The religious
right’s mantra “no special rights” is a deception of which its
members are fully aware. Because of the slogan’s effectiveness, it
will probably be used in future attempts to keep lesbians and gay
men from gaining equality with heterosexuals.
Most often, antidiscrimination statutes are enacted by leg-
islative bodies. These are sometimes overturned by public refer-
endum and then sometimes reinstated by courts. In the year 2001,
there were approximately 300 gay-related bills pending in state
legislatures. About one half of them were antigay. Gay and anti-
gay forces are acutely aware that the battle over gay rights has
moved from Washington to the states.
There is a common belief that once an antidiscrimination
statute is enacted, the problem of discrimination is solved and the
government aggressively protects the people. But just how effec-
tive are government agencies at protecting the rights of citizens?
Stewart (1996) obtained data from the California Department of
Labor Standards Enforcement (DLSE) concerning the outcome of
complaints filed with the agency claiming discrimination based on
sexual orientation in employment. Of the 372 cases disposed
within the first three years after enactment of an antidiscrimina-
tion law (AB 2601), 143 (40 percent) were dismissed, 98 (27 percent)
were abandoned, 97 (24 percent) were withdrawn, and 34 (9 per-
cent) were settled in favor of the complainant.
DLSE was not able to explain why 91 percent of the com-
plaints were not successful, and the department had no plan to
review the cases or to conduct a follow-up to determine if there
Antidiscrimination Statutes
39

was a pattern to the unsuccessful complaints. With only one full-
time investigator on staff for all of California reviewing all com-
plaints of labor law (not just sexual orientation discrimination),
DLSE had no idea how effective it was at enforcing the law. Yet
DLSE expresses pride in the quality of its investigations.
Lesbians, gay men, bisexuals, transgender, transsexual, and
intersex people need to be aware that antidiscrimination statutes
are mostly symbolic and reflect societal attitudes, not actual effec-
tiveness of enforcement.
Child Custody and Adoption
An equally volatile issue is the right of lesbians and gay men to
retain legal rights to their children or to gain custody of children
through second-parent adoptions or foster care. It has been esti-
mated that as many as one quarter of all gay men and one half of
all lesbians have been married at some time in their lives and
many of them have children (Gottman 1990; Patterson 1992).
Child custody is a real issue, and many same-sex couples want to
adopt children of their own. The desire to be a parent is not con-
fined to heterosexuals.
The hysteria over these issues originates with antigay stereo-
typing that homosexuals are unfit parents, that they molest chil-
dren, and that they will influence the child to be homosexual. Let
us look at these stereotypes.
• Lesbians and gay men are unfit parents.
Counterpoint: The research on children raised by lesbian
mothers or gay fathers reveals that there are no significant differ-
ences between these children and children raised in heterosexual
households. The intellectual development (Flaks, Ficher,
Masterpasqua, and Joseph 1995; Green, Mandel, Hotvedt, Gray,
and Smith 1986; Kirkpatrick, Smith, and Roy 1981), gender iden-
tity (Golombok, Spence, and Rutter 1983), sexual orientation
(Bailey, Bobrow, Wolfe, and Mikach 1995; Golombok et al. 1983;
Miller 1979), peer group relations (Green et al. 1986), and self-
esteem (Huggins 1989) are the same regardless of whether the
child is raised in a homosexual or a heterosexual family. Children
of homosexual parents do not suffer disproportionate amounts of
turmoil (Flaks et al. 1995; Weeks, Derdeyn, and Langman 1975) or
depression (Tasker and Golombok 1995; Pennington 1987).
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

• Homosexuals molest children.
Counterpoint: One of the major stereotypes used to denigrate
lesbians and gay men is that homosexuals molest children. This is
not true. Many studies have concluded that “gay men are no
more likely than heterosexual men to molest children” (Newton
1978, 42). For example, in response to the state of Colorado’s
attempt to deny rights to homosexuals with Amendment 2, Jenny,
Roesler, and Poyer (1994) reviewed the charts of all sexually
abused children seen in one year in a Colorado children’s hospi-
tal. The study revealed that children were abused by homosexu-
als only 0–3.1 percent—a rate significantly lower than expected.
From these studies, Groth and Birnbaum (1978) concluded that
children are unlikely to be molested by homosexuals. In contrast,
children are primarily (82 percent) molested by heterosexual part-
ners of a close relative of the child.
Many of the antigay stereotypes have been bolstered by 
the “research” of Paul Cameron. Since 1985, Cameron has self-
published a number of pamphlets purporting that most serial
killers, child molesters, and others who commit heinous crimes
are homosexual. His publications misrepresented the findings of
Groth and Birnbaum and contained his own methodologically
unsound research. Cameron came under investigation by the
American Psychological Association for breach of ethics and poor
research methodology. His membership was terminated. Still, he
continues to be a one-man propaganda machine of “scientific
research” that the religious right has appropriated for its antigay
agenda. Unfortunately, his exclusion from the APA made him a
martyr for the religious right. (For a comprehensive up-to-date
review of this topic, see the website maintained by Gregory Herek
at the University of California at Davis Department of Psychology: 
psychology.ucdavis.edu/rainbow/html/facts_molestation.html#
cameron.)
In June 2002, the Family Research Council (FRC) issued a
“report” claiming that gay men account for one third of all child
abuse cases (available at www.frc.org, Homosexuality and Child
Sexual Abuse, by Timothy J. Dailey, Ph.D.). The article, very formal
looking with many footnotes, gives the impression of being
authoritative. However, this is a case of the religious right pur-
posefully misrepresenting the findings of other researchers. The
conclusions of every respected academic researcher cited in the
study are opposite to the statements made by the FRC. For exam-
ple, Kurt Freund has stated that “homosexuals are no more likely
Child Custody and Adoption
41

than heterosexuals to be attracted to children” (“Pathetic
Propaganda” 2002). Further, A. Nicholas Groth, one of the most
respected academic researchers on the topic, issued an angry let-
ter to the FRC in which he writes that he “objects to my name and
research being associated in any way, shape, or form to lend legit-
imacy to the views proposed in your paper” (Groth 2002). The
FRC misrepresents the work of respected scientist to further its
hateful goals.
• Homosexual parents will make their children homosexuals.
Counterpoint: The sexual orientation of the parent has no
influence on the gender identity of the child (Green 1978) or on
his or her independence (Steckel 1987). Children prefer sex-typed
toys consistent with their biological gender regardless of their
parent’s sexual orientation (Hoeffer 1981). There is ample evi-
dence that the sexual orientation of the parent has no influence on
the sexual orientation of the child (Bailey et al. 1995; Flaks et al.
1995; Miller 1979; Tasker and Golombok 1995).
Antigay stereotypes are false and have been used to oppress
lesbians and gay men. These stereotypes are slowly fading away.
For example, the American Academy of Pediatrics (“Co-parent”
2002) recently came out in support of same-sex couples adopting
children. These important findings are making their way into
court decisions and legislative debate.
Child Custody
Child custody and visitation issues arise when there are compet-
ing interests between adults in regard to their legal relationship to
children. The most common dispute regarding child custody
comes about during divorce. All states use the “best interest of the
child” as the rule guiding their decisions. Such a rule is obviously
vague and open to a wide range of interpretations. Courts have
developed a list of factors to determine what is best for the child
and have shown bias toward keeping children in conventional,
heterosexual, middle- or upper-class homes.
When one or both parents are lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans-
gender, transsexual, or intersex, the court considers this informa-
tion. Historically, courts have held many of the antigay stereo-
types discussed previously and have taken a narrow view of sex-
ual orientation—usually awarding custody to the heterosexual
parent regardless of how abusive he or she may be. Courts are
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

slowly taking a more moderate view and are allowing placement
of children with homosexual parents, but only if the parents are
“parents first,” that is, the parent does not “flaunt” his or her
homosexuality. Parents who are politically active in the gay com-
munity or have a live-in lover have often been denied custody or
visitation rights with their children.
For example, Colorado district judge Thomas Curry barred a
bisexual father from taking his nine-year-old daughter to
Metropolitan Community Church (a predominantly gay church)
or from having overnight guests. The mother, who belonged to a
conservative Christian church, was not ordered to adhere to simi-
lar restrictions. The father fought back, and in 2001 the Colorado
court of appeals reversed the lower court ruling, stating that par-
enting time in custody cases may not be restricted based on sexual
orientation. This is the first time a higher court has ruled on the
legitimacy of child custody in relation to lesbian or gay parents.
At the same time this decision was made, in another part of
the country, Alabama Supreme Court chief justice Roy Moore
concurred with a unanimous decision to deny custody of three
children to their lesbian mother and stated that homosexuality is
“an inherent evil, and if a person openly engages in such a prac-
tice, that fact alone would render him or her an unfit parent”
(Bohling 2002). Thus, local law and opinion have a significant
impact on the success of lesbians and gay men in retaining cus-
tody of their children.
Adoption
The laws concerning adoption of children by lesbians and gay
men and same-sex couples are rapidly changing. Often referred
to as “second-parent adoptions” or “coparent adoptions,” these
are a new development in the law. Here, one partner of a same-
sex couple adopts the child of the other partner, who is the legal
parent—similar to stepparent adoptions. Courts have had diffi-
culty with these arrangements because the act of adopting a child
has historically terminated the rights of the legal parent (Clark
1988). Some courts still do not recognize these types of adoptions.
A few states allow joint adoptions. These are adoptions in
which two people simultaneously adopt a child who is not legally
related to either person. Courts have recognized that having two
parents provides a safety for children that is absent when there is
only one parent. However, there is still much controversy about
Child Custody and Adoption
43

allowing children to be adopted into a lesbian or gay male family.
For example, the Utah state legislature in March 2000 and the
state of Mississippi in May 2000 both approved a ban on all adop-
tions by unmarried couples. This was the first time since 1988 that
a state approved a bill to restrict the rights of lesbians and gay
men to adopt or foster children (Freiberg 2000). In that same year,
eight similar bans in other states were eliminated. This left only
Florida, Arkansas, Utah, and Mississippi with legislation pro-
hibiting adoptions and foster care by lesbians and gay men.
Interestingly, Mississippi’s ban went further, not only banning
same-sex couples from adopting but also refusing to recognize
gay adoptions performed in other states.
Domestic Partnership
Domestic partnership programs provide some of the legal and
financial benefits of marriage to couples who are not married.
Domestic partnership programs vary tremendously in what they
provide and in who qualifies. Sometimes they apply only to
same-sex couples; other times they apply to both opposite-sex
and same-sex couples. In 2002, California enacted the most com-
prehensive domestic partnership program (AB 25) in the United
States, a program that confers virtually all the same rights as mar-
riage.
Many large businesses have instituted domestic partnership
benefit programs for partners of same-sex employee couples.
Benefit programs are a tool to attract and retain employees. By
providing employment benefits only to married couples, compa-
nies ignore the desires and needs of same-sex couples. It is simply
an issue of fairness. Employment benefits have monetary value
(up to 40 percent of an employee’s salary can come from benefits),
and granting them only to traditional married employees gives
these employees financial benefits that are unavailable to
employees in same-sex relationships. It is expected that more
companies will provide benefits to their gay and lesbian employ-
ees.
But not all steps with domestic partnership are forward. For
example, when the city of San Francisco instituted a new law in
1997 requiring all companies doing business with the city to
extend domestic benefits to same-sex partners of employees, the
Salvation Army refused to do so and lost a $3.5 million contract.
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

In 2001, the Salvation Army’s Western Corporation, which covers
thirteen states, decided to extend domestic partner benefits to
same-sex partners of employees. Religious conservatives, headed
by the American Family Association, claimed that “homosexual
relationships are not legitimate in God’s eyes,” and asked mem-
bers to contact the Salvation Army to persuade it to change the
policy (www.afa.net/activism/aa110701.asp). The pressure
worked and the Salvation Army rescinded its domestic partner-
ship program two weeks later.
Sometimes it is argued that implementing domestic partner-
ship benefits for same-sex couples will cost too much. But cities
and businesses have not found this to be true. For example,
Home Box Office found that its health care program for gay part-
ners cost 17 percent less than for heterosexual partners. Likewise,
the cities of Seattle, West Hollywood, Berkeley, and Santa Cruz
found domestic partner costs to be equivalent to adding an equal
number of married spouses (Becker 1995). Although insurance
companies initially added surcharges to their premiums to com-
panies providing domestic partnership programs, most reduced
or eliminated these charges once they learned that costs were no
higher than for spouses of married employees (Report of the
CUNY Study 1993).
Employment and Housing
Gay marriage, adoption by same-sex couples, and other topics
make headlines, are fodder for late-night talk shows, and are used
for urgent requests from religious groups asking for donations to
stop the impending doom. For most lesbians and gay men, how-
ever, these are minor issues compared with the right to work and
have a place to live. Without the antidiscrimination statutes dis-
cussed in the previous section, lesbians, gay men, bisexuals, and
transgender people can be and are fired from their jobs and are
often denied housing or evicted from their homes solely for not
being heterosexual. These are survival issues that make all other
rights secondary.
Employment
The 1884 case of Payne v. Western Alt. R.R. established the doctrine
of “employment at will.” This doctrine allowed both private and
Employment and Housing
45

public employers to hire and fire without cause. Slowly, this
absolute doctrine has been modified by the Civil Rights Act of
1964 and by recent state and city enactment of antidiscrimination
statutes that included sexual orientation as a protected class. In
general, however, lesbians and gay men are not protected from
willful termination by private employers.
Historically, being lesbian or gay automatically disqualified
people from obtaining state licensing and other employment cre-
dentials. Many lesbians and gay men, once found out, have been
terminated from their jobs and have had their credentials
revoked. The McCarthy witch-hunts in the 1950s resulted in thou-
sands of homosexuals being fired from government employment.
Not until 1969 in Morrison v. State Board of Education did a
court rule that homosexuality itself could not be used as a cause
for termination. Instead, the court shifted the emphasis to the
employer (in this case a school district), who had to demonstrate
that the actions of open lesbian or gay employees affected their
ability to work efficiency. However, working in schools and with
children entails other risks that have resulted in some courts rul-
ing that homosexuality, in itself, is cause for dismissal. Even
today, lesbian and gay teachers run great risk of losing their jobs
if they are open.
The U.S. government is the single largest employer in the
United States. The U.S. Civil Service Commission in 1973 issued a
bulletin (December 21) informing federal agencies that they could
not deny employment to gay men or lesbians solely on the basis
of sexual orientation. Later this concept was expanded by the
enactment of the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978. Supervisors
were directed not to discriminate against employees on the basis
of conduct that does not adversely affect their performance or the
performance of others. Finally, in 1998, President Clinton signed
an executive order specifically banning discrimination based on
sexual orientation in the federal civilian workforce.
President George W. Bush proposed a “faith-based initiative”
that would funnel government money to religious organizations
providing social services. Many civil libertarians expressed con-
cern over the initiative, fearing these organizations would use
government money to promote their religions—a condition
expressly forbidden by the U. S. Constitution.
A glimpse of how this could affect homosexual people was
demonstrated in a Kentucky federal court. The Kentucky Baptist
Homes for Children (KBHC) fired its top therapist upon discov-
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

ering she was a lesbian. KBHC claimed that because she was a
lesbian, she would be incapable of inculcating Baptist views in
children. KBHC, which receives more than one half of its annual
$17 million budget from the state, argued that it had the right to
enforce its religious views, which meant excluding lesbian
employees. The woman sued, but the court upheld the firing.
According to Christopher E. Anders, legislative counsel for the
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), “There can now be no
question that if the Bush initiative is passed, the result will be
government-funded discrimination” (“Court Allows Baptist
Homes Firing” 2001).
Currently, the military and any government job that deals
with security or intelligence may legally exclude homosexuals
because they are considered security risks. The premise is that
homosexuals are susceptible to blackmail, an accusation disproved
by many military studies. Although the FBI, CIA, and other agen-
cies officially no longer discriminate against homosexuals, openly
lesbian and gay applicants are invariably turned down.
Unless expressly forbidden by state or local law, private
employers may discriminate against lesbian and gay employees
and applicants. There are no federal laws preventing discrimina-
tion in private business against employees based on sexual orien-
tation. A few states and many cities have enacted antidiscrimina-
tion statutes and ordinances that provide employment protection
for lesbians and gay men, and sometimes for gender.
Much of the controversy that surrounds housing and
employment issues for lesbians and gay men is the enactment of
antidiscrimination ordinances specifying sexual orientation.
Conservatives and members of the religious right see antidis-
crimination statutes as special rights, whereas lesbians and gay
men see them as necessary enforcement of basic constitutional
rights. Some conservative lesbians and gay men believe that
antidiscrimination laws are unnecessary, that the Constitution
already contains language providing protection for every citi-
zen’s right to housing and employment. But as any marginalized
group can attest, characteristics such as race, religion, nationality,
and now gender and sexual orientation have long histories of
being targeted for oppression by the dominant power structure,
which has failed to enforce constitutional protections. Thus, the
need to reaffirm these rights through antidiscrimination statutes
is necessary. Antidiscrimination statutes are not special or addi-
tional rights, but rather affirmations of existing rights.
Employment and Housing
47

Housing
Even with housing antidiscrimination statutes, courts have
allowed religious exemptions. For example, Alaska forbids dis-
crimination in housing based on marital status. Two Christian
landlords in Anchorage, Alaska, claimed that compliance with
city and state fair housing laws by renting to unmarried couples
would force them to “facilitate sin.” The Ninth U.S. Circuit Court
of Appeals ruled in 2000 (Thomas v. Anchorage) that the landlords
had the right to discriminate against tenants based on their reli-
gious beliefs. Further, “the court said the state and city discrimi-
nation laws unconstitutionally forced landlords to choose
between their businesses and their religious beliefs. The court
also said prohibiting landlords from asking about a prospective
tenant’s marital status violates freedom of speech” (Egelko 1999).
The decision was dismissed the next year because the case was
“purely hypothetical” since the landlords had never encountered
the actual situation. However, this case could be a harbinger of
things to come and has implications for lesbian and gay couples,
who are precluded from marriage.
Rent control or rent stabilization statutes can be used to pro-
tect same-sex couples. For example, a New York City gay man
faced eviction from his apartment when his lover of eleven years
died from AIDS. The survivor’s name did not appear on the lease.
Rent control provisions precluded landlords from evicting “either
the surviving spouse of the deceased tenant or some other mem-
ber of the deceased tenant’s family who has been living with the
tenant.” The man argued that he was “family,” and the court of
appeals agreed with that position (Braschi v. Stahl Associates Co.).
This was precedent setting and helped to establish the idea that
lesbians and gay men could form legitimate families.
Hate Crimes
Hate crimes are bias-motivated violence. When aimed at lesbians,
gay men, transgender people, or those perceived to be non-
heterosexual, these crimes are commonly referred to as fag bash-
ing or gay bashing.
The reported incidents of antigay violence increased nation-
ally almost 400 percent between 1988 and 1996 and continues to
rise (“Anti-Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgendered Violence”
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

2001). Of those hate crimes that were reported, 50 percent of all
victims were injured, 25 percent received serious injuries, and 2
percent were killed. The majority of bias crimes are directed at
individuals (95 percent)—not property (5 percent) as popularly
believed (“Anti-Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgendered
Violence” 1996). Furthermore, hate crimes are underreported. The
National Gay and Lesbian Task Force (NGLTF) reports “[Hate
crime] figures released today by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation demonstrate that local law enforcement entities
across the United States are massively underreporting hate
crimes based on sexual orientation, and show the necessity for
more effective legislation mandating that hate crimes be reported
to the federal government” (“FBI Hate Crimes Data” 2001).
In 1990 the federal government passed the Hate Crime
Statistics Act. The act provides for the collection of statistics on
hate crimes, including crimes based on sexual orientation.
Because of conservative forces in Congress, the act specifically
excludes taking action on sexual orientation hate crimes. Senator
Jesse Helms (R-NC) effectively blocked passage of the act in its
first form in 1986, claiming that “studying hate crimes against
homosexuals is a crucial first step toward achieving homosexual
rights and legitimacy in American society” (Yeoman 1996). At this
time, there is still no national hate crime prevention act that
increases punishment for bias-based crimes.
Perpetrators of antigay and lesbian violence tend to be
teenage or young adult males who are unknown to their victims.
Gay men and lesbians of color experience significantly more vic-
timization by white perpetrators. In antigay hate crimes, it is usu-
ally small groups of perpetrators who attack small groups of gays
and lesbians. During the attack, the perpetrators often verbally
condemn the victims based on religious grounds. Studies have
found that the potential to be a gay basher results from (1) learned
beliefs and religious biases against gays and lesbians, sometimes
(2) combined with a latent fear of being homosexual (Adams,
Wright, and Lohr 1996; Goleman 1990).
There is controversy concerning hate crime legislation. Some
people believe that some crimes are worse than others and there-
fore require special consideration. This special model is the
approach taken by the Hate Crime Statistics Act and most hate
crime statutes. Laws created using the special model impose
greater penalties for crimes in which bias hate is a major motiva-
tion. Here, judges can impose stiffer fines and longer sentences
Hate Crimes
49

for hate crimes that, for example, involve robbery than for rob-
bery itself.
However, some lesbian and gay legal advisers argue against
such a special model. They propose a neutral model that requires
rigorous enforcement of already existing criminal laws and
penalties, regardless of who the victim is. They argue that the pri-
mary problem facing lesbians and gays is a long history of police
and courts showing leniency toward people who commit crimes
against nonheterosexuals or of prosecutors who refuse to prose-
cute those who commit these crimes. These advocates point out
that enacting hate crime laws possibly encroaches on the First
Amendment right to free speech. Lesbian and gay activists and
legal thinkers understand the importance of free speech and are
hesitant to impose limitations in this area for fear the limitations
could be used against gay liberation.
Marriage
The hysteria that surrounded gay marriage in the 1990s and 2000s
stemmed from the possibility that Hawaii, Vermont, or both were
going to allow same-sex marriage. The constitutions of both
states provide antidiscrimination protections based on sex or gen-
der. The courts interpreted this to mean that disallowing same-
sex marriage was a form of sex discrimination. Before the Hawaii
Supreme Court could render a decision, however, the voters of
Hawaii enacted a DOMA amendment to their state constitution
that mooted the suit. Vermont took a different approach. Again,
the Vermont Supreme Court determined that barring same-sex
marriage was a form of sex discrimination. Instead of the court
mandating same-sex marriage, it referred the issue back to state
legislators to find a solution that would place same-sex relation-
ships on the same legal footing as opposite-sex relationships. The
legislators created a civil union designation for same-sex couples
that conferred all rights associated with marriage.
Civil unions are marriage in all aspects except in name.
However, civil unions extend only as far as the Vermont border.
Other states and the federal government do not recognize civil
unions. In the first case testing the validity of civil unions, the
Georgia appeals court ruled in January 2002 that civil unions are
not valid marriages in Georgia (“Ga. Appeals” 2002).
In April 2001, the Netherlands became the first country in the
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

world to legalize same-sex marriage. It is unknown if these mar-
riages will be recognized in the United States. A number of U.S.
citizens have been married in the Netherlands (which has a four-
month residency requirement), but none have come back to the
United States to challenge the law.
Religious conservatives have expressed a number of con-
cerns over allowing same-sex marriage. Some of these include the
following:
• Marriage should be reserved for monogamous male-
female attachments to further the goal of raising psychologically,
emotionally, and educationally balanced offspring.
Counterpoint: This statement is based on two false concepts.
The first is that the primary purpose of marriage is reproduction.
If this were true, then opposite-sex couples who cannot have chil-
dren, such as older couples or those who are infertile, would also
be barred from marrying. But our society does not stop these
classes of people from marrying. Thus, reproduction is not a nec-
essary condition for marriage. Second, the belief that only hetero-
sexual married couples can provide emotionally stable environ-
ments for children is false. Same-sex couples provide equally
healthy family environments for children, as demonstrated by the
recent decision by the American Association of Pediatrics (“Co-
parent” 2002) advocating same-sex-couple adoption of children.
• Government policy should encourage marriage and intact
families because they are the basic units of social order, stability,
and growth.
Counterpoint: Most lesbians and gay men would agree with
this statement. However, there is an underlying assumption that
only a traditional heterosexual family structure can fulfill this
role. This is not true. Many different family structures can pro-
vide order, stability, and growth. Same-sex marriages would help
provide legal stability for children in those families.
• Even domestic partnerships are reason for alarm. The
apparent evenhandedness of the law is deceptive. Heterosexuals,
who have the option of marriage, will not use domestic partner-
ship registration. Instead, this is a homosexual rights ordinance,
and it promotes behavior that increases the likelihood of trans-
mission of AIDS.
Counterpoint: Cities that have enacted domestic partnership
programs have found that a majority of enrollees are opposite-sex
couples, not lesbian or gay male couples. The belief that a homo-
Marriage
51

sexual “lifestyle” spreads disease is false, and suggesting that it is
true is one of the strategies used by the religious right to smear
the gay community.
• This is part of the gay agenda. Asking that persecution end
and demanding recognition and full marriage rights will lead to
demands for preferential treatment to counter historic discrimi-
nation.
Counterpoint: The gay agenda, if there is such a thing, is to
obtain equal rights, not special rights. Marriage is an institution
through which heterosexuals have obtained at least 1,049 federal
laws and regulations that are not available to same-sex couples. It
is heterosexuals, not lesbians and gay men, who have obtained
special rights. No gay activist organization, lesbian and gay stu-
dent group, or gay academic has ever requested special rights,
affirmative action, or preferential treatment. Linking the drive for
equal rights with affirmative action is misleading.
• Approving of gay marriage will lead to the sanctioning of
polygamy or worse.
Counterpoint: This has been a scare tactic used by religious
conservatives who claim that approving same-sex marriages will
create a domino effect allowing all kinds of marriages. This is
faulty logic and was used during the debate over interracial mar-
riages. Although white supremacists preached that society would
be ruined if interracial marriages were allowed, that did not hap-
pen. Similarly, allowing same-sex marriage will not destroy soci-
ety and is not related to the issue of polygamy. Whether
polygamy or other marriage forms are allowed will be deter-
mined by debate on the merits of the issue.
Every argument given to promote marriage applies equally
to opposite-sex or same-sex couples.
The Military
Gays in the military became a controversial issue when presiden-
tial candidate Bill Clinton announced that he would lift the ban on
homosexuals serving in the military if elected. Clinton won the
presidency and immediately launched an investigation into the
feasibility of lifting the ban. There was much resistance by the mil-
itary, Congress, and the public. Georgia’s Democratic senator Sam
Nunn blocked the president’s efforts and was able to insert into
the Department of Defense budget a policy that has become
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

known as “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell, Don’t Pursue,” which allows
gays to serve in the military only if they remain closeted.
The military has given a number of arguments for why gay
men and lesbians should not serve.
• Homosexuals are easily blackmailed and cannot be trusted
with classified information.
Counterpoint: In 1957 the secretary of the navy put together a
board chaired by Captain S. H. Crittenden, Jr., USN. The findings,
known as the Crittenden Report, examined the stereotype that
homosexuals are easy targets of blackmail by enemy agents who
might threaten to expose their sexuality. He found that “the num-
ber of cases of blackmail as a result of past investigations of
homosexuals is negligible. No factual data exist to support the
contention that homosexuals are a greater risk than heterosexu-
als” (Dyer 1990, xvi). There is no sound basis to the belief that
homosexuals pose a security risk
• Homosexuality is incompatible with military service.
Counterpoint: Besides the Crittenden Report, two more
research projects were commissioned by the military to analyze
the participation of lesbians and gay men in military service.
Again, both the 1988 and 1989 Personnel Security and Education
Center (PERSEC) reports found no reason to deny lesbians and
gay men the right to serve in the military (Sarbin and Karois 1988;
McDaniel 1989). The reports were buried, but leaks to Congress
and the press brought them, and the Crittenden Report, to the
surface.
• Homosexuals disrupt military morale, and they cannot be
effectively integrated into the service.
Counterpoint: Britain lifted its ban on homosexuals in the mil-
itary in 2000. With the exception of the United States, all member
countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization now accept
homosexual personnel into their military. These countries report
integrating lesbians and gays into their militaries successfully.
• Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell has been stabilizing for the military.
Counterpoint: The persecution of lesbian and gay military
personnel soared, instead of declining, after Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell
was implemented, and the rate of discharge from the military for
homosexuality increased by 73 percent (“New Gay Discharge
Figures Up” 2000). Likewise, antigay harassment increased. The
Servicemembers Legal Defense Network reported that antigay
harassment increased by 142 percent in 1999 over 1998 (“Antigay
Harassment” 2000). In March 2000, the Pentagon inspector gen-
The Military
53

eral released a report based on the responses of 72,000 troops sta-
tioned around the world. The survey found “disturbing” levels of
gay harassment in the U.S. military. Secretary of Defense William
S. Cohen said the survey showed that additional efforts were
needed to end the terrible harassment (Richter 2000).
A number of lawsuits were filed against the military in the
1980s and 1990s by lesbian and gay personnel discharged for
homosexuality. With few exceptions, the suits were not successful,
and the Supreme Court refused to review any of the cases that
directly challenged Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell. Courts often made illog-
ical and irrational decisions in this area. For example, the Ninth
Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals ruled in Holmes/Watson v. California
Army that the Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell policy was not discriminatory
since it treated “homosexuals and heterosexuals equally because
neither are allowed to say they are gay.” This utterly confusing rul-
ing shows to what extent courts are willing to avoid resolving con-
flicts over military policy. Until some president is willing to take
the lead, as did President Harry Truman with the integration of
African Americans into the armed forces, the military will remain
a dangerous place for lesbians and gay men.
Public Attitudes about Gays and Lesbians
There was a striking change in public attitude about key gay
and lesbian rights issues in the last decade of the twentieth cen-
tury. A very large study in 2000 was conducted by the University
of Michigan to measure public attitude on a number of key issues
(Burns, Kinder, Rosenstone, Shapiro, National Election Studies
2001). The research is part of a longitudinal study spanning more
than a decade. The study found:
• Public support for gay adoption had increased 15 percent
since 1992. In 2000, the American people were divided on
this issue, with 41.4 percent supporting gay adoptions
and 50.5 percent opposed (8.1 percent had no opinion).
• Public support for allowing gay men and lesbians to serve
in the military had increased 16 percent since 1992. In 2000,
approximately 71.2 percent of Americans believed gays
should be allowed to serve in the military, whereas 22.9
percent opposed this (5.9 percent had no opinion).
• Public support for enactment of nondiscrimination laws
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

based on sexual orientation had increased 17 percent
since 1988. In 2000, Americans supported this idea by a
two to one margin, with 63.9 percent in favor and 30.9
percent opposed (5.2 percent had no opinion). For the
first time since this question was asked, a majority of
Republicans (55.6 percent) supported enacting such laws.
• The National Election Studies ask respondents to rate
their feelings concerning various groups of people. In
1988, lesbians and gay men rated the lowest among all
groups (feminists, blacks, Hispanics, environmentalists,
Christian fundamentalists, people on welfare, and “illegal
aliens”), at 28.5. This improved in 2000 to 47.5, yet it is
still lower than any other group. Thus, there seems to be a
general thaw in feelings toward minority groups, includ-
ing lesbians and gay men.
The general improvement in the public’s attitude toward les-
bians and gay men shows up in the passage of antidiscrimination
statutes, acceptance of same-sex couples, and a multitude of
areas. However, as lesbians and gay men reach greater levels of
acceptance, members of the religious right feel greater rage and
marginalization and lash back with lawsuits, antigay legislation,
and violence.
Reparative Therapy
There are some who claim that sexual orientation can be changed.
An entire industry has sprung up to “help” homosexuals become
heterosexual. This effort is often referred to as reparative therapy,
through which the gay persons “brokenness of homosexuality” is
“repaired.” Usually conducted by ex-gay ministries, these pro-
grams are always religious based (Christian fundamentalist), tar-
get homosexuals who hate their sexuality and who want to be
heterosexual, and use a number of behavior modification tech-
niques including shock and aversion therapy, psychoanalysis,
“deprogramming,” and twelve-step model. Since the programs
are conducted under the guise of “religious counseling,” they do
not need to conform to professional or state psychotherapy
guidelines. Although these ministries publicly promise “change,”
they “acknowledge that celibacy is the realistic goal to which
homosexuals must aspire” (Haldeman 1991, 156).
Reparative Therapy
55

The ex-gay movement makes a number of claims:
• Reparative therapy is successful from 38 percent to 71.6
percent of the time.
Counterpoint: A number of reports issued by conversion pro-
grams make claims of high success rates. For example, in the 1994
PBS documentary One Nation under God, Exodus International,
the largest ex-gay organization in the world, claimed to have
treated hundreds of thousands of homosexuals and boasted a
success rate of 71.6 percent. Yet Exodus keeps no follow-up
records, does not make its records available to outside re-
searchers, and refuses to publish its findings in peer-reviewed
academic journals.
The founders of Exodus, Michael Bussee and Gary Cooper,
became infamous when they fell in love, divorced their wives,
held their own commitment ceremony, and became outspoken
opponents of the ex-gay movement—otherwise known as “ex-ex-
gay.” “Some people who went through the Exodus program had
breakdowns or committed suicide. . . . After dealing with hun-
dreds of people, [he hadn’t] met one who went from gay to
straight. . . . If you got them away from the Christian limelight . . .
not one person said, ‘Yes, I am actually now heterosexual’” (Mills
1999, 17). If Exodus wanted respectability, it would conduct lon-
gitudinal studies using respected academic researchers who
know how to structure objective studies.
Leaders of ex-gay ministries have a history of engaging in
sex with their clients. This has led to the demise of many groups
and attempted cover-ups by the sponsoring religious organiza-
tions. Perhaps the most notorious of these scandals involved
Colin Clark of the Seventh Day Adventist Church; he had sex
with his patients and the church tried to cover up the abuse
(Lawson 1987). Indeed, “the tradition of conflicted homosexual
pastors using their ministries to gain sexual access to vulnerable
gay people is as long-standing as the conversion movement
itself” (Haldeman 1991, 157). And as reported by Exodus
International, “[The program was] ineffective. . . . Not one person
was healed” (Newswatch Briefs 1990). These religious-based pro-
grams often exacerbated already prominent feelings of guilt and
personal failure among the counselees; many were driven to sui-
cidal thoughts as a result of the failed “reparative therapy”
(Haldeman 1991, 159).
In June 2001, two conflicting studies on the success rate of
reparative therapy were released. Robert Spitzer, a psychiatrist
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

from Columbia University and author of the 1973 resolution to
remove homosexuality from the APA list of disorders, reported
that “good heterosexual functioning” was achieved in 66 percent
of the men and 44 percent of the women in his study who under-
went reparative therapy. However, there are many problems with
this study. Many of the participants were suicidal and acknowl-
edged that they still had attractions to the same sex. More than 65
percent of the participants came from ex-gay ministries or
NARTH. The study was based on a single forty-five-minute
phone call, there was no control group, and Spitzer himself is a
member of NARTH and thus not an impartial researcher. In addi-
tion, Spitzer self-released the report and did not submit it for pro-
fessional review (Dezotos 2001).
At the same time, Shidlo and Schroeder presented their
research at the American Psychiatric Association’s annual confer-
ence. They found that 88 percent of interviewees were unable to
“convert” their sexual orientation, another 9 percent reported that
they were struggling or celibate, and just 3 percent reported being
successful and living contently as heterosexuals. Of the 3 percent
who reported successful change in their sexual orientation, all but
one made their living as “conversion” counselors, thus reflecting
possible bias. This was one of the few studies that attempted to be
objective, in which subjects were interviewed repeatedly over a
five-year period (“Spitzer’s Study” 2002).
In an older study conducted in the 1970s, behavioral psy-
chotherapist Birk claimed that 38 percent of his patients achieved
a solid heterosexual shift. Yet he stated: “Most, if not all, people
who have been homosexual continue to have some homosexual
feelings, fantasies, and interests. More often than not, they also
have occasional, or more than occasional, homosexual outlets,
even while being ‘happily married’” (Birk 1980). By what criteria
are these people heterosexual?
Claims of conversion are made by religious groups or
“researchers” from antigay organizations that do not use objec-
tive measures or methodology. Academic researchers consistently
find few, if any, people who change their sexual orientation.
“[There is] no scientific evidence . . . to support the effectiveness
of any of the conversion therapies that try to change sexual ori-
entation. These interventions do not shift sexual orientation at all.
Rather, they instruct or coerce heterosexual activity in a minority
of subjects which is not the same as reversing sexual orientation”
(“APA Fact Sheet” 1994).
Reparative Therapy
57

• People can be changed from homosexual to heterosexual.
Counterpoint:
According to the American Psychiatric
Association: “There is no published scientific evidence support-
ing the efficacy of reparative therapy as a treatment to change
one’s sexual orientation. . . . Gay men and lesbians who have
accepted their sexual orientation positively are better adjusted
than those who have not done so” (“APA Fact Sheet” 1994). In
1990 the APA stated “that scientific evidence does not show that
conversion therapy works and that it can do more harm than
good” (“Health Care Needs” 1994).
• The APA was taken over by gay activists who were respon-
sible for removing homosexuality from its list of mental disorders
in 1973.
Counterpoint: NARTH has claimed that the APA was
hijacked by gay activists and forced into removing homosexual-
ity from its list of mental disorders. But in fact, the decision to
remove homosexuality as a disorder was voted on by the entire
membership of the APA and other professional organizations
after careful review.
• Homosexuality is a mental disorder. Only when a person
becomes heterosexual can he or she achieve true emotional sta-
bility.
Counterpoint: The APA has stated “For nearly three decades,
it has been known that homosexuality is not a mental illness.
Medical and mental health professionals also now know that sex-
ual orientation is not a choice and cannot be altered. Groups who
try to change the sexual orientation of people through so-called
conversion therapy are misguided and run the risk of causing a
great deal of psychological harm to those they say they are trying
to help” (“Health Care Needs” 1994). All sexual orientations are
equally healthy.
Schools
Homosexuality and schools are a volatile mix. There always have
been and always will be homosexual students and teachers.
Schools have been dangerous places for lesbian and gay students
(and teachers). Academic researcher K. Carter estimated in 1997
that a child hears twenty-five antigay remarks each day in public
schools. When these are said in front of a teacher, 97 percent of
those teachers will make no effort to stop the comments.
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Sexual Harassment
The experience of Jamie Nabozny illustrates the dangers in
school. Nabozny was harassed in school. He was mock-raped by
two boys in front of twenty other students, urinated on in the
bathroom, and beaten so badly that he required surgery to stop
the internal bleeding. When Jamie and his parents complained to
school officials, they said he should “get used to it” because he
was homosexual. Nabozny sued and, for the first time, a court
found a school liable for the mistreatment (Nabozny v. Podlesny).
The school was fined almost $1 million. The court upheld the
notion that harassment of lesbian and gay students that is sexual
in nature constitutes sexual harassment. In 1997, the U.S.
Department of Education clarified that Title IX made schools
responsible for providing a safe environment for all students, that
is, an environment free from sexual harassment—including
harassment toward lesbian and gay students. Only now is this
ruling and its implications filtering down to local schools.
Equal Access Act
Religious groups wanting the right to conduct Bible study on pub-
lic school property during lunch and after school lobbied Congress
in the early 1980s. The debate in Congress demonstrated that such
a law could lead to lesbian and gay student groups wanting the
same right to assemble as other extracurricular groups on campus.
Although the bill in its original form addressed only the problem
of schools barring religious groups, it was amended to include all
extracurricular groups without preference.
In 1984, the Equal Access Act was passed, requiring schools
to give access to all groups equally. With the formation of lesbian
and gay clubs, some schools rebelled against the law. For exam-
ple, the Salt Lake City School District board cancelled all extracur-
ricular clubs and activities rather than allow lesbian and gay stu-
dents the same access. Unfortunately, many parents and students
blamed the lesbian and gay students for cancellation of the clubs
instead of blaming the school board.
Particularly since the Nabozny v. Podlesny case and the expan-
sion of Title IX, courts have been issuing injunctions against
school districts that try to block lesbian and gay students from
organizing. We should expect these conflicts to continue in the
future, particularly in conservative communities.
Schools
59

Prom
The prom is an example of an extracurricular activity that tradi-
tionally has excluded same-sex couples. In a celebrated case,
Aaron Fricke wanted to bring his friend Paul Guilbert to the
Cumberland High School 1980 senior prom. The principal denied
the request, saying that there was a “real and present threat of
physical harm” to the two boys. Fricke sued. At the trial of Fricke
v. Lynch, the judge acknowledged that the principal’s fears were
real, but that the school should have looked into ways of increas-
ing security and instituting other safety measures rather than
denying the couple the right to attend. The court recognized that
attendance at a prom is “symbolic speech,” much like marching
in a parade, and thus merits First Amendment protection. Aaron
and Paul were allowed to attend the prom.
Even though this groundbreaking case occurred more than
twenty years ago, lesbians and gay student are still sometimes
prevented from going to their prom. As recently as May 2002, Cy
Scott and his date, Paul Alexander, were turned away at the door
of the prom. It was claimed that there was an “unwritten rule”
barring the selling of tickets to same-sex couples at Robert E. Lee
High School in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. When Scott sued, the
principal, Jack Stokeld, apologized, claiming that the action was
not deliberate. Still, the young man was denied a once-in-a-
lifetime experience.
Sodomy
Antisodomy statutes are used by about one third of the states to
criminalize adult consensual sexual behavior. The statutes are
inconsistent in defining sodomy, however. In some states,
sodomy is defined as sex between people of the same sex,
whereas in other states sodomy is defined as sex between any two
people who are not married to each other. Even which sexual acts
constitute sodomy varies greatly from state to state. Some limit
sodomy to anal penetration, others include mouth-to-genital con-
tact, and still others only vaguely refer to “detestable and abom-
inable crimes against nature.” Antisodomy provisions are often
found in other laws covering indecent exposure, lewd conduct,
loitering, and disorderly conduct.
The term sodomy comes from the biblical city of Sodom. The
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Bible tells of its destruction by God because of the evils practiced
by its citizens. Some people believe homosexual sex was the evil
practiced in Sodom and Gomorrah. Although most current bibli-
cal scholars acknowledge that Sodom’s sin was the sin of inhos-
pitality, certain Jewish and Christian sects have interpreted the
destruction of Sodom as God’s wrath against homosexuals
(Blumenfeld and Raymond 1993, 173).
In 1961, Illinois became the first state to eliminate sex statutes
against consensual homosexual sex. It took another ten years
before another state followed suit (Connecticut). By the mid-
1980s, about one half of the states still had antisodomy statutes.
Antisodomy statutes were directly challenged at the federal
level in 1986. The U.S. Supreme Court in Bowers v. Hardwick
refused to strike down a Georgia law criminalizing sodomy. In a
five to four vote, the majority opinion in Bowers v. Hardwick stated
that there was no constitutional right to engage in “homosexual
sodomy.” This affirmed the right of states to enact and enforce
antisodomy statutes.
The battle over antisodomy statutes is being fought state by
state. In 1992, the Kentucky Supreme Court struck down its sex
statutes in Commonwealth v. Wasson. This was an important deci-
sion because the court rejected many of the points made by the
majority of judges in Bowers v. Hardwick and recognized that pri-
vacy extended to adult consensual sex regardless of whether it
was homosexual. Other courts have concluded that antisodomy
statutes violate the right to privacy and/or violate the equal pro-
tection laws.
A recent tragic case (Kansas v. Matthew Limon 2002) demon-
strates the conflict between antisodomy statutes and equal pro-
tection provisions. Matthew Limon, an eighteen-year-old boy
who suffers from intellectual disability and lived as a resident of
the Lakemary Center (a school for developmentally disabled
youths in Paola, Kansas), engaged in oral sex with another devel-
opmentally disabled resident of the school, who was fourteen.
When the younger boy asked Limon to stop, he did so. The case
came to the attention of police, and Limon was charged with
sodomy. The court found him guilty and sentenced him to seven-
teen years in prison.
Limon’s defense agreed that Limon had engaged in illegal
behavior, but that the sentence violated equal protection provi-
sions. In the state of Kansas, if a teen between fourteen and six-
teen engages in sex with a teen of the opposite sex who is no more
Sodomy
61

than four years older, the older teen can be prosecuted under the
“Romeo and Juliet Law” and imprisoned for not more than one
year. The law is routinely ignored. The defense argued that
because Limon engaged in same-sex behavior, he was given a
much harsher sentence that violated the state’s equal protection
provisions. The court responded by saying the U.S. Supreme
Court in Bowers v. Hardwick allowed states to treat homosexual
acts differently from heterosexual ones, and as such, there was no
violation of the equal protection provisions.
As of 2002, consensual sodomy was still criminalized in
about one third of the states. Some states are confused, having
enacted legal protections based on sexual orientation and at the
same time retaining their antisodomy laws.
Although antisodomy statutes are rarely enforced, they have
an impact on lesbians and gay men. Their existence makes homo-
sexuals de facto criminals. This often affects child custody deci-
sions, state professional licensing, employment, government
housing, and other areas that exclude “criminals.” Further, those
opposed to gay rights point to antisodomy statutes as justification
for their belief that homosexuals are criminals not deserving
equal treatment under the law.
Speech and Association
The First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution provides protected
status for the right of free speech and association. Many court cases
have upheld the right to discuss homosexuality; publish books,
magazines, pamphlets, movies, videos, and other forms of media
about homosexuality; form organizations both publicly and pri-
vately to promote and educate on homosexual causes; and more.
Probably the most important U.S. Supreme Court decision to
impact the gay community was made in 1958. At that time, homo-
sexual materials were automatically classified as “obscene, lewd,
lascivious and filthy” and were not allowed to be distributed by
the U.S. Postal Service. In a lawsuit brought by the ONE, Inc., the
Court ruled against the government and allowed gay materials to
be mailed through the U.S. postal system (One, Inc. v. Olesen). This
led to a boom in the publishing and distribution of lesbian and
gay information. The dissemination of knowledge concerning les-
bian and gay issues within the lesbian and gay community
helped reduce internalized homophobia and spur political organ-
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

izing. Similarly, the dissemination of knowledge about lesbians
and gay men helped heterosexuals overcome their own homo-
phobia and recognize that homosexuals should be treated fairly
and equally.
Currently, there are three areas of controversy surrounding
free speech and homosexuality. First, many people fear the
spread of an uncontrolled Internet. Some parents and religious
conservatives want to block information they believe is harmful
to minors. Attempts by Congress to regulate the Internet have
been struck down by the Supreme Court in ACLU v. Reno I and
ACLU v. Reno II. Most recently, the Court struck down the
Children’s Internet Protection Act (2002) as being an unconstitu-
tional infringement of the First Amendment. Legislators seem
unable to construct laws that clearly define “harmful,” “offen-
sive,” and “community standards,” or that include regulatory
schemes that can be upheld by courts. Further, there is no scien-
tific evidence that any information, including pornography, is
“harmful” to minors. ACLU Legal Director Stefan Presser states,
“The technology cannot block simply obscene speech, or speech
that is harmful to minors, without blocking an enormous amount
of speech that is constitutionally protected” (Caruso 2002).
Second, just what does it mean for lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, transsexual, and intersex people to come out and be
open about their sexuality? For example, the California Supreme
Court ruled in 1979 in Gay Law Students that a person’s affirma-
tion of homosexuality was analogous to expressing a political
view and as such was protected under the state labor code. But
what constitutes “affirming” one’s homosexuality? Does this
mean a person has the right to declare that he or she is gay? What
about answering questions about beliefs or personal life? Is that
protected?
With homosexuals, these First Amendment rights are unde-
veloped. For example, teachers who share that they are lesbian or
gay with students may be accused of acting unprofessionally and
promoting homosexuality. Often they will be fired from their job.
Interestingly, no city, state, or union contract has ever specified
what constitutes “professional” conduct by teachers. Thus, charg-
ing teachers with “unprofessional” conduct for sharing their sex-
ual orientation with students is a smoke screen for homophobia.
Courts have not been helpful in this area.
In some cases, teachers can declare they are gay but are not
allowed to answer any questions. If they do answer questions
Speech and Association
63

about their personal life, they are accused of talking about sex.
Because sex education is highly regulated by state boards of edu-
cation, the teachers’ employment will often be terminated.
Third, a current legal strategy being used by a number of reli-
gious individuals and groups is to claim “religious freedom” as a
way to circumvent antidiscrimination statutes. For example, J.
Barrett Hyman launched two civil cases in Kentucky in which he
claimed local human rights ordinances made him vulnerable to
prosecution because his antigay religious beliefs required him to
not hire gay employees. The U.S. District Court for Western
Kentucky rejected Hyman’s plea. Chief Judge Charles Simpson
wrote that the human rights ordinances “do not regulate the
beliefs of Dr. Hyman. . . . [They] merely seek to regulate the con-
duct of all individuals who are engaged in the employment of
others” (Hyman v. Louisville City and Jefferson County).
Similarly, some employees with conservative or fundamen-
talist religious beliefs have sued their employers for creating a
“religiously hostile work environment” when they hire openly
gay employees. Here, employees who hold antigay beliefs feel
they are antagonized by the presence of openly gay employees.
Taking their direction from sexual harassment laws and cases,
they claim that their First Amendment right to choose with whom
to associate is compromised by the company, which creates a hos-
tile work environment. So far, courts have rejected these claims.
The Terrorist Attacks 
of September 11, 2001
In the early morning of September 11, 2001, four commercial
jumbo jets were hijacked from airports in the eastern United
States. Two of the jets crashed into the twin towers of the World
Trade Center in New York City. Both towers collapsed a short
time later, killing thousands of people. A third jet crashed into the
Pentagon, causing much damage and loss of life. A fourth jet
crashed in the countryside of Pennsylvania, killing all on board.
It is thought that jet was headed for either the White House or the
Capitol and that a rebellion by passengers and crew caused the
plane to crash before hitting its target.
These attacks made by terrorists constituted the single great-
est attack ever made against the United States on American soil.
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

It was a day no one will forget and a day that profoundly changed
America.
Two days later, Jerry Falwell was interviewed on Pat
Robertson’s The 700 Club television show. There he stated:
ACLU’s got to take a lot of blame for this. And, I know
that I’ll hear from them for this. But, throwing God out
successfully with the help of the federal court system,
throwing God out of the public square, out of the
schools. The abortionists have to bear some burden for
this because God will not be mocked. And when we
destroy 40 million little innocent babies, we make God
mad. I really believe that the pagans, and the abor-
tionists, and the feminists, and the gays and the les-
bians who are actively trying to make that an alterna-
tive lifestyle, the ACLU, People for the American Way,
all of them who have tried to secularize America. I
point the finger in their face and say, ‘You helped this
happen.’
Pat Robertson nodded his head in agreement.
Immediately, other religious leaders distanced themselves
from these comments. There was an outcry from both conserva-
tives and liberals condemning these actions. Both Jerry Falwell
and Pat Robertson made public corrections and apologized for
their comments, but this only intensified the controversy. (For a
day-by-day accounting, see GLAAD New Pop, September 21,
2001 at www.glaad.org/org/publications/documents/index.
html?record=2846.)
Rush Limbaugh, a leading conservative voice in the United
States, responded by saying: “Suggestions of this kind are one of
the reasons why all conservatives get tarred and feathered with
this extremist, bigoted, racist, sexist, homophobic label or image
that isn’t true. . . . All I can say is I was profoundly embarrassed
and disappointed by their comments” (www://rushlimbaugh.
com/home/daily/site_091701/content/stack_a.guest.html; see
also Aravosis 2001).
After the terrorist attack, the U.S. government set up the
September 11 Victims Compensation Fund. It was designed to
give up to $1 million to each surviving family of someone who
had died in the attacks. But what constituted families? Many
debates occurred on the question of whether to provide compen-
sation to the surviving same-sex partner of a lesbian or gay man
The Terrorist Attacks of September 11, 2001
65

who had died in the attack. Reverend Louis P. Sheldon came out
and said, “[Red Cross aid] should be first giving priority to those
widows who were at home with their babies and those widowers
who lost their wives . . . and assistance should be given on the
basis and priority of one man and one woman in a marital rela-
tionship” (Edsall 2001). Eventually, some gay and lesbian sur-
vivors got compensation, while others did not.
References
ACLU v. Reno, 117 S.Ct. 2329 (1997).
ACLU v. Reno II, 31 F.Supp.2d 473 (E.D. Pa. 1999).
Adams, H. E., L. W. Wright, and B. A. Lohr. 1996. “Is Homophobia
Associated with Homosexual Arousal?” Journal of Abnormal Psychology
105, no. 3: 440–445.
“AIDS Set to Surpass Black Death as Worst Pandemic.” 2002. Reuters,
January 25.
“Antigay Harassment in Military Surges Even after Pentagon Announces
Zero Tolerance for Harassment.” 2000. Press release by the
Servicemembers Legal Defense Network, March 10. Available at
http://www.sldn-list@digitopia.net.
“Anti-Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgendered Violence in 1996.”
1996. New York: New York City Gay and Lesbian Anti-Violence Project.
“Anti-Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgendered Violence in 2001.”
2001. New York: New York City Gay and Lesbian Anti-Violence Project.
“APA Fact Sheet: Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Issues.” 1994. www.psych.
org/public_info/gaylesbianandbisexualissues22701.pdf.
Aravosis, John. “The List.”  Available at www.gayadvocacy.com. Cited
September 18, 2001.
Bailey, J. M., D. Bobrow, M. Wolfe, and S. Mikach. 1995. “Sexual Orien-
tation of Adult Sons of Gay Fathers.” Developmental Psychology 31: 124–129.
Becker, L. 1995. “Recognition of Domestic Partnerships by Governmental
Entities and Private Employers.” National Journal of Sexual Orientation
Law 1, no. 1: 91–104.
Birk, L. 1980. “The Myth of Classical Homosexuality: Views of a
Behavioral Psychotherapist.” In J. Marmor, ed., Homosexual Behavior: A
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Modern Reappraisal. New York: Basic Books, pp. 376–390.
Blumenfeld, W. J., and D. Raymond, eds. 1993. Looking at Gay and Lesbian
Life. Rev. ed. Boston: Beacon Press.
Bohling, J. 2002. “Harsh Judgment.” Frontiers (March 15): 28.
Bowers v. Hardwick, 106 S.Ct. 2841, 2843 (1986).
Braschi v. Stahl Associates Co., 74 N.Y.2d 201, 544 N.Y.S.2d 784, 543 N.E.2d
49 (1989).
Burns, J., D. R. Kinder, S. J. Rosenstone, V. Sapiro, and the National Election
Studies. 2001. “National Election Studies, 2000: Pre-/Post-Election Study.”
Data set of the Center for Political Studies. Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press.
Carter, K. 1997. “Group Monitors Pervasiveness of Comments: Gay Slurs
Abound, Students Say.” Des Moines Register, March 7, B3.
Caruso, D. B. 2002. “Judges Toss Out Online Porn Law.” Los Angeles
Times, May 31.
Clark, H. 1988. The Law of Domestic Relations in the United States. 2nd ed.
St. Paul, MN: West Publishing.
Clark, J. P., and L. L. Tifft. 1966. “Polygraph and Interview Validation of
Self-Reported Deviant Behavior.” American Sociological Review 31, no. 4
(August): 516–523.
Commonwealth v. Wasson, 842 S.W.2d 487 (Ky. 1992) (Wintersheimer, J.,
dissenting).
“Co-Parent or Second-Parent Adoption by Same-Sex Parents.” 2002. Pp.
339–340 of the policy statement of the American Association of
Pediatrics. Available at www.aap.org/policy/020008.html.
“Court Allows Baptist Homes Firing of Alicia Pedreira.” 2001. Press
release by the American Civil Liberties Union of Kentucky, July 24.
Dezotos, B. 2001. “The ‘Ex’ Files.” Frontiers (June 8): 22.
Dyer, K. 1990. Gays in Uniform: The Pentagon’s Secret Reports. Los Angeles:
Alyson Publications.
Edsall, T. B. 2001. “Minister Says Gays Should Not Get Aid.” Washington
Post, October 5, A22.
Egelko, B. 1999. “Court to Reconsider Ruling on Renting to Unmarried
Couples.” Associated Press, October 19.
References
67

“FBI Hate Crimes Data Woefully Underreports Crimes against GLBT
People.” 2001. Press release by the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force,
February 13.
Flaks, D. K., I. Ficher, F. Masterpasqua, and G. Joseph. 1995. “Lesbians
Choosing Motherhood: A Comparative Study of Lesbian and Hetero-
sexual Parents and Their Children.” Developmental Psychology 31: 105–114.
Freiberg, P. 2000. “Utah Approves Gay Adoption Ban.” Washington Blade
31, no. 9 (March 3): 12.
Freund, K., et al. 1984. “Pedophilia and Heterosexuality vs. Homo-
sexuality.” Journal of Sex and Marital Therapy 10 (Fall).
Fricke v. Lynch, 491 F.Supp 381 (R.R.I. 1980).
Friedman, R. C., and J. I. Downey. 1994. “Homosexuality.” New England
Journal of Medicine 331, no. 14: 923–930.
“Ga. Appeals Court Rules Civil Unions Not Equal to Marriage.” 2002.
Gay and Lesbian Times, January 31, 24.
Gay Law Students Ass’n v. Pacific Tele. and Tel. Co., 24 Cal. 3d 458, 156 Cal.
Rptr. 14, 595 P.2d 592 (1979).
Giger, B. 1991. “Is 10% Too High?” Frontiers 10, no. 4 (June 21): 43.
Goleman, D. 1990. “Studies Discover Clues to the Roots of Homo-
phobia.” New York Times, July 10. Also available at http://www. youth.
org/loco/PERSONProject/Resources/ResearchStudies/homophobia.
html.
Golombok, S., A. Spence, and M. Rutter. 1983. “Children in Lesbian and
Single Parent Households: Psychosexual and Psychiatric Appraisal.”
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 24: 551–572.
Gottman, J. S. 1990. “Children of Gay and Lesbian Parents.” In F. W.
Bozett and M. B. Sussman, eds., Homosexuality and Family Relations. Bing-
hamton, NY: Harrington Park Press.
Green, R. 1978. “Sexual Identity of 37 Children Raised by Homosexual or
Transsexual Parents.” American Journal of Psychiatry 135, no. 6 (June):
692–697.
Green, R., J. B. Mandel, M. E. Hotvedt, J. Gray, and L. Smith. 1986.
“Lesbian Mothers and Their Children: A Comparison with Solo Parent
Heterosexual Mothers and Their Children.” Archives of Sexual Behavior 15,
no. 2: 167–184.
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Groth, A. N. June 10, 2002. Personal correspondence to Family Research
Council. Copy of letter available from A. Nicholas Groth by e-mail at
a.n.groth@att.net or by mail at P.O. Box 690817, Orlando, FL 32869–0817;
(407) 351–2308.
Groth, A. N., and H. J. Birnbaum. 1978. “Adult Sexual Orientation and
Attraction to Underage Persons.” Archives of Sexual Behavior 7, no. 3:
175–181.
Haldeman, D. C. 1991. “Sexual Orientation Conversion Therapy for Gay
Men and Lesbians: A Scientific Examination.” In J. C. Gonsiorek and J. D.
Weinrich, eds., Homosexuality: Research Implications for Public Policy.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage, pp. 149–160.
“Health Care Needs of Gay Men and Lesbians in the U.S.” December
1994. A report presented by the Council on Scientific Affairs to the AMA
House of Delegates interim meeting.
Hoeffer, B. 1981. “Children’s Acquisition of Sex-Role Behavior in
Lesbian-Mother Families. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 51: 536–544.
Holmes/Watson v. California Army, no. 9615855 (9th Cir., April 7, 1997).
Huggins, S. L. 1989. “A Comparative Study of Self-Esteem of Adolescent
Children of Divorced Mothers and Divorced Heterosexual Mothers.” In
F. W. Bozett, ed., Homosexuality and the Family. New York: Hawthorn, pp.
123–135.
Hyman v. Louisville City and Jefferson County, U.S. Dist. Ct., Western Dist.
of Kentucky, Louisville Division, civil action 3:99CV-597-S (August 14,
2000).
Jenny, C., T. Roesler, and K. Poyer. 1994. “Are Children at Risk for Sexual
Abuse by Homosexuals?” Pediatrics 94, no. 1 (July): 41–44.
Kansas v. Matthew Limon, Kansas Court of Appeals No. 85, 898 (2002).
Keen, L., and S. B. Goldberg. 1998. Strangers to the Law: Gay People on Trial.
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Kinsey, A. C., W. B. Pomeroy, and C. E. Martin. 1948. Sexual Behavior in
the Human Male. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co.
Kinsey, A. C., W. B. Pomeroy, C. E. Martin, and R. H. Gebhard. 1953.
Sexual Behavior in the Human Female. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co.
Kirkpatrick, M., A. Smith, and R. Roy. 1981. “Lesbian Mothers and Their
Children: A Comparative Study.” American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 51:
545–551.
References
69

Lawson, R. 1987. “Scandal in the Adventist-Funded Program to ‘Heal’
Homosexuals: Failure, Sexual Exploitation, Official Silence, and
Attempts to Rehabilitate the Exploiter and His Methods.” Paper given at
a meeting of the American Sociological Association, Chicago.
MacFarquhar, N. 2002. “Condom as a Problem Word: Iran Grapples with
a Surge in AIDS.” New York Times, April 4.
Maugh, T. H. 2001. “Former Soviet Bloc Hit by Skyrocketing Rate of
HIV.” Los Angeles Times, November 29.
McDaniel, M. A. January 1989. Preservice Adjustment of Homosexual and
Heterosexual Military Accessions: Implications for Security Clearance Suit-
ability. Monterrey, CA: Defense Personnel Security Research and Edu-
cation Center.
Michael, R. T., J. H. Gagnon, E. O. Laumann, and G. Kolata. 1995. Sex in
America: A Definitive Survey. New York: Little, Brown.
Miller, B. 1979. “Gay Fathers and Their Children.” The Family Coordinator
(October): 545–552.
Mills, K. I. 1999. Mission Impossible: Why Reparative Therapy and Ex-Gay
Ministries Fail. Washington, DC: Human Rights Campaign.
Morrison v. State Board of Education, 82 Cal. Rptr. 175, 461 P. 2d 375 (Cal.
1969).
Nabozny v. Podlesny, 92 F.3d 446 (7th Cir. 1996).
“New Gay Discharge Figures Up 73% since ‘Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell, Don’t
Pursue’ First Implemented.” 2000. Press release by the Servicemembers
Legal Defense Network, February 1. Available at sldn-list@digitopia.net.
Newswatch Briefs. 1990. Gay Chicago Magazine 8 (February 22): 43.
Newton, D. E. 1978. “Homosexual Behavior and Child Molestation: A
Review of the Evidence.” Adolescence 13: 29–43.
One, Inc. v. Olesen, 355 U.S. 371 (1958).
Ornstein, C. 2002. “Explicit Ads Prompt Review of U.S. AIDS Prevention
Grants.” Los Angeles Times, January 4.
“Pathetic Propaganda: NGLTF Leader Blasts Anti-gay Group’s ‘Report’
on Gays.” 2002. Frontiers (June 21): 42.
Patterson, C. J. 1992. “Children of Lesbian and Gay Parents.” Child
Development 63 (October): 1025–1042.
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Payne v. Western Atl. R.R., 81 Tenn. 507, 519–20 (1884), rev’d on other
grounds sub nom. Hutton v. Watters, 132 Tenn. 527, 179 S. W. 134 (1915).
Pennington, S. B. 1987. “Children of Lesbian Mothers.” In F. W. Bozett,
ed., Gay and Lesbian Parents. New York: Praeger, pp. 58–74.
Report of the CUNY Study Group on Domestic Partnerships. 1993. New York:
City University of New York.
Richter, P. 2000. “Armed Forces Find ‘Disturbing’ Level of Gay
Harassment.” Los Angeles Times, March 25, A1.
Sarbin, T. R., and K. E. Karois. December 1988. Nonconforming Sexual
Orientation and Military Suitability. Monterey, CA: Defense Personnel
Security Research and Education Center.
“Spitzer’s Study Is Biased and Unscientific.” 2002. Frontiers (June 8): 51.
Steckel, A. 1987. “Psychosocial Development of Children of Lesbian
Mothers.” In F. W. Bozett, ed., Gay and Lesbian Parents. New York: Prae-
ger, pp. 75–85.
Stewart, Chuck. 1996. “How Effective Is the Department of Labor
Standards Enforcement at Protecting Our Rights under AB 2601?” Edge
341 (August 7): 30.
Tasker, F., and S. Golombok. 1995. “Adults Raised as Children in Lesbian
Families.” American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 65: 203–215.
Thomas v. Anchorage Equal Rights Commission, No. 97–35220 (August 4,
2000).
Tremblay, P. J. 1995. “The Homosexuality Factor in the Youth Suicide
Problem.” Paper presented at the Sixth Annual Conference of the Cana-
dian Association for Suicide Prevention, Banff, Alberta, Canada, October
11–14.
Weeks, R. B., A. P. Derdeyn, and M. Langman. 1975. “Two Cases of
Children of Homosexuals.” Child Psychiatry and Human Development 6:
26–32.
Yeoman, B. 1996. “Out.” Available at http://www.out.com/out-cgi-bin/
article?a=9605/hesse.
References
71


3
Chronology
U
ntil recently, history courses amounted to little more than
reading about the activities of wealthy white men who en-
gaged in war against one another. Rarely did the histories and
lives of people of color or women appear, and if they did, it was
as a sidebar in textbooks and presented in relation to men. Homo-
sexuality was completely ignored unless it pertained to particular
“scandals.”
The civil rights movement and women’s rights movement in
the 1960s and 1970s brought significant changes to historical text-
books. The process of consciousness-raising initiated by the
women’s movement included reclaiming women’s history—a
process adopted by other marginalized groups, including les-
bians and gay men.
Even though people such as U.S. archivist Jim Kepner pri-
vately collected material on the early American gay movement,
many of the current lesbian and gay historical collections did not
begin until the aftermath of the Stonewall Riots. The Lesbian Her-
story and Archives, founded in 1973, and the San Francisco Les-
bian and Gay History Project, begun in 1977, are examples of two
new collections. Now lesbian and gay archives can be found at
most universities, all around the country, and around the world.
Nevertheless, deciding on which events to include in this
chapter is problematic. Before the twentieth century, there were
virtually no writings, either personal letters or books, that in-
cluded explicit sexual descriptions. We have very little informa-
tion about the actual lives of people in earlier times. Identifying
someone as gay or lesbian is exceedingly difficult. We mostly
have court documents of people who were arrested and con-
73

victed of sexual crimes or the passage of legislation criminalizing
sodomy. Gay identity as an idea and a term is a decidedly mod-
ern invention and cannot be properly applied to people of earlier
cultures and times.
Since Stonewall, and particularly since the mid-1980s, gay
rights have come to the forefront of world politics. Every day
there is some act of gay protest, opposition to gay rights, laws be-
ing passed or rescinded that specifically identify sexual orienta-
tion. Thus, any chronology, including this one, will be incom-
plete. Readers are encouraged to use this list as a starting point in
their own research.
Homosexuality Prior to 
the Nineteenth Century
Until the Industrial Revolution, the lives of most people were un-
changing. The development of steam power, the use of fossil fu-
els, and the invention of electricity were technical developments
that increased the ability of humans to communicate and be pro-
ductive. These events occurred during the 1800s. Before that,
most people worked on farms. A farmer in seventeenth-century
England would be virtually indistinguishable from a farmer in
C.E. 180 Rome or a farmer in Egypt or China or Africa in 2000
B.C.E. Cultures slowly evolved and most accepted homosexuality.
In general, as long as a person fulfilled his or her familial obliga-
tions of producing children, the gender of sexual partners was
relatively immaterial.
Native Americans, Polynesians, 
Indians, Asiatic Eskimos
Before the influence of Christianity, many of these societies saw
sex as a gift from the spirit world. In general, the gender of sex-
ual partners was unimportant and homosexuality was accepted.
Also accepted were transgender people who adopted the behav-
iors and clothing of both men and women. Known as berdaches
(also as yirka-la ul, mahu, hijras), they were thought to have two
spirits and often held the position of teacher and shaman in these
societies.
74
Chronology

Amazons
When explorer Pedro de Magalhaes de Gandavo explored north-
eastern Brazil in 1576, he discovered women who imitated men,
wore their hair like men, and had another woman as a wife. He
was impressed by these women and, in tribute, named the river
that flowed through the area “River of the Amazons” in reference
to the ancient Greek legend of women warriors. At least thirty-
three North American cultural groups included Amazons in their
societies. Other Amazon societies could be found around the
world and in other times.
Institutionalized Homosexuality
Throughout history and into the modern age, many societies in-
stitutionalized homosexual behaviors and relationships. Such
cultures included seventeenth-century Mayan society, Buddhist
monks, the samurai class of early Japan, and Melanesia in south-
ern New Guinea. In these societies, all members engaged in
homosexual relationships for the majority of their lives.
Ancient Greece
Sex for the Greeks was mostly value neutral. Exclusive homo-
sexuality was discouraged. Sexual relationships between older
men and young boys were considered a crucial part of the
younger man’s maturation process. Not much is known of les-
bianism except for a limited number of poems written by Sappho
extolling the virtues of love between women.
Ancient Rome
There is widespread evidence of homosexual behavior being ac-
cepted in the republic and early empire. Neither the Romans nor
Greeks identified homosexuality as a problem. Around the third
century C.E., due to the influence of Christianity, Rome began to
enact a series of laws regulating various aspects of homosexual
relationships.
China
For 300 years beginning in the third century B.C.E., many historical
documents show that homosexuality was accepted, particularly
among the ruling class. It is from these stories that common euphe-
Homosexuality Prior to the Nineteenth Century
75

misms for male homosexual love, fen tao zhi ai (literally, “the love of
shared peach”) and duanxiu (literally, “the cut sleeve”), came.
The Roman Catholic Church and the 
Twelfth-Century European Transformation
For most of the first thousand years of the Roman Catholic
Church, homosexual marriages were sanctioned by church ritual.
Unlike heterosexual ceremonies, which were mostly about prop-
erty rights and were held outdoors, gay marriages were identi-
fied with love and held inside the church. But by the twelfth cen-
tury, the church solidified its hold over Europe and Thomas
Aquinas constructed a framework in which homosexual acts
were classified as less worthy than heterosexual ones. In fifty
short years, from 1250 to 1300, homosexuality went from being
completely legal in most of Europe to meriting the death penalty.
Ming Dynasty, 1368–1644
Homosexuality was tolerated in China as long as it was not an ex-
clusive sexual expression and as long as men fulfilled their famil-
ial procreative duties. When the Manchu entered the city in the
summer of 1644, overthrowing the Ming dynasty, the first male
homosexual rape law was enacted and male homosexuality was
severely punished.
Russia
There is much evidence that male homosexuality was widespread
and tolerated in all strata of Russian society prior to the western-
ization reforms of Peter the Great (early eighteenth century). The
first law penalizing consensual male homosexuality was enacted
in 1706 and required burning at the stake. Peter the Great (who
was bisexual) mitigated the penalty, and there are no known in-
stances of its application. The criminalization of male homo-
sexuality came later, under the brutal rule of Nicolas I, when Ar-
ticle 995 was enacted in the legal code of 1832.
United States
1610
The Virginia Colony passes the first antisodomy law in
America. It requires the death penalty for offenders and
does not include women in its definition of “sodomites.”
76
Chronology

1624
Richard Cornish, master of the ship Ambrose, is executed
in Virginia Colony by hanging for alleged “buggery” of
his indentured servant, William Cowse, ship steward.
1629
Thomas/Thomasina Hall is proclaimed by the governor
to be both “a man and a woman” and ordered to wear ar-
ticles of clothing appropriate for each sex.
Reverend Francis Higginson discovers “5 beastly
Sodomiticall boyes [sic], which confessed their wicked-
ness not to be named” on a ship bound for New England.
The incident is reported to the governor of the Massa-
chusetts Bay Colony, who sends the boys back to England
for punishment. At that time, males over fourteen years
of age could be hanged for sodomy. It is not known what
happened to the boys.
1641
The Massachusetts Bay Colony includes sodomy as a
capital crime in its newly adopted code of laws. It defines
sodomy as “man lying with mankind as he lies with a
woman”—wording taken directly from Leviticus 20:13.
1646
“Jan Creoli, a negro” in New Netherland is executed by
choking for engaging in sodomy. Ten-year-old Manuel
Congo, whom Creoli allegedly sodomized, is flogged in
public.
1649
Sarah Norman and Mary Hammond, two married
women, are charged with lewd behavior. Hammond,
who is younger, has her charges dropped. Norman re-
ceives a warning that her punishment will be greater if
there are any subsequent charges.
1673–
On his voyage down the Mississippi River, Father
1677
Jacques Marquette recounts that some Indians assume
the garb of women, which they wear throughout their
lives. Many other travelers to the American frontier make
similar observations.
1720
By this time, every colony has adopted a law making
sodomy a capital offense.
Homosexuality Prior to the Nineteenth Century
77

1778
Baron Frederich von Steuben is the first soldier known to
be dismissed from the U.S. military for engaging in
homosexuality. Steuben was recognized as one of Eu-
rope’s greatest military minds and was engaged by the
U.S. military to train the disparate armies of the thirteen
colonies. He was discovered in bed with Lieutenant Gott-
hold Frederick Enslin.
1848
The first women’s rights convention is held at Seneca
Falls, New York. Susan B. Anthony and other women are
ejected from the convention, propelling them into the na-
tional limelight.
1860
Walt Whitman publishes his homoerotic Leaves of Grass.
The Homophile Movement
The homophile movement is marked by the medicalization of
homosexuality and an increase in public discourse on the topic.
1869
Karoly Maria Benkert (who uses the pseudonym K. M.
Kertbeny), a Hungarian physician, coins the term homo-
sexual. The word heterosexual does not appear for another
ten years. Heterosexuality initially is used to denote a
sexual perversion.
1865–
At least 100,000 women form a community and political
1935
movement that resists marriage in the districts of Pearl
River Delta, Hong Kong. The sou hei vows to remain sin-
gle and forms emotional and physical bonds only with
her “sworn sisters.”
1885
Homosexual acts are recriminalized by the British Parlia-
ment.
1896
The first periodical addressing the issue of homo-
sexuality, Der Eigene (“The Community of the Special”), is
published in Germany.
Two women hug and kiss for the first time on an Ameri-
78
Chronology

can stage in the play A Florida Enchantment. The scene is
so controversial (although the play is not lesbian in con-
tent) that ushers offer ice water during intermission to
audience members who feel faint.
1897
The Scientific-Humanitarian Committee is founded by
Magnus Hirschfeld, Max Sphor, and Eric Oberg in Ger-
many.
Havelock Ellis, English sexologist, publishes Sexual Inver-
sion. This book is considered the first book in English to
treat homosexuality as a natural condition, not as an ill-
ness or crime.
1901
New York politician Maury Hall dies and is discovered to
have been a woman passing as a man.
1908
English writer Edward Carpenter publishes his book The
Intermediate Sex. It is his most influential book on gay 
issues.
Edward Stevenson releases The Intersexes, the first review
of gay issues within the United States.
1912
A group of “unorthodox women” begins to meet at Polly
Halliday’s restaurant in York City. The group, Hetero-
doxy, meets bimonthly and has among its membership
many prominent lesbians, including Helen Hall,
Katharine Anthony, Dr. Sara Josephine Baker, and Elisa-
beth Irwin. Heterodoxy continues to meet until the 1940s.
1914
A dictionary of criminal slang published in Portland,
Oregon, describes the word faggot for the first time as re-
ferring to male homosexuals.
1916
For the first time in the United States, the Articles of War
make homosexuality and the intent to commit sodomy in
the U.S. military capital crimes.
1919
The Institute for Sexual Research is established by Mag-
nus Hirschfeld in Berlin. It is one of the world’s first or-
ganizations to explore sexual topics from a scientific
The Homophile Movement
79

standpoint. Hirschfeld becomes aware of the need to for-
mally organize to help reform attitudes and laws con-
cerning homosexuality. In 1921 he establishes the World
League for Sexual Reform, whose membership grows to
130,000 people worldwide. It is through the league that
Hirschfeld campaigns in German courts and legislature
for the overturn of Paragraph 175—the legal code that
criminalizes homosexual behaviors.
The U.S. Navy, under orders from Assistant Secretary of
the Navy Franklin Roosevelt, uses a squad of young en-
listed men to search for “sexual perverts” at the Newport
Rhode Island Naval Training Station. Sixteen civilians and
twenty sailors are arrested on morals charges and prose-
cuted by naval and municipal authorities.
1920–
The Harlem Renaissance heralds an unprecedented
1935
flourishing of African American culture. Many lesbian
and gay writers, artists, and musicians are central to this
cultural explosion. These include Claude McKay, Bessie
Smith, Langston Hughes, Countee Cullen, Ma Rainey,
Bruce Nugent, Alain Locke, and Ethel Waters.
1923
Sholom Asch’s God of Vengeance opens on Broadway. It is
the first play with a lesbian content to reach Broadway. It
was originally written in Yiddish and first produced in
Berlin in 1907.
1924
Inversions, the first gay French journal, is founded.
Henry Gerber and others found the Society for Human
Rights in Chicago. It is the first gay rights group in the
United States. It survives only a short time. It publishes
two issues of Friendship and Freedom, its gay liberation
magazine (the first in the country), before police confis-
cate them. The members of the society are arrested and
imprisoned.
1926
Bruce Nugent’s narrative poem “Smoke, Lilies, and Jade”
is published in the periodical Fire! This poem is consid-
ered to be the first published piece about homosexuality
to be written by an African American.
80
Chronology
1919,
cont.

1927
Mae West writes and produces The Drag, the first play
produced in the United States with a gay male content. It
closes before reaching Broadway.
1929
The German constitution is modified by the removal of
Paragraph 175. This will prove to be a hollow victory for
Magnus Hirschfeld and the World League for Sexual Re-
form as the Nazis will soon assume power and recrimi-
nalize homosexuality (in 1934).
Radclyffe Hall’s lesbian novel The Well of Loneliness is
published by Covici-Friede in New York. The publisher is
convicted of obscenity; the conviction is later overturned.
1930
The Motion Picture Production Code is enacted by Hol-
lywood studios. It prohibits all references to homo-
sexuality or “sexual perversion” in movies. The code is
strengthened in 1934 under pressure from the Catholic-
led Legion for Decency, which is influential until the
code’s revision in the 1960s.
1933
Hirschfeld’s Institute for Sexual Research is ransacked by
Nazi students and destroyed. Vast collections of library
and artistic works are burned.
1934
Lillian Hellman’s play The Children’s Hour opens on
Broadway. It escapes the censors because of its moralistic
ending: the lesbian character kills herself.
1941–
Almost 10,000 enlisted personnel in the U.S. military
1945
receive dishonorable discharges for homosexuality. These
are called “blue discharges” because the orders are typed
on blue paper.
1942
The U.S. military issues official prohibitions against
homosexuality and homosexuals in the armed forces.
Jim Kepner begins his private collection of gay-related clip-
pings, artifacts, books, and photographs in Los Angeles.
The Homophile Movement
81

The Modern Gay Movement
World War II dislocated millions of people and brought large
numbers of lesbians and gay men to the city. There, they began to
organize, reject the medical deviancy label, and create the modern
gay movement.
1948
The first U.S. lesbian magazine, Vice Versa, begins pub-
lishing in Los Angeles. From her desk at RKO Studios,
Lisa Ben (anagram for “lesbian”) types each issue twice,
using four carbons, then circulates it among her friends,
who then circulate it among their friends.
Alfred Kinsey and the Kinsey Institute publish their
groundbreaking study of sexual behavior in U.S. men.
Sexual Behavior in the Human Male, finds that more than 50
percent of those surveyed admitted erotic responses to
other men and that approximately 10 percent were exclu-
sively homosexual. The Kinsey findings shake the het-
erosexual world and help get the fledgling gay commu-
nity off the ground.
1948–
McCarthyism purges homosexuals and communists from
1953
the federal government, and thousands lose their jobs.
More homosexuals lose their jobs than do those accused of
being communist. Ironically, Roy Cohn, Joseph Mc-
Carthy’s right-hand man, is found to be gay.
1951–
The International Conference for Sexual Equality is spon-
1958
sored by the Amsterdam-based Cultaur-en-Ontspannings
Centrum. The issue of gay rights is prominent on the
agenda.
1951
The Mattachine Society is founded by Harry Hay, Bob
Hull, and Chuck Rowland in Los Angeles. It evolves into
the ONE Institute and Archives located on the campus of
the University of Southern California and becomes the
most celebrated and long-lived gay rights organization in
the United States.
Edward Sagarin, under the pseudonym Donald Webster
82
Chronology

Cory, publishes The Homosexual in America. It is one of the
first books written by a gay author to describe gay life
and ask for tolerance.
1952
“Sexual deviants” are barred from immigrating into the
United States by the McCarran-Walters Act. The U.S.
Supreme Court extends this definition to lesbians and
gay men in 1967.
1953
The Kinsey Institute publishes Sexual Behavior in the Hu-
man Female. This second historic study finds that 28 per-
cent of women surveyed responded erotically to other
women and that between 2 and 6 percent identified their
sex orientation as lesbian.
ONE begins publishing in Los Angeles as an adjunct to
the Mattachine Society. This is the first national gay male
publication.
Executive Order 10450, signed by President Dwight
Eisenhower, makes “sexual perversion” grounds for be-
ing barred from federal employment.
Evelyn Hooker begins studying male homosexual per-
sonalities. It is this research that leads to the findings that
there are no discernible psychosocial differences between
homosexual and heterosexual men. Her research eventu-
ally enables the overturning of medical theories of homo-
sexuality as a sickness.
Gay concentration camp survivors are rearrested by the
German government for being “repeat offenders.”
1954
Copies of ONE magazine are seized by the Los Angeles
postmaster, who refuses to mail them on the grounds that
they are “obscene, lewd, lascivious, and filthy.” ONE ed-
itors sue, are ruled against by two lower courts, but even-
tually prevail in 1958 in the U.S. Supreme Court (One, Inc.
v. Olesen). Without this favorable decision, the gay rights
movement would have been severely hampered.
1955
The Daughters of Bilitis is founded by Del Martin and
The Modern Gay Movement
83

Phyllis Lyon in San Francisco. This is the first national
lesbian organization in the United States and soon begins
publication of The Ladder.
1957
The Crittenden Report, a 639-page navy document, con-
cludes there is “no sound basis” for the belief that homo-
sexuals pose a military security risk. The Pentagon 
denies the existence of this report for more than twenty
years.
1960
The first national convention of the Daughters of Bilitis
(the first national lesbian conference) is held in San Fran-
cisco.
1961
Illinois becomes the first state to decriminalize consen-
sual homosexual sex conducted in private.
1962
After five years of study, the United Kingdom’s Com-
mittee on Homosexual Offenses and Prostitution (com-
monly known as the Wolfenden Committee) recom-
mends the decriminalization of homosexual behavior.
1964
The “first” street protests for homosexual rights are con-
ducted by the Homosexual League of New York and the
League for Sexual Freedom in front of the U.S. Army In-
duction Center located at Whitehall Street, New York.
The ten members carry signs protesting the army’s dis-
honorable discharges of lesbian and gay soldiers.
The Conference of East Coast Homophile Organizations
in Washington, D.C., produces the first homosexual
rights button.
The first homophile organization in Canada appears, the
Association of Social Knowledge (ASK), along with the
first gay magazine, TWO.
1965
The Mattachine Society New York leads the first protest
demonstration in front of the White House. The seven
gay men and three lesbians receive national television
coverage.
84
Chronology
1955,
cont.

1966
The Society for Individual Rights (SIR) Center opens in
San Francisco and is the first gay community center in the
United States. Later in the same year, ASK opens a com-
munity center in Vancouver, becoming the first such cen-
ter in Canada.
The North American Conference of Homophile Orga-
nizations is created to coordinate protest efforts against
the federal government’s antigay discrimination policies.
1967
The Advocate, currently the oldest national gay publica-
tion, begins publishing in Los Angeles.
The American Civil Liberties Union declares its opposi-
tion to state antisodomy laws.
The first protest demonstration by gay activists against
any police department is held in front of the Black Cat and
New Faces bars in Silver Lake, California. The demon-
stration is held to protest Los Angeles police officers’
treatment of bar patrons during a New Year’s Eve party.
The British government acts on the recommendations
made by the Wolfenden Committee ten years earlier and
decriminalizes homosexual behavior between consenting
adults.
The Oscar Wilde Memorial Bookshop, now the oldest gay
bookstore in the United States, opens in New York. In
1973, the bookstore relocates to the junction of Christo-
pher and Gay Streets.
1968
The Reverend Troy Perry in Los Angeles begins the first
gay church, the Metropolitan Community Church.
John Money at Johns Hopkins University performs the
first complete male-to-female sex-change operation in the
United States.
The university of Sorbonne, Paris, is taken over by rioting
gay French students led by David Cohn-Bendit.
The Modern Gay Movement
85

The Birth of Gay Liberation
1969
New York City police raid the Stonewall Inn on June 27.
The bar’s patrons, including transvestites, butch lesbians,
and gay teenagers, violently resist. This event is consid-
ered the birth of the modern gay liberation movement
and is commemorated each year by parades and festivals
around the United States.
Building on the participants of the Stonewall Riots, the
Gay Liberation Front is founded New York.
Time magazine contains articles on national gay rights
and has on its cover “The Homosexual in America.”
Canada amends its criminal code to legalize sexual acts,
including homosexuality, between consenting adults.
West Germany repeals its antihomosexual sodomy laws.
1970
New York City’s Gay Pride Parade, the first in the nation
to commemorate the Stonewall Riots, draws about 10,000
marchers.
Three New York State Assembly members convene the
first legislative hearing on gay rights in United States.
The New York–based lesbian-feminist group Radicales-
bians publishes its manifesto, “The Woman Identified
Woman,” which defines lesbians as “the rage of all
women condensed to the point of explosion.”
Amazon bookstore in Minneapolis opens for business. It
is the first lesbian/feminist bookstore in the United
States. Later that year, A Woman’s Place bookstore opens
in Oakland, California.
Rita Hauser, U.S. permanent representative to the United
Nations, advocates same-sex marriages as a tool for con-
trolling world population growth.
Carl Wittman releases his “Gay Manifesto,” which sum-
marizes many of the goals of the gay rights movement.
86
Chronology

1971
The Lesbian and Gay Community Services Center is
founded in Los Angeles and becomes the world’s largest
such center.
The National Organization for Women (NOW) passes a
resolution supporting lesbian rights. Just a few years ear-
lier, Betty Friedan, the first president of NOW, had at-
tacked similar resolutions and labeled lesbians “the
Lavender Menace.”
The American Library Association launches its annual
Gay Book Award and gives the first award to Isabel
Miller for her novel Patience and Sarah.
Connecticut becomes the second state to repeal its anti-
sodomy law. Idaho attempts to do the same. It repeals the
law, but then, under pressure from religious and conser-
vative leaders, reinstates the law, which criminalizes
homosexual behavior with felony punishment of up to
five years in prison.
After years of meeting, the President’s National Commis-
sion on Reform of Federal Criminal Laws recommends
the repeal of all state antisodomy laws.
Canadian gay groups call for legal reform and issue a
“We Demand” brief to the federal government. The first
gay public demonstration in Canada takes place shortly
after in support of the brief.
1972
Beth Chayim Chadashim, the first gay synagogue in the
United States, is founded in Los Angeles.
A U.S. district judge rules that the Civil Service Commis-
sion cannot discriminate against employees based on sex-
ual orientation unless the commission can prove that be-
ing gay impacts the workplace.
East Lansing, Michigan, becomes the first city in the
United States to ban discrimination based on sexual ori-
entation in city hiring.
The Birth of Gay Liberation
87

The United Church of Christ, California, ordains William
Johnson as the first openly gay minister of any major re-
ligious denomination.
Ann Arbor, Michigan, becomes the first city in the United
States to officially proclaim Gay Pride Week.
1973
The American Psychiatric Association removes homo-
sexuality from its list of mental disorders.
The American Bar Association adopts a resolution sup-
porting the repeal of all state laws regulating sexual acts
between consenting adults.
Howard Brown declares at a medical convention that he
is gay. As the former New York City commissioner of
health, he is, at this time, the highest-ranked person to
publicly declare his homosexuality. He is later instru-
mental in the formation of the National Gay Task Force.
The National Gay Task Force, later renamed the National
Gay and Lesbian Task Force (NGLTF), is founded in New
York by activists Martin Duberman, Ron Gold, Barbara
Gittings, Frank Kameny, Howard Brown, Bruce Voeller,
and Nathalie Rockhill.
A lesbian-feminist collective begins Olivia Records.
Naiad Press, currently the oldest surviving lesbian book
publisher, is launched in Florida.
Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund is founded
to help gay civil rights court action.
1974
Massachusetts’s Elaine Nobel becomes the first openly
gay person ever elected to a state legislature.
New York City Democratic congressmember Bella Abzug
introduces a federal gay and lesbian civil rights bill (HR-
14752) in the U.S. House of Representatives. The bill fails
and is reintroduced, without success, in subsequent ses-
sions of Congress.
88
Chronology
1972,
cont.

Halton Renaissance Committee is formed by fundamen-
talist minister Ken Campbell in Canada to oppose gay
rights.
Lesbian Connection begins publishing in East Lansing,
Michigan, and become the largest circulation lesbian pe-
riodical in the United States.
1975
Santa Cruz County, California, becomes the first county
in the United States to ban antigay discrimination.
Sergeant Leonard Matlovich is discharged from the U.S.
Air Force because of his homosexuality. Matlovich wins a
five-year court battle with the Air Force but chooses to ac-
cept a financial settlement of $160,000 instead of reenlisting.
The American Association for the Advancement of Sci-
ence (AAAS) passes a resolution opposing discrimination
based on sexual orientation.
A county clerk in Boulder, Colorado, issues a marriage li-
cense to a same-sex couple. The state attorney general
later revokes this license.
The Arkansas state legislature repeals the state’s anti-
sodomy laws, but two years later reinstates them.
The U.S. Supreme Court rules in Rose v. Locke that cun-
nilingus is covered by Tennessee’s “crimes against na-
ture” statute.
1976
Montreal police launch many raids against gay bars to
“clean up” the city before the opening of the Summer
Olympics. The gay community fights back with many
large demonstrations. Emerging from those demonstra-
tions is the Association pour les droits des gai(e)s du
Quebec (ADGQ).
Willard Eugene Allen is released after spending twenty-
six years in a Florida state mental institution for having
been convicted of “lewdness” (having sex with another
man). His doctors had recommended his release for
nearly twenty years.
The Birth of Gay Liberation
89

Tales of the City, by Amistead Maupin, begins its serialized
run in the San Francisco Chronicle.
1977
Fundamentalist singer Anita Bryant and the Save Our
Children campaign are successful at convincing voters in
Dade County, Florida, to repeal a gay rights law.
Harvey Milk is elected as San Francisco’s first openly gay
supervisor.
Toronto police raid the offices of Canada’s leading gay
publication, The Body Politic, claiming “indecent” materi-
als are being distributed. After a long and costly court
battle and another police raid in 1982, the paper is ac-
quitted, but the financial strain pushes it under in 1987.
The National Gay Task Force meets with presidential as-
sistant Midge Constanza at the White House to discuss
gay rights issues. This is the first such meeting between a
gay organization and the Office of the President.
Both the International Association of Chiefs of Police and
the Fraternal Order of Police adopt resolutions opposing
the hiring of lesbian and gay police officers.
The African American lesbian-feminist group the Com-
bahee River Collective, publishes “A Black Feminist
Statement.” The manifesto recognizes the interconnec-
tedness of oppression based on race and sexual identity.
Ellen Marie Barrett is ordained as the first openly lesbian
priest of the Episcopal Church.
The province of Quebec passes a charter of human rights
that bans antigay discrimination in employment, housing,
and public accommodations. This makes Quebec the first
major province in North America to offer such protection.
1978
Supervisor Harvey Milk and Mayor George Moscone of
San Francisco are shot to death at City Hall by ex-
supervisor Dan White. White is later convicted of invol-
untary manslaughter, sentenced to seven years in prison
90
Chronology
1976,
cont.

(of which he serves only five), and commits suicide in
1985.
The Briggs initiative (Proposition 6), which would have
barred lesbians and gay men from teaching in state pub-
lic schools, is defeated by California voters.
San Francisco’s Gilbert Baker designs the rainbow flag,
which becomes the international symbol for gay liberation.
Ed Koch, the mayor of New York City, issues an executive
order forbidding discrimination based on sexual orienta-
tion in government employment. The order is eventually
overturned through efforts of the Roman Catholic Arch-
diocese.
In Federal Communications Commission v. Pacifica Founda-
tion, the U.S. Supreme Court approves restrictions on
broadcast material that is “indecent” but not “obscene.”
Such a distinction affects future broadcasts of gay-
themed programs.
1979
When Dan White is found guilty of involuntary man-
slaughter in the deaths of Mayor George Moscone and
Supervisor Harvey Milk, lesbians and gay men take to
the streets and riot on the night of May 21 in response to
the light sentence. The White Night riots cause more than
$1 million in property damage, and more than 150 people
are injured.
The Moral Majority is founded by Jerry Falwell and his
associates. It later becomes one of the major opponents to
gay rights in the United States.
The First National March on Washington for Lesbian and
Gay Rights draws more than 100,000 marchers.
Stephen Lachs becomes the first openly gay judge to be
appointed to the Superior Court of Los Angeles.
The Japan Gay Center opens in Tokyo. The first center of
its kind in Japan, it is designed to educate the general
public about homosexuality.
The Birth of Gay Liberation
91

The first gay pride march in Mexico City is hosted by
Frente Homosexual de Acción Revolucionaria (Homo-
sexual Revolutionary Action Front).
The San Francisco Police Department swears in its first
openly lesbian and gay police officers.
AIDS and Coalition-Building
1980
Aaron Fricke sues his high school in Providence, Rhode
Island, to allow him to bring his male date to the senior
prom. He wins the suit and goes to the dance with Paul
Guilbert. Fricke chronicles these events in the popular
book Reflections of a Rock Lobster.
The Democratic National Convention accepts a plank sup-
porting federal gay rights legislation. At the same conven-
tion, Mel Boozer, a gay black man, is nominated for vice
president and is allowed to speak to the assembly.
Sasha Alyson launches Alyson Publications, which be-
comes the largest gay press in the United States.
Congressman Robert Bauman (R-MD), a leading oppo-
nent of gay rights legislation and a prominent member of
the Moral Majority, is arrested for soliciting sex from a
sixteen-year-old boy in Washington, D.C. Initially he dis-
avows his homosexuality, but in 1983 he appears before
the American Bar Association recommending adoption
of a gay rights resolution.
The Canadian Union of Postal Workers adopts a contract
that includes nondiscrimination based on sexual orienta-
tion. This is the first such contract covering federal em-
ployees anywhere in the world.
The gay student group at Georgetown University is ex-
pelled and forbidden from using university facilities. It
takes eight years for the student group to win its case and
return to campus.
92
Chronology
1979,
cont.

1981
The U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) revises its policy
concerning lesbians and gays in the military. For the first
time the DOD explicitly states that homosexuality is “in-
compatible with military service.” Its new policy requires
all recruits to be questioned about their sexual orientation.
More than 300 gay men are arrested by Toronto police in
a massive raid on gay bathhouses. This is the largest mass
arrest of gay men in Canadian history and in all of North
America. A riot ensues that is called the Canadian
Stonewall.
The New York Supreme Court overturns the state’s anti-
sodomy laws as being unconstitutional.
All twenty participants in Finland’s first gay pride pa-
rade are arrested in Helsinki for “encouraging lewd be-
havior.”
The first cases of HIV-related illnesses are reported by the
Centers for Disease Control and the New York Times.
A group of mothers and fathers organize the Parents and
Friends of Lesbians and Gays (PFLAG) in Los Angeles. It
becomes the most influential parent group supporting
gay rights in the United States.
The first publishing house in the United States dedicated
to work by and about women of color, Kitchen Table:
Women of Color Press, is founded in New York.
The Kinsey Institute releases a report showing that nei-
ther parental nor societal influences have much effect on
a person’s sexual orientation.
Mary Morgan is appointed to the California Supreme
Court by Governor Jerry Brown, making her the first
openly lesbian judge.
Wisconsin becomes the first state to pass antidiscrimina-
tion laws based on sexual orientation in the areas of em-
ployment, housing, and public accommodation.
AIDS and Coalition-Building
93

The New York City Gay Men’s Chorus performs at
Carnegie Hall. It is the first openly gay group allowed to
perform there and is followed a year later by openly les-
bian singers Meg Christian and Cris Williamson.
The Family Protection Act is defeated in Congress. Its
provisions include withholding social security, welfare,
and pension benefits to anyone who is homosexual or
who supports a homosexual “lifestyle.” Its sponsor, Rep-
resentative Roger Jepsen (R-IA), is later defeated for re-
election when it is discovered that the “health spa” to
which he belonged was actually a house of prostitution.
Florida governor Bob Graham signs the Task Amend-
ment to the state constitution. It withholds money to any
state institution that recognizes gay student groups. The
state supreme court later overturns this legislation.
1982
Wisconsin becomes the first state in the United States to
pass statewide gay rights legislation.
The first Gay Games are held in San Francisco, with
1,300 people from twelve countries participating. Ini-
tially the Gay Games are called the Gay Olympics, but
the U.S. Olympic Committee sues and blocks use of the
word Olympics even though it allows that usage in the
Rat Olympics and Dog Olympics.
The voters in Austin, Texas, reject a ballot initiative de-
signed to allow discrimination against lesbians and gay
men.
Bruce Voeller suggests that gay-related immune disorder
be renamed acquired immune deficiency syndrome
(AIDS) as a better reflection of the characteristics of the
disease. The terminology is adopted by the medical com-
munity.
Quebec passes legislation that gives homosexual rela-
tionships status equal to heterosexual ones.
A social service and education agency, Gay Men’s Health
94
Chronology
1981,
cont.

Crisis (GMHC), is formed in New York and serves as 
the model for other AIDS organizations throughout the
nation.
The Texas antisodomy law is ruled unconstitutional by a
federal judge.
A federal judge declares unconstitutional the U.S. Immi-
gration and Naturalization Service policy of excluding
homosexuals from entering the country.
The 1,700 delegates to the National Convention of the
American Federation of State, County, and Municipal
Employees adopt, by unanimous vote, a resolution call-
ing for laws to be passed prohibiting discrimination
against lesbians and gay men at the federal, state, and lo-
cal levels.
The Philadelphia Board of Education establishes the first
high school for gay and lesbian students at Byton High.
A similar school, Harvey Milk School, is established three
years later by the New York City Board of Education.
1983
Representative Gerry Studds (D-MA) states that he is gay
on the floor of the U.S. House of Representatives.
The Lesbian and Gay Community Services Center of
New York is founded in a former public high school
building.
A man whose partner of twenty-seven years has died is
awarded $25,000 in survivor benefits by the California
Compensation Appeals Board. This appears to be the first
such award by a government agency in the United States.
A West Virginia kindergarten teacher, Linda Conway, is
fired because school administrators believe she looks like
a lesbian.
1984
Mervyn Silverman, head of San Francisco’s Health De-
partment, closes fourteen gay bathhouses because of
high-risk behavior by patrons.
AIDS and Coalition-Building
95

Television evangelist Hans Bratterud is convicted of vio-
lating Norway’s antidiscrimination law when he calls for
the dismissal of gay men and lesbians from their jobs.
The Norwegian Supreme Court upholds the conviction
because his statements were of “an aggravated insulting
nature . . . [against] homosexual tendencies, way of life or
orientation” (Newton 1994, 44).
Berkeley, California, is the first city in the United States to
extend domestic partnership benefits to employees in
same-sex relationships.
The city of West Hollywood becomes incorporated as a
separate municipality and elects a mostly gay city coun-
cil, with a lesbian mayor.
A gay rights bill passes both houses in the California leg-
islature, but Governor George Deukmejian vetoes the
bill.
Louie Welch loses a race for mayor of Houston when,
days before the election, he is heard on an open micro-
phone stating that the best way to contain the HIV epi-
demic is to “shoot the queers.”
1985
The Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation
(GLAAD) is founded in New York City as a watchdog or-
ganization over the media’s poor coverage of AIDS and
gay and lesbian issues.
Margaret Roff is elected mayor of Manchester, England;
she is the first open lesbian in British history to be elected
to public office.
A native Australian man who was involved in a ten-year
monogamous relationship with another man who was a
U.S. citizen faces being deported to his native country. He
contests the deportation and receives an official notice
from the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service
stating, “A bona fide marital relationship cannot exist be-
tween two faggots” (Newton 1994, 45). A court upholds
the deportation ruling.
96
Chronology
1984,
cont.

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) licenses a
test for HIV antibodies.
Movie and television actor Rock Hudson, after repeated
denials of being gay or having AIDS, issues a public
statement that he has AIDS. He dies three months later.
Hundreds of well-known women sign a Ms. magazine
petition condemning government interference in the sex-
ual lives of consenting adults.
The Texas legislature adopts legislation that bans homo-
sexual sodomy only, which is approved by the judiciary.
This overcomes the Texas Supreme Court’s 1982 decision
invalidating the state’s antisodomy laws, which applied
to both opposite-sex and same-sex behaviors.
Lesbian and gay men are prohibited from acting as foster
parents by orders implemented by the Massachusetts
House of Representatives.
1986
The U.S. Supreme Court, in the Georgia Bowers v. Hard-
wick case, upholds the right of states to enforce anti-
sodomy laws.
Pope John Paul II issues a pastoral letter stating that
homosexuality is intrinsically a disorder and forbids all
Catholics from supporting civil rights legislation for les-
bians and gay men.
A gay rights ordinance is passed by the province of On-
tario, Canada.
The experimental drug azidothymidine zidovudine
(AZT) is released by the U.S. Public Health Service for
people with pneumocystis carninii pneumonia.
The Nevada Supreme Court upholds the state’s anti-
sodomy laws. Ironically, Nevada is the only state with le-
galized prostitution.
Outspoken opponent of homosexuality and prominent
AIDS and Coalition-Building
97

conservative Republican Terry Dolan dies from HIV-
related illnesses. He is believed to have been gay.
Voters reject an initiative on the California ballot that re-
quires the quarantine of people with AIDS.
1987
Approximately 500,000 people attend the second Na-
tional March on Washington for Lesbian and Gay Rights.
At the event, 2,000 lesbian and gay couples participate in
a mass wedding held on the steps of the IRS building.
Also, sections equivalent to two football fields in size of
the NAMES Project quilt are displayed on the mall in
front of the U.S. Capitol.
Congressman Barney Frank (D-MA) becomes the second
member of the House to announce that he is gay.
The New York Times, for the first time in its history, uses
the word gay in reference to homosexuality.
Vermont becomes the first state to distribute condoms to
prison inmates.
Larry Kramer, along with other activists, begin the AIDS
Coalition to Unleash Power (ACT UP). Its goal is to bring
public and government attention to the need for AIDS
funding and research.
1988
The World Health Organization hosts its first World
AIDS Day.
NGLTF designates October 11 as National Coming Out
Day in honor of the historic 1987 lesbian and gay march
on Washington.
Ireland is ordered by the European Court of Human
Rights to eliminate its life imprisonment penalty for
homosexual behavior.
Measure 8, an amendment to the Oregon Constitution
that repeals an executive order issued by the governor
prohibiting discrimination in employment of gay men
98
Chronology
1986,
cont.

and lesbians, is passed by the voters. This paves the way
for other antigay legislation to be passed in Oregon.
Clause 28, issued by the British government, prohibits all
local governments from “promoting” homosexuality.
This means all gay and lesbian groups are prohibited
from obtaining local government funding for community
centers, educational activities, health organizations, or
other programs.
The National AIDS Commission releases a report with
more than 500 recommendations. An adviser to President
Ronald Reagan reduces this list to ten items.
Canada eliminates its antisodomy laws.
The national lesbian and gay quarterly magazine
Out/Look begins publication.
After the District of Columbia enacts a gay rights ordi-
nance, the U.S. Congress orders that it revoke the ordi-
nance or face losing all funding.
Leonard Matlovich, who was discharged by the U.S.
Army in 1973 after he announced that he was gay, then
sued and won, dies from HIV-related illnesses.
In response to an escalating national epidemic of violence
against gay men and lesbians, the Campaign to End Ho-
mophobia holds its first conference in Washington, D.C.
Homosexual acts between consenting adults are legal-
ized in the state of Israel.
1989
A federal court orders the reinstatement of Perry Watkins
into the U.S. Army (Watkins v. United States Army).
Changes in the military code render the precedent set in
this case ineffective against future antigay discharges.
San Francisco passes domestic partnership legislation
that includes lesbian and gay relationships.
AIDS and Coalition-Building
99

Denmark enacts domestic partnership legislation that is
just one step away from actual marriage for same-sex
couples. Full marriage for same-sex couples is granted in
2001.
The U.S. Supreme Court rules in Price Waterhouse v. Hop-
kins that an accounting firm violated sex discrimination
laws when it dismissed a woman for “masculine behav-
ior.”
A retrospective of Robert Mapplethorpe’s photographs is
cancelled at the Corcoran Art Gallery in Washington,
D.C. The exhibit is attacked by Senator Jesse Helms for its
homoerotic content. The gallery director resigns, and the
ensuing media attention makes Mapplethorpe’s name
synonymous with protests against artistic censorship.
Massachusetts becomes the second state to enact a gay
rights law.
Over 5,000 ACT UP members demonstrate in front and
inside of New York’s St. Patrick’s Cathedral. They rally
against the Catholic Church’s antigay stance and policies
on AIDS.
Artwork from gay artist Keith Haring is used by the U.S.
Post Office to issue a commemorative stamp in honor of
the twentieth anniversary of the Stonewall Riots.
A New York judge rules that a gay male couple consti-
tutes a “family” for purposes of housing rules.
The Gentlemen’s Alliance is formed as Nigeria’s first gay
male organization.
Poland forms its first national gay rights group
(Lambda), launches an information center, and begins
publishing a journal (Filo).
When Larry Kramer’s play The Natural Heart is scheduled
to play at a local college in Springfield, Missouri, resi-
dents react with animosity. Many believe the topic of the
100
Chronology
1989,
cont.

play, the early years of the AIDS epidemic, is not appro-
priate for public discussion. Efforts made to close the
show include bomb threats sent to the college and a stu-
dent home being burned down. However, the play gives
eight sold-out performances.
Two internal Pentagon reports conclude that homosexu-
als pose no military security risks. The reports are re-
leased by members of Congress after having been hidden
for years.
1990
The Americans with Disability Act (ADA) is signed into
law. It explicitly prohibits AIDS-based discrimination.
Queer Nation is founded in New York City as a direct ac-
tion, in-your-face group with the rallying cry, “We’re
here, we’re queer, get used to it!”
Hong Kong repeals its sodomy laws.
Congress votes to end the national immigration policy
that bans homosexual immigrants.
The National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) revokes
grants already awarded to four solo theater artists. This is
unprecedented in the history of the NEA. The four—
Karen Finley, John Fleck, Holly Hughes, and Tim
Miller—soon become known as “The NEA Four.” Their
defunding was initiated by Senator Jesse Helms. Three of
the four artists are homosexual, and their performance
art is sexually explicit. They become a cause célèbre for
the lesbian and gay community. The four artists sue the
NEA in 1993 and settle out of court for $252,000.
After ordaining two lesbians and a gay man as ministers,
two Lutheran churches in San Francisco are suspended
from their national organization.
The Michigan Supreme Court declares the state’s anti-
sodomy laws unconstitutional.
Dennis Barrie, director of the Cincinnati Museum of Art,
AIDS and Coalition-Building
101

is charged with obscenity, and then acquitted, when he
books the homoerotic photographs of Robert Map-
plethorpe for an exhibition.
The Hate Crime Statistics Act is approved by Congress
and signed by President George Bush. It requires the De-
partment of Justice to collect, maintain, and report statis-
tics on hate crimes motivated by race, religion, national
origin, or sexual orientation. It is the first federal legisla-
tion to include sexual orientation as a specific class. Sen-
ator Jesse Helms is instrumental in holding up the act. He
believes it is a conspiracy initiated by “the radical ele-
ments of the homosexual movement” (Newton 1994, 49).
Polk County, Florida, jail officials discontinue the practice
of requiring gay prisoners to wear pink bracelets. The
practice was used to distinguish gay from nongay pris-
oners in the mistaken hope of reducing the spread of
HIV.
Twenty-seven percent of Russians interviewed for a sur-
vey conducted by the Moscow News support the death
penalty for homosexuality.
General Motors develops a promotional videotape in
which it refers to Japanese-made trucks as “little faggot
trucks.” Later, the company apologizes for the statement.
Two men are sentenced to five years in prison by a judge
in Adrian, Michigan, for having sex in a public park.
The lesbian and gay community boycotts Miller beer and
Marlboro cigarettes, products of the Philip Morris Com-
pany, when it is discovered that Philip Morris provided
campaign financing to antigay senator Jesse Helms.
When the local chapter of PFLAG is asked to participate
in the St. Louis adopt-a-roadway program, the St. Louis
County Board of Highways and Traffic initially decides
to cancel the entire program. Eventually, it changes its
mind and allows PFLAG to participate.
102
Chronology
1990,
cont.

Conservative Backlash
1991
Karen Thompson is awarded guardianship of her lover,
Sharon Kowalski, who is in a coma due to a car accident,
over the objections of Kowalski’s parents.
The International Lesbian and Gay Association cancels its
Thirteenth Annual Conference in Guadalajara, Mexico,
because the mayor threatens to use force to stop the func-
tion.
NOW’s president, Patricia Ireland, discloses that she has
a female lover in addition to being married to a man.
In situations of domestic violence, an Ohio appellate
court rules that lesbian and gay couples have a “spousal
relationship.”
Simon LeVay releases his findings suggesting a biological
influence on brain structure and sexual orientation, oth-
erwise known as “the gay brain.”
For the first time, gay men and lesbians are included in
Amnesty International’s campaign to free individuals im-
prisoned because of sexual orientation and political
crimes.
Department of Defense spokesperson Pete Williams is
outed by The Advocate.
A request by the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization
(ILGO) to march in the annual New York City’s St.
Patrick’s Day Parade is denied. The parade is protested
by 1,000 members of ILGO.
Marlon Riggs’s documentary about African American
gay men, Tongues Untied, is aired on PBS. The Federal
Communications Commission receives many complaints
from homophobic viewers.
Because of the U.S. immigration policy banning the ad-
mission of HIV-positive visitors to the United States, the
Conservative Backlash
103

Eighth Annual International AIDS Conference is can-
celled in Boston and moved to Amsterdam.
Baltimore’s first Black Gay and Lesbian Pride March is
held in Washington, D.C.
Audrey Lorde, a lesbian poet, teacher, and activist, is
named poet laureate of New York State.
Connecticut becomes the fourth state to enact a gay rights
bill.
The Milwaukee School Board approves a gay sensitivity
training program for teachers and staff. It enrages con-
servative citizens and community groups, which demand
a recall of the board members.
1992
The General Accounting Office reports that between 1981
and 1990, approximately 17,000 service men and women
were discharged from the military for homosexuality, at a
cost of almost $500 million.
Voters in Colorado approve Amendment 2 to the state
constitution, which prohibits equal rights ordinances for
gays. A similar ballot initiative in Oregon, Proposition 9,
is defeated.
Canadian country and pop singer k. d. lang becomes the
first major female recording artist to come out as a les-
bian.
The (San Francisco) Bay Area United Way publicly states
that it will no longer support the Boy Scouts of America
because of its antigay policies.
At the Democratic National Convention, Bill Clinton be-
comes the first presidential nominee to mention gay
people in his acceptance speech.
After three years of effort, the government of Argentina
grants legal recognition to the gay and lesbian group Co-
munidad Homosexual Argentina.
104
Chronology
1991,
cont.

U.S. Navy cadet Terry Helvey beats to death sailor Allen
Schindler, who had just come out. The case receives na-
tional media attention due to its brutality and the fact
that Schindler reported these problems to his superiors
months in advance. Schindler was so badly beaten that
his mother is unable to identify his body. Helvey states
during questioning, “I’d do it again.” Helvey is sen-
tenced to life in prison.
New Jersey becomes the fifth state to pass a gay rights
law.
For the first time at the Democratic National Conven-
tion, in New York, an open lesbian, a gay man with AIDS,
and a HIV-positive heterosexual woman address the
members.
Levi Strauss, with 23,000 employees, becomes the largest
company in the United States to grant health benefits to
employee domestic partners.
Lesbian Avengers, International, is launched by a group
of activists in New York City. Within two years, the or-
ganization grows to more than thirty-five chapters in
North America and Europe.
Massachusetts becomes the first state to grant lesbian and
gay state workers the same bereavement and family
leave rights as heterosexual workers.
Antisodomy laws are abolished in the country of Estonia.
Canada removes its ban on lesbians and gays in the
military.
For the first time in North America, the Canadian immi-
gration service grants immigration status to an Irish les-
bian whose partner is a Canadian citizen.
Statewide bans on antigay discrimination are enacted by
Vermont, California, and New Jersey.
Conservative Backlash
105

1993
Soon after taking office as president of the United States,
Bill Clinton directs the secretary of defense to look into
overturning the 1981 ban on gays in the military. Fierce
opposition from conservative members of Congress and
fundamentalist religious groups throughout the nation
force Clinton to settle for the Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell com-
promise, which does not significantly change the current
status of gays in the military.
The Hawaii Supreme Court rules that lower courts in the
state improperly dismissed a challenge to the state’s pol-
icy restricting marriage to opposite-sex couples only. The
court decides that denying same-sex marriage constitutes
sex discrimination, which is prohibited by Hawaii’s state
constitution.
Once again, the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization is ex-
cluded from New York’s annual St. Patrick’s Day Parade.
Both Governor Mario Cuomo and Mayor David Dinkins,
along with thousands of others, stay away from the pa-
rade. More than 200 people are arrested when they try to
stage an alternative parade on the same day.
The Nevada legislature votes to repeal its state’s anti-
sodomy laws.
The March on Washington for Gay, Lesbian, and Bi Equal
Rights draws a crowd between 300,000 (estimated by the
National Park Service) and 1 million (estimated by the
New York Times). President Clinton, along with most legis-
lators, leave town. The three largest newsmagazines in the
nation, Time, Newsweek, and U.S. News and World Report,
fail to mention the march even though its size places it in
the top ten of such demonstrations in Washington, D.C.
The First International Dyke March, organized by the
Lesbian Avengers, takes place the evening before the
March on Washington.
Antigay ballot measures are approved by the voters of
Cincinnati, Ohio; Portsmouth, New Hampshire; and
Lewiston, Maine.
106
Chronology

California becomes the sixth state to enact employment
antidiscrimination provisions protecting the rights of les-
bian and gay public employees.
The Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals rules that Kansas’s
school officials may legally refuse to hire teachers sus-
pected of being gay, even if a teacher/applicant is not gay.
The Christian right embraces findings of the Battelle Hu-
man Affairs Research Center that concludes that only 2.3
percent of U.S. men have had sex with other men and
that only 1.1 percent consider themselves exclusively
homosexual.
Three high school teachers are suspended after several
lesbian mothers are allowed to speak to a parenting class
in Meridian, Idaho. The teachers are reinstated two
weeks later after vigorous protests by students.
The adoption of a multicultural, gay-tolerant “Rainbow
Curriculum” causes much controversy in the New York
City schools. Five of thirty-two local school boards refuse
to adopt the curriculum. City schools Chancellor Joseph
Fernandez does not have his employment contract re-
newed, primarily because of the Rainbow Curriculum.
Roberta Achtenberg is approved by the U.S. Senate as as-
sistant housing secretary over the objections of many
conservatives, including Senator Jesse Helms, who calls
her “a damned lesbian.” She becomes the highest-ranked
acknowledged lesbian in the U.S. government.
President Clinton appoints the first “AIDS czar,” Kristine
Gebbie. She is widely criticized by AIDS activists and is
forced to resign within a year.
The Wisconsin Supreme Court decides that landlords
may refuse to rent to unrelated couples because it would
undermine the stability of marriage and family.
President Clinton restores the ban on HIV-positive visi-
tors to the United States.
Conservative Backlash
107

The U.S. Post Office issues a red ribbon stamp depicting
AIDS awareness.
The Oregon Citizens Alliance (OCA) is successful at get-
ting the town of Cornelius to adopt a law similar to
Proposition 9, which banned civil rights protection for
lesbian and gay men. This success leads the alliance to af-
filiate with other groups and target eleven states for sim-
ilar initiatives.
Ireland eliminates its 132-year-old law banning homo-
sexual acts.
Minnesota becomes the seventh state to pass gay rights
legislation.
Sharon Bottoms, a twenty-three-year-old lesbian mother,
loses custody of her son Tyler to her mother. Henrico
County (Virginia) circuit judge Buford Parsons, Jr. rules
that Virginia’s antisodomy law makes Sharon Bottoms a
criminal and therefore by definition unfit to be a mother.
Judge Parsons states that he fears the boy will grow up
unable to distinguish between women and men. In 1997,
the Virginia Court of Appeals overturns this decision, re-
turning Tyler to his mother.
Russia repeals its antisodomy laws.
The U.S. Supreme Court rules that the antigay Colorado
Amendment 2 is unconstitutional.
1994
Organizers cancel the Boston St. Patrick’s Day Parade
rather than comply with a court order allowing the Irish-
American Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Group to partici-
pate.
For the first time, the U.S. Immigration and Naturaliza-
tion Service grants political asylum based on sexual ori-
entation to a gay Mexican who claims his life will be
threatened if he returns to Mexico.
Amnesty International mounts a six-month campaign in
108
Chronology
1993,
cont.

the United States to combat civil rights abuses against
lesbians and gay men.
The Academy Award for best actor is given to straight ac-
tor Tom Hanks for his portrayal of a gay man with AIDS
in the movie Philadelphia.
The United Nations Human Rights Committee decides
that laws criminalizing consensual sex between adult
men is a breach of privacy and that no nation should
have such laws.
Approximately 15,000 people from two dozen nations
participate in Gay Games IV, in New York City. This be-
comes the largest single athletic event in the world, with
more than 500,000 spectators.
Randy Shilts, author of And the Band Played On and Con-
duct Unbecoming, dies from AIDS-related causes in San
Francisco. His funeral is picketed by Westboro Baptist
Church (WBC) members carrying signs that read, “Filthy
Face of Fag Evil.”
The age of consent for homosexual acts is lowered by the
British Parliament from twenty-one to eighteen. How-
ever, the age of consent for heterosexual acts is sixteen.
Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders, in an interview with
The Advocate magazine, says: “We have to be more open
about sex, and we need to speak out to tell people that
sex is good, sex is wonderful. It’s a normal part and
healthy part of our being, whether it is homosexual or
heterosexual” (Newton 1994, 58). Conservatives press
President Clinton to “publicly disavow” Elders’s views.
The consultative status granted to the International Les-
bian and Gay Association (ILGA) in 1993 is revoked by
the United Nations based on an unsubstantiated claim
that some of its members are affiliated with pedophile
groups.
The American Medical Association (AMA) adopts policy
Conservative Backlash
109

to remove all references in the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual (DSM) to “sexual orientation related disorders.”
By doing so, medical doctors are no longer justified in
conducting “therapies” for “treating” homosexuality.
Massachusetts becomes the first state to provide protec-
tion from antigay harassment to public school children.
The Brazilian newspaper Folha de São Paulo estimates that
one antigay killing occurs every four days in the nation.
In national midterm elections, Republicans obtain a ma-
jority in both houses of Congress and win many guber-
natorial elections. Because these wins were made with
major backing from the homophobic Christian right,
there is much fear within the lesbian and gay community
about its future civil rights.
In a vote of 159 in favor and 96 against, the European Par-
liament recommends that lesbian and gay couples be al-
lowed to marry and adopt children.
With the end of apartheid in South Africa, its new consti-
tution includes sexual orientation as a protected class—
the only country in the world to do so.
An attempt is made by residents of Ovett, Mississippi, to
close down Camp Sister Spirit because of their fear that
the lesbian-run camp will be a haven for violent crime
and transform unborn children in the community into
lesbians. The camp provides food, lodging, and support
for women who are victims of abuse or are homeless.
Field marshals are sent by Attorney General Janet Reno
to protect the lesbians when it becomes evident there is a
potential for physical danger.
1995
Rhode Island becomes the ninth state to pass a statewide
gay rights bill. In another ruling at year’s end, the Rhode
Island Supreme Court upholds the state’s antisodomy
laws.
Greg Louganis, four-time Olympic gold medalist in div-
110
Chronology
1994,
cont.

ing, reveals in a television interview with Barbara Walters
on 20/20 that he has AIDS.
Congress passes the draconian Illegal Immigration Con-
trol and Immigrant Responsibility Act. The law deprives
many binational couples and HIV-positive immigrants of
the opportunity to stay in United States on humanitarian
“hardship” grounds.
Zimbabwe president Robert Mugabe says homosexuals
are “lower than dogs and pigs” (Predrag 2001).
Protease inhibitors, a new generation of AIDS drugs,
show considerable success and receive approval from the
Food and Drug Administration.
The state of South Dakota bans same-sex marriages as a
preemptive strike against the potential of gay marriages
being approved in Hawaii. Other states soon follow.
Jonathan Tyler Schmitz kills Scott Amedure by shooting
him twice in the chest. Three days earlier, both men ap-
peared on a Jenny Jones Show episode in which Amedure
revealed his romantic feelings to an unsuspecting
Schmitz. Schmitz is convicted of second-degree murder
in 1996. His defense attorney argues that humiliation on
the talk show and past mental problems reduce Schmitz’s
responsibility for the killings. The Jenny Jones Show is
sued by the Amedure family and is ordered to pay the
family $25 million. These events lead shock television to
reexamine its programming.
Federal judge Eugene Nickerson declares the Don’t Ask,
Don’t Tell policy unconstitutional. By year’s end, there
are a number of conflicted rulings on this policy—some
for, some against.
When a group of gay and lesbian leaders comes to meet
with President Clinton, White House security personnel
put on latex gloves to meet the group. At the same time,
Marsha Scott, a straight woman, is appointed by Clinton
as his liaison to the gay and lesbian community. Both in-
cidents cause uproar in the gay community.
Conservative Backlash
111

The Hawaii Supreme Court postpones until 1996 a deci-
sion on same-sex marriage in the state. The court allows
a special state commission to review the issue. The com-
mission later recommends legalizing same-sex mar-
riages.
The Ryan White Comprehensive AIDS Resources Emer-
gency Act is approved by the House over delaying tactics
by Senator Jesse Helms.
The Zimbabwe government forces Africa’s biggest book
fair to remove a gay exhibit and sparks more antigay re-
marks from President Robert Mugabe.
President Clinton signs an executive order ending the
policy of denying security clearances to gay men and les-
bians.
Penny Culliton, a schoolteacher in Mascenic, New
Hampshire, is fired when she uses the gay-themed books
Maurice, by E. M. Forster, and The Education of Harriet Hat-
field, by May Sarton, in her high school English class.
More than 100 transvestite, transgender, and transsexual
activists gather for the First National Gender Lobbying
Day on Capitol Hill.
Dean Hammer releases a new study suggesting that
genes inherited from the mother influence whether a
man becomes gay.
The New York Supreme Court grants the right of unmar-
ried couples, whether gay or not, to adopt their partner’s
children. This is a landmark ruling.
PFLAG use quotes from televangelist Pat Robertson’s
own television show to create television ads showing the
impact that hate speech has on gay and lesbian youths.
Threats of lawsuits from Robertson keep most television
stations from showing the spots.
1996
Murder and assisting suicide charges against Keith W.
112
Chronology
1995,
cont.

Green are dropped after the gay community protests.
Green helped reattach an auto exhaust hose being used
by his AIDS-stricken lover to commit suicide.
Magic Johnson returns to the National Basketball Associ-
ation after a five-year absence since his announcement of
being HIV-positive.
District judge Jeffrey Sherlock rules Montana’s antisod-
omy laws unconstitutional. The state appeals the ruling.
Utah passes two bills designed to eliminate gay-straight
student alliances at state-financed high schools. One bill
prohibits teachers from promoting “illegal activities”
(sodomy is illegal in Utah), and the second bill requires
students to obtain parental approval before joining any
club.
The Virginia Federal Appeals Court upholds a ban on
gays in the military.
The U.S. Olympic Committee decides to bypass Cobb
County, Georgia, during the torch run for the Atlanta
Summer Games because of an antigay resolution passed
by the county.
The U.S. Supreme Court declares Colorado’s Amend-
ment 2, which denies legal protection based on sexual
orientation, unconstitutional.
President Clinton signs the federal Defense of Marriage
Act in which marriage is defined as the union of one man
and one woman. Interestingly, no local, state, or federal
law defines “man” or “woman.”
President Clinton boosts funding for the Ryan White
AIDS CARE fund.
Robert James Acemant admits killing Roxanne Ellis and
Michele Abdill of Medford, Oregon, because they were
lesbians. The bodies of the women were found bound
and gagged in the back of a pickup truck; they had been
Conservative Backlash
113

shot execution style. Acemant is convicted of the murders
but not of a hate crime.
Two research teams report finding that about 1 percent of
the male population is resistant to HIV due to a defective
gene.
The last viewing of the complete AIDS Quilt (38,000 pan-
els) is held at the National Mall in Washington, D.C.
The Harvard AIDS Institute International Advisory
Council predicts that blacks will account for one half of
all U.S. AIDS cases by the year 2000.
Jamie Nabozny wins a $962,000 judgment against his
Wisconsin high school for failure to protect him from
antigay harassment while he was a student there. This
ruling has significant impact for all gay and lesbian stu-
dents and the nation’s schools.
1997
An Atlanta lesbian nightclub is attacked with a bomb
laced with nails. Five people are injured. This is the third
such attack in seven months and may be related to the
bomber responsible for the 1996 Summer Olympics bomb
and a blast at a local family planning clinic.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports
the first decline in the number of AIDS-related deaths.
More than 500 AIDS activists converge on Wall Street and
stop traffic in lower Manhattan. ACT UP protests alleged
price-gouging by pharmaceutical companies.
Hawaii becomes the first state to enact a domestic reg-
istry and at the same time passes a constitutional amend-
ment limiting marriage to opposite-sex couples only.
Lesbian actor Ellen DeGeneres’s character comes out as a
lesbian on her television show Ellen. This is the first time
the primary character on a commercial television pro-
gram is openly gay.
114
Chronology
1996,
cont.

New Hampshire becomes the tenth state to ban discrimi-
nation against lesbians and gays in employment, hous-
ing, and public accommodations. Two days later, Maine
becomes the eleventh state to enact similar legislation.
President Clinton makes a promise to find an AIDS vac-
cine within ten years. Activists are unimpressed by the
promise since the initiative includes no new research
funds.
The city of San Francisco passes an ordinance requiring
all companies doing business with the city to provide do-
mestic partnership benefits to employees. The ordinance
is challenged in court, but ultimately upheld in most sit-
uations.
Delegates at the Southern Baptist Convention call on its
15.7 million members to boycott the Walt Disney Com-
pany for ownership of Ellen and Disney’s employee do-
mestic partnership policy.
Andrew Cunanan murders gay fashion designer Gianni
Versace on July 15. While hiding out on a houseboat in
Miami, Florida, Cunanan fatally shoots himself. He is
wanted for a series of murders and is on the FBI’s most-
wanted list.
Many lesbians and gay men grieve the death of Britain’s
Princess Diana. The community remembers her for her
charitable activities, including help in the fight against
AIDS.
Hundreds of AIDS activists protest in front of the De-
partment of Health and Human Services against a federal
ban on funding for needle-exchange programs.
The National Conference of Catholic Bishops distributes
the groundbreaking document titled “Always Our Chil-
dren,” which encourages parents to give first priority to
love and support of their lesbian daughters and gay sons
over church doctrine condemning homosexuality.
Conservative Backlash
115

The lesbian and gay community expresses concern over a
rally of the Promise Keepers in Washington, D.C., that at-
tracts more than 700,000 men. Although they claim to be
apolitical, they have deep ties to the religious right and
espouse antigay rhetoric.
Openly gay businessman James Hormel is nominated to
be the U.S. ambassador to Luxembourg. Acrimonious de-
bate in the U.S. Senate delays his confirmation until 1998.
President Clinton becomes the first sitting president to
speak to a gay rights group. At a speech given at a dinner
for the Human Rights Campaign, he calls for all Ameri-
cans to overcome prejudice.
Researchers confirm that drug therapies using protease
inhibitors are unable to completely eradicate HIV from
all cells in the body.
1998
In the Afghan city of Heat, eighteen-year-old Abdul Sami
and twenty-two-year-old Bismillah are placed beside a
mud wall that is then bulldozed on top of them. The men
were found guilty of engaging in sodomy and are killed
as part of a public execution.
A Dutch man dying of pneumonia is granted the right to
“marry” his partner of forty years to become the first
same-sex couple to marry in the Netherlands. Full mar-
riage rights do not become effective in the Netherlands
until 2001.
The Cayman Islands gives in to religious activists and
prohibits a gay cruise ship from docking at its harbor.
U.S. district judge Stanley Sporkin rules that the U.S.
Navy went too far by illegally obtaining confidential in-
formation about dismissed Senior Chief Petty Officer
Timothy McVeigh.
The voters of Maine throw out a gay rights ordinance en-
acted the previous year.
116
Chronology
1997,
cont.

The U.S. Supreme Court decides in Oncale v. Sundowner
that sexual harassment laws apply to same-sex cases.
Two court decisions in March concerning the Boy Scouts’
ban on gays are conflicted. In the case of James Dale, the
court finds that the Scouts must abide by New Jersey’s
antidiscrimination laws. In the Timothy Curran case, the
California Supreme Court rules the Scouts is not a busi-
ness and therefore the state’s antidiscrimination laws do
not apply.
Nebraska minister Reverend Jimmy Creech is acquitted
of misdeed by the United Methodist Church for perform-
ing a union ceremony between two lesbians. Although he
wins, he is eventually forced out of the church.
While addressing the Wisconsin State Assembly, Green
Bay Packer Reggie White makes a speech full of homo-
phobic comments and ethnic slurs that stuns the audience.
Pop star George Michael is arrested for lewd conduct in a
Beverly Hill’s public restroom. This leads to his coming
out as bisexual and releasing a music video that spoofs
his arrest.
A Pentagon report confirms that discharges from the mil-
itary for being gay skyrocketed 67 percent since Don’t
Ask, Don’t Tell took effect in 1994.
In response to the anti–affirmative action measure Cali-
fornia Proposition 209 passed by voters, the Los Angeles
City Board of Education eliminates its Gay and Lesbian
Education Commission, along with six other minority ed-
ucation commissions.
Although the Clinton administration issues a report
showing that needle-exchange programs are effective at
reducing the spread of AIDS, it still refuses to lift the ban
on federal funding for these programs.
Lawmakers in Rhode Island vote to eliminate the state’s
102-year-old antisodomy laws.
Conservative Backlash
117

The United Methodist Church warns pastors that they
will be tried, reprimanded, or defrocked if they perform
same-sex union ceremonies.
The Second U.S. Court of Appeals rules that Congress has
complete authority to exclude gays from the military as
part of personnel policies.
University of Wyoming gay student Matthew Shepard is
found hanging spread-eagle on a fencepost in subzero
weather beside a remote road in Laramie, Wyoming. His
death a few days later becomes the springboard for many
organizations to push for hate crime laws in their states.
A Cincinnati city charter banning any policies favorable
to gays and lesbians is ruled constitutional by the U.S.
Supreme Court. The ruling infuriates the gay community
since the U.S. Supreme Court had already decided in a
similar case, Colorado’s Amendment 2, that such prohi-
bitions are not constitutional.
Circuit court judge Richard Rombow rules that Maryland’s
1916 antisodomy laws violate the state’s constitution.
The Georgia Supreme Court rules that the state’s 165-
year-old antisodomy law violates its constitutional guar-
antee of privacy. This ruling comes twelve years after the
U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Bowers v. Hardwick that
Georgia had the right to enforce this law.
The Miami-Dade County Board of Commissioners votes
to approve a new antigay discrimination ordinance. This
occurs twenty-one years after Anita Bryant successfully
helped overturn a previous gay rights ordinance.
1999
Both the states of New Hampshire and Connecticut re-
move barriers to child adoption by gay couples, whereas
the states of Arkansas and Utah institute antigay policies
against gay adoptions.
The Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals rules that land-
lords in Anchorage, Alaska, can refuse to rent to unmar-
118
Chronology
1998,
cont.

ried couples if it is against their religious beliefs. This
could have significant impact for gay and lesbian couples.
Almost 13,000 people witness the holy union between
long-time lesbian couple Jeanne Barnett and Ellie Charl-
ton in Sacramento, California. Eighty United Methodist
ministers attending the ecclesiastically disobedient event
may face formal charges from the church.
Jerry Falwell outs Tinky Winky, the purple Teletubby, 
in his National Liberty Journal. The national media and 
gay press have a field day with the absurdity of the accu-
sation.
Billy Jack Gaither, a thirty-nine-year-old man, is found
burned to death on the banks of Pockerwood Creek in Al-
abama. He was bludgeoned with an ax handle and his
body thrown on two burning tires. Two men are con-
victed of his murder and sentenced to life in prison with-
out parole.
Tracey Thompson, a thirty-three-year-old transgender
woman, is found beaten to death with a baseball bat on a
rural south Georgia road. No perpetrator is charged.
New York City police officer Justin Volpe is convicted of
sodomizing Haitian immigrant Abner Louima with a
broken broomstick handle while Louima was in custody.
A coalition of eighteen religious right organizations
launches phase two of its “Truth in Love” ad campaign,
which urges gay men and lesbians to enter therapy to
convert to heterosexuality.
The Canadian Supreme Court rules that same-sex cou-
ples must have the same rights as opposite-sex couples.
Pat Robertson’s Christian Coalition loses its tax-exempt
status from the IRS.
Bill Clinton becomes the first president ever to proclaim
June as Gay and Lesbian Pride Month.
Conservative Backlash
119

Gary Matson and Winfield Scott Mowder of Happy Val-
ley, California, are killed by two white supremacist broth-
ers connected to the antigay, racist World Church of the
Creator. The two brothers, Benjamin Matthew Williams
and James Tyler Williams, are also charged with setting
fire to three synagogues and a medical clinic in Sacra-
mento, California.
Army PFC Barry Winchell is attacked by Private Calvin
N. Glover with a baseball bat while asleep in his barracks.
Prosecutors acknowledge the killing is an antigay hate
crime, and Glover is convicted of premeditated murder.
In 2000, Spc. Justin R. Fisher is sentenced to thirteen years
in prison for obstructing justice in the murder investiga-
tion and for providing Glover with the murder weapon.
Reverend Robert Nugent and Sister Jeannie Gramick are
ordered by the Vatican to end their twenty-two-year-old
ministry to gay men and lesbians.
During the San Diego Gay Pride Parade, a tear-gas canis-
ter is thrown into the middle of a group of seventy chil-
dren, parents, and grandparents. The parade is tem-
porarily disrupted, and approximately fifteen people are
treated for injuries.
The European Court in Strasbourg finds Britain to be in
violation of the European Convention of Human Rights
with its ban on gays and lesbians serving in the military.
As a result, the British Defense Ministry draws up a new
military code of conduct that allows gays to serve in the
military.
Reverend Mel White leads a delegate of some 200 gay ac-
tivists to meet with Reverend Jerry Falwell in an effort to
get him to tone down his antigay rhetoric.
Dana Rivers, a transgender woman ousted from her
teaching position with Antelope School District, Califor-
nia, settles out of court for $150,000 not to seek her job
back.
120
Chronology
1999,
cont.

The Orange County School District Board of Trustees, in
a unanimous vote, denies a gay-straight alliance from
meeting at El Modina High School. The board members
openly acknowledge that they are in violation of federal
law and that other gay-straight alliance student groups
are already meeting in other district high schools.
2000
California enacts the first statewide domestic partnership
registry in the nation.
President Clinton calls on Congress to pass the Hate
Crimes Prevention Act and the Employment Nondis-
crimination Act.
Laura Schlessinger gets a $3 million contract from Para-
mount Studios to place her daily “Dr. Laura” antigay ra-
dio talk show on TV. In response, the StopDrLaura.com
effort is launched. Cincinnati-based Proctor and Gamble
announces that it will not sponsor her upcoming televi-
sion show and also pulls out of her radio show. Soon,
most advertisers cease funding her show, and as a result
it lasts only a short time on television.
Proposition 22, the Knight Initiative outlawing same-sex
marriages, is passed overwhelmingly in California.
Hilary Swank wins the Oscar for best actress for her por-
trayal of transgender murder victim Brandon Teena in
Boys Don’t Cry.
The New Jersey Supreme Court makes a landmark deci-
sion when it declares the nonbiological parent of a same-
sex couple who broke up is the “psychological parent” of
the twin girls she helped raise.
The Vermont House approves the state’s civil union law
as a way of providing marriage to same-sex couples
without calling it marriage.
The U.S. Supreme Court rules that the Boy Scouts of
America has the right to ban gays from its ranks.
Conservative Backlash
121

“J. R” Carl Warren, Jr., of Grant Town in Marion County,
West Virginia, is found dead on a lonely road. Two
seventeen-year-old males confess that they were afraid
he was going to reveal a sexual liaison he had with one or
both of them. They beat and kicked him to death, then
placed his body into the trunk of a car, drove to an iso-
lated spot, placed his body on the ground, and ran over
it several times to make the murder look like a hit-and-
run accident.
The California State Board of Equalization votes to grant
a nonbiological lesbian parent the tax status of “head of
household.”
Two lesbians are ejected from Dodger Stadium, Los An-
geles, California, for kissing to celebrate two home runs
by their team. When the situation hits the media, Dodger
president and CEO Bob Graziano publicly apologizes to
the women and the gay community—which are all the
damages the women requested.
Ronald Gay, fifty-three, kills one and injures six patrons
at a gay bar in Roanoke, Virginia. He defends his actions
by saying that he was made fun of his entire life because
of his surname and that he wanted to get rid of “faggots.”
Exodus International ex-gay chair John Paulk is removed
from his position when he is discovered by three em-
ployees of the Human Rights Campaign sitting in a gay
bar in Washington, D.C. At first he claims that he entered
the bar to use the bathroom not knowing what kind of
bar it was, but later admits that he knew it was a gay bar.
Paulk and his “ex-lesbian” wife, Anne, advocate repara-
tive therapy for homosexuals wanting to be heterosexual.
The Virginia Court of Appeals rejects a challenge to the
state’s antisodomy laws.
2001
In April, the Netherlands becomes the first country in the
world to legally sanctify same-sex marriage.
The Permanent Partners Immigration Act is reintroduced
122
Chronology
2000,
cont.

to Congress by Representative Jerold Nadler (D-NY). The
act offers same-sex couples the same privileges currently
afforded to legal spouses under federal immigration law.
The Chinese Psychiatric Association decides to drop all
references to homosexuality as a pathological condition.
This brings China’s mental health establishment in closer
line with that of Western nations.
Seven gay and lesbian couples in Massachusetts apply
for marriage licenses and are denied. They begin the
process of suing the state.
The Washington Post reports that a Washington, D.C.,
Health Department’s AIDS pamphlet (paid for by the
government) makes statements such as, “Jesus is our
hope!” and contains a fifteen-page tract, “A Christian Re-
sponse to AIDS,” in which the Bible is cited thirty times.
The James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes Act is passed in Texas after
a long, hard-fought battle. Passage is achieved when Lieu-
tenant Governor Bill Ratliff and five other Republicans
break rank and vote with all fifteen senate Democrats.
Police and the Egyptian State Security Intelligence raid the
Queen Boat while it is moored on the Nile in Cairo’s Za-
malek district. They arrest fifty-five men, many teenagers,
while they are partying. The arrests are made because the
men are suspected of engaging in a gay sex party. As the
months unfold and the matter is brought to trial, there is
an international outcry over the proceedings and harsh
sentences. U.S. Representative Barney Frank obtains sig-
natures from thirty-five members of the House and sends
a letter expressing “strong disapproval” to Egyptian pres-
ident Hosni Mubarak over the arrest of the men.
The U.S. Supreme Court rules 8–0 that marijuana cannot
be used for any debilitating diseases, including AIDS.
The U.S. Census releases figures showing that the num-
ber of American households reporting same-sex couples
has skyrocketed.
Conservative Backlash
123

Namibia president Sam Nujoma declares, “The Republic
of Namibia does not allow homosexuality [or] lesbianism
here” (Amnesty 2001).
Senator Jesse Helms is successful at getting the Senate to
pass an amendment that denies federal funding to school
districts that apply their antidiscrimination policies to the
Boy Scouts.
The U.N. General Assembly issues a worldwide plan to
fight the spread of AIDS and to provide better care for the
approximately 36 million people currently infected.
The Washington Post reveals that White House senior ad-
viser Karl Rove brokered a deal with the antigay Salva-
tion Army, which would receive between $88,000 to
$100,000 a month in exchange for its support of President
George W. Bush’s faith-based initiative, HR 7. Initially,
the White House vehemently denies that the meetings
took place, but only days later admits that they had.
Fred Martinez, Jr., a two-spirit sixteen-year-old Native
American, is beaten to death by Shaun Murphy, eighteen,
near Cortez, Colorado. Still, the Colorado legislature fails
to pass a hate crimes bill.
The firing of a lesbian because of her sexual orientation
from the Kentucky Baptist Homes for Children is upheld
by a federal judge in Louisville, Kentucky.
On September 11, terrorists in the northeastern United
States hijack four airliners. Two airliners crash into the
World Trade Center towers, destroying both. One crashes
into the Pentagon, and another, believed to be headed for
the White House, crashes into the countryside of Penn-
sylvania. A few days after the attacks, while on The 700
Club television program, Reverend Jerry Falwell blames
gays and lesbians, among others, for the attacks. While
Falwell makes these statements, Pat Robertson nods his
head in agreement. There is a swift and furious outcry by
liberals, conservatives, other religious leaders, and gay
activists over their comments. Falwell and Robertson at-
124
Chronology
2001,
cont.

tempt damage control, but without success. Also, there is
continuing debate over whether to provide survivor
funds to partners of lesbians and gay men who died in
the attack.
HIV/AIDS and prevention workers are arrested in India
under antisodomy and antiobscenity statutes.
Openly gay Michael Guest is confirmed by the Senate to
act as the United States ambassador to Romania. The
antigay Family Research Council protests his appoint-
ment. Secretary of State Colin Powell presides over the
swearing in and publicly acknowledges Guest’s lover of
six years.
Switzerland’s two largest banks agree to pay $1.25 billion
in settlement to five groups of people, including lesbians
and gay men. This represents more than 50,000 bank ac-
counts placed with them in an effort to keep assets out of
the hands of the Nazis during World War II. After the
war, the banks failed to return the money. Although other
European governments have created funds to provide for
victims redressed for Nazi crimes, this is the first time
gays have been specifically mentioned and documented.
AB 25, California’s Domestic Partnership bill, is signed
into law by Governor Gray Davis, making California sec-
ond only to Vermont in the support of gay and lesbian re-
lationships and families.
Three antigay measures are defeated in Michigan, while
two progay measures in Dade County, Florida, effectively
erase the legacy of Anita Bryant.
Germany comes close to legalizing same-sex marriages
but is blocked at the last moment by conservative re-
gional states.
Los Angeles County sheriff Lee Boca announces that con-
doms will be distributed in county jails as part of a HIV
prevention program.
Conservative Backlash
125

2002
On the first day of the new year, Saudi Arabia, in a pub-
lic execution, beheads three men found guilty of “engag-
ing in the extreme obscenity and ugly acts of homo-
sexuality.”
Alaska governor Tony Knowles signs an administrative
order prohibiting discrimination based on sexual orienta-
tion in state employment.
The Australian High Court reaffirms the right of single
and lesbian women to have in vitro fertilization treatment.
Bill Flanigan sues the University of Maryland medical
system in Baltimore City Circuit Court for refusing him
the right to visit his dying life partner because only
“family” members are qualified to visit. Flanigan and 
his partner had a five-year legal California domestic
partnership, and Flanigan possessed a specified health
care power of attorney, which the hospital refused to
acknowledge.
Two widowed domestic partners file claims with the
New York State Workers’ Compensation Board after be-
ing denied spousal benefits by their partners’ life insur-
ance companies as an aftermath of the September 11,
2001, terrorist attack.
A leading Jerusalem rabbi, David Batzri, states that gays
should be “put to death.”
An Ohio lesbian couple goes to court to secure name
changes so that the couple’s children will have the same
surname. The Ohio Supreme Court has not ruled but has
affirmed Ohio’s law not recognizing de facto parenting.
More homosexual men are arrested in Egypt in an appar-
ent crackdown.
In the first National Day of Silence, on April 10, students
at more than 1,900 high schools and colleges across the
nation choose not to speak in order to bring attention to
antigay bias in schools.
126
Chronology

The Jamaican government rejects a recommendation by
parliament to decriminalize homosexuality.
The state of Washington enacts an antibullying bill in its
public schools that prohibits bias-motivated harassment.
U.N. AIDS chief Peter Piot reports that Russia has the
fastest-growing HIV infection rate in the world.
Pi Kappa Phi’s national council removes all members of
its Michigan State University fraternity for using antigay
epithets and slogans during pledging rituals.
Britain repeals sex statutes that banned “gross inde-
cency” between men, “soliciting for the immoral pur-
pose,” and “buggery.” These were the same statutes used
to prosecute Oscar Wilde.
The city of Dallas, Texas, enacts an antidiscrimination ordi-
nance that includes sexual orientation and gender identity.
Romania bans discrimination based on sexual orientation
and eliminates its antisodomy laws.
J’Noel Gardiner, a transgender woman, is denied the
right to inherit her late husband’s estate because the
Kansas Supreme Court rules that she is not a woman un-
der Kansas law and thus her marriage to Marshall Gar-
diner is not valid.
A thirty-seven-year-old gay man, Clint Scott Risetter, is
killed when gasoline is poured over him while he sleeps
and he is set on fire. The killer, Martin Thomas Hartman,
tells the police that he “has a lot of hatred” toward gays.
References
Amnesty International. 2001. Namibia: Gays and Lesbians under Attack.
Available at http://web.amnesty.org/802568F7005C4453/8F1CEB4390F
1142AF80256A23003CB68A!Open&Highlight=2,gay
References
127

Blumenfeld, W. J., and D. Raymond, eds. 1993. Looking at Gay and Lesbian
Life. Rev. ed. Boston: Beacon Press.
Bowers v. Hardwick, 106 S.Ct. 2841, 2843 (1986).
Duberman, M., M. Vicinus, and G. Chauncey, eds. 1989. Hidden from His-
tory: Reclaiming the Gay and Lesbian Past. New York: Meridian.
Federal Communications Commission v. Pacifica Foundation, 438 U.S. 726, 98
S.Ct. 3026, 57 L.Ed. 2d 1073 (1978).
Frontiers Magazine. Year-end reviews for 1995–2001.
Katz, J. 1976. Gay American History: Lesbians and Gay Men in the U.S.A.
New York: Thomas Y. Crowell.
Marcus, R. 1990. “Powell Regrets Backing Sodomy Law.” Washington
Post, October 26, A3.
National Museum and Archive of Lesbian and Gay History, comp. 1996.
The Gay Almanac. New York: Berkley Books.
Newton, D. E. 1994. Gay and Lesbian Rights: A Reference Handbook. Santa
Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Services, Inc, 523 U.S. 75 (1998).
One, Inc. v. Olesen, 355 U.S. 371 (1958).
Predrag, S. 2001. “Slow Progress: Despite Changes in South Africa, Gays in
Neighboring Counties Sorely Lack Rights.” Frontiers (September 14): 56.
Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, 490 US 228 1989.
Radicalesbians. (1970). “The Woman Identified Woman.” Notes from the
Third Year. This celebrated article is available at www.cwluherstory.
com/CWLUArchive/womidwom.html and may be obtained for reprint
from the Herstory Project from the Women’s Studies Resources, Duke
Special Collections Library, a project of The Digital Scriptorium, Special
Collections Library at Duke University at http://scriptorium.lib.duke.
edu/wim.
Rose v. Locke, 423 U.S. 48 (1975).
Stewart, C. K. 2001. Homosexuality and the Law: A Dictionary. Santa Bar-
bara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Thompson, M., ed. 1994. Long Road to Freedom: The Advocate History of
the Gay and Lesbian Movement. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Watkins v. United States Army, 875 F.2d 699 (9th Cir. 1989) (en banc).
128
Chronology

4
Biographical Sketches
D
eciding which people and events to include in this chapter is
a daunting challenge. There are many books and lists of fa-
mous gays and lesbians. Surf the web to the Queer Resources
Directory, or to the Gay, Lesbian, and Straight Education Network
(GLSEN), or elsewhere and you will find hundreds, if not thou-
sands, of names and biographies. The list here contains only a few
of these names.
People such as Harry Hay, Magnus Hirschfeld, Phyllis Lyon,
and Del Martin have had significant impact on the development
of gay and lesbian consciousness. Others, such as Leonard Mat-
lovich and Yukio Mishima, were not gay activists per se, but by
living openly nonconformist lives, they became role models for
others, as did Evelyn Hooker, a heterosexual psychologist who in
the 1950s was instrumental in overturning the illness model of
homosexuality. Antigay activists such as Anita Bryant, Paul
Drummond Cameron, Jerry Falwell, and Lon Mabon still have a
major influence in contemporary U.S. politics.
Susan B. Anthony (1820–1906)
Susan B. Anthony was one of the major activists behind the
early suffragette movement. She was born to the family of a
Quaker abolitionist on February 15, 1820, in Adams, Massa-
chusetts. She was able to read at an early age and was sent to
boarding school in Philadelphia to finish her education. She be-
came a teacher at Eunice Kenyon’s Quaker Academy in New
Rochelle, New York.
129

By 1846, she moved to Rochester, New York, where she be-
came headmistress of the female department at the Canajoharie
Academy. She joined the temperance movement and began to
identify the inequalities between the sexes. Soon, in 1851, she met
Elizabeth Cady Stanton. They formed a fifty-year-long personal
and political partnership that significantly impacted nineteenth-
century America.
Anthony discovered that male temperance leaders were not
interested in the participation of women. Thus, in 1852, she
founded the Women’s State Temperance Society of New York.
The Civil War pushed the struggle for women’s rights to the back
burner. Once the war was over, Anthony spoke across the coun-
try on the issues of women’s right to control property, to their
guardianship of their children, and to divorce. When the debate
on the Fourteenth Amendment was held in Congress in 1868,
which granted all males the right to vote, she led an unsuccessful
attempt to have women included.
One by one, the women Anthony associated with married.
Her loneliness was swept away in 1868 when she met Anna Dick-
inson—a woman twenty years her junior and popular lecturer on
women’s rights.
In 1872 Anthony tested the legality of the right of women to
vote in Rochester, New York. She attempted to vote and was ar-
rested, tried, and fined. She refused to pay the fine on moral
grounds garnering much publicity for the cause. Susan B. An-
thony died on March 13, 1906, in Rochester, New York, fourteen
years before passage of the Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution—the so-called Anthony amendment that granted
women the right to vote.
James Baldwin (1924–1987)
James Baldwin was an African American gay writer who ad-
dressed racism in his books and essays. Born on August 2, 1924, in
Harlem, New York, Baldwin was raised by a Bible-thumping,
white-hating preacher stepfather. Baldwin read his way through
two Harlem libraries by age thirteen. He initially followed in his
stepfather’s footsteps, and at age fourteen became a Holy Roller
minister at the Fireside Pentecostal Church in Harlem. For those
two years, Baldwin was out of school preaching in the streets.
After high school, Baldwin moved to Greenwich Village,
working at low-paying jobs to help support his siblings. He be-
130
Biographical Sketches

gan to publish reviews and essays in respected magazines such as
The Nation, New Leader, and Commentary. But he felt trapped as a
black man in racist America and as a gay man in the homophobic
African American community. Thus, in 1948, with a passport and
a little pocket money, he went to Paris.
His fiction writing flourished in France. He was encouraged
by his lover, Lucien Happersberger, and published the novel Go
Tell It on the Mountain in 1953. His next two books, Giovanni’s
Room (1956) and Another Country (1962), brought critical acclaim
to Baldwin. But the homosexuality depicted in Another Country
brought savage criticism from the black community. It was virtu-
ally impossible to depict such a taboo subject at that time. Even
today, the contributions made by Baldwin in his discussion of
race and homosexuality are undervalued. For the next forty
years, he continued to write novels, plays, and essays that were
controversial and often dealt with the civil rights movement as it
related to the black experience. He died of cancer on December 1,
1987, in the south of France.
Tammy Baldwin (1962– )
The first open lesbian to be directly elected to Congress, Tammy
Baldwin was born in Madison, Wisconsin, in 1962. Raised by her
mother and maternal grandparents, she graduated first in her
class at Madison West High School. She received an A.B. degree
from Smith College in Northampton, Massachusetts, in 1984 with
majors in government and mathematics. She earned her J.D. from
the University of Wisconsin Law School while an active member
of the Dane County Board of Supervisors. She was a member of
the Wisconsin State Legislature for six years. Not only is she the
first woman from the state of Wisconsin elected to Congress in
1998, but also she did this while being an open lesbian. In Con-
gress she serves on the House Budget and Judiciary Committees
and was reelected in 2000.
She is dedicated to enacting laws that benefit her con-
stituents in Wisconsin. She is a leading advocate for health care
reform, preserving and protecting Social Security and Medicare,
and assisting people with disabilities in their efforts to lead pro-
ductive lives. As a first-term congressmember, Baldwin led the
successful effort to reauthorize the Violence Against Women Act.
Biographical Sketches
131

Elizabeth M. Birch (1959– )
Elizabeth Birch is currently the director of the Human Rights
Campaign and has been responsible for tripling the size of the or-
ganization in fewer than ten years.
Birch was born in Dayton, Ohio, in September 1959 to Cana-
dian parents. He father was in the Canadian Air Force and the
family spent much of their time in Winnipeg. Birch left home in
her teens to join the cast of Up With People (an organization ded-
icated to developing leaders with a global perspective). She then
earned a bachelor’s degree at the University of Hawaii and earned
her law degree from Santa Clara (with honors). While in law
school, she clerked with California Supreme Court justice Mosk.
After law school, she worked as a commercial litigator at the
firm of McCutchen, Doyle, Brown & Enersen in San Francisco.
She moved onto Apple Computer, Inc. where she was Worldwide
Director of Litigation and Human Resources counsel. She has au-
thored a number of AIDS antidiscrimination policies that became
law in California. She is the founder of AIDS Legal Services in
northern California.
In 1995, she began serving as executive director of the Hu-
man Rights Campaign. She has represented HRC and the com-
munity throughout the country and in the media, including such
programs as Good Morning America, 20/20, This Week, Face the Na-
tion, Nightline, Crossfire, Larry King Live, and Newshour with Jim
Lehrer. HRC has developed a reputation for innovative communi-
cations strategies and products. During Birch’s eight-year tenure,
HRC has been successful in defeating every antigay and anti-
AIDS initiatives, except for one, in the United States. This is a ma-
jor achievement considering that during this time the congres-
sional cycles were very conservative. In the 2000 election cycle,
HRC was able to invest over $1 million supporting 210 races with
a 90 percent success rate. HRC has expanded its foundation ef-
forts through launching the National Coming Out Day Program,
HRC WorkNet, and the Lesbian Health Project.
Birch has received numerous legal awards in California, in-
cluding Pro Bono Lawyer of the Year. Birch lives in Chevy Chase,
Maryland, with her partner Hilary Rosen and their two children.
Rita Mae Brown (1944– )
Rita Mae Brown is the author of Rubyfruit Jungle, the first lesbian
132
Biographical Sketches

novel with a happy ending. Brown was born November 28, 1944,
in Hanover, Pennsylvania, and was adopted in infancy. The fam-
ily moved to Fort Lauderdale, Florida, in 1955, where Brown at-
tended high school and had sex with both boys and girls. When
she was sixteen, love letters she had written to a female school-
mate were discovered by a friend. They were shown to the girl’s
father, and Brown was dismissed from the student council and
lost friends.
She attended the University of Florida. Her scholarship was
revoked in 1964 because of her involvement in the civil rights
movement and her public statement that she had the right to love
the person of her choice—black, white, male, or female. The dean
of the university ordered her to therapy on a daily basis with the
campus psychiatrist. She dropped out of school and hitchhiked to
New York City. There she lived for a while with a gay black man
and an orphaned cat in an abandoned car. The cat, named Baby
Jesus, would remain her companion for the next seventeen years.
Brown returned to college in 1967 and founded the Student
Homophile League at New York University. She graduated with
a bachelor’s degree in English in 1968 and joined the New York
chapter of the National Organization for Women (NOW). She
brought the issue of lesbian rights to the attention of NOW and
authored the Radicalesbians manifesto “The Woman Identified
Woman.” The members of NOW responded poorly, and Brown
quit the organization to form a more radical feminist group, Red-
stockings, in 1970. Later, in 1971, she was an organizing member
of the Furies Collective in Washington, D.C.
Brown’s semiautobiographical novel Rubyfruit Jungle was re-
leased in 1973 by a small feminist press. It sold astonishingly well;
more than 70,000 copies were sold through word of mouth. Ban-
tam Books bought the rights to Rubyfruit Jungle for $250,000 and
printed 300,000 copies. This infusion of cash allowed Brown to
devote herself full-time to writing.
She has written many novels and essays, published two
books of poetry, translated six plays by the medieval nun
Hrotsvitha, and written award-winning screenplays for televi-
sion. In 1978, Brown moved to Charlottesville, Virginia, where
she shared a house with Fannie Flagg (author of Fried Green Toma-
toes at the Whistle-Stop Café). Brown met Czechoslovakian tennis
star Martina Navratilova in 1979. The two fell in love and bought
a mansion outside Charlottesville. The relationship lasted only
two years. Brown then moved to Los Angeles to work on a num-
Biographical Sketches
133

ber of screenplays for television. Her 1982 ABC series I Love Lib-
erty won an Emmy nomination.
Brown moved back to Charlottesville and began her own
company, American Artists, Inc., to help produce Rubyfruit Jungle
and other novels for television. After ten years of solitude, she be-
gan a relationship with Judy Nelson, a former lover of
Navratilova. Rita Mae Brown continues to be a prolific writer.
Anita Bryant (1940– )
Anita Bryant launched the Save Our Children organization to
stop gay and lesbian rights in Dade County, Florida. This became
the galvanizing force behind what would become the religious
right.
Born into a devoutly Southern Baptist family in Barnsdall,
Oklahoma, Anita Bryant accepted Jesus Christ as her savior when
she was eight. In 1958 she was chosen Miss Oklahoma and later
runner-up Miss America. She was a talented singer and was cho-
sen by Bob Hope in 1961 to participate in his Christmas junket en-
tertaining GIs in the Caribbean. For seven years, Anita traveled
with Bob Hope to the Arctic, the Pacific, and the Far East, includ-
ing Vietnam, to sing in his Holiday Troupe.
Her trademark song was a rousing rendition of the “Battle
Hymn of the Republic,” which she sang at the 1976 Super Bowl
halftime, Bob Hope’s Christmas specials, and presidential per-
formances. From 1960 to 1980, Bryant was a spokesperson for the
Florida Citrus Growers. She became known as the Sunshine-Tree
Girl. During those eleven years she made seventy-six television
commercials and orange juice sales climbed from 382 million gal-
lons to more than 800 million gallons a year.
In 1977, the Miami-Dade County Commission passed an or-
dinance making it illegal to discriminate on the basis of sexual
orientation. Upset by this development, Bryant organized a
group called Save Our Children. She obtained sufficient signa-
tures to place a referendum on the ballot to overturn the ordi-
nance. It was passed overwhelmingly by the county citizens. Her
crusade galvanized the gay pride movement to organize and co-
ordinate a national protest and spurred conservative religious
groups into what is today known as the religious right. A suc-
cessful boycott by the gay community of orange juice resulted in
the termination of her contract with the Florida Citrus Growers.
At the same time, her marriage dissolved.
134
Biographical Sketches

Twenty-one years later, in 1998, a new law outlawing dis-
crimination based on sexual orientation was approved by the
Miami-Dade County Commission. Bryant has made no com-
ments about this new law, as she is preoccupied with the bank-
ruptcy of the Anita Bryant Theater.
Ron Buckmire (1968– )
Ron Buckmire is an African American professor of mathematics
who is the creator of the Queer Resources Directory—the largest
and oldest source of gay/lesbian/bisexual/transgender and
AIDS/HIV information on the Internet. Born May 21, 1968, in
Grenville, Grenada, Buckmire was recognized early as having
strong mathematical skills. He was three-time Barbados Junior
Chess Champion (1983–1986) and three-time Barbados Senior
Chess Champion (1983–1986). He was accepted to Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute in Troy, New York, where he completed his
bachelor of science degree, magna cum laude, in mathematics in
1989. He continued on to receive his master’s degree (1992) and
then his Ph.D. in applied mathematics (1994). While at Rensselaer,
Buckmire designed and launched the Queer Resources Directory
(www.qrd.org).
In 1991, Buckmire met his life partner, Dean Elzinga. They
both moved to Los Angeles when Buckmire accepted a teaching
position at Occidental College in 1996. Besides teaching,
Buckmire continues his chess playing and is currently ranked in
the top 250 of the United States. He is also a board member of
PlanetOut Corp., on the steering committee of the Los Angeles
Freedom to Marry Coalition, cofounder of Digital Queers 
Los Angeles (1995), and manager of numerous Internet mailing
lists, such as Queerlaw, Marriage, GLBPOC, Queer Politics, and
NA-teach.
Charlotte Bunch (1944– )
Charlotte Bunch is considered one of the most important theorists
on gay and lesbian politics and is an expert on feminism. Bunch
was born October 13, 1944, in West Jefferson, North Carolina, but
grew up in a small town in northern New Mexico. Graduating
high school in 1962 with highest honors, she went to Duke Uni-
versity because “the men there would be more willing to accept
such an independent woman” (Newton 1994, 61). At Duke, she
Biographical Sketches
135

became deeply involved in social and political actions and later
organized demonstrations against racism and the Vietnam War.
Bunch married Jim Weeks in the spring of 1967. However,
they grew apart as Bunch became aware of her lesbianism. She
became deeply involved in the emerging lesbian feminist move-
ment and helped found the Furies Collective.
Over the years she became very involved with one or an-
other civil rights or antiwar organizations, including the National
Organization for Women, the University Christian Movement,
the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, the National Women’s
Program of the American Friends Service Committee, the New
York City Commission on the Status of Women, and the National
Council for Research on Women.
As a professor of urban studies at Case Western Reserve Uni-
versity and Rutgers University, she has lectured and written ex-
tensively on feminist theory. She has developed a core course on
feminist theory used by many universities. She has edited eight
books on feminist thought besides having her essays published
by St. Martin’s Press in 1986 (Passion and Politics).
Paul Drummond Cameron (1939– )
Paul Cameron is the primary source of antigay “research.”
Cameron was born November 9, 1939, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
He received his bachelor’s degree from Los Angeles Pacific Uni-
versity in 1961, obtained a master’s degree from California State
University Los Angeles in 1962, and earned his Ph.D. from the Uni-
versity Colorado in 1966. He was affiliated with various colleges
and universities until 1980, including Wayne State University
(1967–1968), University of Louisville (1970–1973), Fuller Graduate
School of Psychology (part of the Fuller Theological Seminary,
1976–1979), and the University of Nebraska (1979– 1980).
In 1980, his teaching contract with the Department of Psy-
chology of the University of Nebraska was not renewed. At that
time, he began publishing hysterical pamphlets alleging that gays
were disproportionately responsible for serial killings, child mo-
lestation, and other heinous crimes. In these pamphlets, Cameron
misrepresented the findings of academic researchers. Cameron
was asked to retract his statements, but he refused. Complaints
were filed, and the American Psychological Association investi-
gated Cameron and found that he not only misrepresented the
works of others but also used unsound methods in his own stud-
136
Biographical Sketches

ies. For this ethical breach, he was expelled from the association
in 1983. Cameron has also been expelled from the Nebraska Psy-
chological Association and the American Sociological Associa-
tion. In Baker v. Wade (the case in which a Texas court found the
state’s prohibition against consensual sodomy between homosex-
uals to be unconstitutional), Judge Buchmeyer of the U.S. district
court in Dallas states, “Dr. Paul Cameron . . . has himself made
misrepresentations to this court” and “there have been no fraud
or misrepresentation except by Dr. Cameron” (536).
Cameron conducted a large research study in the early 1980s
from which he has made outrageous claims—such as the short
life expectancy of gay men. The professional censure of Cameron
has not stopped his antigay agenda. In 1987, Cameron founded
the Family Research Institute and has been a virtual one-man
propaganda press, periodically revising his brochures and dis-
tributing them to policymakers. Yet with all these problems of
poor science, the religious right latched onto and helped fund
Cameron’s work to substantiate its religious agenda. When chal-
lenges are made concerning Cameron’s ethical breach, unsound
research methodology, and misinformation, the religious right
dismisses the problems, holds him up as a martyr, and continues
to promote his work.
Edward Carpenter (1844–1929)
Carpenter was one of the first authors to write about homosexu-
ality in a positive light. He took great chances with his writing at
a time when people such as Oscar Wilde were being imprisoned
for homosexual acts.
Born in Brighton, England, on August 29, 1844, Edward Car-
penter grew up in a home dominated by his retired naval officer
father. Carpenter was educated in Brighton College and then
studied for the priesthood at Trinity Hall at Cambridge in 1864.
He was ordained in 1869 and appointed to the parish of St. Ed-
ward’s in Cambridge in 1870.
Soon, he had developed serious doubts about the church. He
resigned from the priesthood in 1874. He supported himself
teaching classes on astronomy in northern England. At the same
time, he became active in the socialist movement and wrote a
half-dozen books exploring change in society.
Carpenter became aware of his own sexual awakening and
was influenced by Walt Whitman’s homoerotic poetry. In April
Biographical Sketches
137

1877, Carpenter traveled to the United States to speak with Whit-
man and found the poet reluctant to discuss social and political
issues as they related to his work. Carpenter was disappointed by
these meetings with Whitman but began to integrate a positive
homosexual view into his socialist writings. Carpenter saw the
Uranian (homosexual) spirit to be more enlightened than that of
the common man and believed that Uranians were the new
prophets of the coming social revolution.
Carpenter inherited a large sum of money on the death of his
father in 1882, which allowed him to build a home isolated on
seven acres in Millthorpe, Chesterfield. He lived there for the next
forty years. In 1891, Carpenter met and fell in love with George
Merrill, with whom he lived until the latter’s death in 1928.
Heartbroken, Carpenter moved to a small cottage in nearby Guil-
ford and died a year later.
Martin Bauml Duberman (1930– )
For more than two decades, Martin Duberman has been one of
the leading academic spokespersons on lesbian and gay rights.
He was one of the founding members of the Gay Academic Union
in the 1970s and is the founder/director of the Center for Lesbian
and Gay Studies at the graduate school of the City University of
New York.
Born in New York City on August 6, 1930, he earned his
bachelor of arts degree from Yale in 1952 and a Ph.D. in history
from Harvard in 1957. In his book Cures: A Gay Man’s Odyssey, he
reports being sexually attracted to men as far back as he could re-
member. He did not act on his homosexual feelings until his
freshman year at Yale. For many years, he was in and out of ther-
apy to help him understand and deal with those feelings.
His life has seen a series of increasingly prestigious academic
appointments, from his early days as an instructor of history at
Yale to his professorship of history at Lehman Graduate Center of
the City University of New York. He has also been a prolific
writer of more than a dozen books, many of which have won ma-
jor awards. In 1992, he became the editor of a fifty-volume series
on the lives of Notable Gay Men and Lesbians.
Duberman has written four major books chronicling the gay
rights movement: About Time: Exploring the Gay Past (1986, 1991);
Hidden from History: Reclaiming the Gay and Lesbian Past (1989);
Cures: A Gay Man’s Odyssey (1991); and Stonewall (1993).
138
Biographical Sketches

Jerry L. Falwell (1933– )
Jerry Falwell founded the Moral Majority and is one of the major
forces representing fundamentalist Christian principles in U.S.
politics. Falwell was born on August 11, 1933, in Lynchburg, Vir-
ginia. He received a bachelor’s degree from the Baptist Bible Col-
lege of Springfield, Missouri, in 1956 and was married two years
later to Macel Pate (with whom he has three children).
Falwell founded the Thomas Road Baptist Church in Lynch-
burg in 1956, where he continues to this day as pastor. He saw the
need for a Christian-based school of higher education and
founded Liberty University in Lynchburg in 1971. Recognizing
the power of radio and television, he hosted the Old-Time Gospel
Hour television program for many years.
In 1979, as a reaction to the political battle over homosexual-
ity in Florida and elsewhere, he branched out into political action
and founded the Moral Majority. Unlike the church or university
or television programs, the Moral Majority allowed Falwell to di-
rectly participate in local and national elections. The Moral Ma-
jority has been one of the major opponents of gay rights legisla-
tion in the United States. In 1989, the Moral Majority changed its
name to the Liberty Federation.
Falwell has written many books, with the most influential
being Listen, America! (1980); The Fundamentalist Phenomenon
(1981); Champions for God (1985); and his autobiography, Strength
for the Journey (1987).
A national outcry occurred when Jerry Falwell blamed femi-
nists, lesbians, and gays as well as others on national television
for the bombing of the World Trade Center on September 11, 2001.
Michel Foucault (1926–1984)
Michel Foucault brought academic research and language con-
cerning sexual deconstruction to queer theory and AIDS activism.
Foucault was born in Poitiers, France, on October 15, 1926. He
was the son of an eminent surgeon and excelled in school. In 1946
he attended Ecole Normale Supérièure and was the fourth-
highest-ranked student. There he received his license in philoso-
phy in 1948 and in psychology in 1950; he was awarded diplomas
in psychopathology in 1952. He taught in France, Sweden,
Poland, and Germany and returned to France in 1960 as head of
the Philosophy Department at the University Claremont-Ferrard.
Biographical Sketches
139

There he published his landmark work Madness and Civilization
(1965). For this book he won the doctorate d’état. He argued that
“madness” is an invention of the age of reason.
In that same year, Foucault met Daniel Defret, a philosophy
student ten years his junior. They formed a relationship that
lasted more than eighteen years. It would be Defret’s political ac-
tivism that influenced Foucault’s future theoretical work.
In 1966, Foucault’s second major work, The Order of Things,
became a best-seller in France and made Foucault a household
name. The combination of economics, the natural sciences, and
linguistics in the eighteenth and nineteenth century was, in his
opinion, coming to an end. He predicted that “man” (the con-
struct) would be “erased, like a face drawn in sand at the edge of
the sea” (Russell 1995, 132).
Foucault’s influential work that has impacted gay and les-
bian thought was his monumental unfinished project The History
of Sexuality. Volume 1: An Introduction, which caused much con-
troversy when it was released in 1976. The second and third vol-
umes—The Uses of Pleasure and The Care of the Self—came out just
before his death in 1984.
It was Foucault’s experiences in San Francisco during 1975
when he was teaching at the University California, Berkeley that
influenced the development of The History of Sexuality. He was
impressed by liberated gay sexuality, particularly in the bath-
houses. He wrote: “I think that is politically important that sexu-
ality be able to function as it functions in the bath houses. You
meet men there who are to you as you are to them: nothing but a
body with which combinations in production of pleasure are pos-
sible. You cease to be imprisoned in your own face, in your own
past, in your own identity” (Russell 1995, 133).
The History of Sexuality articulated what is known as the theory
of social constructionism. It states that sexuality is far from being
“natural” and unmediated. Rather, it is a cultural construction that
varies considerably from culture to culture and over time. Our
modern notions of gay and lesbian, of homosexual and heterosex-
ual, are comparatively recent inventions. Michel Foucault died on
June 25, 1984, in Paris from complications resulting from AIDS.
Barney Frank (1940– )
Barney Frank is an openly gay Democratic congressmember from
the state of Massachusetts who wields significant power in the
140
Biographical Sketches

House of Representatives. Born in Bayonne, New Jersey, on
March 31, 1940, Frank earned his bachelor’s degree from Harvard
College in 1962 and then entered a doctoral program in political
science. He left graduate school in 1967 to become involved in
Kevin White’s campaign for mayor of Boston. White was elected
and appointed Frank as his executive assistant. That allowed
Frank an inside look at the workings of politics in Boston and in
Massachusetts.
Frank won election to the Massachusetts House of Represen-
tatives in 1972 and earned a reputation as being very outspoken,
extremely liberal, and sometimes one of the most abrasive per-
sonalities in the state. He easily won reelection in 1974, 1976, and
since. Frank has weathered a number of very close elections, each
time improving his winning margin.
In 1989, the conservative Washington Times discovered and
reported on a male prostitute, Steve Gobie, who was living in
Frank’s home at the time. The Times’ investigation discovered that
Gobie had used Frank’s apartment to operate a bisexual prostitu-
tion business. Frank claimed not to know anything about the ille-
gal behavior, but he nevertheless came under investigation by the
House Ethics Committee. The House officially reprimanded
Frank by a vote of 408 to 18.
After the incident, Frank spoke out more often on gay and
lesbian issues. Frank has said very little about his own personal
life other than “he lives with Herb Moses.” Disclosure of his ho-
mosexuality has had little effect on his career.
Although Frank is openly gay and promotes gay rights leg-
islation, he has sometimes been chastised by lesbian and gay civil
rights leaders. For instance, the debate over President Bill Clin-
ton’s promise to revoke the ban on gays and lesbians in the armed
forces resulted in Frank supporting Clinton’s compromise. Frank
explained this as being an expedient decision.
Barbara Gittings (1932– )
Gittings began the New York chapter of the Daughters of Bilitis,
and was editor of the lesbian magazine The Ladder during its
formative years. Born in Vienna, Austria, in 1932, Gittings grew
up in a diplomat’s household. At the beginning of World War II,
the family returned to the United States, where Gittings com-
pleted high school and entered Northwestern University to study
drama. At Northwestern she had her first homosexual experi-
Biographical Sketches
141

ences. She was accused of being a lesbian by other students be-
cause of her close friendships with other women. She went into
counseling with a psychiatrist, who confirmed that she was a les-
bian. Gittings spent the remainder of her first year trying to find
out exactly what that meant. She spent much of her time at the li-
brary reading fiction works, such as Radclyffe Hall’s The Well of
Loneliness.
Discovering her lesbianism was very important to Gittings,
and she dropped out of Northwestern. She visited San Francisco
in 1956 and met Del Martin and Phyllis Lyon, founders of the
Daughters of Bilitis. This was an uplifting experience, and she re-
turned to New York to begin her own DOB chapter in 1958. In
1962 she became editor of The Ladder and held that position until
1966.
For much of the 1960s, Gittings was active in many of the
early homophile organizations, including New York City’s Gay
Activists Alliance. However, by the 1970s, her interest had
shifted, and she decided to work more within the system. She
joined the gay caucus of the American Library Association (ALA),
which allowed her to address her early frustrations at not finding
gay- and lesbian-related books in public libraries. She has been
instrumental in developing lists of these books and has written
material designed to help librarians locate lesbian and gay mate-
rials.
Radclyffe Hall (1880–1943)
Radclyffe’s Hall’s book The Well of Loneliness (1928) was banned in
Britain and caused far-ranging discussions of the topic of lesbian-
ism in the United States. Hall was born Margaret Radclyffe-Hall
Bournemouth in Hampshire, England, on August 12, 1880. She
came from a wealthy family and was educated at King’s College,
London. She wore very short hair and men’s clothing and was
known to her friends as John. By age twenty-seven, she is reported
to have “probably loved more women than she had read books”
(Russell 1995, 114). At that time, she met Mabel Batten (a woman
twenty years her senior), fell in love, and moved in with her.
At a London tea party in 1915, they met Una, Lady Trou-
bridge, an admiral’s wife. Batten unexpectedly died a few months
later from a heart attack. This facilitated the development of a
close relationship between Hall and Troubridge that lasted for the
next thirty years.
142
Biographical Sketches

Hall wrote and published a considerable volume of poetry
and a set of short stories with lesbian themes in 1924. Soon after
she won a number of coveted prizes for her writing. In 1928 she
published The Well of Loneliness. For its time, it was a sexually ex-
plosive story of a masculine girl who loves and loses women. Al-
though the book seems very tame by today’s standards, it was de-
clared obscene by London magistrate Chartres Biron.
The book was initially withheld in the United States but
eventually was published and distributed. For many women, The
Well of Loneliness was a beacon of light in an otherwise dark time
for lesbians. For years it was known as “the lesbian Bible.” Today,
the book is difficult to read, couched as it is in old terminology
and early-twentieth-century vernacular.
Henry (Harry) Hay (1912–2002)
Harry Hay is considered by many to be the founder of the modern
gay rights movement. Hay was born April 7, 1912, in Worthing
Sussex, England. His family was American and returned to Los
Angeles in 1917. He graduated from Los Angeles High School with
honors in 1929 and worked as an apprentice for a local attorney’s
office. At the age of seventeen, he enticed older gentlemen for sex
at the notorious Pershing Square in downtown Los Angeles.
From one of these older men, Hay learned of the Society for
Human Rights formed in Chicago many years earlier. The society
was the earliest gay rights group in the United States. Hay found
the idea of men getting together for anything other than sex “an
eye opener of an idea” (Newton 1994, 69).
He enrolled in the Drama Department at Stanford University
in 1930. Hay was tired of hiding his sexual orientation and told
his friends. Many avoided contact with him, but his closest
friends were not perturbed by the information. Hay quickly real-
ized that acting was unlikely to provide a living for him, so he be-
came active in guerrilla theater productions focused on workers’
rights and demonstrations. From there he joined the Communist
Party, working as union organizer and a developer of cultural
projects for the next fifteen years. The party was decidedly anti-
homosexual, however, and under its pressure, Hay married an-
other party member, Anita Platky. Their marriage lasted for fif-
teen years, producing two daughters.
In 1948 during a “beer bust” at the University of Southern
California, Hay and a group of gay friends developed the idea of
Biographical Sketches
143

an organization named Bachelors for Wallace in support of presi-
dential candidate Henry Wallace of the Progressive Party. Hay re-
alized that gay men needed to organize themselves to combat the
rising tide of Senator Joseph McCarthy’s anticommunist and an-
tihomosexual campaign. Two years later, Bob Hull, Chuck Row-
land, and Dale Jennings, along with Hay, founded the Interna-
tional Bachelors Fraternal Order for Peace and Social Dignity.
Later the organization was renamed the Mattachine Society. The
Mattachine Society grew and became the longest-lived ho-
mophile organization in the United States. It has been at the fore-
front of activism on behalf of freedom of the press and archiving
gay history.
Hay was instrumental in organizing the first gay pride pa-
rade in Los Angeles (and perhaps the nation) and other political
actions that put Los Angeles at the forefront of gay liberation in
the 1960s. He and his lover John Burnside, with whom he formed
The Circle of Loving Companions, opened a kaleidoscope factory.
The Stonewall Riots in New York in 1969 did not impress Hay. As
far as he was concerned, the East Coast was finally catching up
with Los Angeles. But Hay got caught up in the excitement of the
times and was elected chair of the Southern California Gay Lib-
eration Front in 1969 and hosted “Gay-In” and “funky dances”
despite police warnings against such activities since same-sex
couple dancing was illegal under California law at the time.
In 1970, Hay and Burnside moved their mail-order kaleido-
scope factory to New Mexico. The area had always enchanted
Hay ever since traveling there in the 1950s on his research into
berdache. He became increasingly interested in spiritual issues
and formed the Radical Faeries—a movement devoted to spiri-
tual truth, ecology, and gay life. The first gathering of the Radical
Faeries was in the Arizona desert in 1978 with more than 200 men
in attendance. The Radical Faeries movement grew, but, like the
Mattachine experience, Hay’s politics came in conflict with many
of the Faeries and he was ousted from its leadership.
In their later years, Hay and Burnside were provided hous-
ing and care as a tribute for his pioneering work by the gay com-
munity. Hay died in San Francisco, October 24, 2002.
Jesse Helms (1921– )
For more than thirty years, Jesse Helms had been the most out-
spoken opponent of gay and lesbian rights in the U.S. Senate.
144
Biographical Sketches

Born on October 18, 1921, in Monroe, North Carolina, Helms re-
ceived his bachelor’s degree from Wake Forest University. He
served in the U.S. Navy during World War II and after the war
took a job with the Raleigh North Carolina Times. He later became
city editor. From 1948 to 1970 he was the administrative assistant
to a number of U.S. senators, executive director of the North Car-
olina Bankers Association, and an executive vice president and
vice chairman of the Capitol Broadcasting Company.
He became disenchanted with the Democratic Party and
switched to the Republican Party in 1970. He was elected U.S.
senator in 1972 and has since become one of the most powerful
conservative voices in the U.S. Senate.
Helms consistently blocked gay and lesbian rights legislation
in the Senate. For example, in 1990 he was one of only four sena-
tors to vote against the Hate Crime Statistics Act. He believed the
U.S. Congress was being “hoodwinked” into adopting legislation
that would promote homosexuality. Helms was also a major op-
ponent of AIDS research and education. In 1990, he attempted to
persuade the U.S. Senate to amend the Americans with Disabili-
ties Act (ADA) to permit restaurant owners to discharge HIV-
infected individuals, but he was unsuccessful. Helms retired from
politics in 2002, announcing that he had had a change of heart
with regard to AIDS funding but not homosexuals.
Magnus Hirschfeld (1868–1935)
Hirschfeld founded the Scientific Humanitarian Committee in
Germany, which was the leading homosexual rights organization
in the world until its destruction by the Nazi government in 1933.
Hirschfeld was born in Kolberg, Germany, on May 14, 1868. He
earned a medical degree in 1887 and traveled to numerous for-
eign countries in the early 1890s, including visiting the 1893
Chicago World’s Fair, Asia, Africa, and Europe. Finally, in 1895 he
settled down and opened a medical practice in Charlottenburg,
which he transferred to Berlin in 1909. He specialized in the hu-
man nervous system and sexuality.
Hirschfeld was a homosexual and a Jew and wrote more
than 200 books in his lifetime. He viewed sexual orientation as
a deep and internal state over which one did not have a choice.
He became an advocate of homosexual rights, claiming that ho-
mosexuality was neither a sin nor an illness. He believed the
goal of the medical profession should be to help homosexuals
Biographical Sketches
145

adjust to society’s treatment of them and not try to change their
sexual orientation.
Hirschfeld, along with two friends, Max Sphor and Erich
Oberg, founded the Scientific Humanitarian Committee on May
15, 1897. Hirschfeld devoted nearly every waking moment of his
life to organizing, writing, and speaking for homosexual rights.
Hirschfeld helped found the Medical Society for Sexual Science
and Eugenics. Five years later he establish his own foundation—
the Magnus Hirschfeld Foundation for Sex Research—and later
the Institute for Sexual Research.
The constitution of Germany at this time contained Para-
graph 175, which outlawed homosexual acts. Hirschfeld worked
diligently to have the paragraph revoked. Eventually, the Reich-
stag removed homosexuality from the national penal code in
1929, but the up-and-coming Nazi Party reinstated persecution of
homosexuals. Hirschfeld was constantly harassed by the Nazi
Party and was often badly beaten. He fled to Switzerland in 1932
and then later to France. His last few years of life were spent in
France, where he died in Nice on May 15, 1935. His partner of
many years, Kurt Giese, committed suicide in Prague in 1936.
About 100 students attacked Hirschfeld’s Institute for Sexual
Research on May 6, 1933. They removed its contents of more than
20,000 books and 35,000 photographs, made a bonfire of the
items, and burned the building. The infamous pictures of Nazi
book burning shown in history books are pictures of the destruc-
tion of Hirschfeld’s library, and the books being burned are
mostly on the topic of homosexuality.
Evelyn Hooker (1907–1996)
Evelyn Hooker’s research in psychology in the early 1950s
opened the door to scientific demonstration that homosexuals are
not mentally ill. Born on September 2, 1907, Hooker was the sixth
of nine children. She lived next door to Buffalo Bill’s home in
North Platte, Nebraska. Her parents were extremely poor. They
had lived in a sod house in Sand Hills just months before her
birth. Her family lived on a succession of small farms, and she at-
tended one-room schoolhouses.
She entered the University of Colorado on a tuition scholar-
ship in 1924. She chose the Psychology Department because, in
part, it allowed her to work in the department and pay her own
way through college. In her senior year, Hooker accepted an in-
146
Biographical Sketches

structor position that enabled her to work on a master’s degree.
In 1930 Hooker was determined to go to an eastern university for
her doctoral degree. She wanted to attend Yale University, but the
chair of the department refused to recommend a woman. She
went to Johns Hopkins University instead. She completed her
Ph.D. in 1932 at the height of the Depression. There was no aca-
demic position for her other than a teaching position at a small
women’s college near Baltimore.
In the fall of 1934, she came down with tuberculosis and
went west to a sanitarium in California. She recovered, and after
two years of convalescence she obtain a part-time teaching posi-
tion at Whittier College. There she received an anonymous fel-
lowship that allowed her to travel to Germany and Russia in 1937
and 1938. Experiencing these totalitarian states intensified her
feelings that she wanted to do something important with her life
to help correct social injustices.
Soon, she was offered a research associate position in the
Psychology Department of the University California, Los Angeles
(UCLA), where she remained until 1970. She enjoyed teaching,
and it was at the suggestion of some of her students that she de-
cided to conduct research with homosexuals. She conducted ex-
ploratory research, but her divorce in 1947 and subsequent re-
marriage in 1951 postponed the project.
In 1953, Hooker applied to the National Institute of Mental
Health for a six-month grant to study the adjustments of nonclin-
ical homosexual men and to compare them to a similar group of
heterosexual men. This had never been done. All previous re-
search had included only homosexuals who either were in prison
or were mental patients. John Eberhart, chief of the grants divi-
sion of the institute, explained that her application was quite ex-
traordinary considering this was the height of the McCarthy
witch-hunt era. Even so, she received the grant, which was con-
tinually renewed until 1961. In her 1957 research, Hooker found
that expert clinical judges could not distinguish the projective test
protocols of nonclinical homosexual men from those of a compa-
rable group of heterosexual men, nor were there differences in ad-
justment ratings. Her findings were soon validated by other aca-
demic investigators. Research by Hooker and others directly led
to the American Psychiatric Association deleting homosexuality
from the DSM in 1973. Hooker gained great satisfaction from con-
tributing to the freedom of and lifting of the stigma from this mar-
ginalized group.
Biographical Sketches
147

Hooker entered private practice in the 1970s and was ap-
pointed chair of the National Institute of Mental Health Task
Force on Homosexuals. She won many awards and acclaims. She
died at her home in Santa Monica, California, on November 19,
1996, at the age of eighty-nine.
Larry Kramer (1935– )
Larry Kramer was a founder of ACT UP and was one of the ear-
liest AIDS activists. Kramer was born in Bridgeport, Connecticut,
on June 25, 1935. He grew up in a middle-class household, re-
ceived his bachelor of arts degree from Yale, and served a brief
stint in the army. He found work as an agent with the William
Morris Agency in New York City. Within a year, he began work-
ing for Columbia Pictures as an assistant story editor and then
production executive. United Artists hired him to be the assistant
to the president in 1965.
By 1969, he was a respected screenwriter and wrote the
screenplay for and produced Ken Russell’s film Women in Love.
For his effort, Kramer was nominated for an Academy Award.
The movie was famous for its homoerotic elements, something
unseen at the time.
In 1978 Kramer published his first novel, called Faggots. It
was a satire of a gay man’s search for love in bathhouses and bars.
Many in the gay community denounced the work but Kramer ar-
gued that it was meant to be a serious critique of the excesses of
certain people within the gay community.
Kramer was one of the first to write essays on what we now
know as AIDS. In his famous “1,112 and Counting” article, he
wrote: “If this article doesn’t scare the shit out of you, we’re in
real trouble. If this article doesn’t rouse you to anger, fury, rage,
and action, gay men may have no future on this earth. Our con-
tinued existence depends on just how angry you can get” (Russell
1995, 187).
Seeing the potential devastation from AIDS, Kramer, along
with five other men, founded the Gay Men’s Health Crisis
(GMHC) in 1982. Kramer’s combative personality forced him to
resign one year later. He used that experience to frame his 1985
drama, The Normal Heart. Although many agents and directors
initially turned the drama down, eventually it was produced and
won the 1986 Dramatists Guide Marton Award, the City Lights
Award, and the Sarah Siddons Award for best play of the year. It
148
Biographical Sketches

was later made into a movie. The purpose of the play was to
make people see gay men as men who love men and are sup-
portive during the dying process.
In 1987 Kramer was the primary force behind the creation of
the AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power (ACT UP). Its purpose was
to encourage public disobedience to draw attention to the AIDS
crisis. Its first demonstration was on March 24, 1987, on Wall
Street in New York City. Almost 300 men and women tied up traf-
fic for several hours chanting for AIDS reform. Many were ar-
rested, and the story garnered widespread media attention. ACT
UP spread across the country, with chapters found in every major
city.
Kramer learned he was HIV-positive in 1988. He responded
by writing the critically acclaimed 1992 play, The Destiny of Me.
His in-your-face activism has made him one the most influential
gay men in America today.
Audre Lorde (1934–1992)
Audre Lorde was an African American poet whose book of essays
Sister Outsider has become a feminist classic and is used as a sta-
ple in women’s studies courses. Lorde was born in Harlem, New
York, on February 18, 1934. Her parents were from Granada and
believed they were going to return to their Caribbean home. As
such, Lorde had a profound nostalgia for her lost “home.”
She picked up languages easily and memorized poems vora-
ciously. She attended Hunter College High School and in 1954 at-
tended the National University of Mexico for a year. “For the first
time in my life,” she wrote, “I walked down the streets of the city
where most of the people were brown-skinned, everywhere I
went. It was like coming into sunlight” (Russell 1995, 201).
She returned to the United States and entered the “gay-girl”
scene in Greenwich Village. However, she was distressed to find
only three or four black women in the lesbian community. At
Hunter College she worked as a librarian and continued to write
poetry. She attempted to become part of the Harlem Writers
Guild, but was driven away by the groups’ homophobia. In 1959
she received a bachelor of arts degree in literature and philosophy
and went on to Columbia University School of Library Services
where she earned a master’s of library science in 1960.
She published her first book of poems, The First Cities, in
1968. Because of its success, she spent six weeks as a writer-in-
Biographical Sketches
149

residence at Tougaloo College in Mississippi. It was there that she
met Frances Clayton, the woman who would become her life
partner.
Lorde returned to New York City and taught courses for the
SEEK program at City College. There she met writers Alice
Walker and Adrienne Rich, an enriching experience for Lorde.
Through their encouragement, Lorde publicly read a lesbian love
poem for the first time in 1971. Although it was later published in
Ms. magazine, her book editor rejected it for inclusion in her third
volume of poetry, From a Land Where Other People Live. That book
was nominated for a National Book Award in 1974.
Lorde contracted breast cancer in the late 1970s, which later
recurred She wrote about her mastectomy and decision to forgo
additional surgery in her autobiographical Cancer Journals (1980).
In 1984 she wrote Sister Outsider, a collection of essays on femi-
nism and race that has become a staple of women’s studies
courses. She died on November 17, 1992.
Phyllis Lyon (1924– )
Phyllis Lyon cofounded the Daughters of Bilitis and the nation’s
first lesbian periodical, The Ladder. Lyon was born on November
10, 1924, in Tulsa, Oklahoma. Her family moved many times dur-
ing her childhood and she lived in Seattle, Southern California,
and the San Francisco Bay area. She eventually graduated from
Sacramento High School in 1943 and received a bachelor of arts
degree in journalism in 1946 from the University of California,
Berkeley.
Lyon, like many women of her day, believed that she would
eventually have to marry and center her life on a man. However,
while working as a writer for a trade magazine in Seattle, she met
Del Martin and fell in love. They have been together ever since.
Phyllis Lyon and Del Martin together founded the Daughters
of Bilitis in 1955. A year later, they founded the nation’s first les-
bian periodical, The Ladder. In 1972, Lyons and Martin wrote
Lesbian/Woman, a book that Publishers Weekly considers one of the
twenty most important books of our time.
Lyon focused on the study of human sexuality and in 1970
cofounded the Institute for the Advanced Study of Human Sexu-
ality in San Francisco. It is there that she earned her doctorate in
education in 1976. She has also served for many years on the San
Francisco Human Rights Commission.
150
Biographical Sketches

Lon T. Mabon (1947– )
Lon Mabon founded Oregon Citizens Alliance (OCA), which was
instrumental in the passage of Measure 8 (which revoked the gov-
ernor’s executive order giving equal legal protection based on sex-
ual orientation). Mabon was born May 12, 1947, in Minnesota. As
an adult, he lived in southern Oregon with his wife, Bonnie, and
their three children. He and his wife owned an adult retirement
home. Lon Mabon is a Bible teacher involved in his local church.
In 1986, Mabon was the southern Oregon regional director
for fundamentalist Baptist preacher Joe Lutz in his challenge for
Robert Packwood’s Senate seat. From that experience and his re-
ligious teachings, Mabon launched OCA and the No Special
Rights Committee. Their goal was to overturn Governor Neil
Goldschmidt’s executive order giving equal legal protection
based on sexual orientation. OCA collected the necessary signa-
tures to place Measure 8 on the ballot, and the measure won by
an overwhelming majority. Thus, the executive order was re-
voked. OCA has been instrumental in developing other initiatives
and political movements in Oregon with the goal of preventing
antidiscrimination laws based on sexual orientation, stopping
abortions, and prohibiting public schools from “promoting the
homosexual lifestyle.” Most of these other efforts have been un-
successful.
During a 1991 antigay event, gay rights activist Catherine
Stauffer was roughed up by OCA spokesman Scott Lively. She
sued and won a $30,000 judgment against OCA. The Mabons re-
fused to pay, and the case went back to court a number of times.
The Mabons claimed that OCA did not have the $30,000 to make
restitution, even though it is estimated that more than $1 million
went through the organization in a few years. The court required
the Mabons to produce OCA’s financial records. Lon Mabon re-
fused to comply with the court order and was jailed for contempt
of court. Bonnie Mabon avoided going to jail when she agreed to
bring the records in. Stauffer continued suing Lon Mabon, claim-
ing he fraudulently transferred money out of OCA to avoid pay-
ing the 1992 judgment to her.
Del Martin (1921– )
Del Martin cofounded the Daughters of Bilitis and the nation’s
first lesbian periodical, The Ladder. Born in San Francisco on May
Biographical Sketches
151

5, 1921, Martin graduated from George Washington High School
in 1937. As a young woman living in the United States before
World War II, Martin was uncomfortable with the expected life
path of marriage and family. In a 1971 interview, Martin related
that when she double-dated, she had little interest in her male
date and was more interested in the other girls. Still, she married
and gave birth to a daughter.
Her feelings for other women were strong, and eventually
she divorced her husband. She read Radclyffe Hall’s The Well of
Loneliness and other books that helped her recognize her sexual
orientation. She came out to friends when she was twenty-six,
and several years later met Phyllis Lyon, who became her life
partner.
Martin, Lyon, and six other women were dissatisfied with
the limited social outlets available to lesbians. They wanted an al-
ternative to the bars and formed an organization named the
Daughters of Bilitis. Although it began as a social club, DOB
quickly expanded into educational programs for lesbians and the
general community and engaged in political activism. Within a
year, Martin and Lyon founded The Ladder, the nation’s first les-
bian periodical.
Martin and Lyon have been together for more than four
decades and have been deeply involved in political activism.
Martin was a founding member of the Council of Religion and the
Homosexual in 1964 and San Francisco’s Alice B. Toklas Memo-
rial Democratic Club in 1972. The National Organization for
Women accepted Martin on the board of directors in 1973 as
NOW’s first open lesbian representative. In 1972 Martin, along
with Lyon, wrote one of the most important books on gay love in
the lesbian movement—Lesbian/Woman. Martin also wrote Bat-
tered Wives, a book that has had significant impact on the national
movement against domestic violence.
Leonard Matlovich (1943–1988)
Leonard Matlovich was involved in one of the earliest legal test
cases against the U.S. military’s discharge of gay personnel. Mat-
lovich was born July 6, 1943, in Savannah, Georgia. Since his fa-
ther was a sergeant in the U.S. Air Force, Matlovich grew up at
various bases in the United States and England. After graduating
from high school, he enlisted in the Air Force and was trained in
its electrical school. Upon completing his training, he eagerly ac-
152
Biographical Sketches

cepted an assignment to Vietnam. Matlovich revealed in an inter-
view many years later that he had been aware of his homosexual
feelings since age twelve and it was important for him to “prove
that he was a man” (Newton 1994, 76). Thus, he often volunteered
for the most dangerous missions in Vietnam. By the time he re-
turned to the United States, he had been awarded the Bronze Star
and Purple Heart, along with other medals.
After the war, Matlovich was assigned to teach classes on
racism at U.S. military bases. Matlovich found this to be a some-
what ironic assignment because of his self-acknowledged racist
views. As he taught, he found that he began to include discus-
sions about homosexuality. However, at age thirty, Matlovich was
still a virgin. He decided that he needed to find other gay people
and discover what it meant to be gay; so he went to a gay bar.
Matlovich expected the worst. He later told interviewers that
“seeing the real thing was totally different. In an instant, a billion
pounds of pressure fell from my shoulders” (Newton 1994, 76).
Matlovich decided he could not continue living a double life.
In discussions with the ACLU and other legal representatives,
Matlovich volunteered to become a test case to challenge the U.S.
military’s discrimination against lesbians and gays. He an-
nounced his homosexuality to a commanding officer and was
immediately expelled. Although he had twelve years of perfect
performance reviews in the military, homosexuality caused his
discharge. For many years, his case was bounced back and forth
between courts. Eventually, the U.S. military offered Matlovich
$160,000 not to return to duty, an offer he accepted. Matlovich ex-
plained he was no longer the person he used to be and did not
want to return to the Air Force.
Matlovich moved to San Francisco in 1978 and was unsuc-
cessful at gaining a seat on the city’s Board of Supervisors. In 1986
he was diagnosed with AIDS and spent the remaining two years of
life working as an HIV activist. He died in San Francisco on June
23, 1988, and two years later President George H. W. Bush issued
a special citation to Matlovich’s parents, stating: “The United
States of America honors the memory of Leonard P. Matlovich.
This certificate is awarded by a grateful nation in recognition of de-
voted and selfless consecration to the service of our country in the
armed forces of the United States” (Newton 1994, 77). Matlovich is
buried at the Congressional Cemetery in Washington, D.C., where
his tombstone states, “When I was in the military, they gave me a
medal for killing two men, and a discharge for loving one.”
Biographical Sketches
153

Harvey Milk (1930–1978)
Harvey Milk was one of the first openly gay officials elected to of-
fice in a major U.S. city; he was murdered by Dan White on No-
vember 27, 1978. Born in New York City on May 22, 1930, Milk
grew up in a middle-class family where he constantly battled to
keep his rigorous school activities and his homosexual interests
separate from each other. He received a bachelor’s degree in
mathematics in 1950 from New York State College for Teachers
and enlisted in the U.S. Navy. He rose to the rank of petty officer
and was discharged in August 1955. He worked as an actuarial
statistician and researcher for a Wall Street investment firm. In
1963, he was transferred to Dallas for a short time, after which he
resigned his job to follow his partner to San Francisco.
San Francisco changed Milk. He abandoned his Republican
conservatism and became a brash Democratic liberal. He opened
a camera shop on Castro Street that became a center for social and
political life for the growing gay community. Milk soon earned
the nickname “the mayor of Castro Street.”
Milk ran for the city’s Board of Supervisors in 1973 but was
not elected. He ran again in 1975 and in a stunning upset won
with more than 30 percent of the votes. In November 1978, con-
servative supervisor Dan White resigned his position on the
board citing personal pressures. White changed his mind and
asked for his position back. The mayor refused. A week later Dan
White entered City Hall and shot Harvey Milk and Mayor
George Moscone to death. White had had a long-standing feud
with Milk and believed that he was partially responsible for
Moscone’s decision.
The murder of the two men resulted in one of the most im-
pressive memorial services ever seen in San Francisco, with more
than 40,000 men, women, and children marching by candlelight
to City Hall. Days before his assassination, Milk recorded his po-
litical will. One statement stood out from all the rest. He said: “if
a bullet should enter my brain, let that bullet destroy every closet
door” (Russell 1995, 951). Later that year, when White was given
a short seven-year sentence for the two murders, the largest riot
in San Francisco’s history occurred, with police cars overturned,
fires set, and hundreds of thousand of people marching to City
Hall in what is known as White Night.
154
Biographical Sketches

Yukio Mishima (1925–1970)
Yukio Mishima was a charismatic Japanese writer who was nom-
inated for the Nobel Prize three times. Born on January 14, 1925,
in Tokyo, Hiraoka Kimitake was the son of a high-level civil ser-
vant. He was slight and sickly by nature and allowed to be raised
as a girl by his grandmother. He wrote and published his first
short story when he was sixteen under the pseudonym Yukio
Mishima.
He worked in a factory during World War II and after the de-
feat studied law at the University of Tokyo. His second novel,
Confessions of a Mask, was published in 1949 and brought imme-
diate fame. Although the story revolves around a young boy rec-
ognizing his homosexuality and the need to conceal it behind a
mask, Japanese audiences seemed to miss the homosexual theme
and saw the story as a coming-of-age tale. After the success of the
novel, Mishima wrote numerous books and plays, including the
famous Madame de Sade.
He became obsessed with the military samurai past of Japan
and saw it as a solution to the materialism and isolation of the
modern world. Through exercise, karate, and kendo (a traditional
Japanese form of swordsmanship), he transformed himself phys-
ically into the samurai he wanted to be. Although dutiful as a
husband and father, his main sexual attraction was to male
“rough trade.” He celebrated and engaged in the tradition of ho-
mosexual love between samurai warriors.
His writings and beliefs attracted many followers. He built
his own private army, the Shield Society, to defend the emperor in
the event of a leftist uprising. On November 25, 1970, Mishima
and his followers took an army general hostage in Tokyo’s Ichi-
gaya military headquarters and encouraged an assembly of 1,500
soldiers to reject Japan’s democratic constitution and restore wor-
ship of the emperor. The soldiers were unimpressed with the de-
mand. Two hours later, Mishima had himself beheaded and his
devoted young collaborators committed hara-kiri.
Martina Navratilova (1956– )
Martina Navratilova was the number-one ranked tennis player in
the world for a number of years and has been one of the few
sports personalities who has been open about her homosexuality.
Born in Prague, Czechoslovakia, on October 18, 1956, Navratilova
Biographical Sketches
155

was brought up in a sports enthusiast’s family. She took up ten-
nis and won tournaments around Czechoslovakia. She visited
West Germany in 1969 as part of a tennis club exchange program.
It was a revealing experience for her. By age fifteen, she was tour-
ing Czechoslovakia and the Eastern bloc countries; she was better
known abroad than at home.
In the early 1970s, she was granted permission to play in the
United States in a number of tours, where she was managed by
Beverly Hills businessman Fred Barman. In 1975, while partici-
pating in the U.S. Open in New York, she contacted the New York
office of the Immigration and Naturalization Service through
Fred Barman and was granted asylum.
It was during these tours of the United States that she dis-
covered that she was attracted to women. She had a number of re-
lationships over the years, including a three-year affair with her
new manager, Sandra Haynie.
In 1978, Navratilova beat Chris Everett at Wimbledon to be-
come the number-one ranked tennis player in the world. That
same year she met novelist Rita Mae Brown and began a short-
lived, intense affair. Brown’s divergent opinions concerning
sports split the relationship apart. Navratilova learned that celeb-
rity status has a price in a free-press society, as her name often
showed up in the tabloids.
Navratilova worried that her homosexuality would affect
her career and pending application for U.S. citizenship. However,
citizenship was granted without incident in 1981, and tennis
sponsors did not withdraw their funding.
Martina Navratilova had a spectacular tennis career, includ-
ing nine singles wins at Wimbledon, and four U.S. Opens. Her
very public affairs with other well-known lesbians made her the
most highly visible lesbian sports celebrity in the world.
Holly Near (1949– )
Holly Near was one of the first and probably the most influential
lesbian singer to emerge from the women’s music movement.
Born on June 6, 1949, in Ukiah, California, Near grew up in a mu-
sical family. She made her public singing debut when she was
seven years old. By her teens, she had appeared in a number of
films and television programs. After high school, she traveled to
New York, where she landed the lead in the Broadway produc-
tion of the musical Hair.
156
Biographical Sketches

She was very politically active and campaigned against the
Vietnam War. She toured with the controversial Jane Fonda’s
“Free the Army” show. Throughout the 1970s, Near traveled con-
stantly on the vocal music circuit. Although she was approached
by major record companies, she did not take up their offers. She
did not want to give up control over material that included
lesbian-themed songs. Instead, she established her own record
company, Redwood Records.
Redwood released its first album, Hang in There, in 1973. By
1979, Redwood had sold more than 155,000 copies of this album,
which is considered highly successful for a small independent la-
bel. One of her songs, “Singing for Our Lives,” with the refrain
“We are gay and lesbian people/And we are singing, singing for
our lives,” was considered by many to be the anthem for the gay
civil rights movement.
Another feminist music company to rise in the 1970s was
Olivia Records. It was dedicated to women making music for
women and operated nonhierarchically as a collective. Its first
record was Meg Christian: I Know You Know, which included the
well-known song “Ode to a Gym Teacher.” Its second album was
by Cris Williamson, The Changer and the Changed. Holly Near also
sang for Olivia Records, and the three singers created what is
known as the Olivia sound.
Olivia Records flourished throughout the 1970s and early
1980s, but by the mid-1980s was floundering because of financial
undercapitalization. Olivia abandoned some of its initial lesbian
feminist principles and became more mainstream in its business
operations. With the changes at Olivia, Holly Near went on with
her solo career and continued playing at college concerts and on
the coffeehouse circuit. She is well loved and admired by her les-
bian followers.
Will Perkins (1928– )
Perkins founded Colorado for Family Values (CFV) and was re-
sponsible for placing Amendment 2 (outlawing antidiscrimina-
tion statutes based on sexual orientation) on the Colorado ballot
in 1992. Born in Montrose, Colorado, on August 22, 1928, Perkins
received his bachelor’s degree in business from Colorado College
in 1950. While in college, he was a respected athlete and was head
baseball coach at Colorado College during the 1951–1952 season.
Later he played professional baseball for the Chicago White Sox
Biographical Sketches
157

for one year. He married his wife, Bess, with whom he has three
daughters and one son.
He worked for many years as a car salesman and eventually
became chairman of the board of the Perkins Chrysler Plymouth
Company in Colorado Springs. Frustrated with what he per-
ceived as the antifamily gay agenda that was gaining support in
many cities throughout the state of Colorado, he founded CFV in
1991. He was able to convince a number of city councils to refuse
to adopt or to rescind antigay discrimination ordinances. Perkins
was successful at obtaining wide support for his efforts and get-
ting Amendment 2 placed on the 1992 statewide ballot. The ini-
tiative passed in November 1992 and was immediately chal-
lenged in courts. It was eventually ruled unconstitutional in
Romer v. Evans (1996). Perkins continues as chair of the board of
CFV and provides expert advice to other conservative organiza-
tions battling gay right ordinances.
Troy Perry (1940– )
Troy Perry founded Metropolitan Community Church (MCC),
the world’s largest gay and lesbian religious organization. Born in
Tallahassee, Florida, on July 27, 1940, Perry did not come from a
particularly religious family. However, at an early age Perry de-
cided he wanted to become a minister and was influenced by lo-
cal Baptist and Pentecostal churches. He adopted their strict
moral code and did not attend movies or dances or play cards or
games involving dice. Before he would go out on a date, he made
his date kneel with him and pray to have the strength to avoid
temptation.
Perry had his first homosexual experiences by the age of nine
but did not believe that he was homosexual. When he married a
pastor’s daughter in 1958 at the age of eighteen, he was con-
vinced that his homosexual fantasies were of minor importance.
Five years later, after having two sons, he divorced his wife.
Perry attended Midwest Bible College and Moody Bible In-
stitute in Chicago and became an ordained minister in the Church
of God in 1962. He became pastor of a church in Santa Ana, Cali-
fornia, but found it increasingly difficult to reconcile his religious
beliefs with his homosexual feelings. He therefore left the church
in 1964 and worked at Sears Roebuck.
Perry joined the army for a brief time and felt worthless after
a failed relationship with another man. He attempted suicide.
158
Biographical Sketches

These experiences made him confront the pain of being a stigma-
tized outsider. The only solution he saw was to start his own
church, providing supportive religious messages for the gay and
lesbian community. A small group of twelve people attended the
first service of MCC in Perry’s living room on October 16, 1968.
Of the twelve people, nine were friends who “came to console me
and to laugh at me” while the other three came as a result of an
ad placed in The Advocate (Newton 1994, 81).
The church grew so spectacularly that by March 7, 1971,
MCC had purchased its own building in Los Angeles, with 1,012
people attending the dedication service. Today MCC has more
than 400 churches throughout the world, with a membership of
more than 50,000 people, of which 84 percent are lesbian and gay.
Perry has written an autobiography, The Lord Is My Shepherd
and He Knows I’m Gay, and coauthored two additional books—
Don’t be Afraid Anymore and Profiles in Gay and Lesbian Courage.
Adrienne Rich (1929– )
Adrienne Rich is a major poet and essayist who has been a
tremendously influential writer on women’s issues and lesbian
identity. Rich was born on May 16, 1929, in Baltimore, Maryland.
Her father was a professor of medicine and her mother a com-
poser and pianist. In 1951 she graduated from Radcliffe College
and her first collection of poems, A Change of World, was chosen
for the Yale Younger Poets Award. In 1953 she married Harvard
economist Alfred Conrad and lived as a model faculty wife in
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
She wrote a number of other books between 1959 and 1966
while trying to balance her traditional female role with her life as
a poet. In 1966 she began teaching at City College in New York
City. This position brought her into contact with African Ameri-
can poets Alice Walker and Audre Lorde. Rich’s 1973 collection of
poems, Diving into the Wreck, was given a National Book Award.
Rich rejected the award as an individual and instead accepted it
“in the name of all women whose voices have gone and still go
unheard in a patriarchal world” (Russell 1995, 184).
Rich became an outspoken radical feminist and lesbian sep-
aratist after the suicide of her husband in 1970. Besides publish-
ing her poems in mainstream magazines, she reached out to fem-
inist and lesbian journals. Probably her most influential essay is
“Compulsory Heterosexuality and Lesbian Existence.” In this
Biographical Sketches
159

essay, Rich argues that “heterosexuality, like motherhood, needs
to be recognized and studied as a political institution” (Rich
1980). She believes that women are forced into compulsory het-
erosexuality by the power wielded by men against women. How-
ever, she observes that women have resisted through a number of
ways, which she defines as “lesbian continuum.” The lesbian con-
tinuum is “a range, through each woman’s life and through his-
tory—of women-identified experience: not simply the fact that a
woman has had or consciously desired genital sexual experience
with another woman . . . [but includes] the sharing of rich inner
life, the bonding against male tyranny, the giving and receiving of
practical and political support. . . . [that far exceeds the] clinical
definitions of ‘lesbianism’” (Rich 1980). Rich continues writing
and teaching at Stanford University as a professor of English.
Marion Gordon (Pat) Robertson (1930– )
Pat Robertson founded the Christian Broadcast Network (CBN)
and The 700 Club television program and is one of the primary
spokespeople against lesbian and gay rights. Born on March 22,
1930, in Lexington, Virginia, Robertson grew up in a religious
household. He received his bachelor’s degree from Washington
and Lee University in 1950, a law degree from Yale University in
1955, and a master’s degree from the New York Theological Sem-
inary in 1959. He was ordained a minister in the Southern Baptist
Church in 1961, at the same time founding CBN. The TV program
gave him national exposure such that he was able to begin CBN
University in 1977. He has hosted The 700 Club since its begin-
nings in 1968 and continues to be active in CBN. He is author or
coauthor of a number of books, including My Prayer for You
(1977), The Secret Kingdom (1982), Beyond Reason (1984), and Amer-
ica’s Date with Destiny (1986).
Robertson campaigned for the Republican nomination for
president of the United States in 1988. Although not successful,
his campaign significantly impacted conservative politics in the
United States. From his efforts sprang the Christian Coalition,
which sought to transform the United States into a Christian theo-
cratic state.
A national outcry occurred when on The 700 Club Pat Robert-
son agreed with Jerry Falwell that feminists, lesbians and gays,
and others were to blame for the destruction of the World Trade
Center on September 11, 2001.
160
Biographical Sketches

Sappho (sixth century B.C.E.)
Sappho has been a significant influence on lesbian identity for
2,500 years. Sappho was born on the Aegean island of Lesbos off
the coast of Asia Minor, probably in the early sixth century B.C.E.
We know virtually nothing about this woman whose very name
has come to signify women who love women. It is believed that
she was married to a wealthy merchant, had a daughter named
Cleis, and plotted against the tyrant Pittacus. It is also believed
that she spent most of her life on Lesbos.
The island of Lesbos in the sixth century was a gathering
place for aristocratic women who formed informal societies to
compose and recite poetry. Sappho headed one of these societies
and wrote mostly about her relationships with other women. Her
lyrics are passionate and simple rather than literary. Although no
complete poem of hers still exists, with the largest fragment being
only twenty-eight lines long, we know that her works were col-
lected into ten books in the third or second century B.C.E. These
books survived until the Middle Ages, when they were either lost
or destroyed. Many writers and religious leaders have attempted
to disparage Lesbos and Sappho. Yet the idea of a band of women
living with women who were poetic and passionate manages to
survive. When American lesbians in the 1950s decided to orga-
nize a national organization, they called themselves the Daugh-
ters of Bilitis in homage to Sappho’s fictitious disciple.
Phyllis Stewart Schlafly (1924– )
Phyllis Schlafly is one of the major conservative voices in the
United States and led the successful fight to stop passage of the
Equal Rights Amendment (ERA).
Schlafly was born in 1924 in St. Louis, Missouri. Her family
quickly realized how intelligent she was and entered her into col-
lege as a young teenager. She graduated at age twenty with a B.A.
from Washington University in St. Louis with honors (Phi Beta
Kappa, Pi Sigma Alpha, Final Honors). She received her master’s
in Government from Harvard University the next year (1945). She
worked her way through college on the night shift at the St. Louis
Ordnance Plant where, as a laboratory technician investigating
misfires, tested ammunition by firing rifles and machine guns.
Her appetite for politics was wetted when she worked as the
campaign manager for a Republican candidate for Congress in St.
Biographical Sketches
161

Louis in 1946. The campaign was successful which encouraged
her to run for an Illinois congressional seat in 1952 and later in
1970. Although she was not successful at these efforts, she later
was elected delegate to six different Republican National Con-
ventions beginning in 1956.
In support of Barry Goldwater’s 1964 presidential campaign,
she wrote A Choice, Not An Echo. It became a best-seller and put
Schlafly on the conservative map as author and speaker. She be-
gan in 1967 to publish a regularly syndicated column—The Phyl-
lis Schlafly Report—which continues today in 100 newspapers and
with radio commentaries heard daily on 460 stations. Mainstream
press seeks her conservative, profamily, prolife, and antigay com-
ments and she has testified before more than fifty congressional
and state legislative committees. She also wrote a monthly article
for the ultraconservative Daughters of the American Revolution
Magazine from 1977 to 1995.
In the 1970s, she started the Eagle Forum, a conservative
think tank and political action organization. At the same time, she
launched the Stop ERA campaign. Schlafly was the major force be-
hind defeat of the Equal Rights Amendment. She believes a con-
stitutional amendment should be passed to put prayer back into
the schools, “but to the real God, the Christian God, the one re-
ferred to on our currency. Don’t let the atheists and the commu-
nists run this country. Put it back in the hands of good, Christian,
white males. That’s my opinion” (Schlafly 1998).
She has authored more than twenty books and was selected
the 1992 Illinois Mother of the Year. She and her late husband are
the parents of six children. Her oldest son, John, is gay. He was
outed by Queer World in 1992. At age forty-one, he still lived with
his mother. Schlafly conceded that she knew from John’s earliest
years that he was homosexual. During interviews where ques-
tions are asked about her gay son, Schlafly becomes irritated and
often refuses to answer. While speaking on Meet the Press in 1993,
she was asked about her son’s homosexuality. She became angry
and said, “The only reason people bring it up is to embarrass me
“(Voboril 1993). The National Gay and Lesbian Task Force assail
her as one of the “top five most powerful anti-gay forces in the
country” (Voboril 1993).
Michelangelo Signorile (1960– )
Michelangelo Signorile launched the newsmagazine Outweek,
162
Biographical Sketches

which outed public figures. Signorile was born in Brooklyn, New
York, in 1960 to a tight-knit Roman Catholic family. He did not
enjoy baseball but instead played with dolls and his female
cousin. He was called a sissy and faggot and queer in school and
fought back. He later wrote, “I became a queer-basher to prove I
wasn’t queer” (Russell 1995, 371).
He had his first sexual experience when he was twelve years
old with a thirty-five-year-old male neighbor. He felt insur-
mountable guilt and was physically ill for days. In an attempt to
“cure himself,” he took up football and became very athletic.
However, he discovered other Italian boys his own age along the
Franklin D. Roosevelt boardwalk at South Beach with whom he
could have sex.
He attended a prestigious high school where he played foot-
ball and continued to queer-bash. He was called in by his princi-
pal to explain his violent behavior. He replied that he got into
fights because the other boys called him faggot or queer.
He tried Brooklyn College for a short time but was dissatis-
fied. He transferred to Syracuse University to study journalism.
There, he was able to come out of the closet. He reported, “I was
the happiest I had ever been” (Russell 1995, 372).
He graduated from Syracuse, moved to New York City, and
began working for a public relations firm that placed celebrity
gossip in the news. Signorile noticed that everything was fair
game in the gossip trade except homosexuality. He saw this as a
vast conspiracy of silence.
He began to attend ACT UP meetings as one friend after an-
other became HIV-positive or died of AIDS. His friend Gabriel
Rotello asked him in 1989 to start a controversial gay and lesbian
publication named Outweek. Its purpose was to publicly identify
and disclose closeted gay and lesbian public figures. Outweek gar-
nered a large readership of not only those who approved of his
methods but also of those who were offended. Signorile was ac-
cused of engaging in McCarthyism and invasion of privacy.
It was Outweek that revealed that Malcolm Forbes, one of the
wealthiest men in the United States and owner of the business
magazine Forbes, was homosexual. The firestorm over the Forbes
revelation was nothing compared to what occurred in 1991 when
Signorile revealed in The Advocate that Pete Williams, senior civil-
ian Department of Defense spokesman and protégé of Secretary
of Defense Dick Cheney, was gay. Signorile saw this as the great-
est hypocrisy: the U.S. military, which regularly discharged ho-
Biographical Sketches
163

mosexual personnel, had as its spokesperson a gay man. Signorile
came under much abuse for the revelation. In 1993, Signorile pre-
sented his case for outing in his book Queer in America: Sex, the
Media, and the Closets of Power.
Socrates (469–399 B.C.E.)
Socrates was one of the earliest Western philosophers to promote
same-sex love. Socrates was born in 469 B.C.E. in the Greek city-
state of Athens. Very little known about his childhood, but he did
serve as a foot soldier in the Athenian army during the Pelopon-
nesian War. In his adult life, Socrates spent much of his time sit-
ting under the shade of olive trees discussing philosophical ques-
tions of justice, virtue, and the soul with well-born youths. He
was a teacher and lover of young men and embodied the Athe-
nian institution of paiderasteia, or “boy love.”
The Great Oracle at Delphi declared Socrates to be the wisest
among men. He held no firm philosophical doctrines of his own
but asked students a series of questions and then directed them to
examine the implications of their answers. This became known as
the Socratic method. Socrates criticized Athenian politics and re-
ligious institutions. He was arrested, tried, convicted of corrupt-
ing the morals of Athenian youths and speaking religious heresy,
and sentenced to death. He fulfilled the sentence by drinking
hemlock, a poison prescribed by law.
None of Socrates’s writings has survived. Instead, we have
the writings of his famous student Plato with which to better un-
derstand this man and his influence. Plato’s Symposium and Phae-
drus have had the greatest impact on gay thought. Socrates dis-
cussed how the love between an older man and a beautiful boy
begins as erotic passion, then evolves as the older man becomes a
teacher, as well as lover, of the beautiful boy. This is the essence of
what is known as platonic love.
John Addington Symonds (1840–1893)
John Symonds is credited with writing the first essay to re-
view all existing research on homosexuality and to show that
same-sex love was admirable and normal. Born in Bristol, Eng-
land, on October 5, 1840, Symonds came from the family of a
physician. He attended Balliol College and earned high honors
in classics. He suffered from many health problems and began
164
Biographical Sketches

to travel extensively in hopes of finding a climate where he
could live.
He married a woman while on a visit to Italy in 1864 and had
three daughters. He was still in poor health and devoted himself
to a literary life. Over the next three decades, he produced many
volumes of literary works, travel articles, biographies, and trans-
lations. Modern scholars are mostly interested in his essay enti-
tled “A Problem in Greek Ethics,” an essay not listed in his offi-
cial biography. He had fifty copies of it printed at his own
expense and distributed it in 1891. In the essay, he systematically
reviewed all that was known about homosexuality and took the
position that same-sex love was both normal and admirable.
Although Symonds was married, he had homosexual feel-
ings throughout his life. While in high school he fell in love with
a boy three years younger than himself, and he referred to this as
his “birth,” an experience similar to what could be construed in
modern life as coming out.
Symonds wrote extensively to Walt Whitman. This con-
cerned Whitman so much that he abruptly discontinued corre-
sponding with Symonds. Symonds formed relatively long-lasting
homosexual relationships with other men.
Alan Turing (1912–1954)
Alan Turing developed the basic theories used for creating the
computer. Turing was born in London on June 23, 1912. His parents
were British civil servants stationed in India. He and his brother
were placed with an English family to attend school at Sheborne,
one of England’s oldest public schools. There, the headmaster char-
acterized Turing as being “antisocial.” Turing developed a deep, af-
fectionate relationship with one of the boys in the school and was
devastated when the lad died at the age of eighteen.
Turing was only twenty-three and studying mathematical
logic at King’s College, Cambridge, when in 1938 he wrote the ar-
ticle “On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the
Entscheidungsproblem.” The theories presented in the article about
unsolvable problems became the basis for the development of
computer theory. Turing conceived of a universal machine—a
Turing machine—that eventually became what we now know as
a digital computer.
Turing came to the United States in 1938, where he received
his doctoral degree in mathematics from Princeton University. He
Biographical Sketches
165

returned to England at the beginning of World War II and worked
with the British Code and Cipher School. He is credited with in-
venting the machines the broke the German code, otherwise
known as Enigma, and contributed directly to the defeat of Ger-
many by the Allies.
Turing helped design and construct the Automatic Comput-
ing Engine and became director of Manchester Automatic Digital
Machine (MADAM). His far-ranging theories about mathematics,
machines, and intelligence led to the development of the com-
puter and were the beginnings of research into the field of artifi-
cial intelligence.
Immediately after the war, Turing’s top-secret clearance was
revoked because of his known homosexuality. In 1952, a burglary
of his apartment by a former lover resulted in the police charging
him with “gross indecency” for being a homosexual. He was sub-
jected to “chemical castration” by means of hormone injections
that left him physically and emotionally scarred. On June 7, 1954,
he committed suicide by eating an apple dipped in cyanide.
Karl Heinrich Ulrichs (1825–1895)
Karl Ulrichs was one of the earliest writers on the subject of ho-
mosexuality and suggested that homosexuals constituted a
third sex situated between male and female (he referred to it as
Uranian).
Born in Hanover, Germany, in 1825, Ulrichs spent a signifi-
cant portion of his life writing about the issues of human sexual-
ity. He first published a twelve-volume work under the pseudo-
nym Numa Numantius in 1864. Over the next six years he
published another dozen books, but this time under his own
name. Ulrichs believed homosexuals constituted a third sex that
was inborn, natural, and thus not sinful, depraved, or perverted.
Although his belief that Uranians are a third sex is considered
primitive by our modern science, other ideas, such as the im-
mutability of sexual orientation, have sustained.
He attempted to bring the issue of rights for gays and les-
bians to the Congress of German Jurists in 1867, but was shouted
down and prevented from speaking. In 1870 Ulrich left Germany
for Italy and lived a quiet life. Even though he was an early pio-
neer, very little of his work influenced the burgeoning gay rights
movement in Germany.
166
Biographical Sketches

Urvashi Vaid (1958– )
Urvashi Vaid was responsible for transforming the National Gay
and Lesbian Task Force (NGLTF) into the principal source of in-
formation in the United States on lesbian and gay rights issues.
Vaid was born in India in 1958 to Indian parents and moved
to the United States when she was eight years old. She was an
awkward young girl with very thick glasses and long, thick,
straight Indian hair that extended to her waist. She was socially
shy and an intellectual who spent her time voraciously reading.
Vaid describes herself as feeling as an outsider because of her
ethnicity, accent, and intellectual interests. She became politically
aware and involved at very early age. She participated in her first
antiwar march when she was twelve years old.
She graduated high school early and attended New York’s
Vassar College on an academic scholarship. She was impressed
by Vassar and attracted to the feminist movement, though she
was concerned about oppression in all its forms. She graduated
college in 1979 with a bachelor’s degree in English and political
science. She worked as a legal secretary while serving on the
steering committee of the Allston-Brighton Greenlight Safehouse
Network, an antiviolence neighborhood project that she co-
founded.
In 1980, she enrolled in law school at Northeastern Univer-
sity in Boston. At that time, she also cofounded the Boston
Lesbian/Gay Political Alliance. Immediately after graduating law
school in 1983, she worked as a staff attorney with the ACLU’s
National Prisons Project in Washington, D.C. In 1984 she initiated
the National Prisons Project’s work with prisoners who had con-
tracted the HIV virus.
Vaid was appointed to the board of directors of NGLTF in
1985. She became the group’s director of public information and
brought with her a degree of professionalism and media savvy it
had not known before. In doing so, she increased coverage of
NGLTF’s activities and agenda and established the organization
as a principal source of information on issues concerning gay and
lesbian rights.
In 1989 Vaid became executive director of NGLTF’s Policy In-
stitute in Washington, D.C. There, she tripled the group’s operat-
ing budget and increased staff while beginning major fund-
raising and public outreach programs. As always, Vaid was
working to increase visibility, believing that the more gays and
Biographical Sketches
167

lesbians are seen by the media as ordinary citizens participating
in society just like anyone else, the fewer barriers there will be to
acceptance. She also cofounded the NGLTF’s Creating Change
conference, which remains the only national gay and lesbian po-
litical conference.
In 1992 she resigned her position to work on Virtual Equality,
which was published in 1995. She returned to the Policy Institute
in 1997.
Bruce Voeller (1934–1994)
Bruce Voeller coined the term acquired immune deficiency syndrome
(AIDS). Voeller was born in Minneapolis, Minnesota, on May 12,
1934. He experienced homosexual feelings as early as junior high
school, but a school counselor and minister assured him he was
not gay because, unlike sick perverts, he “was emotionally
healthy, a good athlete and not effeminate” (Newton 1994, 90).
He graduated Reed College with a bachelor’s degree in 1956
and received his Ph.D. in biology in 1961 from the Rockefeller In-
stitute in New York City. He became a research assistant, assistant
professor, and then associate professor at Rockefeller.
He met and married a woman from graduate school and fa-
thered three children. His life seemed to be following a traditional
academic and personal path, but he could no longer ignore his
homosexual feelings. He left his academic life and marriage in
1971 to concentrate full-time on the growing gay liberation move-
ment.
He became president of the New York Gay Activists Alliance
(GAA) and soon found that it was too limited in scope. Sitting at
his kitchen table in October 1973 with four other friends, they
drew up plans for a new national organization called the National
Gay Task Force (later known as the National Gay and Lesbian
Task Force).
Voeller worked for the task force until 1978, by which time it
had achieved most of its early goals including establishing con-
tacts with more than 2,000 local gay groups throughout the coun-
try and building a national membership of more than 10,000.
Voeller move to California and became president of the Mari-
posa Foundation, an organization devoted to sex research and ed-
ucation. As a biological researcher and gay activist, he felt the
term gay related immune defense disorder continued to stigmatize
homosexuals. He coined the term acquired immune deficiency syn-
168
Biographical Sketches

drome (AIDS) and wrote more than sixty scholarly papers on the
topic. Voeller died from AIDS in California on February 13, 1994.
Tom Waddell (1937–1987)
Tom Waddell founded the Gay Games. He was born Tom
Flubacher on November 1, 1937, in Paterson, New Jersey. At an
early age he befriended Gene Waddell, who was a vaudevillian
acrobat, and his wife, Hazel Waddell, who was a dancer. They fu-
eled Tom’s interest in sports. Tom’s closeness with the Waddells
eventually led to his decision to change his name to Waddell. As
a child he studied ballet. In secondary school he took up athletics,
but he dropped athletics while in college to pursue a medical de-
gree.
Passionately opposed to the Vietnam War, Waddell avoided
fighting by excelling in military athletics. As a thirty-three-year-
old, he trained for the 1968 Olympic Games in Mexico City and
placed sixth in the decathlon. It was at this Olympics that two
African American athletes gave the Black Power salute during the
U.S. national anthem. Waddell supported their actions and was
threatened with court-martial by his commanding officers.
In 1980, Waddell proposed the idea for a gay Olympics that
would be inclusive rather than exclusive. He intended that any-
one, regardless of sex, age, sexual orientation, race, national ori-
gin, or athletic ability, be allowed to participate. As a committed
socialist, he believed the Gay Olympics should promote equality
and universal participation.
When the U.S. Olympic Committee (USOC) heard about the
Gay Olympics, its members were outraged. Shortly before the
first Gay Olympics were to take place in 1982, the committee filed
a court action claiming that it had exclusive use of the word
Olympic. The Gay Olympics therefore changed its name to the
Gay Games.
The first Gay Games (1982) were held in San Francisco, with
1,300 female and male athletes competing. Two years later, a lien
was placed against Waddell’s house by the USOC in an attempt
to recover $96,000 in legal fees it had spent in the court case
against the Gay Olympics.
At the next Gay Games (1986), more than 3,000 athletes com-
peted. Sadly, Waddell was diagnosed with AIDS-related pneu-
mocystis carninii pneumonia. He still competed and won, but the
disease was taking its toll. He was forced to resign his position as
Biographical Sketches
169

chief physician at San Francisco’s Central Emergency Facility. His
last few years were spent fighting the USOC’s lawsuit. A month
before his death, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld USOC’s legal
authority “to bar homosexual rights group from using the generic
word Olympic in the names of its games” (Russell 1995, 328).
Thomas Waddell died on July 11, 1987, at his home. Just three
years after his death, in 1990, the Gay Games in Vancouver at-
tracted more than 7,000 athletes from around the world. The Gay
Games have become the largest amateur sporting event in the
world.
We’wha (1849–1896)
We’wha was a Zuni two-spirit (berdache) who became the toast
of Washington, D.C., society and whose legacy has had an impact
on our modern understanding of transgenderism. We’wha was
born at Anthill at the Middle of the World, of the Pueblo of Zuni
(near the present-day border of New Mexico and Arizona), in
1849. His parents died from smallpox brought by white American
settlers passing through. His father’s sister adopted him and his
brother. In matrilineal Zuni society, this would mean that he re-
tained membership in his mother’s clan, the Badger People, while
also maintaining lifelong ties to his father’s clan, the Dogwood
People. We’wha’s adoptive family was very powerful within the
pueblo.
As a child, perhaps as early as three or four, We’wha showed
signs of being a woman. The Zuni saw gender as an acquired
trait, not something inborn. Biological sex was not the determin-
ing factor as to whether someone was male or female. Thus,
We’wha was identified as a lhamana (what anthropologists refer
to as berdache or two-spirited) and trained in the customs and
skills of a woman.
During We’wha’s childhood, there was great intertribal con-
flict between the Zunis and the neighboring Navajos and
Apaches. The U.S. Army defeated the Navajos in 1864 and forced
their removal to distant reservations. Peace brought increasing
contacts between the Zunis and white people. Mormon mission-
aries converted hundreds of Zunis in 1876 and set up a mission.
Presbyterians moved in two years later, hoping to run the Mor-
mons out. It was then that anthropologist Matilda Stevenson dis-
covered We’wha and assumed him to be a Zuni “girl.”
A friendship developed between Stevenson and We’wha. In
170
Biographical Sketches

1885, We’wha, along with Stevenson and several others Zunis,
went to Washington, D.C. We’wha quickly learned English and
soon became the toast of the town. People did not know that he
was not a woman. He was introduced as an Indian princess, and
receptions were held in his honor. On June 23, 1886, We’wha
shook hands with President Grover Cleveland.
We’wha returned to his pueblo. There were conflicts between
the Zuni leaders and the U.S. military. We’wha was arrested along
with five of the Zuni leaders. We’wha was charged with engaging
in witchcraft and served a month in prison.
While participating in the annual Sha’lako festival in Decem-
ber 1896, We’wha died from heart failure at the age of forty-seven.
His death was viewed as a great “calamity” and disrupted the
calm of the clan. Some Zuni took to their horses and raided
nearby lands. This provided the U.S. government with an excuse
to exert complete authority over the Zunis. Understanding
We’wha’s place in Zuni culture sheds light on how gender is con-
structed in Western societies.
Walt Whitman (1819–1892)
Walt Whitman was an influential poet of early America whose
homosexual themes encouraged closeted gay men and women.
Born in Huntington, New York, on May 31, 1819, Whitman began
working in a printing shop at eleven years of age and continued
in the publishing business for the next twenty-four years. He met
his heart’s companion, Peter Doyal, an eighteen-year-old street-
car conductor, in 1865 and depicted their relationship in the col-
lection of poems Leaves of Grass. The section called “Calamus “
contained overtly homosexual poems. During the Civil War,
Whitman volunteered to visit soldiers in hospitals and was ap-
preciated for his ability to bring cheer and boost the men’s spirits
in the camps.
In 1873, Whitman had a stroke that partially paralyzed him.
He moved to Camden, New Jersey, leaving Doyal behind. While
there he met an eighteen-year-old boy named Harry Stafford.
Their relationship lasted a number of years, but Whitman finally
disengaged himself from the boy.
By 1884, the Philadelphia edition of Leaves of Grass brought fi-
nancial rewards that enabled him to purchase a house in Camden,
New Jersey. However, another stroke in 1888 left him very inca-
pacitated. He died at home on March 26, 1892.
Biographical Sketches
171

Oscar Wilde (1854–1900)
Oscar Wilde was a famous British writer who was arrested and
convicted in a very public trial for his “love that dare not speak
its name.” Born on October 16, 1854, in Dublin, Ireland, Wilde
came from a professional family. His father was a famous eye and
ear surgeon, and his mother was a folklorist and poet. He gradu-
ated with honors in 1878 from Oxford University. He had a repu-
tation as a serious classic scholar, but he was also an aesthete who
favored gorgeously decorated rooms and gaudy clothing.
Acting as the advance agent for London’s Gilbert and Sulli-
van touring companies, he was able to lecture in more than sev-
enty U.S. cities on arts and literature. He became a celebrity
hound and was well known for being well known. Although he
married and had two sons, he led a double life with a widening
circle of available young men.
In 1891, Wilde completed his novel The Picture of Dorian Gray.
It caused a storm of indignation for its “purple patches” and thinly
veiled allusions to homosexual life. At the same time, Wilde was
introduced to Lord Alfred Douglas. The beauty of this twenty-
one-year-old stunned Wilde. Within the year they were reckless
lovers and Wilde was completely in love. Personal letters between
them found their way to Douglas’s father, the Marquis of Queens-
berry. The father left a card with a scrawled insult at Wilde’s hotel.
Douglas egged on Wilde, who sued Queensberry for criminal li-
bel. When the case came to court, the tables were turned, and
Wilde was placed on trial for sodomy. Wilde was convicted and
sentenced to two years of hard labor. After his release from prison,
Wilde moved to France and was reunited with Douglas. Wilde
died November 30, 1900, at the age of forty-six in Paris.
References
Baker v. Wade, 553 F. Supp. 1121 (N.D. Tex. 1982), aff’d on other grounds, 743
F.2d 236 (5th Cir. 1984), rev’d, 769 F.2d 289 (5th Cir. 1985).
Newton, D. E. 1994. Gay and Lesbian Rights: A Reference Handbook. Santa
Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Rich, Adrienne. 1980. “Compulsory Heterosexuality and Lesbian Exis-
tence.” Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 5 (Summer):
631–660.
172
Biographical Sketches

Russell, P. 1995. The Gay 100. New York: Kensington Books.
Schlafly, Phyllis. 1998. “None Dare Call It Reason.” Phyllis Schlafly Report
31(8) (March): 1. Available at www.mattneuman.com/schlafly.htm.
Voboril, M. 1993. “Conservative Leader Schlafly Says ‘Outing’ of Son Was
‘Strike at Me.’” Knight-Ridder Newspapers, April 28. Available at www.
qrd.org/qrd/misc/text/schlafly.outing.reaction-KNIGHT.RIDDER.
References
173


5
Documents, Cases, 
Laws, and Quotations
Documents
Antidiscrimination Policies and Statutes:
Wisconsin’s Antidiscrimination Law
Antidiscrimination statutes are laws passed to provide protection
against discrimination. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 was the most sig-
nificant step taken by the federal government to enact antidiscrimina-
tion provisions. It provided protections for a few categories of people
based on race, color, religion, sex, and national origin.
Interestingly, sex was not initially included in the draft of the Civil
Rights Act. It was put there by conservatives hoping that its inclusion
would ensure that the act did not pass. But it did pass, and it opened the
door for local and state antidiscrimination policy and laws specifying
gender and eventually sexual orientation.
Every state has some types of laws providing protection from dis-
crimination. Only a few explicitly include sexual orientation. In the
other states, courts have made wide interpretations that sometimes
exclude and other times include sexual orientation as a protected class.
More than 100 towns, cities, and counties have passed antidiscrimina-
tion laws based on sexual orientation.
Wisconsin became the first state in the nation to adopt a statewide
nondiscrimination law for gay men and lesbians. Following is an
excerpt from Chapter 12, Laws of 1981.
175

SECTION 12: It is the intent of this section to render unlaw-
ful discrimination in housing. It is the declared policy of this state
that all persons shall have an equal opportunity for housing
regardless of sex, race, color, sexual orientation as defined in
[Section 15], handicap, religion, national origin, sex or marital sta-
tus of the person maintaining the household, lawful source of
income, age or ancestry and it is the duty of the local units of gov-
ernment to assist in the orderly prevention or removal of all dis-
crimination in housing through the power granted to municipal-
ities. The legislature hereby extends the state law governing equal
housing opportunities to cover single-family residences which
are owner-occupied. The legislature finds that the sale and rental
of single-family residences constitutes a significant portion of the
housing business in this state and should be regulated. This sec-
tion shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the state
for the protection of the welfare, health, peace, dignity, and
human rights of the people of this state.
SECTION 13: The Equal Rights Council shall disseminate
information and attempt by means of discussion as well as other
proper means to educate the people of the state to a greater under-
standing, appreciation and practice of human rights for all people,
of whatever race, creed, color, sexual orientation, national origin, to
the end that this state will be a better place in which to live. . . .
SECTION 17: It is discrimination because of sexual orienta-
tion:
1. For any employer, labor organization, licensing agency or
employment agency or other person to refuse to hire, employ,
admit or license, or to bar or terminate from employment, mem-
bership or licensure any individual, or to discriminate against an
individual in promotion, compensation or in terms, conditions or
privileges of employment because of the individual’s sexual ori-
entation. . . .
SECTION 25: [A person is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor
who] denies to another or charges another a higher price than the
regular rate for the full and equal enjoyment of any public place
of accommodation or amusement because of sex, race, color,
creed, physical condition, developmental disability . . . sexual ori-
entation . . . national origin or ancestry [or] gives preferential
treatment to some classes of persons in providing services or
facilities in any public place of accommodation or amusement
because of sex, race, color, creed, sexual orientation, national ori-
gin or ancestry.
176
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

Antigay Public Policy: Paragraph 175
and Colorado’s Amendment 2
On June 28, 1935, the German government amended its constitution to
prohibit homosexuality. Eventually, Paragraph 175 would be used to
send gay men and lesbians to the concentration camps for execution.
Even after the war, legal-minded Allied commanders returned homo-
sexual prisoners back to prison to serve out their sentence.
175:
1. A male who indulges in criminally indecent activities with
another male or who allows himself to participate in such activi-
ties will be punished with jail.
2. If one of the participants is under the age of twenty-one,
and if the crime has not been grave, the court may dispense with
the jail sentence.
(a): A jail sentence of up to ten years or, if mitigating circum-
stances can be established, a jail sentence of no less than three
years will be imposed on.
1. any male who by force or by threat of violence and danger
to life and limb compels another man to indulge in criminally inde-
cent activities, or allows himself to participate in such activities;
2. any male who forces another male to indulge with him in
criminally indecent activities by using the subordinate position of
the other man, whether it be at work or elsewhere, or who allows
himself to participate in such activities;
3. any male who indulges professionally and for profit in
criminally indecent activities with other males, or allows himself
to be used for such activities or who offers himself for same.
(b): Criminally indecent activities by males with animals are
to be punished by jail; in addition, the court may deprive the sub-
ject of his civil rights.
In November 1992, the voters of Colorado passed Amendment 2 to
the state constitution. It prohibited the state and municipalities from
enacting antidiscrimination laws designed to protect lesbians and gay
men. The amendment was challenged in court, and the U.S. Supreme
Court in Romer v. Evans declared it to be unconstitutional. Here is the
Initiative.
Amendment to the Constitution of the State of Colorado:
Be it Enacted by the People of the State of Colorado:
Article 2 of the Colorado Constitution is amended by the
addition of Section 30, which shall state as follows:
Documents
177

No protected status based on homosexual, lesbian or bisex-
ual Orientation.
Neither the State of Colorado, through any of its branches or
departments, nor any of its agencies, political subdivisions,
municipalities or school districts, shall enact, adopt or enforce
any statute, regulation, ordinance or policy whereby homosexual,
lesbian or bisexual orientation, conduct, practices or relationships
shall constitute or otherwise be the basis of, or entitle any person
or class of persons to have or claim any minority status, quota
preferences, protected status or claim of discrimination. This
Section of the Constitution shall be in all respects self-executing.
Natalie Meyer, Secretary of State
Co-parenting: The American 
Academy of Pediatrics
AAP is the largest professional organization in the United States
devoted to the needs of health professionals working with children. It has
issued many position papers.
Coparent or Second-Parent Adoption by Same-Sex Parents
Policy Statement, February 2002
ABSTRACT. Children who are born to or adopted by 1 mem-
ber of a same-sex couple deserve the security of 2 legally recog-
nized parents. Therefore, the American Academy of Pediatrics
supports legislative and legal efforts to provide the possibility of
adoption of the child by the second parent or coparent in these
families. Children deserve to know that their relationships with
both of their parents are stable and legally recognized. This
applies to all children, whether their parents are of the same or
opposite sex. The American Academy of Pediatrics recognizes that
a considerable body of professional literature provides evidence
that children with parents who are homosexual can have the same
advantages and the same expectations for health, adjustment, and
development as can children whose parents are heterosexual.
Reparative Therapy: The American
Psychiatric Association, the Human Rights
Campaign, and the National Association of
Research and Therapy of Homosexuality
Psychiatric and psychological groups in the United States have come to
178
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

the conclusion that it is impossible and unethical to attempt to change a
person’s sexual orientation. Religious-based reparative therapy groups
disagree.
The APA declassified homosexuality as a mental illness in 1973. It
is the largest and most powerful psychiatric association in the world and
has worked toward normalizing homosexuality.
Fact Sheet: Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Issues
Is It Possible to Change One’s Sexual Orientation? (“Repara-
tive Therapy”)
There is no published scientific evidence supporting the effi-
cacy of “reparative therapy” as a treatment to change one’s sexual
orientation, nor is it included in the APA’s Task Force Report,
Treatments of Psychiatric Disorder. More importantly, altering
sexual orientation is not an appropriate goal of psychiatric treat-
ment. . . . Clinical experience indicates that those who have inte-
grated their sexual orientation into a positive sense of self-function
are at a healthier psychological level than those who have not.
The Human Rights Campaign (HRC) is one of the largest and most
powerful lesbian and gay civil rights organizations in the United States.
Here are its comments on reparative therapy.
Why Reparative Therapy and Ex-Gay Ministries Fail
By Kim I. Mills, Education Director, HRC, 1999.
The purveyors of “reparative therapy” are well outside
mainstream research and thinking in the psychotherapeutic
world. They rail constantly that their work is being subverted by
the professional associations, which they claim were hijacked in
the 1970s by activist gay members into removing homosexuality
from the official lists of mental disorders.
We question how it could be that the American Psychiatric
and American Psychological Associations—the pre-eminent pro-
fessional associations in their fields—could have been held cap-
tive by these so-called gay activists for more than 20 years. Surely
if there were clinical evidence that homosexuality per se were a
mental illness, this information could not have been suppressed
by so many bright minds for so long. In addition, the “reparative
therapists” protest loudly and often that homosexuality was
removed from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual without
empirical research. We submit that it was placed in the DSM orig-
inally without such evidence.
It is our studied belief that the purveyors of “reparative ther-
apy” refuse to confront the underlying reasons for the apparent
Documents
179

unhappiness of many of the gay people who seek their help. They
presume that all gay people are mentally unwell, ignoring the
hundreds of thousands of happy, well-adjusted, successful les-
bians and gay men across this nation.
As for ex-gay ministries, our research found that many of
them dangle impossible promises before troubled people in order
to lure them into their programs. The clearest evidence that these
programs are not effective are the “ex-ex gay” testimonials of
people who once participated in them—and the fact that so many
of the most prominent ex-gay leaders returned to their former gay
lives, only to be replaced by people who were never gay them-
selves and therefore cannot create new public relations disasters.
Like the so-called reparative therapists, these ministries play to
guilt and unhappiness that have their roots in something other
than people’s intrinsic sexual natures.
The National Association for Research and Therapy of Homosexual-
ity (NARTH) promotes psychological understanding of the cause, treat-
ment, and behavior patterns associated with homosexuality and its cure.
NARTH’s Purpose
During the last 25 years, powerful political pressures have
done much to erode scientific study of homosexuality. As a result,
there is now great misunderstanding surrounding this issue.
Because of the angry tenor of the debate, many researchers have
been intimidated, we believe, into trading the truth for silence.
As clinicians, we have witnessed the intense suffering caused
by homosexuality, which many of our members see as a “failure
to function according to design.” Homosexuality distorts the nat-
ural bond of friendship that would naturally unite persons of the
same sex. It threatens the continuity of traditional male-female
marriage—a bond which is naturally anchored by the comple-
mentarily of the sexes, and long been considered essential for the
protection of children.
In males, homosexuality is associated with poor relationship
with father; difficulty individuating from mother; a sense of mas-
culine deficit; and a persistent belief of having been different
from, and misunderstood by, same-sex childhood peers. In adult-
hood we also see a persistent pattern of maladaptive behaviors
and a documented higher level of psychiatric complaints.
Professionals who belong to NARTH comprise a wide vari-
ety of men and women who defend the right to pursue change of sex-
ual orientation.
180
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

Most NARTH members consider homosexuality to represent
a developmental disorder. Some of our clinician-members, how-
ever, do not consider the condition disordered, but simply defend
the right to treatment for those who desire it.
It is NARTH’s aim to provide a different perspective.
Particularly, we want to clarify that homosexuality is not
“inborn,” and that gays are not “a people,” in the same sense that
an ethnic group is “a people”—but instead, they are (like all of us)
simply individuals who exhibit particular patterns of feelings and
behavior.
Statements for Gay Rights: Amnesty
International, the American Psychiatric
Association, the American Psychological
Association, Dignity USA, the National
Federation of Priests’ Councils, and the
Union of American Hebrew Congregations
Amnesty International conducts a worldwide campaign against tor-
ture. Lesbians, gay men, and bisexual and transgender people all over
the world suffer persecution and violence simply for being who they
are. They are tortured or intimidated by state officials to extract con-
fessions of “deviance” and raped to “cure” them of it. They are attacked
in their homes and communities because of their sexual orientation or
gender identity. Amnesty International has issued this report, avail-
able on the web:
Crimes of hate, conspiracy of silence: Torture and ill-
treatment based on sexual identity.
Section 8: Recommendations.
1. Repeal laws criminalizing homosexuality. Review all legis-
lation which could result in the discrimination, prosecution and
punishment of people solely for their sexual orientation or gender
identity. This includes “sodomy” laws or similar provisions out-
lawing homosexual or transgender behavior; discriminatory age
of consent legislation; public order legislation used to prosecute
and punish people solely for their sexual identity; and laws ban-
ning the “promotion” of homosexuality which can be used to
imprison LGBT rights advocates.
All such laws should be repealed or amended. Anyone
imprisoned or detained solely for their real or perceived sexual
Documents
181

orientation or gender identity should be released immediately
and unconditionally. This includes those detained for same-sex
sexual relations between consenting adults in private, those held
for advocating LGBT rights, and those detained for their political
beliefs or activities under the pretext of charges of homosexuality.
In 1973, the American Psychiatric Association’s Board of Trustees
removed homosexuality from its official diagnostic manual, the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Second
Edition (DSM-II). This action was taken following a review of the sci-
entific literature and consultation with experts in the field. The experts
found that homosexuality does not meet the criteria necessary to be con-
sidered a mental illness. The APA’s prepared statement on homo-
sexuality is available on the web.
Fact Sheet: Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Issues
What Causes Homosexuality/Heterosexuality/Bisexuality?
No one knows what causes heterosexuality, homosexuality,
or bisexuality. Homosexuality was once thought to be the result
of troubled family dynamics or faulty psychological develop-
ment. Those assumptions are now understood to have been based
on misinformation and prejudice. . . . To date there are no repli-
cated scientific studies supporting any specific biological etiology
for homosexuality. Similarly, no specific psychosocial or family
dynamic cause for homosexuality has been identified, including
histories of childhood sexual abuse. Sexual abuse does not appear
to be more prevalent in children who grow up to identify as gay,
lesbian, or bisexual, than in children who identify as hetero-
sexual.
What Position Has the American Psychiatric Association
Taken Regarding This Stigma?
Whereas homosexuality per se implies no impairment in
judgment, stability, reliability, or general social or vocational
capabilities, the American Psychiatric Association calls on all
international health organizations and individual psychiatrists in
other countries, to urge the repeal in their own country of legisla-
tion that penalized homosexual acts by consenting adults in pri-
vate. And further the APA calls on these organizations and indi-
viduals to do all that is possible to decrease the stigma related to
homosexuality wherever and whenever it may occur.
How Do the Children of Gay/Lesbians Parents Fare?
Numerous studies have shown that the children of gay par-
ents are as likely to be healthy and well adjusted as children
182
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

raised in heterosexual households. Children raised in gay or les-
bian households do not show any greater incidence of homo-
sexuality or gender identity issues than other children.
In 1975, the APA followed its 1973 decision to resolve that “homo-
sexuality per se implies no impairment in judgment, stability, reliabil-
ity, or general social or vocation capabilities. . . .Over 25 years later the
implications of this resolution have yet to be fully implemented in prac-
tice. There is a need for better education and training on mental health
practitioner in this area.” To that end, the APA issued guidelines (avail-
able on the web) to psychologists about the care of homosexual clients:
Guidelines for Psychotherapy with Lesbian, Gay, and
Bisexual Clients
Attitudes toward Homosexuality and Bisexuality
Guideline 1. For over a century, homosexuality and bisexual-
ity were assumed to be mental illnesses. Hooker’s (1957) study
was the first to question this assumption. She found no difference
between nonclinical samples of heterosexual and homosexual
men on projective test responses. Subsequent studies have shown
no difference between heterosexual and homosexual groups on
measures of cognitive abilities (Tuttle and Pillard 1991) and psy-
chological well-being and self-esteem (Coyle 1993; Herek 1990;
Savin-Williams 1990). Fox (1996) found no evidence of psy-
chopathology in nonclinical studies of bisexual men and women.
Further, an extensive body of literature has emerged that identifies
few significant differences between heterosexual, homosexual,
and bisexual people on a wide range of variables associated with
overall psychological functioning (Pillard 1998; Rothblum 1994;
Gonsiorek 1991). When studies have noted differences between
homosexual and heterosexual subjects with regard to psychologi-
cal functioning (DiPlacido 1998; Ross 1990; Rotheram-Borus,
Hunter, and Rosario 1994; Savin-Williams 1994), these differences
have been attributed to the effects of stress related to stigmatiza-
tion based on sexual orientation. This stress may lead to increased
risk for suicide attempts, substance abuse, and emotional distress.
The literature that classifies homosexuality and bisexuality
as mental illness has been found to be methodologically unsound.
Gonsiorek (1991) reviewed this literature and found serious
methodological flaws including unclear definition of terms, inac-
curate classification of subjects, inappropriate comparison of
groups, discrepant sampling procedures, an ignorance of con-
founding social factors, and questionable outcome measures.
Documents
183

All major American mental health associations have affirmed
that homosexuality is not a mental illness. In 1975, the American
Psychological Association (APA) urged all psychologists to ‘take
the lead in removing the stigma long associated with homosexual
orientations’ (Conger 1975, p. 633). Subsequently, the APA and all
other major mental health associations adopted a number of res-
olutions and policy statements founded on this basic principle,
which has also been embodied in their ethical codes.
Dignity USA is a religious organization serving lesbian and gay
Catholics. According to the Catholic Church, homosexuals must be chaste
in order to be moral in the eyes of God. This was outlined in the church’s
document “Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith—On the Pastoral
Care of Homosexual Persons: Letter to the Bishops of the Catholic
Church,” October 1, 1986 (excerpted later in this chapter). Dignity USA
responded to this letter on its website:
FAQs: Catholicism, Homosexuality, and Dignity
. . .
2. What is the official Catholic teaching about homo-
sexuality?
The Catholic Church holds that, as a state beyond a person’s
choice, being homosexual is not wrong or sinful in itself. But just
as it is objectively wrong for unmarried heterosexuals to engage
in sex, so too are homosexual acts considered to be wrong. . . .
8. What options are open to a person who is homosexual and
Catholic?
Official Catholic teaching requires that homosexual people
abstain from sex. But the Catholic Church also teaches solemnly
that people are obliged to form their conscience carefully and
responsibly and to follow it as the bottom line in every moral
decision. . . . Accordingly, and after much soul-searching, many
gay and lesbian Catholics have formed consciences that differ
from official Church teaching and have entered into homosexual
relationships. In this respect they are exactly like the many mar-
ried Catholic couples who cannot accept the official teaching on
contraception. . . .
10. How could someone do what (the Church says) is wrong
and not be living in sin?
As the Catholic Church understands it, wrong and sin are not
the same thing. Wrong is harm, disorder, destruction; it is in the
objective or external world. Sin is self-distancing from God; it is in
the heart. . . . The Church teaches right and wrong but never says
184
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

who is a sinner. Only God knows our hearts. Many homosexual
people simply cannot believe that gay sex as such is wrong. So
they do what for them is “the best they can do,” though Church
teaching says that homogenital acts are wrong. Still, according to
the same Church’s teaching on conscience, they do not sin in their
hearts nor before God. Then they need not confess what is not sin,
and they may participate in the Sacraments of the Church.
At a 1974 meeting, the National Federation of Priests’ Councils
(NFPC) adopted a progay resolution:
BE IT RESOLVED that the NFPC hereby declares its opposi-
tion to all civil laws which make consensual homosexual acts
between adults a crime and thus urge their repeal: and BE IT
FURTHER RESOLVED that the NFPC also express [sic] its oppo-
sition to homosexuality as such being the basis of discrimination
against homosexuals in employment, governmental services,
housing and child rearing involving natural or adoptive parents.
In 1977, the Union of American Hebrew Congregations passed a
progay rights resolution.
Homosexual persons are entitled to equal protection under
the law. We oppose discrimination against homosexuals in areas
of opportunity, including employment and housing. . . . We
affirm our belief that private sexual acts between consenting
adults are not the proper province of government and law
enforcement agencies.
Statements Opposing Gay Rights: The Boy
Scouts of America, the Catholic Church, 
the Concerned Women for America, and 
God Hates Fags
On June 28, 2000, the U.S. Supreme Court in Boy Scouts of America v.
Dale (2000) held that requiring the Boy Scouts to include an open homo-
sexual in its ranks would violate the organization’s First Amendment
right of “expressive association.” The Court said: “We are not, as we must
not be, guided by our views of whether the Boy Scouts’ teachings with
respect to homosexual conduct are right or wrong. Public or judicial dis-
approval of a tenet of an organization’s expression does not justify the
state’s effort to compel the organization to accept members where such
acceptance would derogate from the organization’s expressive message.”
Documents
185

The Boy Scouts of America website lists two documents. The first
statement gives its position on supporting diversity; the second is a res-
olution declaring that homosexuals cannot participate in the organiza-
tion at any level.
On June 28, 2000, the United States Supreme Court reaf-
firmed the Boy Scouts of America’s standing as a private organi-
zation with the right to set its own membership and leadership
standards. The BSA respects the rights of people and groups who
hold values that differ from those encompassed in the Scout Oath
and Law, and the BSA makes no effort to deny the rights of those
whose views differ to hold their attitudes or opinions. Scouts
come from all walks of life and are exposed to diversity in
Scouting that they may not otherwise experience. The Boy Scouts
of America aims to allow youth to live and learn as children and
enjoy Scouting without immersing them in the politics of the day.
Boy Scouts of America Resolution (February 6, 2002):
5. WHEREAS, the national officers agree with the report that
“duty to God is not a mere ideal for those choosing to associate
with the Boy Scouts of America; it is an obligation,” which has
defined good character for youth of Scouting age throughout
Scouting’s 92-year history and the Boy Scouts of America has
made a commitment “to provide faith-based values to its con-
stituency in a respectful manner”; and
6. WHEREAS, the national officers agree that “conduct of
both Scouts and Scouters must be in compliance with the Scout
Oath and Law” and that “membership is contingent upon one’s
willingness to accept the values and standards espoused by the
Boy Scouts of America,” and
7. WHEREAS the national officers further agree that homo-
sexual conduct is inconsistent with the traditional values
espoused in the Scout Oath and Law and that an avowed homo-
sexual cannot serve as a role model for the values of the Oath and
Law; and
8. WHEREAS, the national officers reaffirm that, as a national
organization whose very reason for existence is to instill and rein-
force values in youth, the BSA’s values cannot be subject to local
option choices, but must be the same in every unit; and
10. THEREFORE, the national officers recommend the
National Executive Board affirm that the Boy Scouts of America
shall continue to follow its traditional values and standards of
leadership.
186
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

In 1986, the Catholic Church issued a letter to the bishops of the
Catholic Church concerning the care of homosexuals. The church’s posi-
tion has not shifted since that time. This letter is available on the web
and is excerpted here.
“Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith—On the Pastoral
Care of Homosexual Persons: Letter to the Bishops of the Catholic
Church” (October 1, 1986)
5. . . .There is a clear consistency within the Scriptures them-
selves on the moral issue of homosexual behavior. The Church’s
doctrine regarding this issue is thus based, not on isolated
phrases for official theological argument, but on the solid foun-
dation of a constant Biblical testimony. . . . To be correct, the inter-
pretation of Scripture must be in substantial accord with that
Tradition.
6. . . .He fashions mankind, male and female, in his own
image and likeness. Human beings, therefore, are nothing less
than the work of God himself; and in the complementarily of the
sexes, they are called to reflect the inner unity of the Creator. . . .
The human body retains its “spousal significance” but this is now
clouded by sin. Thus, in Genesis 19:1–11, the deterioration due to
sin continues in the story of the men of Sodom. There can be no
doubt of the moral judgement made there against homosexual
relations. In Leviticus 18:22 and 20:13, in the course of describing
the conditions necessary for belonging to the Chosen People, the
author excludes from the People of God those who behave in a
homosexual fashion.
7. . . .A person engaging in homosexual behavior therefore
acts immorally. . . .
10. It is deplorable that homosexual persons have been and
are the object of violent malice in speech or in action. Such treat-
ment deserves condemnation from the Church’s pastors wher-
ever it occurs. . . .
12. What, then, are homosexual persons to do who seek to
follow the Lord? . . . Christians who are homosexual are called, as
all of us are, to a chaste life.
15. We encourage the Bishops, then, to provide pastoral care
in full accord with the teachings of the Church for homosexual
persons of their dioceses. No authentic pastoral program will
include organizations in which homosexual persons associate
with each other without clearly stating that homosexual activity
is immoral. A truly pastoral approach will appreciate the need for
homosexual persons to avoid the near occasions of sin.
Documents
187

Concerned Women for America (CWA) is one of the most powerful
pro–traditional family organizations in the United States. Its members
are outspokenly antihomosexual. Here is a statement by the organiza-
tion’s president.
Homosexuality
By Carmen Pate, President, June 26, 1998
“Extreme! Backward!” Those are the terms the White House
chooses to describe millions of Christians across America who
believe in the Biblical truth that homosexuality is a sin. As one of
those Christians, I am outraged. White House Press Secretary
Michael McCurry said that the subject is no longer a matter for
conscience, but for science. How reputable is your scientific
authority, Mr. McCurry, in comparison to Almighty God?
McCurry refers to the claims of the American Psychiatric
Association who in 1973 declared homosexuality normal. . . . Dr.
Charles Socarides reported the process by which the APA task
force removed homosexuality from the category of abnormality.
He says, “The APA rationale for removing homosexuality relied
heavily on the work of Alfred Kinsey and his belief in the nor-
mality of homosexuality. . . .”
A closer look at the small hand-picked APA task force reveals
that the declaration was strictly Kinseyan. . . . Members of the
APA task force included Kinsey Institute Director (at the time)
Paul Gebhard. . . . Also on the task force was Kinsey Institute
advisor John Money . . . who in the 1991 Journal of Pedophilia
called for legalizing all adult/child sex.
How dare Mr. McCurry call Christian values extreme and
backward! Thousands of young men and women who want to
leave the homosexual lifestyle, who desire to be free from the dis-
ease and death that awaits them, are being given a hateful mes-
sage from the office of our nation’s President. They are being told
that they can’t change, that they are doomed to live the rest of
their lives without hope. Speaking the truth to homosexuals is the
most compassionate thing one can do. . . . You can call it
extreme—or even backward—Mr. McCurry, but they call it love.
Westboro Baptist Church maintains a webpage called God Hates
Fags. Reverend Fred Phelps has staged hundreds, if not thousands, of
protest demonstrations around the world, including one at the funeral
of Matthew Shepard. The document here contains the WBC’s stated
purpose.
188
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

Purpose
Good afternoon gentle friend.
Welcome to the Westboro Baptist Church homepage. This
page is dedicated to preaching the Gospel truth about the soul-
damning, nation-destroying notion that “It is OK to be gay.”
“God Hates Fags”—though elliptical—is a profound theo-
logical statement, which the world needs to hear more than it
needs oxygen, water and bread. The three words, fully
expounded, show:
1. the absolute sovereignty of “GOD” in all matters whatso-
ever (e.g., Jeremiah 32:17, Isaiah 45:7, Amos 3:6, Proverbs 16:4,
Matthew 19:26, Romans 9:11–24, Romans 11:33–36, etc.),
2. the doctrine of reprobation or God’s “HATE” involving
eternal retribution or the everlasting punishment of most of
mankind in Hell forever (e.g., Leviticus 20:13, 23, Psalm 5:5, Psalm
11:5, Malachi 1:1–3, Romans 9:11–13, Matthew 7:13, 23, John
12:39–40, 1 Peter 2:8, Jude 4, Revelation 13:8, 20:15, 21:27, etc.), and
3. the certainty that all impenitent sodomites (under the ele-
gant metaphor of “FAGS” as the contraction of faggots, fueling
the fires of God’s wrath) will inevitably go to Hell (e.g., Romans
1:18–32, 1 Corinthians 6:9–11, 1 Timothy 1:8–11, Jude 7, etc.). (If
you are concerned with our use of the word “fag,” please click
here to find out why we use this word.)
The only lawful sexual connection is the marriage bed. All
other sex activity is whoremongery and adultery, which will
damn the soul forever in Hell. Heb. 13:4. . . . Better to be a eunuch
if the will of God be so, and make sure of Heaven. Mat. 19:12.
Better to be blind or lame, than to be cast into Hell, into the fire
that never shall be quenched. Mk. 9:43–48. Abstain, you fools.
Youth Suicide: The American 
Academy of Pediatrics
The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) is the largest professional
organization in the United States devoted to the needs of health profes-
sionals working with children. It has issued many position papers. The
one here focuses on youth suicide and is available from the web.
Suicide and Suicide Attempts in Adolescents (RE9928)
ABSTRACT. Suicide is the third leading cause of death for
adolescents 15 to 19 years old.1
The number of adolescent deaths from suicide in the United
States has increased dramatically during the past few decades. In
Documents
189

1997, there were 4,186 suicides among people 15 to 24 years old,
1,802 suicides among those 15 to 19 years old, and 2,384 among
those 20 to 24 years old.1 In 1997, 13 percent of all deaths in the
15- through 24-year-old age group were attributable to suicide.1
The true number of deaths from suicide actually may be higher,
because some of these deaths are recorded as “accidental.”2
From 1950 to 1990, the suicide rate for adolescents in the 15-
to 19-year-old group increased by 300 percent. 4 Adolescent males
15 to 19 years old had a rate 6 times greater than the rate for
females.1 Suicide affects young people from all races and socio-
economic groups, although some groups seem to have higher
rates than others. Native American males have the highest suicide
rate, African American women the lowest. A statewide survey of
students in grades 7 through 12 found that 28.1 percent of bisex-
ual and homosexual males and 20.5 percent of bisexual and
homosexual females had reported attempting suicide.6
Gay and bisexual adolescents have been reported to exhibit
high rates of depression and have been reported to have rates of
suicidal ideation and attempts 3 times higher than other adoles-
cents.20
Notes
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/National Center for
Health Statistics. (1999). Death Rates from 72 Selected Causes by 5-Year Age
Groups, Race, and Sex: United States, 1979–1997. Atlanta, GA: Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention/National Center for Health Statistics;
Table 291 A.
2. American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Adolescence.
(1998). Suicide and suicide attempts in adolescents and young adults.
Pediatrics, 8(1):322–324. . . .
4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (1994). Programs for
prevention of suicide among adolescents youth adults. Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep CDC Surveill Summ, 43:1–7. No RR-6. . . .
6. Remafedi, G., French, S., Story, M., Resnick, M. D., and Blum, R.
(1998). The relationship between suicide risk and sexual orientation:
results of a population-based study. Am J Public Health, 88:57–60. . . .
20. Remafedi, G., Farrow, J. A., and Deisher, R. S. (1991). Risk factors
for attempted suicide in gay and bisexual youth. Pediatrics, 87:869–875.
190
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

Case Summaries
Obscenity or Free Speech: 
ONE, Inc. v. Olesen (1958)
Dorr Legg and his friends at the Mattachine Society decided to
publish a national monthly newsletter under the new organization
called the ONE, Incorporated. The newsletter began publication in
January 1953 and served as the voice of the homophile movement
during its early years. In 1954, the Los Angeles postmaster seized
copies of ONE magazine and refused to mail them on the grounds
that they were “obscene, lewd, lascivious and filthy.” ONE editors
challenged the seizure in court. Two lower courts upheld the
actions of the postmaster but ultimately, the U.S. Supreme Court
overturned the lower courts in 1958. This was a “legal and pub-
lishing landmark” (National Museum and Archive 1996, 13).
Material containing homosexual themes and information was no
longer automatically deemed obscene and could be distributed
through the mail service. Without this favorable decision, the gay
rights movement would have been significantly delayed.
Employment Rights: Norton v. Macy (1969)
The issue of homosexuality and federal employment came to
court in 1969. Clifford Norton was employed by the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration. He was arrested by offi-
cers of the District of Columbia Police Department’s morals
squad in Lafayette Square (directly across from the White House)
for a traffic violation after they saw him attempt to make the
acquaintance of another man. He was fired from his job. He sued
and the Washington, D.C., circuit court agreed that the govern-
ment had failed to show a specific connection between the
employee’s potentially embarrassing conduct and any reduction
in the efficiency of the department for which he worked. On the
basis of this and related decisions, the Civil Service Commission
issued a directive to federal supervisors in December 1973 that
stated that “you many not find a person unsuitable for Federal
employment merely because the person is a homosexual or has
engaged in homosexual acts” (Civil Service Bulletin 1973). Later
this concept was expanded by the enactment of the Civil Service
Reform Act of 1978. Supervisors were directed not to discrimi-
nate against employees on the basis of conduct that does not
Case Summaries
191

adversely affect the performance of others. Finally, in 1998
President Bill Clinton signed an executive order specifically ban-
ning discrimination based on sexual orientation in the federal
civilian workforce.
Teachers’ Rights: Morrison v. 
State Board of Education (1969)
Morrison engaged in noncriminal same-sex conduct. The school
board deemed his behavior “immoral” and revoked his teaching
credential. The California Supreme Court held that teaching cre-
dentials cannot be revoked because of homosexual conduct
unless school authorities demonstrate an “unfitness to teach.”
Importantly, the court required factual evidence of fitness rather
than mere speculation about immorality.
Gay Right to Organize: Gay Students 
Org. v. Bonner (1974)
Initially, when the Gay Activists Alliance sought to obtain corpo-
ration status in New York in 1972, its application was rejected
because the secretary of state believed that the purpose of the
organization was to promote activities that were illegal in the
state. A New York court overruled the secretary of state, saying
that it was not unlawful for individuals to peaceably agitate for
repeal of any law.
Teachers’ Rights: Ancafora v. 
Board of Education (1974)
When Ancafora applied to be a teacher, he did not include the les-
bian and gay organizations to which he belonged for fear that
doing so would disqualify him from the position. When he was
discovered to be a homosexual, the board of education trans-
ferred him to an administrative position away from teaching. The
school board reviewed his personnel file and discovered that he
had left off membership in Homophiles of Penn State from his
teaching application. The board fired him, claiming he had falsi-
fied his application. The Fourth District Court agreed that his
intentional misrepresentation was sufficient grounds to qualify
the board’s decision for the transfer and dismissal.
192
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

Military Service: Matlovich v. 
Secretary of the Air Force (1976)
In this celebrated 1975 case, Leonard Matlovich sued the air force
to be reinstated after being dismissed for homosexuality. His story
made the cover of Time magazine and was later made into an NBC
TV movie. His suit dragged on to 1980 when a federal judge
ordered Matlovich reinstated. Instead of reentering the air force,
he settled for financial restitution and became a gay rights activist.
Teachers’ Rights: Gaylord v. 
Tacoma School Dist. No. 10 (1977)
A Tacoma school district discovered that Mr. Gaylord was a homo-
sexual. The officials believed that being known as a “gay teacher”
would automatically impair his efficiency as the teacher. He sued
when he was fired. During the trial, the U.S. Supreme Court
resorted to encyclopedias, including the New Catholic Encyclopedia,
to conclude that homosexuality was implicitly immoral. As such,
the Court surmised that Gaylord could not be trusted to teach stu-
dents about morality, and his presence was considered disruptive
even though he had been a successful teacher for the previous
twelve years. This Court’s opinion about the immorality of homo-
sexuality contradicted the conclusions reached by the state, which
had repealed its antisodomy law by the time of the trial.
Coming Out as Free Speech: Gay Law
Students Ass’n v. Pacific Tele. and 
Tel. Co. (1979)
Coming out, in some states, is considered a political act protected
by the First Amendment and the Due Process Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment. The California Supreme Court ruled in
this case that a person’s affirmation of homosexuality was analo-
gous to expressing a political view and as such was protected
under the state labor code.
Gay Students’ Rights: Fricke v. Lynch (1980)
In this celebrated case, Aaron Fricke wanted to bring his friend
Paul Guilbert to the Cumberland High School senior prom. The
Case Summaries
193

principal denied the request, saying that there was a “real and
present threat of physical harm” toward the two boys. Fricke
sued. At the trial, the judge acknowledged that the principal’s
fears were real but said that the school should have looked into
ways of increasing security and instituting other safety measures
rather than denying the couple the right to attend. The court rec-
ognized that attendance at a prom is “symbolic speech,” much
like marching in a parade, and thus merits First Amendment pro-
tection.
Child Custody by Lesbian Parents: In re
Breisch (1981)
The state of Pennsylvania took custody of a preschool boy
who had a speech impediment. The mother had a masculine
appearance and wore men’s clothing. At the time of the hearing,
she lived with another woman who had two children living with
them. The mother took notes at meetings with the social workers
and refused, as a condition of custody, not to live with her lover.
Her actions were construed by the courts to be “uncooperative.”
The state took custody of her child. When the mother appealed,
the Pennsylvania Supreme Court decided that restricting her
from living with her lover was not an act of discrimination and
interference with her lesbian relationship, but rather an attempt
to establish order to the child’s life and to bring the mother and
son closer.
Teachers’ Rights: National Gay Task Force v.
Board of Education of Oklahoma City (1985)
Lesbian and gay teachers in the Oklahoma City school system
brought suit against the state to rescind a state law permitting
punishment of teachers for “public homosexual conduct.” This
conduct was defined as advocating, soliciting, imposing, encour-
aging, or promoting public or private homosexual activity in a
manner that may bring it to the attention of schoolchildren or
school employees. “Advocacy,” the Court ruled, is squarely
within the protection of the First Amendment. Thus, teachers
have the right to take political action, including advocating for
lesbian and gay rights.
194
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

Sodomy: Bowers v. Hardwick (1986)
Michael Hardwick was a twenty-eight-year-old white gay man
who worked at one of the well-known gay bars in Atlanta,
Georgia. After a long night at the bar, he left at 7:00 A.M. with a
beer in hand. He decided he did not want the beer and disposed
of it in a trash can outside the bar before getting in his car to drive
home. Police officer Torrick pulled Hardwick over to the side of
the highway. He asked Hardwick where he worked. Hardwick’s
answer indirectly indicated to the police officer that Hardwick
was gay. Torrick suspected Hardwick of drinking and asked
where he had disposed of his beer. Hardwick was placed in the
rear of the police car while Torrick drove to where the beer was
discarded. He did not find the trash receptacle, and Torrick issued
a ticket to Hardwick for drinking in public.
The ticket Hardwick was given required him to appear in
court. There was a discrepancy as to whether the court appearance
was on a Tuesday or a Wednesday. Two hours after the Tuesday
court date, a warrant for the arrest of Hardwick was issued.
Officer Torrick came to Hardwick’s home to arrest him, but he was
not there. When Hardwick returned home later that day, his room-
mate informed him about the officer’s visit. Hardwick went to the
county clerk. The clerk said that was impossible that a warrant for
his arrest could be issued so quickly because it usually took at
least forty-eight hours to issue warrants. Later it was discovered
that Torrick had personally processed the warrant, the first time
this had been done in more than ten years. Hardwick paid the $50
fine and thought the case was closed.
About three weeks later, Officer Torrick returned to
Hardwick’s home at 3:00 A.M. with the arrest warrant. The door
was open and Torrick was allowed to enter the home by a house-
guest who was half asleep on the couch. He did not know that
Hardwick and his companion were together in Hardwick’s bed-
room. Torrick walked into the bedroom and discovered
Hardwick engaged in oral sex with another man. Torrick pro-
ceeded to arrest Hardwick and his companion for violating
Georgia’s sex statutes. Hardwick was entitled to bail within an
hour after arriving at the jail, but instead he was held for twelve
hours and was subjected to harassment by other prisoners
because they had been informed of the charges against him.
Hardwick was charged. Gay activists saw this as a perfect
test case, and Hardwick decided to challenge the Georgia statute
Case Summaries
195

in federal court. Because the Georgia sex statutes do not refer to
the gender or marriage status of an offender, a married hetero-
sexual couple attempted to join Hardwick’s action, but the court
dismissed the married couple’s claim.
Hardwick lost his claim in federal court, but won on his
appeal to the U.S. District Court for the Eleventh Circuit. The case
was appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court by Attorney General
Bowers for Georgia. In a 5–4 decision, the Court ruled against
Hardwick, stating that claims for “homosexual sodomy” as a pro-
tected right to privacy are “facetious, at best.” The Court therefore
established that lesbians and gay men have no right to sexual
expression under the U.S. Constitution.
Interestingly, Georgia’s antisodomy law would later play a
role in ending Bower’s public career. In 1998, Bowers resigned as
attorney general to seek the Republican nomination for governor.
He presented himself as a moral crusader who had helped defend
Georgia against homosexual sodomy. However, during the cam-
paign, it came to light that Bowers was involved in a long-term
extramarital affair—a violation of Georgia’s archaic sex law
against adultery. Bowers’s hypocrisy put a nail in the coffin of his
political career, and he lost the race.
Employment Rights: Price Waterhouse 
v. Hopkins (1989)
Ann Hopkins was a successful senior manager and a candi-
date for partnership at Price Waterhouse. When her nomination
came up, many partners at Price Waterhouse reacted negatively
and accused her of being “macho,” of “overcompensat[ing] for
being a woman” (233). They suggested she needed to take a
“course in charm school” and that to improve her chances of
becoming a partner, she should “walk more femininely, talk more
femininely, dress more femininely, wear make-up, have her hair
styled, and wear jewelry” (233). Hopkins sued and prevailed,
with the court stating:
An employer who objects to aggressiveness in women but
whose positions require this trait places women in an intol-
erable and impermissible Catch 22: out of a job if they
behave aggressively and out of a job if they do not. Title VII
lifts women out of this bind. . . . She had proved discrimina-
tory input into the decisional process, and had proved that
196
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

participants in the process considered her failure to conform
to the stereotypes credited by a number of decisionmakers
had been a substantial factor in the decision.
Family Issues: Braschi v. Stahl 
Associates Co. (1989)
A New York City gay man was faced with eviction from his apart-
ment when his lover of eleven years died from AIDS. The sur-
vivor’s name did not appear on the lease. Rent control provisions
precluded landlords from evicting “either the surviving spouse of
the deceased tenant or some other member of the deceased ten-
ant’s family who has been living with the tenant.” The man
argued that he was “family,” and the New York Court of Appeals
agreed with that position. The court’s precedent-setting decision
helped establish the idea that lesbians and gay men can form
legitimate families.
Asylum from Torture: Matter 
of Toboso-Alfonso (1990)
In the first case of a gay male refugee to be considered for asy-
lum, Judge Robert Brown of the Court of Immigration agreed in
1986 not to return Fidel Armando-Alfonso to Cuba because of
the documented mistreatment of homosexuals by the communist
government (“Gay Refugees Tell of Torture” 1980). The Board of
Immigration Appeals upheld the decision in 1990, and Attorney
General Janet Reno in 1994 designated this decision as precedent
for all other requests for asylum by homosexual applicants. As
such, lesbians and gay men who are persecuted by their govern-
ments may be eligible to remain in the United States. To date,
only a few lesbians and gay men have secured asylum in the
United States because meeting the criteria for asylum is ex-
tremely difficult.
Child Custody by De Facto Parents:
Alison D. v. Virginia M. (1991)
The nonbiological mother, Alison D., sued to have visitation
rights with the child carried by her lover, Virginia M. Although
Case Summaries
197

she was not the legal parent and had not adopted the child, she
argued that she was a de facto parent. The New York Supreme
Court said that she may, in fact, be a de facto parent, but that such
a category had no legal claims, including visitation rights, to the
child. Alison lost her right to visit the child.
Solicitation: Commonwealth 
v. Wasson (1992)
Jeffrey Wasson engaged in conversation with a man for twenty to
twenty-five minutes during which he invited the other man to
“come home” with him. The other man prodded Wasson to pro-
vide details about the sexual acts in which they would engage.
What Wasson described violated Kentucky’s sex statutes.
Unknown to Wasson, the other man was an undercover police
officer who was wired for sound and was taping the conversa-
tion. At the end of the conversation, the police officer arrested
Wasson for “soliciting” to engage in unlawful sexual behavior.
Wasson moved to have the charges dropped against him on
the grounds that the sex statutes violated the state constitution.
The trial judge, appellate court, and, finally, the Kentucky
Supreme Court all agreed with Wasson, stating that “the guaran-
tees of individual liberty provided in our 1891 Kentucky
Constitution offer greater protection of the right of privacy than
provided by the Federal Constitution” (Robson 1997, 30). This
was an important decision because the court rejected many of the
points made by the majority in Bowers v. Hardwick and recognized
that privacy extended to adult consensual sex regardless of
whether it was homosexual.
Same-Sex Marriage: Baehr v. Lewin (1993)
In December 1990, the Hawaii Department of Health denied mar-
riage licenses to three gay couples. The three gay couples sued the
department. In September 1991, circuit court judge Robert Klein
threw out the case, ruling that homosexual marriage was not a
fundamental right. The ruling was appealed. In May 1993, the
Hawaii Supreme Court reinstated the lawsuit and ruled that the
state’s denial of marriage licenses to the three couples violated
their rights as a form of sex discrimination. Sex has suspect class
status in the Hawaii constitution and thus requires the highest
scrutiny in legal review. The state was required to show a com-
198
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

pelling reason to justify the ban. Circuit court judge Kevin Chang
ruled in 1996 that prohibiting same-sex couples from marrying
violated the state constitution’s equal protection clause.
However, an amendment to the Hawaii Constitution was passed
by the voters in November 1998 that restricted the definition of
marriage to opposite-sex couples only. As a result, the state
supreme court unanimously overturned Chang’s 1996 decision.
Child Custody by Lesbian Parents:
Bottoms v. Bottoms (1995)
In 1993, a grandmother sought custody of Tyler, her two-year-old
grandson. The mother, Sharon Bottoms, was a lesbian. The grand-
mother argued that Bottoms’s lesbian relationship made her an
unfit mother. Bottoms argued that she was a fit mother and did
not want Tyler visiting the grandmother’s home because the man
who had sexually abused Bottoms while she was growing up
lived there. The trial judge agreed with the grandmother, and
Tyler was removed from Sharon Bottoms. This case caused
tremendous outrage in the lesbian and gay community. Later, the
Virginia appellate court reversed the lower court and gave cus-
tody of Tyler to the mother. The court said that Bottoms’s sexual
orientation as a lesbian did not make her unfit to have custody of
her child.
Discrimination by Private Organizations:
Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and
Bisexual Group of Boston (1995)
A gay marching contingent applied to participate in the Boston St.
Patrick’s Day parade and wanted to carry a banner indicating gay
pride. The organizers refused the application and barred the group
from the event because of its intent to express a message in the
parade contrary to that of the parade organizers. The gay contin-
gent sued. The U.S. Supreme Court upheld the First Amendment
right of the organizers to exclude gays from their event, not
because they were gay but because they intended to promote a
political belief contrary to the beliefs of the private organizers of
the event. The Court said that parades are a “form of expression”
and private sponsors cannot be forced to include groups that
“impart a message the organizers do not wish to convey.”
Case Summaries
199

Constitutionality of Antidiscrimination
Statutes: Romer v. Evans (1996)
In 1987, Boulder citizens approved an antidiscrimination ordi-
nance based on sexual orientation. In 1989, Colorado governor
Roy Romer issued an executive order prohibiting discrimination
against people with AIDS. In 1991, the Colorado Civil Rights
Commission recommended that the state adopt antidiscrimina-
tion statues based on sexual orientation.
In response to these progay laws, three religious right
activists—David Noebel, Tony Marco, and Kevin Tebedo—
formed a new organization, Colorado for Family Values (CFV).
Their goal was to repeal the governor’s executive order and the
antidiscrimination laws already on the books in Aspen, Boulder,
and Denver, and to prevent any future efforts to pass antidis-
crimination laws aimed at protecting lesbian and gay people else-
where in the state. They drafted constitutional Amendment 2,
which was passed by the voters in 1992 with 53 percent in favor.
Nine days later, a group of activists filed a lawsuit in the
Colorado District Court for Denver.
At the first hearing, a temporary injunction was granted to
the plaintiffs barring the state from implementing Amendment 2.
Six months later, the case was heard by the Colorado District
Court for Denver, Judge Jeffrey Bayless presiding. The state gave
six reasons that Amendment 2 was constitutional. Judge Bayless
issued a sixteen-page ruling adhering closely to the six justifica-
tions and the evidence introduced at trial. He rejected all state
claims, saying the state failed to demonstrate a compelling reason
to abridge the fundamental rights of lesbian and gay citizens.
The state appealed Judge Bayless’s decision to the Colorado
Supreme Court, asking the court to reverse the fundamental
rights analysis. By doing so, the state hoped to lower the burden
of proof from a compelling one to a rational interest justification.
The court rejected this approach and reiterated its view that
Amendment 2’s ultimate effect was to infringe on the fundamen-
tal rights of the plaintiffs by prohibiting the adoption of laws, reg-
ulations, ordinances, and policies against discrimination based on
sexual orientation. The court provided a step-by-step analysis
similar to that prepared by Judge Bayless.
In 1995, the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to review the
Colorado Supreme Court’s decision. Besides the two primary
parties involved, the Court accepted more than two dozen friend-
200
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

of-the-court briefs from almost 100 organizations, cities, and
individuals. The Court debate was similar to the previous court
arguments. The Court characterized Amendment 2 as “unprece-
dented in our jurisprudence” in that it identified “persons by a
single trait and then denies them protection across the board. . . .
A law declaring in general that it shall be more difficult for one
group of citizens than for all others to seek aid from government
is itself a denial of equal protection of the laws in the most lit-
eral sense” (637). Also, Amendment 2 “inflicts on [gay people]
immediate, continuing, and real injuries that outrun and belie
any legitimate justifications that may be claimed for it” (638).
The Court ruled (6–1) that Amendment 2 appeared to violate the
fundamental right of lesbians, gay men, and bisexuals to partic-
ipate in the political process on a basis equal to other
Coloradans. Justice Kennedy stated, “We conclude that
Amendment 2 classifies homosexuals not to further a proper
legislative end but to make them unequal to everyone else. This
Colorado cannot do. A state cannot so deem a class of persons a
stranger to its laws” (639).
Harassment of Gay Students:
Nabozny v. Podlesny (1996)
Jamie Nabozny experienced terrible abuse from other students
while attending an Ashland, Wisconsin, high school. He was
wrestled to the classroom floor while his teacher was out of the
room, and then two boys pretended to rape him while twenty
other students watched and laughed. He was also urinated on in
a bathroom and kicked so badly that he required surgery to stop
the internal bleeding. His parents complained, but a school offi-
cial told them that he “had to expect that kind of stuff” because
he was a homosexual. Jamie eventually moved to Minneapolis,
where he graduated with an equivalency degree, but he sued
the Ashland School District in 1995. Initially, the case was dis-
missed, but the Seventh U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals could not
find any rational reason for permitting one student to assault
another based on the victim’s sexual orientation and thus
allowed the suit to continue. A jury found that school officials
violated Jamie’s rights under the Fourteenth Amendment’s
Equal Protection Clause, and the district was forced to pay
$962,000 in damages.
Case Summaries
201

AIDS and the Americans with Disabilities
Act: Bragdon v. Abbot (1998)
Sidney Abbot went to the dental office of Randon Bragdon for an
examination. She revealed that she was HIV-positive on the
patient registration form. Dr. Bragdon performed a routine exam-
ination, determined that she had a cavity, and told her that he
would not fill the tooth in his office because of his HIV policy.
Rather, filling the tooth should be done in a hospital setting and
at her expense. She declined his conditions and filed a complaint
under Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the Maine
Human Rights Act (MHRA).
Both lower courts determined that Abbot’s asymptomatic
HIV was a physical impairment and that she was disabled as a
matter of law under the ADA. The U.S. Supreme Court used the
case-by-case method of analysis—first used in Ennis v. National
Ass’n of Business and Education Radio, Inc. in 1995 where the court
decided that the plain language of ADA required each case to be
analyzed by itself.
The Court decided HIV infection is an “impairment from the
moment of infection” (Bragdon v. Abbot, 2203–04). Second, the
Court agreed that HIV infection “substantially limits . . . [a] major
life activit[y]” [42 U.S.C. § 12102(2) (1997)]. The Court noted this
position was further supported by the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC) regulation for Title 1, which
states that a physical or mental impairment is “[a]ny physiologi-
cal disorder, or condition, . . . affecting any one or more of [a num-
ber of listed body systems]” [29 C.F.R. §1630.2 (h)(1) (1997)]. The
Court upheld Abbot’s claim of discrimination under ADA.
The Bragdon decision is exemplary for finding asymptomatic
HIV a disability under ADA. However, the Court failed to explic-
itly state that HIV infection is a disability per se. Although a few
lower courts have accepted the argument that HIV infection is a
disability per se (Hoepfl v. Barlow), only the future will reveal if the
U.S. Supreme Court agrees.
Same-Sex Sexual Harassment: Oncale v.
Sundowner Offshore Services, Inc. (1998)
A male worker claimed sexual harassment by his male supervisor
and two male coworkers on an offshore oil rig. All parties in the
case presented themselves as heterosexual. The Court established
202
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

that Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act disallowing sexual
harassment in the workplace applied to same-sex sexual harass-
ment claims. However, the Court continued, “the conduct that is
not severe or pervasive enough to create an objectively hostile or
abusive work environment—an environment that a reasonable
person would find hostile or abusive—is beyond Title VII’s
purview (Harris, 510 U.S., at 21, citing Meritor, 477 U.S., at 67). . . .
In same-sex (as in all) harassment cases, that inquiry requires
careful consideration of the social context in which particular
behavior occurs and is experienced by its target” (79).
Transsexual Name Change:
In re McIntyre (1998)
Until recently, only transsexuals who completed or nearly com-
pleted changing over, including surgery, could have their names
changed. With the case of Robert Henry McIntyre, the
Pennsylvania Supreme Court granted permission to Robert to
change his name to Katherine Marie McIntyre even though he
had not begun surgical reassignment. The court followed the rea-
soning in Commonwealth v. Goodman and In re Grimes that the main
purpose of name change statutes is to prohibit fraud by those
attempting to avoid financial obligations. Furthermore, in In re
Eck the court determined that it is not a matter of governmental
concern when someone wants to change a traditionally female or
traditionally male name. Thus, in In re McIntyre the court found
no public interest in denying McIntyre’s request for a name
change and determined that his transgender status had no bear-
ing on the matter.
Civil Unions: Baker v. State 
of Vermont (1999)
In December 1999, the Vermont Supreme Court found that same-
sex couples in Vermont are entitled to the same protections and
benefits provided through law as are given opposite-sex married
couples. The Vermont Constitution contains an equal protection
clause that guarantees all citizens the same treatment under the
law. These clauses are similar to the equal protection provision of
the U.S. Constitution’s Fourteenth Amendment, which was used to
secure civil rights for racial minorities, women, and other groups.
Case Summaries
203

The court did not decide that same-sex couples were entitled
to civil marriage licenses. Instead, the court referred the matter
back to the Vermont legislature to craft a solution for same-sex
couples. The legislature decided against marriage and instead
created a new category implemented under a “civil union” pro-
gram. Immediately, the religious right and conservative represen-
tatives called for the impeachment of the judges making this deci-
sion and a reversal of the decision. However, many powerful
Vermont politicians took great pride in the fact that Vermont was
the first state to outlaw slavery in 1777 and believed that lesbians
and gay men deserved to be treated fairly and equitably.
Governor Howard Dean stated, “We will remain in the forefront
of the struggle for equal justice under law” (Dean, 2000).
Diversity Training: Altman v. Minnesota
Department of Corrections (1999)
Often, employees are required to attend diversity training
courses. In Minnesota, three prison employees protested having
to attend workplace training on sexual orientation. They believed
that the mandatory program was “state-sponsored propaganda”
promoting homosexuality. The three men said that homo-
sexuality went against their religious beliefs and that same-sex
intimacy was sinful. The men took their Bibles to the training pro-
gram and read silently during class. Afterward, the employees
received written reprimands for violating prison policies pro-
hibiting improper conduct and prejudicial behavior. Supervisors
further charged that the protest was an attempt to impede efforts
to prevent sexual orientation harassment. The men sued. In
August 1999, U.S. district judge Ann D. Montgomery of
Minnesota ordered the state to withdraw the disciplinary notices.
Judge Montgomery decided that the employees’ First
Amendment right to free expression of religion and the
Minnesota Constitution’s freedom of conscience clause had been
violated by the prison’s actions.
Safe Schools: Godkin v. San Leandro School
District (1999) and Berrill v. Houde (1999)
These two cases illustrate a current trend in First Amendment
arguments. In both situations, parents complained that teachers
204
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

made comments in class that the parents believed violated their
religious liberty. The California U.S. District Court dismissed a
suit by parents who claimed their constitutional rights were vio-
lated when Godkin, their son’s teacher, made progay remarks in
class at a San Leandro public school. The court saw through the
argument and said the teacher’s discussion of homosexuality
could not be legitimately characterized as the imposition of a the-
ology. In Berrill’s case, the teacher told her high school homeroom
class that students were not allowed to use derogatory terms
about gay people in her room. Parents of one of the girls in the
class complained, writing the Brookfield Board of Education con-
tending that her remarks constituted “homosexual recruiting”
and a promotion of a “homosexual agenda.” Berrill sued the par-
ents for defamation and settled out of court.
Student Rights to Form Gay Clubs: 
East High Gay/Straight Alliance v. 
Board of Education (1999)
In 1995, a group of lesbian and gay students at East High in Salt
Lake City, Utah, submitted an application to form a gay-straight
alliance on campus. The school denied the application. The stu-
dents sued, citing the Equal Access Act. This act requires federally
funded public schools that provide access to noncurricular clubs
to extend the opportunity to all clubs without discrimination. In
April 1996, the board terminated forty-six school clubs not
directly linked to the curriculum in an effort to block the alliance
from meeting on school property. The clubs that were terminated
included Students against Drunk Driving and the Young
Republicans. Many in the community blamed the gay students
and “gay agenda” for the cancellation of the extracurricular activ-
ities. The lesbian and gay students still met, but off campus.
However, when they learned that at least one noncurricular
club was allowed to meet on school property in the 1997–1998
school year, they sued again. Federal district court judge Bruce S.
Jenkins ruled that the school district had violated the federal
Equal Access Act and the students’ First Amendment rights
(“Gay/Straight Alliance’s Lawsuit to Proceed against Salt Lake
School Board” 1999).
A few months later, a federal judge dismissed the student
lawsuit against the Salt Lake City School Board because school
Case Summaries
205

officials produced definitive policy guarantees that allowed the
right to express progay opinions. However, the lesbian and gay
students still wanted to meet on campus. Thus, they reorganized
their original club to link directly with the curriculum. In February
2000, the students petitioned the school to form the People
Respecting Important Social Movements (PRISM) academic club.
The goal of the club was to discuss history through gay and les-
bian issues and expand and enhance the study and understanding
of American history and government. The school denied the
application. The students sued. U.S. judge Tena Campbell granted
PRISM a preliminary injunction because school officials had vio-
lated their own policy and the Constitution.
Discrimination by Private Organizations:
Boy Scouts of America v. Dale (2000)
James Dale was involved with the Boy Scouts for twelve years. He
obtained the rank of Eagle Scout, was elected to the Order of the
Arrow, and became assistant troop leader in 1990 at age twenty.
He never made his homosexuality known to the Scouts, nor did he
mention or discuss the topic of homosexuality. That same year, he
was interviewed in a college newspaper and was identified as the
copresident of a lesbian and gay student group at Rutgers
University. The paper ran a photo of him marching in the local gay
pride parade. When the Scouts Monmouth Council in New Jersey
discovered this fact, it expelled him from the organization. The
Scouts told Dale that it “does not admit avowed homosexuals to
membership in the organization” (Asseo 2000). Dale was expelled
not for acting inappropriately “on” or “off duty,” but rather for
simply being identified as a homosexual.
Dale sued the Monmouth Council and the national organiza-
tion in 1992. He contended that their actions violated New Jersey’s
antidiscrimination law. The state court threw the case out, stating
that the Boy Scouts was not a public accommodation and therefore
was not bound by state antidiscrimination laws. The case was
appealed, and the New Jersey Supreme Court ruled in Dale’s
favor. The court rejected the Scouts’ position that allowing homo-
sexuals to participate would violate the Scouts oath to remain
“morally straight” and “clean.” The court decided that Boy Scouts
was a public accommodation and was subject to state regulation.
On June 28, 2000, the U.S. Supreme Court reversed the New
Jersey Supreme Court decision. It held that requiring the Boy
206
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

Scouts to include Dale in its ranks would violate the organization’s
First Amendment right of “expressive association.” The Court said:
“We are not, as we must not be, guided by our views of whether
the Boy Scouts’ teachings with respect to homosexual conduct are
right or wrong. Public or judicial disapproval of a tenet of an orga-
nization’s expression does not justify the state’s effort to compel the
organization to accept members where such acceptance would
derogate from the organization’s expressive message” (722).
Student Rights to University Funding: Board
of Regents of the University of Wisconsin
System v. Southworth (2000)
Some students with antigay religious convictions have sued their
universities to stop funding LGBT groups. They claimed their
money was being used to fund organizations of which they
morally disapproved and this violated their First Amendment
right to free speech and association. In a unanimous decision by
the U.S. Supreme Court, the Court upheld university-funding
systems that use student fees for all student groups. Because stu-
dents contribute to a neutral fund that supports all viewpoints
rather than a particular ideology, the Court ruled that the univer-
sity did not compel any speech or violate the First Amendment.
Transsexual Rights: Schwenk 
v. Hartford (2000)
Douglas Schwenk, a self-identified preoperative transsexual who
went by the name Crystal and dressed as a woman, received
repeated unwanted sexual overtures from prison guard Robert
Mitchell. Mitchell attempted to rape Crystal anally in her prison
cell. She filed a federal lawsuit claiming violation of her civil
rights under the Eighth Amendment (cruel and unusual punish-
ment) and the Gender-Motivated Violence Act (GMVA).
Judge Stephen Reinhardt of the Ninth Circuit Court of
Appeals concluded that Schwenk was protected under the Eighth
Amendment since precedent had been set in prior transsexual
prisoner cases (Farmer v. Brennan). He rejected Mitchell’s argu-
ment that GMVA did not apply to the case because it was part of
the Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) and Schwenk was a
man. Reinhardt noted that members of Congress made opinions
Case Summaries
207

that supported the terms of GMVA to protect all residents of the
United States from gender-motivated violence. Reinhardt found
that the Supreme Court had, in fact, collapsed the concept of sex
and gender into one broad category—gender identity.
Laws, Statutes, and Executive Orders
Affirmative Action
The term affirmative action was first used by President John F.
Kennedy when issuing Executive Order 10925, which created the
Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity. Later, President
Lyndon Johnson signed into law the Civil Rights Act of 1964,
which included provisions for affirmative action programs that
were enforced through Executive Order 11246 in 1965. The Civil
Rights Act provided protections for a few categories of people
based on race, color, religion, sex, and national origin. These are
categorized as “suspect class” for the purpose of strict court
scrutiny. Contrary to the claims of the religious right, no national
gay and lesbian organization has campaigned to include sexual
orientation in affirmative action plans.
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
(ADA) (Public Law 101–336)
In 1987, a Florida court decided that tuberculosis was a disabil-
ity protected by law (School Board of Nassau County v. Arline).
This was an important decision because AIDS, like tuberculosis,
is an infectious disease that often causes people to lose their job
and face other discriminations. This concept of protecting those
with disabilities was further developed by Congress with the
enactment of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of
1990. Although it was not enacted to cover only HIV-infected
individuals, AIDS was clearly on the minds of congressional
representatives during the debate over this measure. In enact-
ing the ADA, Congress intended to “provide clear, strong, con-
sistent, enforceable standards addressing discrimination
against individuals with disabilities” [§12101(b)(2)]. However,
court interpretation of HIV as being a disability has been any-
thing but consistent.
208
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

Civil Service Reform Act of 1978, 
5 U.S.C. §2302(b)(10)
On the basis of Norton v. Macy and related decisions, the Civil
Service Commission issued a directive to federal supervisors in
December 1973 that stated that “you many not find a person
unsuitable for Federal employment merely because the person is
a homosexual or has engaged in homosexual acts” (Civil Service
Bulletin 1973). Later this concept was expanded by the enactment
of the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978. Supervisors were directed
not to discriminate against employees on the basis of conduct that
does not adversely affect the performance of others.
Civil Unions (91 V.S.A. Chapt. 23, 
Eff. July 1, 2000)
Vermont became the first state to give full legal rights to same-sex
couples similar to those enjoyed by opposite-sex married couples,
called civil unions. For complete details, see www.sec.state.vt.us/
pubs/civilunion.htm.
Communications Decency Amendment (CDA)
and Child Online Protection Act (COPA)
Many parents, congressmembers, and conservatives wish to cen-
sor information from the Internet in the belief that some material
is harmful to minors. To achieve this aim, Congress passed the
Communications Decency Act in 1996, which was struck down in
ACLU v. Reno I as being an unconstitutional restriction of the First
Amendment. Congress tried again in 1998 and created the Child
Online Protection Act (COPA). Even though it was more nar-
rowly focused, U.S. district judge Lowell A. Reed, Jr. issued a pre-
liminary injunction barring COPA from going into effect after he
determined that the ACLU was likely to win the case against
COPA (ACLU v. Reno II).
Court discussion showed that there were major questions
about enforcing the act. For example, the act claimed to protect
children from “harmful” materials, yet no one could give a clear
definition of what constituted “harmful” or give evidence that
such material actually harmed. Second, the act required adults
to divulge personal information such as credit card numbers to
Laws, Statutes, and Executive Orders
209

gain access to adult sites. The judges recognized that this would
produce a “chilling effect” and radically reduce usage of the
sites since some people would be reluctant to give that infor-
mation. Third, the act specified that “contemporary community
standards” would be used to delineate “offensive” material.
However, the government could not clearly indicate which
community and which standards would be used, given that 
the Internet is worldwide. Judge Reed concluded that the gov-
ernment was relatively helpless in trying to solve the problem
of children’s access to material that might be harmful to them
on the Internet. Any kind of censorship of the Internet has
impact for the gay rights movement because historically LGBT
materials and discussion were automatically deemed obscene
and censored.
Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA) 
(5/96 H.R. 3396)
This act provides that no state will be required to honor a law of
any other state with respect to same-sex “marriage.” DOMA
defines “marriage” and “spouse” as a legal union between one
man and one woman as husband and wife. According to Section
1738C:
No State, territory, or possession of the United States, or
Indian tribe, shall be required to give effect to any public act,
record, or judicial proceeding of any other State, territory,
possession, or tribe respecting a relationship between per-
sons of the same sex that is treated as a marriage under the
laws of such other State, territory, possession, or tribe, or a
right or claim arising from such relationship.
DOMA also amends Chapter 1, Title 1, of the U.S. Code as
follows:
In determining the meaning of any Act of Congress, or of
any ruling, regulation, or interpretation of the various
administrative bureaus and agencies of the United States,
the word marriage means only a legal union between one
man and one woman as husband and wife, and the word
spouse refers only to a person of the opposite sex who is a
husband or wife.
210
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

Many states have enacted their own version of DOMA. See
the next section for a discussion of how DOMA may be found
unconstitutional. Summary and analysis are available from the
electric law library at www.lectlaw.com/files/leg23.htm.
Full Faith and Credit Clause
The U.S. Constitution, Article IV, Section 1, reads, “Full Faith and
Credit shall be given in each State to the public Acts, Records, and
judicial Proceedings of every other State.” This has been inter-
preted to mean that each state must treat the judgments of other
states as the judgment would be treated in the state in which it
was made. The clause is a “nationally unifying force” (Magnolia
Petroleum Co. v. White) that recognizes that states are required to
“sacrifice particular local powers as the price of membership in a
federal system” of government (Sherrer v. Sherrer, 356).
However, there are limits to the power that the federal gov-
ernment can exert over states to accept one another’s laws.
Judgments of other states do not need to be respected if they are
(1) “obnoxious” to the public policy of the state or (2) if the state
can show that there are important, rather than merely legitimate,
state interests for rejecting the other state’s claim. When courts are
faced with competing state interests and laws, this becomes a
choice of law.
Choice of law is a notoriously murky area. It is sometimes
difficult to determine which state’s laws apply to a particular sit-
uation. In general, the Hague court explained that “if a state has
only an insignificant contact with the parties and the occurrence
or transaction, application of its law is unconstitutional” (Allstate
Insurance Co. v. Hague, at 310–311). Further, courts have recog-
nized that frequently the laws of one state and the contrary laws
of another state may apply equally. Unfortunately, the U.S.
Supreme Court has not stepped in to help clear up the confusion
over the Full Faith and Credit Clause. The Court believes such
conflicts are “unavoidable” and has left it for other courts to
“determine for [themselves] the extent to which the statute of one
state may qualify or deny rights asserted under the statue of
another” (Allstate Insurance Co. v. Hague, at 547). The Court has
decided that the alternative to this confusion is worse.
The prospect of same-sex marriages set off a storm of contro-
versy nationwide. Confusion over the Full Faith and Credit
Clause led Congress to enact DOMA. It was clear, however, from
Laws, Statutes, and Executive Orders
211

the debate in Congress that there was no understanding of how
the current system works. DOMA (as well as legislation enacted
in many states) defined marriage as being between one man and
one woman and allowed states to not recognize same-sex mar-
riages of couples who move into their state. This was unnecessary
since states already possessed this power. Legal theorists believe
that when the federal DOMA is tested in court, it will be declared
unconstitutional for a number of reasons.
Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell, Don’t Pursue Policy,
U.S.C. Chapter 37, Title 10, Sec. 546
(September 16, 1993)
On July 19, 1993, President Clinton issued military directives
that stated the following:
1. “Servicemen and women will be judged based on their
conduct, not their sexual orientation.”
2. “The practice . . . of not asking about sexual orientation
in the enlistment procedure will continue.”
3. An “open statement by a service member that he or she
is a homosexual will create a rebutable presumption that he
or she intends to engage [in] prohibited conduct, but the
service member will be given an opportunity to refute that
presumption; in other words, to demonstrate that he or she
intends to live by the rules of conduct that apply in the mil-
itary service.”
Behaviors that would no longer initiate an investigation, or serve
as the basis for separation, included association with known
homosexuals, presence at a gay bar, possession or reading of
homosexual publications, participation in a gay rights rally, or the
listing of someone of the same gender as the person to be con-
tacted in case of emergency or as the beneficiary of an insurance
policy.
Has the policy been effective in reducing lesbians and gay
harassment? No! “Since the regulations took effect in early 1994,
the number of gays dismissed from military service has climbed
42 percent” (Graham 1997). A Pentagon report released in
February 2000 revealed that expulsion from the military in 1999
was 73 percent above the rate in 1993, the year preceding Don’t
Ask, Don’t Tell (“New Gay Discharge Figures Up” 2000).
212
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

Quotations
AIDS
“AIDS is character-building. It’s made me see all of the shal-
low things we cling to, like ego and vanity. Of course, I’d rather
have a few more T-cells and a little less character.”
—Randy Shilts, author of And the Band Played On (National
Museum and Archive 1996, 74)
“AIDS is not the only issue in the nation tonight. Be con-
cerned about AIDS, but also sickle-cell anemia. . . . Be concerned
about the human rights of gays, but also Native Americans
trapped on reservations and blacks in ghettos. I would urge you,
as I urge black people, the bigger you get beyond yourselves, the
more you protect yourselves.”
—Jesse Jackson, influential African American leader,
addressing a gay fund-raising dinner in New York City (National
Museum and Archive 1996, 78)
“I’ve learned that God doesn’t punish people. I’ve learned
that God doesn’t dislike homosexuals, like a lot of Christians
think. AIDS isn’t their fault, just like it isn’t my fault.”
—Ryan White, sixteen-year-old person with AIDS (National
Museum and Archive 1996, 79)
Being Out
“Better than I’ve ever felt in my life.”
—Representative Gerry Studds (D-MA) after being asked
how he felt now that he’d come out (National Museum and
Archive 1996, 75)
“Did you see those two fruits? They were holding hands! I
wasn’t going to wait on them even if the store manager saw me
blow them off.”
—Salesclerk in a study to determine the difference in treat-
ment made by sales staff toward heterosexual or homosexual
couples (Walters and Curran 1996, 138)
“Every gay person must come out. As difficult as it is, you
must tell your immediate family, you must tell your relatives, you
must tell your friends if indeed they are your friends, you must
tell your neighbors, you must tell the people you work with, you
must tell the people at the stores you shop in. And once they real-
Quotations
213

ize that we are indeed their children, that we are indeed every-
where—every myth, every lie, every innuendo will be destroyed
once and for all. And once you do, you will feel so much better.”
—Harvey Milk, openly gay supervisor of the City of San
Francisco, who was assassinated in City Hall by Dan White in
1978, in a speech following the defeat of Proposition 6, which
would have barred homosexuals from teaching in California pub-
lic schools (National Museum and Archive 1996, 79)
“I get so tired of these stories about, ‘Oh, the torture and tor-
ment of coming out.’ There’s no torment in coming out. The tor-
ment is in being in.”
—Armistead Maupin, writer (National Museum and Archive
1996, 76)
“Would you ask me how I dare to compare the civil rights
struggle with the struggle for lesbian and gay rights? I can com-
pare them and I do compare them, because I know what it means
to be called a nigger and I know what it means to be called a fag-
got, and I understand the difference in the marrow of my bone.
And I can put that difference in one word: none.”
—Mel Boozer, after being nominated for vice president of the
United States at the Democratic National Convention in New
York City in 1980 (National Museum and Archive 1996, 69)
“We believe an avowed homosexual is not a role model for
the values espoused in the Scout Oath and Law.”
—Letter signed by Irene Szinavel, Boy Scout Exective
Director for the Des Plaines Valley Council, to the seven Scout
groups in Oak Park, Illinois, informing them that they could not
renew their charter agreement with the Boy Scouts because they
agreed with the local school district to treat all people equally
“without regard to race, color, creed, sexual orientation, age,
national origin, gender or disabilities” (Brown 2001, A3)
Existence of Homosexuals
“All 34,000 homosexuals had been tested for the virus with
negative results.”
—Russian Counselor Office reporting in 1989 the first two
cases of AIDS and saying that they “were both foreigners”
(Frontiers 1989, 20)
“We don’t have homosexuals in Uganda, so this is mainly
heterosexual transmission.”
—Ugandan president Yoweri Museveni at the Common-
214
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

wealth Summit in Australia, where he accepted an award for his
government’s work in slashing the rate of HIV infection from 28
percent to less than 10 percent of the population (Frontiers 2002, 19)
Judicial Commentary
“Heterosexual activity [was] meant to sway [her] from her
lesbianism.”
—Judge explaining why he dismissed all charges of sexual
battery, assault, and kidnapping of a nineteen-year-old Ohio les-
bian (Comstock 1991, 201)
“Gays and lesbians should be put in some type of mental insti-
tution instead of having a law [marriage] like this passed for them.”
—Mississippi Supreme Court justice Connie Wilkerson in 
a letter to the George County Times, which ran on March 28, 2002
(“Judge” 2002)
“[They were] just all-American boys.”
—Judge explaining away the brutal beating of a gay man by
teenage boys (Valente 1984, B1)
“No matter how much society appears to change, the law on
this subject has remained steadfast from the earliest history of the
law, and that law is and must be our law today. The common law
designates homosexuality as an inherent evil, and if a person
openly engages in such a practice, that fact alone would render
him or her an unfit parent.”
—Alabama chief justice Roy Moore in deciding to give cus-
tody of three teenagers to their father rather than to their lesbian
mother (“Ala. Chief” 2002)
“We conclude that Amendment 2 classifies homosexuals not
to further a proper legislative end but to make them unequal to
everyone else. This Colorado cannot do. A state cannot so deem a
class of persons a stranger to its laws.”
—Supreme Court justice Anthony Kennedy, ruling in Romer v.
Evans that Colorado’s Amendment 2 violated the fundamental right
of lesbians, gay men, and bisexuals to participate in the political
process on a basis equal to other Coloradans (Stewart 2001, 236)
Love
“I am the love that dare not speak its name.”
—Lord Alfred Douglas, 1894, describing his love for Oscar
Wilde (National Museum and Archive 1996, 68)
Quotations
215

“When he died, I went to pieces. I retreated into a shell. For
nine months, I wouldn’t speak to a living soul. I just clamed up. I
wouldn’t answer the telephone and I wouldn’t leave the house.”
—Tennessee Williams, playwright, on the death of his lover
Frank Merlo, from lung cancer, in 1963 (National Museum and
Archive 1996, 71)
Military
“After more than fifty years in the military and politics, I am
still amazed to see how upset people can get over nothing. . . .
Everyone knows that gays have served honorably in the military
since at least the time of Julius Caesar. . . . There is no valid reason
for keeping the ban on gays. . . . The conservative movement, to
which I subscribe, has as one of its basic tenets the belief that gov-
ernment should stay out of people’s private lives. . . . Legislating
someone’s version of morality is exactly what we do by perpetu-
ating discrimination against gays. . . . Congress would best serve
our national interest by finding the courage to rally the troops in
support of ending this un-American discrimination.”
—Former senator and one-time Republican presidential can-
didate Barry Goldwater (Goldwater 1993)
“Our biggest mistake was unconditionally believing in them,
believing that they were really not lying to us, placing too much
power and too much faith in them. We should never have put our
fate in one individual’s hands, especially in a non-gay individ-
ual’s hands.”
—David Mixner, campaign manager for President Clinton,
on Clinton’s reversal on lifting the military ban in 1994 (National
Museum and Archive 1996, 77)
“When I was in the military, they gave me a medal for killing
two men, and a discharge for loving one.”
—Leonard Matlovich’s headstone (Thompson 1994, 341)
“The one thing I hate is faggots and niggers.”
—Private Clavin Glover explaining why he killed Private
First Class Barry Winchell at Ft. Campbell, Kentucky (“Soldier
Pleads Guilty” 1999)
Presidential Commentary
“I don’t want to see this country go that way. You know what
happened to the Greeks. Homosexuality destroyed them. Sure,
216
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

Aristotle was a homo, we all know that, so was Socrates. . . . You
see, homosexuality, dope, uh, immorality in general: These are
the enemies of strong societies.”
—President Richard M. Nixon in recently released White
House audiotapes from May 13, 1971 (Weingarten 2002, A4)
“I find it extremely outrageous and repugnant to my human
conscience that such immoral and repulsive organizations, like
those of homosexuals who offend both the laws of nature and the
morals of religious beliefs espoused by our society, should have
any advocates in our midst and even elsewhere in the world.”
—Zimbabwe president Robert Mugabe (Predrag 2001, 56)
“The Republic of Namibia does not allow homosexuality [or]
lesbianism here.”
—President Sam Nujoma, speaking to students at the
University of Namibia (Predrag 2001, 56)
“Police should eliminate gays and lesbians from the face of
the Earth. . . . Police are ordered to arrest and deport [homosexu-
als] and imprison [them], too.”
—Namibia minister Jerry Ekandjo (Predrag 2001, 56)
“Other Christians and the general public must not condone,
even by silence, obnoxious attitudes, increasingly promoted
among a few demagogic religious and political leaders. . . . We
must make it clear that a platform of ‘I hate gay men and women’
is not a way to become president of the United States.”
—Former U.S. president Jimmy Carter (Carter 1996)
The Religious Right
“Homosexuals and lesbians are not only a sickness, they are
an abomination which should be removed from every city in the
country, also from those districts where they feel protected like in
Tel Aviv . . . [and] put to death.”
—Rabbi David Batzri, religious leader in Jerusalem (“Rabbi
Wants” 2002, 33)
“I agree with capital punishment and I believe that homo-
sexuality . . . could be coupled with murder. . . . It would be the
government that sits upon this land who will be executing the
homosexuals.”
—Dean Wycoff, director of the Moral Majority of Santa Clara
County, California (Young 1982, 77)
“I know what you feel about these queers, these fairies. We
wish we could get in our cars and run them down when they
Quotations
217

march. . . . We need an emotionally charged issue to stir up
people. . . . I believe that the homosexual issue is the issue we
should use.”
—Robert Billings, the first executive director of the Moral
Majority, recognizing the solicitation potential in using homo-
sexuality (Young 1982, 78)
“The country was founded by Christians. It was founded as
a Christian nation. They’re trying to sell us this nonsense about
separation of church and state. And that’s what it is, it’s a fanati-
cal interpretation of the First Amendment. . . . We’re going to win
this battle but we’ve got to stand together, all the Christians in
America need to join hands together and say we’ve had enough
of this utter nonsense.”
—Pat Robertson, founder and director of the Christian
Coalition (White 1997)
“When the Christian majority takes control, pluralism will be
seen as evil and the state will not allow anybody the right to prac-
tice evil.”
—Gary Potter, Catholics for Christian Political Action (White
1997)
“You just wait until 1996, then you’ll see a real right-wing
tyrant.”
—Patrick Buchanan describing a future for the presidency in
1996 (Corn 1995, 12)
For more pages of quotes from antigay sources, visit the organ-
ization HateCrime.org websites: www.wiredstrategies. com/narth.
html,/ phelps.html, /aftah.html, /claremont.html, /sheldon.html,
/laura.html, /robertson.thml, /frc.html, /exgayspeech.html, /cc.
html, /cameron.html, /relycameron. html, and /afa.html.
References
ACLU v. Reno I, 117 S.Ct. 2329 (1997).
“Ala. Chief Justice Says Gays Evil, Unfit Parents.” 2002. Gay and Lesbian
Times, February 21, 27.
Alison D. v. Virginia M., 77 N.Y.2d 651, 572 N.E.2d 27, 569 N.Y.S.2d 586
(1991).
Allstate Insurance Co. v. Hague, 449 U.S. 302, 310–311 (1981).
218
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

Altman v. Minnesota Department of Corrections, No. 98-CV-1075 (D. Minn.,
Aug. 19, 1999).
American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Adolescence. 1998. “Sui-
cide and Suicide Attempts in Adolescents and Young Adults.” Pediatrics 8,
no. 1: 322–324. Available at http://www.aap.org/policy/re9928.html.
American Academy of Pediatrics, E. C. Perrin, and the Committee 
on Psychosocial Aspects of Child and Family Health. 2002. “Coparent
or Second-Parent Adoption by Same-Sex Parents.” Pediatrics 109:
341–344.
American Psychiatric Association. 2000a. Fact Sheet: Is It Possible To
Change One’s Sexual Orientation (“Reparative Therapy”)? Arlington, VA:
APA. Available at www.psych.org/public_info/gaylesbianandbisexual-
issues22701.pdf
———. 2000b. “What Causes Homosexuality /Heterosexuality
/Bisexuality?” Available at: www.psych.org/public_info/gaylesbian
andbisexualissues22701.pdf.
American Psychological Association. 1998. “Amicus Curiae Brief for
Janice Ann Delong v. Fredrick Joseph Delong III, Guardian ad Litem.”
Available at http://www.psyclaw.org/delongbrief.html.
———. Amicus Curiae Brief for Kimberly Y. Boswell v. Robert G. Boswell.
———. 2001. Guidelines for Psychotherapy with Lesbian, Gay, & Bisexual
Clients. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Available
at www.apa.org/pi/lgbc/guidelines.html.
Amnesty International. 2001. Crimes of Hate, Conspiracy of Silence: Torture
and Ill-Treatment Based on Sexual Identity. New York: Amnesty  Inter-
national USA. Available at: www.amnesty.org/80256770002C7290/
0E0160F89337B69 3E80256A7200554E56?OPEN.
Ancafora v. Board of Education, 491 F.2d 498 (4th Cir. 1974).
Asseo, L. 2000. “High Court Takes on Gays in Scouts.” Associated Press,
January 14.
Baehr v. Lewin, 852 P.2d 44 (Haw.), reconsideration granted in part, 875 P.2d
225 (Haw. 1993).
Baker v. State of Vermont, 1999 WL 1211709 (Vt. Sup. Ct., Dec. 20, 1999).
Benkov, L. 1994. Reinventing the Family: The Emerging Story of Lesbian and
Gay Parents. New York: Crown.
References
219

Berrill v. Houde, Connecticut, 1997 Conn. Super. LEXIS 1272. Oct. 13, 1999.
Unreported.
Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System v. Southworth, U.S.
No. 98–1189 (March 22, 2000).
Boswell v. Boswell, 25 Family Law Reporter 1103 (Maryland Court of
Appeals, 1998).
Bottoms v. Bottoms, 444 S.E.2d 276, 281–83 (Va. App. 1994), rev’d 457
S.E.2d 102 (Va. 1995).
Bowers v. Hardwick, 106 S. Ct. 2841, 2843 (1986).
Boy Scouts of America. 2000. Position Statements: In Support of Diversity.
Irving, TX: Boy Scouts of America, National Council. Available at:
www.scouting.org/excomm/positions/diversity. html.
Boy Scouts of America v. Dale, No. 99–699 U.S. (2000).
Bragdon v. Abbot, 118 S. Ct. 2196, 2201–02 (1998).
Braschi v. Stahl Associates Co., 74 N.Y.2d 201, 544 N.Y.S.2d 784, 543 N.E.2d
49 (1989).
Brown, M. 2001. “Scouts’ Honor Is Undermined by Anti-gay Policy.”
Chicago Sun-Times, January 29, A3.
Buchanan, P. 1988. Right from the Beginning. Boston: Little, Brown.
Carter, J. 1996. “It’s Fundamentally Christian to Reject Politics of Hate:
No One Should Condone, Even by Silence, the Persecution of
Homosexuals.” Los Angeles Times, February 23, B9.
Catholic Church. October 1, 1986. Congregation for the Doctrine of the
Faith—On the Pastoral Care of Homosexual Persons: Letter to the Bishops of the
Catholic Church. Available at: www.newadvent.org/docs/df86ho.htm.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1994. “Programs for
Prevention of Suicide among Adolescents and Young Adults.” Morbidity
and Mortality Weekly Report CDC Surveillance Summary 43: 1–7.
———. 1999. Death Rates from 72 Selected Causes by 5-Year Age Groups, Race,
and Sex: United States, 1979–1997. Atlanta: Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention/National Center for Health Statistics, Table 291A.
Civil Service Bulletin. December 21, 1973. Quoted in Aston v. Civiletti, 613
F.2d 923, 927 (D.C. Dir. 1979).
Colorado, State of. 1992. Amends Article II, 30.b of the Colorado Constitution
(known as Amendment 2).
Commonwealth v. Goodman, 676 A.2d 234 (Pa. 1966).
220
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

Commonwealth v. Wasson, 842 S.W.2d 487 (Ky. 1992) (Wintersheimer, J.,
dissenting).
Comstock, G. D. 1991. Violence against Lesbians and Gay Men. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Conger, J. 1975. “Proceedings of the American Psychological Association
for the Year 1974: Minutes of the Annual Meeting of the Council of
Representatives.” American Psychologist 30: 620–651.
Coyle, A. 1993. “A Study of Psychological Well-being among Gay Men
Using the GHQ-30.” British Journal of Clinical Psychology 32, no. 2:
218–220.
Dean, H. January 5, 2000. “State of the State Address.” Montpelier,
Vermont.
Delong v. Delong, Case No. 80637 (Sup. Ct. Mo. 1998).
Dignity USA. 2002. FAQs: Catholicism, Homosexuality, and Dignity.
Washington, DC: DIGNITY/USA. Available at: www.dignityusa.org/
faq.html.
DiPlacido, J. 1998. “Minority Stress among Lesbians, Gay Men, and
Bisexuals: A
Consequence of Heterosexism, Homophobia, and
Stigmatization.” In G. Herek, ed., Psychological Perspectives on Lesbian and
Gay Issues: Vol. 4. Stigma and Sexual Orientation: Understanding Prejudice
against Lesbians, Gay Men, and Bisexuals. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, pp.
138–159.
East High Gay/Straight Alliance v. Board of Education, U.S. No. 2:98-CV-193J
(November 30, 1999).
Ennis v. National Ass’n of Business & Education Radio, Inc., 53 F.3d 55 (4th
Cir. 1995).
Farmer v. Brennan, 511 U.S. 825 (1994).
Fox, R. 1996. “Bisexuality in Perspective: A Review of Theory and
Research.” In B. Firestein, ed., Bisexuality: The Psychology and Politics of an
Invisible Minority. Newbury Park, CA: Sage, pp. 3–50.
Fricke v. Lynch, 491 F.Supp 381 (R.R.I. 1980).
Frontiers. 1989. (September 25): 20.
———. 2002. (March 25): 19.
Gay Law Students Ass’n v. Pacific Tele. and Tel. Co., 24 Cal. 3d 458, 156 Cal.
Rptr. 14, 595 P.2d 592 (1979).
References
221

“Gay Refugees Tell of Torture, Oppression in Cuba.” 1980. The Advocate,
November 27, 15.
Gay Students Org. v. Bonner, 367 F. Supp. 1088 (D.N.H.), aff’d, 509 F.2d 652
(1st Cir. 1974).
“Gay/Straight Alliance’s Lawsuit to Proceed against Salt Lake School
Board.” 1999. Press release by the Lambda Legal Defense and Education
Fund, October 8.
Gaylord v. Tacoma School Dist. No. 10, 559 P. 2d 1340 (WA. 1977), cert.
denied 434 U.S. 879 (1977).
Godkin v. San Leandro School District, (U.S. Dist. Ct., Calif., Walker, J., Oct.
1999).
Gold, M. A., E. C. Perrin, D. Futterman, and S. B. Friedman. 1994.
“Children of Gay or Lesbian Parents.” Pediatric Review 15: 354–358.
Goldwater, B. (1993, June 10). “Ban on Gays Is Senseless Attempt to Stall
the Inevitable.” Washington Post, A2.
Gonsiorek, J. 1991. “The Empirical Basis for the Demise of the Illness
Model of Homosexuality.” In J. Gonsiorek and J. Weinrich, eds., Homo-
sexuality: Research Implications for Public Policy. Newbury Park, CA: Sage,
pp. 115–136.
Graham, B. 1997. “Military Reviews Allegations of Harassment against
Gays.” Washington Post, May 14, A1.
Herek, G. 1990. “Gay People and Government Security Clearance: A
Social Perspective.” American Psychologist 45: 1035–1042.
Hoepfl v. Barlow, 906 F.Supp. 317, 319 n.7 (E.D. Va. 1995).
Hooker, E. 1957. “The Adjustment of the Male Overt Homosexual.”
Journal of Projective Techniques 21: 18–31.
Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of Boston, No.
94–749, (1995, June 19).
In re Breisch, 434 A.2d 815 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1981).
In re Eck, 584 A.2d 859, 860–61 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 1991).
In re Grimes, 609 A.2d 158 (Pa. 1992).
In re McIntyre, 715 A.2d 400, 401 (Pa. 1998).
“Judge: Put Gays in Mental Institutions. Rights Groups File Ethics
Complaint over Judge’s Letter to Newspaper.” 2002. ABC News, April
12, ABCNews.com.
Magnolia Petroleum Co. v. White, 320 U.S. 430, 439 (1943).
222
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

Matlovich v. Secretary of the Air Force, 414 F. Supp. 690 (D.D.C. 1976).
Matter of Toboso-Alfonso (A23 220 644) (March 12, 1990).
Mills, K. I. 1999. Why Reparative Therapy and Ex-Gay Ministries Fail.
Washington, DC: HRC. www.hrc.org/publications/exgay_ministries/
change.asp.
Mohr, R. D. 1988. Gay/Justice—A Study of Ethics, Society, and Law. New
York: Columbia University Press.
Morrison v. State Board of Education, 82 Cal. Rptr. 175, 461 P. 2d 375 (Cal.
1969).
Nabozny v. Podlesny, 92 F.3d 446 (7th Cir. 1996).
National Association of Research and Therapy of Homosexuality
(NARTH). 2002. Purpose. Encino, CA: NARTH. www.narth.com/
menus/statement.html.
National Gay and Lesbian Task Force. 1990. Who Supports the Gay and
Lesbian Rights Movement? Washington, DC: NGLTF.
National Gay Task Force v. Board of Education of City of Oklahoma City. 729
F.2d 1270 (10th Cir. 1984), aff’d by an equally divided court, 470 U.S. 903
(1985).
National Museum and Archive of Lesbian and Gay History, comp. 1996.
The Gay Almanac. New York: Berkley Books.
“New Gay Discharge Figures Up 73% since ‘Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell, Don’t
Pursue’ First Implemented.” 2000. Press release by the Servicemembers
Legal Defense Network (SLDN), February 1. Available at sldn-list@
digitopia.net.
Newton, D. E. 1994. Gay and Lesbian Rights: A Reference Handbook. Denver,
CO: ABC-CLIO.
Norton v. Macy, 417 F.2d 1161 (D.C. Cir. 1969).
Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Services, Inc, 523 U.S. 75 (1998).
One, Inc. v. Olesen, 355 U.S. 371 (1958).
Parks, C. A. 1998. “Lesbian Parenthood: A Review of the Literature.”
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 68: 376–389.
Pate, C. June 26, 1998. Homosexuality. Washington, DC: Concerned
Women for America. Available at: www.cwfa.org/library/family/
1998–06–26_homo.shtml.
Patterson, C. J. 1997. “Children of Lesbian and Gay Parents.” Advanced
Clinical Child Psychology 19: 235–282.
References
223

Perrin, E. C. 1998. “Children Whose Parents Are Lesbian or Gay.”
Contemporary Pediatrics 15: 113–130.
Pillard, R. 1998. “Sexual Orientation and Mental Disorder.” Psychiatric
Annals 18, no. 1: 51–56.
Plant, R. 1986. The Pink Triangle: The Nazi War against Homosexuals. New
York: Henry Holt.
Predrag, S. 2001. “Slow Progress Despite Changes in South Africa, Gays in
Neighboring Countries Sorely Lack Rights.” Frontiers (September 14): 56.
Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, 490 US 228 (1989).
Purpose. 2002. Topeka, KS: Westboro Baptist Church (WBC). Available at:
www.godhatesfags.com/main/purpose.html.
“Rabbi Wants to Execute Gays.” 2002. Gay and Lesbian Times, January 31,
33.
Remafedi, G., J. A. Farrow, and R. S. Deisher. 1991. “Risk Factors for
Attempted Suicide in Gay and Bisexual Youth.” Pediatrics 87: 869–875.
Remafedi, G., S. French, M. Story, M. D. Resnick, and R. Blum. 1998. “The
Relationship between Suicide Risk and Sexual Orientation: Results of a
Population-Based Study.” American Journal of Public Health 88: 57–60.
Robson, R. 1997. Gay Men, Lesbians, and the Law. New York: Chelsea
House.
Romer v. Evans, 517 U.S. S. Ct. 620 (1996).
Ross, M. 1990. “The Relationship between Life Events and Mental Health
in Homosexual Men.” Journal of Clinical Psychology 46: 402–411.
Rothblum, E. 1994. “‘I Only Read about Myself on Bathroom Walls’: The
Need for Research on the Mental Health of Lesbians and Gay Men.”
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 62, no. 2: 213–220.
Rotheram-Borus, M., J. Hunter, and M. Rosario. 1994. “Suicidal Behavior
and Gay-Related Stress among Gay and Bisexual Male Adolescents.”
Journal of Adolescent Research 9: 498–508.
Savin-Williams, R. 1990. Gay and Lesbian Youth: Expressions of Identity.
New York: Hemisphere.
———. 1994. “Verbal and Physical Abuse as Stressors in the Lives of
Lesbian, Gay Male, and Bisexual Youths: Associations with School
Problems, Running Away, Substance Abuse, Prostitution, and Suicide.”
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 62: 261–269.
224
Documents, Cases, Laws, and Quotations

School Board of Nassau County v. Arline, 480 U.S. 273 (1987).
Schwenk v. Hartford, 9735870, U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals (March 11,
2000).
Sherrer v. Sherrer, 334 U.S. 343, 355 (1948).
“Soldier Pleads Guilty to Non-Premeditated Murder in Murder of Pfc.
Barry Winchell.” 1999. Press release by the Servicemembers Legal De-
fense Network (SLDN), December 7. Available at sldn-list@digitopia.net.
Stewart, C. 2001. Homosexuality and the Law: A Dictionary. Santa Barbara,
CA: ABC-CLIO.
Tasker, F. 1999. “Children in Lesbian-Led Families: A Review.” Clinical
Child Psychology and Psychiatry 4: 153–166.
Thompson, M., ed. 1994. Long Road to Freedom: The Advocate History of
the Gay and Lesbian Movement. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Tuttle, G., and R. Pillard. 1991. “Sexual Orientation and Cognitive
Abilities.” Archives of Sexual Behavior 20, no. 3: 307–318.
Valente, J. 1984. “Gay Community Seeks Judge Nunzio’s Ouster.”
Washington Post, May 19, B1.
Walters, A. S., and M. Curran. 1996. “‘Excuse Me, Sir? May I Help You
and Your Boyfriend?’: Salespersons’ Differential Treatment of Homo-
sexual and Straight Customers.” Journal of Homosexuality 31, nos. 1–2:
135–152.
Weingarten, G. 2002. “Just What Was He Smoking?” Washington Post,
March 25, A4.
White, M. 1997. “Selected Quotes from The 700 Club.” In The Justice
Report. Special edition. Laguna Beach, CA: Soulforce.
Wisconsin, State of. 1981. Chapter 12, Discrimination Appended. Sexual
Orientation Discrimination in Housing (Section 12), Employment
(Section 17), or Business Preferential Treatment (Section 25).
Young, P. D. 1982. God’s Bullies: Native Reflections on Preachers and Politics.
New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
References
225


6
Directory of National 
and International Organizations
and Associations
T
his chapter provides contact information, historical descrip-
tions, and statements of goals for major organizations focused
on LGBT and HIV issues. Both progay and antigay organiza-
tions are included. In each case, the contact information has been
verified to be accurate at the time of this printing. The organiza-
tions are listed by category—AIDS, Educational, Family, Legal
Support, Libraries and Archives, Media, Military, Minority Focus,
Political Action, Professional Organizations, Religious, Schools,
and Transgender (Transsexual, Transgender, Intersex). The chap-
ter concludes with a number of websites that contain links to
other organizations.
AIDS
AIDS Treatment News
PO Box 411256
San Francisco, CA 94141
Phone: (800) TREAT-1-2
Voice-mail: (415) 255-0588
Fax: (415) 255-4659
E-mail: aidsnews@aidsnews.org
Website: http://www.aids.org/immunet/atn.nsf/page/o-about
227

Begun in 1986, AIDS Treatment News is published twice monthly
by John S. James as a resource for physicians and people living
with HIV/AIDS who are looking for current, authoritative infor-
mation on new therapies. Community-based organizations, gov-
ernment agencies, social and clinical professionals, and national
media have come to rely on AIDS Treatment News for its accurate
and timely reporting.
Publications: AIDS Treatment News (twice monthly).
CDC National AIDS Hotline
PO Box 13827
RTP, NC 27709
Phone: (800) 342-AIDS (2437)
Spanish: (800) 344-7432
TTY: (800) 243-7889
Fax: (919) 361-4855
The CDC National AIDS Hotline is a toll-free, twenty-four hours
a day, seven days a week telephone service that offers anonymous
and confidential HIV/AIDS information. More than 3,000 phone
calls a day are handled by trained specialists (speaking in Eng-
lish, Spanish, or TTY for the deaf). Besides answering questions
about HIV infection, specialists make referrals to appropriate so-
cial, medical, educational, financial, and legal services in the
United States. Since its inception in 1983, the hotline has handled
more than 13 million phone calls.
Publications: The hotline offers many pamphlets, booklets,
brochures, and posters originating from other offices of the CDC,
American Social Health Association, and related governmental
agencies.
NAMES Project Foundation
101 Krog Street
Atlanta, GA 30307
Phone: (404) 688-5500
Fax: (404) 522-1673
E-mail: info@aidsquilt.org
Website: http://www.aidsquilt.org/Newsite
During a 1985 annual candlelight march honoring those who had
died from AIDS, Cleve Jones asked fellow marchers to write on
placards the names of friends and loved ones who had died. At
228
Directory of National and International Organizations

the end of the march, he and others stood on ladders taping these
placards to the walls of the San Francisco Federal Building. This
newly formed wall looked like a patchwork quilt. Thus, the Quilt
was conceived. Jones teamed up with several similarly minded
people to formally organize the NAMES Project Foundation in
June 1987. Today about thirty-five NAMES Project chapters exist
in the United States, and worldwide there are forty-six indepen-
dent Quilt affiliates. Nominated for a Nobel Peace Prize in 1989,
the Quilt is now the largest community art project in the world.
Publications: The Aids Memorial Quilt (quarterly) and brochures.
National Minority AIDS Council (NMAC)
1931 13th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20009
Phone: (202) 483-6622
Fax: (202) 483-1135
E-mail: info@nmac.org
Website: http://www.nmac.org
In response to the misconception that AIDS is an exclusively gay
white male disease, NMAC formed in 1987 to help bring aware-
ness of this spreading epidemic to the minority community.
NMAC provides technical assistance to community-based AIDS
organizations serving communities of color, focusing on manage-
ment problems and corrective actions. Conferences are held sev-
eral times a month to discuss the AIDS agenda and program man-
agement. NMAC offers services in the set up and maintenance of
treatment-related programs at the community service level. Ad-
ditionally, NMAC’s prison initiative cultivates working partner-
ships for promoting a national standard of care in correctional
settings.
Publications: NMAC Lifeline (quarterly), reference manuals, and
brochures.
Educational
Campaign to End Homophobia
PO Box 382401
Cambridge, MA 02238-2401
E-mail: barbarazoloth@earthlink.net
Website: http://www.endhomophobia.org
Educational
229

The U.S. Supreme Court’s decision in Bowers v. Hardwick moti-
vated the members of the Gay Rights and Homophobia Task
Group of the National Organization for Changing Men to launch
the Campaign to End Homophobia in 1986. Since the beginning,
they have held annual conferences drawing more and more par-
ticipants from the United States, Canada, England, and Israel.
The campaign develops teaching materials, curricula, pam-
phlets, class activities, and other educational resources for anti-
homophobia workshops. These materials are distributed by Cre-
ative Response in Nyack, New York. One- and two-day intensive
seminars are provided by experienced trainers to people wishing
to increase their skill at teaching about homophobia. The cam-
paign has built a strong support network of people and organiza-
tions working together to end homophobia and heterosexism
through education.
Publications: Guide to Leading Introductory Workshops on Homo-
phobia, Opening Doors to Understanding and Acceptance, and vari-
ous other books promoting reduction in homophobia and hetero-
sexism.
Lesbian and Gay Law Association 
of Greater New York (LeGaL)
799 Broadway, Suite 340
New York, NY 10003
Phone: (212) 353-9118
Fax: (212) 353-2970
E-mail: le-gal@interport.net
Website: http://www.le-gal.org
LeGaL is a nonprofit bar association of LGBT legal representa-
tives in the New York metropolitan area committed to the ad-
vancement of LGBT legal professionals, public education on legal
issues concerning LGBT people, the advancement of civil rights,
and the elimination of homophobia in the justice system. As a
nonprofit organization, it supports the publication of Lesbian/Gay
Law Notes, the nation’s most comprehensive monthly update of
developments in LGBT civil rights law; a low-income law clinic;
and the Dr. M. L. “Hank” Henry Judicial Internship Fund.
Publications: Lesbian/Gay Law Notes (eleven issues/year).
230
Directory of National and International Organizations

Matthew Shepard Foundation
191 University Boulevard, Suite 724
Denver, CO 80206-4613
Phone: (303) 368-9636
Fax: (303) 368-9614
E-mail: info@matthewshepard.org
Website: http://www.matthewshepard.org
The Matthew Shepard Foundation was created as a nonprofit or-
ganization in 1998 by Dennis and Judy Shepard to honor the
memory of their son, who had been brutally murdered in a gay
bashing. The goals of the foundation include supporting diversity
programs in education and helping youth organizations establish
environments in which young people can feel safe and be them-
selves. To these ends, the foundation sponsors Judy Shepard to
share her thoughts and values of respect and dignity through a
national speaking program. Also, an educational partnership
with New Light Media has produced the award winning docu-
mentary Journey to a Hate Free Millennium and other multimedia
programs for use in classrooms and elsewhere.
National Association for Research 
and Therapy of Homosexuality (NARTH)
16633 Ventura Boulevard, Suite 1340
Encino, CA 91436-1801
Phone: (818) 789-4440
Fax: (818) 789-6452
Website: http://www.narth.com
Charles Socarides, Benjamin Kaufman, and Joseph Nicolosi
founded NARTH in 1992. They believe they have been the targets
of scientific censorship due to their work on homosexuality.
NARTH provides the mechanism to continue their research.
NARTH is dedicated to affirming the male-female model of gen-
der and sexuality and considers homosexuality to represent a de-
velopmental disorder. NARTH helps homosexuals find the psy-
chological therapy needed to change their sexual orientation and
become heterosexual.
NARTH’s ongoing projects include an international referral
service in the United States, Canada, Europe, and Australia to li-
censed therapists offering sexual reorientation treatment; contin-
ued research into the psychological factors associated with the
gay lifestyle and its deviance; a worldwide survey of homosexu-
Educational
231

als who have changed; lectures by respected mental health pro-
fessionals; scholarly publications; distribution of educational ma-
terials to all levels of schooling; distribution of NARTH’s own
pamphlet, “All the Facts,” to counter the progay propaganda
given to 14,700 school superintendents in “Just the Facts”; infor-
mation for students about the availability of ex-gay ministries
and sexual reorientation therapy; and efforts to make the public
aware that some homosexual people do seek and achieve change.
Publications: “All the Facts.”
Family
Family Pride Coalition
PO Box 65327
Washington, DC 20035-5327
Phone: (202) 331-8015
Fax: (202) 331-0080
E-mail: pride@familypride.org
Website: http://www.familypride.org/index.html
At the first national March on Washington in 1979, a group of
men formed the Gay Fathers Coalition. It received tax-exempt
status in 1984 and soon after changed its name to the Gay and
Lesbian Parents Coalition International (GLPCI), reflecting the
changes in the organization through the inclusion of lesbian par-
ents. By 1990, it had become apparent that children of lesbian or
gay parents needed support, and Children of Lesbians and Gays
Everywhere (COLAGE) was formed as a new program under
GLPCI. The needs of straight spouses of gay or lesbian parents
were accommodated through the addition of a board seat for the
Straight Spouse Network in 1995.
But families include more than just heterosexuals or homo-
sexuals; they also include bisexual, transsexual, intersex, and
transgender parents. Thus, in 1998 GLPCI voted to change its
name to Family Pride Coalition to reflect the inclusion of a wide
diversity of family structures. The mission remains to support
and advance the well-being of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and trans-
gender parents and their families.
Publications: The Family Tree (quarterly).
232
Directory of National and International Organizations

Gay Parent Magazine and Ripe Magazine
PO Box 750852
Forest Hills, NY 11375-0852
Phone: (718) 997-0392
E-mail: info@gayparentmag.com
Website: http://www.gayparentmag.com
E-mail: info@ripemag.com
Website: www.ripemag.com
Gay Parent Magazine addresses the needs of lesbians, gay men, bi-
sexuals, and transgender people who are parents. GPM provides
articles and references about gay parents’ legal status and strug-
gles, child rearing, and the emotional and practical issues of be-
ing a gay parent in a culture that otherwise does not acknowledge
his or her existence. GPM has applied for nonprofit status and
will soon be a 501(c)3 corporation.
Ripe Magazine provides articles aimed at older lesbians and
gay men, who are practically invisible in U.S. culture. Ripe Maga-
zine includes practical articles on, for instance, how to talk with
the Social Security Administration, Medicaid, or other organiza-
tions that do not have a history of understanding the needs of
older lesbians and gay men and their partners.
Publications: Gay Parent Magazine (bimonthly) and Ripe Magazine.
Lesbian Mothers Support Society (LMSS)
PO Box 61 Station M
Calgary, Alberta T2P 2G9
Phone: (403) 265-6433
E-mail: lesbianmothers@home.com
Website: http://www.lesbian.org/lesbian-moms/index.html
LMSS is a Canadian nonprofit organization that assists lesbian
families through peer sharing of experiences, potlucks, children’s
activities, and support in a positive environment. LMSS also pro-
vides legal, medical, and psychosocial referrals as needed. LMSS
interests include rights of nonbiological parents, access to insem-
ination for lesbians seeking to become parents, custody issues in
lesbian family breakups, and equal treatment of lesbian families
in society. The organization maintains a reference library of
books, articles, and essays, and videos.
Family
233

Parents, Friends, and Families of Lesbians and Gays (PFLAG)
1726 M Street, NW, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 467-8180
Fax: (202) 467-8194
E-mail: info@pflag.org
Website: http://www.pflag.org
While watching a local newscast, Jeanne Manford saw her son at-
tacked during a gay rights protest and the failure of the police to
intervene. Shortly after, she marched in the 1972 New York Gay
Pride Day Parade alongside her son. It was an eye-opening expe-
rience. Many young gay men and lesbians ran up to Jeanne dur-
ing the parade and begged her to talk to their parents. She re-
sponded by creating PFLAG, a support group for families with
LGBT member(s). Now PFLAG is a national nonprofit organiza-
tion with more than 80,000 members and supporters and is affili-
ated with more than 460 organizations throughout the United
States. PFLAG is probably the most influential and respected
LGBT organization addressing the needs of families and friends
experiencing the coming-out process of a loved one.
PFLAG promotes the health and well-being of the LGBT
community and its families and friends via support, education,
and advocacy. PFLAG provides an opportunity for dialogue
about sexual orientation and gender identity and acts to create a
society that is healthy and respectful of human diversity.
Publications: PFLAGpole (quarterly) and many authoritative pam-
phlets, booklets, brochures, and posters.
Partners Task Force for Gay and Lesbian Couples
PO Box 9685
Seattle, WA 98109-0685
Phone: (206) 935-1206
E-mail: demian@buddybuddy.com
Website: http://www.buddybuddy.com
Partners was founded in 1986 to provide information, support,
and advocacy for same-sex couples. Initially, Partners published
the Partners Newsletter for Gay and Lesbian Couples, which evolved
into the quarterly Partners Magazine. By the mid-1990s, the maga-
zine was discontinued, and Partners focused on publishing spe-
cial issues and videos. In 1995, Partners produced The Right to
Marry video, which featured interviews with Reverend Mel
234
Directory of National and International Organizations

White, Evan Wolfson, authors Phyllis Burke and Richard Mohr,
and other activists. Most of this material has been placed on the
organization’s website.
Publications: Partners Newsletter, Partners Magazine, and The Right
to Marry (video).
OutProud, the National Coalition for Gay, 
Lesbian, Bisexual, and Transgender Youth
369 Third Street, Suite B-362
San Rafael, CA 94901-3581
E-mail: info@outproud.org.
Website: http://www.queer.com
Started in 1995, OutProud is a web-based organization providing
advocacy, information, resources, and support for queer teens just
coming to terms with their sexual orientation and for those con-
templating coming out. OutProud “lets them [youths] know
they’re not alone by helping them find local sources of friendship
and support.” At the site are many links to local support groups,
such as PFLAG, local lesbian and gay community centers, and
school GLSEN organizations.
WeAreFamily Foundation (WAF)
PO Box 30734
Charleston, SC 29417
Phone: (843) 766-2123
E-mail: Ciri@waf.org
Website: http://www.waf.org
Established in August 1994, WeAreFamily works for acceptance of
lesbians and gay men within the heterosexual world. WAF focuses
on the plight of lesbian, gay, and questioning children, who most
often feel completely alone in a hostile world. WAF provides ad-
vice and counsel through the use of direct mail to teachers, coun-
selors, clergy, and parents to encourage them to accept these chil-
dren. The WAF website contains important links to local services
from which children may obtain educational information.
Legal Support
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU)
125 Broad Street, 18th Floor
Legal Support
235

New York, NY 10004
Phone: (212) 549-2500
E-mail: @aclu.org
Website: http://www.aclu.org/issues/gay/hmgl.html
The ACLU was founded in 1920 by Crystal Eastman and Roger
Baldwin. Civil liberties were not strongly enforced by courts at
the time. Women had just gained the right to vote, activists were
sent to prison for distributing antiwar literature, racial segrega-
tion was the law of the land, sex discrimination was firmly en-
trenched, and rights for lesbians and gay men were unthinkable.
The ACLU has been at the forefront of many of the most histori-
cally significant legal battles in the United States—the 1925 Scopes
case challenging the right to teach evolution, the 1954 Brown v.
Board of Education case that outlawed racially segregated schools,
and the 1973 Roe v. Wade case that affirmed women’s right to re-
productive choice, including abortion. The ACLU was again there
in 1996 protecting the rights of lesbians and gay men to partici-
pate in the political process when it was successful at overturning
Amendment 2 to the Colorado Constitution in Romer v. Evans.
The ACLU is one of the largest and most influential civil
rights organizations in the United States and has many regional
offices. It issues press releases, position papers, friend-of-the-
court briefs, and more.
Publications: Many pamphlets and brochures.
Gay and Lesbian Advocates and Defenders (GLAD)
294 Washington Street, Suite 301
Boston, MA 02108
Phone: (617) 426-1305
E-mail: gladlaw@glad.org
Website: http://www.glad.org
GLAD is New England’s only public interest legal organization
that focuses on defending the rights of lesbians, gay men, bisexu-
als, transgender and intersex people, and people with HIV. Since
its founding in 1978, GLAD has been involved in most of the sig-
nificant court cases affirming gay rights. The AIDS Law Project
began in 1984 and fights discrimination against people with HIV.
The lawyers at GLAD choose cases they believe will set a good
precedent and have broad implications for the gay community.
Besides these impact cases, GLAD fields more than 3,000 requests
236
Directory of National and International Organizations

for legal advice and assistance each year. GLAD operates mostly
with a volunteer staff and cooperating attorneys in good standing
with one of the New England state bar associations. Unpaid in-
ternships are available.
Some of the recent cases in which GLAD has been involved
include GLAD et al. v. Attorney General Thomas Reilly et al. (chal-
lenging the constitutionality of antisodomy laws in Massachu-
setts), Doe v. Kelley (State Police) (presenting evidence of police ha-
rassment of gay men), Ayer v. Sommi and Keller (reviewing fairness
of domestic violence as applied to same-sex couples), In re
John/Jane Doe (affirming Connecticut’s sex discrimination prohibi-
tions apply to transgender people), Crandall v. Boston Concession
Group (defending against employment discrimination), Goodridge
et al. v. Dept. Public Health (defending the right of same-sex cou-
ples to marry), Baker et al. v. State of Vermont (establishing civil
unions in Vermont), and Rubano v. DiCenzo (affirming co-parent
rights).
Publications: English and Spanish materials regarding LGBT civil
rights and how to access the legal system.
Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund
120 Wall Street, Suite 1500
New York, NY 10005-3904
Phone: (212) 809-8585
Fax: (212) 809-0055
E-mail: legalhelpdesk@lambdalegal.org
Website: http://www.lambdalegal.org/cgi-
bin/iowa/index.html
Lambda Legal Defense is the nation’s oldest and largest legal or-
ganization dedicated to the civil rights of lesbians, gay men, and
people with HIV/AIDS. From its beginnings in 1973 when it had
to fight in court to overcome a New York court denial of
Lambda’s application to become a nonprofit legal organization (it
won in the New York Supreme Court later that year), Lambda has
used impact litigation, education, and public policy to make the
nation a safer place for lesbians and gay men. Test cases are se-
lected for their likelihood of success in establishing positive legal
precedents. With offices in New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, and
Atlanta, Lambda’s attorneys work on an average of fifty cases at
any given time.
Legal Support
237

Lambda has a long history with many successes in fighting
discrimination in employment, housing, public accommodations,
and the military as well as fighting for equal rights in laws that af-
fect marriage, domestic partnership benefits, antisodomy laws,
immigration issues, antigay initiatives, and free speech.
Publications: Monthly newsletter.
Marriage Project—Hawaii
PO Box 11690
Honolulu, HI 96828
Phone: (808) 944-4598
E-mail: MPH@hawaii.rr.com
Website: http://www.members.tripod.com/~MPHAWAII
In December 1990, two lesbian couples and one gay male couple
applied for marriage licenses at the Hawaii State Department of
Health. The applications were denied, and attorney Dan Foley
filed suit (Baehr v. Lewin) in the Hawaii State First Circuit Court
alleging that the couples’ rights to privacy and equal protection
under Hawaii’s Constitution had been violated. The Marriage
Project was formed as a nonprofit organization to help fund the
ensuing ten-year court battle. Even thought the voters of Hawaii
passed a constitutional amendment limiting marriage to hetero-
sexual couples, the equal protection aspects of the earlier court
decision have not been addressed. The project continues and pre-
dicts that lawsuits will chip away at the legal limitations and that
eventually same-sex marriages will be allowed.
National Center for Lesbian Rights (NCLR)
870 Market Street, Suite 570
San Francisco, CA 94102
Phone: (415) 392-6257
Fax: (415) 392-8442
E-mail: info@nclrights.org
Website: http://www.nclrights.org
Since 1977, NCLR has fought for the rights of lesbians in child cus-
tody and same-sex adoption cases. As a progressive, feminist, mul-
ticultural legal center, it advances the rights of lesbians and their
families. NCLR currently focuses on the areas of same-sex mar-
riage, child custody and visitation, alternative insemination, immi-
gration and asylum, domestic partnership, adoption, and youth.
238
Directory of National and International Organizations

Attorney Kate Kendell, executive director of NCLR, states:
“The current climate facing lesbians is a dangerous one. Although
we are greater in number than ever before, so too are those op-
posed to our equality. Each stride we make toward securing our
civil rights spurs a hostile and, at times, dangerous response. The
best defense against such well organized and particularly well
funded actions is systematic legal challenges to change such dis-
crimination.”
Publications: Several LGBT civil rights leaflets.
Libraries and Archives
Canadian Lesbian and Gay Archives
PO Box 639, Station A
Toronto, Ontario M5W 1G2
Phone: (416) 777-2755
E-mail: queeries@clga.ca
Website: http://www.clga.ca
The Canadian Lesbian and Gay Archives was established in 1973
to aid in the recovery and preservation of Canadian LGBT histo-
ries. The archive’s goal is to acquire, preserve, organize, and give
public access to information and materials in any medium, by
and about lesbians and gays, primarily produced in or concern-
ing Canada. The Body Politic, published in 1971, forms the core of
the archives, which has expanded to more than 7,200 titles. In
1980, the archives incorporated as an independent, nonprofit or-
ganization. As the archives grew, it moved to larger and larger fa-
cilities, finally settling in a 2,000-square-foot building in 1992. The
archives also maintains major nonarchival collections, including a
research library, international subject files, and an international
collection of lesbian and gay periodicals.
Publications: Lesbian and Gay Archivist (monthly) and many books.
June L. Mazer Archives
626 N. Robertson Boulevard
West Hollywood, CA 90069
Phone: (310) 659-2478
E-mail: mazercoll@earthlink.net
Website: http://www.lesbian.org/mazer
Libraries and Archives
239

The archives was founded in Oakland, California, in 1981 and
was originally called the West Coast Lesbian Collections. Six
years later, it moved to the Connexxus Women’s Center/Centro
de Mujeres in Los Angeles. When June Mazer died, the archives
acquired her name to honor her work as a community activist
and invaluable supporter of the archives.
The archives is the largest lesbian collection on the West
Coast. It is a nonprofit organization staffed completely by volun-
teers. It is dedicated to preserving materials by and about lesbians
of all classes, ethnicities, races, and experiences. It includes more
than 2,300 books—some extremely rare, such as the 1895 Norma
Trist, feminist novels of the 1970s and 1980s, and the immensely
popular “pulps” of the 1950s and early 1960s. More than 250 pe-
riodicals and 200 feminist publications are available, in addition
to audio- and videotapes and rare photographic collections. Pos-
sibly the most important holdings are the personal correspon-
dence between lesbians. These give insight into the daily lives
and loves of lesbians of different eras.
Publications: In the Life (monthly).
Kinsey Institute
Morrison 313
Bloomington, IN 47405
Phone: (812) 855-7686
E-mail: kinsey@indiana.edu
Website: http://www.kinseyinstitute.org
The Kinsey Institute for Research in Sex, Gender, and Reproduc-
tion was founded in 1947 and is a private, not-for-profit corpora-
tion affiliated with Indiana University. The institute’s mission is
to promote interdisciplinary research and scholarship in the fields
of human sexuality, gender, and reproduction.
The institute began when Dr. Alfred C. Kinsey was asked to
teach a course for students who were married or were contem-
plating marriage. He discovered that few scientific data existed
on human sexual behavior. What did exist was either extremely
value laden or based on very small samples. Kinsey decided to
collect his own data. Eventually, he and his associates gathered
more than 18,000 sexual histories based on in-depth, face-to-face
interviews. The results of the data were presented in two ground-
breaking books, Sexual Behavior in the Human Male (1948) and Sex-
ual Behavior in the Human Female (1953). The institute became a
240
Directory of National and International Organizations

nonprofit organization in 1947 to which Kinsey transferred all
materials by deed for $1.00. The institute has since published
other important books on the topic of human sexuality. It is cur-
rently located in Morrison Hall on the Bloomington campus of In-
diana University.
Publications: Sexual Behavior in the Human Male and Sexual Behav-
ior in the Human Female, as well as more recent publications and
the monthly publication Kinsey Today.
Lesbian Herstory Education Foundation (LHEF)
PO Box 1258
New York, NY 10116
Phone: (718) 768-DYKE (3953)
Fax: (718) 768-4663
Website: http://www.datalounge.net/network/pages/lha//
The Lesbian Herstory Archives of New York City is the largest
and oldest lesbian archives in the world. The founders believed
that women, and particularly lesbian culture, were not fully ap-
preciated by mainstream publishers, libraries, archives, and re-
search institutions. Thus, the only way to preserve lesbian culture
and history was to establish an independent archives governed
by lesbians.
LHEF began in 1973 as an outgrowth of lesbian consciousness-
raising with the Gay Academic Union. It moved to Joan Nestle and
Deborah Edle’s Upper West Side apartment in 1976. They created a
traveling slide show and took it to homes, bars, churches, syna-
gogues, and elsewhere. As word spread of its existence, the mate-
rials flowed in. Through years of effort, LHEF was able to buy a
building and move the entire collection to larger quarters. LHEF is
an all-volunteer organization that strives to make the archives ac-
cessible to all women. The collection is community based and col-
lects materials from all lesbians, not just those who are famous or
published. Funding comes from the community.
Publications: Lesbian Herstory Education Foundation Newsletter
(biannual).
New York Public Library Gay and Lesbian Collection
Curator of Manuscripts
Manuscripts and Archives Division, Room 324
New York Public Library
Libraries and Archives
241

5th Avenue and 42nd Street
New York, NY 10018-2788
Phone: (212) 930-0801
Fax: (212) 302-4815
E-mail: mssref@nypl.org
Website: http://www.nypl.org/research/chss/spe/
rbk/igic.html
Like most gay and lesbian archives, the New York Public Library
Gay and Lesbian Collection began through the efforts of private
individuals. The Gay Activist Alliance collected items for its His-
tory Committee that later incorporated in 1982 as the International
Gay Information Center (IGIC). It operated as a community-
based repository until 1988, when IGIC directors decided to give
the collection to the New York Public Library. The collection has
continued to grow and consists of 4,000 books, mostly published
after 1950; 2,000 separate periodical titles consisting of tens of
thousands of pieces; more than 300 audiotapes and 40 videotapes
of interviews, meetings, forums, lectures, radio broadcasts, and
public access cable channel programs; and hundreds of linear feet
of other materials consisting of flyers, posters, announcements,
and mailings. Many of the leaders of the gay rights movement
have donated their personal papers to the collection.
ONE Institute and Archives
909 W. Adams Boulevard
Los Angeles, CA 90007
Phone: (213) 741-0094
Fax: (213) 741-0220
E-mail: oneigla@usc.edu
Website: http://www.oneinstitute.org
ONE Institute and Archives (ONE) is the world’s largest library
and collection of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender books,
periodicals, and other memorabilia. With more than 19,700 books,
1,500 films, 3,000 videos, 1,000 audiotapes, and hundreds of lin-
ear feet of files totaling more than 1 million items, ONE has be-
come a major research center on LGBT life and issues. Special col-
lections include AIDS History Project Lesbian Legacy Collection;
Performing Arts Collection; Twice Blessed—Everything Gay/
Lesbian/Bisexual/Transgender and Jewish; and Art Collection
(including works of Don Bachard, Philip Core, Raymundo Meza,
and Tomata du Plenty). ONE holds more than 6,850 different pe-
242
Directory of National and International Organizations

riodical titles, including recent and rare issues such as the lesbian
newsletter Vice Versa from the 1940s and complete runs of ONE
Magazine and the Mattachine Review from the early 1950s. The col-
lection includes more than 500 magazines in 25 different lan-
guages. ONE’s collection includes some of the earliest gay Euro-
pean publications, such as Arcadie and Der Kreis, as well as
significant runs of Gai Pied, SEK, Homologie, Der Gay Krant, Revolt,
and Vennen.
ONE Institute and Archives had its genesis from two differ-
ent sources. Jim Kepner began collecting LGBT items in the 1940s
and founded the International Gay and Lesbian Archives (IGLA).
In the 1950s, the Mattachine Society set up ONE, Inc. to publish a
newsletter in January 1953. By the mid-1990s, ONE and IGLA
merged and placed the combined collection in a 30,000-square-
foot building provided by the University of Southern California.
Publications: The One Institute Newsletter.
Stonewall Library and Archives (SLA)
1717 North Andrews Avenue
Fort Lauderdale, FL 33311
Phone: (954) 763-8565
E-mail: info@stonewall-library.org
Website: http://www.stonewall-library.org
The Stonewall Library began in 1974 as a project of the Stonewall
Committee under the direction of Mark Silber. A few years later,
the committee disbanded and Silber took the library into his per-
sonal care. In 1984, Sunshine Cathedral Metropolitan Community
Church in Fort Lauderdale provided the library with a space rent
free. It merged with the Boca Raton-based Southern Gay
Archives, changed its name to include archives, outgrew its
space, and moved to a 1,000-square-foot suite adjoining the Gay
and Lesbian Community Center (GLCC) of Greater Fort Lau-
derdale in 1997. Less than a year later, it was forced to move to a
smaller temporary space, with much of the collection being
spread to three remote locations. Finally, in 1999 GLCC provided
1,500 square feet with an additional 800 square feet of space ad-
joining the entrance of the center. For once, the entire collection is
housed in one location.
SLA contains more than 8,000 books, thousands of newspa-
pers, periodicals and journals, and many items that are unique to
the southeastern United States. The collection is the largest south
Libraries and Archives
243

of Washington, D.C., and east of Houston, Texas. SLA assistance
has been noted in scholarly works, including the 1998 book Lonely
Hunters: An Oral History of Lesbian and Gay Southern Life, 1948-
1968 by James T. Sears.
Publications: Archeion (Monthly) and The Legacy (Monthly).
Media
American Family Association (AFA)
PO Box 2440
Tupelo, MS 38803
Phone: (662) 844-5036
Fax: (662) 842-7798
E-mail: afa@afa.net
Website: http://www.afa.net
Founded in 1977 by Don Wildmon, AFA focuses on the influence
television and other media have had on society. AFA believes in
traditional family values and opposes pornography and homo-
sexuality. It believes there has been a decline in morals in the
United States that can be directly attributed to the entertainment
industry. For example, it believes the dramatic increase in teen
pregnancies, sexually transmitted diseases such as AIDS, and
abortion stems from twenty years of national entertainment “nor-
malizing” and glorifying premarital sex and “normalizing”
homosexuality. It holds accountable the sponsors of programs
that attack traditional family values. AFA encourages its members
to support companies that sponsor profamily programming by
sending postcards or making phone calls.
Publications: AFA Journal (monthly) and Life@Work (bimonthly).
Gay and Lesbian Alliance against Defamation (GLAAD)
8455 Beverly Boulevard, Suite 305
Los Angeles, CA 90048
Phone: (323) 933-2240
Fax: (323) 933-2241
E-mail: glaad@glaad.org
Website: http://www.glaad.org
Before 1985, the mainstream media in the United States were bla-
tantly antigay and sensationalized stories about AIDS. Most pub-
lications, television, and movies did not even use the word gay or
244
Directory of National and International Organizations

lesbian; instead they used negative stereotypes when describing
or portraying homosexuals. Against that backdrop, GLAAD was
founded to overcome the negative language and stereotypes used
against lesbians and gay men. Although GLAAD began in New
York by protesting against the New York Post, chapters were soon
formed in Los Angeles, Atlanta, Chicago, Dallas, Denver, Kansas
City, San Diego, San Francisco, and the Washington, D.C., area.
The early battles were tough. It was not until 1987 that the New
York Times, after meetings with GLAAD, changed its editorial pol-
icy to use the word gay. Soon after, GLAAD was instrumental in
getting the Los Angeles Times to modify its stylebook to eliminate
derogatory terms for gays and lesbians. Television and movie stu-
dios finally met with GLAAD in 1990. In 1992, Entertainment
Weekly named GLAAD one of Hollywood’s most powerful enti-
ties, and the Los Angeles Times recognized GLAAD’s success at
lobbying the media for inclusion.
GLAAD has five main strategies: (1) respond to negative and
positive media portrayals of LGBT through the Monitoring and
Mobilization Program, (2) offer seminars as part of the Outreach
to Media Professionals Program to improve understanding of the
LGBT community, (3) work with other LGBT organizations to
help them understand the media, (4) promote LGBT visibility
with positive public education campaigns, and (5) study and ar-
ticulate cultural and media-specific trends.
Publications: IMAGES (biannually), GLAADAlert (biweekly), and
Access Denied.
Gay/Lesbian International News Network (GLINN)
1107 Key Plaza, Box 306
Key West, FL 33040
Phone: (305) 849-5020
Fax: (305) 296-2015
E-mail: mediamaster@gaydata.com
Website: http://www.glinn.com
Launched in 1989, GLINN attempted to provide news services to
the lesbian and gay media. Associated Press (AP) and United
Press International (UPI) also targeted these same markets. Be-
cause AP and UPI had larger staffs and the ability to be full-
fledged news services, GLINN had no choice but to scale back to
being a BBS service with news. Later, UPI virtually went bank-
rupt and all other attempts by smaller news services to target the
Media
245

gay media failed. But the Internet has changed all this. By the late
1990s, GLINN began providing direct contact between reporting
professionals working on lesbian and gay news. GLINN could
provide something AP could not—news reporting from a gay
perspective. More and more lesbian and gay media outlets now
get news reports from GLINN. Also, GLINN provides a central
market where publications and freelance writers, photographers,
and others come together to do business.
Outfest
3470 Wilshire Boulevard, Suite 1022
Los Angeles, CA 90010
Phone: (213) 480-7088
Fax: (213) 480-7099
E-mail: Outfest@outfest.org
Website: http://www.outfest.org
Many independent LGBT filmmakers explored the issues of com-
ing out, sexual repression, hate crimes, and more, but had no
commercial outlet for their work. They came together in 1982 to
launch the first Gay and Lesbian Media Festival and Conference,
held in conjunction with UCLA Film and Television Archives.
Later, in 1994, the conference was renamed Outfest to better re-
flect the dynamics of the community. Outfest has grown to be-
come the largest film festival in Southern California and now in-
cludes weekly gay-themed screenings.
Yankee Samizdat
PO Box 165
Austerlitz, NY 12017
E-mail: Staff@YankeeSamizdat.org
Website: http://www.yankeesamizdat.org
Samizdat is Russian for “self-publishing” and means an under-
ground press used by dissidents to tell “truth” outside established
media channels. The Yankee Samizdat confronts the American
press by challenging its anti-intellectual propaganda regarding
homosexuality, abortion, and other leftist issues. To that end, Yan-
kee Samizdat points readers to sources of information to “protect
your families and lead a life free from the seductive manipulation
of the new materialists, the pragmatic atheists.”
Publications: Yankee Samizdat periodical.
246
Directory of National and International Organizations

Military
Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Veterans of America (GLBVA)
PO Box 3755
Washington, DC 20007
Phone: (301) 438-3650
E-mail: hank_thomas@hotmail.com
Website: http://www.glbva.org
GLBVA is a nonprofit association of active, reserve, and veteran
servicemembers dedicated to full and equal rights and equitable
treatment for all present and former members of the U.S. armed
forces. Lesbians, gay men, bisexuals, and transgender people
have always participated in, and continue to participate in, the
military to help defend the principles of the Declaration of Inde-
pendence and the Constitution. GLBVA believes LGBT people
should be allowed to join and serve in the military openly with-
out discrimination. Since 1996, GLBVA has worked in conjunc-
tion with Servicemembers Legal Defense Network and the Mili-
tary Law Task Force to lift the ban against gays and lesbians in
the military.
Publications: The Forward Observer (quarterly).
Servicemembers Legal Defense Network (SLDN)
PO Box 65301
Washington, DC 20035-5301
Phone: (202) 328-3244
Fax: (202) 797-1635
E-mail: sldn@sldn.org
Website: http://www.sldn.org
SLDN is the primary organization dedicated to defending the
rights of lesbian and gay men in the U.S. military. Since its begin-
nings in the early 1990s, SLDN has grown to a staff of fifteen full-
time employees and an annual operating budget of $1.25 million,
with more than 11,000 members making donations. As a non-
profit organization, SLDN has assisted more than 2,600 military
members in all fifty states, at sixteen foreign bases, and in all
branches of the military. It has intervened to stop dozens of witch-
hunts, was instrumental in obtaining fair investigations into the
murder of PFC Barry Winchell and gay sailor Allen Schindler, has
documented antigay harassment throughout the armed services,
Military
247

and has worked to secure a better environment for homosexual
miltary personnel.
Publications: Conduct Unbecoming Reports, Action Alert, Survival
Guide, and other booklets.
Minority Focus
National Association of Black 
and White Men Together (NABWMT)
PO Box 73796, NW
Washington, DC 20056-3796
Phone: (202) 462-3599; (800) NA4-BWMT
Fax: (202) 462-3300
E-mail: nabwmt@mindspring.com
Website: http://www.nabwmt.com
NABWMT is committed to overcoming racial and cultural barri-
ers in the gay community. Existing in more than thirty cities,
NABWMT chapters identify themselves as Black and White Men
Together, Men of All Colors Together, or People of All Colors To-
gether. They engage in educational, political, cultural, and social
activities as a means of addressing racism, sexism, homophobia,
and HIV/AIDS discrimination.
Publications: The Quarterly (quarterly).
National Latina/o Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, 
and Transgender Organization (LLEGÓ)
1420 K Street, NW, Suite 200
Washington, DC 20006
Phone: (202) 408-5380
Fax: (202) 408-8478
E-mail: info@llego.org
Website: http://www.llego.org
A Latino caucus was formed at the 1986 International Lesbian
and Gay People of Color Conference in Los Angeles, California.
This led to the formation of the National Latino(a) Lesbian and
Gay Activists, which incorporated as Latino(a) Lesbian and Gay
Organization (LLEGÓ) at the 1988 Segundo Encuentro in Los An-
248
Directory of National and International Organizations

geles. Ten years later, LLEGÓ officially changed its name to Na-
tional Latina/o Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Organi-
zation while still retaining the acronym LLEGÓ.
LLEGÓ is a nonprofit organization made up of approxi-
mately 172 Network of Allies (Afiliados and Aliados), LGBT
Latina/o capacity-building organizations, and those who serve
the Latina/o LGBT communities. LLEGÓ is one of the largest
Latina/o providers of capacity-building assistance in the United
States. It focuses on overcoming social, health, and political barri-
ers due to sexual orientation, gender identity, and ethnic back-
ground. It works to empower LGBT Latinas/os to obtain access
to culturally appropriate health and wellness services. It works
with mainstream communities, including the non-LGBT
Latino/Hispanic communities, in addressing homophobia and
sexism. LLEGÓ is the first national Latina/o organization servic-
ing the LGBT community to formally sign an agreement of coop-
eration with the Small Business Administration and is one of only
twenty-two funded National Regional Minority Organizations to
work in partnership with the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) since 1994. Much of the organization’s website
is available in Spanish.
Political Action
ACT UP/ New York
332 Bleecker Street, Suite G5
New York, NY 10014
Phone: (212) 966-4873
E-mail: actupny@panix.com
Website: http://www.actupny.org
ACT UP was founded in March 1987 by a group of individuals
united in anger and committed to ending the AIDS crisis through
direct action. It brings AIDS issues to the attention of government
and health officials, researches and distributes current medical in-
formation, and engages in protest demonstrations. Recent activities
include zapping (disrupting a speech) of New York governor
George Pataki over his cuts in New York State AIDS budgets (1999),
a march and rally in New York City (2001) to encourage “Stop
Global AIDS NOW,” and a day-long protest by the Thai Network
for People Living with HIV/AIDS demanding that the Thai gov-
ernment’s AIDS program—“Thirty Baht Health Scheme”—include
Political Action
249

antiretroviral treatment for AIDS (2001). ACT UP and DIVA TV
archives are available at the New York Public Library.
BiNet USA
4201 Wilson Boulevard, Suites 110-311
Arlington, VA 22203
Phone: (202) 986-7186
E-mail: BiNetUSA@aol.com
Website: http://www.binetusa.org
Seventy-five bisexuals marched in the 1987 March on Washing-
ton and later met to convene the first nationwide bisexual gath-
ering. In 1990, a national organization was founded as the North
American Bisexual Network, later becoming BiNet USA. Its mis-
sion is to end oppression based on sexuality and to create a sex-
positive world that celebrates and supports all types of people,
including bisexuals. Fund-raising is achieved through dona-
tions to Project 387.
BiNet USA was instrumental in convincing the 1992 March
on Washington to include “Bi” in its name. Newsweek picked up
on a BiNet USA media packet in 1995 and transformed it into a
cover story. Soon after, in 1996, BiNet USA met with the White
House liaison for gay and lesbian affairs. The Policy Institute of
the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force has teamed up with Bi-
Net USA to develop public policy on issues affecting bisexual
people.
Christian Coalition
499 S. Capitol Street, SW, Suite 615
Washington, DC 20003
Phone: (202) 479-6900
Fax: (202) 479-4260
Website: http://www.cc.org
Pat Robertson founded the Christian Coalition in 1989 to give
Christians a voice in government. It gives profamily perspectives
to school districts, state legislatures, city and county councils, and
Congress. In 1998, to resolve the issue of its tax-exempt status, the
Christian Coalition split into two groups: the Christian Coalition
International, which openly endorses candidates and makes cam-
paign contributions, and the tax-exempt Christian Coalition of
America (formerly the Christian Coalition of Texas).
250
Directory of National and International Organizations

Concerned Women for America (CWA)
1015 Fifteenth Street, NW, Suite 1100
Washington, DC 20005
Phone: (202) 488-7000
Fax: (202) 488-0806
E-mail: mail@cwfa.org
Website: www.cwfa.org
Beverly LaHaye was stirred to action while watching a television
interview of Betty Friedan (founder of the National Organization
for Women). LaHaye did not believe Friedan was speaking for the
majority of women in America. LaHaye spoke later that year to
1,200 Christian women about defeating the Equal Rights Amend-
ment. They were overwhelmingly supportive and came together
to launch Concerned Women for America. Officially incorporated
in 1979, CWA has been at the forefront in the battles over abor-
tion, gay rights, sex education, pornography, and more. The mis-
sion of CWA is to promote and protect biblical values through
prayer, education, and political means. As a protraditional Chris-
tian family organization, it is the leading organization fighting
against gay rights. CWA was instrumental in funding the legal
battles over same-sex marriage in Hawaii and Alaska, the federal
passage of the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA), the Boy Scouts
case with the U.S. Supreme Court, and others. CWA has more
than 500,000 members and 15,609 online subscribers.
Publications: Family Voice magazine (bimonthly).
Gay and Lesbian Victory Fund
1705 DeSales Street, NW, Suite 500
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 842-8679
Fax: (202) 289-3863
E-mail: jsiegel@victoryfund.org
Website: http://www.victoryfund.org
Founded in 1991, the Gay and Lesbian Victory Fund has become
the leading national political organization that recruits, trains,
and supports open lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender candi-
dates and officials. The fund has supported qualified candidates
in thirty-four states and the District of Columbia and has helped
quadruple the number of openly gay officials. It has a member-
ship of over 9,000 nationwide and is the largest nonconnected po-
Political Action
251

litical action committee (PAC). Since its inception, the fund has
raised more than $3 million to support the campaigns of qualified
openly gay and lesbian candidates. Donors are able to target their
donations to particular candidates, thus giving small donors a
major impact that would otherwise be lost by donating to larger
political parties.
Human Rights Campaign (HRC)
919 18th Street, NW, Suite 800
Washington, DC 20006
Phone: (202) 628-4160
TTY: (202) 216-1572
Fax: (202) 347-5323
E-mail: hrc@hrc.org
Website: http://www.hrc.org
Founded in 1980, HRC is the nation’s largest gay and lesbian or-
ganization. HRC effectively lobbies Congress, mobilizes grass-
roots organizations in diverse communities, supports elections of
fair-minded representatives, and increases public understanding
of the issues through innovative educational programs. With
more than 400,000 members, both gay and nongay, HRC is com-
mitted to equality based on sexual orientation and gender ex-
pression and identity. The organization works to make the United
States safe for lesbians, gay men, bisexuals, and transgender
people.
HRC has many programs aimed at (1) protecting gays from
job discrimination, (2) protecting communities from hate vio-
lence, (3) advancing public policy on HIV/AIDS and lesbian
health, (4) protecting families and advocating for fair treatment
under federal law, and (5) ensuring a fair-minded judiciary.
Members are kept updated through Action Networks from
which tens of thousands of members receive regular Action
Alerts on HRC’s legislative and campaign efforts. HRC partners
with statewide and national organizations to pass progay ballot
measures and defeat antigay ones. HRC is also a major research
institute conducting polls and other measures of the political
landscape.
HRC Foundation, affiliated with HRC, provides educational
programs for families and the workplace and was the original
sponsor of National Coming-Out Day. The foundation is the pub-
lishing arm of HRC, with many books and pamphlets, including
252
Directory of National and International Organizations

ones that review the failed effort by the religious right to obtain
change in sexual orientation through reparative therapy.
Publications: HRC Quarterly (quarterly), many major pamphlets
and brochures, and a Spanish-language booklet for coming out of
the closet.
Log Cabin Republicans (LCR)
1633 Q Street, NW, Suite 210
Washington, DC 20009
Phone: (202) 347-5306
Fax: (202) 347-5224
E-mail: info@lcr.org
Website: http://www.lcr.org
Log Cabin Republicans was founded to fight the nation’s first
antigay ballot measure—Proposition 6 in California in 1978. LCR
was able to enlist Republican Ronald Reagan to publicly oppose
the measure—which was overwhelmingly defeated. Since then,
LCR has become the nation’s largest lesbian and gay Republican
organization, with more than fifty chapters across the nation and
a staffed office in Washington, D.C. LCR raises more than
$100,000 per election for Republican candidates.
LCR believes in Republican values—limited government, in-
dividual liberty, individual responsibility, free markets, and a
strong national defense. Its members also believe that these prin-
ciples and the moral values that underlie them are consistent with
the pursuit of equal treatment under the law for gay men and
women. Further, LCR members believe that Republican core prin-
ciples best serve the interests of the gay community.
Publications: LCR Inclusion Wins (weekly).
National Gay and Lesbian Task Force (NGLTF)
1700 Kalorama Road, NW
Washington, DC 20009-2624
Phone: (202) 332-6483
Fax: (202) 332-0207
TTY: (202) 332-6219
E-mail: ngltf@ngltf.org
Website: http://www.ngltf.org
NGLTF is one of the most influential LGBT organizations in the
United States. It builds political strength through the use of
Political Action
253

proactive campaigns focusing on state-level legislative work and
aligning with grassroots organizers to advocate for civil rights.
NGLTF organizes activists, trains leaders, equips organizers, mo-
bilizes voters, and builds coalitions. NGLTF is recognized as an
expert in LGBT-related state and federal legislation and uses a
comprehensive program to track, monitor, and report what is
happening.
For example, in 1973 NGLTF worked to change the American
Psychiatric Association’s classification of homosexuality as a
mental illness. In 1975 NGLTF worked on the introduction of the
first gay rights bill in the U.S. Congress. In 2000, it helped coordi-
nate Federal Partnerships Day, advocating federal funding of
LGBT community centers.
Publications: Discrimination Social y la Salud: El Caso de los Hombres
Latinos Homosexuales y el Riesgo de Infección por HIV (July 2001),
The 2000 National Election Study and Gay and Lesbian Rights: Sup-
port for Equality Grows (June 2001), Transgender Equality: A Hand-
book for Activists and Policymakers (June 2000), Legislating Equality:
A Review of Laws Affecting Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, and Transgendered
People in the United States (January 2000), and Domestic Partnership
Organizing Manual for Employee Benefits (June 1999).
Oregon Citizens Alliance (OCA)
PO Box 9276
Brooks, OR 97305
Phone: (503) 463-0653
Fax: (503) 463-8745
E-mail: oca@oregoncitizensalliance.org
Website: http://www.oregoncitizensalliance.org
OCA grew out of the Joe Lutz for U.S. Senate campaign and was
formed by Lon T. Mabon in February 1987. (Mabon is a Bible
teacher and owns an adult retirement home in southern Oregon.)
OCA launched the No Special Rights Committee the next year
and was instrumental in passing Measure 8—revoking Governor
Neil Goldschmidt’s executive order giving equal legal protection
based on sexual orientation. In 1990, OCA, in coalition with other
organizations, sponsored an initiative that would have banned 95
percent of all abortions in Oregon. The initiative was defeated. In
1992, the No Special Rights Committee placed on the ballot a state
initiative designed to prevent special rights for homosexuals. It,
too, did not pass. The same initiative was reworded and placed
254
Directory of National and International Organizations

on the 1994 ballot and again did not pass. As an alternative ap-
proach, OCA was successful in placing pro-OCA candidates into
office in seven counties and nineteen cities. However, the state
legislature passed a law that removed antidiscrimination ordi-
nances from local authority, thus negating the local approach.
In November 2000, OCA placed on the ballot the Student
Protection Act, which would have prohibited public schools from
“promoting the homosexual lifestyle.” The initiative lost by 3.5
percent. A second attempt was made in 2002 to place the Student
Protection Act 2 on the ballot. It failed to get enough signatures.
Publications: The Oregon Alliance.
Stonewall Democrats
PO Box 9330
Washington, DC 20005
Phone: (202) 625-1382
Fax: (202) 625-1383
E-mail: info@stonewalldemocrats.org
Website: http://www.stonewalldemocrats.org
When the Stonewall Democrats began thirty years ago, neither
the Republicans nor Democrats stood against the prejudice that
blights the lives of LGBT people. Through years of campaigning,
the Democratic Party has become a champion for gay rights. Pres-
ident Bill Clinton was very supportive and broke the barriers by
appointing openly LGBT people to high federal office, issuing
policies prohibiting discrimination in federal employment based
on sexual orientation, and taking other actions. However, Clinton
failed to support LGBT rights related to the military and mar-
riage. The Republican Party has hardened its stance against LGBT
rights and consistently blocks any attempts made by Democrats
to gain equal rights for LGBT people.
The Stonewall Democrats is committed as Democrats to im-
proving the rights and liberties of all persons. The organization
works to help nominate Democratic candidates at every govern-
ment level who are fully supportive of LGBT rights. Unlike other
political organizations, it foresees a time when it will disband be-
cause all of its goals will have been met.
Publications: The National Stonewall Democrats.
Political Action
255

Professional Organizations
Gay and Lesbian Medical Association (GLMA)
459 Fulton Street, Suite 107
San Francisco, CA 94102
Phone: (415) 255-4547
Fax: (415) 255-4784
E-mail: info@glma.org
Website: http://www.glma.org
GLMA is a nonprofit organization seeking to end homophobia in
health care. Founded in 1981 as the American Association of
Physicians for Human Rights (AAPHR), GLMA/AAPHR influ-
enced public policy in developing equitable health care for les-
bians and gays. GLMA created a successful campaign to ban dis-
crimination based on sexual orientation within the American
Medical Association. In 1998 GLMA set up GLMA*PAN, a physi-
cians’ advocacy network designed to influence public policy on
issues crucial to LGBT health. GLMA has initiated diverse pro-
grams such as the Lesbian Health Fund (LHF), which focuses on
education of primary care providers on lesbian health and con-
ducts cultural sensitivity training. LHF has granted more than
$335,000 to address the health concerns of lesbian patients.
Publications: Journal of the Gay and Lesbian Medical Association
(quarterly) and GLMA Report (quarterly).
Golden State Peace Officers Association (GSPOA)
1125 McCadden Place
Los Angeles, CA 90038
Phone: (323) 962-5555
Fax: (323) 962-5500
E-mail: gspoa@gspoa.com
Website: http://www.gspoa.com
Beginning in 1979, a group of gay male San Francisco deputy
sheriffs and police officers met for a yearly retreat at the Russian
River, California. This party affectionately became known as
“Pigs in Paradise.” As it grew, a more structured organization
evolved, and GSPOA incorporated in 1985. More than 400 men
and women from both law enforcement and fire fighting have
since joined. GSPOA holds monthly meetings, schedules social
events, raises money through special events for distribution to
256
Directory of National and International Organizations

other LGBT organizations, helps with recruitment with agency
support, consults on academy diversity training, and sponsors a
yearly educational conference. GSPOA maintains strict confiden-
tiality of its membership and provides professional educational
services to law enforcement and fire fighting agencies.
Publications: Hogcaller (newsletter).
International Association of Lesbian and Gay Judges (IALGJ)
Bronx Criminal Court
215 E. 161st Street
Bronx, NY 10451
Phone: (718) 590-2941
E-mail: mrsonberg@abanet.org
Website: http://home.att.net/~ialgj/
Twenty-five lesbian and gay judges and judicial officers met in
April 1993 in suburban Washington, D.C., and formed IALGJ.
They wanted to provide a forum in which judicial officers could
meet and exchange views and promote education among mem-
bers. They believed it was important to have openly LGBT judicial
officers to serve as role models for other LGBT judicial officers
and to bring their existences to general public attention. Most im-
portantly, they want to ensure the equal treatment of all persons
who appear in a courtroom as a litigant, juror, attorney, judge, or
staff person. Within seven years, membership grew to sixty-one
members from fourteen jurisdictions. Among its members are the
Chief Justice of Guam’s Supreme Court, two U.S. district court
judges, a judge of the U.S. Tax Court, a chief tribal judge, a state’s
chief administrative law judge, and two judges from state inter-
mediate appellate courts. Fifty-eight of its members are from nine
states, the District of Columbia, and Guam. Two members are
from Canada, and one is from the United Kingdom.
National Lesbian and Gay Law Association (NLGLA)
PO Box 180417
Boston, MA 02118
Phone/Fax: (508) 982-8290
E-mail: nlgla@aol.com
Website: http://www.nlgla.org
NLGLA, established in 1988, is a national association of legal pro-
fessionals, law students, and LGBT legal organizations. NLGLA
Professional Organizations
257

became an affiliate of the American Bar Association in 1992.
NLGLA sponsors year-round regional and local events throughout
the United States. It focuses on civil rights issues for the LGBT com-
munity at many levels of the legal profession. NLGLA has rapidly
become a national voice for LGBT people in the legal profession.
Publications: NLGLA Newsletter (biannual).
National Organization of Gay and Lesbian Scientists and
Technical Professionals (NOGLSTP)
PO Box 91803
Pasadena, CA 91109
Phone: (626) 791-7689
Website: http://www.noglstp.org
NOGLSTP, launched as a nonprofit educational organization in
1980, is dedicated to addressing stereotypes and discrimination
based on sexual orientation in the scientific/technical professions.
NOGLSTP was accepted into the American Association for the
Advancement of Science (AAAS) in 1994 and is currently regis-
tered in the section Societal Impacts of Science and Engineering.
NOGLSTP, acting as a cohort of the Los Angeles Lawyers for Hu-
man Rights, submitted an amicus brief asking for the rejection of
the CIA’s contention that sexual orientation is a security risk. Sub-
sequently, it monitored security clearance suspensions and per-
suaded the AAAS to adopt a nondiscrimination policy. NOGLSTP
shares in the dissemination of information with lesbian and gay
support groups within corporations such as Aerospace Corp., Boe-
ing, Caltech, DEC, Hewlett-Packard, the Jet Propulsion Labora-
tory, the National Academy of Science, the National Institutes of
Health, the National Laboratories, RAND, TRW, and Xerox.
Publications: NOGLSTP Newsletter (quarterly), Queer Scientists of
Historical Note, Beyond Biased Samples: Challenging the Myths on the
Economic Status of Lesbians and Gay Men, and Scientists and AIDS
Research: A Gay Perspective.
Religious
Affirmation: Gay and Lesbian Mormons
PO Box 46022
Los Angeles, CA 90046-0022
Phone: (323) 255-7251
258
Directory of National and International Organizations

E-mail: aff@sitedesignpros.com
Website: http://www.affirmation.org
Even before Stonewall, gay Mormons often formed small secret
groups to meet others in a social setting away from the eyes of the
Church of Latter-Day Saints. However, these organizations were
short-lived. In 1978, Matthew Price formed a group in Salt Lake
City and named it “Affirmation—Gay Mormons United.” This
got press coverage in The Advocate and encouraged others to join
and form chapters in other cities. Ultimately, the chapter in Los
Angeles headed by Paul Mortensen became the primary
spokesperson for Affirmation. Representatives marched in the
Los Angeles Gay Pride Parade in 1979, which brought national at-
tention to their efforts, and representatives from other chapters of
Affirmation met in Los Angeles later that year and changed the
organization’s name to Affirmation: Gay and Lesbian Mormons.
Since then, it has grown, with affiliations in major cities and other
countries. Matthew Price states, “We firmly believe that Affirma-
tion has a place in the plan of our Father in Heaven and His King-
dom, and that the Holy Spirit is still with us.” Affirmation spon-
sors annual conferences and retreats to build local chapters,
conducts local and worldwide chapter meetings, supports a
group dedicated to gay Mormon fathers (Gamofites), and con-
ducts an active electronic mailing of gay Mormon issues.
Publications: Affinity (monthly magazine).
Affirmation United Methodist
PO Box 1021
Evanston, IL 60204
Phone: (847) 733-9590
E-mail: umaffirmation@yahoo.com
Website: http://www.umaffirm.org
In 1972, a delegation of openly gay men attended the United
Methodist Church General Conference. They engaged in conver-
sations concerning the acceptance of homosexuality within the
church but were not well received. By the end of the conference,
a new statement of social principles by the church held, “We do
not condone the practice of homosexuality and consider this prac-
tice to be incompatible with Christian teaching.”
Out of frustration with the church, Gay United Methodists
formed in 1975 to insist that homosexuality is a gift from God 
Religious
259

and not rebellion against His will. Later, in 1976, the name was
changed to Affirmation, in preparation for what members be-
lieved to be a decades-long struggle for inclusion in the church.
In 1984, the church adopted a specific provision against the
ordination or appointment of “self-avowed practicing homosexu-
als.” Affirmation responded by creating the Reconciling Congre-
gation Program (RCP). RCP has become the second-largest LGBT
Christian organization, with hundreds of congregations and
thousands of individuals reconciling United Methodists. Affirma-
tion continues to promote the inclusion of homosexuals in the
United Methodist Church.
Affirmation is an independent, nonprofit organization; it has
no official ties to the United Methodist Church and does not re-
ceive support from the church.
Publications: General Conference newsletters.
American Family Association
c/o Abiding Truth Ministries
6060 Sunrise Vista Drive, Suite 3050
Citrus Heights, CA 95610
Phone: (916) 676-1057
E-mail: info@abidingtruth.com
Website: http://www.abidingtruth.com
The American Family Association of California has as its mission
to glorify God through the promotion of Christian views regard-
ing human sexuality and the family and to fight evil with good as
revealed in the Bible. To these ends, a number of support organi-
zations have been formed. The Pro-family Law Center provides
the profamily movement with legal advice and assistance on pub-
lic policy and matters of law. It is the nation’s only law-oriented
organization devoted exclusively to promoting strategies oppos-
ing homosexuality. The Pro-family Resource Center works in con-
cert with the law center by directing profamily activists to re-
sources that oppose homosexuality. These include a resource
guide with links to other websites and archives. To fund these ac-
tivities, The Pro-family Charitable Trust was established and is
managed by Abiding Truth Ministries and gives grants for pro-
family projects deemed to have promise at increasing grassroots
activism or other goals that oppose homosexuality.
Publications: The Poisoned Stream, The 7 Steps to Recruit-Proof Your
260
Directory of National and International Organizations

Child, The Pink Swastika, Why and How to Defeat the Gay Movement,
and other related books.
Association of Welcoming and Affirming Baptists (AWAB)
PO Box 2596
Attleboro Falls, MA 02763-0894
Phone: (508) 226-1945
Fax: (508) 226-1991
E-mail: Mail@WABaptists.org
Website: http://www.wabaptists.org
The Association of Welcoming and Affirming Baptists (AWAB)
comprises churches, organizations, and individuals who are will-
ing to go on record as welcoming and affirming all people with-
out regard to sexual orientation and who have joined together to
advocate for the full inclusion of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and trans-
gender people within Baptist communities of faith. Begun at a
gathering of pastors at the 1991 American Baptist Biennial in
Charleston, West Virginia, AWAB has grown to more than forty-
five churches and organizations throughout the United States.
Publications: The InSpiriter (quarterly).
Cathedral of Hope
5910 Cedar Springs
Dallas, TX 75235
Phone: (214) 351-1901
E-mail: hope@cathedralofhope.com
Website: http://www.cathedralofhope.com
Cathedral of Hope is dedicated to removing exclusive language
from Christian worship. It believes exclusive language is sinful and
just as unacceptable as sexism, bigotry, classism, or ageism. It does
not view God as a “man” or a “woman” but rather an embodiment
of both. Similarly, the Cathedral of Hope does not view God as ei-
ther homosexual or heterosexual, but rather embracing of both. Fur-
thermore, the Cathedral of Hope asks why issues such as judgment,
pride, and hypocrisy (on which the scriptures say a great deal) are
not vehemently condemned, whereas homosexuality (a topic on
which the Bible has little to say) is vigorously attacked by Christian
fundamentalists. The Cathedral of Hope is a gay-affirming congre-
gation and hosts a nationally syndicated television program.
Publications: National Newsletter.
Religious
261

Dignity USA
1500 Massachusetts Avenue, NW, Suite 11
Washington, DC 20005
Phone: (800) 877-8797
Fax: (202) 429-9808
E-mail: dignity@aol.com
Website: http://www.dignityusa.org
Dignity USA is the largest and most progressive gay, lesbian, bi-
sexual, and transgender Catholic organization in the United States.
It serves as a proactive voice for reform in the Catholic Church and
is supportive of same-sex marriages, women’s ministry, AIDS min-
istry, and the elimination of hate crimes. Contrary to official
Catholic teaching, which requires people to abstain from homo-
sexual behaviors, Dignity believes these teachings to be incorrect
and a misinterpretation of history and scripture. Dignity does not
consider homosexual behaviors or relationships to be sinful.
Father Patrick Nidorf, OSA, founded Dignity USA in 1969 as
a counseling group in Los Angeles. By 1973, it had become an in-
dependent nonprofit organization with a national office located
in Washington, D.C., and local chapters throughout the United
States. After the Vatican issued its 1986 document “Congregation
for the Doctrine of the Faith—On the Pastoral Care of Homo-
sexual Persons,” many chapters of Dignity were evicted from
Catholic churches and had to find accommodations elsewhere. In
response, Dignity became a founding member of Catholic Orga-
nizations for Renewal (COR), which hosts a biennial national con-
vention that attracts thousands of members. Dignity believes that
“God created us, Christ died for us, and the Holy Spirit sanctified
us in Baptism.”
Publications: Dignity USA News (monthly).
Exodus International North America
PO Box 77652
Seattle, WA 98177
Phone: (206) 784-7799
Fax: (206) 784-7872
E-mail: info@exodusnorthamerica.org
Website: http://www.exodusintl.org
Exodus International was founded in 1976 on the belief that free-
dom from homosexuality is possible through the power of Jesus
262
Directory of National and International Organizations

Christ. As an interdenominational Christian organization, it has
grown to include over 100 local ministries in the United States
and Canada, with links to an additional 135 ministries in 17 coun-
tries. Exodus is the largest Christian organization dealing with
homosexual issues. It challenges those who claim homosexuality
as a valid sexual orientation. It believes that homosexuals who ac-
cept Jesus Christ into their lives can change their sexual orienta-
tion and find peace as heterosexuals.
Exodus provides referrals and information on homo-
sexuality. Most members are “lay” (nonprofessional) ministries.
These ministries engage in “spiritual counseling” to lead homo-
sexuals out of the “darkness of their depravity.” Each year, more
than 1,000 ex-gays, therapists, spouses, parents, friends, and pas-
tors attend an annual conference. Many workshops are presented
to help guide homosexuals and their families through difficult
times of change.
Publications: Update (monthly).
Gay and Lesbian Atheists and Humanists (GALAH)
PO Box 34635
Washington, DC 20043
E-mail: writegalah@bellatlantic.net
Website: http://www.galah.org
GALAH is the only national lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgen-
der organization devoted to atheism and humanism. GALAH
strongly supports separation of church and state and believes “re-
ligion promotes fear, limits freedom, oppresses the poor, and sup-
presses knowledge. Religion is authoritarian, sexist, and homo-
phobic.” As such, GALAH opposes political support of religious
“morality,” particularly that espoused by the religious right and
others who advocate the eradication of homosexuals. GALAH
keeps its members updated on the activities of the religious right
by e-mail and a monthly newsletter. It holds meetings in many
major cities in the United States.
Publications: The GALAH Newsletter (monthly).
God Hates Fags
Westboro Baptist Church (WBC)
3701 W. 12th Street
Topeka, KS 66604-1730
Religious
263

Phone/Fax: (954) 337-0400
E-mail: ghf-info@godhatesfags.com
Website: http://www.godhatesfags.com
Founded in 1955 as an Old School (or Primitive) Baptist Church
by Reverend Fred Phelps, WBC preaches against all forms of sin,
such as fornication, adultery, and sodomy. Members believe that
Christians have been lied to when they are told that “God loves
everyone” and “Jesus died for everyone.” Instead, WBC believes
that God is vengeful and that the “homosexual lifestyle” is soul-
damning and nation-destroying filth. WBC engages in daily side-
walk demonstrations at homosexual parades, funerals (“of im-
penitent sodomites like Matthew Shepard”), and other public
places. WBC claims to have conducted more than 20,000 such
demonstrations since 1993 throughout the United States, Canada,
and Iraq. The unique picketing ministry of WBC has received
much media attention. WBC believes its gospel message to be the
world’s last hope.
Publications: Many books and pamphlets.
Homosexuals Anonymous (H.A.)
PO Box 7881
Reading, PA 19603
Phone: (610) 921-0345
E-mail: ha_devotions@yahoo.com
Website: http://members.aol.com/hawebpage
H.A. is a Christian fellowship of men and women who help each
other to live free of homosexuality. H.A. believes that homosexual
activity is not in harmony with the will of God and the universal
creation norm of heterosexuality. Through weekly meetings and a
fourteen-step program, members attempt to heal their spiritual
and intrapsychic relationship with Christ, thereby attaining free-
dom and recovery from homosexuality. H.A. does not believe that
a change in homosexual inclination is required for the acceptance
of God or the church. However, the degree to which a person ac-
cepts Christ will be the degree to which that person is healed of
homosexuality.
Publications: Many books and pamphlets.
Lutherans Concerned/North America (LC/NA)
PO Box 10197
264
Directory of National and International Organizations

Chicago, IL 60610
E-mail: ric@lcna.org
Website: http://www.lcna.org
LC/NA is an independent membership organization founded in
1974 and supported entirely by donations. It accepts all Lutheran
affiliations as well as other Christian denominations. LC/NA be-
lieves in employing the Gospel’s principles of inclusiveness and
justice while celebrating God’s gift of sexuality and diversity.
LC/NA maintains that homosexuality, heterosexuality, and all
other sexual orientations are part of the spectrum of God’s human
creation and that sexuality is not a consciously made choice.
Rather, the choice is in how it is expressed. LC/NA helps people
reconcile their spiritual and sexual conflicts in uplifting ways and
calls on its members to be visible advocates for gay, lesbian, bi-
sexual, and transgender people.
Publications: Various brochures and a handbook.
New Ways Ministry
4012 29th Street
Mt. Rainier, MD 20712
Phone: (301) 277-5674
Fax: (301) 864-6948
E-mail: newwaysm@aol.com
Website: http://members.aol.com/newwaysm
New Ways Ministry provides a gay-positive ministry of advocacy
and justice for LGBT Catholics and reconciliation within the
larger Christian and civil communities. Founded in 1977 by Sister
Jeannine Gramick, SSND, and Father Robert Nugent, SDS, New
Ways was incorporated as a nonprofit organization seeking to
promote the full and equal acceptance of lesbians and gay men
into the Catholic Church. Because of the founders’ actions, the
Vatican decided to silence them in May 23, 2000. Gramick and
Nugent were ordered to no longer speak or write about homo-
sexuality or about their eleven-year harassment by the Vatican.
Publications: Bondings (quarterly).
Presbyterian Parents of Gays and Lesbians, Inc. (PPGL)
PO Box 600882
Dallas, TX 75360-0882
Phone: (214) 750-7186
Religious
265

E-mail: ppglinfo@presbyterianparents.org
Website: http://www.presbyterianparents.org
Jane Loflin, the mother of a gay son, saw the need for a ministry
for mothers and fathers within the Presbyterian Church to come
together to share their experiences in an environment of concern,
compassion, and spiritual nurturance when coping with having
homosexual children. In 1993, the clergy and lay leaders at Grace
Presbytery assisted her in creating PPGL. Soon, other groups
formed in Dallas, Texas; La Cañada/Glendale, California;
Raleigh, North Carolina; Seattle, Washington; Albany/Watervliet,
New York; and Norwalk, Connecticut. The group welcomes par-
ents of all faiths, beliefs, and backgrounds. The goal of PPGL is to
provide a support network of pastoral care and information
about homosexuality to parents of gay and lesbian children in an
environment of faith that is safe, nurturing, and confidential. It
guides parents toward understanding, acceptance, and affirma-
tion of themselves and their sons and daughters.
Rainbow Baptists
American Baptists Concerned for Sexual Minorities (ABC)
PO Box 3183
Walnut Creek, CA 94598
Phone: (925) 439-4672
E-mail: abc-sfba@rainbowbaptists.org
Website: http://www.rainbowbaptists.org
Honesty
c/o Jeff Street Baptist Community at Liberty
800 East Liberty Street
Louisville, KY 40205
Phone: (502) 635-1905
E-mail: ambaptists@aol.com
Website: http://www.rainbowbaptists.org
Rainbow Baptists is a website cooperative for American Baptists
Concerned for Sexual Minorities and Honesty. Both organizations
provide support, education, and advocacy for gay, lesbian, bisex-
ual, and transgender Baptists with a Southern Baptist back-
ground. They believe that LGBT people are wholly loved and ac-
cepted as they are by the Creator. Both organizations bring a voice
of enlightenment, hope, and encouragement to all Baptists. ABC
has assembled two booklets, one focusing on coming-out issues
266
Directory of National and International Organizations

and experiences of LGBT youths and the other telling the stories
of parents and families of LGBT people.
Publications: Voice of the Turtle (quarterly).
Scriptures for America
PO Box 766
LaPorte, CO 80535
Phone: (307) 745-5913
Fax: (307) 745-5914
E-mail: preacher@fiberpipe.net
Website: http://www.scripturesforamerica.org
Scriptures for America is an international outreach ministry of the
LaPorte Church of Christ. Pastor Peter J. Peters believes his
church is engaged in a struggle between good and evil, Christ
and anti-Christ, as exemplified by the struggle between hetero-
sexuals and homosexuals. Peters believes homosexuals are to be
judged and killed. For details, see Death Penalty for Homosexuals Is
Prescribed in the Bible by Peter J. Peters (www.voy.com/28938/
5.htm). Scriptures for America broadcasts on short-wave, main-
tains a website, and publishes a newsletter.
Soulforce
PO Box 4467
Laguna Beach, CA 92652
Phone: (877) 705-6393
Fax: (949) 455-0959
E-mail: garynixon@soulforce.org
Website: http://www.soulforce.org
Soulforce is named for Mohandas Gandhi’s teaching of satya-
graha, “truth force” or “soul force,” a plan of action that develops
inner lives while working to transform society. Founded by Rev-
erend Mel White and his partner, Gay Nixon, in 1998, Soulforce
aims to help end the suffering of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and trans-
gender people; change the minds and hearts of religious leaders
whose antihomosexual campaigns lead to suffering; and help
heal society from homophobia and heterosexism.
Soulforce engages in direct action by meeting with religious
leaders and, when need be, by nonviolent picketing. Its first stage
was a campaign to stop spiritual violence. It trained 1,000 volun-
teers on site at the national conventions of the United Methodist,
Religious
267

Southern Baptist, and Presbyterian Churches, and the National
Conference of Catholic Bishops. After silent, candlelight vigils,
more than 500 Soulforce members were arrested in carefully
planned acts of nonviolent dissent. The second stage is a nonco-
operation campaign; that is, to encourage people not to cooperate
with evil religions by cutting off donations.
Soulforce produces films and other educational materials.
Also, White and Nixon have been tracking for more than a decade
antigay rhetoric in television and radio programs, using letter
writing campaigns to respond to the negative misinformation.
Publications: Stranger at the Gate (book), Soulforce (video), How
Can I Be Sure That God Loves Me, Too? (video), and other videos.
Universal Fellowship of Metropolitan 
Community Churches (UFMCC)
8704 Santa Monica Boulevard, 2nd Floor
West Hollywood, CA 90069
Phone: (310) 360-8640
Fax: (310) 360-8680
E-mail: info@MCCchurch.org
Website: http://www.ufmcc.com
Reverend Troy Perry founded the Universal Fellowship of Metro-
politan Community Churches (commonly known as MCC) of Los
Angeles in 1968 to serve the spiritual needs of gay and lesbian
people. This was before the Stonewall Riots and the national
pride festivals and parades. His Pentecostal church had de-
frocked him for his homosexuality and for a suicide attemp. His
first worship service was attended by eleven men and one
woman—encompassing people with Protestant, Catholic, and
Jewish backgrounds, including one Latino and one heterosexual
couple. This foreshadowed the diversity that would characterize
MCC in the coming years.
MCC has grown to include more than 300 churches around
the world, with a membership exceeding 40,000 in 18 countries.
In many small communities, MCC is the only local lesbian- and
gay-oriented organization. Because of it longevity and central
support, MCC has been the birthplace of dozens of different gay
and lesbian organizations and social justice projects across the
world.
Publications: Many pamphlets.
268
Directory of National and International Organizations

Schools
American Federation of Teachers (AFT)
555 New Jersey Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20001
Phone: (202) 879-4400
E-mail: online@aft.org
Website: http://www.aft.org
Beginning in the basement of a teacher’s home in Winnetka, Illi-
nois, in 1916, AFT has grown to more than 1 million current mem-
bers. It holds strong democratic ideals and has long been known
for taking risks and taking a stand on controversial issues. As
early as 1918, AFT called for equal pay and representation for
African American teachers. In 1954, it filed an amicus brief in
Brown v. Board of Education supporting the end of segregated
schools. In 1957, AFT required all affiliated local unions to fully
integrate or be expelled from the organization. Nearly 7,000
members left the small fledgling union at that time, but the AFT
board believed it was “worth it.”
AFT has a gay and lesbian caucus. It has issued a position pa-
per denouncing discrimination against homosexuals and in-
cludes sexual orientation antidiscrimination language in its con-
stitution.
Publications: Inside AFT (monthly).
Gay, Lesbian, and Straight Education Network (GLSEN)
PO Box 5392
Albany, New York 12205
Phone: (518) 228-3251
E-mail: glsencr@nycap.rr.com
Website: http://www.glsen.org
GLSEN is the leading national organization focused on ending
antigay bias in K–12 schools. It strives to ensure that every stu-
dent, teacher, administrator, and staff member in every school
community is respected regardless of his or her sexual orientation
or gender identity/expression. GLSEN believes that heterosexism
and homophobia undermine a healthy school climate and nega-
tively impact educational achievement.
GLSEN members also believe that education is the key to
ending antigay prejudice and hate-motivated violence. It advo-
Schools
269

cates educating not only gay and lesbian students but also their
families, friends, teachers, and others on issues of sexual orienta-
tion and gender identity so that they can work together to reform
America’s educational system. Thousands of volunteers working
through a national network of local chapters have made a signif-
icant impact. The public policy program works with elected offi-
cials and educational policy leaders to ensure basic protections
for LGBT students, teachers, and families. GLSEN has success-
fully mounted a number of nationally significant court battles.
GLSEN helps students organize their own gay-straight alliances
at their schools in an effort to help change the environment from
the inside out. GLSEN has also created teacher training materials
and inclusive curricular resources.
Publications: Respect (quarterly).
National Consortium of Directors of 
LGBT Resources in Higher Education
Website: www.lgbtcampus.org
This consortium aims to support colleagues and develop curricu-
lum to enhance professional standing, to improve campus climate
by reducing homophobia and heterosexism, and to advocate for
policy change. The consortium communicates with members
through its listserv. Members meet twice a year—once at the
NGLTF Creating Change conference and once at another location.
Overall, the consortium hopes to achieve environments in higher
education in which LGBT students, faculty, staff, administrators,
and alumni have equality with all other people in every respect.
National Education Association Gay 
and Lesbian Caucus (NEA)
1201 16th Street, NW
Washington, DC 90036
Phone: (202) 833-4000
E-mail: webmaster@nea-glc.org
Website: http://www.nea-glc.org
The National Education Association is the oldest and largest or-
ganization in the United States devoted to the cause of public ed-
ucation. Founded in 1857, it has more than 2.5 million members
working at every level of education, from preschool to university
graduate programs. The Gay and Lesbian Caucus was estab-
270
Directory of National and International Organizations

lished in 1987 and represents public education employees who
are concerned about sexual orientation issues and their impact on
students and the school employees who work with them. The
caucus helps educate state education associations on issues of
sexual orientation and promotes nondiscriminatory policies and
actions that support LGBT persons. Also, the caucus is involved
in developing legal response protocols, domestic partnership
benefit programs, training, curriculum, and family life education.
Publications: Caucus Connection (quarterly), Strengthening the
Learning Environment, and A School Employee’s Guide to Gay and
Lesbian Issues.
Stonewall Center
256 Sunset Avenue
Crampton House, SW
Amherst, MA 01003
Phone: (413) 545-4824
Fax: (413) 545-6667
E-mail: stonewall@stuaf.umass.edu
Website: http://www.umass.edu/stonewall/resources/campus
A series of homophobic incidents on the Amherst campus of the
University of Massachusetts in 1984 led to disturbing protest
demonstrations. The college conducted systematic research about
heterosexism and homophobia on campus and issued the report
“The Consequences of Being Gay: A Report on the Quality of Life
for Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Students at the University of Mas-
sachusetts at Amherst.” One of the key recommendations was the
creation of the Program for Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Concerns.
When established in 1985, this was only one of three such college
centers across the United States.
Since then, the Stonewall Center has grown in size and scope.
Besides students, faculty, and staff, the center now serves the sur-
rounding community by providing cultural and educational pro-
gramming; video, audio, and text library holdings; educational
resources; referral services; responses to harassment and discrim-
ination; training; advocacy; newsletters; and web service.
Publications: In Newsweekly (weekly), Bay Windows (biweekly),
Voice Male (quarterly), and other such LGBT periodicals.
Schools
271

Transgender (Transgender, 
Transsexual, Intersex)
Female-to-Male International (FTM)
1360 Mission Street, Suite 200
San Francisco, CA 94103
Phone: (415) 553-5987
E-mail: info@ftm-intl.org
Website: http://www.ftm-intl.org
FTM provides support for women who desire to act on their feel-
ings and beliefs that they are men. The support includes a
monthly newsletter and other publications, a hotline, mailing
lists, links, monthly meetings, and special events. FTM operates
with volunteers who are at different stages of transitioning and
encourages each person to take the path with which he is most
comfortable. FTM does not push any member to take the expen-
sive and potentially dangerous medical approach. The members
of FTM range in age from teens to seventies and include people
who are just beginning to examine gender issues and those who
are experts on the topic.
Publications: Trans Forming Families: Real Stories about Transgen-
dered Loved Ones, The Transsexual Phenomenon, and other books
and articles on transgender.
Intersex Society of North America (ISNA)
PO Box 301
Petaluma, CA 94953
Phone: (707) 283-0420
Fax: (707) 283-0419
E-mail: info@isna.org
Website: http://www.isna.org
ISNA is aimed at ending the shame, secrecy, and unwanted gen-
ital surgeries for people born with atypical reproductive
anatomies. Until recently, the medical establishment believed it
was necessary to “correct” reproductive anomalies in children
within the first few months and years of life. In the United States
alone, five children are subjected to harmful, medically unnec-
essary sexual surgeries every day. ISNA challenges the medical
status quo by citing research to show that early genital surgery
272
Directory of National and International Organizations

has a high failure rate and often results in sexual dysfunction.
ISNA urges physicians to adopt patient-centered, rather than
concealment-centered, practices. Because of the efforts of ISNA
and other intersex organizations, the basic philosophy of med-
ical management of sexual ambiguity is being reevaluated to-
ward leaving the child unaltered.
Publications: ISNA News (monthly), Hermaphrodites with Attitude
(quarterly), and many pamphlets and brochures in English and in
Spanish regarding intersex people.
Transgender Fund
PO Box 2313
Vineyard Haven, MA 02568
Phone/Fax: (508) 696-6767
E-mail: tgfund@tgforum.com
Website: http://www.tgfund.org
The Transgender Fund is a nonprofit organization devoted to fi-
nancially supporting initiatives advancing the interests of the
transgender community. It supports collaborative education, re-
search, and public awareness programs. One of its major efforts is
the creation and maintenance of the Transgender Forum, which
allows other transgender organizations to link into one large re-
source (called a webring, at www.trangender.org).
Web Resources
Most of the foregoing organization websites contain links to
other organizations. However, there are a number of websites
that provide links to hundreds and sometimes thousands of
other websites or have unique links. These “master” directory
websites are very helpful in locating local, national, and interna-
tional organizations. The reader is cautioned that web addresses
change often, and no guarantee is made that these addresses are
still valid.
Blackstripe
Website: blackstripe.com/index.html
This is the Internet’s leading resource for news, information, and
culture affecting LGBT people of African descent.
Web Resources
273

GayLawNet
Website: www.gaylawnet.com/main.html
This site is dedicated to providing general information and re-
sources concerning the law as it affects the global LGBT commu-
nity and the simplest access to LGBT or LGBT-friendly lawyers.
Gay/Lesbian International News Network (GLINN)
Weblink: www.glinn.com/books/lar1.htm
This site has a list of LGBT archives and libraries across the
United States.
Gay/Lesbian Politics and Law: WWW and Internet Resources
Website: www.indiana.edu/~glbtpol/
This site contains a selected, annotated guide designed by stu-
dents at Indiana University, to the best and most authoritative re-
sources on politics, law, and policy.
Gayscape
Website: www.jwpublishing.com/gayscape
This site lists more than 68,000 mostly commercial indexed sites
by topics.
International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission
(IGLHRC)
Weblink: www.iglhrc.org/world/resources/index.html
This site contains a list of international LGBT organizations.
Lesbian.org
Website: www.lesbian.org
This site promotes lesbian visibility on the Internet.
Queer Resources Directory
Website: www.qrd.org
This is one of the oldest and largest websites devoted to linking
to everyone possible. It contains more than 26,000 files. However,
this directory is often not current.
274
Directory of National and International Organizations

Transgender Forum’s Community Center
Website: www.transgender.org
This website has links to transgender organizations in the United
States.
UC Davis—Sexual Orientation: Science, Education, and Policy
Website: psychology.ucdavis.edu/rainbow/
This site lists major books on the topic.
University of Washington Libraries
Website: faculty.washington.edu/alvin/gayorg.htm#ARCHIV
Here is a listing of national and international LGBT organizations
and publications.
Web Resources
275


7
Selected Print 
and Nonprint Resources
Books
Academic Research
Altman, D. 1982. The Homosexualization of America, the Ameri-
canization of the Homosexual. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
This work examines the progress made in the gay movement by
individual gay men and lesbians in the United States of the late
1970s and early 1980s. The gay movement is analyzed through a
cultural focus and not solely in terms of politics.
Badgett, M. V. L. 1998. Income Inflation: The Myth of Affluence
among Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Americans. Washington, DC:
National Gay and Lesbian Task Force. Available free at
www.ngltf.org.
The stereotype is that lesbians and, even more, gay men have
higher than average incomes in the United States. This stereotype is
often used to claim that antidiscrimination policies are not needed.
Lee Badgett, professor of economics at the University of Massachu-
setts at Amherst, conducted research using the national census and
other publicly funded economic studies to show that LGBT people
actually earn decidedly less than heterosexual Americans.
277

Blumenfeld, W. J., and D. Raymond. 1993. Looking at Gay and
Lesbian Life. Rev. ed. Boston: Beacon Press.
When this book came out, it was the first comprehensive
overview of lesbian and gay research, history, law, health, and
culture. This book could be used as the core text for introductory
courses on homosexuality. It reads easily and is well documented.
Cahill, S., and K. T. Jones. 2001. Leaving Our Children Behind:
Welfare Reform and the Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, and Transgender
Community. Washington, DC: National Gay and Lesbian Task
Force. Available free at www.ngltf.org.
This is the first comprehensive report to critically analyze wel-
fare’s impact on poor gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender
people. The report shows parallels to the attacks made by right-
wing conservatives on the gay community.
Cory, D. 1951. The Homosexual in America. New York: Greenburg.
This is one of the most important early books to be written on ho-
mosexuality. Unlike the sentiments at the time that condemned
homosexuality as an illness and criminal activity, Cory presented
gay culture as a positive force in the United States of the 1940s. He
demonstrated a sociological and psychological understanding of
the times. Also as a complement to his thesis, the appendix lists
federal and state laws regulating homosexual behavior.
Cruikshank, M. 1992. The Gay and Lesbian Liberation Move-
ment. New York: Routledge, Chapman, and Hall.
Using feminist analysis, Cruikshank discusses existing conflicts
between lesbians and gay men within the gay and lesbian libera-
tion movement. She proclaims a radical new departure from an-
tiquated ideas in politics regarding sexual freedoms. The book is
one of the series Revolutionary Thought/Radical Movements.
Dawson, J. 2000. Gay and Lesbian Online. 4th ed. Los Angeles:
Alyson Publications.
Encyclopedic in nature, this book provides a useful guide to sites
of interest to lesbians and gay men on the Internet. The author has
written for Macworld, The Net, and MacHome Journal and brings
his expertise to the ever-changing world of the Internet.
278
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

D’Emilio, J. 1983. Sexual Politics, Sexual Communities: The Mak-
ing of a Homosexual Minority in the United States. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.
Although many lesbians and gay men believe the modern gay lib-
eration movement began with the Stonewall Riots, a handful of
men and women laid the groundwork more than two decades
earlier. D’Emilio traces the beginnings of the Mattachine Society,
the Daughters of Bilitis, and other early gay organizations.
Dynes, W. R. 1990. Encyclopedia of Homosexuality. New York:
Garland.
The encyclopedia deals with topics as diverse as economics, an-
thropology, art, gender, relationships, and several others all re-
lated to homosexuality. The book’s format lends itself to a quick
reference or leisure reading.
Garnets, L. D., and D. C. Kimmel, eds. 1993. Psychological Per-
spectives on Lesbian and Gay Male Experiences. New York: Co-
lumbia University Press.
This was one of the major textbooks written in the 1990s. It is a
comprehensive review of what was known about the psychology
of homosexuality. It is still worth reading since there has not been
a similar volume published by anyone else.
Gonsiorek, J. C., and J. D. Weinrich, eds. 1991. Homosexuality:
Research Implications for Public Policy. Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.
Although other books have reviewed the research into homosex-
uality, the selected articles in this book look at the impact such re-
search has on government and organizational policies. Topics in-
clude the origins of human sexuality, the medicalization and
“deviancy” of homosexuality, cross-cultural analysis, a review of
law, reparative therapy, lesbian and gay relationships, and fami-
lies. The book is well written and aimed for college-level readers.
Greenberg, D. 1988. The Construction of Homosexuality.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
David Greenberg is a physicist who turned his attention to the de-
velopment of homosexuality. He believes same-sex sexual and
Books
279

personal relationships have always existed and gives many cul-
tural examples to prove the point. But it has been politics that has
given special emphasis to the supposed “difference” in homosex-
uals, and that difference has been constructed through language,
customs, and law. This important work is quite long and written
at a high academic level.
Heger, H. 1994. The Men with the Pink Triangles: The True, Life-
and-Death Story of Homosexuals in the Nazi Death Camps. Rev.
ed. Trans. David Fernbach. Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
This important work first appeared in Germany in 1972 and
should be considered a primary source for studying the persecu-
tion and execution of homosexuals under Adolf Hitler. The writer
recounts the concentration camp experiences of an Austrian man
who remains anonymous because of continued persecution. Un-
like other subsequent books detailing the Nazi holocaust against
homosexuals, this book contains greater personal details of what
happened.
Herek, G. M., ed. 1997. Stigma and Sexual Orientation: Under-
standing Prejudice against Lesbians, Gay Men, and Bisexuals.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Herek discuses the nature of antigay prejudice, stereotypes, and
behaviors; the consequences of homophobia; and the critical need
for science and psychology to examine homophobia and related
issues.
International Gay Association. 1985. IGA Pink Book, 1985. Am-
sterdam: COC-Magazine.
This is a directory of various worldwide organizations whose fo-
cus is on gay civil rights.
Katz, J. N. 1996. The Construction of Heterosexuality. New York:
Penguin.
Katz’s review of historical documents demonstrates that modern
heterosexuality is a new social arrangement. This is an important
finding because it blasts the heterosexual presumption of nor-
malcy and an ahistorical status. Since social forces have created
heterosexuality, it can be refashioned into one that is less exclu-
sive and more embracing of human sexual diversity.
280
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Marcus, E. 1999. Is It a Choice? Answers to 300 of the Most Fre-
quently Asked Questions about Gay and Lesbian People. San
Francisco: Harper.
This popular book is easy to read and gives concise answers to
frequently asked questions about homosexuality.
Marotta, T. 1981. The Politics of Homosexuality. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.
This thorough academic overview of the first decade of gay civil
rights and liberation is based on the author’s dissertation and re-
search, but has been revised to make it easier to read. Excellent
endnotes and index make the book useful to academic researchers.
Mills, K. I. 1999. Mission Impossible: Why Reparative Therapy
and Ex-Gay Ministries Fail. Washington, DC: Human Rights
Campaign. Available at www.hrc.org/publications/exgay_min-
istries/change.asp.
Although the religious right has adopted reparative therapy as a
significant program in its intention to eliminate homosexuality, it
continues to fail at this goal. Those engaging in reparative ther-
apy claim to be successful, but they do not publish their results or
have their work corroborated by others. This paper explores these
failures and demonstrates the real political purpose of reparative
therapy—to disenfranchise LGBT people and to raise money.
National Museum and Archive of Lesbian and Gay History,
comp. 1996. The Gay Almanac. New York: Berkley Books.
This is a wonderful resource on the gay community, its history, fa-
mous people, quotes, glossary, statistics, and other topics. It con-
tains a comprehensive list of lesbian and gay community centers
and a national directory of lesbian and gay organizations.
Pharr, S. 1988. Homophobia: A Weapon of Sexism. Little Rock,
AR: Chardon Press.
This small book powerfully demonstrates that homophobia is a
major tool for maintaining sexism in U.S. culture. Told from her
experience of conducting group counseling, Pharr shares her
deep insight into how the fear of being labeled a dyke keeps
women in their place.
Books
281

Remafedi, G. 1994. Death by Denial: Studies of Suicide in Gay
and Lesbian Teenagers. Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
A federal study in 1989 found that lesbian and gay teenagers are
three times more likely to attempt suicide than their peers. The re-
port was squelched by the Bush administration. Here it is printed
in its entirety, along with other studies documenting the difficul-
ties teenagers face when coming out.
Rothblum, E. D., ed. 1996. Preventing Heterosexism and Homo-
phobia. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
The contributors to this volume propose methods for eliminating
heterosexual bias in many settings—health care, therapy, com-
munities, corporate America, and education. They explore the
risks and joys of being gay, lesbian, or bisexual and how hetero-
sexism affects the lives of all people.
Sandfort, T., J. W. Schuyf, J. Duyvendak, and J. Weeks, eds. 2000.
Lesbian and Gay Studies: An Introductory, Interdisciplinary Ap-
proach. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
This timely book introduces readers to the interdisciplinary ap-
proaches to the field while asking, What is lesbian and gay stud-
ies? When did it emerge? What are the goals and achievements of
the research agenda?
Tierney, W. G. 1997. Academic Outlaw: Queer Theory and Cul-
tural Studies in the Academy. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Until recently, even considering a lesbian or gay topic for research
was fatal to an academic career. Tierney reviews the cultural
changes that have allowed academic institutions to incorporate
queer studies into their curriculum. However, Tierney warns
readers that doctoral research and publishing on LGBT topics are
considered of lesser value than mainstream topics and that se-
lecting such topics will negatively affect professional progress.
Much of the book is difficult to read due to the heavy use of fem-
inist terminology.
Woog, D. 2001. Gay Men, Straight Jobs. Los Angeles: Alyson Pub-
lications.
Journalist Woog, who has written on the intersection of sexual
282
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

orientation and class (Jocks and School’s Out), brings his observa-
tional skills to the issue of gay men working and coping in jobs
that traditionally have attracted straight men. Some of the stories
are liberating, whereas others are frightening and sometimes
tragic.
Zuckerman, A. J., and G. F. Simons. 1995. Sexual Orientation in
the Workplace: Gay Men, Lesbians, Bisexuals, and Heterosexuals
Working Together. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
This excellent book demonstrates how individuals’ sexual orien-
tation may affect both how well they are accepted by coworkers
and how they react to coworkers. Included are a variety of simple
tools and exercises to help readers develop the skills to work ef-
fectively and realistically with a diverse workforce.
AIDS
Herek, G. M., and B. Green, eds. 1995. AIDS, Identity, and Com-
munity: The HIV Epidemic and Lesbians and Gay Men. Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Most of the chapters of this volume reflect study findings from
AIDS-related research, including discussions of AIDS in large ur-
ban centers and in less populated settings. The specific topics ex-
plore the relationship between AIDS and gay and bisexual men of
color, lesbian women, gay and lesbian youths, public policy, vol-
unteerism, and long-term survival as it relates to AIDS awareness
and education.
Shilts, R. 1987. And the Band Played On: Politics, People, and the
AIDS Epidemic. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Shilts traces the efforts to identify the cause of AIDS in this com-
pelling story of intrigue, professional rivalry, sorrow, and hope.
Written in journalistic style, this award-winning book was later
made into a popular movie of the same title.
Antigay Sources
American Family Association. n.d. The Pink Swastika. Citrus
Heights, CA: Abiding Truth Ministries. Available at http://
www.abidingtruth.com.
Books
283

In response to The Pink Triangle (1987), by Richard Plant, which
documents the arrests and death of homosexuals in Nazi concen-
tration camps, The Pink Swastika attempts to show how the upper
echelon of the Nazi Party and German military were homosexu-
als. Full of inaccuracies and assumptions, the book is rejected by
respected academics. In response to this document, the Citizens
Allied for Civic Action commissioned a professional annotation
of The Pink Swastika (The Annotated Pink Swastika is available at
www.glinn.com/pink). The Pink Swastika belongs to the crypto-
history genre, which uses out-of-context selective quoting from
respectable authors and extensive quoting from disreputable
ones although claiming that one’s position has been purposefully
suppressed by evil powers. This book is interesting reading for
those aware of its inaccuracies and reveals a deeper understand-
ing of those who hate lesbians and gay men.
———. n.d. The Poisoned Stream. Citrus Heights, CA: Abiding
Truth Ministries. Available at http://www.abidingtruth.com.
This large document traces select elements of world history in an
attempt to show a correlation between the practice of homosexu-
ality and the downfall of society. It is extremely inaccurate and
makes unsupportable claims with which no respected academic
would agree, such as homosexuality was the cause of the fall of
the Roman Empire. Nevertheless, this book has had a major in-
fluence on the religious right. Its lack of acceptance by respected
academics is considered by members of the religious right as
proof that this document is true but is being suppressed by a con-
spiracy of silence.
———. n.d. The 7 Steps to Recruit-Proof Your Child. Citrus
Heights, 
CA: 
Abiding 
Truth 
Ministries. 
Available 
at
http://www.abidingtruth.com.
Fears of religious right members concerning the “recruitment” of
children by gay militants has resulted in this pamphlet being
printed. It relies on false stereotypes to model behaviors that sup-
posedly will protect children. For example, boys are encouraged
to play sports to build their masculine characters (the pamphlet
denies, of course, that gay men play sports), whereas girls are to
be on the alert for lesbian coaches coercing them into homosexu-
ality. The book easily could have been the blueprint for the movie
farce But I’m a Cheerleader. Unfortunately, this book is taken seri-
284
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

ously and surely discourages children from accepting diversity in
gender and sex roles.
———. n.d. Why and How to Defeat the Gay Movement. Citrus
Heights, 
CA: 
Abiding 
Truth 
Ministries. 
Available 
at
http://www.abidingtruth.com.
This small pamphlet begins with the basic religious right belief
that homosexuality is deviant and that homosexuals should not
be entitled to basic political rights. The text then develops a num-
ber of strategies designed to hinder or stop the gay rights move-
ment. Much of the strategies discussed involve simple political
steps, including electing conservative members to school boards
and local offices, distributing educational materials, organizing
antigay religious groups, and more.
Bryant, A. 1977. The Anita Bryant Story: The Survival of Our Na-
tion’s Families and the Threat of Militant Homosexuality. Old
Tappan, NJ: Revell.
Bryant provides an outline of her fear of “the militant homosex-
ual agenda.” In doing so, she reviews the battle she undertook in
1977 to override gay rights legislation in Dade County, Florida.
This important book sheds light on the psychology of religious
right leaders.
Falwell, J. 1980. Listen, America! Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Falwell presents his views on “traditional morality” and the anti-
gay beliefs promulgated by the Moral Majority. He warns of the
destruction of America by evil forces, including homosexuality.
Gramick, J., and P. Furey. 1988. The Vatican and Homosexuality.
New York: Crossroad.
In 1986, the Catholic Church issued its “Congregation for the
Doctrine of the Faith—On the Pastoral Care of Homosexual Per-
sons.” This book contains this letter, along with twenty-five arti-
cles analyzing and responding to it. The authors of the book agree
with the sentiments of the letter. They explain that lesbians and
gay men should not try to claim civil rights and that violent hate
crimes directed at them are “understandable” given their “pro-
motion of immoral causes.”
Books
285

Magnuson, R. J. 1990. Are Gay Rights Right? Making Sense of the
Controversy. Portland, OR: Multnomah Press.
Magnuson presents arguments as to why the gay rights move-
ment has no legal legitimacy.
Peters, P. J. 1992. Intolerance of, Discrimination against, and the
Death Penalty for Homosexuals Is Prescribed in the Bible. La
Porte, CO: Scriptures for America. Posted on the web 5/7/01 at
www.voy.com/28938/6.html by D. R. W. Wadsworth.
This article is cited by extreme Christian right groups and pur-
ports to give biblical evidence as to why homosexuals should be
put to death. Peters further argues that the 1982 joint resolution of
both houses of the U.S. Congress declaring that the “Bible is the
Word of God” authorizes it to carry out the execution of homo-
sexuals.
Rodgers, W. D. 1977. The Gay Invasion: A Christian Looks at the
Spreading Homosexual Myth. Denver: Accent Book.
Rodgers outlines the spread of homosexuality and analyzes the
threat to society posed by “militant homosexuals.” Rodgers
makes specific suggestions as to what steps Christians can take to
stop this threat.
Bisexuality
Firestein, B. A., ed. 1996. Bisexuality: The Psychology and Poli-
tics of an Invisible Minority. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Written for academics, Bisexuality discusses many of the political
issues that arise from stereotypes and myths concerning bisexu-
ality.
Hutchins, L., and L. Kaahumanu, eds. 1991. Bi Any Other Name:
Bisexual People Speak Out. Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
Bisexuals have had difficulty in being accepted in the gay rights
movement. Slowly, bisexuals have gained limited acceptance and
have launched their own campaign for civil rights. This book de-
tails their struggle and discusses many of their issues.
286
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Coming Out
Barber, K., and S. Holmes, eds. 1994. Testimonies: A Collection of
Lesbian Coming Out Stories. Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
Lesbians speak with their own voices about their experiences
coming out to family and friends. This nontechnical book is
aimed at the average reader.
Bono, C., with B. Fitzpatrick. 1999. Family Outing. Boston: Little,
Brown.
Bono is the lesbian daughter of Sonny Bono and the famous en-
tertainer Cher. Although Cher has spent a lifetime working with
lesbians and gay men and is an icon of gay male culture, having
a lesbian daughter challenged her concept of family. In this book,
Bono gives insight into the process of coming out when one’s
every action is recorded by the tabloids. Cher proved to be sup-
portive of her daughter and her lesbianism.
Borhek, M. 1993. Coming Out to Parents. New York: Pilgrim
Press.
Probably the most frightening thing any lesbian or gay young
adult faces is coming out to her or his parents. This little book
provides encouragement for this important step and gives effec-
tive suggestions for doing so.
Groff, D., ed. 1997. Out Facts: Just about Everything You Need to
Know about Gay and Lesbian Life from Out Magazine. New
York: Universe Publishing.
Written like a travel guide, this book provides the basics about
what it is like to be openly gay. Sometimes witty, sometimes seri-
ous, the topics include clothing styles, what to look for to avoid
discrimination at work and elsewhere, health and AIDS, safer sex,
gay culture, lesbian culture, and coming out.
Holmes, S., and J. Tust, eds. 2002. Testimonies: Lesbian Coming-
Out Stories. Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
Nearly two dozen women recount their coming-out experiences.
The women represent different ethnic, social, racial, and economic
classes. This is better written than most coming-out stories.
Books
287

Saks, A., and W. Curtis, eds. 1994. Revelations: A Collection of
Gay Male Coming Out Stories. Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
Coming out is a frightening process. This collection of coming-
out stories provides insight into the emotional turmoil many men
go through when deciding to share their sexual orientation with
others. Fear, self-hate, understanding, tears, anger, and hope dis-
tinguish coming out. Ultimately, each writer shows great strength
of character by being true to himself.
Signorile, M. 1995. Outing Yourself: How to Come Out as Lesbian
or Gay to Your Family, Friends, and Coworkers. New York: Ran-
dom House.
Although similar in content to other books on the process of com-
ing out, Outing Yourself addresses the additional issue of coming
out at work and personal public safety. Each topic is well written
and nonacademic.
Counseling
DeCrescenzo, T. 1997. Gay and Lesbian Professionals in the
Closet: Who’s in, Who’s Out, and Why. Binghamton, NY: Har-
rington Park Press.
Although one would think that professional counselors, psycholo-
gists, and psychiatrists would be honest about their sexual orien-
tation, that is often not the case. This book explores why many in
the helping professions are not open about their sexual orientation.
Kominars, S. B., and K. D. Kominars. 1996. Accepting Ourselves
and Others: A Journey into Recovery from Addiction and Com-
pulsive Behavior for Gays, Lesbians, and Bisexuals. Center City,
MN: Hazelden.
Internalized homophobia leads many lesbians and gay men into
chemical addiction and compulsive behavior. It is important for
professional counselors to recognize internalized homophobia
and how it manifests itself instead of wrongly trying to treat ho-
mosexuality. This book is quite academic and is aimed at the
working professional counselor.
Ryan, C., and D. Futterman. 1998. Lesbian and Gay Youth, Care
and Counseling. New York: Columbia University Press.
288
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Counselors, unfortunately, are often unaware that their clients are
lesbian or gay. This book brings awareness to this topic and gives
specific guidelines for appropriate services.
Cultural Diversity
Battle, J., C. J. Cohen, D. Warren, G. Fergenson, and S. Audam.
2002. Say It Loud: I’m Black and I’m Proud. Washington, DC: Na-
tional Gay and Lesbian Task Force. Available free at www.
ngltf.org.
This study examines the family structure, political behavior, ex-
periences of racism and homophobic bias, sexual identity, and the
policy priorities of more than 2,500 black LGBT people who par-
ticipated in black gay pride celebrations.
Constantine-Simms, D., ed. 2000. The Greatest Taboo: Homosex-
uality in Black Communities. Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
Constantine-Simms has compiled twenty-eight essays by aca-
demics and writers of different ethnic heritages, genders, and sex-
ualities to discuss the often-volatile relationship between black
gay men and lesbians and others of their race. Histories from
nineteenth-century slave quarters to postapartheid South Africa,
from RuPaul to Wu Tan Clan, from 1920s Harlem to the Million
Man March on Washington in 1995 provide settings to discuss the
transformation and continued repression of black gay men and
lesbians.
Greene, B., ed. 1997. Ethnic and Cultural Diversity among Les-
bians and Gay Men. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
A diverse group of authors provide empirical, clinical, and theo-
retical discussions concerning diversity within the lesbian and
gay community. The volume includes a number of personal nar-
ratives that offer poignant insight into the complexities, pres-
sures, and losses experienced by lesbians and gay men as a result
of the closed fist of bigotry.
Hinsch, B. 1990. Passions of the Cut Sleeve: The Male Homosex-
ual Tradition in China. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Legend tells of Han Emperor Ai cutting the sleeve of his shirt to
keep from waking his lover Dong Xia, who was sleeping soundly
Books
289

in his arms. As a result of this legend, homosexuals in China have
long been called “those of the cut sleeve.” In this book Hinsch ex-
plores homosexual norms in China. For those who have never
thought about homosexuality in terms other than those of West-
ern culture, this book is an eye-opening experience.
Williams, W. 1992. The Spirit and the Flesh: Sexual Diversity in
American Indian Culture. Boston: Beacon Press.
Although numerous books have examined other cultures with re-
spect to homosexuality, The Spirit and the Flesh is probably the
best. Written for the high school or college-level reader, the book
reads easily, yet is authoritative. For people studying homosexu-
ality, a book such as this provides a better understanding of the
diversity in human sexuality, which is greater than the simple bi-
nary heterosexual-homosexual paradigm. It may surprise readers
to learn that in some cultures everyone engages in homosexual
relationships for the majority of life. This demonstrates the flexi-
bility of human sexuality.
History and Biographies
Cowan, T. 1992. Gay Men and Women Who Enriched the World.
Rev. ed. Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
This fascinating collection of biographies has been recently up-
dated to include more biographies and address some of the con-
troversies caused by the earlier editions. Biographies include
Plato, Colette, Bessie Smith, Andy Warhol, Laurence Olivier, and
Barbara Jordan.
Duberman, M. 1991. About Time: Exploring the Gay Past. Rev.
ed. New York: Meridian.
Duberman presents a collection of gay commentaries dating from
1826 to his own personal essays. This is enlightened reading from
the past.
Duberman, M., M. Vicinus, and G. Chauncey, Jr., eds. 1990. Hid-
den from History: Reclaiming the Gay and Lesbian Past. New
York: Meridian.
This is one of the major books written in the 1990s. It discusses the
history of many different cultures and their acceptance of homo-
290
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

sexuality. Designed for the college classroom, it is fully cited and
won many literary awards.
Faderman, L. 1981. Odd Girls and Twilight Lovers: A History of
Lesbian Life in Twentieth-Century America. New York: Penguin.
Faderman wrote one of the first books to look at lesbian life in the
United States. Odd Girls is widely cited for its content and re-
search and is recommended for use in college classrooms.
Harris, D. 1997. Rise and Fall of Gay Culture. New York: Hype-
rion.
The reception of this book was mixed when released. The author
argues that as lesbians and gay men are accepted into society,
much of the uniqueness of the gay community has been lost. The
book looks primarily at the gay male experience, and many book
reviewers complained that it lacked a global view. It is interesting
to read when these caveats are taken into consideration.
Katz, J. 1976. Gay American History: Lesbians and Gay Men in
the U.S.A. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell.
This authoritative book includes more than 200 source docu-
ments related to homosexuality in America dating back to 1566.
Many pivotal documents of the gay rights movement are in-
cluded, such as the founding in 1924 of the Chicago Society for
Human Rights in Illinois—the first gay rights group to obtain
nonprofit corporation status.
———. 1983. Gay/Lesbian Almanac: A New Documentary. New
York: Harper and Row.
Katz accumulated more information on American history than he
could include in his book Gay American History. These documents
are included in this book and are a must for any student of gay
history studying the period between 1607 and 1950.
Liebman, M. 1992. Coming Out Conservative. San Francisco:
Chronicle Books.
What would it be like to hold conservative values your entire life
and then, at age sixty-seven, to have the public become aware of
your same-sex attraction? Liebman led such a double life, having
Books
291

had close ties to right-wing conservatives such as William F.
Buckley, Jr. and Ronald Reagan. He shares inside views about
antigay politics from in and out of the closet.
Perry, T. D., and T. L. P. Swicegood. 1991. Profiles in Gay and Les-
bian Courage. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Perry and Swicegood have written biographies of eight gay men
and lesbians who have “achieved recognition” in various fields.
These are Ivy Bottini, Barbara Gittings, Harry Hay, Gilberto Gerald,
Harvey Milk, Jean O’Leary, Elaine Noble, and Leonard Matlovich.
Plant, R. 1987. The Pink Triangle: The Nazi War against Homo-
sexuals. New York: New Republic Books/Henry Holt.
Plant writes about the personal experiences of those who suffered
in Nazi concentration camps. Included in the appendixes is Para-
graph 175, which outlawed homosexuality, and a chronology of
the German gay civil rights movement concluding with the Ger-
man Nuremberg trials.
Rector, F. 1981. The Nazi Extermination of Homosexuals. New
York: Stein and Day.
Rector chronicles the changes in gay German society from the hey-
day of the 1920s to the brutality of the concentration camps two
decades later. Rector shows what life was like under these cir-
cumstances and includes testimonials from gay men who sur-
vived the camps. This stirring book is emotionally difficult to read.
Rutledge, L. W. 1992. The Gay Decades. New York: Plume.
Rutledge tells hundreds of narratives to weave a tapestry of the
U.S. gay social movement from 1969 to the present. It is a delight
to read and contains social, legal, historical, political, and psy-
chological data not available in any other source.
Shilts, R. 1982. The Mayor of Castro Street: The Life and Times of
Harvey Milk. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
This was Shilts’s first major work and received wide accolades.
The book tells the personal story of Harvey Milk, his political ca-
reer in San Francisco, and his subsequent murder by Dan White.
Shilts is able to write in a way that keeps the reader’s interest.
292
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Simpson, R. 1976. From the Closet to the Courts: The Lesbian
Transition. New York: Richard Seaver/Viking Press.
Simpson presents a personal view of the early gay rights move-
ment from the position of a lesbian who was directly involved in
it beginning in 1969.
Timmons, S. 1990. The Trouble with Harry Hay: Founder of the
Modern Gay Movement. Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
This is a well-written biography of one of the central figures in the
development of the modern gay movement. Hay was responsible
for the founding of the Mattachine Society; ONE, Inc.; and the
Radical Fairies.
Tobin, K., and R. Wicker. 1972. The Gay Crusaders. New York: Pa-
perback Library.
Biographical sketches are presented of fifteen men and women
who were politically active during the early stages of the modern
gay rights movement. These include Jim Baker, Del Martin, Jim
Owles, Michael McConnell, Franklin Kameny, Troy Perry, Bar-
bara Gittings, and Phyllis Lyon.
Weeks, J. 1977. Coming Out: Homosexual Politics in Britain, from
the Nineteenth Century to the Present. London: Quartet Books.
This is the best-written chronology of the gay rights movement in
Britain. Weeks provides historical listings and analyzes the
changes occurring in British culture.
Weiss, A., and G. Schiller. 1988. Before Stonewall: The Making of
a Gay and Lesbian Community. Tallahassee, FL: Naiad Press.
This is a reprint of the script used to make the award-winning
documentary film of the same name. Stills from the film highlight
the book.
Humor
Cohn, M. 1995. “Do What I Say”: Ms. Behavior’s Guide to Gay
and Lesbian Etiquette. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
This is a marginally funny book that pokes fun at lesbian and gay
stereotypes.
Books
293

Eisenback, H. 1996. Lesbianism Made Easy. New York: Crown.
This book has nonstop laughs as it guides readers into becoming
full-blown lesbians.
Hanes, K. 1994. The Gay Guy’s Guide to Life: 463 Maxims, Man-
ners, and Mottoes for the Gay Nineties.
This book is witty and funny, with many quotes and mottoes to
choose from. Unfortunately for the academic, the sources are not
clearly identified.
Instructional Guides and Curricula
Besner, H. F., and C. I. Spungin. 1995. Gay and Lesbian Students:
Understanding Their Needs. Washington, DC: Taylor and Francis.
This is a small book that talks about the difficulties of being a les-
bian or gay male student in public schools. It includes a detailed
outline for a six-hour faculty workshop on homophobia, but fails
to provide the content of the workshop.
Blumenfeld, W. 1992. Homophobia: How We All Pay the Price.
Boston: Beacon Press.
Blumenfeld first discusses the impact of homophobia on our so-
ciety and the individual. The final chapters present his teaching
program for reducing homophobia. It is considered one of the
best short courses available.
Gallos, J., V. J. Ramsey, and Associates. 1997. Teaching Diversity:
Listening to the Soul, Speaking from the Heart. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
Here, teachers who have faced the challenges of teaching diver-
sity tell their experiences. Most are candid, telling us what
worked and what bombed. A few of the stories are funny and ul-
timately encouraging. Each writer provides gems of ideas for ed-
ucators faced with the daunting task of developing their own di-
versity training programs.
Gay, Lesbian, Straight Education Network (GLSEN). n.d. Ad-
vanced Anti-Homophobia Training. Watertown, CT: GLSEN.
Available at http://www.glsen.org.
294
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

GLSEN is the largest organization devoted to the needs of lesbian
and gay students and their allies in K–12 education. This training
manual is designed to help teachers and others conduct antiho-
mophobia training. Much of this material has been repackaged by
GLSEN in its Lunchbox Series—literally, a yellow lunchbox with
all materials and activities placed on cards for ease of use.
Jennings, K. 1994. Becoming Visible: A Reader in Gay and Lesbian
History for High School and College Students. Los Angeles:
Alyson Publications.
Jennings is the major force behind GLSEN and has put together a
reader applicable for high school and college students on LGBT
issues.
Lipkin, A. n.d. A Staff Development Manual for Anti-Homophobia
Education in the Secondary Schools. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
Graduate School of Education.
Massachusetts mandated statewide antihomophobia training in all
secondary schools. This book is the result of that mandate. It speaks
about the need and rationale for antihomophobia training and pres-
ents a workshop model appropriate for secondary school personnel.
Unfortunately, the book does not contain the content required for the
course and expects teachers to be familiar with the facts and data.
McNaught, B. 1993. Gay Issues in the Workplace. New York: St.
Martin’s Press.
McNaught is a leading authority on LGBT issues in the work-
place. Based on almost twenty years of practical experience, this
book is an invaluable resource for human relations departments.
It discusses the needs of lesbian, gay, and bisexual workers. In the
final chapters of the book, McNaught presents a teaching model
he has found to be effective in meeting the goals of the corpora-
tion and the personal needs of workers.
Mitchell, L., ed. 1998. Tackling Gay Issues in School. Watertown,
CT: Gay, Lesbian, Straight Education Network (GLSEN). Avail-
able at http://www.glsen.org.
This book discusses many of the controversies concerning lesbian
and gay issues in K–12 schools. Although not a training manual,
it contains insights helpful to those contemplating an antibias
program that includes LGBT issues.
Books
295

National Education Association (NEA), Human and Civil Rights
Division. n.d. Affording Equal Opportunity to Gay and Lesbian
Students through Teaching and Counseling: A Training Handbook
for Educators. Washington, DC: NEA.
The National Education Association is the largest educational or-
ganization in the United States. This handbook was a collabora-
tive effort by many educators who have experience in developing
antibias educational programs. This book is invaluable to educa-
tors faced with the challenges of providing safe environments for
all students—including lesbian and gay students.
Riddle, D. 1994. Alone No More: Developing a School Support
System for Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Youth. Appendix A. St.
Paul: Minnesota Department of Education.
This program was funded by the Minnesota Department of Edu-
cation and gives a broad discussion of the issues of lesbian, gay,
and bisexual youths in school. This is not a curriculum but rather
gives suggestions to school administrators and staff on develop-
ing support systems to meet the needs of LGBT students.
Stewart, C. 1995a. The Efficacy of Sexual Orientation Training in
Law Enforcement Agencies. UMI: 9614075. Los Angeles: Univer-
sity of Southern California.
This is the only research to review educational programs and
their efficacy at reducing bias. Although based on law enforce-
ment environments, the findings are applicable to other areas.
Stewart pulls no punches about what does not work and, more
importantly, what does. Academic and sometimes difficult to
read, the book contains important messages for educators faced
with developing and delivering antibias programs.
———. 1995b. Training for Law Enforcement: Gay and Lesbian
Cultural Awareness. Rev. ed. Los Angeles: L.A. Gay and Lesbian
Police Advisory Task Force.
This is the only training manual on lesbian and gay issues in law
enforcement that has been sold nationwide. Each topic focuses on
the unique needs of law enforcement, including points of contact
and the law.
———. 1999. Sexually Stigmatized Communities—Reducing Het-
296
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

erosexism and Homophobia: An Awareness Training Manual.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
This is the most comprehensive and thorough training manual for
developing and delivering educational programs to reduce het-
erosexism and homophobia. It provides everything an educator
would need for an antibias training program. Chapters 1 and 2
present educational theory, research findings, and a step-by-step
model. Chapter 3 contains over 100 topic papers concisely pre-
senting what is known about homosexuality. Chapter 4 contains
23 overhead transparencies, and Chapter 5 contains 47 classroom
activities—many with worksheets. The materials are designed for
high school or college-level students.
Legal Resources
Cain, P. A. 2000. Rainbow Rights. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Cain has written a readable book about the history and develop-
ment of LGBT civil rights. Instead of simply listing what laws
and rights exist in specific jurisdictions, she expands on the pol-
itics that created legal situations and influenced court decisions.
The book is written for all those interested in the law and its
development.
Editors of the Harvard Law Review. 1990. Sexual Orientation and
the Law. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Written as a guide for legal professionals, this book presents top-
ics on criminal justice, employment, education, same-sex cou-
ples, family, immigration, and others with a concise explanation
of the law and some of the controversy. It does not contain aca-
demic research on homosexuality. Although outdated, the book
is still useful.
Eskridge, W. N., Jr. 1999. Gaylaw: Challenging the Apartheid of
the Closet. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
This is an impressive historical review of the politics and changes
in U.S. law that constructed the modern gay closet. It is written
for law and college students. At the end of the book, Eskridge dis-
cusses many of the paradoxes surrounding sex, consent, and the
law and their future implications. The unique appendix traces the
changes in sex statutes from the 1600s to the present. The appen-
Books
297

dix alone is worth the price of the book. In many ways, this is an
update of the well-written book Intimate Matters: A History of Sex-
uality in America (1988).
Hunter, N. D., S. E. Michaelson, and T. B. Stoddard. 1992. The
Rights of Lesbians and Gay Men: The Basic ACLU Guide to a
Gay Person’s Rights. 3rd ed. Carbondale and Edwardsville:
Southern Illinois University Press.
This small handbook is a concise summary of the laws and court
cases relating to lesbians and gay men in the United States. It des-
perately needs to be updated, yet it is still usable to guide re-
searchers in their own work. It is written for both the lay reader
and the legal professional.
Keen, L., and S. B. Goldberg. 1999. Strangers to the Law: Gay
People on Trial. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
This book traces the development of Colorado’s Amendment 2
and its ultimate defeat by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1996 in
Romer v. Evans. Written by Goldberg, lawyer for the Lambda Le-
gal Defense and Education Fund, and Keen, editor for the Wash-
ington Blade, the book is a captivating glimpse of the struggles
Colorado experienced with the attempt to block antidiscrimina-
tion laws for lesbians and gay men. It is well written and appro-
priate for high school and college students. It contains much of
the Supreme Court dialogue and the complete written decision.
Marotta, T. 1981. The Politics of Homosexuality. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.
Although this is an old book, it has one of the best historical ac-
counts of the founding of the modern gay civil rights movement.
It reviews the founding of the Mattachine Society and subsequent
activists groups such as the Gay Liberation Front, the Gay Ac-
tivists Alliance, Radicalesbians, and the Daughters of Bilitis. More
than anything, this book shows how a handful of activists was
able to make significant strides toward gaining equal rights.
These achievements were not made through intimidation, but
rather through educating the heterosexual establishment about
gay and lesbian issues and concerns. This is a “must-have” book
for any student of gay history.
298
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Mohr, R. D. 1988. Gay/Justice—a Study of Ethics, Society, and
Law. New York: Columbia University Press.
Written for the legal professional, this book engages in deep le-
gal analysis of a number of issues, including discrimination,
sodomy, privacy, gay rights, and AIDS. It is perfect for class de-
bates about legal gay issues. Although the laws regarding homo-
sexuality have changed considerably since the publication of this
book, it contains many of the classic arguments on freedom and
social responsibility.
Richards, D. A. J. 1998. Women, Gays, and the Constitution: The
Grounds for Feminism and Gay Rights in Culture and Law.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Written for the legal analyst and college student, this book makes
the argument that sex statutes are examples of “moral slavery.”
Richards develops his thesis by tracing the writings of early first-
wave feminists and their analysis of slavery. Ultimately, Richards
provides arguments as to why sexual orientation should be made
a suspect class, gay marriages should be made legal, and other
topics. This book is perfect for a college law class.
Robson, R. 1997. Gay Men, Lesbians, and the Law. New York:
Chelsea House.
This thin book is probably the best-written book for the lay reader
or high school student. It reviews in nontechnical terms sex
statutes, discrimination, education, families, criminal justice,
health concerns, and the legal profession. It was written mainly to
present the current legal status of gay men, lesbians, and the law.
However, its brevity limits the depth of the topics discussed.
Stewart, C. 2001. Homosexuality and the Law: A Dictionary.
Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
This is the most recent and comprehensive book covering the le-
gal status of gay and lesbian people in the United States. The vol-
ume blends sociological, psychological, and medical research on
human sexuality and discusses historical and political forces that
affect the legal status of homosexuality. It is the first book to ex-
amine transsexual, transgender, and intersex legal issues in detail.
It is written in language understandable by the layperson.
Books
299

Strasser, M. 1997. Legallywed: Same-Sex Marriage and the Con-
stitution. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
This book focuses on the controversy of same-sex marriage. Writ-
ten for the college-level reader, the book contains a detailed dis-
cussion of the legal aspects of marriage, full faith and credit, the
Defense of Marriage Act, and the impact same-sex marriage
would have on child custody and adoptions. It is easy to read and
not overburdened with references.
Students of the Tulane University School of Law, eds. n.d. Law
and Sexuality: A Review of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Trans-
gender Legal Issues. New Orleans, LA: Tulane University School
of Law. Available at http: www.law.tulane.edu/journals.htm.
This excellent law journal is written for law students and practic-
ing judges and lawyers. Each volume is reasonably priced. Vol-
ume 8 contains a comprehensive state-by-state summary of
statutes dealing with HIV and AIDS as well as other topics.
Van der Meide, W. 2000. Legislating Equality: A Review of Laws
Affecting Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, and Transgendered People in
the United States. Washington, DC: National Gay and Lesbian
Task Force. Available at http://www.ngltf.org.
The Policy Institute Research of NGLTF has written a compre-
hensive report on the extent to which laws and regulations
throughout the United States have been enacted to provide pro-
tection and equality for the LGBT community.
LGBT Parenting
Arnup, K. 1995. Lesbian Parenting: Living with Pride and Preju-
dice. Charlottetown, PEI: Gynergy.
Lesbian mothers face discrimination because they are lesbian,
and have lower incomes because they are women. These issues
affect parenting choices. This book concisely addresses these is-
sues while at the same time giving support to lesbian mothers in
their struggles.
Barret, R., and B. Robinson. 1990. Gay Fathers. Lexington, MA:
Lexington Books.
300
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Groundbreaking when it was released, Gay Fathers gives voice to
gay men who are fathers through marriage or adoption. Ques-
tions such as, When do I tell my children I am gay? and Do I tell
the school administration? are addressed through example.
Drucker, J. 1998. Families of Value: Gay and Lesbian Parents and
Their Children Speak Out. New York: Plenum.
Drucker surveyed lesbian and gay parents and their children about
their family experiences. Each story is presented to show the wide
range in responses to the issue of homosexuality and family. No
other book on gay families gives as much first-person reporting.
Johnson, S. M., and E. O’Connor. 2001. For Lesbian Parents. New
York: Guilford Press.
This highly regarded book provides guidance on the numerous
special questions lesbian parents face, such as when and how to
come out to their child, interfacing with school officials, teasing at
school, and more. Written with clarity and wit, Johnson and
O’Connor bring to the book their knowledge as Ph.D.s in psy-
chology as well as their personal experience as lesbian mothers.
LGBT Seniors
Adelman, J., ed. 1993. Lambda Gray: A Practical, Emotional, and
Spiritual Guide for Gays and Lesbians Who Are Growing Older.
North Hollywood, CA: Newcastle.
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender older people are often ig-
nored by the dominant culture. Lambda Gray discusses some of
the dynamics associated with growing older, along with practical
ideas for dealing with these issues.
LGBT Youths
Bass, E., and K. Kaufman. 1996. Free Your Mind: The Book for
Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Youth and Their Allies. New York:
HarperPerennial.
Because of the controversy concerning homosexuality and
youths, few books address the needs of young gays and lesbians
and their allies. This book contains many first-person accounts
that envision a world without homophobia.
Books
301

Day, F. A. 2000. Lesbian and Gay Voices: An Annotated Bibliog-
raphy and Guide to Literature for Children and Young Adults.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
The world of literature for children and young adults that ad-
dresses the issue of homosexuality has exploded. This bibliogra-
phy provides annotations to help readers select materials suitable
for young readers.
Heron, A., ed. 2001. Two Teenagers in Twenty: Writings by Gay
and Lesbian Youth. Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
More than a decade ago, Heron published the writings of lesbian
and gay youths in One Teenager in Ten—the first time LGBT
youths had written about their lives in their own words. Now she
asks another group of youths to tell their stories and finds that the
fears and feelings of isolation have not abated with the new gen-
eration.
Pollack, R., and C. Schwartz. 1995. The Journey Out: A Book for
and about Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Teens. New York: Puffin
Books.
Although there are a number of excellent books on the topic of
gay, lesbian, and bisexual youths, this one is structured more to
assist youths in coming to terms with their sexuality and growing
into happy, adjusted adults whose sexual orientation is an inte-
gral part of their lives.
Rench, J. 1990. Understanding Sexual Identity: A Book for Gay
and Lesbian Teens. Minneapolis: Lerner Publications.
Much of the literature on sexual identity is written for adults and
academics. This accessible book brings this important topic to the
reading level and understanding of teenagers. Important infor-
mation on coming out, sexual development, masculinity and fem-
ininity, and more is covered.
Sonnie, A., ed. 2000. Revolutionary Voices: A Multicultural Queer
Youth Anthology. Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
This collection of queer youths’ experiences, ideas, and dreams
expressed through poetry, letters, prose, diaries, and artwork
gives an indication of the diversity of future queer society.
302
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Marriage
Cabaj, R. P., and D. W. Purcell, eds. 1998. On the Road to Same-
Sex Marriage: A Supportive Guide to Psychological, Political,
and Legal Issues. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
This collection of articles is one of the most comprehensive re-
views of the topic of same-sex marriage. In addition to the legal
implications of same-sex marriage, the psychological and politi-
cal impacts are discussed. Even when same-sex marriage is fi-
nally approved, it will take time for members of the lesbian and
gay community to come to view this as a desirable arrangement
for their relationships, not simply a replication of heterosexual
coupling.
Eskeridge, W. N., Jr. 1996. The Case for Same-Sex Marriage: From
Sexual Liberty to Civilized Commitment. New York: The Free Press.
Eskeridge presents solid arguments as to why legalizing same-
sex marriage is important for maintaining civil liberties within a
democracy. Denying lesbians and gay men the right to marriage
has serious implications for other freedoms and for the mainte-
nance of equality between citizens. Written for academics, the
book is well cited.
Graff, E. J. 1999. What Is Marriage For? The Strange Social His-
tory of Our Most Intimate Institution. Boston: Beacon Press.
Our current concept of marriage in the United States is but one of
many forms that marriage has taken over human history. This
book reviews many different cultures from many different re-
gions and with many different religions and shows that marriage
is a social construction used to solidify power. This is important
to remember when the discussion of same-sex marriage is de-
bated in our modern media.
Kohn, S. 1999. The Domestic Partnership Organizing Manual for
Employee Benefits. Washington, DC: National Gay and Lesbian
Task Force. Available at http://www.ngltf.org.
This report provides comprehensive information on what domes-
tic partnerships benefits are, why employers should adopt them,
and how employees and citizens can organize effectively for pol-
icy change.
Books
303

Men and Gay Men Issues
Fanning, P., and M. McKay. 1993. Being a Man: A Guide to the
New Masculinity. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
The men’s movement has brought forth a flood of writings. This
book looks at contemporary America and discusses what it
means to be a man. The authors address the issue of sexual ori-
entation, which, to the surprise of many men, is not related to
masculinity.
Hemphill, E., ed. 1991. Brother to Brother: New Writings by
Black Gay Men. Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
Black activist Hemphill follows in the footsteps of Joseph Beam
with this powerful anthology of essays, poetry, and fiction. Con-
tributors include Marlon Riggs, Assoto Saint, Melvin Dixon, and
Craig G. Harris.
Lowenthal, M., ed. 1997. Gay Men at the Millennium: Sex, Spirit,
and Community. New York: Tarcher/Putnam.
Many gay men struggle with their masculinity in an environment
in which major religions tell them that they are not legitimate
men or that they do not have an enlightened spirit. This book ex-
plores more diverse understandings of masculinity and seeks to
encourage a spiritual revolution toward greater acceptance of
sexual and gender diversity.
Nardi, P. M., ed. 1999. Gay Masculinities. Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.
The articles in this collection attempt to explain how contempo-
rary gay men in the United States engage in, contest, and modify
notions of masculinity. The writers explore how gay men form
masculine identities in business, church, home, the community,
and interpersonal relationships. This is a fascinating and thought-
provoking book.
Outland, O. 2000. Coming Out: A Handbook for Men. Los Ange-
les: Alyson Publications.
Outland is the author of The Principles: The Gay Man’s Guide to Get-
ting (and Keeping) Mr. Right, Death Wore a Smart Little Outfit, and
304
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Death Wore a Fabulous New Fragrance. He brings his wit and in-
sight to the topic of coming out.
Penn, R. 1997. Gay Men’s Wellness Guide: The Natural Lesbian
and Gay Health Association’s Complete Book of Physical, Emo-
tional, and Mental Health and Well-Being for Every Gay Male.
New York: Henry Holt.
Similar to other wellness guides, this one focuses on the needs of
gay men. It is very helpful, with many resources.
The Military
Benecke, M. M., C. D. Osburn, and K. Gilberd. 1997. Survival
Guide. Washington, DC: Servicemembers Legal Defense Network
(SLDN). Available at http://www.sldn.org.
This guide was developed by SLDN to help military person-
nel who have been accused of being lesbian or gay, or of 
being supportive of gay rights to protect themselves from ha-
rassment and persecution. This is an excellent and comprehen-
sive resource.
Bérubé, A. 1990. Coming Out Under Fire: The History of Gay Men
and Women in World War Two. New York: The Free Press.
Bérubé provides a retrospective outlook on military attitudes re-
garding homosexuality and studies the roles that lesbians and ho-
mosexual men played in World War II.
Dyer, K. 1990. Gays in Uniform: The Pentagon’s Secret Reports.
Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
Dyer makes comments and reprints two different studies carried
out by the Pentagon regarding gays and lesbians in the military.
The reports were squelched by the military because they both
proved that the antigay policies of the military are unjustified.
Hippler, M. 1989. Matlovich: The Good Soldier. Los Angeles:
Alyson Publications.
This is an autobiography about the trials and tribulations of Mat-
lovich, the first soldier to come out while still in the military.
Books
305

Shilts, R. 1993. Conduct Unbecoming: Lesbians and Gays in the
U.S. Military. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Shilts, one of America’s finest gay journalists, writes a popular
history of U.S. policies concerning gays and lesbians in the mili-
tary. Shilts reveals the hypocrisy demonstrated by the military on
this topic. Many of the leading spokespersons during the 1993
congressional battles over gays in the military are documented as
giving different positions when speaking on or off the record.
Further, Shilts reviews the military’s own findings that lesbians
and gay men make excellent military personnel.
Political Activism
Currah, P., S. Minter, and J. Green. 2000. Transgender Equality: A
Handbook for Activists and Policymakers. Washington, DC: Na-
tional Gay and Lesbian Task Force. Available at http://www.
ngltf.org.
This handbook provides the tools for activists and policymakers
to pass transgender-inclusive nondiscrimination and antiviolence
legislation.
Yang, A. S. 2001. The 2000 National Election Study and Gay and
Lesbian Rights: Support for Equality Grows. Washington, DC:
National Gay and Lesbian Task Force. Available at http://
www.ngltf.org.
Using data from the 2000 National Election Study, researcher
Yang shows that support for LGBT rights has substantially in-
creased among all people of all political ideologies.
Religion and Homosexuality
Balka, C., and A. Rose, eds. 1989. Twice Blessed: On Being Gay
and Jewish. Boston: Beacon Press.
Written with a sense of humor, this book gives historical, socio-
logical, and psychological research on homosexuality and Jewish
culture.
Boswell, J. 1980. Christianity, Social Tolerance, and Homosexual-
ity: Gay People in Western Europe from the Beginning of the
Christian Era to the Fourteenth Century. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
306
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Boswell’s groundbreaking research looks at various opinions re-
garding homosexuality in the first twelve centuries of the Christian
church. He shocked the world with the discovery that same-sex
marriages were not only sanctioned by the early Christian church
but were also celebrated in marriages between same-sex clergy.
Denman, R. M. 1990. Let My People In. New York: Morrow.
Denman recounts her personal trials and tribulations in being a
lesbian minister in a United Methodist Church. In 1987 she was
dismissed from the church due to her sexuality. Shortly after her
removal from the church, she was ordained in the Unitarian Uni-
versalist Association, a church that does not disenfranchise mem-
bers and clergy based on sexual orientation.
Glaser, C. R. 1988. Coming Out as Sacrament. 1991. Coming Out
to God. Louisville, KY: Westminster/John Knox Press.
These two books are connected through the meditations of Chris
Glaser. He explores what it means to be gay and religious. They
clearly show that lesbians and gay men do not have to give up
their spirituality to live an openly gay life.
Hasbany, R., ed. 1990. Homosexuality and Religion. New York:
Haworth Press.
This was one of the first books to review many different world re-
ligions and their positions on homosexuality. It is well written
and easy to read.
Helminiak, D. 2000. Rev. ed. What the Bible Really Says about
Homosexuality. San Francisco: Alamo Square Press.
Helminiak discusses many of the arguments and counterargu-
ments concerning the Bible and its supposed condemnation of
homosexuality. He reviews the successive translations of the Bible
from Hebrew to Greek, to Old English, to Modern English and
how these have impacted our understanding of homosexuality.
He concludes that the Bible does not condemn homosexual sex as
we understand it today. This is an extremely important contribu-
tion to gay and biblical studies.
Johnson, T. 2000. Gay Spirituality: The Role of Gay Identity in
the Transformation of Human Consciousness. Los Angeles:
Alyson Publications.
Books
307

Once many lesbians and gay men discover that the social con-
ventions concerning sexuality and sex roles are wrong, they are
inclined to question other social norms—such as religion. John-
son contends that this experience provides a kind of enlighten-
ment that is unique to being gay and can help lead the way to re-
ligious transformation.
Kolodny, D. R., ed. 2000. Blessed Bi Spirit: Bisexual People of
Faith. New York: Continuum.
A bisexual person involved in an opposite-sex relationship is wel-
comed with open arms by major religious organizations. How-
ever, when the same person is involved in a same-sex relation-
ships, these doors are often closed. The author explores the
emotional and spiritual impact that religious hypocrisy has on bi-
sexual people.
National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, Political Research Associa-
tions, and Equal Partners in Faith. 1998. Calculated Compassion.
Washington, DC: NGLTF. Available at http://www.ngltf.org.
The ex-gay movement presents itself as being a caring haven for
“healing the homosexual.” Actually, the ex-gay movement serves
to camouflage and retool the religious right assault on legal pro-
tections against discimination for LGBT persons. Calculated Com-
passion traces the roots of this political change and reveals that the
goal of the religious right is to create a theocratic government in
the United States.
Perry, T. D. 1997. The Lord Is My Shepherd and He Knows I’m
Gay. Los Angeles: Universal Fellowship Press.
Perry’s long history with the Metropolitan Community Church
(MCC), which he founded, gives him a unique perspective on re-
ligion and homosexuality. Here, he shares his understanding and
supports the full acceptance of lesbians and gay men by major re-
ligious institutions.
Perry, T. D., and T. L. P. Swicegood. 1990. Don’t Be Afraid Any-
more. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
The book retells Perry’s life and the founding of MCC, the first
gay church.
308
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

White, M. 1994. Stranger at the Gate: To Be Gay and Christian in
America. New York: Simon and Schuster.
White worked for many years as a writer for members of the reli-
gious right, such as Pat Robertson. As a spiritual man coming to
terms with his homosexuality, White eventually left that work to
become a pastor for the Metropolitan Community Church. He
toured America with his message of hope for lesbians and gay
men. He was shocked by the blatant hatred espoused by many
Christians toward him and other homosexuals. This book shares
his experiences of this tour and contains quotes from religious
leaders explicitly stating that homosexuals should be put to
death. This book is excellently written and easy to read.
Young, P. D. 1982. God’s Bullies: Native Reflections on Preachers
and Politics. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Young was a reporter assigned to cover the Evangelical move-
ment in the United States during the development of the Moral
Majority and other fundamentalist religious groups. He was there
for many of the founding meetings and includes many interviews
and quotes from these leaders. As such, he observed the hatred
many of these leaders expressed concerning homosexuality and
gay rights. The book is excellently written and documents per-
sonal beliefs of these leaders that their followers rarely hear.
School Issues
Fricke, A. 1981. Reflections of a Rock Lobster: A Story About
Growing Up Gay. Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
Fricke’s autobiography details his court battles over his desire to
attend a high school prom with a male date.
Harbeck, K. M., ed. 1992. Coming Out of the Classroom Closet:
Gay and Lesbian Students, Teachers, and Curricula. Binghamton,
NY: Harrington Park Press.
This was the first book aimed at educational issues. It contains re-
search articles on the attitudes and beliefs of educational profes-
sionals, a legal review of cases and statutes as they apply to stu-
dents and staff, suggestions on curriculum development, and a
number of personal experiences. Everyone interested in the
school setting should read this book.
Books
309

Howard, K., and A. Stevens, eds. 2002. Out and About Campus:
Personal Accounts by Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgendered
College Students. Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
This collection—the first of its kind—allowed twenty-eight les-
bian, gay, bisexual, and transgender college students to describe
how they survived college and, more importantly, how they
fought, endured, and changed it.
Jennings, K. 1994a. Becoming Visible. Los Angeles: Alyson Publi-
cations.
Jennings, executive director of GLSEN, has written a 2,000-year
history of lesbians and gay men. It is a welcomed general reader
and is appropriate for high school students.
———. Jennings, K., ed. 1994b. One Teacher in 10. Los Angeles:
Alyson Publications.
Jennings, executive director of GLSEN, has compiled stories writ-
ten by gay and lesbian teachers about their professional experi-
ences. The book chronicles both the struggles and victories these
educators experienced in their fight for visibility.
———. 1998. Telling Tales Out of School: Gays, Lesbians, and
Bisexuals Revisit Their School Days. Los Angeles: Alyson Publi-
cations.
More than thirty men and women share their experiences—some
written with wry humor, others with acknowledged pain. Most
discovered they are still trying to overcome the self-hate they
learned in school. The stories are varied, detailing valiant strug-
gles in pre-Stonewall days, the isolation experienced by tomboys
and sissies, and the constant threat of violence.
National Gay and Lesbian Task Force (NGLTF). 1996. LGBT Cam-
pus Organizing: A Comprehensive Manual. Washington, DC:
NGLTF. Available at http://www.ngltf.org.
This is an invaluable how-to manual to help with the creation of
student, faculty, staff, or alumni LGBT groups on college campus.
Windmeyer, S. L., and P. W. Freeman, eds. 2001a. Out on Frater-
nity Row: Personal Accounts of Being Gay in a College Frater-
nity. Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
310
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Thirty gay men share their stories of coming out or staying silent
while belonging to a fraternity. Many of the stories are emotion-
ally charged, detailing the struggles of trying to belong while at
the same time being true to themselves.
———. 2001b. Secret Sisters: Stories of Being Lesbian and Bisex-
ual in a College Sorority. Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
Thirty-two women share their personal accounts of pain and iso-
lation resulting from being lesbian or bisexual while belonging to
a college sorority. The book also provides a resource guide on or-
ganizations designed to promote greater tolerance of sexual di-
versity within the college Greek system.
Sports
Kopay, D., and P. D. Young. 1977. The David Kopay Story. New
York: Arbor House.
A closeted professional football player of the 1960s and 1970s,
Kopay tells his experiences and his views on antigay discrimina-
tion in professional sports.
Louganis, G., with E. Marcus. 1995. Breaking the Surface. New
York: Random House.
Louganis became the most celebrated Olympic diver of all time.
This biography details his dyslexia and discrimination, battles
with low self-esteem, bouts of depression, and conflicts over his
sexuality. It is also the story of a man who learns to live with HIV
and the media intrusion into his life.
Pallone, D., with A. Steinberg. 1990. Behind the Mask: My Double
Life in Baseball. New York: Viking Press.
Pallone began his career in major league baseball as a closeted
umpire in the National League. After many faltering attempts to
conceal his sexuality, he finally announced that he was gay. He
was fired and wrote this book to explore his feelings and expose
the antigay culture that pervades professional baseball.
Sanford, W. R., and C. R. Green. 1993. Billie Jean King. New York:
Crestwood House.
This biography pulls no punches about tennis immortal King and
her lesbianism.
Books
311

Woog, D. 2001. Jocks: True Stories of America’s Gay Male Ath-
letes. Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
Is there life for gay athletes after they come out to their team? Is
there life before coming out? This collection of stories by journal-
ist Woog explores what it means to be a gay male athlete in Amer-
ican sports.
Young, P. D., and M. Duberman. 1995. Lesbians and Gays and
Sports. New York: Chelsea House.
This book gives biographical information about many sports per-
sonalities who are lesbian or gay. This is a nice overview, with dis-
cussion about homophobia within sports.
Zwerman, G. 1995. Martina Navratilova. New York: Chelsea
House.
Unlike other biographies of tennis star Martina Navratilova, this
one shows a caring and touching side of her struggle regarding
her sport, love, and media intrusion.
Straight Parents, Family, and Friends
Aarons, L. 1995. Prayers for Bobby: A Mother’s Coming to Terms
with the Suicide of Her Gay Son. San Francisco: Harper.
Bobby Griffith committed suicide by jumping off a bridge over a
freeway. He came from a religious family that was concerned that
its religion had let it down. This book tells how his mother came
to terms with his suicide, and identifies the hate spread by reli-
gious leaders as the source of his pain.
Cohen, S., and D. Cohen. 1989. When Someone You Know Is Gay.
New York: M. Evans and Company.
This classic self-help book provides basic information on homo-
sexuality in terms of how to be helpful to the person coming out.
It is easy to read and is supportive of the coming-out process.
DeGeneres, B. 2000. Just a Mom. Los Angeles: Alyson Publica-
tions.
Written by the mother of television and motion picture star
Ellen DeGeneres, this book tells of her trials and tribulations
312
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

watching many in the media alternately slam and then support
her daughter in her decision to come out as a lesbian on national
television.
Herdt, G., and B. Koff. 2000. Something to Tell You—the Road
That Families Travel When a Child Is Gay. New York: Columbia
University Press.
When a child comes out gay or lesbian, the family also comes out.
It has to face possible ridicule and discrimination from religious
leaders, employers, and friends. This book details many of the
common problems families with gay children experience.
Miller, D. A. 1993. Coping When a Parent Is Gay. New York:
Rosen Publishing.
Often not discussed are families in which one or more of the par-
ents are homosexual. This book is designed for children of homo-
sexual parents. It answers many questions about homosexuality
and assures children that they are not the cause of their parent’s
sexual orientation. Although somewhat dated and limited be-
cause of a focus on middle-class family structure, the book is still
relevant today.
Woog, D. 1999. Friends and Family: True Stories of Gay America’s
Straight Allies. Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
Friends of people who come out lesbian or gay face a coming out
of their own. This book tells the stories of straight people who
learned to cope with and admire the strength of their loved ones
who came out.
Straight Spouses
Buxton, A. P. 1994. The Other Side of the Closet: The Coming-Out
Crisis for Straight Spouses and Families. New York: John Wiley
and Sons.
Spouses who discover or are told that their partner is lesbian or
gay may be overcome with feelings of guilt, hatred, sadness, and
more. This book gives some basic information on homosexuality
and hopes to guide the couple into a deeper dialogue to address
this important junction in the relationship.
Books
313

Corley, R. 1990. The Final Closet: The Gay Parent’s Guide for
Coming Out to Their Children. Miami: Editech Press.
Gay or lesbian parents often lead hidden lives. Coming out, and
coming out to their own children, may seem to be an insur-
mountable hurdle. This book gives support and advice to parents
wanting to tell their children of their sexual orientation.
Transgender and Intersex 
People and Their Families
Boenke, M., ed. 1999. Trans Forming Families: Real Stories about
Transgendered Loved Ones. Imperial Beach, CA: Walter Trook.
First-person accounts are used to describe the challenges faced by
families in which one or more members are transgender. In some
cases, the stories are tragic, whereas others show the indomitable
strength of family love. Each story helps shed light on this other-
wise hidden phenomenon.
Brown, J., and C. A. Rounsley. 1996. True Selves: Understanding
Transsexualism for Family, Friends, Coworkers, and Helping
Professionals. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
This book takes a middle ground between academic research and
general public knowledge of transsexualism to provide informa-
tion to those who want to gain a basic understanding.
Bullough, V., and B. Bullough. 1993. Crossdressing, Sex, and Gen-
der. Philadelphia: University of Philadelphia Press.
The Bulloughs are one of the preeminent academic research
teams on human sexuality, with many books to their credit. Here,
they give a good academic review of gender and how it is ex-
pressed through sex and culture.
Burke, P. 1996. Gender Shock: Exploding the Myths of Male and
Female. New York: Doubleday.
Male and female are considered by most to be self-evident and
fixed. They are not. Human sexuality spreads across a wide spec-
trum of expression. This book reviews some of the sociological,
anthropological, and psychological research on gender.
314
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Dreger, A. D., ed. 2000. Intersex in the Age of Ethics. Hagerstown,
MD: University Publishing Group.
Intersex activists are challenging the status quo concerning sexual
assignment, particularly the surgery performed on infants to
make them conform to the binary male-female paradigm. Inter-
sexuality brings to the forefront ethical questions concerning gen-
der, sexual orientation, and violence. This book gives an excellent
overview of these dynamics.
Greenberg, J. A. 1999. “Defining Male and Female: Intersexual-
ity and the Collision Between Law and Biology.” Arizona Law
Review 41 (Summer): 265.
This is what is termed the “mother” of all articles—that is, it re-
views all previous articles and research on the subject of intersex-
uality. It contains medical definitions and examines the impact in-
tersexuality has on sex statutes, legal identity, and documents. It
is important for its legal analysis and the impact of the law in
defining gender, sex, and sexual orientation.
Mallon, G. P. 1999. Social Services with Transgendered Youth.
Binghamton, NY: Harrington Park Press.
Too often transgendered youths have been viewed as simply be-
ing confused about their gender because of inexperience. This
view is changing with the recognition that anyone with a will and
personality strong enough to go against cultural norms of gender
is probably sincere in his or her belief. This book addresses many
of the issues related to transgendered youths, promotes accep-
tance, and does not advocate attempting to change deep-seated
gender identity.
Paisely, C., and S. Minter. n.d. Transgender Equality: A Handbook
for Activists and Policymakers. San Francisco: National Center
for Lesbian Rights. Available at http://www.nclrights.org.
The National Center for Lesbian Rights has produced this book-
let to guide activists and policymakers who seek to gain equality
for transgender people. Many practical applications are dis-
cussed, and resources that could be used in this effort are listed.
Walworth, J. 1998. Transsexual Works: An Employer’s Guide.
Westchester, CA: Center for Gender Sanity.
Books
315

This is an excellent resource on the issue of transsexual workers.
It gives many practical suggestions and some review of the law.
Every business should have a copy of this book.
Violence
Bowker, L. H., ed. 1997. Masculinities and Violence. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
This collection of essays explores the connection between the cul-
tural norms of masculinity and violence. Men are trained to use
violence to ensure conformity to gender norms. Because lesbians
and gay men do not conform to these norms, they experience a
greater level of bias-motivated violence. Written for the academic,
the essays are well documented.
Comstock, G. D. 1991. Violence against Lesbians and Gay Men.
New York: Columbia University Press.
This is an excellent book reviewing the research on antigay vio-
lence. It provides a historical overview, empirical data on victims
and perpetrators, and an understanding of the patriarchal under-
pinnings of antigay violence, and it analyzes the connection be-
tween conservative religious beliefs and antigay violence. This
book is well written and documented for college readers. For
complementary materials, see the works of Gregory Herek.
Herek, G. J., and K. T. Berrill, eds. 1992. Hate Crimes: Confronting
Violence against Lesbians and Gay Men. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
This is a collection of essays on the psychological and sociological
dimensions of antigay hate crimes. Suggestions for overcoming
the problems are included.
Women and Lesbian Issues
Boston Women’s Health Book Collective. Our Bodies, Ourselves
for the New Century: A Book by and for Women. 1998. New York:
Simon and Schuster.
Our Bodies is one of the better health books written for women.
With many updated references, it should be in the library of all
women and those interested in providing quality health care to
women.
316
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Brill, S., and K. Toevs. 2002. The Essential Guide to Lesbian Con-
ception, Pregnancy, and Birth. Los Angeles: Alyson Publications.
This book, the first of its kind, provides a step-by-step guide to
the physical and emotional aspects of conception as these are re-
lated to the unique needs of lesbians. Resources in the appendix
include lists of fertility centers, legal and medical guidance, legal
forms and contracts, and fertility charts.
Gruskin, E. P. 1998. The Care and Treatment of Lesbian and Bi-
sexual Women: A Guide for Health Professionals. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lesbian and bisexual women have unique health needs that are
often ignored by health professionals. This book addresses many
of these issues and provides appropriate guidance for their care.
Landrine, H., and E. A. Klonoff. 1997. Discrimination against
Women: Prevalence, Consequences, Remedies. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Women experience a high level of discrimination based upon
their gender. Lesbians are subjected not only to sexism but also to
homophobia. This academic book documents the level of sexism
in the United States and proposes many remedies. It is written for
policymakers and academics.
Strock, C. 2000. Married Women Who Love Women: The Secret
Life of Married Women and the Power of Female Attraction. Los
Angeles: Alyson Publications.
Strock interviewed more than 100 women and their husbands
and children to explore the emotional consequences of married
women who suddenly discover they are attracted to other
women. How do they cope? How is making love with another
woman different from making love with men? The topic remains
largely taboo but is explored here with discreet concern and un-
derstanding.
White, J., and C. Martinez, eds. 1997. The Lesbian Health Book:
Caring for Ourselves. Seattle: Seal Press.
Women’s health issues are overlooked by our culture, and lesbian
health is virtually ignored. This book provides an excellent
Books
317

overview of the health needs of lesbians. It argues that neglect by
the medical establishment makes it even more important that les-
bians take care of themselves and their lesbian community. This
is an excellent resource.
Bookstores
Most major bookstore chains and college bookstores have lesbian
and gay sections. There are a handful of bookstores that are ex-
clusively gay. These include:
A Different Light Bookstores (www.adlbooks.com):
151 West 19th Street
New York, NY 10011
Phone: (212) 989-4850; (800) 343-4002
489 Castro Street
San Francisco, CA 94114
Phone: (415) 431-0891
8853 Santa Monica Boulevard
West Hollywood, CA 90069
Phone: (310) 854-6601
Lambda Rising Bookstore
1625 Connecticut Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20009-1013
Phone: (202) 462-6969; (800) 621-6969
Periodicals
If you search the web for LGBT periodicals, you will find thou-
sands. Many no longer exist or have merged with others, and it is
difficult to verify who or what they are. Some are so specialized
that they really are newsletters of small groups. The better place
to search is Gay/Lesbian International News Network (GLINN).
It keeps lists of periodicals from around the world that are sub-
stantial enough to attract contributing writers. Still, there are
more than 500 periodicals meeting that criterion.
Following is a selection of approximately 150 periodicals that
are either large, old, uniquely serve a particular geographic loca-
tion, or serve a subpopulation of the LGBT community.
318
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Most periodicals are broad in scope. They report on political
progress, current events, entertainment news, and medical ad-
vances, and they provide self-help articles. Regional periodicals
focus on local events, whereas national publications take a
broader view. Journals, as opposed to periodicals, are typically
more academically oriented. The international periodicals listed
are ones for which English is the primary language. Thus, many
of the major international periodicals are not listed because they
are not in English.
The periodicals listed are mostly commercial. Publications of
nonprofit organizations are often the only print media available
in restricted countries or area of limited populations.
Note: Biweekly refers to every other week; bimonthly refers to
every other month.
Journals
AIDS Clinical Care
Massachusetts Medical Society
1440 Main Street
Waltham, MA 02154-1600
Mail to: PO Box 9085
Waltham, MA 02254-9081
Ambitious Amazons, Lesbian Connection
PO Box 811
East Lansing, MI 48826-0811
Phone: (517) 371-5257 #09244
E-mail: elsiepub@aol.com
BiFocus
4213 Baltimore Avenue
Philadelphia, PA 9104-4411
Campaign
PO Box A228
Sydney South
NSW 2000
Australia
Phone: 61 2 332-3620
Fax: 61 2 361-5962
Periodicals
319

Common Lives—Lesbian Lives
1802 7th Avenue Court
Iowa City, IA 52240-6436
Phone: (319) 335-1486
Cross Dresser’s Information Guide
PO Box 566065
Atlanta, GA 30356
Phone: (404) 333-6455
De Gay Krant
Postbus 161
NL-5680 AD Best
The Netherlands
Defiance
c/o Women’s Resources
PO Box 645
Delaware Water Gap, PA 18327-9999
Disability Rag
PO Box 145
Louisville, KY 40201-0145
Diversity
PO Box 323
Boise, ID 83701-0323
Phone: (208) 323-0805; (208) 386-3870
Empathy
PO Box 5085
Columbia, SC 29250-5085
Phone: (803) 791-1607
The Evergreen Chronicles
PO Box 8939
Minneapolis, MN 55408-0939
Feminist Bookstore News
PO Box 882554
San Francisco, CA 94188-2554
Phone: (415) 626-1556
Fax: (415) 626-8970
320
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

The Feminist Press
City University of New York
311 E. 94th Street
New York, NY 10128-5603
Phone: (212) 360-5790
Feminist Studies Program
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742-0001
Phone: (301) 405-7413
Fireweed: A Feminist Quarterly
PO Box 279, Station B
Toronto, ON M5T 2W2
Canada
Phone: (416) 504-1339; (416) 323-9512
Gay Community News
Hirschfeld Centre
10 Fownes Street
Dublin 2, Ireland
Phone: 353 1 671-9076
Fax: 353 1 671-3549
Gay Community News
PO Box 37083
Honolulu, HI 96837-0083
Phone: (808) 526-3000
Homo-en lesbiennejongerenkrant
Lange Leemstraat 337
B-2018 Antwerpen
Belgium-Belgique
Phone: 03 230 37 64
Journal of Gay and Lesbian Psychotherapy 
Haworth Press
10 Alice Street
Binghamton, NY 13904-1580
Phone: (607) 722-5857
Fax: (800) 895-0582; (607) 722-6362
E-mail: getinfo@haworth.com
Website: http://www.haworth.com
Periodicals
321

Journal of Gay and Lesbian Social Services
Haworth Press
10 Alice Street
Binghamton, NY 13904-1580
Phone: (607) 722-5857
Fax: (800) 895-0582; (607) 722-6362
E-mail: getinfo@haworth.com
Website: http://www.haworth.com
Journal of Homosexuality
The Haworth Press, Inc.
10 Alice Street
Binghamton, NY 13904
Phone: (800) 429-6784
Fax: (607) 771-0012
E-mail: getinfo@haworth.com
Website: http://www.haworthpressinc.com
Journal of Lesbian Studies
4202 E. Fowler Avenue, CPR 107
Tampa, FL 33620-9900
Phone: (813) 974-2550
Lambda Book Report
PO Box 73910
Washington, DC 20056-3910
Phone: (202) 462-7924
Fax: (202) 462-7257
E-mail: lambdabookreport@his.com
Lesbian Ethics
PO Box 4723
Albuquerque, NM 87196-4723
Lesbians in Colorado
PO Box 533
Denver, CO 80201-0533
Phone: (303) 399-3544
New Voice of Nebraska
PO Box 3512
Omaha, NE 68103-0512
322
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Northeast Directory
PO Box 2357
Princeton, NJ 08543-2357
Northwest Gay and Lesbian Reader
1501 Belmont Avenue
Seattle, WA 98122-3711
Phone: (206) 322-4609
Out and About
PO Box 5691
Portsmouth, NH 03802-5691
Ozark Feminist Review
PO Box 1662
Fayetteville, AR 72702-1662
Phone: (501) 846-3740
Resources for Feminist Research, OISE
252 Bloor Street W.
Toronto, ON M5S 1V6
Canada
Rocky Mountain Oyster
PO Box 27467
Denver, CO 80227-0467
Phone: (303) 985-3034
SAGE: A Scholarly Journal on Black Women
PO Box 42741
Atlanta, GA 30311
Phone: (404) 223-7528
Sojourner
42 Seaverns Avenue
Boston, MA 02130-2865
Phone: (617) 524-0415
Woman of Power Magazine
PO Box 2785
Orleans, MA 02653
Phone: (508) 240-7877
Periodicals
323

Women’s Review of Books
Wellesley College Center for Research on Women
Wellesley, MA 02481
Phone: (617) 283-2555
WomenSource
PO Box 8230
Pittsburgh, PA 15217-0030
Womyn’s Community Newsletter
PO Box 75025
Charleston, WV 25375-0025
Womyn’s Community Newsletter
852 River Trail Terrace, Apt. 717
Salt Lake City, UT 84123-7787
Phone: (801) 484-6325
Legal Journals
Georgetown Journal of Gender and the Law
600 New Jersey Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20001
Phone: (202) 662-9460
E-mail: gigl@law.georgetown.edu
Law and Sexuality: A Review of Lesbian, 
Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Legal Issues
Tulane Law School
6329 Freret Street
New Orleans, LA 70118
Phone: (504) 865-5835
Fax: (504) 862-6748
Website: www.law.tulane.edu/journals/l&s/contact.htm
National Journal of Sexual Orientation Law (on-line journal)
E-mail: gaylaw@e-mail.unc.edu
Website: sunsite.unc.edu/gaylaw
Queer Law (on-line listserv)
E-mail: queerlaw@abacus.oxy.edu
324
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Popular Magazines
The Advocate
PO Box 4371
Los Angeles, CA 90078
Phone: (323) 871-1225
Fax: (323) 467-0173
E-mail: letters@advocate.com
Website: http://www.advocate.com
Monthly
Alternative Family Magazine
PO Box 5650
River Forest, IL 60305-5650
Phone: (708) 386-4770
Fax: (708) 386-5662
E-mail: info@altfammag.com
Website: http://www.altfammag.com
Bimonthly
Art and Understanding Magazine
25 Monroe Street, Suite 205
Albany, NY 12210
Phone: (800) 841-8707; (518) 426-9010
Fax: (518) 436-5354
E-mail: editor@aumag.org
Website: http://www.aumag.org
Monthly
Cybersocket Web Magazine
7510 Sunset Boulevard, Suite 1203
Los Angeles, CA 90046
Phone: (323) 650-9906
Fax: (323) 650-9926
E-mail: editor@cybersocket.com
Website: http://www.cybersocket.com
Bimonthly
Gay and Lesbian Review Worldwide
PO Box 180300
Boston, MA 2118
Phone: (617) 421-0082
Periodicals
325

E-mail: editor@glreview.com
Website: http://www.glreview.com
Bimonthly
Gay Parent Magazine
PO Box 750852
Forest Hills, NY 11375-0852
Phone: (718) 997-0392
E-mail: info@gayparentmag.com
Website: http://www.gayparentmag.com
Bimonthly
Genre
145 West 28th Street, 8th Floor
New York, NY 10001
Phone: (212) 594-8181
Fax: (212) 594-8263
E-mail: benreadv@aol.com
Website: www.genremagazine.com
Monthly
Girlfriends
3415 Cesar Chavez, Suite 101
San Francisco, CA 94110
Phone: (415) 648-9464
Fax: (415) 648-4705
E-mail: editorial@girlfriendsmag.com
Website: http://www.gfriends.com
Monthly
Identity’s Rainbow Borealis
PO Box 200070
Anchorage, AK 99520-0070
Phone: (907) 258-4777
E-mail: northvue@pobox.alaska.net
Website: http://www.alaska-net/~identity/northvue.htm
OUT
110 Green Street, Suite 600
New York, NY 10012
Phone: (212) 334-9119
Fax: (212) 334-9227
326
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

E-mail: outm@kable.com
Website: http://www.out.com
Monthly
Out World Magazine
1104 North Nova Road, Suite 251
Daytona Beach, FL 32117
Phone: (904) 441-5367
Fax: (904) 441-5604
E-mail: senioreditormatt@aol.com
Website: http://www.ourworldmag.com
Monthly
POZ
PO Box 1965
Danbury, CT 06813-1965
Website: http://www.posmag@aol.com
QV Magazine
PO Box 9700
Long Beach, CA 90910
Phone: (818) 766-0023
Fax: (818) 985-5106
E-mail: qv@qvmagazine.com
Website: http://www.qvmagazine.com
Bimonthly
XY Magazine
4104 24th Street, Suite 900
San Francisco, CA 94114
Phone: (877) 996-0930
Fax: (415) 552-6664
E-mail: wazup@xy.com
Website: http://www.xy.com
Bimonthly
Publications by State
Alabama
Alabama Forum
205 32nd Street S, Suite 216
Periodicals
327

Birmingham, AL 35233
Phone: (205) 328-9228
E-mail: alforum@aol.com
Arizona
Heatstroke Gay and Lesbian News
PO Box 33430
Phoenix, AZ 85067
Phone: (602) 264-3646
Fax: (602) 294-9695
E-mail: alkalphx@aol.com
Biweekly. Free.
The Source
2750 W. McDowell Road
Phoenix, AZ 85009
Phone: (602) 278-5600
Fax: (602) 278-6600
E-mail: info@gaysource.com
Website: http://www.gaysource.com
California
Bay Area Reporter
395 Ninth Street
San Francisco, CA 94103-3831
Phone: (415) 861-5019
Fax: (415) 861-6534
E-mail: barpaper@aol.com
Website: http://www.ebar.com
Community Yellow Pages
2305 Canyon Drive
Los Angeles, CA 90068-2411
Phone: (213) 469-4454
Website: http://www.gaycommunitydirectory.com
fab!
6363 Wilshire Boulevard, Suite 350
Los Angeles, CA 90048
Phone: (323) 655-5716
Fax: (323) 655-1408
E-mail: editor@gayfab.com
328
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Website: http://www.gayfab.com
Biweekly
Frontiers News Magazine
7985 Santa Monica Boulevard, Suite 109
West Hollywood, CA 90046
Phone: (323) 848-2222
Fax: (323) 656-8784
E-mail: gaynewsla@aol.com
Website: http://www.frontiersweb.com
Gay and Lesbian Times/Uptown
3911 Normal Street
San Diego, CA 92103
Phone: (619) 299-6397
Fax: (619) 299-3430
E-mail: editor@uptownpub.com
Website: http://www.gaylesbiantimes.com
Lavender Reader
PO Box 7293
Santa Cruz, CA 95061
Phone: (408) 423-8044
E-mail: scotty@cruzio.com
Lesbian News
PO Box 55
Torrance, CA 90507
Phone: (562) 438-4444
Fax: (310) 787-1965
E-mail: theln@earthlink.net
Website: http://www.lesbiannews.com
Monthly
Mom, Guess What Newspaper
1725 L. Street
Sacramento, CA 95814
Phone: (916) 441-6397
Fax: (916) 441-6422
E-mail: info@mgwnews.com
Website: http://www.mgwnews.com
Biweekly
Periodicals
329

Orange County and Long Beach Blade
PO Box 1538
20754 Los Zorillas Canyon Road
Laguna Beach, CA 92652
Phone: (949) 376-9880
Fax: (949) 494-6945
E-mail: bladeedtr@aol.com
Website: http://www.metrog.com
Florida
Lavender Community Pages
2031 Wilton Drive, Suite C
Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33305
Phone: (954) 567-1616
Fax: (954) 567-1611
E-mail: kprigal@aol.com
Website: http://www.lavender.com
Georgia
David Atlanta Magazine
575 Juniper Street
Atlanta, GA 30308
Website: http://www.davidatlanta.com
Weekly
Eclipse Magazine
1095 Zonolite Road, Suite 100
Atlanta, GA 30306
Phone: (404) 876-0789
Fax: (404) 876-2709
E-mail: editor@eclipsemag.net
Website: http://www.eclipsemag.net
Weekly
Hawaii
Out in Maui
PO Box 5042
Kahului, HI 96733-5042
Phone: (808) 248-4022
Fax: (808) 248-7501
E-mail: gaymaui@maui.net
Website: http://www.maui-tech.com/glom
Monthly
330
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Illinois
Gay Chicago Magazine
3121 North Broadway
Chicago, IL 60657
Phone: (773) 327-7271
Fax: (773) 327-0112
E-mail: gaychimag@aol.com
Indiana
The Word
225 E. North Street, Tower 1, Suite 2800
Indianapolis, IN 46204-1349
Phone: (317) 579-3075
Fax: (317) 687-8840
Website: www.the-word-online.com
Monthly
Iowa
Gay and Lesbian Resource Center Newsletter
PO Box 7008
Des Moines, IA 50309
Phone: (515) 277-7884
E-mail: outword414@aol.com
Website: http://www.glrc-dsm.org
Kansas
Liberty Press, Wichita, KS
PO Box 16315
Wichita, KS 67216
Phone: (316) 652-7737
Fax: (316) 685-1999
E-mail: editor@libertypress.net
Website: http://www.libertypress.net
Monthly
Kentucky
The Letter
PO Box 3882
Louisville, KY 40201
Phone: (502) 636-0935
Fax: (502) 635-6469
E-mail: willNich@aol.com
Periodicals
331

Maryland
Baltimore Gay Paper
PO Box 2575
Baltimore, MD 21203
Phone: (410) 837-7748
Fax: (410) 837-8512
E-mail: editor@bgp.org
Website: http://www.bgp.org
Biweekly
Massachusetts
The Amazonian
PMB 118, 351 Pleasant Street
Northhampton, MA 01060
Phone: (413) 529-0083
Fax: (877) 510-2363
E-mail: editors@amazonian.net
Website: http://www.amazonian.net
Bi Women
PO Box 400639
Cambridge, MA 02140
Phone: (617) 424-9595
E-mail: nellythrustmon@aol.com
Website: http://www.biresource.com/bbwn
Gay Community News
29 Stanhope Street
Boston, MA 02116
Phone: (617) 262-6969
Michigan
Between the Lines
20793 Farmington Road, Suite 25
Farmington, MI 48336
Phone: (248) 615-7003
Fax: (248) 615-7018
E-mail: pridepblis@aol.com
Website: http://www.betweenthelinesnews.com
Weekly
332
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Minnesota
focusPOINT
3105 Bloomington Avenue S.
Minneapolis, MN 55407
Phone: (612) 722-8800
Fax: (612) 722-1192
E-mail: focuspointe-mail@aol.com
Website: http://www.gaydata.com/db/focus.htm
Weekly
Mississippi
Mississippi Voice
PO Box 7737
Jackson, MS 39284
Phone: (601) 873-8610
Missouri
Current News
809 W. 39th Street, Suite 1
Kansas City, MO 64111
Phone: (816) 753-4300
Fax: (816) 753-2700
E-mail: current@currentnews.com
Website: http://www.currentnews.com
Weekly
Liberty Press, Kansas City
1509 Westport Road, Suite 203B
Kansas City, MO 64111
Phone: (816) 931-3060
Fax: (816) 931-1420
E-mail: kc@libertypress.net
Website: www.libertypress.net
Monthly
Nevada
Las Vegas Bugle
714 E. Sahara Avenue, Suite 220
Las Vegas, NV 89104
Phone: (702) 369-6260
Fax: (702) 369-9325
E-mail: bugle@lvbugle.com
Periodicals
333

Website: http://www.lvbugle.com
Biweekly
Lesbian VOICE
714 E. Sahara Avenue, Suite 210
Las Vegas, NV 89104
Phone: (702) 650-0636
Fax: (702) 650-0641
E-mail: lesbianvoice@hotmail.com
Website: http://www.lesbianvoice.com
Monthly
New York
New York Blade
242 West 30th Street, 4th Floor
New York, NY 10001
Phone: (212) 268-2711
Fax: (212) 268-2069
E-mail: editor@nyblade.com
Website: http://www.nyblade.com
Weekly
Outcome
266 Elmwood Avenue, PMB 226
Buffalo, NY 14222
Phone: (716) 441-7476
Fax: (716) 883-2756
E-mail: outcomewny@aol.com
Monthly
North Carolina
Carolina Lesbian News
PO Box 11776
Charlotte, NC 28220
Phone: (704) 559-5991
Fax: (704) 333-9316
E-mail: clesbiann@aol.com
Website: http://www.sarahsplace.com/cln
Ohio
Gay People’s Chronicle
PO Box 5426
334
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Cleveland, OH 44101
Phone: (216) 631-8646
Fax: (216) 631-1052
E-mail: chronicle@chronohio.com
Website: http://www.cleveland.com/community/gay
Weekly
Outlook News
700 Ackerman Road, Suite 600
Columbus, OH 43202
Phone: (614) 265-8525
Fax: (614) 261-8200
E-mail: editor@outlooknews.com
Website: http://www.outlooknews.com
Biweekly
Oklahoma
Gayly Oklahoman
PO Box 60930
Oklahoma City, OK 73146
Phone: (405) 528-0800
Fax: (405) 528-0796
E-mail: gaylyok@aol.com
Website: http://www.gayly.com
Oregon
Just Out
PO Box 14400
Portland, OR 97293-0400
Phone: (503) 236-1252
Fax: (503) 236-1257
E-mail: marty@justout.com
Pennsylvania
Access Philadelphia
2 Penn Center Plaza, Suite 200
Philadelphia, PA 19102
Phone: (215) 854-6447
Fax: (509) 694-1533
E-mail: editor@accessphilly.net
Website: http://www.accessphilly.net
Weekly
Periodicals
335

Lavender Letters (Womyn Events)
PO Box 266
Mechanicsburg, PA 17055
Phone: (717) 975-0464
E-mail: lavlet4wym@aol.com
Website: http://www.lavenderletter.com
Out Magazine, Philadelphia, PA
1000 Ross Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15221
Phone: (412) 243-3350
Fax: (412) 243-7987
E-mail: out@outpub.com
Website: http://www.outpub.com
Monthly
South Carolina
In Unison
PO Box 8024
Columbia, SC 29202
Phone: (803) 771-0804
Fax: (803) 799-6504
E-mail: nunison@aol.com
Tennessee
Family and Friends
PO Box 771948
Memphis, TN 38177-1948
Phone: (901) 682-2669
Fax: (901) 685-2234
E-mail: familymag@aol.com
Website: http://members.aol.com/familymag/homepage.html
Monthly
Texas
Dallas Voice
3000 Carlisle Street, Suite 200
Dallas, TX 75204
Phone: (214) 754-8710
Fax: (214) 969-7271
E-mail: editor@dallasvoice.com
Website: http://www.dallasvoice.com
336
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Houston Voice
500 Lovett, Suite 200
Houston, TX 77006
Phone: (713) 529-8490
Fax: (713) 529-9531
E-mail: editor@houstonvoice.com
Website: http://www.houstonvoice.com
Weekly
Outsmart Magazine
3404 Audubon Place
Houston, TX 77006
Phone: (713) 520-7237
Fax: (713) 522-3275
E-mail: dennise@outsmartmagazine.com
Website: http://www.outsmartmagazine.com
Monthly
Vermont
Out in the Mountains
PO Box 1978
Richmond, VT 5477
Phone: (802) 434-6486
Fax: (802) 434-7046
E-mail: editor@mountainpridemedia.org
Website: http://www.mountainpridemedia.org
Monthly
Virginia
Blue Ridge Lambda Press
PO Box 237
Roanoke, VA 24022
Phone: (540) 989-8016
Eros Magazine
PO Box 321
Alexandria, VA 22313-0321
Phone: (301) 717-3313
Fax: (703) 549-3879
E-mail: info@eroswebmag.com
Website: http://www.eroswebmag.com
Weekly
Periodicals
337

West Virginia
Out and About
152 6th Avenue
Huntington, WV 25701
Phone: (304) 522-9089
Wisconsin
In Step Magazine
1661 N. Water Street, Suite 411
Milwaukee, WI 53202
Phone: (414) 278-7840
Fax: (414) 278-5868
E-mail: instepnews@aol.com
Website: http://www.instepnews.com
Biweekly
Publishers
Although most of the larger publishers print books on lesbian
and gay subjects, there are a handful that make a major effort to
target the LGBT reader.
Alyson Publications
PO Box 4371
Los Angeles, CA 90078
Phone: (213) 860-6065
Fax: (213) 467-0173
E-mail: mail@alyson.com
Website: http://www.alyson.com.
Chelsea House Publishers
1974 Sproul Road, Suite 400
Broomall, PA 19008
Phone: (800) 848-BOOK
E-mail: info@chelseahouse.com
Website: http://www.chelseahouse.com
Gay Sunshine Press/Leyland Publications
PO Box 410690
San Francisco, CA 94141
Phone: (415) 626-1935
Fax: (415) 626-1802
338
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Haworth Press, Inc.
10 Alice Street
Binghamton, NY 13904
Phone: (800) 429-6784; (607) 722-5857
Fax: (800) 895-0582; (607) 771-0012
E-mail: getinfo@haworthpress.com
Website: http://www.haworthpressinc.com
Sage Publications
2455 Teller Road
Newbury Park, CA 91320
Phone: (805) 499-0721
Website: http://www.sagepub.com
Radio and Television
Many public and college radio stations have broadcast LGBT pro-
grams since the beginnings of the modern gay civil rights move-
ment. Today, there are a few stations that devote significant time
to LGBT news, interviews, and entertainment. There are even
plans to launch an all-gay cable channel. Here is a list of a few of
the radio programs that have heavy LGBT content.
Radio
Colorado OUT Spoken
PO Box 9901
Denver, CO 80209
Phone: (303) 861-0829
Fax: (303) 861-0829
E-mail: lambdacom@tde.com
Website: http://www.coloradoOUTspoken.org
Q’zine Radio Program
3905 Spruce Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6005
Phone: (215) 898-6677
Fax: (215) 573-6094
E-mail: qzine@xpn.org
Website: http://www.xpn.org
Radio and Television
339

This Way Out Radio Program
PO Box 38327
Los Angeles, CA 90038-0327
Phone: (818) 986-4106
Fax: (818) 763-7526 at TWO
E-mail: TWOradio@aol.com
Website: http://www.qrd.org/grd/www/media/radio/
thiswayo
Television Shows
Queer as Folk (British version). 1999. Original British TV show that
spawned the U.S. version. Source: Wolfe Video; tlavideo.
Queer as Folk (U.S.) 2001-2002. Smash hit TV show on Showtime.
Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Queer as Folk Two—Same Men. New Tricks (British version). 2001.
Original British TV show that spawned the U.S. version. Source:
Wolfe Video; tlavideo.
Video and DVD Resources
The number of movies, video, and DVD titles with gay and les-
bian themes has exploded. Prior to the Stonewall Riots of 1969,
homosexuals depicted in movies were always self-loathing, were
criminals, and were either murdered or committed suicide by the
end of the story. The Children’s Hour is a classic early 1960s movie
in which two teachers, played by Audrey Hepburn and Shirley
MacLane, were accused of being lesbians. The character played
by MacLane, who at the end of the movie revealed her lesbian in-
clinations, hung herself because of the shame. Likewise, the cen-
tral figure under investigation by the U.S. Senate in Advise and
Consent (1962) committed suicide.
In the 1970s and early 1980s, movies began to portray homo-
sexuals as human beings, although ultimately as lost souls
doomed to a hidden underground. Martin Sheen played the
handsome boyfriend of the older, married, coming-out Hal Hol-
brook in the made-for-TV movie That Certain Summer. They were
never allowed to show affection, and the story implied that Hal
Holbrook was giving up everything good to live a gay life. Desert
340
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Hearts (1986) explored the subject of a married woman (Helen
Shaver) coming to terms with her lesbianism, but she was pre-
sented as a pathetic figure. Similarly, in Making Love (1982), a
young married physician (Michael Ontkean) discovered his ho-
mosexual feelings, became involved with a care-free but some-
what closeted writer (Harry Hamlin), told his wife (Kate Jackson),
divorced, and moved to New York. Audiences were made to feel
that both the wife and husband were tragic victims. Also, seeing
two men, with their shirts off, embrace and kiss in a scene that
faded to black sent audiences squirming.
Even with this shift toward normalizing lesbians and gay
men through the telling of coming-out stories, an occasional
movie punctuated this trend. Gays went from being victims to be-
ing portrayed as both victims and victimizers. Homosexuality
was seen as a strange evil power that people could not resist. The
1980 film Cruising reinforced these points. In it gay men were
shown to be pathetic creatures obsessed with sadomasochistic sex
and sadistic murders. Al Pacino played a cop investigating a se-
ries of brutal murders committed by a deranged man. The power
of gay sadomasochism influenced Pacino’s character to explore
his own sadomasochistic leanings. Many gay organizations called
for a general boycott of Cruising.
Another shift occurred in sentiments toward lesbians and
gays in movies of the late 1970s and 1980s. Gay or transgender
people became a source of comedy. Although gay people were the
source of comedy in the movies of the 1930s through the 1950s,
they were not out or easily identified. Beginning with La Cage aux
Folles (French 1978) and three films in 1982 (Partners, Tootsie, Vic-
tor/Victoria) audiences laughed as long as gay people or cross-
dressers conformed to bitchy stereotypes using witty repartee. An
exceptional film was Mel Brooks’s 1983 comedy To Be or Not To Be,
which was the first time the persecution and extermination of gay
people by Nazis during World War II were mentioned in main-
stream media. This pattern continued with the release of more
mainstream comedies such as Torch Song Trilogy (1988); The Ad-
ventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert (1994); Jeffrey (1995); Bird-
cage (1995, an American remake of La Cage aux Folles); In and Out
(1997); and But I’m a Cheerleader (1999).
Most mainstream gay films focused on white male experi-
ences and portrayed mostly effeminate men. Independent film-
makers began to explore the issues of coming out, sexual repres-
sion, hate crimes, racism, violence, and more serious issues as
Video and DVD Resources
341

related to the gay community. Filmmakers came together in 1982
to launch the first Gay and Lesbian Media Festival and Confer-
ence, held in conjunction with UCLA Film and Television
Archives. The festival was renamed Outfest in 1994 to better re-
flect the dynamics of the community. Outfest has grown to be-
come the largest film festival in Southern California, and it now
includes screenings of movies with gay themes.
Likewise, Sundance and other international film festivals in-
cluded more and more entries that focused on gay and lesbian
themes. Many films that once would have been shown only at art
houses have made their way to television via cable TV. Now, any-
one with access to HBO, Showtime, Sundance, Starz, and other
cable channels can see a wide range of gay-themed films, from
mainstream comedies such as Trick, to Spanish-language films
Nico and Dani and Before Night Falls, to lesbian experimental film-
making in Go Fish, to an exploration of the intersection of race and
sexual orientation in The Wedding Banquet, or to dramatizations of
hate crimes such as the murder of transgender Teena Brandon in
Boy’s Don’t Cry (1999), which garnered the Academy Award for
best actress for Hilary Swank, or the murder of Matthew Shepard
in The Laramie Project (2001).
AIDS became a popular topic for filmmakers in the 1990s. Al-
though the made-for-television film An Early Frost (1985) ad-
dressed the anguish that a closed-minded family experienced on
discovering their son was gay and dying of AIDS, it was not un-
til 1993 that Randy Shilts’s book on the history of AIDS, And the
Band Played On, was made into a movie. The discrimination ex-
perienced by AIDS sufferers was personalized in Philadelphia (for
which Tom Hanks won the Academy Award for best actor in
1993), the story of an attorney who was fired because he had
AIDS. In the Gloaming (1997), Christopher Reeve’s (Superman) di-
rectorial debut, brought the horrors of AIDS to an intimate family
level by telling the story of a young man who returned home to
die and how his parents and siblings responded.
TV has made great strides in the inclusion of lesbians and
gay men, although mostly in comedies. The first show with a
main character who was gay was Soap (1970s). Billy Crystal
played an over-the-top parody of a gay man who eventually mar-
ried a woman. The 1980s cable TV show Brothers focused on the
interactions of Cliff, the gay brother, with his two other brothers
and their outrageously flamboyant gay friend, Donald. This was
truly the first gay-focused TV show. By the 1990s, Ellen became
342
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

the first prime-time network show to have the main character
come out on television. There was much controversy when Ellen
came out and the show was cancelled within a year. In none of
these shows could lesbian or gay characters show physical affec-
tion toward someone of the same gender.
Immediately after the cancellation of Ellen, NBC launched
Will & Grace to much success. As a comedy, it teamed an openly
gay man with a straight woman. It played along with gay stereo-
types, with gay men acting like straight women or swishy
queens. Again, none of the gay characters displayed physical af-
fection or kissed on screen. In 2001, Showtime broke new ground
with Queer as Folk, an hour-long program that contained explicit
full-body nudity, explicit sex, and explicit language among a cast
composed mostly of gay and lesbian characters. Critics of the
show claim that it focused on gay white male fantasies and rein-
forced stereotypes that all gay men are promiscuous.
The prevalence of gay male roles makes it seem that many
male actors in Hollywood want to claim on their resume that they
have played a gay role—even John Goodman from Roseanne fame
played the gay male lead in the failed television show Normal,
Ohio. Unfortunately, many female actors and directors, whether
gay or straight, are still treated as second-class citizens, with
fewer opportunities. In the 2000s, many television shows have
openly gay characters in secondary roles that do not reinforce
antigay stereotypes.
Given how mainstream gay and lesbian films have become,
the list here does not begin to describe the thousands of films
available. Instead, the list focuses on three categories of films: (1)
recent or classic films of general interest that could be obtained
from a local video store and are shown often on cable TV; (2) bio-
graphic, and historic films, and international/foreign-language
films obtainable from select video distributors who target gay au-
diences; and (3) educational films/videos that can often be ob-
tained only from the producing organization. Pornography has
not been included in this list, although some of the titles contain
adult material. Here are some video distribution companies that
target gay audiences:
Flying Focus Video Collective
3439 N.E. Sandy Boulevard, PMB 248
Portland, OR 97232
Phone: (503) 321-5051
Video and DVD Resources
343

Fax: (503) 239-7456
E-mail: ffvc@agora.rdrop.com
Website: http://www.rdrop.com/~ffvc
Intermedia
1700 Westlake Avenue N., Suite 724
Seattle, WA 98109
Phone: (800) 553-8336
Website: http://www.intermedia-inc.com
Strand Releasing
1460 Fourth Street, Suite 302
Santa Monica, CA 90401
Phone: (310) 395-5002
Fax: (310) 395-2502
E-mail: strand@strandreleasing.com
Website: http://www.strandreleasing.com
Telling Pictures
121 Ninth Street
San Francisco, CA 94103
Phone: (415) 864-6714
Website: http://www.tellingpix.com
TLA Entertainment Group, Inc.
234 Market Street, 4th Floor
Philadelphia, PA 19106
Phone: (800) 333-8521, ext. 1
Fax: (215) 733-0668
E-mail: customer.service@tlavideo.com
Website: http://www.tlavideo.com
TRB Production
PO Box 2014
Provincetown, MA 02657
Phone: (508) 487-3700
Website: http://www.brian-mcnaught.com
Wolfe Video
PO Box 64
New Almaden, CA 95042
Phone: (408) 268-6782
344
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Fax: (408) 268-9449
E-mail: info@wolfevideo.com
Website: http://www.wolfevideo.com
Women Vision Library
22-D Hollywood Avenue
Hohokus, NJ 07423
Phone: (800) 343-5540
Women’s Educational Media
2180 Bryant Street, Suite 203
San Francisco, CA 94110
Phone: (415) 641-4616
Each of the following video listings indicates a possible source as
general (video store) and/or as the name of the distributor or producer.
AIDS
And the Band Played On (140 min.) 1993. Randy Shilts’s best-
seller on the history of HIV was made into this film. Matthew
Modine plays Dr. Don Francis, a researcher at the Centers for Dis-
ease Control, who uncovers the source of a number of mysterious
deaths. The film chronicles the political and scientific background
of the developing AIDS epidemic. It is an unforgettable tale of
scientific struggle, corruption, media manipulation, deceit, and
tragedy. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Common Threads: Stories from the Quilt (73 min.) 1992. This
Academy Award-winning film uses powerful stories from the
NAMES Project AIDS Quilt to recount the tumultuous history of
the first decade of the AIDS epidemic in America. Source: Telling
Pictures.
An Early Frost (97 min.) 1985. This is the first film, whether for
TV or movie theater, to explore one family’s struggle with the
news that their son (Aidan Quinn) is gay and has AIDS. Although
almost twenty years old, the film is still relevant today. Source:
Wolfe Video.
In the Gloaming (62 min.) 1997. Christopher Reeve made his di-
rectorial debut with this heart-warming family drama about a
Video and DVD Resources
345

young man coming home to die from complications of AIDS. Taut
acting and picturesque country scenes make this an updated ver-
sion of An Early Frost. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
It’s My Party (120 min.) 1995. Nick, played by Eric Roberts, dis-
covers that he has untreatable brain lesions due to AIDS that will
leave him unable to care for himself in a short few weeks. He de-
cides to throw one last party before committing suicide by taking
a drug overdose. Family and friends come to the party, and, un-
expectedly, his former live-in who could not handle Nick’s HIV-
positive diagnosis but who desires a last rapprochement. Based
on a true story, this is a finely acted but weepie film. Source: gen-
eral; Wolfe Video.
Longtime Companion (100 min.) 1990. This film was hailed as the
first mainstream film to put a human face on the AIDS epidemic.
The film traces a group of friends in New York as they experience,
over the course of the early 1980s, the onslaught of friends be-
coming ill and dying from a mysterious “gay cancer.” Those who
survived are redefined by unconditional displays of love,
courage, and hope. Source: general; Wolfe Video; tlavideo.
My Own Country (106 min.) 1998. This unique story follows the
experiences of a medical doctor from India who moves his family
to Johnson City, Tennessee, to set up practice. At the same time,
the first documented case of AIDS rocks the city. The doctor
makes AIDS his personal crusade and is overwhelmed with pa-
tients from surrounding states. This places a strain on his mar-
riage. He struggles with making the adjustment to a new country
and having compassion for a class of patients no one else will
treat. Source: Wolfe Video.
Philadelphia (119 min.) 1993. Tom Hanks leads in this Academy
Award-winning film (best actor for Hanks). Hanks’s character
contracts AIDS and is fired from his prestigious law firm. Hanks
joins forces with another lawyer played by Denzel Washington
and successfully sues Hanks’s former employer for AIDS dis-
crimination. In addition to excellent acting, the film contains a
fine score. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Rock the Boat (84 min.) 1998. This documentary chronicles a
crew of HIV-positive men who participate in the Get Challenged
346
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Team of the 1997 TransPacific Yacht Race. The mostly amateur
sailors experience numerous squalls, mishaps, and clashes of
egos. A mixture of black comedy, adventure, and intimate human
drama, this film is an unforgettable portrait of ordinary guys and
their will to live. The film was an Academy Award nominee for
best documentary. Source: Wolfe Video.
Silverlake Life (99 min.) 1994. This is a video diary of the last days
of two men, one dying from AIDS. This film is gritty, touching,
and difficult to watch. Source: Wolfe Video.
Coming Out
And Then Came Summer (115 min.) 1999. A couple of teenage
boys discover their homosexual feelings for each other, only to
have their families find out. Once exposed, one of the boys re-
veals that he was previously institutionalized for his homosexu-
ality. Source: Wolfe Video.
Beautiful Thing (89 min.) 1995. In this sweet British film of two
teenage boys falling in love, Jamie, the more outgoing lad, helps
protect his next-door neighbor, Steve, from being physically
abused by his father and brother. It is refreshing to see a film
about love between average guys without the element of class
struggle. Source: general; Wolfe Video; tlavideo.
But I’m a Cheerleader (90 min.) 2001. This is a hysterical comedy
about a high school cheerleader who is accused by her friends
and parents of being a lesbian. They ship her off to an isolated
ranch, where she is forced to participate in a behavioral modifi-
cation program to make her straight. Of course, it all fails in a se-
ries of funny mishaps, and the local gay group helps organize a
rescue mission. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Change of Heart (96 min.) 1998. This made-for-television movie
tackles the problem of a woman discovering that her husband is
having an affair with another man. The woman is stunned, and
the children are unable to deal with their father’s homosexuality.
This better-than-average film delves into how each member of the
family must deal with the unexpected changes in his or her life.
Especially noteworthy is the change the “Stepford wife” must ad-
dress when given a dose of reality. Source: Wolfe Video.
Video and DVD Resources
347

The Delta (85 min.) 1997. A white teenager, Lincoln Bloom, leads
a double life in Memphis, partying with his friends and girlfriend
and then going off to the city’s gay pick-up spots. Lincoln meets
John, an older Asian immigrant from Vietnam whose father is an
unknown black American GI. The two have a brief romantic en-
counter, but the impossibility of their situation leads to tragic con-
sequences. Source: Wolfe Video; tlavideo.
Desert Hearts (91 min.) 1986. One of the first positive lesbian
films, Desert Hearts tells the story of a repressed English professor
who goes to Reno for a quick divorce in 1959. While waiting for
the papers to be processed, she meets and falls in love with Cay,
a beautiful young casino worker. The movie has a fabulous 1950s
soundtrack featuring Elvis Presley, Patsy Cline, and Patti Page.
Source: general; Wolfe Video; tlavideo.
Edge of Seventeen (100 min.) 1999. Eric, a teenager in Sandusky,
Ohio, goes through the many levels of coming out—thinking he
is bisexual; having a girlfriend; hiding the attraction he has for
men; meeting and falling in love with Rod, who tosses him aside
after a short time; and coming out to his parents. This is one of the
better coming-out films because it does not sanitize the experi-
ence. Source: general; Wolfe Video; tlavideo.
Get Real (108 min.) 1999. This British film explores the coming out
of sixteen-year-old Steven. He knows that he is gay and goes to the
local park to meet men in the bathroom. There, he meets John, the
school’s handsome superjock. The two get involved, but Steven’s
desire to be open about his relationship with John threatens John’s
carefully constructed closet. It all comes to a head when Steven
wins a writing contest and comes out to the school during his ac-
ceptance speech. Source: general; Wolfe Video; tlavideo.
In and Out (92 min.) 1997. This is a big-budget movie with main-
stream actors in a Hollywood fantasy of one man coming out in
middle America. Actor Kevin Kline plays Howard Brackett, a lo-
cal teacher who is engaged to be married in three days, when, on
a national broadcast of the Oscars, the acceptance speech given by
the best actor “outs” Brackett. Everyone in town is devastated, in-
cluding Howard, and the media turn the situation into a circus.
Howard eventually comes to realize that he really is gay and tells
348
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

his fiancée during the marriage ceremony. Source: general; Wolfe
Video.
The Incredibly True Adventure of Two Girls in Love (94 min.)
1995. This is a touching and comic story of the first love between
two girls in high school. Randy Dean, the rebellious tomboy, falls
in love with Evie Roy, a beautiful and smart African American.
The romance leads them to decide to run away together. A series
of comic misadventures culminates with family and friends con-
verging on a motel to keep the lovers from leaving. Source: gen-
eral; Wolfe Video.
Journey of Jared Price (90 min.) 2000. Nineteen-year-old Jared
Price leaves home in Georgia for Southern California on a journey
of self-realization and sexual discovery. He stumbles through a
Hollywood youth hostel and discovers that his prostitute room-
mate wants more than a platonic friendship. Jared gains employ-
ment with a wealthy, older, blind woman and falls into a decep-
tive relationship with her affluent older son, Matthew. The two
men’s relationship becomes personally destructive, and Jared
faces the difficult decision of abandoning the relationship. Source:
Wolfe Video.
Lost Language of Cranes (90 min.) 1992. This BBC adaptation of
David Leavitt’s literary masterpiece shows a family in crisis as
Philip, their college son, tells the family of his homosexuality. Do-
ing so brings up long-hidden secrets concerning homosexuality
and infidelity of the parents. The rigid, angular movement of con-
struction cranes becomes a metaphor for the emotional remote-
ness within this dysfunctional family. Source: general; Wolfe
Video.
Maurice (139 min.) 1987. Adapted from E. M. Forster’s novel of
the same name, Maurice tells the story of the love that develops
between two upper-class Cambridge College students. Their love
exceeds the bounds of “decent society” in sexually repressed pre-
World War I Britain, yet they never cross the line into physical in-
timacy. Eventually, Clive is unable to overcome his privileged up-
bringing and marries, ending the relationship with Maurice who
then moves to America. The film was produced by the Academy
Award-nominated creators of Remains of the Day and Howard’s
End. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Video and DVD Resources
349

Trevor (18 min.) 1995. This Academy Award–winning short film
tells the story of a thirteen-year-old boy, his emerging sexuality,
and his realization that he is gay. Source: Intermedia.
Culture and Education
Always My Kid: A Family Guide to Understanding Homosexual-
ity (74 min.) 1994. Parents and children of PFLAG recount their
experiences. Source: Triangle Video Productions, 550 Westcott,
Suite 400, Houston, TX 77007, (713) 869-4477.
Both of My Moms’ Names Are Judy (10 min.) 1994. This film is
composed of a powerful and moving series of interviews with
children (aged six to eleven) who have gay or lesbian parents.
Training materials for overcoming homophobia in the elementary
classroom are also available. Source: Lesbian and Gay Parents As-
sociation, 260 Tingley Street, San Francisco, CA 94112, (415) 522-
8773, lgpasf@aol.com
Combating Homophobia (30 min.) 1991. This is a video of a ho-
mophobia workshop in which fourteen gay couples talk about
their desire to be married. Source: Flying Focus Video Collective.
Disarming the OCA (30 min.) 1992. A panel discusses attempts by
the Oregon Citizens Alliance to curb gay rights. Donna RedWing
and Suzanne Pharr are on the panel. Source: Flying Focus Video
Collective.
The Gay Agenda (19 min.) 1990. This is one of the most famous
antigay videos ever made. It weaves together clips from gay pride
parades showing simulated sex and sadomasochistic behaviors
with testimony from “expert” witnesses on the deviancy of ho-
mosexuality. Currently, The Gay Agenda seems impossible to lo-
cate, but it is available for viewing at some libraries. Source:
Stonewall Center, 256 Sunset Avenue, Crampton House SW,
Amherst, MA 01003-9324, (413) 545-4824, (413) 545-6667 (fax), 
e-mail: stonewall@stuaf.umass.edu, website: http://www.
umass.edu/stonewall/library/videos/tvcoverage.html. Also at
the ONE Institute and Archives, 909 W. Adams Boulevard, Los
Angeles, CA 90007, (213) 741-0094, (213) 741-0220 (fax), e-mail:
oneigla@usc.edu, website: http://www.oneinstitute.org.
350
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Gay Issues in the Workplace (25 min.) 1993. A cross-section of
gay, lesbian, and bisexual workers speak for themselves in this
engaging and enlightening discussion. Hosted by Brian Mc-
Naught. Source: TRB Production.
Gay Lives and Culture Wars (27 min.) 1994. Gay youths tell their
stories against the backdrop of antigay propaganda used in Ore-
gon’s Ballot Measure 9. Source: Democracy Media, PO Box 82777,
Portland, OR 97282, (503) 235-5036.
Homophobia in the Workplace (57 min.) 1993. Brian McNaught
explains why companies need to address issues of concern to gay,
lesbian, and bisexual employees. Source: TRB Production.
It’s Not Gay (30 min.) 2002. This video produced by the religious
right provides an uncompromising, yet “compassionate” look at
the “tragic consequences of homosexual life.” Ex-gays share their
experiences and the emotional pain and brokenness that led to
their empty lives and to AIDS. Source: American Family Associa-
tion, PO Box 2440, Tupelo, MS 38803, (626) 844-5036, (662) 842-
7798 (fax), e-mail: webmaster@afa.net.
A Little Respect (30 min.) 1991. This video is intended to help col-
lege students combat homophobia. Source: Rutgers University,
Department of Health Education, University Heights, 249 Uni-
versity Avenue, Newark, NJ 07102, (973) 353-1236.
On Being Gay (57 min.) 1994. In this highly praised two-part
presentation, Brian McNaught explains the unique aspects of
growing up gay. He addresses often cited but erroneously inter-
preted biblical quotes. This can be used in twenty-minute seg-
ments. Source: TRB Production.
Out at Work (60 min.) 1998. This is the best documentary detail-
ing people who experienced job discrimination for being lesbian
or gay. Also included is the Cracker Barrel case. Source: HBO Con-
sumer Affairs, 1100 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY
10036, (212) 512-1000, (212) 512-5451.
Out for a Change: Addressing Homophobia in Women’s Sports
(27 min.) 1996. Open lesbian sports figures describe their experi-
ences and discuss what needs to change in sports. Source: Women
Vision Library.
Video and DVD Resources
351

The Right to Marry (72 min.) 1996. Here are interviews with Mel
White, Phyllis Burke, Richard Mohr, and Kevin Cathcart dis-
cussing the issues around lesbian and gay men’s right to marry.
Source: Partners Task Force for Gay and Lesbian Couples, PO Box
9685, Seattle, WA 98109-0685, (206) 935-1206, e-mail: demian@
buddybuddy.com.
Straight from the Heart (24 min.) 1995. This work contains mov-
ing accounts of parents’ struggles with homophobia on learning
that their child is lesbian or gay. It uses simple stories told by real
people: a police chief who talks about his pride in his lesbian
daughter, a Mormon family whose son is believed to be the first
person to die from AIDS in Idaho, a mother who talks about her
two lesbian daughters and how she has been told that they are
“that way” because they caught the “predilections from white
people.” Academy Award nominee. Source: Wolfe Video; Women
Vision Library.
Teaching Respect for All (52 min.) 1996. A project of the Gay, Les-
bian, and Straight Education Network, this is a “Homophobia
101” workshop. Source: GLSEN, 122 W. 26th Street, Suite 1100,
New York, NY 10001, (212) 727-0135, www.glsen.org.
TransFamily. 2001. Having a transgender member of the family is
explored. Source: PFLAG Transgender Network, c/o Mary
Boenke, 180 Baily Boulevard, Hardy, VA 24101.
What Lesbians Have Done for America (60 min.) 1999. Historian
Lillian Faderman examines lesbians’ contributions to the positive
history of the United States since the 1800s. Source: Flying Focus
Video Collective.
Who’s Afraid of Project 10? (23 min.) 1989. This video contains in-
terviews with Virginia Uribe, founder of Project 10; gay and les-
bian students; political and religious opponents of the program;
and the mother of a teen who committed suicide over being gay.
Source: Friends of Project 10, 115 W. California Boulevard, Suite
116, Pasadena, CA 91105, (626) 577-4553.
Why and How to Defeat the “Gay” Movement. Based on the book
of the same name by Scott Lively, this video provides a “straight-
forward, nonsectarian plan for rolling back the gay agenda and
352
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

restoring the natural family to primacy in America.” Source: Abid-
ing Truth Ministries, 6060 Sunrise Vista Drive, Suite 3050, Citrus
Heights, CA 95610, (916) 676-1057, website: http://www.abid-
ingtruth.com.
Gay Male Comedy
The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert (102 min.) 1994.
Priscilla is the simple story of two drag queens and one female
transsexual taking a trip across the great expanse of the Aus-
tralian outback. Taking their drag show to a gig in rural Alice
Springs, they find that their camp show, outrageous costumes,
disco music, and dancing get interesting responses from the lo-
cals at every stop they make. This was one of the big hits of 1994.
Source: general; Wolfe Video; tlavideo.
Billy’s Hollywood Screen Kiss (89 min.) 1998. Sean Hayes, of TV’s
Will & Grace fame, plays Billy, who dreams of meeting Mr. Right
through the viewfinder of his instamatic camera. He meets and
falls for handsome coffeehouse waiter Gabriel, who is unsure of
his sexuality. Billy asks Gabriel to pose for a series of photos re-cre-
ating Hollywood’s great screen kisses. It is then that Billy discov-
ers the truth about Gabriel. This is one of the better-written and
acted gay male comedies. Source: general; Wolfe Video; tlavideo.
Broadway Damage (108 min.) 1998. Three friends are determined
to take New York City by storm. Marc dreams of his Broadway
break, Cynthia dreams of landing her fantasy job at the top, and
Robert dreams of Marc. Reality intervenes and the fun begins in
this tale of unrequited love and relentless optimism. Source: gen-
eral; Wolfe Video.
I Think I Do (90 min.) 1997. Two college roommates meet five
years later at a straight mutual friend’s wedding. The roommate
who was openly gay in college brings his boyfriend, whereas the
other roommate has recently come out, unbeknownst to the oth-
ers. Romantic entanglements ensue. This is a screwball comedy in
the 1930s style. Source: Strand Releasing; tlavideo.
Jeffrey (92 min.) 1995. With a big budget and a star-studded cast
(including Patrick Stewart and Sigourney Weaver in the support-
ing cast), Jeffrey comes from the acclaimed writer Paul Rudnick
Video and DVD Resources
353

(In and Out, The Addams Family). It is a hilarious boy-meets-boy
romantic comedy adapted from the stage play of the same name.
Because of AIDS, Jeffrey (Steven Weber of television show Wings
fame) swears off sex—until he meets sweet, hunky, sensitive
Steve. However, once passions ignite, Steve reveals that he is
HIV-positive, leaving Jeffrey to choose between what may be true
love or solitude. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Kiss Me, Guido (86 min.) 1997. Franki Zito, a straight as an arrow
pizza maker from the Bronx, decides to leave home and hunt for
an apartment. He sees an ad that says GWM and figures it means
“guy with money,” not knowing that it means “gay white male.”
This is the setup for a movie with plenty of laughs and good-
hearted intentions. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Love! Valor! Compassion! (115 min.) 1996. Based on Terrance Mc-
Nally’s Tony Award-winning play, this film tells the story of eight
gay friends who leave the city to spend three weekends out at a
country home. It becomes a mix of strong personalities, outrageous
camp, and poignant reflections. Jason Alexander (from television
show Seinfeld) is in a leading role. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Psycho Beach Party (95 min.) 2000. Based on Charles Busch’s
long-running stage play, Psycho Beach Party is a wickedly funny
satire of Hollywood movie genres. Characters include a burnt-out
surf guru, dreamy surfboys, a stylish homicide detective, drag
queens, good-bad split personalities, and more. Source: general;
Strand Releasing.
Relax . . . It’s Just Sex (110 min.) 1998. This Hollywood-studded
cast dramatizes tangled relationships among a group of close-knit
friends. Tara is a sexy straight woman whose biological clock is
ticking and who wants a child from her boyfriend, who is not
ready. Vincey, Tara’s best friend, is looking for Mr. Right and has
a violent clash with street thugs. Longtime couple Megan and Sa-
rina break up over Megan’s affair with a man. Add a couple of
hopeless crushes and you have a hilarious romantic comedy with
a twist ending. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
The Sum of Us (95 min.) 1994. In this humorous and touching
Australian film, Russell Crowe (Gladiator) plays a gay son whose
father tries to help him find “Mr. Right.” Source: general; tlavideo.
354
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Torch Song Trilogy (126 min.) 1988. Tony Award-winning actor
and playwright Harvey Fierstein (Bullets over Broadway) re-creats
his role as Arnold Beckoff in this film adaptation of the smash
Broadway play of the same name. Arnold is a drag queen looking
for love who gets involved first with a closeted man who wants
to be heterosexually married and then with a young fashion
model (Matthew Broderick). Arnold has a complicated relation-
ship with his mother (Anne Bancroft). Arnold also has a keenly
developed sense of humor and piercing wit. Source: general;
Wolfe Video.
Trick (90 min.) 1999. The simple premise of two men meeting and
trying to arrange a quickie becomes, instead, a chance for them to
get to know each other and develop something deeper. Each time
they try to find a place for sex, they are thwarted in some hu-
morous situation. Tori Spelling has a memorable part as the bull-
dozing best friend. Source: general; Wolfe Video; tlavideo.
Gay Male Experience
Advise and Consent (139 min.) 1962. This is one of the classic
black-and-white movies in which the gay character must commit
suicide. The president’s choice of a candidate for secretary of
state divides the Senate. When the candidate is threatened with
the revelation that he is gay, he commits suicide. The film is
based on Allen Drury’s novel and was controversial for its time.
Source: general.
Big Eden (107 min.) 2001. A New York artist returns to his home-
town of Big Eden, Montana. He confronts his unrequited love for
his high school best friend and his feelings about being gay in a
small town. He is surprised to find the town residents quietly
conspiring to help him with his romance. Big Eden’s residents
defy the stereotype of “small town, small minds.” The movie ex-
plores the universal longing and hope of finding a place where
we are unconditionally loved. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Boys Life (90 min.) 1994. This is actually three short films on com-
ing out and growing up: Pool Days, Friend of Dorothy, and The
Disco Years. The series includes Boys Life 2 and Boys Life 3. Source:
general; Strand Releasing.
Video and DVD Resources
355

Common Ground (105 min.) 2000. This film tells the stories of
three generations of gays living in the tiny town of Hormer, Con-
necticut. The all-star cast includes Donna Deitch, Beau Bridges,
Ed Asner, Helen Shaver, Margot Kidder, and Jonathan Taylor
Thomas. Source: Wolfe Video.
Finding North (95 min.) 1997. Rhonda, a love-starved girl, spots
her ideal man, Travis. Unfortunately, Travis is a naked gay man in
the process of jumping off a bridge to commit suicide. In a quirky
chain of events, they end up on the road driving to Texas in a tale
of misconceptions and mistaken identities. The journey becomes
an exploration of self-worth and life. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Green Plaid Shirt (87 min.) 1996. Back in 1978, Phillip and Guy
were experiencing the exhilaration of first love, sharing life expe-
riences with their friends Devon, Jerry, and Todd. Ten years later,
all have died except Phillip, who tries to make sense of the joys
and sorrows of life, while looking hopefully to a new future.
Source: Wolfe Video.
The Hanging Garden (91 min.) 1997. William, a once inept young
man, returns home confident in his gay life. Yet he must address
old demons and family dynamics. This film is a lyrical and hu-
morous approach to the topic of gay men attending family re-
unions. Source: Wolfe Video.
Hollow Reeds (106 min.) 1995. A gay man attempts to save his son
from abuse. However, the father is then subjected to the harsh
scrutiny of the court. This film is a heart-stirring dramatic thriller.
Source: Wolfe Video.
Lilies (95 min.) 1996. Lilies won four Canadian Genie Awards
(equivalent to the Oscar) in 1996, including best picture, and is
found on many ten best movies lists. In 1952, a Catholic bishop
visits a prison to hear a dying prisoner’s last confession. There, he
is confronted by Simon, a childhood friend, who, along with
other prisoners, takes the bishop hostage. Simon and his cohorts
reenact Simon’s version of events that took place in 1912 in the ru-
ral village in which the bishop and Simon grew up. The action
moves back and forth between the crude prison enactment and
the actual events of 1912, culminating in the tragic night when
both men’s fates were sealed. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
356
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

My Beautiful Laundrette (93 min.) 1985. This British film explores
the relationship between a Pakistani and his white working-class
childhood friend. They are lovers, and neither family nor friends
approve. (Daniel Day Lewis gives an excellent performance as the
white Brit.) Source: general.
My Own Private Idaho (105 min.) 1991. Mike (River Phoenix) is
a narcoleptic street hustler searching for his mother and pos-
sessed by his idyllic memories of his childhood. He meets Scott
(Keanu Reeves), who is a runaway rich kid on a personal quest to
find the meaning of life while waiting to inherit his father’s es-
tate. Together, Mike and Scott travel through a bizarre world of
wealthy strangers, male prostitutes, and more. Source: general;
Wolfe Video.
The Opposite of Sex (100 min.) 1998. Dedee is a sixteen-year-old
runaway who goes to live with her gay half-brother, Bill. He is a
caring teacher in a small town. She turns his quiet existence
upside-down and interferes with his attempt to date a new
boyfriend. Source: Wolfe Video.
Parallel Sons (93 min.) 1995. A white teenager who identifies
completely with blacks (he wears his blond hair in dreadlocks,
likes hip-hop, and treats The Autobiography of Malcolm X as his
bible) falls in love with a young black man who has been
wounded escaping from prison. This film received the Grand
Jury Award at Outfest. Source: Strand Releasing.
Querelle (106 min.) 1983. Set in a surreal Barbarella-style seaport,
Brad Davis plays a sailor who discovers and explores homosex-
ual sadism. This is a surprising early gay film. Source: general;
Wolfe Video.
Rites of Passage (95 min.) 1999. The Farraday family men unex-
pectedly end up at the family’s mountain cabin. Conflict arises
among them, and the father (Dean Stockwell) comes to realize
that his homophobia is pushing his youngest son (Jason Behr of
Roswell) into the arms of a much deadlier father. From writer/
director Victor Salva (Powder). Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Under Heat (90 min.) 1994. A family reunion between an eccentric
mother (played by Lee Grant) and her two sons (one straight and
Video and DVD Resources
357

one gay) becomes an explosive mix. The compelling musical
score is by Obie Award-winner Elizabeth Swados. Source: Wolfe
Video.
World and Time Enough (92 min.) 1995. Winner of the 1994 audi-
ence award at the San Francisco International Lesbian and Gay
Film Festival, this clever and bittersweet comedy offers a glimpse
into gay coupledom rarely seen—young, midwestern, and not
chic. Mark is a radical artist-activist, and Joey is a garbage collec-
tor. They encounter many issues—family obligations, HIV status,
temporary jobs, and more. In spite of everything, they are, inex-
plicably, a happy couple. Source: Strand Releasing.
Foreign
Aimee and Jaguar (126 min.) 1997. Lilly Wust leads a comfortable
life as a married woman in her late twenties with four children
and a Nazi husband. It is 1943 and Berlin is under constant bomb-
ing. At a concert she meets Felice. Eventually, the two women fall
in love. They write to each other using the pseudonyms Aimee
(Lilly) and Jaguar (Felice). Unknown to Lilly, Felice is Jewish and
works for the underground resistance. Lilly divorces her hus-
band, and the two women move in together. On a hot August day
in 1944, the Gestapo waits in the apartment for the women to re-
turn from swimming and playing along the banks of the Havel.
This film was nominated for a Golden Globe award. German with
English subtitles. Source: Wolfe Video; tlavideo.
Beloved Friend (90 min.) 2001. Official selection of the Berlin In-
ternational Film Festival, Beloved Friend tells the story of an ac-
complished professor of medieval literature who is fixated on one
of his students, David. He is surprised when, in response to a call
for an anonymous callboy, David arrives at his door. A dysfunc-
tional relationship begins between the two men. The professor
risks his career and faces the possibility of cruelty and violence at
the hands of heartless David. Spanish with English subtitles.
Source: Strand Releasing.
Coming Out (108 min.) 1989. Coming Out is the only film to show
gay life in communist East Germany. Phillip has strong feelings
for his best male friend, but puts that behind him to live with a
girl in a “normal” relationship. Yet Phillip finds he cannot deny
358
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

his passionate desires for men. German with English subtitles.
Source: Wolfe Video.
Don’t Tell Anyone (111 min.) 1998. A young man searches for hon-
esty and sexual identity against the backdrop of modern Catholic
Peru. Spanish. Source: Wolfe Video.
East Palace, West Palace (90 min.) 1996. This is one of the first
Chinese-language films to address the issue of homosexuality. A
police officer arrests a young man found cruising on the grounds
of the Forbidden Palace in Beijing. At the police station, the young
man tells a tale of sexual oppression and sexual torture. The po-
lice officer seems intrigued, if not actually interested in pursuing
the young man. There is tension between the officer and young
man as they jockey for sexual dominance, a metaphor for the au-
thoritarian regime and its helpless citizens. Mandarin Chinese
with English subtitles. Source: general; Strand Releasing; Wolfe
Video.
Entre Nous (112 min.) 1983. Academy Award for best foreign-
language film, Entre Nous tells the story of two married women
who challenge the social rules of their time to develop a rare, lov-
ing friendship. French with English subtitles. Source: general;
Wolfe Video.
Fire (108 min.) 1996. Banned in India for its lesbian content, Fire
tells the story of two sisters-in-law who abandon their loveless
marriages to be with each other. Hindi with English subtitles.
Source: Wolfe Video.
Full Speed (82 min.) 1996. Rick and Samir had a friendship they
thought would last forever. One rowdy night, Rick is killed and
Samir is left to overcome the guilt associated with being the one
who survived. French with English subtitles. Source: Strand Re-
leasing; Wolfe Video.
Happy Together (97 min.) 1996. Director Wong Kar-Wai chronicles
the stormy affair of a gay Chinese couple living as expatriates in
Buenos Aires. Chinese with English subtitles. Source: Wolfe Video.
Le Jupon Rouge (90 min.) 1987. Shifting attractions among three
women of different ages are played out in this lesbian drama.
Video and DVD Resources
359

Jealousy and intrigue place this film alongside other European
lesbian favorites such as November Moon and Another Way. French
with English subtitles. Source: Strand Releasing.
Nico and Dani (105 min.) 2001. Nico visits his best friend, Dani,
in Barcelona during summer vacation. They engage in homosex-
ual play. Dani comes to realize that he is sexually attracted to
Nico, but for Nico, it is just play. Dani begins to associate with
other homosexuals, which places Nico in the awkward position
of seeing his friend head on a different life path. The film is well
done and told without condemnation. Spanish with English sub-
titles. Source: general; Wolfe Video; tlavideo.
Salut Victor (83 min.) 1989. Salut Victor breaks ground with its
portrait of romance between two older gay men. Phillipe, a
straight-laced loner, checks into a stately nursing home to die.
There he meets Victor, the resident rebel who is openly gay.
Phillipe is inspired to share his secrets and falls in love with Vic-
tor. French with English subtitles. Source: Strand Releasing.
Show Me Love (89 min.) 1999. Sweden’s 1999 entry for the Acad-
emy Award for best foreign-language film, Show Me Love is a sen-
sitive and funny coming-of-age drama about two teenage girls
living in a small town called Amal. Elin is the school debutante,
popular and cool. Agnes is an outcast. She accidentally goes to the
wrong party, where she is challenged to kiss Elin. The kiss trans-
forms them both, and they fall in love. Swedish with English sub-
titles. Source: Strand Releasing; Wolfe Video.
Steam (96 min.) 2000. Francesco arrives in Turkey to oversee the
disposition of an estate left to him by his recently deceased aunt.
The property is a hamam, a traditional Turkish steam bath. Letters
and friends’ accounts help Francesco learn how remarkable and
passionate his aunt was. The beautiful son of the hamam’s custo-
dian, Mehmet, introduces Francesco to the sultry world of the
Turkish baths and men’s erotic love for each other. Francesco de-
cides to stay in Istanbul and restore the hamam. Turkish with
English subtitles. Source: general; Strand Releasing; tlavideo.
Via Appia (90 min.) 1992. Frank, a former Lufthansa steward,
goes to Rio to look for Mario, a young man with whom he had a
one-night stand. Before he left, Mario scrawled on the bathroom
360
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

mirror, “Welcome to the AIDS club.” It seems that whenever
Frank arrives at a location, he is told that Mario has just left. Via
Appia is the nickname given to the district in Rio where male
prostitutes hang out. German, Portuguese, and English with En-
glish subtitles. Source: Strand Releasing; Wolfe Video.
Wedding Banquet (111 min.) 1993. Agay Taiwanese yuppie living in
New York with his American lover tries to end his parents’ endless
matchmaking by announcing he is engaged to a woman—actually,
a tenant in one of his buildings who is an illegal Chinese alien in
need of a green card. Within days the parents fly to meet the bride
and arrange a traditional wedding. The gay couple strips the apart-
ment of all things gay and tries to pull off the charade. Hilarious
with many twists and turns. Wedding Banquet is an interesting ex-
amination of Chinese and American cultures and their views on ho-
mosexuality. English and Chinese. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Westler: East of the Wall (94 min.) 1986. Felix is a West Berliner
who falls in love with Thomas, an East Berliner. As Felix journeys
back and forth to East Berlin, he comes under increasing suspi-
cion. Their love grows stronger despite the distance between
them, and they plan for Thomas’s escape to West Berlin. This film
was awarded best feature film at the San Francisco International
Lesbian and Gay Film Festival. German with English subtitles.
Source: Strand Releasing.
Wild Reeds (110 min.) 1994. This is a poignant coming-of-age
story of four young teenagers in a nation torn apart by war.
Franscois finds himself attracted more to his male classmate Serge
than to his platonic girlfriend Maite. Henri, an older boy, is drawn
into the circle of friends, complicating the relationships. There are
sexual and political conflicts that mark their passage into adult-
hood. French with English subtitles. Source: Wolfe Video.
History and Biography
Before Night Falls (133 min.) 2000. The late Cuban poet Reinaldo
Arenas fought for personal expression by defying censorship and
persecution. A largely international cast, including Johnny Depp,
Sean Penn, Cunningham O’Keefe, Javier Bardem, and Olivier
Martinez tells his story. This was considered one of the best for-
eign films of the year. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Video and DVD Resources
361

Bent (104 min.) 1997. Based on Martin Sherman’s play, the film
reenacts the forgotten persecution of homosexuals during the
Nazi reign of terror. The arrest and incarceration of a gay male
couple bring the audience face-to-face with the atrocities of the
concentration camps. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Brandon Teena Story (85 min.) 1998. This documentary uses in-
terviews and still shots to recreate the story of Brandon Teena, a
fresh-scrubbed young man who was biologically a woman. Only
twenty years old, Brandon dated woman and dressed and acted
as a man. When uncovered as a woman by former friends, he was
beaten, raped, and later killed. Much of the material in this film
was the basis for the fictional film Boys Don’t Cry. Source: Wolfe
Video.
Breaking the Surface (95 min.) 1996. This documentary profiling
the life of Greg Louganis, Olympic gold medalist in diving,
chronicles his overbearing father; his achievements in diving; his
abusive relationship with his lover Tom Barrett, who later dies
from AIDS; and Louganis’s own HIV status. This is a heroic story
of a man overcoming personal demons and personal turmoil
while being a public figure. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Celluloid Closet (102 min.) 1995. This documentary, narrated by
Lily Tomlin, presents a dazzling 100-year history of lesbians and
gay men in the movies. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Coming Out under Fire (71 min.) 1994. This documentary profil-
ing the experiences of nine gay and lesbian veterans combines de-
classified documents and rare archival footage with interviews
and photographs. It is moving to hear first-person accounts of
men and women who fought for their country, only to later be
persecuted and expelled from the military for being homosexual.
Source: Wolfe Video.
Dear Jesse (82 min.) 1997. Filmmaker Tim Kirkman returns home
to North Carolina to rediscover his roots. He turns his camera on
the pervasive homophobia personified in Jesse Helms. Kirkman
interviews openly gay elected officials, a civil rights leader, writ-
ers, and others on their opinions about Helms. Kirkman explores
how he and Helms had similar upbringings, yet hold such differ-
ent views concerning gay men. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
362
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Execution of Justice (103 min.) 1999. Based on Emily Mann’s play,
Execution of Justice dramatizes the people and events leading to
the assassinations of San Francisco mayor George Moscone and
City Supervisor Harvey Milk. Tim Daly plays killer Dan White.
The light sentence received by White triggered the worst riots in
San Francisco’s history. Source: Wolfe Video.
Extramuros (120 min.) 1985. During the Spanish Inquisition Sister
Angela, along with her lover, Sister Ana, decides to fake stigmata
to help save her convent from ruin. The scam brings unexpected
notoriety as well as enemies who want to destroy the women’s re-
lationship. The film is strange, beautiful, and serious. The strug-
gle for political power is contrasted with the smoldering passion
between the sisters. Spanish with English subtitles. Source: Wolfe
Video.
Gods and Monsters (105 min.) 1998. This is a fictional account of
the last few weeks in the life of Hollywood’s only openly gay di-
rector in the 1930s—James Whale (Frankenstein, Bride of Franken-
stein, Showboat). Openly gay British actor Sir Ian McKellen por-
trays the confusion experienced by Whale, who had a brain
illness. A gardener (Brendan Fraser) is a character used to dra-
matize Whale’s life and his conflicts over being openly gay. This
excellently written and acted film was nominated for numerous
Oscars. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
The Life and Times of Harvey Milk (50 min.) 1984. Produced and
written by Robert Epstein and Richard Schmiechen, the film uses
gay politics in San Francisco during the 1970s and 1980s as a
backdrop to recount the events surrounding the assassination of
City Supervisor Harvey Milk. Source: Telling Pictures.
Living with Pride: Ruth Ellis at 100 (60 min.) 1999. Ruth Ellis, at
100 years old, is the oldest “out” African American lesbian. This
documentary includes rare film footage and interviews of this in-
spiring woman. Source: Wolfe Video.
The Man Who Drove with Mandela (98 min.) 1998. Cecil Williams
was a white gay man who fought against South Africa’s
apartheid and homophobia from the 1940s to the 1960s. The film
documents the economic disparity created by racism and the de-
velopment of apartheid after World War II. The most dramatic
Video and DVD Resources
363

moment in the film is when Williams helps Nelson Mandela sneak
back into South Africa by having Mandela pose as his chauffeur. It
is through Williams’s work and that of many others that South
Africa became the first country in the world to give constitutional
equality to gay men and lesbians. Source: Wolfe Video.
Out of the Past (70 min.) 1998. This powerful and instructional
film tells the history-making story of a high school student in Salt
Lake City who formed a gay-straight alliance in her public school.
Source: Wolfe Video.
Paragraph 175 (81 min.) 2001. A mix of interview, rare film
footage, and still photographs, Paragraph 175 tells the story of the
Nazi persecution of homosexuals. The survivors relate bitter sto-
ries infused with a powerful will to endure. The film won the au-
dience award for best documentary at the San Francisco Lesbian
and Gay Film Festival. In English, German, and French with En-
glish subtitles. Source: Wolfe Video.
Paris Was a Woman (75 min.) 1995. This film re-creates the excit-
ing and magical time when women writers, artists, and photog-
raphers flocked to the Left Bank of Paris in the early decades of
the twentieth century. Source: Wolfe Video.
The Real Ellen Story (52 min.) 2002. The inner workings of the sit-
com industry are revealed as we watch the development and sub-
sequent controversy over Ellen coming out on national TV in the
“Puppy Episode.” Footage of Ellen, Oprah, Anne Heche, Bill
Clinton, and others provides a fascinating picture of what it
meant to be out in the 1990s. Source: Wolfe Video.
Serving in Silence: The Margarethe Cammermeyer Story (91 min.)
1995. Glenn Close stars as Margarethe Cammermeyer, a deco-
rated army colonel who challenged the U.S. military’s antigay
policy (Judy Davis stars as her lover). Based on a true story, the
film won Emmy Awards for best actress, best supporting actress,
and best screenplay. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Silent Pioneers (30 min.) 1984. Produced by Patricia Ginger Sny-
der, this work shows elderly gays and lesbians talking about their
struggles. Source: Filmsmaker Library, 133 East 58th Street, New
York, NY 10022, (212) 355-6545.
364
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Stolen Moments (92 min.) 1998. Lesbian history from Sappho’s
poems in ancient Greece, to Gertrude Stein’s Parisian salon, to
Stonewall and beyond, is brought to life in this acclaimed film.
Source: Wolfe Video.
Stonewall (99 min.) 1995. This is a fictional retelling of the events
leading up to the 1969 Stonewall Riots, often marked as the event
launching the modern gay liberation movement. The story fol-
lows Matty Dean, a self-made hustler who becomes involved
with gay activists in New York. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Tongues Untied (64 min.) 1991. Through the use of poetry, per-
sonal testimony, rap, and performance, Tongues Untied describes
the homophobia and racism that confront black gay men. Many
of the stories are difficult to watch, such as black men being re-
fused entry into gay white bars or a gay black man being left on
the street after a gay bashing. The film explores the rich diversity
of the gay black male experience—from smoky bars, to protest
marches, to the language of the “snap diva” and Vogue dancer.
The film became a source of controversy when many public tele-
vision stations refused to air it during their POV programs and it
was excerpted by Republican presidential candidate Patrick
Buchanan as part of his muckraking campaign. Source: Strand Re-
leasing; Wolfe Video.
Twilight of the Golds (92 min.) 1997. An all-star cast appears in
this riveting science fiction story of how a family deals with a
husband who wants to abort a fetus that genetics has determined
will be gay. Brendan Fraser plays the gay brother-in-law who
fights for the life of the unborn child and who must confront the
long simmering antigay feelings of his own parents. Source: gen-
eral; Wolfe Video.
Wilde (116 min.) 1997. Stephen Fry plays Oscar Wilde from his
days as a celebrated London socialite to his banishment to prison
for being openly gay. This is one of the better Oscar Wilde biog-
raphies and film treatments. Source: general; Wolfe Video;
tlavideo.
Video and DVD Resources
365

Lesbian Experience
Better Than Chocolate (101 min.) 1999. Maggie, played by Karyn
Dwyer, is a college dropout who is living with her lover. Maggie
has not told her flighty mother that she is a lesbian. Her mother,
Lila, who is recently divorced, comes along with her son to live
with Maggie. Maggie tries to pass off her girlfriend as a room-
mate. At the same time, Lila comes to discover sex toys. Very
funny, but also educational. Source: general.
Bound (107 min.) 1996. This romantic thriller of two girls in love
who attempt to foil the Mob was hailed as one of the best films of
the year by Roger Ebert. Source: Wolfe Video.
Boys on the Side (117 min.) 1994. Whoppie Goldberg plays Jane, an
unemployed lesbian singer who befriends Robin (Mary-Louise
Parker) for a road trip to California. They pick up addle-brained
Holly (Drew Barrymore), who just accidentally killed her drug-
crazed abusive beau with a baseball bat to the head. The threesome
are on the run from the cops and emotionally bond as a family. They
also face two huge secrets—one is pregnant and another of the
women has AIDS. Strong performances and cool soundtrack make
up for a rather trite movie premise. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Chutney Popcorn (92 min.) 2000. Reena and Lisa are two young
women in love. But when Reena agrees to be a surrogate mother
for her childless sister, a rift develops between Reena’s Indian fam-
ily and her lesbian life. Chutney Popcorn is a delightful and heart-
felt comedy illustrating the struggles between immigrant parents
and their Americanized children. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Claire of the Moon (102 min.) 1992. Claire, a famous satirist, at-
tends a writer’s conference in the Pacific Northwest. She is het-
erosexual and extremely promiscuous. There, she shares a cabin
with Dr. Noel Benedict, a solemn sex therapist. They engage in
extended philosophical discussions that slow the pace of the
movie. Claire finds the discussions challenging and is disturbed
to find that she is falling for Noel. An intricate courting “dance”
takes place between the women as they address their fears of
same-sex intimacy. Source: general, Wolfe Video.
Dyke Drama (89 min.) 1993. Four lesbian short stories investigate
366
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

couples, exploration, and cruising. IFE, MAYA, Things We Said To-
day, and A Certain Grace originated from the esteemed San Fran-
cisco Lesbian and Gay Film Festival. Source: Wolfe Video.
Family of Women (36 min.) 1995. This work explores, through in-
terview and video footage, three women-only communities. The
women are asked why they have chosen to separate from main-
stream society to live in an exclusively female society. Source:
Wolfe Video.
Framing Lesbian Fashion (90 min.) 1992. Changes in lesbian iden-
tity are reflected in dress codes—butch/femme, corporate drag,
leather, androgyny, lipstick, flannel, queer fluorescence, and
more. This documentary uses archival photographs, interviews,
and contemporary “shocking” footage of lesbian sex clubs. The
film shows a butch/femme contest before 400 dykes, poet Kitty
Tsui getting a military flat top, ACT UP Crystal Mason having her
tongue pierced, and stand-up comic Mimi Freed modeling cloth-
ing required at lesbian sex clubs. Source: Wolfe Video.
Fresh Kill (80 min.) 1987. Two young lesbian parents get caught
up in a global crisis of nuclear refuse, household pets glowing
ominously, the sky snowing soap flakes, and people speaking in
tongues. A multinational corporation is implicated, and the cou-
ple’s infant daughter mysteriously vanishes. After uncovering
censored information, our lesbian parents team up with a group
of young New Yorkers to strike back. Source: Strand Releasing.
Go Fish (83 min.) 1994. Filmed in black and white, this lesbian ex-
perimental film traces the changes in an older lesbian who
“punks” out for her new younger girlfriend. The film is a classic
lesbian movie, with love, comedy, gossip, dating, and matchmak-
ing. Source: Wolfe Video.
If These Walls Could Talk 2 (90 min.) 1996. Presented as a HBO
drama, this film contains three short films about and for lesbians.
Source: general; Wolfe Video; tlavideo.
It’s in the Water (100 min.) 1996. In the small southern town of
Azalea Springs, a tipsy comment starts the rumor that the local
drinking water turns anyone who drinks it gay. An outrageous
comedy with a queer twist ensues. Source: Wolfe Video; tlavideo.
Video and DVD Resources
367

Johnny Greyeyes (76 min.) 2001. This is a powerful story of a Na-
tive American woman struggling to maintain strength, love, and
spirit while confined to prison for the shooting death of her fa-
ther. She falls in love with her cellmate and struggles with main-
taining that relationship in light of her impending release. The
film was nominated for best picture at the 2000 American Indian
Motion Picture Awards. Source: Wolfe Video; tlavideo.
Lavender Limelight (60 min.) 1997. America’s most successful les-
bian movie directors discuss their sexual identities, working in
Hollywood, and more. The conversations are intimate, with clips
of their work. Source: Wolfe Video.
Monkey’s Mask (93 min.) 2000. A bisexual married woman is
pulled into a torrid love affair with a women private investigator
searching for the murderer of a young woman. Staring Kelly
McGillis (The Accused, Witness), Monkey’s Mask is a smoldering story
of two lovers whose lives are irrevocably changed. This film con-
tains frequent, steamy sexual situations. Source: Strand Releasing.
My Femme Divine (54 min.) 1999. From the creator of Framing
Lesbian Fashion, director Karen Everett explores contemporary
butch/femme lesbians, contrasted with her own explosive love
affairs. Source: Wolfe Video.
Out in Suburbia (28 min.) 1989. Eleven lesbians aged twenty-
three to sixty-seven tell about their families, friends, and loves.
Source: Wolfe Video.
Personal Best (128 min.) 1982. Mariel Hemingway stars as a
promising hurdler who falls in love with her female mentor. As
passions increase, the potential for conflict rises as both vie for a
spot on the U.S. Olympic team. This film is considered a classic
lesbian movie. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Salmonberries (94 min.) 1990. Beautifully shot in Alaska and Ger-
many, Salmonberries tells the story of two women who form an
unusual and unexpected relationship. Kotz, an androgynous
young Eskimo (k. d. lang) is attracted to Roswitha, a German ex-
patriate and town librarian. Roswitha initially rebuffs the
younger woman, but persistence gradually wins her over. Source:
Wolfe Video.
368
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Short Shorts (135 min.) 1999. This is a collection of short stories
for lesbians. Source: Wolfe Video.
The Sticky Fingers of Time (82 min.) 1997. A very 1990s nod to les-
bian chic, The Sticky Fingers of Time is an elaborate tale of passion
between two women as they travel through the hazards of non-
linear time. Tucker is a modishly sexy, 1950s pulp fiction novelist
who time-travels. She collides with present-day Drew, a writer
who has attempted suicide and is confused about what she
wants. The film constantly shifts in style from science fiction to
film noir. Source: Strand Releasing.
The Truth about Jane (91 min.) 2001. In this Lifetime movie with the
highest ratings in five years, Jane meets Taylor and falls in love. She
realizes that she is lesbian. Her classmates and family have trouble
adjusting to her “experiment.” Jane faces her mother (played by
Stockard Channing) who cannot or will not accept her daughter’s
lesbianism. That could end their relationship. Source: Wolfe Video.
Two in Twenty (330 min.) 1996. This film is a five-part episodic
soap opera following the complex lives of two lesbian house-
holds. With suspense and humor, the film tackles topics such as
child custody, AIDS, lesbian parenting, racism, monogamy, sub-
stance abuse, crushes, bisexuality, lust, coming out, sex, and ther-
apy. The film contains fictional commercials rooted in feminist
and lesbian humor. Source: Wolfe Video.
Walk on the Wild Side (114 min.) 1962. In this drama (which won
an Academy Award for best song), a man searches for his long-
lost love in 1930s New Orleans, only to find her working as a
prostitute. He fights to free her from the wicked lesbian madame
(played by Barbara Stanwyck). Source: general.
West Coast Crones (28 min.) 1990. Nine older lesbians (over sixty)
tell their stories. The film includes footage from the Gay Games
and gay and lesbian pride marches in which senior lesbians par-
ticipate. Source: Wolfe Video.
Religion
All God’s Children (25 min.) 1986. This film is a celebration of
black churches as they embrace and acknowledge the spiritual
Video and DVD Resources
369

value of their gay and lesbian members. Source: Women Vision
Library.
Eve’s Daughters (27 min.) 1996. Documentary look at the lives of
five lesbians who create a supportive religious community in the
face of antigay Christian leaders condemnations. Source:
Leonardo’s Children, Inc., 26 Newport Bridge Road, Warwick,
NY 10990, (914) 986-6888.
License to Kill (80 min.) 1997. This disturbing documentary pro-
files religious gay hatred. Director Arthur Dong interviews men
who have killed gay men. Source: Deep Focus Production, 4506
Palmero Drive, Los Angeles, CA 90065-4237, (213) 254-7072, (213)
254-7112 (fax), e-mail: adongla@aol.com, website: http://film-
mag.com/community/adong.
Maybe We’re Talking About a Different God (28 min.) 1996. A
woman pastor is barred from serving her Presbyterian church
when she is discovered to be lesbian. The film interviews congre-
gation members who were overwhelmingly in support of her
work and records the Rochester religious court hearings. The doc-
umentary is skillfully crafted and shows that homophobia in the
church may be overcome through the experiences of human love.
Source: Leonardo’s Children, Inc., 26 Newport Bridge Road, War-
wick, NY 10990, (914) 986-6888.
One Nation under God (50 min.) 1994. This funny video looks at
the religious-sponsored reparative therapy movement. Source:
Video Finder (for Public Television), 425 E. Colorado Street, Suite
B-10, Glendale, CA 91205, (800) 328-7271.
Portrait of Courage (60 min.) 2000. Produced by Courage, an apos-
tolate of the Roman Catholic Church, the video teaches homosexu-
als how to develop an interior life of chastity so that they can move
beyond the confines of their homosexual identity to a more com-
plete one in Christ. Source: Courage, c/o Church of St. John the
Baptist, 210 West 31st Street, New York, NY 10001, (212) 268-1010,
e-mail: webmaster@courageRC.net, website: CourageRC.net.
The Rhetoric of Intolerance (30 min.) 1996. Dr. Mel White was
once a ghostwriter for leaders of the religious right. He later ac-
knowledged that he was gay. In this video, he addresses intoler-
370
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

ance spread by the religious right. Source: The Justice Report, 1280
Bison, Suite B9-431, Newport Beach, CA 92660, (714) 224-9392.
Your Mom’s a Lesbian: Here’s Your Lunch, Have a Good Day
(27 min.) 1980. This is a beautiful and moving portrait of a
woman coming to embrace her lesbianism and her family’s jour-
ney of acceptance and love. A true documentary that is highly
recommended for children and families. Source: Leonardo’s Chil-
dren, Inc., 26 Newport Bridge Road, Warwick, NY 10990, (914)
986-6888.
Safe Sex
She’s Safe (55 min.) 1994. This compilation of woman-to-woman
safer-sex videos from around the world is sexually explicit and
contains Girls Will Be Boys and Cunt Dykula. Source: Wolfe Video.
Well Sexy Women (50 min.) 1993. This frank presentation of the
practices and sensuality of safer sex for lesbians was made by and
for lesbians. Six women demonstrate safer-sex techniques and
present the facts without sermonizing. Source: Wolfe Video.
Transgender
Boys Don’t Cry (114 min.) 1999. Hilary Swank won an Oscar for
best actress for her portrayal of Teena Brandon, a female-to-male
transgender youth who was brutally murdered for passing as a
male. Based on the documentary Brandon Teena Story, Boys Don’t
Cry is excellent and disturbing. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Crying Game (112 min.) 1992. Crying Game is a complex blend of
violence, love, betrayal, guilt, and redemption. It tells the story of
an IRA terrorist who befriends the girlfriend of a soldier he held
hostage. A surprising twist made this little film into one of the
highest-grossing films of the year. Source: general.
Different for Girls (97 min.) 1996. In this funny and poignant film,
Paul, a loser deliveryman in his early thirties, bumps into Kim
and takes an interest in her. He is unaware that Kim is a postop-
erative transsexual who was a schoolmate of his fifteen years ear-
lier. They form a stormy relationship that results in Kim being
outed at work. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Video and DVD Resources
371

Flawless (110 min.) 1999. Director Joel Schumacher took a real sit-
uation and turned it into a second-rate melodrama, complete
with ridiculous subplots and stereotypes. Walt (Robert De Niro)
is a retired cop living in the same building as Rusty, a flamboyant
drag queen. Walt is injured and requires speech therapy. He does
not like “sissy” men, but turns to Rusty to give him singing les-
sons. Slowly, Walt overcomes his homophobia and befriends
Rusty and his fellow drag queens. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
A Gaudi Afternoon (88 min.) 2000. An American woman, Casan-
dra (Judy Davis), working in Barcelona is approached by a glam-
orous American woman, Frankie (Marcia Harden), and offered a
large sum of money to help locate Frankie’s husband. Soon, Cas-
sandra finds herself ensnarled in a web of mistaken identities and
double-crossing families besides discovering that Frankie’s hus-
band is really a woman. Source: general, Wolfe Video.
Hedwig and the Angry Inch (95 min.) 2001. Based on the long-
running New York smash hit play, Hedwig and the Angry Inch is a
wickedly funny high-powered rock musical that tells that story of
how a German glam-rock diva traveled to the United States to
find love and stardom only to find himself abandoned in a trailer
park. Source: Wolfe Video; tlavideo.
Wigstock (82 min.) 1995. This film documents the tenth anniver-
sary of New York’s most notorious underground event. Wigstock
is a spoof of Woodstock. Source: general; Wolfe Video.
Youth
Gay Youth (40 min.) 1993. Here are poignant stories of two ado-
lescents: one who committed suicide, the other who is openly gay
in high school. The video (with a classroom guide) shows that in-
formation, acceptance, and support can make a significant differ-
ence in the lives of young people. Source: Wolfe Video.
Growing Up Gay and Lesbian (57 min.) 1993. This is a wonderful
presentation by Brian McNaught about what it is like to grow up
gay in a heterosexist society. Source: TRB Production.
Hate, Homophobia, and Schools (60 min.) 1995. Sexual Orienta-
tion: Reading between the Labels (30 min.) 1993. These films con-
372
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

tain discussions between gay and antihomosexual youths and
adults about what it is like to grow up gay in this society. Unfor-
tunately, both films are slow paced and uninvolving. Source:
NEWIST/CESA 7, IS 1040, University of Wisconsin at Green Bay,
Green Bay, WI 54311, (920) 465-2599, (800) 633-7445, e-mail:
newist@uwgb.edu, website: http://www.uwgb.edu/~newist.
It’s Elementary: Talking about Gay Issues in School (78 min. or
shorter 37 min. version) 1997. This feature-length documentary
film shot in schools across the United States makes a compelling
case for including gay issues in multicultural education. Source:
Women’s Educational Media; Women Vision Library.
Live to Tell (30 min.) 1995. This video documents the first lesbian
and gay prom in America. Source: Wolfe Video.
Planet Out Shorts (92 min.) 2001. This collection of award-
winning short films sponsored by Planet Out contains Girls Shorts
and Boys Shorts. Source: Wolfe Video.
Speaking for Ourselves: Portraits of Gay and Lesbian Youth (27
min.) 1994. The lives of five lesbian and gay youths are explored.
Source: Intermedia.
What If I’m Gay? (55 min.) 1987. This CBS Schoolbreak Special
dramatizes the problems faced by youths who come out as gay.
Source: Coronet/Phoenix Film and Video, 2349 Chaffee Drive, St.
Louis, MO 63146, (800) 777-8100.
Video and DVD Resources
373


Glossary
375
gay Gay, rather than homosexual, is the preferred term for reference to a
same-gender sexual orientation and is comparable to the distinction
between black or African American and Negro. Gay is preferred to
homosexual because homosexual implicitly emphasizes the sexual and
diminishes the other aspects of gender orientation. Stylistically, gay is
often paired with straight, meaning “heterosexual.” Similarly, homosex-
ual is paired with heterosexual. The history of the word gay is confused.
It is thought that gay was used in eighteenth-century England to connote
the conduct of a playboy. Later, in the nineteenth century, gay, when
applied to women, came to mean “of loose morals; a prostitute.” By the
early twentieth century in the United States, the use of gay to refer to
male homosexuals was becoming more prevalent, and this definition
was first printed in 1933 in Noel Ersines’s Dictionary of Underground Slang
as “geycat” (Dynes 1985, 58).
gay agenda
Antigay people often claim that lesbians and gays are seek-
ing special rights. But lesbians and gays are seeking protections for them-
selves as workers, homeowners, and citizens—rights that other
Americans have. These are not special rights but rather equal rights.
Unfortunately, the term “gay agenda” has been used to mislead the pub-
lic into believing that lesbians and gays are seeking legal rights greater
than those possessed by heterosexuals, greater than those available
through affirmative action, or both. None of the national gay rights
organizations, community services centers, college resource centers, or
academic writers has ever made claims for special rights.
heterosexism and homophobia
Heterosexism is the assumption, both
explicit and implicit, that everyone is heterosexual. It is “the continual
promotion by major social institutions of heterosexuality and the simul-
taneous subordination” of lesbians, gay men, and bisexuals (Neisen 1990,
36). It is also the conscious or unconscious bias that heterosexuals are

more important than gay people, or that gay people do not exist, or both.
For example, offering medical and other benefits to the spouses of mar-
ried employees denies the fact that gay employees have partners.
Homophobia is a strong negative emotional attitude toward gay people.
It manifests itself in four ways: overt homophobia, institutional homo-
phobia, societal homophobia, and internalized homophobia.
homosexual panic defense
The homosexual panic defense is a legal
strategy used by perpetrators of violence against gays in which they
claim to have panicked and reacted with violence toward a gay person
who “came onto them” (also known as a “gay advance”). Homosexual
panic was considered a psychological disorder by the APA in versions of
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual before the fourth revised edition
based on the Freudian theory that persons with latent homosexual ten-
dencies would react with extreme and uncontrollable violence when
propositioned by a homosexual (Chuang and Addington 1988). No court
has ever acquitted a defendant based solely on the homosexual panic
defense. However, the defense has been instrumental in obtaining
reduced sentences in murder cases involving gay victims. Recently,
judges have denied defendants the use of the homosexual panic defense,
as demonstrated in the Matthew Shepard murder.
homosexuality
Homosexuality is a primary sexual attraction to mem-
bers of the same gender. For men, the preferred terms are gay man and
gay male. For women, the preferred terms are gay woman, gay female,
and lesbian. It is acceptable to use gay to mean both men and women in
the context of the gay community, but the term should not be overused.
Instead, when referring to women as well as men, writers should use
both lesbian and gay and the gay community. Also, it is important not to
overlook bisexual, transgender, transsexual, or intersex people. Using
the all-encompassing term gay community does not provide recognition
of their important issues.
intersexed
Intersex people have partially or fully developed genitalia,
gonads, or chromosomes that are not distinctly male or female but are
some combination of both. The archaic term hermaphrodite is inaccurate
because it implies that an intersexed person has genitalia that is equally
male and female. Intersex people are born between (inter) the sexes.
There are roughly eight classifications and forty subclassifications of
intersexuality. It is estimated that from 1 to 4 percent of the population
have a hermaphroditic condition, which means there are approximately
2.8–12 million intersex people in the United States alone (Fausto-Sterling
1993).
376
Glossary

lesbian
Lesbian is the term for a female with a same-gender orienta-
tion. The regular and conscious use of lesbian, as in “lesbians and gay
men,” affirms the equality and independence of women within the gay
community. Reference to gay people and the gay community as inclusive
of lesbians and gay men is acceptable if not used exclusively. Many les-
bians prefer the term gay woman or dyke. When in doubt, it is best to ask
the woman directly what label, if any, she wants to be called.
National Coming-Out Day
October 11 was designated by the Human
Rights Campaign as National Coming-Out Day. Begun in 1988, this day
has grown into thousands of events held nationally to encourage people
to come out to family, friends, neighbors, and coworkers about being les-
bian, gay male, bisexual, transgender, transsexual, or intersex. It has been
found that visibility, that is, being seen and known to be homosexual, is
the most effective way to change societal attitudes toward and increase
the acceptance of homosexuality.
outing
Outing is when public disclosure is made to reveal the sexual ori-
entation of a closeted gay person. Outing is very controversial both in and
out of the lesbian and gay community. Many lesbians and gay men believe
that outing is never acceptable. Others believe that outing public figures is
OK and, in fact, necessary to break the wall of silence that surrounds homo-
sexuals and their relationships. By doing so, the world becomes aware of
how many lesbians, gays, and bisexuals there are. Some believe that outing
should only be used against public figures who are closeted homosexuals
whose job is to persecute gays and lesbians (such as in the military). Others
believe that everyone who is homosexual needs to be outed so as to destroy
the last vestiges of secrets that lead to discrimination.
public accommodations
Public accommodations, which involve ser-
vices, items, or benefits offered to the public, commonly include hotels
and motels, restaurants, stores, and other businesses or organizations
catering to the public. Local, state, and federal laws regulate public busi-
nesses under public accommodation statutes. However, the legal defini-
tion of public accommodation varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. A
business subject to ordinances against discrimination in one jurisdiction
may be exempt in other jurisdictions.
What constitutes a “private” club is an area of continuing litigation
in our society. For example, the Boy Scouts has been sued for excluding
lesbian and gay members. Some courts have ruled that the Boy Scouts
has the right to discriminate, whereas other courts have ruled that the
organization is a public entity and must accommodate lesbian and gay
members. Ultimately, the Supreme Court decided that the Boy Scouts’
Glossary
377

right to determine policy overruled the applicability of government rules
concerning antidiscrimination.
queer
Queer was probably the most common mid-twentieth-century
U.S. abusive slang term for homosexual. The word is most likely rooted
in the use of the word for counterfeit money and coins, as in “queer as a
three-dollar bill.” Queer implied not being authentic. When applied to
male homosexuals, queer meant that the man was not an authentic male
and not normal. Queer was rarely applied to women.
In the early 1990s, the word began to be appropriated by the lesbian
and gay community. Queer Nation was an activist anarchist group that
staged in-your-face confrontations with political, business, and educa-
tional leaders. Similar to ACT UP, which brought media attention to the
problem of AIDS, Queer Nation brought attention to the problems of
homophobia and heterosexism.
Queer became mainstreamed into academic parlance. Instead of
writing the phrase lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, transsexual, and
intersex people, queer became a shorthand way of referring to all people
who are not heterosexual. Many college and academic conferences on
lesbian and gay issues became queer conferences. However, the lesbian
and gay community has not wholeheartedly embraced the term. For
many, the term is still negative in much the same way the word faggot is.
The process of appropriating epithets by stigmatized groups is well
documented. For example, the word black was an epithet that Negroes
and colored people once detested. The Black Panthers appropriated the
term in the 1960s. Now, black no longer has the sting it once had and can
be used neutrally to refer to African Americans. This same process may
happen with queer, but at this time it is not universally accepted by the
lesbian and gay community and should not be used by heterosexuals in
reference to homosexuals.
safe sex
Safe sex involves specific sexual practices that reduce the
transmission of sexually transmitted diseases (STD). With the advent of
AIDS, health professionals developed safe-sex guidelines to reduce the
risk of people contracting HIV. Safe-sex campaigns have proven effec-
tive. The rate of infection for gay men has dropped significantly. “Gay
males have changed their behavior on an unprecedented scale”
(Gonsiorek and Shernoff 1991, 237).
sexual preference
Sexual preference should not be used as a synonym
for sexual orientation. Sexual preference suggests that sexual orientation
is a choice. No person would choose to become a stigmatized outcast of
society. A better term is sexual orientation.
378
Glossary

transgender
A transgender person is one whose outward gender pre-
sentation (being feminine or masculine) does not conform to his or her
biological sex (being female or male). Transgender people may self-
identify as butch, femme, drag king, drag queen, intersex person, trans-
vestite, transgenderist, androgyne, or transsexual.
transvestite
A transvestite is a person who chooses to wear clothing
that society deems appropriate for the opposite gender. German sexolo-
gist Magnus Hirschfeld introduced the term in 1910. Transvestitism is
prevalent among both heterosexuals and homosexuals. When transves-
tites dress in the clothing of the opposite sex, they are attempting to
“pass” as the opposite sex. Homosexual transvestites are popularly
known as drag queens or drag kings. Mixing clothing and hairstyles of
both genders at one time is known as camp.
References
Chuang, H. T., and D. Addington. 1988. “Homosexual Panic: A Review
of Its Concept.” Canadian Journal of Psychiatry 33(7) (October): 613–617.
Dynes, W. 1985. “Homolexis: A Historical and Cultural Lexicon of
Homosexuality.” Gai Saber Monographs 4. New York: Scholarship
Committee of the Gay Academic Union.
Fausto-Sterling, A. 1993. “How Many Sexes Are There? Intersexuality Is
a Biological Condition, Not a Disease, and Medical Policy toward It
Should Be Reevaluated.” New York Times, March 12, A15(N), A29(L).
Gonsiorek, J. C., and M. Shernoff. 1991. “AIDS Prevention and Public
Policy: The Experience of Gay Males.” In J. C. Gonsiorek and J. D.
Weinrich, eds., Homosexuality: Research Implications for Public Policy.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage, pp. 230–243.
Neisen, J. 1990. “Heterosexism or Homophobia?” Out/Look 3(2) (Fall): 36.
Glossary
379


Index
381
3AAP. See American Academy of
Pediatrics
ABC. See American Baptists
Concerned for Sexual
Minorities
About Time: Exploring the Gay Past
(Duberman), 138
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP)
Coparent or Second-Parent
Adoption by Same-Sex
Parents Policy Statement, 178
(document)
ACLU. See American Civil
Liberties Union
ACLU v. Reno I, 63
ACLU v. Reno II, 63
Acquired immune deficiency
syndrome (AIDS), 15, 19–20,
37–38, 51, 148, 149, 164
AIDS Coalition to Unleash
Power (ACT UP), 20, 148,
149, 164
AIDS Coalition to Unleash
Power (ACT UP/New York),
249–250
as term, 19, 168–169
prevention programs, 37–38
research and education, 145
ACT UP. See AIDS Coalition to
Unleash Power
ADA. See Americans with
Disabilities Act
Adoption. See Gay adoption
The Advocate, 164
AFA. See American Family
Association
Affirmation: Gay and Lesbian
Mormons, 258–259
Affirmation United Methodist,
259–260
Affirmative action, 36–37, 208
and domestic partnership
programs, 52
Africa
AIDS prevention programs in,
38
African Americans
and civil rights movement, 28,
29
AFT. See American Federation of
Teachers
AIDS. See Acquired immune
deficiency syndrome
AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power
(ACT UP), 20, 148, 149, 164
AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power
(ACT UP/New York),
249–250
AIDS Legal Services (California),
132
AIDS Treatment News, 227–228
ALA. See American Library
Association
Alaska, 48
Alexander, Paul, 60
Alice B. Toklas Memorial
Democratic Club, 152
Alison D. v. Virginia M.
case summary, 197–198
Allston-Brighton Greenlight
Safehouse Network, 
167

Altman v. Minnesota Department of
Corrections
case summary, 204
Amendment 2 (Colorado state
constitution), 21, 22–24,
38–39, 157, 158, 177–178
(document)
American Academy of Pediatrics
(AAP)
youth suicide, position on,
189–190 (document)
American Artists, Inc., 134
American Association of
Pediatrics, 42, 51
American Baptists Concerned for
Sexual Minorities (ABC), 266
American Civil Liberties Union
(ACLU), 47, 65, 153, 235–236
and Internet, and free speech
and association, right of, 63
National Prisons Project, 167
American Family Association
(AFA), 45, 244, 260–261
American Federation of Teachers
(AFT), 269
American Library Association
(ALA), 142
American Psychiatric Association
(APA), 147
Council on Research and
Development, Reference
Committee, and Assembly,
16
homosexuality, 1973 decision
on, 182–183 (document)
homosexuality, 1975 decision
on, 183–184 (document)
and homosexuality, as mental
illness, 12, 16, 26
and homosexuality, causes of,
34
and reparative therapy, 57, 58
reparative therapy, position on,
179 (document)
See also Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders
American Psychological
Association, 41
and Cameron, Paul
Drummond, 136–137
American Sociological
Association, 137
Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA), 20, 145, 208
America’s Date with Destiny
(Robertson), 160
Amnesty International
Crimes of hate, conspiracy of
silence: Torture and ill-
treatment based on sexual
identity, 181–182 (document)
Ancafora v. Board of Education
case summary, 192
Anita Bryant Theater, 135
Another Country (J. Baldwin), 131
Anthony, Susan B., 129–130
Antidiscrimination statutes,
15–25, 38–40
public attitude about, 54–55
and religious right, 47
See also Antisodomy statutes;
Gay rights statutes; individual
statutes
Antigay harassment, 59
and U.S. military, gays in,
53–54
See also Police harassment;
Sexual harassment
Antigay research
and Cameron, Paul
Drummond, 136–137
Antigay slogans
and religious right, 26
Antigay stereotypes, 24, 29, 42–43
and religious right, 26
and same-sex parents, 40–42
Antigay violence, 48–49. See also
Hate crimes
Antisodomy statutes, 19, 21, 22,
60–62. See also Anti-
discrimination statutes; Gay
rights statutes; Sodomy
382
Index

APA. See American Psychiatric
Association
Apaches, 70
Apple Computer, Inc., 132
Arkansas, 44
Association of Welcoming and
Affirming Baptists (AWAB),
261
Automatic Computing Engine,
166
AWAB. See Association of
Welcoming and Affirming
Baptists
Bachelors Anonymous. See
International Bachelors
Fraternal Order for Peace
and Social Dignity
Bachelors for Wallace, 144
Baehr v. Lewin
case summary, 198–199
Baker v. State of Vermont
case summary, 203–204
Baker v. Wade, 137
Baldwin, James, 130–131
Baldwin, Tammy, 131
Balliol College, 164
Bantam Books Redstockings, 133
Baptist Bible College, 139
Barbados Junior Chess
Champion, 135
Barbados Senior Chess
Champion, 135
Barman, Fred, 156
Batten, Mabel, 142
Battered Wives (Martin), 152
Bayless, Jeffrey, 23
Benkert, Karoly Maria (pseud.
K. M. Kertbeny), 2
Berdache (Zuni two-spirit), 144,
170
Berkeley, 45
Berrill v. Houde
case summary, 204–206
Beyond Reason (Robertson), 
160
Bias crimes, 49. See also Hate
crimes
Billings, Robert, 26
BiNet USA, 250
Birch, Elizabeth M., 132
Birk, L., 57
Biron, Chartres, 143
Bisexuals, 15
and hate crimes, 48–49
“Black Is Beautiful,” 8–9
Blackmail
and U.S. military, gays in, 53
Blackstripe, 273
Blue discharges, 4. See also U.S.
military, gays in
Board of Regents of the University of
Wisconsin System v.
Southworth
case summary, 207
Bookstores
and culture war, 26
“Booty Call,” 37
Boston Lesbian/Gay Political
Alliance, 167
Boston St. Patrick’s Day Parade,
24–25
Bottoms v. Bottoms
case summary, 199
Bowers v. Hardwick, 19, 61–62
case summary, 195–196
Boy love (paiderasteia), 163
Boy Scouts of America, 25
Boy Scouts of America
Resolution, 186 (document)
Boy Scouts of America v. Dale, 25
case summary, 206–207
Bragdon v. Abbot
case summary, 202
Braschi v. Stahl Associates Co., 48
case summary, 197
Bratterud, Hans, 21
Briggs effort, 17, 18
Briggs, John, 17
Brighton College, 137
British Code and Cipher School,
166
Index
383

Brooklyn College, 164
Brown, Michael, 13
Brown, Rita Mae, 132–134, 156
Brown v. Board of Education of
Topeka, Kansas, 28
Brownshirts, 2, 3
Bryant, Anita, 17, 18, 129, 134–135
Buchanan, Patrick
and AIDS, 19–20
Buchmeyer, Jerry, 137
Buckmire, Ron, 135
Bunch, Charlotte, 135–136
Burnside, John, 144
Bush, George H. W., 153
Bush, George W., 46
Bussee, Michael, 56
California, 7, 44, 63
Department of Labor Standards
Enforcement, 39–40
Proposition 6, 17
Cameron, Paul Drummond, 41,
129, 136–137
Camp Fire Girls, 25
Campaign to End Homophobia,
228–229
Canada, 21
Canadian Lesbian and Gay
Archives, 239
Canadian Stonewall, 21
Canajoharie Academy (New
York), 130
Cancer Journals (Lorde), 150
Capitol Broadcasting Company,
145
Carpenter, Edward, 137–138
Carter, K., 58
Case Western Reserve University,
136
Cathedral of Hope, 261
Catholic Church
and AIDS, 20
“Congregation for the Doctrine
of the Faith—On the Pastoral
Care of Homosexual Persons:
Letter to the Bishops of the
Catholic Church,” 187
(document)
CBN. See Christian Broadcast
Network
CDA. See Communications
Decency Amendment
CDC National AIDS Hotline, 
228
Celibacy, 55
Center for Lesbian and Gay
Studies (City University of
New York), 138
Central Emergency Facility (San
Francisco), 170
CFV. See Colorado for Family
Values
Champions for God (Falwell), 139
A Change of World (Rich), 159
The Changer and the Changed
(album), 157
Chapter 12, Laws of 1981
(Wisconsin), 175–176
(document)
Chemical castration, 166
Cheney, Dick, 164
Chicago Society for Human
Rights, 3
Chicago White Sox, 157–158
Child custody, and gay and
lesbian parents, 24, 33, 40–42,
42–43
Child Online Protection Act
(COPA), 209–210
Child sexual abuse
and antigay stereotypes, 41–42
Childers v. Dallas Police
Department, 18
Children’s Internet Protection
Act, 63
China
and AIDS prevention
programs, 38
A Choice, Not An Echo (Schlafly),
162
Christian Broadcast Network
(CBN), 18, 160
384
Index

Christian Broadcast Network
(CBN) University, 18, 160
Christian Coalition, 27, 160, 250
formation of, 20
Christian conservatives
and AIDS prevention
programs, 37
and civil rights movement, 
28
and same-sex marriage, 28–29
See also Christian
fundamentalists; Religious
conservatives; Religious right
Christian fundamentalists
and equal rights, 29
and reparative therapy, 55–58
See also Christian conservatives;
Religious conservatives;
Religious right
Christianity, 27
“Christopher Street Riots,” 13
Church of God, 158
CIA, 47
The Circle of Loving
Companions, 144
City College (New York), 150, 
159
City Lights Award, 148
City University of New York, 138
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 28, 46
Civil rights movement, 1, 27–28,
29
Civil Service Reform Act, 46, 209
Civil unions, 21, 22, 29, 33, 50,
209. See also Domestic
partnership programs;
Marriage; Same-sex marriage
Civil War, 130
Clark, Colin, 56
Clayton, Frances, 150
Cleveland, Grover, 171
Clinton, William, 21, 46, 141
and U.S. military, gays in,
52–53
Cohen, William S., 54
Colorado College, 157
Colorado for Family Values
(CFV), 22–23, 157, 158
Colorado state constitution
Amendment 2, 21, 22–24,
38–39, 157, 158, 177–178
(document)
Columbia Pictures, 148
Columbia University School of
Library Services, 149
Commentary, 131
Commonwealth v. Wasson, 61
case summary, 198
Communications Decency
Amendment (CDA), 209–210
Communism
and Hay, Henry (Harry), 5
and McCarthyism, 5
Communist Party, 143
Community building, 14–25
“Compulsory Heterosexuality
and Lesbian Existence”
(Rich), 159–160
Computer theory, development
of, 165, 166
Concerned Women for America
(CWA), 18, 251
homosexuality, position on, 188
(document)
Confessions of a Mask (Mishima),
155
“Congregation for the Doctrine of
the Faith—On the Pastoral
Care of Homosexual Persons:
Letter to the Bishops of the
Catholic Church” (Catholic
Church), 187 (document)
Congress of German Jurists, 
166
Connecticut, 61
Conrad, Alfred, 159
Conversion therapy, 57. See also
Reparative therapy
Cooper, Gary, 56
COPA. See Child Online
Protection Act
Coparent adoptions, 43
Index
385

Coparent or Second-Parent
Adoption by Same-Sex
Parents Policy Statement
(AAP), 178 (document)
Cory, Donald Webster, 6
Council of Religion and the
Homosexual, 152
Council on Research and
Development, Reference
Committee, and Assembly
(APA), 16
Courts
and antigay stereotypes, 
42–43
and hate crimes, 50
Crimes of hate, conspiracy of
silence: Torture and ill-
treatment based on sexual
identity (Amnesty
International), 181–182
(document)
Crittenden Report, 53
Crittenden, S. H., Jr., 53
Culture
and homosexuality, 10
Culture war, 25–27, 29
Cumberland High School, 60
Cures: A Gay Man’s Odyssey
(Duberman), 138
CWA. See Concerned Women for
America
Dailey, Timothy J., 41
Dale, James, 25
Dallas, Texas, 18
Dane County Board of
Supervisors, 131
Daughters of Bilitis (DOB), 8, 141,
142, 150, 151, 152, 161
Daughters of the American
Revolution (DAR) Magazine,
162
Defense of Marriage Act
(DOMA), 22, 29, 33, 50,
210–211
Defret, Daniel, 140
Demonstrations, gay. See Gay
demonstrations
Denmark, 21
Department of Education, 59
Department of Labor Standards
Enforcement (DLSE)
(California), 39–40
The Destiny of Me (Kramer), 149
Deviant behavior
and homosexuality, 10
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM), 12,
16, 147. See also American
Psychiatric Association
Dickinson, Anna, 130
Digital computer, 165
Digital Queers Los Angeles, 135
Dignity USA, 262
homosexuality, position on,
184–185 (document)
Diving into the Wreck (Rich), 159
DLSE. See Department of Labor
Standards Enforcement
DOB. See Daughters of Bilitis
DOMA. See Defense of Marriage
Act
Domestic partnership programs,
44–45, 51–52
and culture war, 25
and homosexuality, incidence
of, 36–37
See also Civil unions; Marriage;
Same-sex marriage
“Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell, Don’t
Pursue,” 53–54, 212. See also
U.S. Military, gays in
Don’t Be Afraid Anymore (Perry),
158
Douglas, Lord Alfred, 172
Doyal, Peter, 171
Dramatists Guide Marton Award,
148
DSM. See Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders
Duberman, Martin Bauml, 138
Duke University, 135–136
386
Index

Eagle Forum, 162
Eastern Europe
AIDS prevention programs in,
38
Eastern Regional Conference of
Homophile Organizations, 14
Eberhart, John, 147
Ecole Normale Supérièure, 139
Education
and AIDS, 145
and homophobia, 10
Ellis, Havelock, 2
Elzinga, Dean, 135
Emotional hysteria, 16
Employment, 45–47
and antidiscrimination statutes,
39
See also Employment
discrimination; Employment
benefits
Employment at will, 45–46
Employment benefits
and domestic partnership
programs, 44–45
See also Employment;
Employment discrimination
Employment discrimination
federal civilian, 21
and gay demonstrations, 9
and police officers,
employment as, 18
public, 9, 14, 18, 46, 47
See also Employment;
Employment benefits
Enclaves, gay. See Gay enclaves
Enigma (German code), 166
Entrapment, police. See Police
entrapment
Equal Access Act, 24, 59
Equal Protection Clause, 22, 24
Equal rights, 29–30
Equal Rights Amendment (ERA),
161, 162
ERA. See Equal Rights
Amendment
Erotophobic societies, 37
Establishments, Gay. See Gay
establishments
Europe
gay rights movement in, 20–21
European Court of Human
Rights, 21
Everett, Chris, 156
Ex-gay ministries, 56
Ex-gay movement, 26–27, 55–58
and homosexuality, causes of,
34
See also Reparative therapy
Exodus International, 56
Exodus International North
America, 262–263
Expressive association, right of,
25
Fag bashing, 48. See also Hate
crimes
Faggots (Kramer), 148
Faith-based initiative, 46–47
Falwell, Jerry, 18, 129, 139
and terrorist attack (September
11), 65, 139, 160
Family
and homosexual relations, 10
Family Pride Coalition, 232
Family Research Council (FRC),
41–42
Family Research Institute, 137
FBI, 47
Federal civilian employment
discrimination, 21. See also
Employment; Employment
discrimination
Female-to-Male International
(FTM), 272
Festivals, gay pride. See Gay
pride festivals
Finland, 21
Fireside Pentecostal Church
(Harlem), 130
The First Cities (Lorde), 149–150
Flagg, Fannie, 133
Florida, 44
Index
387

Florida Citrus Growers, 134
Flubacher, Tom, 169
Fonda, Jane, 157
Forbes magazine, 164
Forbes, Malcolm, 164
Foster care, 40–42, 44
Foucault, Michel, 139–140
Frank, Barney, 140–141
FRC. See Family Research Council
Free speech and association, right
of, 62–64
“Free the Army,” 157
Freud, Sigmund, 2
Freund, Kurt, 41–42
Fricke, Aaron, 60
Fricke v. Lynch, 60
case summary, 193–194
Fried Green Tomatoes at the Whistle-
Stop Café (Flagg), 133
From a Land Where Other People
Live (Lorde), 150
FTM. See Female-to-Male
International
Full Faith and Credit Clause,
211–212
Fuller Graduate School of
Psychology, 136
Fuller Theological Seminary, 136
Fundamentalist Christians, 37
The Fundamentalist Phenomenon
(Falwell), 139
Furies Collective, 133, 136
GAA. See Gay Activists Alliance
GALAH. See Gay and Lesbian
Atheists and Humanists
Gay
definition of, 35
Gay Academic Union, 138
Gay activists
and political action, 10–11
Gay Activists Alliance (GAA), 14,
15, 142
Gay adoption, 24, 33, 40–42,
43–44
public attitude about, 54
Gay and Lesbian Advocates and
Defenders (GLAD), 236–237
Gay and Lesbian Alliance against
Defamation (GLAAD),
244–245
Gay and Lesbian Atheists and
Humanists (GALAH), 263
Gay and Lesbian Medical
Association (GLMA), 256
Gay and lesbian parents, 24,
43–44
and child custody, 42–43
See also Same-sex parents
Gay and lesbian student groups,
24, 59
and Gay Liberation Front, 13
See also Gay and lesbian
students; Gay and lesbian
teachers; Schools
Gay and lesbian students, 18, 24,
33–34, 58. See also Gay and
lesbian student groups; Gay
and lesbian teachers; Schools
Gay and lesbian teachers, 17, 46,
47, 58
and free speech and
association, right of, 63–64
See also Gay and lesbian
students; Gay and lesbian
student groups; Schools
Gay and Lesbian Victory Fund,
251–252
Gay bashing, 48, 49. See also Hate
crimes
Gay demonstrations, 9
Gay enclaves, 4
Gay establishments
and police harassment, 6, 9–10
Gay Games, 169
Gay groups, formation of,
prohibition against, 15
Gay identity, 35
“Gay Is Good,” 8–9
Gay Law Students Ass’n v. Pacific
Tele. and Tel. Co., 63
case summary, 193
388
Index

Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual
Veterans of America
(GLBVA), 247
Gay, Lesbian and Straight
Education Network
(GLSEN), 129, 269–270
Gay Liberation Front (GLF),
13–14
Gay Men’s Health Crisis
(GMHC), 148
Gay Olympics, 169–170
Gay organizations
after Stonewall riots, 13
Gay Parent Magazine, 233
Gay pride festivals, 14
Gay pride movement, 134
Gay pride parades, 14, 144
Gay rights, 1
Gay rights movement, 143
in Canada, 21
and community building, 14–25
and culture war, 25–27
in Europe, 20–21
in Germany, 1–3
history of, 1–30
and homophile movement,
5–12
in Israel, 21
in Nigeria, 21
and separate but equal status,
27–30
and Stonewall riots, 12–14
in United States, 3–4
Gay rights statutes, 15–25. See also
Antidiscrimination statutes;
Antisodomy statutes
Gay Students Org. v. Bonner
case summary, 192
Gay Students Organization v.
Bonner, 15
Gay underground, 3–4
Gay-ins, 14
GayLaw.Net, 274
Gay/Lesbian International News
Network (GLINN), 245–246,
274
Gay/Lesbian Politics and Law:
WWW and Internet
Resources, 274
Gaylord v. Tacoma School Dist. No.
10
case summary, 193
Gayscape, 274
Gay-straight alliance student
group, 24
Gentlemen’s Alliance (Nigeria),
21
George Washington High School,
152
Georgia, 19, 50, 61
Gerber, Henry, 3
German code, 166
German constitution
Paragraph 175, 146, 177
(document)
Germany
gay rights movement in, 1–3
New Prussian Penal Code, 2
Scientific Humanitarian
Committee, 2
Giese, Kurt, 146
Gilbert and Sullivan touring
companies, 172
Girl Scouts, 25
Gittings, Barbara, 141–142
GLAAD. See Gay and Lesbian
Alliance against Defamation
GLAD. See Gay and Lesbian
Advocates and Defenders
GLBVA. See Gay, Lesbian, and
Bisexual Veterans of America
GLF. See Gay Liberation Front
GLINN. See Gay/Lesbian
International News Network
GLMA. See Gay and Lesbian
Medical Association
GLSEN. See Gay, Lesbian and
Straight Education Network
GMHC. See Gay Men’s Health
Crisis
Go Tell It on the Mountain (J.
Baldwin), 131
Index
389

Gobie, Steve, 141
God Hates Fags, 263–264
Godkin v. San Leandro School
District
case summary, 204–206
Golden State Peace Officers
Association (GSPOA),
256–257
Goldschmidt, Neil, 152
Goldwater, Barry, 162
Grandfather of gay liberation, 2
Great Britain, 21
and U.S. military, gays in, 53
Great Oracle at Delphi, 163
“Great Sex Workshop,” 37
Groth, A. Nicholas, 42
GSPOA. See Golden State Peace
Officers Association
Guilbert, Paul, 60
H.A. See Homosexuals
Anonymous
Hair (musical), 156
“Hairpin Drop Heard around the
World,” 13
Hall, Radclyffe, 142–143, 152
Hang in There (album), 157
Happersberger, Lucien, 131
Harassment. See Antigay
harassment; Police
harassment; Sexual
harassment
Hardwick, Michael, 19
Harlem, 3
Harlem Writers Guild, 149
Harvard, 138, 141, 161
Hate crime legislation, 49–50
Hate Crime Statistics Act, 49, 145
Hate crimes, 48–50
and culture war, 25
Hawaii, 22, 50
Hay, Henry (Harry), 5, 129,
143–144
Haynie, Sandra, 156
Helms, Jesse, 49, 144–145
Helsinki, 21
Heterosexism
and equal rights, 29, 30
Heterosexuality
definition of, 2
Hidden from History: Reclaiming the
Gay and Lesbian Past
(Duberman), 138
Hippies, 13
Hiring quotas, 37
Hirschfeld, Magnus, 2–3, 129,
145–146
The History of Sexuality (Foucault),
140
Hitler, Adolf, 2–3
HIV. See Human
immunodeficiency virus
Holmes/Watson v. California Army,
54
Home Box Office, 45
Homophile movement, 5–12
Homophobia, 10, 11, 30
Homophobic rhetoric
and religious right, 26
Homosexual
as term, 2
The Homosexual in America (Cory),
6
Homosexual League of New
York, 9
Homosexual materials
and the U.S. Postal Service, 7,
62–63
Homosexual panic defense, 24
Homosexual themes
and novels, 3
Homosexuality
APA 1973 decision on, 182–183
(document)
APA 1975 decision on, 183–184
(document)
causes of, 34
CWA position on, 188
(document)
definition of, 35
Dignity USA position on,
184–185 (document)
390
Index

measuring the incidence of,
35–37
as mental illness, 12, 16, 26
NFPC resolution on, 185
(document)
theories of, 2, 10, 11–12
Union of American Hebrew
Congregations resolution on,
185 (document)
Homosexuality and Child Sexual
Abuse (Dailey), 41
Homosexuals Anonymous (H.A.),
264
Honesty, 266–267
Hooker, Evelyn, 12, 16, 129,
146–148
Hope, Bob, 134
Housing, and gay and lesbian
rights, 45, 48
HRC. See Human Rights
Campaign
HRC WorkNet, 132
Hrotsvitha, 133
Hull, Bob, 144
Human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV), 19, 38
Human Rights Campaign (HRC),
18, 19, 132, 252–253
Why Reparative Therapy and
Ex-Gay Ministries Fail,
179–180 (document)
Hunter College High School, 149
Hurley v. Irish-American Gay,
Lesbian, and Bisexual Group of
Boston, 25
case summary, 199
Hyman, J. Barrett, 64
Hyman v. Louisville City and
Jefferson County, 64
I Love Liberty, 134
IALGJ. See International
Association of Lesbian and
Gay Judges
Identity formation
and homophile movement, 5
IGLHRC. See International Gay
and Lesbian Human Rights
Commission
Illinois, 61
Illinois Mother of the Year, 162
Immigration and Naturalization
Service, 156
In re Breisch
case summary, 194
In re McIntyre
case summary, 203
Indian Guides, 25
Institute for Sexual Research, 2, 3,
146
Institute for the Advanced Study
of Human Sexuality, 150
International Association of
Lesbian and Gay Judges
(IALGJ), 257
International Bachelors Fraternal
Order for Peace and Social
Dignity, 5, 144
International Gay and Lesbian
Human Rights Commission
(IGLHRC), 274
Internet
and free speech and
association, right of, 63
Internet mailing lists, 135
Internet resources, 129
Intersex Society of North America
(ISNA), 272–273
Iran
AIDS prevention programs in,
38
Iranian Center for Disease
Control, 38
Ireland, 21
ISNA. See Intersex Society of
North America
Israel, 21
Jennings, Dale, 6–7, 144
Jews, 37
Jim Crow laws, 28
Johns Hopkins University, 147
Index
391

Judiciary Committee, 131
Judson Memorial Church, 9, 11
June L. Mazer Archives, 239–240
Kameny, Frank, 8–9
Kansas, 61–62
Kansas v. Matthew Limon, 61–62
KBHC. See Kentucky Baptist
Homes for Children
Kennedy, Anthony, 24
Kentucky, 46–47, 61
Kentucky Baptist Homes for
Children (KBHC), 46–47
Kenyon, Eunice, 129
Kertbeny, K. M. See Benkert,
Karoly Maria
Kimitake, Hiraoka (pseud. Yukio
Mishima), 129, 155
King’s College, 142, 165
Kinsey, Alfred, 4–5
Kinsey Institute, 240–241
Kinsey reports, 4–5
Kiss-ins, 14
Kramer, Larry, 20, 148–149
The Ladder, 8, 141, 142, 150, 151
LaHaye, Beverly, 18
Lakemary Center, 61
Lambda, 15, 21
Lambda Legal Defense and
Education Fund, 237–238
Latin America
AIDS prevention programs in,
38
LC/NA. See Lutherans
Concerned/North America
LCR. See Log Cabin Republicans
The League, 7
League for Sexual Freedom, 9
Leaves of Grass (Whitman), 171
LeGaL. See Lesbian and Gay Law
Association of Greater New
York
Lehman Graduate Center (City
University of New York), 138
Leitsch, Dick, 13
Lesbian and Gay Law Association
of Greater New York
(LeGaL), 230
Lesbian continuum, 160
Lesbian Health Project, 132
Lesbian Herstory Education
Foundation (LHEF), 241
Lesbian Mothers Support Society
(LMSS), 233
Lesbian organizations, 8
Lesbian.org, 274
Lesbians. See under Gay and
lesbian
Lesbian/Woman (Lyons and
Martin), 150, 152
Lesbos, isle of, 161
LHEF. See Lesbian Herstory
Education Foundation
Liberty Federation, 18, 139
Liberty University, 139
Limbaugh, Rush, 65
Limon, Matthew, 61–62
Lindsay, John, 14
Listen, America! (Falwell), 139
Lively, Scott, 152
LLEGÓ. See National Latina/o
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and
Transgender Organization
LMSS. See Lesbian Mothers
Support Society
Log Cabin Republicans (LCR),
253
The Lord is My Shepherd and He
Knows I’m Gay (Perry), 158
Lorde, Audre, 149–150, 159
Los Angeles, 4, 9, 144
Project 10, 18
Los Angeles Freedom to Marry
Coalition, 135
Los Angeles High School, 143
Los Angeles Pacific University,
136
Louisiana, 60
Louÿs, Pierre, 8
Lutherans Concerned/North
America (LC/NA), 264–265
392
Index

Lutz, Joe, 152
Lyon, Phyllis, 8, 129, 142, 150, 152
Mabon, Bonnie, 152
Mabon, Lon, 129, 151
MADAM. See Manchester
Automatic Digital Machine
Madame de Sade (Mishima), 155
Madison West High School, 131
Madness and Civilization
(Foucault), 140
Magnus Hirschfeld Foundation
for Sex Research, 146
Manchester Automatic Digital
Machine (MADAM), 166
March on Washington (1979), 18
March on Washington (1987), 18
March on Washington (1993), 21
Mariposa Foundation, 168
Marriage, 50–52
vs. civil unions, 29
See also Civil unions; Domestic
partnership programs; Same-
sex marriage
Marriage Project—Hawaii, 238
Martin, Del, 8, 129, 142, 150,
151–152
Massachusetts House of
Representatives, 141
Matlovich, Leonard, 129, 152–153
Matlovich v. Secretary of the Air
Force
case summary, 193
Mattachine Foundation, 6, 7
Mattachine Review, 7–8
Mattachine Society, 5–11, 144
Mattachine Society New York
(MSNY), 7–8
and Stonewall riots, 12–13
Mattachine Society Washington
(MSW), 8–9
Mattachine Society/ONE, Inc., 7
Matter of Toboso-Alfonso
case summary, 197
Matthew Shepard Foundation,
231
MCC. See Metropolitan
Community Church
McCarthy, Joseph, 5, 7, 144
McCarthyism, 5, 46
McCormick, Brian, 23
McCutchen, Doyle, Brown &
Enersen, 132
Measure 8 (Oregon), 152
Medical Society for Sexual
Science and Eugenics, 146
Meet the Press, 162
Meg Christian: I Know You Know
(album), 157
Mental illness, homosexuality as,
12, 16, 26
Merrill, George, 138
Metropolitan Community Church
(MCC), 158, 159
Mexico
AIDS prevention programs in,
38
Miami-Dade County
Commission, 16–17, 134, 135
Middle East
AIDS prevention programs in,
38
Midwest Bible College, 158
Military. See U.S. military
Milk, Harvey, 17, 18, 154
Mishima, Yokio. See Kimitake,
Hiraoka
Mississippi, 44
Moody Bible Institute, 158
Moral Majority, 18, 26, 27, 139
Morale
and U.S. military, gays in, 53
Morford, Sam, 7
Morrison v. State Board of
Education, 46
case summary, 192
Moscone, George, 17, 18, 154
Moses, Herb, 141
Mosk, Stanley, 132
Ms. magazine, 150
MSNY. See Mattachine Society
New York
Index
393

MSW. See Mattachine Society
Washington
Muslims, 37
My Prayer for You (Robertson), 160
Nabozny, Jamie, 24, 59
Nabozny v. Podlesny, 24, 59
case summary, 201
NABWMT. See National
Association of Black and
White Men Together
NAMES Project Foundation,
228–229
NARTH. See National Association
for Research and Therapy of
Homosexuality
The Nation, 131
National Association for Research
and Therapy of
Homosexuality (NARTH),
34, 57, 58, 231–232
stated purpose, 180–181
(document)
National Association of Black and
White Men Together
(NABWMT), 248
National Book Award, 150, 159
National Center for Lesbian
Rights (NCLR), 238–239
National Coming Out Day
Program, 132
National Consortium of Directors
of LGBT Resources in Higher
Education, 270
National Council for Research on
Women, 136
National Education Association
(NEA), 18
Gay and Lesbian Caucus,
270–271
National Election Studies, 55
National Federation of Priests’
Councils (NFPC)
homosexuality, resolution on,
185 (document)
National Gay and Lesbian Task
Force (NGLTF), 15, 136, 162,
167–168, 253–254
National Gay Task Force, 15, 168
National Gay Task Force v. Board of
Education of Oklahoma City
case summary, 194
National Institute of Mental
Health (NIMH), 147
Task Force on Homosexuality,
16, 148
National Latina/o Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual, and Transgender
Organization (LLEGÓ),
248–249
National Legal Foundation, 23
National Lesbian and Gay Law
Association (NLGLA),
257–258
National Minority AIDS Council
(NMAC), 229
National Organization for
Women (NOW), 14, 133, 136,
152
National Organization of Gay
and Lesbian Scientists and
Technical Professionals
(NOGLSTP), 258
National Prisons Project (ACLU),
167
National University of Mexico,
149
National Women’s Program of
the American Friends Service
Committee, 136
Navajos, 170
Navratilova, Martina, 133, 134,
155–156
Nazi Party, 146
Nazism, 1, 3
NCLR. See National Center for
Lesbian Rights
NEA. See National Education
Association
Near, Holly, 156–157
Nebraska Psychological
Association, 137
394
Index

Nelson, Judy, 134
Netherlands, 21, 50–51
Neutral model, and hate crime
legislation, 50
New Leader, 131
New Left organizations, 13
New Orleans, 4
New Prussian Penal Code, 2
New Ways Ministry, 265
New York, 4, 7–8, 9, 15
New York City, 9–10, 11, 12–13
New York City Commission on
the Status of Women, 136
New York Gay Activist Alliance
(GAA), 168
New York Police Department
(NYPD)
and Stonewall riots, 12–13
New York Public Library Gay
and Lesbian Collections,
241–242
New York State College for
Teachers, 154
New York Theological Seminary,
160
New York Times, 20
New York University, 133
NFPC. See National Federation of
Priests’ Councils
NGLTF. See National Gay and
Lesbian Task Force
Nigeria, 21
NIMH. See National Institute of
Mental Health
Nineteenth Amendment, 130
NLGLA. See National Lesbian
and Gay Law Association
NMAC. See National Minority
AIDS Council
No Special Rights Committee, 
152
Nobel Prize, 155
NOGLSTP. See National
Organization of Gay and
Lesbian Scientists and
Technical Professionals
The Normal Heart (Kramer),
148–149
North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, 53
North Carolina Bankers
Association, 145
Northeastern University, 167
Northwestern University, 141–142
Norton v. Macy
case summary, 191–192
Norway, 21
Notable Gay Men and Lesbians
(Duberman), 138
Novels
with homosexual themes, 3
NOW. See National Organization
for Women
Numantius, Numa. See Ulrich,
Karl Heinrich
Nunn, Sam, 52–53
Oberg, Erich, 146
OCA. See Oregon Citizens
Alliance
Occidental College, 135
Old-Time Gospel Hour, 139
Olivia Records, 157
Olympic Games (1968), 
169
“On Computable Numbers, 
with an Application to 
the Entscheidungsproblem”
(Turing), 165
Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore
Services, Inc.
case summary, 202–203
ONE, Inc. v. Olesen, 7, 62–63
case summary, 191
ONE, Incorporated, 7, 62–63
ONE Institute and Archives, 7,
242–243
One Nation under God
(documentary), 56
“1,112 and Counting” (Kramer),
148
Operation New Broom, 9
Index
395

Oppression
overcoming, process of, 10, 11
The Order of Things (Foucault), 
140
Oregon
Measure 8, 152
Oregon Citizens Alliance (OCA),
151, 254–255
Organizations, gay. See Gay
organizations
Outfest, 246
Outproud, the National Coalition
for Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual,
and Transgender Youth, 235
Outweek, 163, 164
Oxford University, 172
Pacifists, 13
Packwood, Robert, 152
Paiderasteia (boy love), 163
Parades, gay pride. See Gay pride
parades
Paragraph 175 (German
constitution), 146, 177
(document)
Parents. See Gay and lesbian
parents; Same-sex parents
Parents, Friends, and Families of
Lesbians and Gays (PFLAG),
234
Partners Task Force for Gay and
Lesbian Couples, 234–235
Passion and Politics (Bunch), 136
Pate, Macel, 139
Payne v. Western Alt. R.R., 45–46
Perkins, Bess, 158
Perkins Chrysler Plymouth
Company, 158
Perkins, Will, 157–158
Perry, Troy, 158–159
PERSEC. See Personnel Security
and Education Center
Pershing Square, 143
Personnel Security and Education
Center (PERSEC), 53
Petition drives, 14
PFLAG. See Parents, Friends, and
Families of Lesbians and
Gays
Phaedrus (Plato), 163
The Phyllis Schlafly Report, 162
The Picture of Dorian Gray (Wilde),
172
PlanetOut Corp., 135
Platky, Anita, 143
Plato, 1, 163
Platonic love, 163
Poland, 21
Police
and hate crimes, 50
Police Cadets, 25
Police entrapment, 4, 6–7, 10, 11,
14
Police harassment, 4, 14
and gay establishments, 6, 9–10
See also Antigay harassment;
Sexual harassment
Police officers, employment as, 18
Political action
and gay activists, 10–11
Pornography, 3
Powell, Lewis, 19
PPGL. See Presbyterian Parents of
Gays and Lesbians, Inc.
Presbyterian Parents of Gays and
Lesbians, Inc. (PPGL),
265–266
Presser, Stefan, 63
Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins
case summary, 196–197
Princeton University, 165
Private organizations
and antidiscrimination statutes,
24–25
Pro Bono Lawyer of the Year, 
132
“A Problem in Greek Ethics”
(Symonds), 165
Profiles in Gay and Lesbian Courage
(Perry), 158
Progressive Party, 144
PROJECT 10 (Los Angeles), 18
396
Index

Proms
and same-sex couples, 
60
Proposition 6 (California), 17
Pseudonyms, 8
Psychology
and homosexuality, theories of,
2, 10, 11–12
Public attitude, 54–55
and culture war, 26
Public employment
discrimination, 14, 46, 47
and gay demonstrations, 9
and police officers,
employment as, 18
See also Employment;
Employment discrimination
Public Morals Section of NYPD
and Stonewall riots, 12–13
Publishers Weekly, 150
Quaker Academy (New York),
129
Queensberry, Marquis of, 172
Queer in America: Sex, the Media,
and the Closets of Power
(Signorile), 164
Queer Resources Directory, 129,
135, 274
Queer World, 162
Radcliffe College, 159
Radical Faeries, 144
Rainbow Baptists, 266
Raleigh North Carolina Times,
145
Reagan, Ronald, 17
and AIDS, 19–20
Redwood Records, 157
Reed College, 168
Religious conservatives, 18
and APA, and homosexuality,
as mental illness, 16
and domestic partnership
programs, 45
and emotional hysteria, 17
and free speech and
association, right to, 64
See also Christian conservatives;
Christian fundamentalists;
Religious right
Religious freedom
and free speech and
association, right to, 64
Religious groups, 18
in schools, 59
Religious right
and AIDS, 19
and AIDS prevention
programs, 37
and antidiscrimination statutes,
38–39, 47
and APA, and homosexuality,
as mental illness, 16
and Bryant, Anita, 134
and Cameron, Paul
Drummond, 41, 137
and culture war, 26–27
and domestic partnership
programs, 52
and ex-gay movement, 26–27
formation of, 18
and homosexuality, causes of,
34
and public attitude, about gays
and lesbians, 55
and same-sex marriage, 22,
51–52
and special rights, 23. See also
Special rights
See also Christian conservatives;
Christian fundamentalists;
Religious conservatives
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute,
135
Rent control statutes, 48
Rent stabilization statutes, 
48
Reparative therapy, 55–58
APA position on, 178
(document)
See also Ex-gay movement
Index
397

Reparative Therapy: The
American Psychiatric
Association, the Human
Rights Campaign, and the
National Association of
Research and Therapy of
Homosexuality, 178–181
Republican politicians
and AIDS prevention
programs, 37
Research
and AIDS, 145
antigay, and Cameron, Paul
Drummond, 136–137
sex, 35, 36–37
Research setting
and homosexuality, measuring
the incidence of, 36
Researches on the Riddle of Love
between Men (Ulrich), 1
Respondent, truthfulness of
and homosexuality, measuring
the incidence of, 36, 37
Rich, Adrienne, 150, 159–160
Right of assembly, 15
Ripe Magazine, 233
Robert E. Lee High School, 60
Robertson, Marion Gordon (Pat).
See Robertson, Pat
Robertson, Pat, 18, 20, 23, 27, 160
and terrorist attack (September
11), 65, 160
Rockefeller Institute, 168
Rodwell, Craig, 9
Roehm, Ernst, 3
“Romeo and Juliet Law,” 62
Romer v. Evans, 23, 158
case summary, 200–201
Rosen, Hilary, 132
Rotello, Gabriel, 164
Rowland, Chuck, 144
Rubyfruit Jungle (Brown), 132, 133,
134
Russell, Ken, 148
Rutgers University, 136
Sacramento High School, 150
Safe-sex programs, 37–38
Salt Lake City School District, 
59
Salvation Army, 44–45
Same-sex couples
and proms, 60
and September 11 Victims
Compensation Fund, 65–66
Same-sex marriage, 21–22, 28–29,
33–34, 50–52. See also Civil
unions; Domestic
partnership programs;
Marriage
Same-sex parents, 40–42. See also
Gay and lesbian parents
San Francisco, 4, 9, 44–45
San Francisco City Council, 17–18
San Francisco Human Rights
Commission, 150
Santa Clara University, 132
Santa Cruz, 45
Sappho, 161
Sarah Siddons Award, 148
Save Our Children, 17, 134
Scare tactics, 17
Schlafly, Phyllis Stewart, 161–162
Schools, 24, 58
and culture war, 26
religious groups in, 59
See also Gay and lesbian
students; Gay and lesbian
student groups; Gay and
lesbian teachers
Schroeder, Michael, 57
Schwenk v. Hartford
case summary, 207–208
Scientific Humanitarian
Committee (Germany), 2,
145, 146
Scientists
and culture war, 26
Scott, Cy, 60
Scriptures for America, 267
Seattle, 45
Second-parent adoptions, 43
398
Index

The Secret Kingdom (Robertson),
160
SEEK program (City College—
New York), 150
Segura, Tony, 7
Separate but equal status, 27–30
Separatism, 14
September 11 Victims
Compensation Fund, 65–66
Servicemembers Legal Defense
Network (SLDN), 53,
247–248
The 700 Club, 18, 65, 160
Seventh Day Adventist Church,
56
Sexual Behaviors in the Human
Female (Kinsey), 4–5
Sexual Behaviors in the Human
Male (Kinsey), 4–5
Sexual harassment, 59. See also
Antigay harassment; Police
harassment
Sexual inversion, 10
as term, 2
Sexual orientation
and antidiscrimination statutes,
15–25, 38–40
Sheldon, Louis P., 65–66
Shepard, Matthew, 24
Shidlo, Ariel, 57
Shield Society, 155
Signorile, Michelangelo, 163–164
Simpson, Charles, 64
Sister Outsider (Lorde), 149, 150
SLA. See Stonewall Library and
Archives
SLDN. See Servicemembers Legal
Defense Network
Slogans. See Antigay slogans
Smith College, 131
Smith, Tom, 35
Snyder, Fred M., 7
Social constructionism, theory of,
140
Société Matachine, 5
Societies, erotophobic, 37
Society
and homophobia, 10
Society for Human Rights, 143
Socrates, 162–163
Socratic method, 163
Sodom (biblical city), 60–61
Sodomy
definition of, 60–61
See also Antisodomy statutes
“Song of Bilitis” (Louÿs), 8
Soulforce, 267–268
South Boston Allied War Veterans
Councils, 25
Southern Baptist Church, 160
Southern California Gay
Liberation Front, 144
Soviet Union, former
AIDS prevention programs in,
38
Special model, and hate crime
legislation, 49–50
Special rights, 23, 39, 47, 52, 152.
See also Antidiscrimination
statutes; Domestic
partnership programs
Sphor, Max, 146
Spies, and U.S. military, 21
Spitzer, Robert, 56–57
St. Edwards Church, 137
St. Louis, 37
St. Louis Ordnance Plant, 161
St. Martin’s Press, 136
St. Patrick’s Day Parade (Boston),
24–25
Stafford, Harry, 171
Stanford University, 143, 160
Stanton, Elizabeth Cady, 130
Statutes. See Antidiscrimination
statutes; Antisodomy statutes
Stauffer, Catherine, 152
Stereotypes. See Antigay
stereotypes
Stevens, Matilda, 170–171
Stigmatization
overcoming, process of, 10
Stokeld, Jack, 60
Index
399

Stonewall (Duberman), 138
Stonewall Center, 271
Stonewall Democrats, 255
Stonewall Inn. See Stonewall riots
Stonewall Library and Archives
(SLA), 243–244
Stonewall riots, 12–14, 144
Stop ERA campaign, 162
Street theater, 14
Strength for the Journey (Falwell),
139
Student groups. See Gay and
lesbian student groups
Student Homophile League (New
York University), 133
Students. See Gay and lesbian
students
Students for a Democratic Society,
13
Suffragette movement, 129, 130
Sunshine-Tree Girl, 134
Symonds, John Addington,
164–165
Symposium (Plato), 1, 163
Syracuse University, 164
Task Force on Homosexuality
(NIMH), 16
Teachers. See Gay and lesbian
teachers
Television
and culture war, 25–26
Television coverage
of gay demonstrations, 9
Temperance movement, 130
Term, definition of
and homosexuality, measuring
the incidence of, 35–36
Terrorist attack (September 11),
64–66, 139, 160
Theocratic state, 27
Thomas Road Baptist Church, 
139
Thomas v. Anchorage, 48
Title IX, 59
Tougaloo College, 150
Transgender Forum’s Community
Center, 275
Transgender Fund, 273
Transgender people, 15
and hate crimes, 48–49
Transgenderism, 170
Trinity Hall, 137
Troubridge, Una, 142
Truman, Harry, 54
Turing, Alan, 165–166
Turing machine, 165
“Twinkie Defense,” 17–18
UCLA. See University of
California at Los Angeles
UFMCC. See Universal
Fellowship of Metropolitan
Community Churches
Ulrich, Karl Heinrich (pseud.
Numa Numantius), 1–2, 
166
Underreporting
and homosexuality, measuring
the incidence of, 35
Union of American Hebrew
Congregations
homosexuality, resolution on,
185 (document)
United States
gay rights movement in, 3–4
Universal Fellowship of
Metropolitan Community
Churches (UFMCC), 268
Universal machine, 165
University Christian Movement,
136
University Claremont-Ferrard,
139–140
University of California at
Berkeley, 140, 150
University of California at
Davis—Sexual Orientation:
Science, Education, and
Policy, 275
University of California at Los
Angeles (UCLA), 12, 136, 147
400
Index

University of Colorado, 136,
146–147
University of Florida, 133
University of Hawaii, 132
University of Louisville, 136
University of Nebraska, 136
University of Southern California,
5, 7, 143
University of Tokyo, 155
University of Washington
Libraries, 275
University of Wisconsin Law
School, 131
Up With People, 132
Uranians, 1, 138
U.S. Army
and Zunis, 170–171
U.S. Army Induction Center
(New York), 9
U.S. Civil Service Commission, 
46
U.S. Congress, 131
and Equal Access Act, 59
and hate crimes, 49
and U.S. military, gays in,
52–53
U.S. Constitution, 11
U.S. House of Representatives,
141
Budget Committee, 131
Ethics Committee, 141
Un-American Activities
Committee, 7
U.S. military, 47, 164
and gay demonstrations, 9
gays in, 52–54, 152, 153
gays in, public attitude about,
54
and homosexuality, 4
and spies, 21
U.S. Olympic Committee (USOC),
169–170
U.S. Postal Service
and homosexual materials, 7,
62–63
U.S. Senate, 144, 145
USOC. See U.S. Olympic
Committee
Utah, 44
Vaid, Urvashi, 167–168
Vassar College, 167
Vermont, 21, 22, 29, 33, 50
Violence. See Antigay violence
Violence Against Women Act
(VAWA), 131
Virtual Equality (Vaid), 168
Visitation issues
and gay and lesbian parents,
42–43
Voeller, Bruce, 19, 168–169
Waddell, Gene, 169
Waddell, Hazel, 169
Waddell, Tom, 169–170
WAF. See WeAreFamily
Foundation
Wake Forest University, 145
Walker, Alice, 150, 159
Wallace, Henry, 144
Washington and Lee University,
160
Washington, D.C., 9
Washington Monument, 9
Washington State, 8–9
Washington Times, 141
Washington University, 161
Wayne State University, 136
WeAreFamily Foundation (WAF),
235
Weeks, Jim, 136
The Well of Loneliness (Hall), 142,
143, 152
West Hollywood, 45
Westboro Baptist Church
stated purpose, 189 (document)
We’wha, 170–171
“What People Should Know
about the Third Sex”
(Scientific Humanitarian
Committee), 2
White, Dan, 17–18, 154
Index
401

White, Kevin, 141
White Night, 154
White supremacists
and equal rights, 29
Whitman, Walt, 137–138, 165, 171
Whittier College, 147
Why Reparative Therapy and Ex-
Gay Ministries Fail (HRC),
179–180 (document)
Wicker, Randy, 9–10
Wilde, Oscar, 137, 172
William Morris Agency, 148
Williams, Dana, 37–38
Williams, Pete, 164
Williamson, Cris, 157
Wisconsin, 24
Chapter 12, Laws of 1981,
175–176 (document)
Wisconsin State Legislature, 131
Women
and Mattachine Society, 8
Women in Love (film), 148
Women’s rights, 29, 130
Women’s State Temperance
Society of New York, 130
World Trade Center, bombing of,
139, 160
Wycoff, Dean, 27
Yale University, 138, 147, 148, 
160
Yale Younger Poets Award, 
159
Yankee Samizdat, 246
Youth suicide
AAP position on, 189–190
(document)
Zap actions, 14
Zuni society, 170–171
Zuni two-spirit (berdache), 144,
170
402
Index

About the Author
C
huck Stewart received his Ph.D. from the University of South-
ern California School of Education, along with a certificate in
women’s studies. He specialized in intercultural education
and was funded by the California Commission on Peace Officers
Standards and Training (POST) to conduct research into effective
means to reduce heterosexism and homophobia through the de-
sign and implementation of educational programs. His master’s
thesis, “Homosexuality and Public Education Law,” led to the Po-
lice Advisory Task Force hiring him to write the curriculum and
teaching materials for use on sexual orientation training within
the Los Angeles Police Department. He wrote the award-winning
book Sexually Stigmatized Communities—Reducing Heterosexism
and Homophobia: An Awareness Training Manual for Sage (1999).
For ABC-CLIO, he wrote Homosexuality and the Law, which was re-
leased in 2001 to rave reviews. He is a twenty-year member and
cochair of the Los Angeles Gay and Lesbian Scientist, administra-
tive assistant to the Lesbian and Gay Psychotherapy Association
and Southern California Lambda Medical Association, member of
the America Civil Liberties Union Gay and Lesbian Caucus, and
research fellow for the ONE Institute and Archives. He was the
newsletter editor for both the Los Angeles Unified School District
Gay and Lesbian Education Commission and University of
Southern California Lambda Alumni. He teaches ballroom and
western dancing and founded Out Dancing Ballroom, a perform-
ing group that brings the delights of ballroom dancing to the gay
community.
In his previous life (the 1970s and 1980s), he worked as a re-
search physicist, built cars for the custom car circuit, and worked
as a professional classical ballet dancer (at the same time—yes, he
was a dancing physicist—how eclectic). Visit his website for arti-
cles, reviews, and pictures at http://members.aol.com/ckstewar/
CStewart.html.
403

