Guide to
Cruelty-Free
Eating
Recipes and 
Cooking Tips,
How to Stay Healthy,
Resources, Q&A, 
and more!

Thank you for taking the time to explore the following ideas! 
This guide is for all thoughtful, compassionate people—from lifelong 
meat eaters who recently learned about factory farms, to vegetarians 
seeking new recipes and nutritional information, to vegans interested 
in more ways to help end cruelty to animals.
	
5	
Eating Cruelty-Free
	
6	
Glossary
	
8	
Cooking Cruelty-Free
	
11	
Recipes
	
16	
Staying Healthy on Plant-Based Diets
	 26	
Advocating for Animals
	 29	
Resources
	 30	
Questions & Answers
This guide was produced by 
Vegan Outreach, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit 
organization dedicated to reducing animal 
suffering by promoting a vegan lifestyle.
Some of the photos that appear in this brochure were 
provided courtesy of Farm Sanctuary, Hoss Firooznia, 
Millennium Restaurant, Kari Nienstedt, and USDA.
Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating  Rev. 12/06
© Vegan Outreach, 2006
Printed on recycled paper

When you ﬁrst discover the reality of modern
animal agriculture, avoiding all products from
factory farms might seem too big a change.
But don’t be overwhelmed—just take small
steps. For example, you could eliminate meat
from certain meals or on certain days. As
you get used to eating less meat and ﬁnd
alternatives you enjoy, it may become easier
to eliminate meat altogether.
At some point, you might decide to try to root
out every product associated with modern
animal agriculture. However, if one looks hard
enough, some type of connection can be
found everywhere: organic foods (manure used
as fertilizer), bicycles (animal fat used in the
vulcanization of tires), books (hooves and
bones in binding glue), roads and buildings
(animal products used in curing concrete)—
even water (bone char used for ﬁltration by
some water treatment plants).
Ultimately, living with compassion means
striving to maximize the good we accomplish,
not following a set of rules or trying to ﬁt a
certain label. From eating less meat to being
vegan, our actions are only a means to an end:
decreasing suffering.
For this reason, we believe the consequences
of our actions should guide our choices.
Oftentimes, there’s more to consider than
whether or not an item is completely animal-
free. For instance, it can be prohibitively
expensive and time-consuming to shun every
minor or hidden animal-derived ingredient.
More importantly, avoiding an ever-increasing
list of these ingredients can make us appear
obsessive and lead others to believe that com-
passionate living is impossible. This defeats
our purpose: ending cruelty to animals!
VeganOutreach.org ●Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating 3
Choosing
Compassion
What we choose to eat makes a powerful
statement about our ethics and our view
of the world—about our very humanity. By
not buying meat, eggs, and dairy products, we
withdraw our support from cruelty to animals,
undertake an economic boycott of factory farms,
and support the production of cruelty-free foods.
From children and grandparents to celebrities
and athletes, compassionate living is spreading—
and easier than ever! Today, even small-town grocery
stores can feature a variety of veggie burgers, dogs, and
deli slices, plant-based milks, and nondairy desserts—
a bounty unimaginable only a decade ago!
Opposing Cruelty: A Results-Based Approach

Our desire to oppose and help end cruelty to animals can help guide our choices, as well as pro-
vide a simple, easy-to-understand explanation of our actions. The question isn’t, “Is this vegan?”
but, “What is best for preventing suffering?”
Dealing with Others
When you share your new discoveries and ideas, some people may not only show resistance, but
might even react with mockery or anger. In order to prevent suffering, however, we must let the
compassion we feel for animals shine through the pain and anger we feel about the atrocities of
factory farming. Unless others can respect us—as opposed to ﬁnding us cold and judgmental—
they will have little interest in taking steps to end cruelty to animals.
Instead of expecting others to change immediately, we need to be understanding, giving everyone
time to consider the realities of factory farms at their own pace and within their unique situations.
Burning bridges with anger only serves to create enemies and to feed the stereotype that vegans
are self-righteous.
Although it may be tempting to argue over related topics (such as what our prehistoric ancestors
ate), the simplest statement can be the most powerful: “I know that I don’t want to suffer.
Therefore, I don’t want to cause others to suffer.”
As long as we remain respectful, our positive example and the information we provide will
ultimately be the best voice for the animals.
All the arguments
to prove human superiority
cannot shatter this hard fact:
in suffering,
the animals are our equals.
—Peter Singer, author of Animal Liberation
“
”

What’s on the Menu?
Many people believe that eliminating animal
products will greatly narrow their menus. But
according to most vegans, quite the opposite
happens. If you visit your local natural food
store or co-op, explore your supermarket’s
organic and ethnic food sections, peruse some
vegetarian cookbooks, or just follow the sug-
gestions in this booklet, you will soon become
familiar with the wide variety of options that
were not part of your previous diet. And you’ll
ﬁnd that you can follow almost any recipe—
old or new—by substituting ingredients.
For those who prefer not to cook, there are a
large number of vegan packaged foods from
which to choose: frozen dinners; canned and
dehydrated soups, stews, and chilies; and
veggie dogs and burgers. You may even ﬁnd
that your local health food store has its own
deli counter, stocked with prepared foods.
If there aren’t many vegan offer-
ings in your area, you
may want to order from
The Mail Order Catalog
(see page 29), a great
source for meat and
dairy substitutes.
VeganOutreach.org ●Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating 5
Eating
Cruelty-Free
When I ﬁrst started looking into vegetarianism and then veganism,
I chose to explore a new type of cooking or a new type of food every week:
Indian one week, recipes for this strange grain called ‘quinoa’ the next…
Thai, seitan, Middle Eastern, nutritional yeast. Soon, I had a menu that
far exceeded my previous, omnivorous diet, in both diversity and taste.
—Erik Marcus, author of Meat Market and Vegan:The New Ethics of Eating
“
”

ﬂavor than the variety made
from raw seeds. Tahini is calcium-rich, and its
nutty taste and creamy consistency are great
for sauces, dips, spreads, and creamy dressings.
Tempeh Whole soybeans, sometimes
mixed with grains, are fermented to produce
tempeh [TEM-pay]. Compared to tofu, tempeh
is richer both in absorbable nutrients and in
ﬂavor. You can use plain tempeh in recipes that
call for meat, or try ﬂavored products such as
Lightlife’s Lemon Grilles.
Tofu Also known as bean curd, tofu is made
from the mild white milk of the soybean. Tofu
is not only inexpensive and easy to ﬁnd, but it’s
a great source of protein.
There are two main types of tofu: regular
(Chinese-style, such as White Wave) and silken
(Japanese-style, such as Mori-Nu). Regular tofu
typically comes in refrigerated water-packed
tubs, while silken tofu is commonly sold in
shelf-stable aseptic packages. Both types are
available in soft, ﬁrm, and extra-ﬁrm varieties.
Nutritional Yeast Available as ﬂakes
or powder, nutritional yeast adds a cheesy ﬂa-
vor to all sorts of foods. Red Star’s Vegetarian
Support Formula (T6635+) is fortiﬁed with
vitamin B12 (see page 18 for more on B12).
Seitan Also known as wheat meat, seitan
[say-TAN] is versatile, hearty, and chewy. It is
available ready-made (refrigerated or frozen)
or as a mix. Seitan is also relatively easy to
make from scratch (see recipe on page 13).
And, given that it keeps well, you can make
a lot to have on hand.
The main ingredient is vital wheat gluten, also
called instant gluten ﬂour. This can generally
be found in the baking aisle at larger grocery
stores. Be sure not to substitute any other
ﬂour—high gluten ﬂour is not the same.
The cookbook Vegan Vittles has an excellent
section on seitan, including recipes for ground
seitan, sausage-style seitan, and seitan salami,
pepperoni, and pastrami.
Tahini A staple in Middle Eastern cooking,
tahini is a versatile paste made from ground,
hulled sesame seeds. (Sesame butter, from
unhulled seeds, is thicker and more bitter.)
Tahini made from roasted seeds has a stronger
6 Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating ●VeganOutreach.org
Glossary
Meat Analogues Today’s mock meats include burgers, franks,
sandwich slices, bacon, sausage, chicken-style cutlets and nuggets, and
ground meat. There are imitation chicken and tuna salads—even jerky!
Sample as many brands/ﬂavors as you can to ﬁnd those you like most.

Silken tofu’s custardlike texture makes it a
wonderful substitute for dairy products. It’s
best for dressings, spreads, sauces, shakes,
soups, desserts, and baked goods.
Firm or extra-ﬁrm regular tofu is used as a meat
substitute. It can be stir-fried, baked, broiled,
or grilled. (See page 10 for tips.)
Tofu’s neutral taste makes it extremely versatile,
allowing it to pick up ﬂavors from herbs, spices,
and other ingredients. You can marinate tofu
before cooking it, or buy ready-to-eat products
such as White Wave’s baked tofu in barbeque,
Thai, and Italian styles.
TVP Textured vegetable protein (also known
as textured soy protein) is made from soy ﬂour
that has been cooked under pressure, extruded,
and dried. Since the oil has been extracted, it
has a long shelf life. TVP is high in protein, iron,
calcium, ﬁber, and zinc. It’s available, ﬂavored
and unﬂavored, in various styles, shapes and
sizes, such as ground “beef,” “chicken” cutlets,
and “bacon” bits.
VeganOutreach.org ●Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating 7
Egg Substitutes Breakfast scrambles
and mock egg salads, made from crumbled and
seasoned tofu (recipes on page 11), and egg-
less mayonnaise can be prepared at home or
purchased ready-made. Ener-G’s
Egg Replacer, found in most health
food stores, can be used for any
baking recipe that calls for a few
eggs as a leavening and binding
agent (see page 9 for more tips
on egg-free baking).
Dairy Alternatives Almonds, oats, potatoes,
rice, or soybeans are used to make vegan milks, many of
which are fortiﬁed with calcium and vitamins D and B12.
Taste and richness vary widely from brand to brand, so
experiment to ﬁnd your favorite. You’ll ﬁnd vegan milks in the
dairy case, as well as in shelf-stable aseptic packages, which require
refrigeration after opening. Nondairy milk can be used in recipes,
poured over cereal, or enjoyed straight from the carton. There are vegan
creamers available for your coffee, too.
Soy margarine is a great substitute for butter when baking cakes and
other desserts. Earth Balance’s buttery spreads are not only tasty on
bread but also excellent for all types of cooking.
Other dairy alternatives include soy- and rice-based frozen desserts,
tofu sour cream, and a wide assort-
ment of vegan cheeses.

Use sauce to marinate and cook your protein
source or to cover your carbohydrate source
and veggies. Sauces can be made more nutri-
tious by adding nuts, seeds, and/or oils, such
as ﬂaxseed oil (see page 20), which is best in
cold sauces or dressings with an already strong
flavor. With the variety of sauces available and
the number of food combinations possible,
you can easily try innumerable new dishes
without ever cracking open a cookbook!
Sauce There are many canned and bottled sauces available at most supermarkets, from the
mundane (basic tomato or barbeque sauce, for example) to the exotic (such as chili salsa or
Thai sesame-lime marinade).
8 Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating ●VeganOutreach.org
Protein source
Beans, seitan, tempeh, tofu,
TVP, faux meat
Carbohydrate source
Potatoes, bread, pasta, rice,
tortillas, unusual grains (such
as quinoa or amaranth)
Vegetable
Countless options
Cooking
Cruelty-Free
DoYou Really Need a Recipe?
It’s fun to ﬁnd a new recipe and add it to your regular
favorites. But if you don’t have time for a recipe, try the “meat,
potatoes, and vegetable” approach to a meal, and sauce it up!
Simply pick one or more of each of the following:

VeganOutreach.org ●Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating 9
Baking without Eggs
Most baked goods that don’t require
much leavening and only call for one egg
can easily be made without the egg—just
add two or three additional tablespoons
of liquid to the batter. To lighten baked
goods, try Ener-G’s Egg Replacer or one
of the following (equivalent to one egg):
●1⁄4 C applesauce or mashed banana
●3 T silken tofu blended with the
recipe’s liquid ingredients
●2 T cornstarch mixed with 2 T water
Substitution Tips
Recipes are often presented as ﬁxed and ﬁnal.
It might seem that if you don’t have tempeh,
or green shallots, or vegetable broth, for
example, you are out of luck. But very rarely
is something so vital to a recipe that you can’t
substitute for it—or even ignore it (such as
the eggs called for in boxed pancake mixes).
Don’t be afraid to experiment—try TVP
instead of seitan, onions instead of scallions,
peas instead of carrots, tomato sauce or even
ketchup instead of tomato purée, soy sauce
instead of tamari, pasta instead of rice, etc.
Indeed, most traditional recipes can be made
vegan with some imagination. The more you
experiment, the better you’ll be able to revital-
ize old favorites and create new ones! Read on
for some ideas to get you started, followed by
recipes on page 11.
Vegan Tacos & Chili
Any number of meals can be centered around
Lightlife’s Gimme Lean, a product loved by
vegetarians and nonvegetarians alike. For
vegan taco meat, fry up one tube of Gimme
Lean in canola oil and then add a package
of Ortega’s taco seasoning and Campbell’s
V8 juice (the spicy version
if you like more heat).
Of course, there are many alternatives
to this. Several meat substitutes will
work: imitation ground meat
(Boca, Lightlife, or Yves brand,
for example), reconstituted TVP,
or even crumbled veggie burgers,
tofu, or tempeh. You can skip the
V8 and just use water. Use another
brand of seasoning, or try salsa or your
own combination of spices (cumin,
chili powder, garlic, etc.) instead.
From a base of fried Gimme Lean (or what-
ever), you can do just about anything. Add a
can of drained black beans or chickpeas. Add
a can of diced tomatoes, including those with
spicy jalapeños or green chilies.
Taco meat or chili can be served in just about
any fashion: in ﬂour or corn tortillas or taco
shells, over baked potatoes or rice,
with chips or hot bread, etc.
Shredded vegan cheese and/or
tofu-based sour cream are good
compliments. You can also eat
chili Cincinnati style—that is, over
spaghetti with chopped raw onions
and oyster crackers. For a sample
chili recipe, see page 13.

On-the-Fly Stir-Fries
You can make a stir-fry to meet any taste,
using whatever you have on hand: tofu or
tempeh, onions, garlic, mushrooms, carrots,
peas, cabbage, cauliﬂower, broccoli, etc. Cut
up whatever you want to use beforehand.
For an easy tofu dish, heat a tablespoon each
of sesame oil and canola oil in a nonstick fry-
ing pan or wok. Once the oil is medium hot,
drop in bite-size pieces of tofu (one 16-ounce
package, frozen and thawed; see sidebar).
After a few minutes, start to add other ingredi-
ents, generally in the order of those that need
to cook the longest (carrots) or will impart the
most ﬂavor to the tofu (onions and/or garlic).
Once the tofu has
browned enough
(sometimes, more oil
must be added), pour
in a bottle of Iron
Chef’s General Tso’s
sauce or another sauce
from the Asian food
section of your grocery
—or any other type
of sauce that sounds
good! Add a bit of
water to the empty bottle, shake, and add to
the pan. Stir thoroughly, cover, and simmer
for 10 to 20 minutes. Serve over rice or pasta.
Creamy Nondairy Dips
Although you can use any variety of beans
as the basis for a dip, such as chickpeas for
hummus (see opposite page for recipe), many
dips can be prepared using silken tofu.
Starting with 12 ounces of Mori-Nu extra-ﬁrm
silken tofu in a food processor, add 1⁄2 cup of
rice milk and 1⁄8–1⁄4 cup of canola oil. Of course,
you can use soymilk, a different oil (or none),
soy sauce (to taste), water, etc. If you use soft
silken tofu instead of extra ﬁrm, you won’t
need as much liquid, if any.
Next, add whatever type of seasoning mix
you’re in the mood for; then blend at a high
speed for 3 to 5 minutes, stopping once or
twice to scrape down the sides. A half package
each of Hidden Valley’s fat-free ranch dip and
Lipton’s onion soup mix is an interesting
combination. For a new
dip, add part of a
bottle of a favorite
salad dressing.
10 Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating ●VeganOutreach.org
Tofu as a Meat Replacer
Select ﬁrm or extra-ﬁrm regular tofu.
Pressing When used in place of meat,
tofu should ﬁrst be pressed: cut the block
lengthwise and squeeze out the excess
water. The more liquid
removed, the ﬁrmer and
more ﬂavor absorbent the
tofu becomes.
Freezing For a chewier
texture, use frozen and
thawed tofu. Frozen tofu
not only lasts longer
but, once thawed and
pressed, more readily
soaks up sauces and marinades.
Be sure to use regular tofu and, for best
results, freeze for a minimum of 48 hours.
Let the tofu thaw in the refrigerator for
about 24 hours. Once fully defrosted,
press thoroughly; then slice or tear into
bite-size pieces, as desired.

Tofu Breakfast Scramble
1 lb ﬁrm or extra-ﬁrm regular tofu, crumbled
2 T vegan margarine or vegetable oil
1⁄2 C nutritional yeast
2 tsp onion powder
1 tsp garlic powder
1 tsp parsley ﬂakes
1⁄2 tsp turmeric
salt & pepper, to taste
In a large frying pan, sauté crumbled tofu in
margarine for 2 to 3 minutes. Add remaining
ingredients; mix well. Cook over medium heat
for 5 to 10 minutes, stirring often.
Serve with traditional breakfast sides such as
toast, potatoes, and veggie bacon or sausage.
Variations Add sautéed vegetables (onions,
mushrooms, peppers, etc.) and/or top with
melted vegan cheese. For breakfast burritos,
wrap scramble in tortillas and serve with salsa.
Fluffy Pancakes
11⁄2 C ﬂour
1 T sugar
1 tsp baking powder
1⁄2 tsp baking soda
11⁄2 C soymilk or water
2 T vegetable oil
Mix the dry ingredients and then stir in the wet
ingredients. If the batter is too thick, add water
a tablespoon at a time until desired consistency
is reached.
Pour batter onto a nonstick pan and cook over
medium heat, turning once when the edges
begin to bubble and brown.
Hummus
1 15-oz can chickpeas (garbanzos), drained
1⁄2 C water (1⁄4 C or less for a stiffer texture)
3 T tahini
1 T toasted sesame oil (or olive or canola oil)
1⁄2 lemon, juiced
1 large garlic clove, mashed
salt & pepper, to taste
Place all the ingredients in a blender or food
processor and blend to desired consistency.
Serve with raw vegetables or chips as
a dip, on crackers as a spread, or stuff
into warmed pita bread halves with grated
carrots, chopped tomato, shredded lettuce,
and/or fresh alfalfa sprouts on top.
Variations Blend in vegetables (such as red
pepper), add spices (such as cumin), and/or
stir in chopped olives or sun-dried tomatoes.
VeganOutreach.org ●Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating 11
Recipes

Gee Whiz Spread
from The Uncheese Cookbook by J. Stepaniak
1 151⁄2-oz can Great Northern beans
(about 11⁄2 C), rinsed well and drained
1⁄2 C pimiento pieces, drained
6 T nutritional yeast ﬂakes
3 T fresh lemon juice
2–3 T tahini
1⁄2 tsp onion granules
1⁄2 tsp prepared yellow mustard
1⁄2 tsp salt
Process all the ingredients in a blender until
completely smooth. Transfer to a storage
container and chill thoroughly before serving.
12 Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating ●VeganOutreach.org
Oven-Cooked Brown Rice
Do you constantly have trouble getting
your rice to come out as well as it does
when you order it from a restaurant?
If so, try this foolproof method:
Preheat oven to 350° F. Place 2 C brown
rice in a casserole dish. Boil 4 C water,
pour it over the rice, and stir. Cover dish
and bake for 50 to 60 minutes, until
water is fully absorbed.
Makes perfect rice every time!
Recipes continued
Tofu Ricotta
from The Uncheese Cookbook by J. Stepaniak
11⁄2 lb ﬁrm regular tofu, well mashed
1⁄4 C fresh lemon juice
2 tsp dried basil leaves
1⁄2–11⁄2 tsp sweetener of your choice
3⁄4 tsp salt
1⁄2 tsp garlic granules
Mash all the ingredients together until mixture
has a ﬁne, grainy texture. Use in veggie lasagna
or any savory dish that calls for ricotta cheese.
Creamy Potato Salad
6 medium potatoes, boiled until tender,
and cut into cubes
1 large onion, chopped
1 C chopped celery
1⁄2 C vegan mayonnaise
(such as Vegenaise or Nayonaise)
1⁄4 C distilled white vinegar
salt & pepper, to taste
paprika (optional)
Combine all ingredients in a bowl and season
to taste. Sprinkle paprika on top, if desired.
Missing Egg Sandwiches
1⁄2 lb ﬁrm regular tofu, mashed (about 1 C)
2 green onions, ﬁnely chopped
2 T pickle relish
1 T vegan mayonnaise
1 tsp mustard
1⁄4 tsp cumin
1⁄4 tsp turmeric
1⁄4 tsp garlic powder
8 slices whole wheat bread
4 lettuce leaves
4 tomato slices
Combine the mashed tofu with all but the last
three ingredients. Mix thoroughly.
Spread on bread and garnish with lettuce and
tomato. Makes four sandwiches.

Seitan (Basic Boiling Recipe)
from Vegan Vittles by J. Stepaniak
Dry ingredients
11⁄2 C instant gluten ﬂour (vital wheat gluten)
1⁄4 C nutritional yeast ﬂakes
(optional; adds a deeper ﬂavor)
1⁄2 tsp garlic granules (optional or to taste)
1⁄2 tsp onion granules (optional or to taste)
herbs & spices, as desired (optional)
Liquid ingredients
1 C water, vegetable broth, tomato juice, or a
combination (juice adds a “beeﬁer” ﬂavor)
3 T soy sauce
1 T olive oil (optional)
Simmering broth
10 C water or vegetable broth
1⁄2 C soy sauce (optional)
Combine the dry ingredients in a medium
mixing bowl.
Combine liquid ingredients in a small mixing
bowl. Pour into dry ingredients, and mix well.
If there is still ﬂour around the edges, add a
small amount of additional water.
Knead the gluten directly in the mixing bowl
for about a minute. Slice the gluten into three
relatively equal pieces, and set aside.
Place the ingredients for the simmering broth
into a 41⁄2-quart saucepan or Dutch oven, add
the gluten pieces, and bring to a gentle boil.
Reduce heat to medium low. Simmer with pot
partially covered for one hour. Maintain the
heat so that the liquid barely simmers;
turn the gluten over during cooking.
Let cool in broth uncovered.
Transfer to storage containers, adding
enough of the broth to keep the seitan
immersed. Seal containers tightly and
store in refrigerator for up to ten days
or in freezer for up to six months.
Best and Fastest Chili
from The Convenient Vegetarian by V. Messina & K. Schumann
just under 1 C boiling water
1 C TVP (textured vegetable protein)
1 T canola or olive oil
1 onion, coarsely chopped
1 green bell pepper, diced
2 15-oz cans diced or crushed tomatoes
1 15-oz can pinto, kidney, or black beans
1 3-oz can tomato paste
1 2-oz can diced jalapeño chilies;
or 2 fresh hot chilies, diced
2 T chili powder
2 tsp ground cumin
2 tsp garlic powder
2 tsp dried oregano
1⁄4 tsp allspice (optional)
In a small bowl, pour boiling water over the
TVP. Set aside.
In a large skillet, heat oil over medium heat.
Sauté the onion and bell pepper until tender
(about 8 minutes). Add TVP and the remaining
ingredients; mix thoroughly. Simmer 30 min-
utes. Serve alone or over a cooked grain of
your choice.
Variation Substitute two thawed and crumbled
veggie burgers for the reconstituted TVP.
Staples for a Vegan Pantry
Vegan broth mixes are great
to have on hand for any
recipe that calls for stock.
For a nutritious alternative
to soy sauce and tamari,
try Bragg’s Liquid Aminos.
VeganOutreach.org ●Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating 13
You’ll ﬁnd a list of classic cookbooks
and other resources on page 29.

Mac & “Cheese” Casserole
from The New Farm Vegetarian Cookbook by L. Hagler & D. Bates
Have ready
31⁄2 C (dry) elbow macaroni, cooked
Sauce
1⁄2 C vegan margarine
1⁄2 C ﬂour
31⁄2 C boiling water
2 T soy sauce (or Bragg’s Liquid Aminos)
11⁄2 tsp salt
11⁄2 tsp garlic powder (or crushed fresh garlic)
pinch of turmeric
1⁄4 C vegetable oil
1 C nutritional yeast ﬂakes
paprika (optional)
Preheat oven to 350° F. In a saucepan, melt
margarine over low heat. Beat in ﬂour with a
wire whisk and continue to beat over a medium
flame until mixture is smooth and bubbly.
Whip in boiling water, soy sauce, salt, garlic
powder, and turmeric, beating well.
Cook the sauce until it thickens and bubbles;
then whip in the oil and nutritional yeast ﬂakes.
Mix part of the sauce with the noodles and
put in a casserole dish. Then pour a generous
amount of sauce on top.
Sprinkle the top with paprika, and bake for
15 minutes. Then put under broiler for a few
minutes until the top is crisp.
Variations Serve sauce over steamed veggies,
baked potatoes—anything you like!
14 Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating ●VeganOutreach.org
Recipes continued
Chuckwagon Stew
from Vegan Vittles by J. Stepaniak
3 C water or vegetable broth
1 8-oz package tempeh, cut into 1⁄2-inch cubes
4 medium carrots, peeled and sliced
2 medium potatoes, peeled and cut into
bite-size chunks
2 medium onions, cut into wedges
1⁄2 C ketchup
1⁄4 C soy sauce
2 tsp olive oil (optional)
1 tsp garlic granules
1 tsp dried tarragon leaves
1⁄4 tsp ground black pepper
1⁄4 C whole wheat pastry ﬂour
1⁄3 C cold water
1–2 T minced fresh parsley (optional)
Place the ﬁrst 11 ingredients in a 41⁄2-quart
saucepan or Dutch oven. Bring stew to a boil.
Reduce heat to medium low, and cover the
pan. Simmer until the vegetables are tender
(about 30 minutes), stirring occasionally.
Place ﬂour in a small bowl or measuring cup.
Gradually stir in the water, beating vigorously
with a fork until the mixture is smooth.
Stir the flour-water mixture into the stew.
Cook, stirring constantly, until the gravy is
thickened and bubbly.
Ladle into soup bowls to serve. Garnish each
serving with the parsley, if desired.

Pumpkin Pie
2 101⁄2-oz packages ﬁrm silken tofu, drained
1 16-oz can solid-pack pumpkin
3⁄4 C granulated sugar
1⁄2 tsp nutmeg
1⁄4 tsp ginger
1⁄4 tsp ground cloves
1⁄4 tsp allspice
1 9-inch piecrust
Preheat oven to 375° F. Blend tofu in a food
processor until creamy and smooth. Add the
remaining ingredients except the piecrust and
blend well.
Pour mixture into crust. Bake about one hour
or until a toothpick inserted in the center
comes out almost clean.
Chocolate Pudding
from Vegan Vittles by J. Stepaniak
1 101⁄2-oz package ﬁrm silken tofu, crumbled
2⁄3 C unbleached cane sugar
1⁄3 C unsweetened cocoa powder
2 tsp vanilla extract
pinch of salt
Place all the ingredients in a food processor
ﬁtted with a metal blade, and process until
smooth, creamy, and thick. Chill in refrigerator
until serving time.
Variation For pudding pie, double the recipe
and chill pudding in a baked pie shell.
VeganOutreach.org ●Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating 15
For more information on vegan cooking, including dozens of links
to thousands of recipes, visit VeganOutreach.org/guide
Chocolate Cake
11⁄2 C ﬂour
1 C sugar
3 T cocoa or carob powder
1 tsp baking soda
1⁄8 tsp salt
4 T oil
1 tsp vanilla
1 T vinegar
1 C cold water
Preheat oven to 350° F. In an adequate mixing
bowl, combine the dry ingredients.
Create three holes in the mixture. Put oil in the
ﬁrst hole, vanilla in the second, and vinegar in
the third. Cover with water and mix thoroughly.
Transfer to oiled or nonstick 9-inch cake pan or
equivalent. Bake for 35 minutes.
Variation Batter can be used for cupcakes;
bake for 25 minutes.

Introduction: Research on Vegetarian and Vegan Diets
Although lacto-ovo vegetarianism has been around for most
of human history, the vegan diet appears to be a relatively
new experiment—only since the mid-1940s has it been
practiced in an organized fashion in the Western world. So far,
the experiment appears to be successful: vegans in developed
countries have been shown to have the same overall mortality
rates (deaths per year before age 90) as meat eaters with healthy
lifestyles (low smoking and alcohol intake).2 These rates are about 50%
lower than those of the general population.2
The American Dietetic Association’s 2003 position paper on vegetarian diets states:
Well-planned vegan and other types of vegetarian diets are appropriate for
all stages of the life cycle, including during pregnancy, lactation, infancy,
childhood, and adolescence. Vegetarian diets offer a number of nutri-
tional beneﬁts, including lower levels of saturated fat, cholesterol,
and animal protein as well as higher levels of carbohydrates, ﬁber,
magnesium, potassium, folate, and antioxidants such as vitamins
C and E and phytochemicals. Vegetarians have been reported to
have lower body mass indices than nonvegetarians, as well as
lower rates of death from ischemic heart disease; vegetarians also
show lower blood cholesterol levels; lower blood pressure; and
lower rates of hypertension, type 2 diabetes, and prostate and
colon cancer.30
“Health Beneﬁts of a Vegetarian Diet,” a 1999 paper coauthored by two
experts on the mortality rates of vegetarians, concludes:
Compared with nonvegetarians, Western vegetarians have a lower
mean BMI [body mass index] (by about 1 kg/m2), a lower mean plasma
total cholesterol concentration (by about 0.5 mmol/l [19 mg/dl]), and a
16 Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating ●VeganOutreach.org
Below is an abridged version
of “Staying Healthy on Plant-
Based Diets.” For more details,
including a list of references,
please see the full article at
VeganHealth.org/sh
Staying Healthy
on Plant-Based Diets
by Jack Norris, Registered Dietitian and Vegan Outreach President
The term “vegetarian” includes vegetarians who drink milk
and/or eat eggs (lacto-ovo vegetarians), and vegetarians who
consume neither dairy nor eggs (vegans). Although this article
is focused on vegetarian and vegan diets, many of the nutri-
tional concerns can also be applied to people who eat almost
vegetarian diets (sometimes called “semivegetarians”).

lower mortality from IHD [ischemic heart disease] (by about 25%). They may also have a
lower risk for some other diseases such as diverticular disease, gallstones and appendicitis.
No differences in mortality from common cancers have been established. There is no evidence
of adverse effects on mortality. Much more information is needed, particularly on other causes
of death, osteoporosis, and long-term health in vegans.12
In 2001, a study of 34,192 members of the Seventh-Day Adventist (SDA) church living in Southern
California1 showed them to be the longest-lived formally studied population in the world at the
time (with an average life span of 78.5 years for men and 82.3 for women).27 Twenty-nine percent
were vegetarian, 7–10% of which were vegan. Compared to the nonvegetarians, SDA vegetarians
●had a 38% lower heart disease rate for men (no difference for the women);
●lived 2–3 years longer;
●had half the high blood pressure, diabetes, and colon cancer;
●had two-thirds the rheumatoid arthritis and prostate cancer.
“I Was Vegan for a While, But...”
There are a number of nutritional issues that, if not attended to, could make someone feel less
than optimal on a vegetarian or vegan diet. Some examples include not consuming enough
calories, protein, vitamin B12, calcium, or vitamin D; or eating too much dairy, soy, or wheat
(“too much” will differ greatly from person to person).
Consuming an adequate amount of calories can be a challenge for a new vegan. Those on the
standard Western diet may only be aware of vegan foods that are low in calories (e.g., salads,
vegetables, fruits). Eating only these foods will likely leave them unsatisﬁed and thinking the
vegan diet is to blame, when all they need to do is eat more high-calorie foods.
People once believed that vegetarians had to combine particular foods at every meal to get the
proper balance of amino acids (the building blocks of protein). We now know that this is not the
case. However, some vegans may not get enough total protein (see page 23).
Some vegan advocates emphasize that humans need only small amounts of B12, and
that it can be stored in the body for years. Certain individuals do have enough
B12 stored in their liver to prevent overt B12 deﬁciency for many years.
However, people often misinterpret this to mean that one need only
consume a tiny amount of B12 once every few years. Actually, to build
up such stores, it takes many years of consuming B12 beyond one’s
daily needs. Many people do not have such stores. This problem is
easily solved by eating B12-fortiﬁed foods or taking a supplement.
One can ﬁnd certain studies that seem to support the idea that
meat, eggs, and/or dairy are the cause of osteoporosis. Selectively
choosing such studies leaves out the majority of research published
on the subject, which concludes that vegans, like nonvegans, should
ensure daily sources of calcium and vitamin D.
There are real differences in how people respond to various diets.
Although many people thrive on a vegan diet, it may not be so easy for
others. Afﬁrming everyone’s experience is the ﬁrst step in working towards
a more humane diet. With commitment to reducing animal suffering,
there are generally solutions to any dilemmas that arise.
VeganOutreach.org ●Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating 17

●In fortiﬁed foods, the amount of vitamin
B12 listed on the nutrition label is based on
6 µg/day. For example, 25% of the Daily Value
is 1.5 µg (.25 x 6 µg = 1.5 µg).
●Follow steps 1 and 2 below if you have not
had a regular source of B12 for some time;
if you have, go directly to step 2:
Step 1. Buy a bottle of sublingual B12 and
dissolve 2,000 mcg under your tongue once
a day for two weeks. (Tablets can be broken
for smaller doses until you ﬁnish the bottle;
it’s okay to take more than recommended.)
Step 2. To maximize your B12 status, follow
one of these daily recommendations:
●Eat two servings of fortiﬁed foods
containing 3–5 mcg of B12 (spaced at least
six hours apart).
●Take 10–100 mcg (or more) of B12 in a
supplement or multivitamin.
●Take two 5 mcg supplements of B12
(spaced at least six hours apart).
Vitamin B12 There are no reliable, unforti-
fied plant sources of vitamin B12. Do not rely
on any seaweed (e.g., algae, nori, spirulina),
brewer’s yeast, tempeh, or a “living” vitamin
supplement that uses plants as a source of
B12. Nor should you rely solely on one type
of fortiﬁed food, such as Red Star’s Vegetarian
Support Formula nutritional yeast. Fortiﬁed
foods and/or supplements are necessary for
the optimal health of all vegans and many
vegetarians. Vegan infants need B12 through
breast milk (mothers must have a consistent
B12 intake) or formula.
Overt Vitamin B12 Deﬁciency
B12 protects the nervous system. Without it,
permanent damage can result (e.g., blindness,
deafness, dementia). Fatigue, and tingling in
the hands or feet, can be early signs of deﬁ-
ciency. Vitamin B12 also keeps the digestive
system healthy.
Mild Vitamin B12 Deﬁciency
By lowering homocysteine levels, B12 also
reduces the risk of heart disease, stroke, and
other diseases. Vegans and near-vegans who
do not supplement with B12 have consistently
shown elevated homocysteine levels.
Vitamin B12 Recommendations
●The Dietary Reference Intake for vitamin
B12 is 2.4 micrograms per day for adults
(abbreviated as mcg or µg; 1,000 µg = 1 mg).
18 Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating ●VeganOutreach.org
Some Benefits of Selected Vegan Foods
Beans & Nuts In addition to being good sources of protein, beans
and nuts have many other beneﬁts, such as vitamins, minerals,
ﬁber, and other chemicals that may prevent cancer
and heart disease.28,29 Nuts also contain
monounsaturated fats, which are healthy
for the heart. In one study, eating nuts
(including peanuts)34 ﬁve or
more times per week
reduced heart disease
by about 50%!1
Nutrients That Need Attention in Vegetarian and Vegan Diets
Many cereals
and plant milks
are B12 fortiﬁed.

●Soy Garden and
Earth Balance are two
vegan margarines with
no hydrogenated oils.
Monounsaturated Fats (MUFA)
●MUFA improve cholesterol levels.
●MUFA are abundant in olive oil, canola oil,
high oleic sunﬂower oil, hazelnut oil, high
oleic safﬂower oil, and almond oil.
●Olive may be the best oil for cooking at
moderate temperatures. It is not as reﬁned
as other oils, making it a reliable source of
vitamin E. It has stood the test of time as the
primary oil used in the healthy Mediterranean
diet. If you do not like the taste of olive oil in
some dishes, try other oils high in MUFA.
●Avocados and many nuts (almonds,
cashews, ﬁlberts/hazelnuts, macadamias,
peanuts, pecans) are high in MUFA. Since nuts
are high in nutrients and other protective
compounds, you can beneﬁt from eating them
on a daily basis.
Polyunsaturated Fats (PUFA)
There are two main families of PUFA:
omega-6s and omega-3s.
Omega-6 Fatty Acids
●Omega-6s are building blocks for hormones
that increase inﬂammation and blood clotting.
●Linoleic acid is the most prevalent omega-6
in plant foods.
Fats The following is a quick summary
about fats, intended simply to give basic
recommendations. For a more comprehensive
discussion, see “The Challenge of Deﬁning
Optimal Fat Intake” by Virginia Messina,
MPH, RD (available at www.andrews.edu/
NUFS/vndpg.html).
Saturated Fats
●Many saturated fats raise the risk of heart
disease.
●Saturated fats are found in high amounts
in many animal products.
●Because saturated fats are stable at high
temperatures, they are often used for deep-
frying. You should limit deep-fried foods, but
if you are going to fry foods at high tempera-
tures, palm oil (which is mostly saturated)
may be the best choice for its stability.
Trans Fats
●Trans fats are found mostly in foods made
with hydrogenated and/or partially hydro-
genated oils, including many margarines,
shortenings, commercial frying fats, crackers,
cookies, and other snacks. (Read the label
to determine whether the product contains
hydrogenated oils.)
●Butter and animal fat can also contain trans
fats from bacterial fermentation.33
●The consensus among nutrition profession-
als is that trans fats increase the risk of heart
disease and many other diseases.
VeganOutreach.org ●Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating 19
Fruits & Vegetables High fruit and vegetable consumption has been associated
with a reduced risk for cardiovascular disease, several common cancers, and
other chronic diseases (such as macular degeneration and cataracts).
Whole Grains Whole-grain consumption has been associated with
a reduced risk for heart disease, diabetes, hypertension, and stomach
and colon cancers. Whole grains include brown rice,
whole wheat, barley, oatmeal, corn,
quinoa, and millet.

●Omega-6s are prevalent in corn, sunﬂower,
safﬂower, and “vegetable” oils. Since most veg-
etarians get too many omega-6s, they should
consume a limited amount of these oils.38
Omega-3 Fatty Acids
●There are three important omega-3s:
●Alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) is found
mainly in ﬂaxseeds, hemp seeds, walnuts,
soybeans, and their oils, as well as in
canola oil. It reduces blood clotting,
improves artery ﬂexibility, and may also
reduce heart arrhythmias. ALA shows a
strong association with reduced cardio-
vascular mortality rates, including those
from heart attack and stroke.
●Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), found
mainly in fatty ﬁsh, serves as a precursor for
the eicosanoids (hormonelike substances
that act on local tissues) that reduce inﬂam-
mation, blood clotting, and cholesterol.
●Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), found
mainly in fatty ﬁsh and seaweed, is a
major structural component of the gray
matter of the brain, the retina of the eye,
and cell membranes. Low DHA levels are
associated with depression.
●For some of its beneﬁts, ALA must ﬁrst be
converted by the body into EPA, then into DHA.
Most people’s bodies will naturally convert
ALA from supplements at an adequate rate,
but others’ might not. The body can also turn
DHA into EPA.
About Flaxseeds
●Flaxseed oil is the most con-
centrated source of ALA.
●One teaspoon of ﬂaxseed oil
contains 2.5 g of ALA. Cooking
ﬂaxseed oil damages the ALA,
but it can be put on warm food
such as toast. Flaxseed oil
should be kept refrigerated.
●One tablespoon of ﬂaxseeds contains 2.1 g
of ALA. If ﬂaxseeds are not ground, they may
not be digested. They can be ground in a
blender (works best with a large amount) or
coffee grinder and then stored in the freezer.
20 Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating ●VeganOutreach.org
Ground ﬂax-
seeds can be
sprinkled on cereal
or used in baked goods.
PUFA Recommendations
●Be sure to follow the table below, as many
vegetarians do not get enough omega-3s.15
Age
ALA
Flaxseed Oil
(years)
(g/day)
(rounded tsp)
.5–6
.9–2.0
1⁄2
>7
2.2–3.3
1
Pregnant*
(trimesters 2 & 3)
extra .3
extra 1⁄2
Lactating*
extra .6
extra 1⁄2
*Pregnant and breast-feeding women should consider
replacing the extra 1⁄2 tsp of ﬂaxseed oil with 300 mg
(.3 g) of DHA because infants have more difﬁculty
converting omega-3s.
●Limiting omega-6 intake is important for
maximizing the conversion of omega-3s.
Aim for an omega-6 to omega-3 ratio of 4:1.
Source of Omega-3
Omega-6:Omega-3*
Flaxseed oil
1:4
Canola oil
2:1
English walnuts
4:1–5:1
Walnut oil
5:1
Soybean oil
7.5:1
Black walnuts
10:1
*Approximate.
●Flaxseed oil goes a long way in correcting the
imbalance in a typical vegetarian diet, but you
should only take the recommended amounts.
If you prefer oils on foods such as bread, raw
olive or raw canola oil will minimize your
omega-6 to omega-3 ratio.
●People with diabetes do not efﬁciently con-
vert ALA to EPA and DHA. Therefore, diabetic
vegetarians should replace .3 g of ALA with
300 mg of DHA per day.
●Although there is no clear evidence that
vegans generally require them, DHA supple-
ments can be ordered online from many
vegan companies (see resources on page 29).
It would be prudent to get a bottle once a year
and take 300 mg per day until it’s gone.

Calcium
●Recent small studies have shown vegans
to have the same or slightly less bone mineral
density than nonvegans.5,6,7,8,9 Factors that can
prevent osteoporosis include
●weight-bearing exercise throughout
one’s lifetime (one of the most important);
●adequate intake of calcium, vitamin D,
vitamin K, protein, potassium, magnesium,
and boron;
●adequate estrogen levels (for women).
Factors that can contribute to osteoporosis
include
●high intake of sodium and caffeine;
●smoking;
●too much or too little protein.
●Plant foods that provide calcium offer other
nutrients that are good for bones: vitamin K
in leafy greens; vitamin C, potassium, and
magnesium in calcium-fortiﬁed orange juice;
boron in beans, nuts, leafy green vegetables,
and non-citrus fruits.10
Multivitamins
Some people may have speciﬁc problems
absorbing or utilizing particular nutrients
regardless of their diets. And some vegans’
diets might be low in certain nutrients, such
as riboﬂavin (vitamin B2) or pyridoxine
(vitamin B6). For these reasons, it might
be prudent to take a modest multivitamin
supplement each day.
See full article at
VeganHealth.org/sh
for a list of vegan
multivitamins.
VeganOutreach.org ●Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating 21
Nutrients That Need Attention in Vegan Diets
Pangea’s VeganLife
multivitamins can
be ordered online
(see resources on
page 29).
Food
Serving
Calcium (mg)
Orange juice, fortiﬁed
1 C
250–300
Soymilk, fortiﬁed
1 C
200–300
Tofu (if “calcium-set”)*
1⁄2 C
120–300
Blackstrap molasses
1 T
187
Collard greens†
1⁄2 C
178
Sesame seeds
2 T
176
Vegetarian baked beans†
1 C
128
Navy beans†
1 C
128
Broccoli†
1⁄2 C
50
Almonds
2 T
50
Kale†
1⁄2 C
47
*Read the label for calcium amounts.
† Cooked.
●The absorbability of the calcium in kale,
broccoli, collard greens, and soymilk is about
the same as that in cows’ milk, which contains
300 mg per cup.
●The calcium in spinach, Swiss chard, and
beet greens is not well absorbed, due to their
high content of oxalates, which bind calcium.
●Many nondairy milks are now fortiﬁed with
calcium, vitamin D, and/or vitamin B12.
●Many orange juices are calcium-fortiﬁed.
Calcium Recommendations
●The Daily Value for calcium on food labels is
1,000 mg. If a label says 25% of the Daily Value,
it has 250 mg of calcium per serving.
●Dietary Reference Intake for calcium:
Age
DRI
Upper Limit*
(years)
(mg/day)
(mg/day)
1–3
500
2,500
4–8
800
2,500
9–18
1,300
2,500
19–50
1,000
2,500
>50
1,200
2,500
*Do not exceed the upper limit.

Vitamin D
●Vitamin D regulates the absorption and
excretion of calcium, especially when calcium
intake is low.
●Vitamin D can be made by the action of
sunlight (UV rays) on skin. Light-skinned non-
elderly adults exposing their hands and faces
to sunlight for 10 to 15 minutes two to three
times per week can get enough vitamin D.
●Vitamin D is not synthesized during the
winter in northern climates.10 Vegans who
do not get much sunlight exposure should
supplement with vitamin D, especially during
the winter or cloudy months.
●One small recent study found an increase
in lumbar spine density in four out of ﬁve
vegans in Finland (a northern country where
sunlight does not activate vitamin D during
the winter) who took 5 mcg of vitamin D2
per day for 11 months.4
●Elderly people may need up to four times
the amount of sunlight exposure listed
above,18 and dark-skinned people may need
up to six times this amount in order to meet
vitamin D needs through sunshine alone.
●According to some experts, dark-skinned
breast-fed babies should have vitamin D
supplements.18
Young Vegans
Infants The American Dietetic Association
and the American Academy of Pediatrics agree
that well-planned vegan diets can satisfy the
nutrient needs and normal growth of infants.25
For more information on the needs of vegan
infants, please refer to Becoming Vegan (see sidebar
on page 24).
Children & Fiber Vegan children can
easily exceed the upper limit for ﬁber.
Therefore, it is recommended they eat half
of their servings of grains as reﬁned (e.g.,
white pasta, white rice, white bread).26
Vegan children may beneﬁt from some
other low-ﬁber foods such as peeled fruits
and vegetables, nut butters, and added oils.26
22 Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating ●VeganOutreach.org
Vitamin D Recommendations
●The Daily Value for vitamin D is 10 mcg
(400 IU). If a food label says 25% of the Daily
Value, it has 2.5 mcg (100 IU) per serving.
Typical fortiﬁed soy, almond, and rice milks
have 2–3 mcg (80–120 IU) per cup.
●Vitamin D of ergocalciferol, which comes
from plants, can be found in health stores
or ordered online (see resources on page 29).
●Dietary Reference Intake for vitamin D:
Age
DRI
Upper Limit*
(years)
(mcg† [IU]/day)
(mcg [IU]/day)
<1
5 (200)
25 (1,000)
1–50‡
5 (200)
50 (2,000)
51–70
10 (400)
50 (2,000)
>70
15 (600)
50 (2,000)
*Do not exceed the upper limit.
† mcg = microgram = µg.
‡ Including during pregnancy.
Iodine
●Iodine is needed for healthy thyroid function,
which regulates metabolism.
●Receiving an adequate amount of iodine
through foods is not as much of a problem
for U.S. vegans as it is for European vegans,19,20
whose food supply contains less iodine due

to the lower iodine content of the soil used
to grow food.
Iodine Recommendations
●Since it’s very hard to predict how much
iodine is in any given person’s food supply,
North American vegans should take a modest
supplement on a regular basis to ensure they
are meeting requirements; 75–150 mcg every
few days should be ample.
●Dietary Reference Intake for iodine:
Age
DRI
Upper Limit*
(years)
(mcg†/day)
(mcg/day)
1–3
90
200
4–8
90
300
9–13
120
600
14–18
150
900
>18
150
1,100
Pregnant
≤18
220
900
>18
220
1,100
Lactating
≤18
290
900
>18
290
1,100
*Important: Do not exceed the upper limit.
† mcg = microgram = µg.
Other Important Nutrients
Protein
●The plant foods highest in protein are
legumes (beans, peanuts, soyfoods such as
tofu) and nuts, but grains and vegetables also
contain signiﬁcant amounts. Here are some
high-protein plant foods:
Food
Serving
Protein (g)
Tofu
1⁄2 C
10–20
Veggie dog/burger
1
6–18
Soybeans*
1⁄2 C
14.3
Textured soy protein
1⁄2 C
11
Soymilk
1 C
5–10
Lentils*
1⁄2 C
8.9
Peanut butter
2 T
8.0
Chickpeas*
1⁄2 C
7.5
Sunﬂower seeds
2 T
5.0
Brown rice*
1 C
4.9
Potato*
1 medium
4.5
*Cooked.
●Vegans may not meet
their protein needs,
resulting in loss of
muscle mass and/or
reduced immunity, if
●food intake does
not meet energy
needs, such as
in cases of
anorexia
nervosa,
depression,
poverty, illness,3
or dieting;
●higher-protein plant foods are
not included in sufﬁcient amounts.
This can happen when
●most food eaten is junk food such as
French fries, soda, etc.;
●beans are avoided3 (in which case,
other high-protein foods should be
consumed instead);
●protein is believed to be unimportant
or higher-protein foods are avoided (as
in some fruitarian or raw-food diets).
Protein Recommendations
●Recommended protein for young vegans:26
Age (years)
Females (g/day)
Males (g/day)
1–2
18–19
18–19
2–3
18–21
18–21
4–6
26–28
26–28
7–10
31–34
31–34
11–14
51–55
50–54
15–18
50–55
66–73
●Experts recommend that adult vegans eat
.4 g of protein per day for every pound of
healthy body weight.22
Edamame (sweet, green
soybeans) are a good
source of protein.
VeganOutreach.org ●Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating 23

Amino Acids
Taurine, carnitine, and creatine are found
either primarily or only in animal products.
However, since the body can make these
molecules, extra supplementation isn’t
generally needed for vegans.
Iron
●Iron-deﬁciency symptoms include pale skin,
brittle ﬁngernails, fatigue, weakness, difﬁculty
breathing upon exertion, inadequate tempera-
ture regulation, loss of appetite, and apathy.
●Iron-deﬁcient anemia is probably one of the
most inaccurately self-diagnosed illnesses.
Those who think they may be suffering from
it should see a doctor.
●Iron in vegetarian diets is a somewhat
controversial topic for a number of reasons:
●Although vegetarians’ ferritin (the storage
form of iron) levels are normally lower than
nonvegetarians, they have not been found
to have more iron-deﬁciency anemia.
●Low iron stores are associated with
higher glucose tolerance and could help
prevent diabetes.
●High iron stores are associated with
cancer and, to a lesser extent, heart disease.
●Vegans tend to have iron intakes at least as
high as nonvegetarians. However, iron from
plants is generally not absorbed as well as
iron from meat.
●Vitamin C signiﬁcantly aids in plant-iron
absorption (they must be eaten at the same
meal). A 3⁄4-cup serving (six ﬂuid ounces) of
orange juice contains 93 mg of vitamin C.
●In one study, vegetarian children with iron-
deﬁciency anemia were given 100-mg tablets
of vitamin C at both lunch and dinner for 60
days. They saw a drastic improvement in their
anemia, with most making a full recovery.39
●Calcium supplements, coffee, and tea inhibit
iron absorption if eaten at the same time.23
Iron Recommendations
You do not need to worry about iron if you are
otherwise healthy and eat a varied vegan diet.
If you suspect an iron deﬁciency, see a doctor.
If the doctor thinks your iron stores are too low,
eating meat (which is unnecessary) or taking
an iron supplement may be suggested. Taking
a 100-mg tablet of vitamin C with two meals
a day for 60 days should improve the anemia.
24 Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating ●VeganOutreach.org
Articles available via VeganHealth.org
●“Vitamin B12: Are You Getting It?” by Jack Norris, RD
●“What Every Vegan Should Know about Vitamin B12:
An Open Letter from Health Professionals and Vegan Organizations”
●“Vegetarian Diet for Exercise and Athletic Training and Performing:
An Update” by D. Enette Larson, MS, RD, LD
Books available via VeganOutreach.org/catalog
●Becoming Vegan by Brenda Davis, RD & Vesanto Melina, MS, RD
●Plant Based Nutrition and Health by Stephen Walsh, PhD
Iron-rich plant foods include beans, bran ﬂakes,
blackstrap molasses, and pumpkin seeds.
Further reading for staying healthy on plant-based diets...

Zinc
●Symptoms of zinc deﬁciency include poor
growth and delayed sexual maturation in
children, poor wound healing, hair loss,
impaired immune function, and dermatitis
(especially around body oriﬁces).23
●Zinc is not found in large amounts in plant
foods, but vegetarians tend to have adequate
zinc status.
●Sources of zinc include corn, peas, cashews,
peanuts, pumpkin seeds, and sunﬂower seeds;
cereals are often fortiﬁed with zinc.
●The leavening of breads (most are leavened)
and fermenting of soyfoods (tempeh and
miso) enhance zinc absorption.26
Selenium
●Selenium intake is more related to
the selenium content of the soil than
to dietary pattern. U.S. and Canadian soil
appears to be adequate in selenium. Studies
of vegetarians and vegans in the United States
have shown them to have adequate intakes.
●Selenium is found
in many foods, but
in higher amounts
in Brazil nuts, whole
grains (whole-wheat bread,
oatmeal, barley), white rice, and beans.22
Vitamin A
●Preformed vitamin A exists only in animal
products. However, there are about 50
carotenoids that the body can convert into
vitamin A; the most common is beta-carotene.
●The vitamin A content of foods is now stated
as retinol activity equivalents (RAE). The daily
Dietary Reference Intake of 900 RAE for men
and 700 RAE for women can be met with one
of the following foods:
Food
Serving
RAE
Pumpkin*
1 C
1,345
Cantaloupe
2⁄3 medium
1,290
Sweet potato*
1 medium
1,244
Carrot
1 medium
1,012
*Cooked.
●Other sources of vitamin A
include kale, mango, spinach,
butternut squash, and various greens.
VeganOutreach.org ●Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating 25
Dietary Reference Intake*
Vitamin B12
3–100 mcg (µg)
Omega-3 fats
2.2–3.3 g†
Calcium
1,000–1,200 mg
Vitamin D
5–15 mcg (200–600 IU)
Iodine
75–150 mcg every few days
General health
Plenty of green and yellow
vegetables, other vegetables,
fruits, nuts, legumes, and
whole grains
*Please see speciﬁc sections above for the needs of
other age groups.
† Easily obtained through 1 tsp of ﬂaxseed oil.
Summary of Daily Recommendations for Vegan Adults

Our experience has shown us that the most
effective way to accomplish this is through
understanding and constructive outreach,
rather than expressions of anger. Positive out-
reach takes patience and can be frustrating,
but it is worth the effort.
Some speciﬁc activities are
●leaﬂeting, especially at colleges;
●stocking literature displays at health
food stores, bookstores, restaurants,
libraries, record shops, etc. (with the
permission of management);
●wearing clothes that display the word
“vegan” or “vegetarian.” For example,
buttons and shirts printed with “Ask Me
Why I’m Vegan” can create opportunities
for discussion or for offering literature.
Advocating
for Animals
excerpts from essays at VeganOutreach.org/advocacy
Living one’s life as a vegan is a ﬁrst step for many, but then what?
There are countless ways in which motivated individuals can help reduce
even more animal suffering each day. Indeed, since there are so many options, we
must keep in mind that when we choose to do one thing, we are choosing not to do others.
Everyone has limited resources and time. So instead of choosing to do anything, we should
try to pursue actions that will lead to the greatest reduction in suffering.
Vegan Outreach promotes veganism through the
widespread distribution of our illustrated booklets
(above). This form of outreach allows interested
individuals to consider the animals’ plight on their
own terms and at their
own pace, without
confrontation.

Honest Advocacy
Is Powerful Advocacy
In today’s society, it seems that if you don’t
scream the loudest, you are not heard.
Because moderate voices are often drowned
out, it can feel necessary to make fantastic
claims in order to advance your cause.
In the long run, however, this can do more
harm than good. When it comes to advocating
for the animals, most people are looking for
a reason to ignore us—no one sits around
thinking, “I want to give up my current favorite
foods and create tension with my friends and
family!” Therefore, we can’t give anyone any
excuses to ignore the terrible and unnecessary
suffering endured by today’s farmed animals.
For this reason alone, it is imperative that we
present information that the public will not
regard as ludicrous nor dismiss as drawn from
biased sources.
This can be hard, of course, as there is a natu-
ral tendency to accept any claim that seems
to support our position, as well as to argue
any side issue that comes up. But we have
to remember: Our message is simple. We
mustn’t distract people from it by trying to
present every piece of information we’ve
ever heard that sounds vaguely pro-veg
or by trying to answer every argument
that’s tossed at us. Rather, we must
keep the focus of the discussion on
the fact that eating animals causes
needless suffering.
VeganOutreach.org ●Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating 27
Leafleting
Leaﬂeting is an effective way of speaking for
the animals. Little preparation is needed and,
at the right time and place, just one person
can hand out hundreds of brochures in less
than an hour!
You’ll inevitably interest many new people in
making their way towards veganism, sowing
seeds of change where they don’t currently
exist. For every person you persuade to
become vegetarian, dozens of farmed animals
will be spared from suffering each year!
Since students tend to be more interested
in veganism—and more willing to change—
than the rest of society, college campuses
are particularly good places to leaﬂet. To
learn about our Adopt a College leaﬂeting
program, visit VeganHealth.org/colleges

Progressing Towards Justice
It may seem that our actions can’t make
a difference, or that we must do some-
thing “bigger” than person-to-person
outreach in order to bring about more
change more quickly.
But creating true, fundamental change
requires us to take a broader view.
Look at the long-term evolution of
civilization: Socrates, considered the
father of philosophical thought, was
teaching more than twenty-ﬁve hun-
dred years ago. It was thousands of
years later that we saw the beginnings
of our democratic system. Not until
the nineteenth century was slavery
abolished in the developed world.
Only in the last century have we in the United
States ended child labor, criminalized child
abuse, allowed women to vote, and granted
minorities wider rights.
When viewed in this context, you can see that
we have a great opportunity to make this pre-
diction inThe Economist magazine come true:
Historically, man has expanded the reach
of his ethical calculations, as ignorance
and want have receded, ﬁrst beyond family
and tribe, later beyond religion, race, and
nation. To bring other species more fully
into the range of these decisions may seem
unthinkable to moderate opinion now.
One day, decades or centuries hence,
it may seem no more than “civilized”
behavior requires.
We can each make the world a better place—
through both our choices and our example.
Living compassionately and working to
reduce the amount of suffering in the world
provides a powerful and profound purpose.
To paraphrase Martin Luther King, Jr.:
The arc of history is long
And ragged
And often unclear
But ultimately
It progresses towards justice.
Each one of us can be part of that progress!
Countering the Stereotype
Anyone who has been veg for more than
a few minutes knows the many roadblocks
—habit, tradition, convenience, taste,
familiarity, peer pressure, etc.—that keep
people from opening their hearts and minds
to consider the animals’ plight. Perhaps the
biggest problem is society’s stereotype of
vegans. No longer does “vegan” need to be
explained when referenced on television or
in movies, but unfortunately, the word is
often used as shorthand for someone young,
angry, deprived, fanatical, and isolated.
In short, “vegan” = “unhappy.”
As a reaction to what goes on in factory farms
and slaughterhouses, very strong feelings are
understandable and entirely justiﬁed. Over
time, people tend to deal with their anger in
different ways. Some take to protesting, some
to screaming, hatred, and sarcasm. Others
disconnect from society and surround them-
selves with only like-minded people, seeing
society as a large conspiracy against vegans.
But none of these responses—however
understandable—helps make the world
a better place.
As long as there is conscious life on Earth,
there will be suffering. The question becomes
what to do with the existence each of us is
given. We can choose to add our own fury and
misery to the rest, or we can set an example
by working constructively to alleviate suffering
while still taking part in society.
If we want to maximize the amount of suffer-
ing we can prevent, we must actively be the
opposite of the vegan stereotype. We must
show everyone we meet that living vegan is
living a fulﬁlling, joyful, and meaningful life.
28 Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating ●VeganOutreach.org

Classic Cookbooks
The New Farm Vegetarian Cookbook
edited by Louise Hagler & Dorothy R. Bates
Tofu Cookery by Louise Hagler
The Uncheese Cookbook
by Joanne Stepaniak
Products
Not Tested
on Animals
Most products sold in
natural food stores are
made by companies that
do not test on animals;
check the packaging for
information. Major super-
market chains also carry products that haven’t
been tested on animals (e.g., Safeway’s and
Pathmark’s house brands, Tom’s of Maine).
Advocacy Brochures
In addition to our Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating,
Vegan Outreach offers the following booklets:
Why Vegan?
Try Vegetarian!
Even If You Like Meat…
¿Por Qué Vegano? Why Vegan? en Español
Honoring God’s Creation from the Christian
Vegetarian Association
The suggested donation is 20¢ per booklet.
To order, visit VeganOutreach.org/catalog or
write to us at Vegan Outreach, POB 38492,
Pittsburgh, PA 15238-8492.
Online/Mail Order Catalogs
The Mail Order Catalog Large assortment
of vegetarian food products (many of which can
be purchased in bulk) and discount cookbooks.
800.695.2241; Healthy-Eating.com
In addition to foods and books, the following
merchants carry vegan vitamins/supplements;
shoes, clothing, and accessories; personal care
and household products; and more!
Pangea 800.340.1200; VeganStore.com
Vegan Essentials 866.88.VEGAN;
VeganEssentials.com
The Vegetarian Site 520.529.8691;
TheVegetarianSite.com
Leather Alternatives
Nonleather belts, bags, and shoes can also be
found in many mainstream stores, and most
athletic shoe companies offer leather-free
options. For more information, see
VRG.org/nutshell/leather.htm
VeganOutreach.org ●Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating 29
Resources
For more information…
Please visit VeganOutreach.org for
additional resources and further discus-
sion of vegan-related issues. We also
invite you to subscribe to our free weekly
electronic publication, containing news
items, tips, recipes, product reviews,
and other interesting links.

Isn’t it hard to be vegan?
It can be, especially if you try to change too
fast or hold yourself to too high a standard.
The important thing is to do the best you can.
Living vegan is an ongoing progression; all
choices made with compassion are positive.
How can I give up the taste of milk, cheese, and ice cream?
First of all, remember that continuing to eat cheese while avoiding meat and eggs does much
more good than scrapping the whole idea because you cannot be completely consistent.
That said, there are a lot of tasty substitutes for cows’ milk. Silk, a very popular brand,
is now found in most grocery stores. There are also several good ice cream substitutes
(e.g., Soy Delicious and Tofutti). Ice cream shops often have vegan sorbet. Some of
the better cheese substitutes are Follow Your Heart’s Vegan Gourmet (a mozzarella
that’s perfect for pizza), Soymage (cheddar block and parmesan),
and Tofutti (American cheese slices that melt
and a cream cheese that’s great
on bagels). There are even a few
vegan yogurts (e.g., Whole Soy
and Silk). Your local natural food
store will have many options with
which to experiment.
Isn’t being vegan expensive?
There is nothing inherently more expensive about a
vegan diet. Trying to replicate the standard American
diet with mock meats and dairy products can be costly.
But pasta, beans, potatoes, and breads are all generally less
expensive than animal products of similar nutritional value.
30 Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating ●VeganOutreach.org
Questions
&Answers

Doesn’t the Bible say we should eat meat?
There are plenty of devout Christians and Jews who are vegetarian and vegan; the Bible does not
condemn people for being vegetarian or opposing cruelty to animals.
What do you think about abortion?
People who oppose cruelty to animals often disagree on the matter of abortion and other ethical
issues. Whatever our opinion on abortion—or any other political or ethical issue—
each one of us can reduce suffering by not buying meat, eggs, and dairy.
What about free-range products?
Meat, eggs, and dairy may be labeled “free-range” if the animals had
USDA-certiﬁed access to the outdoors. However, no other criteria—such
as environmental quality, size of the outside area, number of animals, or
space per individual—are included in this term.
Free-range laying hens, for example, often have only one to two square feet of
ﬂoor space per bird and must compete with many others for access to a small exit
from the shed. While these chickens can live an average of seven to eight years, they
are taken to slaughter after a year or two. Also, both free-range and commercial laying
hens generally come from the same hatcheries, where the baby hens’ beaks are painfully
trimmed and the unwanted male chicks are commonly gassed, ground up
alive, or thrown into trash bags to suffocate or starve.
Although some of these farms may be an improvement over standard
factory-farm conditions, free-range does not mean cruelty-free.
Unless you investigate a farm to see the conditions yourself, do
not put much trust in the term “free-range.” For more information,
see COK.net/lit/freerange.php
VeganOutreach.org ●Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating 31
What about invertebrate animals?
While bivalve mollusks (e.g., clams, mussels, oysters, and scallops)
have fairly simple nervous systems (with no brains, but masses of
nerve tissue called ganglia), cephalopod mollusks (e.g., octopuses
and squids) have well-developed brains and are thought to be the
most intelligent of all the invertebrates. Arthropods (e.g., insects
and crustaceans) also have complex nervous systems.
However, what these animals feel is unknown, and questions remain
as to whether their nervous systems are developed enough for the
consciousness of pain and the experience of suffering.
Although you may choose to err on the side of caution and avoid eating invertebrate
animals and their products, most people have yet to face the blatant cruelty involved
in meat, dairy, and egg production. So it’s important to remember that equating meat
with honey will make the vegan case seem absurd to the average person. At this point
in history, the more obvious and undeniable issues should receive our focus.

POB 38492, Pittsburgh, PA 15238-8492 ● 412.968.0268 ● VeganOutreach.org ● info@VeganOutreach.org
Working to end cruelty to animals
Why should I concern myself with animals
when there are so many people suffering in the world?
Peter Singer answers in Animal Liberation:
[P]ain is pain, and the importance of preventing unnecessary pain and suffering
does not diminish because the being that suffers is not a member of our species.…
Most reasonable people want to prevent war, racial inequality, poverty, and unem-
ployment; the problem is that we have been trying to prevent these things for years,
and now we have to admit that, for the most part, we don’t really know how to do it.
By comparison, the reduction of the suffering of nonhuman animals at the hands
of humans will be relatively easy, once human beings set themselves to do it.
In any case, the idea that “humans come ﬁrst” is more often used as an excuse for not
doing anything about either human or nonhuman animals than as a genuine choice
between incompatible alternatives. For the truth is that there is no incompatibility
here…there is nothing to stop those who devote their time and energy to human
problems from joining the boycott of the products of agribusiness cruelty.… [W]hen
nonvegetarians say that “human problems come ﬁrst” I cannot help wondering
what exactly it is that they are doing for human beings that compels them to continue
to support the wasteful, ruthless exploitation of farm animals.

