GENE WOLFE
A Cabin on the Coast
 
The  Little  People  are known to have the  power  to  grant
wishes of all sorts, but it is always dangerous for mortals
to try to bar-gain with them. Often they will give  you what
you ask for,  but always for  a price... and sometimes  the
price will turn out to be a higher one than you were willing
to pay ...
Gene Wolfe is perceived by many critics to be one
of  the  best-perhaps  the  best—SF  and  fantasy  writers
working  today.  His most  acclaimed  work is  the  tetralogy
The  Book  of  the  New  Sun—technically  science  fiction,
but  which  feels  enough  like  fantasy  to  appeal  to  most
fantasy  readers—individual  volumes  of  which  have  won
the  Nebula  Award,  the  World  Fantasy  Award,  and  the
John  W  Campbell  Memorial  Award.  His  other  books
include the classic fantasy nov-els Peace and The Devil
in a Forest, both recently re-released, as well as Soldier
of the Mist, Free Live Free, Soldier of Arete,  There  Are
Doors,  Castleview,  Pandora  by  Holly  Hollander,  and
The  Urth  of  the  New  Sun.  His  short  fiction  has  been
collected  in  The  Island  of  Doctor  Death  and  Other
Stories and Other Stories, Gene Wolfe’s Book of Days,
The  Wolfe  Arch-ipelago,  the  recent  World  Fantasy
Award-winning  collection  Storeys  from  the.  Old  Hotel,
and  Endangered  Species.  His  most  recent  books  are
part  of  a  popular  new  series,  including  Nightside  the
Long Sun, The Lake of the Long Sun, and Calde of the
Long  Sun.  He  has  just  published  a  new  novel,  Exodus
from the Long Sun.
* * * *
IT might have been a. child’s drawing of a ship. He blinked, and blinked
again. There were masts and sails, surely. One stack, perhaps another. If

the ship were really there at all. He went back to his father’s beach cottage,
climbed the five wooden steps, wiped his feet on the coco mat.
 
Lissy was still in bed, but awake, sitting up now. It must have been the
squeaking of the steps, he thought. Aloud he said, “Sleep good?”
 
He crossed the room and kissed her. She caressed him and said,
“You shouldn’t go swimming without a suit, dear wonderful swimmer. How
was the Pacific?”
 
“Peaceful. Cold. It’s too early for people to be up, and there’s nobody
within a mile of here anyway.”
 
“Get into bed then. How about the fish?”
 
“Salt water makes the sheets sticky. The fish have seen them
before.” He went to the corner, where a showerhead poked from the wall.
The beach cottage—Lissy called it a cabin—had running water of the
sometimes and rusty variety.
 
“They might bite ‘em off. Sharks, you know. Little ones.”
 
“Castrating woman.” The shower coughed, doused him with icy spray,
coughed again.
 
“You look worried.”
 
“No.”
 
“Is it your dad?”
 
He shook his head, then thrust it under the spray, fingers combing his
dark, curly hair.
 
“You think he’ll come out here? Today?”
 
He withdrew, considering. “If he’s back from Washington, and he
knows we’re here.”
 
“But he couldn’t know, could he?”
 
He turned off the shower and grabbed a towel, already damp and a
trifle sandy. “I don’t see how.”
 

“Only he might guess.” Lissy was no longer smiling. “Where else
could we go? Hey, what did we do with my underwear?”
 
“Your place. Your folks’. Any motel.”
 
She swung long, golden legs out of bed, still holding the sheet across
her lap. Her breasts were nearly perfect hemi-spheres, except for the
tender protrusions of their pink nipples. He decided he had never seen
breasts like that. He sat down on the bed beside her. “I love you very
much,” he said. “You know that?”
 
It made her smile again. “Does that mean you’re coming back to
bed?”
 
“If you want me to.”
 
“I want a swimming lesson. What will people say if I tell them I came
here and didn’t go swimming.”
 
He grinned at her. “That it’s that time of the month.”
 
“You know what you are? You’re filthy!” She pushed him. “Absolutely
filthy! I’m going to bite your ears off.” Tangled in the sheet, they fell off the
bed together. “There they are!”
 
“There what are?”
 
“My bra and stuff. We must have kicked them under the bed. Where
are our bags?”
 
“Still in the trunk. I never carried them in.”
 
“Would you get mine? My swim suit’s in it.”
 
“Sure,” he said.
 
“And put on some pants!”
 
“My suit’s in my bag too.” He found his trousers and got the keys to
the Triumph. Outside the sun was higher, the chill of the fall morning nearly
gone. He looked for the ship and saw it. Then it winked out like a star.
 
That evening they made a fire of driftwood and roasted the big,
greasy Italian sausages he had brought from town, making giant hot dogs

by clamping them in French bread. He had brought red supermarket wine
too; they chilled it in the Pacific. “I never ate this much in my life,” Lissy
said.
 
“You haven’t eaten anything yet.”
 
“I know, but just looking at this sandwich would make me full if I wasn’t
so hungry.” She bit off the end. “Cuff tough woof.”
 
“What?”
 
“Castrating woman. That’s what you called me this morning, Tim. Now
this is a castrating woman.”
 
“Don’t talk with your mouth full.” 
 
“You sound like my mother. Give me some wine. You’re hogging it.”
 
He handed the bottle over. “It isn’t bad, if you don’t object to a
complete lack of character.”
 
“I sleep with you, don’t I?”
 
“I have character, it’s just all rotten.”
 
“You said you wanted to get married.”
 
“Let’s go. You can finish that thing in the car.”
 
“You drank half the bottle. You’re too high to drive.”
 
“Bullshoot.”
 
Lissy giggled. “You just said bullshoot. Now that’s character!”
 
He stood up. “Come on, let’s go. It’s only five hundred miles to Reno.
We can get married there in the morning.”
 
“You’re serious, aren’t you?”
 
“If you are.”
 
“Sit down.”
 

“You were testing me,” he said. “That’s not fair, now is it?”
 
“You’ve been so worried all day. I wanted to see if it was about
me—If you thought you’d made a terrible mistake.”
 
“We’ve made a mistake,” he said. “I was trying to fix it just now.”
 
“You think your dad is going to make it rough for you—”
 
“Us.”
 
“—for us because it might hurt him in the next election.”
 
He shook his head. “Not that. All right, maybe partly that. But he
means it too. You don’t understand him.”
 
“I’ve got a father myself.”
 
“Not like mine. Ryan was almost grown up before he left Ireland.
Taught by nuns and all that. Besides, I’ve got six older brothers and two
sisters. You’re the oldest kid. Ryan’s probably at least fifteen years older
than your folks.”
 
“Is that really his name? Ryan Neal?”
 
“His full name is Timothy Ryan Neal, the same as mine. I’m Timothy,
Junior. He used Ryan when he went into politics because there was another
Tim Neal around then, and we’ve always called me Tim to get away from
the Junior.”
 
“I’m going to call him Tim again, like the nuns must have when he was
young. Big Tim. You’re Little Tim.”
 
“Okay with me. I don’t know if Big Tim is going to like it.”
 
Something was moving, it seemed, out where the sun had set.
Something darker against the dark horizon.
 
“What made you Junior anyway? Usually it’s the oldest boy.”
 
“He didn’t want it, and would never let Mother do it. But she wanted to,
and I was born during the Democratic convention that year.”
 
“He had to go, of course.”

 
“Yeah, he had to go, Lissy. If you don’t understand that, you don’t
understand politics at all. They hoped I’d hold off for a few days, and what
the hell, Mother’d had eight with no problems. Anyway he was used to
it—he was the youngest of seven boys himself. So she got to call me what
she wanted.”
 
“But then she died.” The words sounded thin and lonely against the
pounding of the surf.
 
“Not because of that.”
 
Lissy upended the wine bottle; he saw her throat pulse three times.
“Will I die because of that. Little Tim?”
 
“I don’t think so.” He tried to think of something gracious and
comforting. “If we decide we want children, that’s the risk I have to take.”
 
“You have to take? Bullshoot.”
 
“That both of us have to take. Do you think it was easy for Ryan,
raising nine kids by himself?”
 
“You love him, don’t you?”
 
“Sure I love him. He’s my father.”
 
“And now you think you might he ruining things for him. For my sake.”
 
“That’s not why I want us to be married, Lissy.”
 
She was staring into the flames; he was not certain she had even
heard him. “Well, now I know why his pictures look so grim. So gaunt.”
 
He stood up again. “If you’re through eating ...”
 
“You want to go back to the cabin? You can screw me right here on
the beach—there’s nobody here but us.”
 
“I didn’t mean that.”
 
“Then why go in there and look at the walls? Out here we’ve got the
fire and the ocean. The moon ought to be up pretty soon.”
 

“It would be warmer.”
 
“With just that dinky little kerosene stove? I’d rather sit here by the
fire. In a minute I’m going to send you off to get me some more wood. You
can run up to the cabin and get a shirt too if you want to.”
 
“I’m okay.”
 
“Traditional roles. Big Tim must have told you all about them. The
woman has the babies and keeps the home fires burning. You’re not going
to end up looking like him though, are you, Little Tim?”
 
“I suppose so. He used to look just like me.”
 
“Really?”
 
He nodded. “He had his picture taken just after he got into politics. He
was running for ward committeeman, and he had a poster made. We’ve still
got the picture, and it looks like me with a high collar and a funny hat.”
 
“She knew, didn’t she?” Lissy said. For a moment he did not
understand what she meant. “Now go and get some more wood. Only don’t
wear yourself out, because when you come back we’re going to take care
of that little thing that’s bothering you, and we’re going to spend the night on
the beach.”
 
When he came back she was asleep, but he woke her carrying her up
to the beach cottage.
 
Next morning he woke up alone. He got up and showered and
shaved, supposing that she had taken the car into town to get something for
breakfast. He had filled the coffee pot and put it on before he looked out
the shore-side window and saw the Triumph still waiting near the road.
 
There was nothing to be alarmed about, of course. She had
awakened before he had and gone out for an early dip. He had done the
same thing himself the morning before. The little patches of green cloth
that were her bathing suit were hanging over the back of a rickety chair, but
then they were still damp from last night. Who would want to put on a damp,
clammy suit? She had gone in naked, just as he had.
 
He looked out the other window, wanting to see her splashing in the
surf, waiting for him. The ship was there, closer now, rolling like a derelict.
No smoke came from its clumsy funnel and no sails were set, but dark

banners hung from its rigging. Then there was no ship, only wheeling gulls
and the empty ocean. He called her name, but no one answered.
 
He put on his trunks and a jacket and went outside. A wind had
smoothed the sand. The tide had come, obliterating their fire, reclaiming
the driftwood he had gathered.
 
For two hours he walked up and down the beach, calling, telling
himself there was nothing wrong. When he forced himself not to think of
Lissy dead, he could only think of the headlines, the ninety seconds of ten
o’clock news, how Ryan would look, how Pat—all his brothers—would look
at him. And when he turned his mind from that, Lissy was dead again, her
pale hair snarled with kelp as she rolled in the surf, green crabs feeding
from her arms.
 
He got into the Triumph and drove to town. In the little brick station he
sat beside the desk of a fat cop and told his story.
 
The fat cop said, “Kid, I can see why you want us to keep it quiet.”
 
Tim said nothing. There was a paperweight on the desk—a baseball
of white glass.
 
“You probably think we’re out to get you, but we’re not. Tomorrow
we’ll put out a missing persons report, but we don’t have to say anything
about you or the senator in it, and we won’t.”
 
“Tomorrow?”
 
“We got to wait twenty-four hours, in case she should show up. That’s
the law. But kid—” The fat cop glanced at his notes.
 
“Tim.”
 
“Right. Tim. She ain’t going to show up. You got to get yourself used
to that.”
 
“She could be . . .” Without wanting to, he let it trail away.
 
“Where? You think she snuck off and went home? She could walk out
to the road and hitch, but you say her stuffs still there. Kidnapped? Nobody
could have pulled her out of bed without waking you up. Did you kill her?”
 
“No!” Tears he could not hold back were streaming down his cheeks.

 
“Right. I’ve talked to you and I don’t think you did. But you’re the only
one that could have. If her body washes up, we’ll have to look into that.”
 
Tim’s hands tightened on the wooden arms of the chair. The fat cop
pushed a box of tissues across the desk.
 
“Unless it washes up, though, it’s just a missing person, okay? But
she’s dead, kid, and you’re going to have to get used to it. Let me tell you
what happened.” He cleared his throat.
 
“She got up while you were still asleep, probably about when it started
to get light. She did just what you thought she did—went out for a nice
refreshing swim before you woke up. She went out too far, and probably
she got a cramp. The ocean’s cold as hell now. Maybe she yelled, but if
she did she was too far out, and the waves covered it up. People think
drowners holler like fire sirens, but they don’t—they don’t have that much
air. Sometimes they don’t make any noise at all.”
 
Tim stared at the gleaming paperweight.
 
“The current here runs along the coast-you probably know that.
Nobody ought to go swimming without somebody else around, but
sometimes it seems like everybody does it. We lose a dozen or so a year.
In maybe four or five cases we find them. That’s all.”
 
The beach cottage looked abandoned when he returned. He parked
the Triumph and went inside and found the stove still burning, his coffee
perked to tar. He took the pot outside, dumped the coffee, scrubbed the
pot with beach sand and rinsed it with salt water. The ship, which had been
invisible through the window of the cottage, was almost plain when he stood
waist deep. He heaved the coffee pot back to shore and swam out some
distance, but when he straightened up in the water, the ship was gone.
 
Back inside he made fresh coffee and packed Lissy’s things in her
suitcase. When that was done, he drove into town again. Ryan was still in
Washington, but Tim told his secretary where he was. “Just in case
anybody reports me missing,” he said.
 
She laughed. “It must be pretty cold for swimming.”
 
“I like it,” he told her. “I want to have at least one more long swim.”
 
“All right, Tim. When he calls, I’ll let him know. Have a good time.”

 
“Wish me luck,” he said, and hung up. He got a hamburger and more
coffee at a Jack-in-the-Box and went back to the cottage and walked a long
way along the beach.
 
He had intended to sleep that night, but he did not. From time to time
he got up and looked out the window at the ship, sometimes visible by
moonlight, sometimes only a dark presence in the lower night sky. When
the first light of dawn came, he put on his trunks and went into the water.
 
For a mile or more, as well as he could estimate the distance, he
could not see it. Then it was abruptly close, the long oars like the legs of a
water spider, the funnel belching sparks against the still-dim sky, sparks that
seemed to become new stars.
 
He swam faster then, knowing that if the ship vanished he would turn
back and save himself, knowing too that if it only retreated before him,
retreated forever, he would drown. It disappeared behind a cobalt wave,
reappeared. He sprinted and grasped at the sea-slick shaft of an oar, and it
was like touching a living being. Quite suddenly he stood on the deck, with
no memory of how he came there.
 
Bare feet pattered on the planks, but he saw no crew. A dark flag
lettered with strange script flapped aft, and some vague recollection of a
tour of a naval ship with his father years before made him touch his
forehead. There was a sound that might have been laughter or many other
things. The captain’s cabin would be aft too, he thought. He went there,
bracing himself against the wild roll, and found a door.
 
Inside, something black crouched upon a dais. “I’ve come for Lissy,”
Tim said.
 
There was no reply, but a question hung in the air. He answered it
almost without intending to. “I’m Timothy Ryan Neal, and I’ve come for
Lissy. Give her back to me.”
 
A light, it seemed, dissolved the blackness. Cross-legged on the
dais, a slender man in tweeds sucked at a long clay pipe. “It’s Irish, are
ye?” he asked.
 
“American,” Tim said.
 
“With such a name? I don’t believe ye. Where’s yer feathers?”
 

“I want her back,” Tim said again.
 
“An’ if ye don’t get her?”
 
“Then I’ll tear this ship apart. You’ll have to kill me or take me too.”
 
“Spoken like a true son of the ould sod,” said the man in tweeds. He
scratched a kitchen match on the sole of his boot and lit his pipe. “Sit down,
will ye? I don’t fancy lookin’ up like that. It hurts me neck. Sit down, and ‘tis
possible we can strike an agreement.”
 
“This is crazy,” Tim said. “The whole thing is crazy.” 
 
“It is that,” the man in tweeds replied. “An’ there’s much, much more
comin’. Ye’d best brace for it, Tim me lad. Now sit down.”
 
There was a stout wooden chair behind Tim where the door had
been. He sat. “Are you about to tell me you’re a leprechaun? I warn you, I
won’t believe it.”
 
“Me? One o’ them scamperin’, thievin’, cobblin’, little misers? I’d
shoot meself. Me name’s Daniel O’Donoghue, King o’ Connaught. Do ye
believe that, now?”
 
“No,” Tim said.
 
“What would ye believe then?”
 
“That this is—some way, somehow—what people call a saucer. That
you and your crew are from a planet of another sun.”
 
Daniel laughed. “‘Tis a close encounter you’re havin’, is it? Would ye
like to see me as a tiny green man wi’ horns like a snail’s? I can do that
too.”
 
“Don’t bother.”
 
“All right, I won’t, though ‘tis a good shape. A man can take it and be
whatever he wants, one o’ the People o’ Peace or a bit o’ a man from Mars.
I’ve used it for both, and there’s nothin’ better.”
 
“You took Lissy,” Tim said.
 
“And how would ye be knowin’ that?”

 
“I thought she’d drowned.”
 
“Did ye now?”
 
“And that this ship—or whatever it is—was just a sign, an omen. I
talked to a policeman and he as good as told me, but I didn’t really think
about what he said until last night, when I was trying to sleep.”
 
“Is it a dream yer havin’? Did ye ever think on that?”
 
“If it’s a dream, it’s still real,” Tim said doggedly. “And anyway, I saw
your ship when I was awake, yesterday and the day before.”
 
“Or yer dreamin’ now ye did. But go on wi’ it.”
 
“He said Lissy couldn’t have been abducted because I was in the
same bed, and that she’d gone out for a swim in the morning and drowned.
But she could have been abducted, if she had gone out for the swim first. If
someone had come for her with a boat. And she wouldn’t have drowned,
because she didn’t swim good enough to drown. She was afraid of the
water. We went in yesterday, and even with me there, she would hardly go
in over her knees. So it was you.”
 
“Yer right, ye know,” Daniel said. He formed a little steeple of his
fingers. “‘Twas us.”
 
Tim was recalling stories that had been read to him when he was a
child. “Fairies steal babies, don’t they? And brides. Is that why you do it?
So we’ll think that’s who you are?”
 
“Bless ye, ‘tis true,” Daniel told him. “’Tis the Fair Folk we are. The
jinn o’ the desert too, and the saucer riders ye say ye credit, and forty score
more. Would ye be likin’ to see me wi’ me goatskin breeches and me
panpipe?” He chuckled. “Have ye never wondered why we’re so much alike
the world over? Or thought that we don’t always know just which shape’s the
best for a place, so the naiads and the dryads might as well be the ladies o’
the Deeny Shee? Do ye know what the folk o’ the Barb’ry Coast call the hell
that’s under their sea?”
 
Tim shook his head.
 
“Why, ‘tis Domdaniel. I wonder why that is, now. Tim, ye say ye want
this girl.”

 
“That’s right.”
 
“An’ ye say there’ll be trouble and plenty for us if ye don’t have her.
But let me tell ye now that if ye don’t get her, wi’ our blessin’ to boot, ye’ll
drown.-Hold your tongue, can’t ye, for ‘tis worse than that.-If ye don’t get her
wi’ our blessin’, ‘twill be seen that ye weri Irownin’ now. Do ye take me
meaning?”
 
“I think so. Close enough.’
 
“Ah, that’s good, that is. Now here’s me offer. Do ye remember how
things stood before we took her?”
 
“Of course.”
 
“They’ll stand so again, if ye but do what I tell ye. ‘Tis yerself that will
remember, Tim Neal, but she’ll remember nothin’. An’ the truth of it is,
there’ll be nothin’ to remember, for it’ll all be gone, every stick of it. This
policeman ye spoke wi’, for instance. Ye’ve me word that ye will not have
done it.”
 
“What do I have to do?” Tim asked.
 
“Service. Serve us. Do whatever we ask of ye. We’d sooner have a
broth of a girl like yer Lissy than a great hulk of a lad like yerself, but then
too, we’d sooner be havin’ one that’s willin’, for the unwillin’ girls are
everywhere—I don’t doubt but ye’ve seen it yerself. A hundred years, that’s
all we ask of ye. ‘Tis short enough, like Doyle’s wife. Will ye do it?”
 
“And everything will be the same, at the end, as it was before you
took Lissy?”
 
“Not everything. I didn’t say that. Ye’ll remember, don’t ye remember
me savin’ so? But for her and all the country round, why ‘twill be the same.”
 
“All right,” Tim said. “I’ll do it.”
 
“‘Tis a brave lad ye are. Now I’ll tell ye what I’ll do. I said a hundred
years, to which ye agreed—”
 
 Tim nodded.
 
“—but I’ll have no unwillin’ hands about me boat, nor no ungrateful

ones neither. I’ll make it twenty. How’s that? Sure and I couldn’t say fairer,
could I?”
 
Daniel’s figure was beginning to waver and fade; the image of the
dark mass Tim had seen first hung about it like a cloud.
 
“Lay yerself on yer belly, for I must put me foot upon yer head. Then
the deal’s done.”
 
The salt ocean was in his mouth and his eyes. His lungs burst for
breath. He revolved in the blue chasm of water, tried to swim, at last
exploded gasping into the air.
 
The King had said he would remember, but the years were fading
already. Drudging, dancing, buying, spying, prying, waylaying and betraying
when he walked in the world of men. Serving something that he had never
wholly understood. Sailing foggy seas that were sometimes of this earth.
Floating among the constellations. The years and the slaps and the kicks
were all fading, and with them (and he rejoiced in it) the days when he had
begged.
 
He lifted an arm, trying to regain his old stroke, and found that he was
very tired. Perhaps he had never really rested in all those years. Certainly,
he could not recall resting. Where was he? He paddled listlessly, not
knowing if he were swimming away from land, if he were in the center of an
ocean. A wave elevated him, a long, slow swell of blue under the gray sky.
A glory—the rising or perhaps the setting sun—shone to his right. He swam
toward it, caught sight of a low coast.
 
He crawled onto the sand and lay there for a time, his back struck by
drops of spray like rain. Near his eyes, the beach seemed nearly black.
There were bits of charcoal, fragments of half-burned wood. He raised his
head, pushing away the earth, and saw an empty bottle of greenish glass
nearly buried in the wet sand.
 
When he was able al last to rise, his limbs were stiff and cold. The
dawnlight had become daylight, but there was no warmth in it. The beach
cottage stood only about a hundred yards away, one window golden with
sunshine that had entered from the other side, the walls in shadow. The red
Triumph gleamed beside the road.
 
At the top of a small dune he turned and looked back out to sea. A
black freighter with a red and white stack was visible a mile or two out, but it
was only a freighter. For a moment he felt a kind of regret, a longing for a

part of his life that he had hated but that was now gone forever. I will never
be able to tell her what happened, he thought. And then, Yes I will, if only I
let her think I’m just making it up. And then, No wonder so many people tell
so many stories. Goodbye to all that.
 
The steps creaked under his weight, and he wiped the sand from his
feet on the coco mat. Lissy was in bed. When she heard the door open she
sat up, then drew up the sheet to cover her breasts.
 
“Big Tim,” she said. “You did come. Tim and I were hoping you
would.”
 
When he did not answer, she added, “He’s out having a swim, I think.
He should be around in a minute.”
 
And when he still said nothing. “We’re—Tim and I—we’re going to be
married.”
 

