

FOOD SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS 
 
RESTRICTIONS IN 23 COUNTRIES  
AND THE EUROPEAN UNION 
 
 
No part of this digital document may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or
by any means. The publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this digital document, but makes no
expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No
liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of information
contained herein. This digital document is sold with the clear understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering legal, medical or any other professional services. 

FOOD SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
Additional books in this series can be found on Nova’s website  
under the Series tab. 
 
 
Additional e-books in this series can be found on Nova’s website  
under the e-book tab. 
 

FOOD SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS 
 
RESTRICTIONS IN 23 COUNTRIES  
AND THE EUROPEAN UNION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MORRIS BISHOP 
EDITOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New York 
 

Copyright © 2016 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or 
transmitted in any form or by any means: electronic, electrostatic, magnetic, tape, mechanical 
photocopying, recording or otherwise without the written permission of the Publisher. 
 
We have partnered with Copyright Clearance Center to make it easy for you to obtain permissions 
to reuse content from this publication. Simply navigate to this publication’s page on Nova’s 
website and locate the “Get Permission” button below the title description. This button is linked 
directly to the title’s permission page on copyright.com. Alternatively, you can visit 
copyright.com and search by title, ISBN, or ISSN.  
  
For further questions about using the service on copyright.com, please contact:  
Copyright Clearance Center 
Phone: +1-(978) 750-8400 Fax: +1-(978) 750-4470  
E-mail: info@copyright.com. 
 
NOTICE TO THE READER 
The Publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this book, but makes no expressed or 
implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No 
liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of 
information contained in this book. The Publisher shall not be liable for any special, 
consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or in part, from the readers’ use of, or 
reliance upon, this material. Any parts of this book based on government reports are so indicated 
and copyright is claimed for those parts to the extent applicable to compilations of such works. 
 
Independent verification should be sought for any data, advice or recommendations contained in 
this book. In addition, no responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage 
to persons or property arising from any methods, products, instructions, ideas or otherwise 
contained in this publication. 
 
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information with regard to the 
subject matter covered herein. It is sold with the clear understanding that the Publisher is not 
engaged in rendering legal or any other professional services. If legal or any other expert 
assistance is required, the services of a competent person should be sought. FROM A 
DECLARATION OF PARTICIPANTS JOINTLY ADOPTED BY A COMMITTEE OF THE 
AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION AND A COMMITTEE OF PUBLISHERS. 
 
Additional color graphics may be available in the e-book version of this book. 
 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 
 
 
 
Published by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. † New York 
 
ISBN: 978-1-63484-288-4 (eBook)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
Preface 
 
vii 
Chapter 1 
Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms:  
Argentina, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, Egypt,  
England and Wales, European Union, France, Germany, 
Israel, Italy, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Netherlands,  
New Zealand, Norway, Russian Federation, South Africa,  
South Korea, Sweden,  United States 
1 
Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
Chapter 2 
Legal Issues with Federal Labeling of Genetically  
Engineered Food: In Brief 
213 
Emily M. Lanza 
Index 
 
223 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
 
Genetically engineered (GE) foods, sometimes referred to as genetically modified foods 
(GMO foods), are foods that are derived from scientific methods used to introduce new traits 
or characteristics to an organism. This book discusses the legislation of genetically modified 
organisms (GMOs) and genetically modified (GM) plants and foods in Argentina, Belgium, 
Brazil, Canada, China, Egypt, England and Wales, France, Germany, Israel, Italy, Japan, 
Lebanon, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, the Russian Federation, South 
Africa, South Korea, Sweden, and the United States. The European Union and International 
Protocols are also examined. This book summarizes enacted laws on the cultivation and sale 
of GMOs, as well as public opinion on GM products. A selected bibliography is included. 
Furthermore, the book examines legal issues with federal labeling of GMOs. 
 
 
 
 


In: Genetically Modified Organisms 
ISBN: 978-1-63484-287-7 
Editor: Morris Bishop 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1 
 
 
 
RESTRICTIONS ON GENETICALLY MODIFIED 
ORGANISMS: ARGENTINA, BELGIUM, BRAZIL, 
CANADA, CHINA, EGYPT, ENGLAND AND WALES, 
EUROPEAN UNION, FRANCE, GERMANY, ISRAEL, 
ITALY, JAPAN, LEBANON, MEXICO, NETHERLANDS, 
NEW ZEALAND, NORWAY, RUSSIAN FEDERATION, 
SOUTH AFRICA, SOUTH KOREA, SWEDEN,  
UNITED STATES* 
 
 
Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
 
 
ARGENTINA 
 
Graciela Rodriguez-Ferrand 
Senior Foreign Law Specialist 
 
 
Summary  
 
Argentina is the third largest grower of biotech crops in the world, after the United 
States and Brazil. GMOs are regulated in Argentina under the Law on Seeds and 
Phytogenetic Creations and the Law on the Promotion of the Development and 
Production of Modern Biotechnology, and under administrative regulations issued by the 
Secretary of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Food. Argentina has not ratified the 
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety. 
 
                                                        
* This is an edited, reformatted and augmented version of a report issued by the Law Library of Congress, March 
2014. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
2 
I. Introduction 
 
Argentina was among the first countries in the world to use genetically modified (GM) 
crops in agriculture,1 using GM technologies in the production of soybeans, corn, and cotton. 
Argentina first started using GM technologies in 1996 with the introduction of soybeans 
tolerant of the herbicide glyphosate.2 Since then, Argentina has increased its production of 
GM crops to become the third largest grower of biotech crops in the world, after the United 
States and Brazil.3 
GM technologies applied in agriculture have resulted in economic benefits for Argentina, 
a commodities exporting country, of about US$72.6 billion through 2011. The introduction of 
GM technologies in agriculture in Argentina has resulted in the creation of an estimated 1.8 
million jobs through 2011.4 
Of the US$72.6 billion in economic benefit, $65.4 billion is attributable to herbicide-
tolerant soybeans. Regarding the distribution of economic benefits from cultivating such 
soybeans, 72.4% went to farmers, 21.2% to the national government in the form of export 
taxes and other duties, and the remaining 6.4% to seed and herbicide suppliers.5 
 
 
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion 
 
In general, basic knowledge of the use of biotechnology in agriculture and food is 
limited.6 In a 2004 survey, only 39% of the polled population knew that Argentina produced 
GM soybeans. In the same poll, 51% said they prefer to consume non-GM food, even if it 
costs more.7 Only 12% said they believe GM crops benefit the population, while 51% said 
they believe big corporations, especially foreign ones, are the main beneficiaries.8 
There have been recent demonstrations against the US company Monsanto in Malvinas, 
in the Province of Córdoba, near the main entrance of a new seed plant currently under 
construction.9 Monsanto is planning to start construction of 240 silos for the storage of GMO 
corn that is chemically treated. These silos have shafts that need ventilation through fans. The 
population living close to the future plant opposes the exposure to the chemical dust that 
those fans would spread throughout the area. Monsanto has been blamed for damage to the 
health of persons allegedly caused by long-term exposure to the company’s Roundup 
herbicide.10 
Epidemiological surveys were conducted in 2001–2002 in areas treated with Roundup. 
Results of those surveys revealed rates of birth defects and malformations in children, cancer, 
and miscarriages one hundred times higher than the national average, coinciding with the 
increase of GM soy cultivation and herbicide spraying near populated areas.11 
 
 
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation 
 
GMOs are regulated in Argentina under the general Law on Seeds and Phytogenetic 
Creations (Ley de Semillas y Creaciones Fitogéneticas, LS)12 and the Law on the Promotion 
of the Development and Production of Modern Biotechnology (Ley de Promoción del 
Desarrollo y Producción de la Biotecnología Moderna, LB).13 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
3 
The LS is intended to promote the efficient production and marketing of crops by 
providing farmers with assurances as to the identity and quality of seeds that they acquire 
while protecting the property of phytogenetic innovations.14 It provides a definition of seeds 
that is broad enough to include transgenic crops, since it includes all vegetable matter 
susceptible to sowing or propagation.15 
The LS sets forth a general legal framework for the commercialization of crops, including 
their import and export,16 as well as seed classification and registration requirements and 
procedures.17 It established the National Commission on Seeds within the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Cattle as the enforcement authority empowered to determine which species 
will be subject to control and registration under the law.18 It also provided for the 
establishment of the National Registry of Cultivars, in which seeds that are open to the public 
or offered to consumers in any way are identified.19 
Regarding GM seeds, Resolution 46/2004 on Genetically Modified Plant Organisms 
(Resolución 46/2004 de Organismos Vegetales Geneticamente Modificandos)20 requires an 
additional registration in a specific National Registry of Operators of Genetically Modified 
Plant Organisms by all those who conduct experiments, import or export, produce or 
reproduce, or carry out any activity related to GM plants that have not been approved for 
commercialization in Argentina.21 Registration is a prerequisite to request authorization for 
the release of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) for purposes of testing.22 Registration 
is also required to obtain authorization for import or export of GM plants.23 
The LB is intended to promote the development and production of modern biotechnology 
by granting tax incentives to qualifying research and production projects that meet safety and 
health standards.24 
Argentina signed the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety25 in 2000, but has not yet ratified 
it.26 The Protocol, which regulates transboundary movements of GMOs, adopts the 
“precautionary principle,” which entitles the member parties to restrict or prohibit the import 
of GMOs if there is no sufficient or conclusive information as to its safety.27 Major world 
producers of GMOs such as the US, Canada, and Argentina have not ratified it, however, 
largely due to concerns that the restrictions that it would impose on the free trade of GMOs 
would be detrimental to their agricultural exports.28 
 
 
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing  
 
A. Responsible Agencies 
The Secretary of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Food (Secretaría de Agricultura, 
Gandería, Pesca y Alimentación, SAGPA) is in charge of granting permits for the release and 
commercialization of GMOs. Its permitting decisions are undertaken with the assistance of 
expert advisory commissions.29 The review process for granting such permits involves 
 
1) an assessment to verify that biosafety standards are met with regard to the 
agricultural ecosystem, with respect to both experiments on GMOs in greenhouses 
and their release into the environment; 
2) a review of their safety as food additives or ingredients; and 
3) an evaluation of the impact that their commercialization would have on Argentina’s 
international trade.30 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
4 
The first two steps, the environmental and food safety assessments, are based exclusively 
on scientific data and conducted by expert commissions composed of representatives of both 
the public and private sectors. The evaluation of environmental safety is assigned to the 
Biotechnology Directorate (BD) and food safety review is carried out by the National Service 
on Agricultural Food Health and Quality (Servicio Nacional de Sanidad y Calidad 
Agroalimentaria, SENASA). The assessment of the impact of the GMO on international 
commerce is assigned to the Agriculture Market Directorate (AMD), which evaluates whether 
authorizing commercialization is compatible with the standards of Argentina’s trade partners. 
This is critical because agricultural commodities are Argentina’s main exports.31 In many 
cases, GMOs that have been proved safe for the agricultural ecosystem and approved for use 
in the raw components for food are still not permitted to be commercialized until approval is 
received from the importing country’s authorities.32 
A Biotechnology Office has been created to coordinate seed registration and control and 
to participate in international negotiations in biotechnology matters. This office has the 
authority to decide on biosecurity issues, to design and implement guidelines and 
administrative procedures, and to set biotechnology and agricultural policies.33 
 
 
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment 
 
Subject to regulatory approval, Argentina allows GMOs to be released into the 
environment, under either confined or unconfined circumstances. Regulatory approval may be 
obtained for confined releases in three situations: (1) cultivation in greenhouses, (2) field 
trials, and (3) production of regulated seeds.34 Permission for unconfined planting of GM 
crops is granted only after a comprehensive study assessing whether free planting of the crop 
would be safe for the agricultural ecosystem.35 
Regulatory approval requires the applicant to provide pertinent technical information on 
the crop that is analyzed by the National Advisory Commission on Agricultural 
Biotechnology (Comisión Nacional Asesora de Biotecnología Agropecuaria, CONABIA). 
The approval process includes an evaluation of the risks that a GM crop would pose to the 
agricultural ecosystem.36 
Authorizations are subject to specific conditions, including appropriate environmental 
risk management and risk mitigation measures, isolation distances, the availability of specific 
detection methods, and restrictions on the use of both the harvested material and the field plot 
in future seasons.37 Production of regulated seed is permitted only under stringent isolation 
and seed processing conditions designed to prevent the regulated material from entering the 
commercial chain.38 
 
 
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs 
 
SENASA has the authority to evaluate the risks to human and animal health of food 
derived from GMOs.39 The risk evaluation includes an assessment of whether such food is 
harmful, its nutritional characteristics, and a comparison between the GM-derived food and 
its conventional counterpart. For a GM-derived food to be approved, it must be as safe and 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
5 
nutritious as conventional food already in the market. As new scientific and technical 
information becomes available, the food’s risk assessment is reevaluated accordingly.40 
Detailed requirements, forms, and procedures that need to be submitted for approval of 
GM-derived food are included in Annexes II and III of Resolution 412/2002.41 
Labelling of food containing GMO material is not required, although several bills 
requiring the labelling of food with GMO elements for human or animal consumption have 
been submitted and are pending congressional debate.42 
The labeling of food and agricultural products with GMOs being imported in the 
European Union from Argentina and the US, among other countries, was the subject of 
consultation and a trade dispute before the World Trade Organization in 2003. The exporting 
countries maintained that the EU required labeling of such imports constituted an undue 
restriction of agricultural product restrictions.43 
 
 
VII. Liability Regime 
 
Liability for damage to the environment in Argentina is provided for in the General Law 
on the Environment (Ley General del Ambiente, LGA),44 which defines environmental 
damage as any relevant alteration that negatively modifies the environment, its resources, the 
balance of ecosystems, or collective values or assets.45 
The LGA establishes a general principle of civil liability that anyone who causes current 
or future degrading effects to the environment is responsible for the costs of preventive and 
corrective actions, regardless of other environmental liabilities that may arise.46 Whoever 
causes environmental damage is subject to strict liability to restore the environment to its 
prior condition before the damage occurred.47 An allegedly responsible party may be 
exonerated from liability only by proving that all measures aimed at preventing the damage 
were taken and the damage was caused exclusively by the victim or a third party.48 
 
 
VIII. Prominent Judicial Decisions 
 
On September 4, 2012, a Criminal Court of Appeals of the Córdoba Province rendered a 
decision convicting a farmer and a crop-spraying pilot for spraying agrochemicals in the 
suburbs of the provincial capital neighborhood. It appears that the herbicides were applied to 
a GM soy variety. During the criminal proceeding, it was proved that 114 out of 142 children 
in the same neighborhood had agrochemicals in their blood. The medical expert in the case 
testified that he had found children in the area with more than five herbicides and insecticides 
in their blood. This is an unprecedented decision, since it is the first case in which pollution 
and harm to public health is treated as a crime and prosecuted in a Criminal court, under the 
Law 24051 on Hazardous Products49, which punishes offenders with between five and ten 
years in prison for polluting soil, water, air, or the environment in a manner that is harmful to 
health. The ruling points specifically to two agrochemicals: endosulfan and glyphosate.50 This 
case may highlight the popular concern about the increased use of herbicides on herbicide-
resistant GM crops. 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
6 
BELGIUM 
 
Nicolas Boring 
Foreign Law Specialist 
 
 
Summary  
 
Belgium is considered to have an intermediate level of restrictions on GMOs, 
although public opinion tends to generally be hostile to GMOs. Most of Belgium’s 
regulation of GMOs is directly or indirectly derived from European regulations. The fact 
that Belgium is a federal state has an important impact on the regulatory environment of 
GMOs, and the applicable rules can exist either at the federal or at the regional level, 
depending on the specific issue. Overall, regulation of GMOs in Belgium is mostly 
focused on authorization requirements prior to their production, use, or distribution; on 
mandatory technical requirements to limit the potential release of GMOs into non-GMO 
fields; and on information and transparency measures. 
 
 
I. Introduction 
 
Belgium has been a pioneer in the biotechnology sector, and two Belgian researchers, 
together with an American scientist, created the first genetically modified plant in 1983.1 
Several Belgian universities are still very active in GMO research.2 Nonetheless, the use of 
genetically modified organisms (GMOs) is quite controversial in Belgium. Perhaps because 
of this dichotomy between an active GMO research agenda and a generally-hostile public 
opinion, Belgium is considered to have an “intermediate” policy on this topic: less permissive 
than countries such as the United States, and less restrictive than countries such as Germany.3 
 
 
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion 
 
GMOs are quite controversial in Belgium. A number of consumer rights organizations 
and environmental groups have voiced their opposition to GMOs, which has led to general 
concern over the potential risks of GMOs on the part of consumers.4 A European Union 
public opinion study from 2007 found that only 22% of Belgians polled were in favor of 
GMOs, and 55% were against.5 
This placed Belgium near the average for the EU as a whole (in the same study, 21% of 
EU citizens polled were in favor of GMOs, and 58% were against). Although this and other 
studies6 show strong opposition to GMOs in Belgium, this hostility is not quite as strong as it 
is in some other European countries such as France or Germany.7 It should also be noted that 
there seems to be a difference of opinion between the northern and the southern parts of 
Belgium. Indeed, there is more support for GMOs in Flanders than in Wallonia and Brussels.8 
 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
7 
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation 
 
A. EU Regulations 
As Belgium is a member of the European Union, its laws and regulations are subordinate 
to EU regulations regarding consumer and environmental protection.9 These are issues of 
shared competence between the EU and Member States, which means that the Belgian 
government may enact and implement its own laws and regulations at the national level, as 
long as this does not conflict with EU-level regulations.10 The main European texts regarding 
GMOs are Regulation (EC) 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council on 
genetically modified food and feed,11 and Directive 2001/18/EC of the European Parliament 
and of the Council on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified 
organisms.12 The first, being an EU regulation, automatically became applicable law in the 
Member States on the date it was published in the European official gazette. The second, 
being an EU directive, was not automatically and directly applicable, and each Member State 
is required to transpose the Directive’s provisions into its law by passing appropriate 
legislation at the national level. 
 
B. Domestic Provisions 
The main piece of national legislation regarding GMOs in Belgium is a Royal Decree 
from 2005, which essentially transposed the rules set out in Directive 2001/18/EC of the 
European Parliament and of the Council on the deliberate release into the environment of 
genetically modified organisms.13 
At the national level, the Belgian federal government (particularly the Ministries for the 
Environment and for Public Health) is the principal authority with regard to regulating 
GMOs.14 Given that Belgium is a federal state, however, the regional authorities of Belgium 
play a relatively strong role in the regulation of GMOs, mainly within the framework of a 
1997 cooperation agreement between the federal government and the regions with regard to 
administrative and scientific coordination for biosecurity issues.15 
 
C. Definition of GMO 
The Royal Decree of February 21, 2005, defined a GMO in exactly identical terms as 
Directive 2001/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council: “an organism, with the 
exception of human beings, in which the genetic material has been altered in a way that does 
not occur naturally by mating and/or natural recombination” (“Un organisme, à l’exception 
des êtres humains, dont le matériel génétique a été modifié d’une manière qui ne s’effectue 
pas naturellement par multiplication et/ou par recombinaison naturelle”).16 
 
 
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing 
 
Belgian law on the research, production, and marketing of GMOs is fractured. As can be 
seen in the discussion below, certain rules come from the federal level and apply equally over 
the whole country, but much regulation is done at the regional level. 
 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
8 
A. Use of GMOs in Confined Environments 
The use of GMOs in confined environments (laboratories) falls under the authority of the 
regions. All three regions of Belgium (Wallonia, Flanders, and Brussels-Capital) have enacted 
legislation transposing European norms17 into their respective regional laws.18 All three 
regions require prior authorization for the use of GMOs in confined environments, and such 
authorization is based on assessments of risks and how such risks may be mitigated.19 
 
B. Deliberate Release of GMOs in Open Environments for Research Purposes 
The deliberate release of GMOs in open environments for research purposes is subject to 
governmental authorization as described in the Royal Decree of February 21, 2005.20 A 
person or organization wishing to release GMOs for purposes other than commercialization 
must submit an application to the Federal Public Service (FPS) for Public Health, Food Chain 
Safety and Environment, which must evaluate the application’s admissibility in coordination 
with the Biosecurity and Biotechnology Service (BBS).21 If the application is admissible, the 
file is sent to the regional ministers that may be concerned, and to the Biosecurity Counsel, 
which is supposed to give its opinion on the matter.22 The general public is informed of the 
application, and its opinion is solicited, through a website.23 
Once it has reached a decision, the FPS for Public Health, Food Chain Safety and 
Environment sends it, along with the opinion of the Biosecurity Counsel and the information 
provided to the public, to the ministers in charge of public health and the environment.24 
These ministers may then approve or reject the application.25 If any event or new information 
comes to light that would change the facts upon which an approval was based, the relevant 
ministers must be informed of it, and they may suspend or revoke their authorization if need 
be.26 
 
C. Distribution and Release of GMOs for Commercial Purposes 
The use or commercial distribution of GMOs or products containing GMOs is subject to 
governmental authorization as described in the Royal Decree of February 21, 2005.27 
Alternatively, a GMO (or a product containing GMOs) can legally be used or commercially 
distributed in Belgium if it has another EU Member State’s written authorization for the same 
purposes.28 
In a procedure generally similar to what is required for the release of GMOs for research 
purposes (see above), the application to use or market GMOs first goes to the FPS for Public 
Health, Food Chain Safety and Environment, which evaluates the application’s admissibility 
in cooperation with the BBS, and then sends the file to the competent federal and regional 
ministers and to the Biosecurity Counsel.29 The general public is also informed and consulted 
via a website.30 The European Commission and other EU member states are informed as 
well,31 and they have sixty days from the date of their receipt of the file to voice any 
objections to the possible authorization of that GMO.32 Any authorization is subject to 
periodic renewal,33 and the authorization may be changed or revoked if new information 
comes to light that justifies it.34 
 
 
 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
9 
D. Transparency Rules for GM Crops 
 
The Flemish government requires anyone intending to plant GM crops to give official 
notice to the regional authorities,35 and also to notify other farmers whose lands are situated 
within a certain distance from the proposed GM crops.36 The appropriate governmental 
authorities are to maintain an online register listing certain information regarding fields of 
GM crops.37 Some of the information on this register is made available to the public, 
including the size of each field, the type of crop grown on it, and the township in which it is 
located.38 Some of the more specific information, however, such as the name and address of 
the GM-growing farmer, the exact location of the field, and the precise variety of GMO 
planted in it, is only made available to certain official bodies and not to the general public.39 
The Walloon government also requires any farmer wishing to plant GM crops to give 
official notice to the regional authorities,40 and to notify other nearby farmers as well as any 
other farmers who might use the same equipment as the GM farmer.41 The Walloon 
authorities may allow the public to have access to certain information regarding GM crops, 
and contrary to what is the case in Flanders, they can make public the GM farmer’s name and 
business address, as well as the GM field’s precise location and time of cultivation.42 
No analogous regulation seems to exist in the Brussels-Capital region, but this is 
probably because Brussels-Capital is primarily an urban area, where such rules would have 
little relevance. 
 
 
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment 
 
Rules intended to prevent or limit the release of GMOs into the environment are 
primarily within the domain of regional authorities. Flanders requires that farmers intending 
to plant GMOs follow a training course to ensure that they know the best practices to prevent 
the accidental release of GMOs into the environment.43 The Flemish government also 
requires that GM crops be separated from other crops. The specific separation distance differs 
according to the crops in question: for example, the buffer zone for GM maize must be at 
least fifty meters,44 while the minimum buffer zone for sugar beets is only five meters.45 
Wallonia also mandates that there be a separation zone between GMOs and other crops.46 
It seems that, as of yet, only the separation zone for GM maize has been specifically defined: 
the buffer zone must be at least 600 meters if the field does not have a band of non-GM crops 
at its edges, or it can be of 300 meters if there is a band of non-GM maize around the edges 
(the non-GM band must be at least six rows wide).47 Wallonia also mandates certain specific 
procedures and practices with regard to the seeding of GM crops; their harvest, transportation, 
and storage; and the handling, cleaning, and maintenance of equipment used for their 
cultivation.48 
As with the transparency rules for GM crops discussed in Part IV(D), no analogous 
regulations seem to exist in the Brussels-Capital region. As mentioned earlier, this is probably 
because Brussels-Capital is mostly an urban area, where such rules would have little 
relevance. 
 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
10
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs 
 
The sale of GMOs is authorized at the European level in accordance with Regulation 
(EC) 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to food for human 
or animal consumption.49 Furthermore, the use of GMOs for commercial purposes is subject 
to authorization under the Royal Decree of February 21, 2005, as described above.50 
Additionally, rules on traceability and labeling are established through Regulation (EC) 
1830/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning traceability and 
labeling of genetically modified organisms and the traceability of food and feed products 
produced from genetically modified organisms.51 
Contrary to some other EU Member States, Belgium does not provide for specific “no 
GMO” labels highlighting the absence of GMOs in a product. These types of labels would 
run against existing Belgian law on advertising, and are therefore not allowed.52 
 
 
VII. Liability Regime 
 
There does not seem to be a specific liability regime for GMOs in Belgium, whether at 
the federal level or the regional level, beyond the normal rules of civil liability. The regions of 
Flanders and Wallonia, however, have institutional mechanisms that are indirectly related to 
the concept of liability for GMO producers. 
Flanders has a sort of mandatory insurance system, by which all farmers are required to 
pay into a Fund for Agriculture and Fishing, which is to indemnify them if they suffer certain 
economic losses.53 Farmers who plant GM crops may be required to pay extra contributions 
into the fund, in order to make up for the indemnities that this fund may have to pay non-GM 
farmers due to contamination from GM crops.54 Furthermore, this fund may require a GM 
crop farmer to reimburse it when the fund had to pay indemnities to non-GM crop farmers 
due to the GM crop farmer’s failure to follow proper rules and best practices with regard to 
his/her GM crops.55 
The situation is very similar in Wallonia. That region has a Budgetary Fund for the 
Quality of Plant and Animal Products (Fond budgétaire de la qualité des produits animaux et 
végétaux),56 which is very similar to the Flemish Fund for Agriculture and Fishing. Like its 
Flemish equivalent, the Walloon fund is supposed to indemnify farmers for various types of 
economic damage they may suffer, including contamination from nearby GM crops.57 If a 
court finds a GM crop farmer to be liable for the damage to other crops, then the fund may 
require that farmer to reimburse it for the indemnities that it may have had to pay the farmers 
of these damaged crops.58 
 
 
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases 
 
The production of GMOs is a very controversial topic in Belgium, and certain anti-GMO 
activists have resorted to destroying or degrading fields of GM crops.59 The first such 
destructions happened in 2000, and became an increasingly frequent occurrence over the next 
few years.60 This has led to several well-publicized trials, and some militants were found 
guilty by the courts.61 The sentences tended to be very light, such as when thirteen activists 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
11
were sentenced to pay one symbolic Euro to the Monsanto Corporation in 2004.62 Some 
sentences can be heavier, however. For example, a group of militants that destroyed a field of 
experimental GM crops in 2011 was recently sentenced to pay €25,000 (approximately 
US$33,400) in damages to the owners of the crops.63 
 
 
BRAZIL 
 
Eduardo Soares 
Senior Foreign Law Specialist 
 
Summary 
 
In Brazil, genetically modified organisms (GMOs) are governed by Law No. 11,105 
of March 24, 2005, which regulates principles established by the Constitution regarding 
the preservation of the environment and the country’s genetic patrimony, as well as the 
supervision of entities dedicated to research and manipulation of genetic material. 
Scientific advances in the areas of biosafety and biotechnology; the protection of life, 
human health, and the health of animals and plants; and the observance of the 
precautionary principle for the protection of the environment were used as guidelines to 
draft Law No. 11,105. This Law, in turn, led to the creation of general rules on 
biotechnology research, restructuring of the national technical commission responsible 
for all regulation of the biotechnology sector, creation of a National Biosafety Council, 
and establishment of the National Biosafety Policy. 
Law No. 11,105 defines the concept of a GMO, and sets rules for the laboratories 
that work with them. Additionally, it establishes authorization procedures for GMO 
research, and establishes rules for the production and marketing of GMOs, restrictions on 
their release into the environment, regimes for their cultivation, requirements for 
reporting their release, inspections and monitoring of GMO research activities and their 
commercial release, implementing authorities and authorizing procedures for their 
release, and restrictions on GMOs in foodstuffs. Finally, it provides for the punishment of 
administrative violations and criminal offenses. 
As for labeling, in 2003 a decree was issued to regulate the right to information, as 
guaranteed by federal law, regarding food and food ingredients intended for human 
consumption and animal feed when they contain or are produced from GMOs. 
 
 
I. Introduction 
 
Brazil’s Biosafety Law (Law No. 11,105 of March 24, 2005), passed by the Congress in 
2005, put an end to the controversy surrounding genetically modified organisms (GMOs) in 
the country. In addition to creating general rules on biotechnology research, Law No. 11,105 
regulates constitutional principles and establishes safety standards and mechanisms for 
monitoring activities involving GMOs and their by-products.1 The guidelines used for 
drafting this Law were the recognition of scientific advances in the areas of biosafety and 
biotechnology; the protection of life, human health, and the health of animals and plants; and 
the observance of the precautionary principle for the protection of the environment.2 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
12
Additionally, Law No. 11,105 created a national technical commission (CTNBio), which 
became responsible for all regulation of the biotechnology sector. Since then, CTNBio has 
approved the commercial use of about fifty GMOs, of which thirty-five are plants, including 
beans, cotton, corn, and soy, the latter of which is the most cultivated GMO in the country. 
According to the president of CTNBio, the rules for the release of these organisms in the 
country are among the strictest in the world.3 
A genetically modified (GM) product must go through five different stages before it can 
be sold. First, a company must submit the project to CTNBio for approval. The Commission 
reviews the proposal and makes a site visit to determine whether the conditions exist for 
carrying out the work safely. Once the proposal is approved, development and testing can 
begin, and must be performed in a restricted and controlled environment. If the work site is a 
plant, the Ministry of Agriculture is in charge of supervising the experiment. Then, before the 
GM product’s commercial release, CTNBio evaluates whether the data collected correspond 
to the Commission’s biosecurity criteria.4 
Prior to its marketing, however, the product is still subject to a political assessment 
conducted by a council of eleven ministers, who decide whether it is advantageous for the 
country to launch the new product on the market.5 
In 2012, Brazil was the second major producer of GMO crops in the world, with an area 
of thirty million hectares dedicated to the planting of GMOs, which was only behind the 
United States with an area of 69 million hectares.6 
 
 
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion 
 
A study conducted in 2011 by the Brazilian Agricultural Research Company (Empresa 
Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuária, Embrapa)7 on the development of strategic 
communication on GMO biosafety8 mentioned that surveys of public opinion in several 
studies have shown that, in general, people are aware of GMOs, but are suspicious of the 
“ulterior motives” behind the “defense” of GMOs.9 
The biggest controversy involving GMOs occurred before the enactment of Law No. 
11,105 and revolved around conflicting biosafety and environmental laws. This conflict led to 
a lawsuit (see Part VIII, below) and the subsequent approval of a new legal framework for the 
regulation of GMOs. 
 
 
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation 
 
A. Constitutional Principle 
The Brazilian Constitution determines that everyone has the right to an ecologically 
balanced environment, which is a public good for the people’s use and is essential for a 
healthy life. The government and the community have a duty to defend and preserve the 
environment for present and future generations.10 To ensure the effectiveness of this right, it 
is the government’s responsibility to preserve the diversity and integrity of the country’s 
genetic patrimony, and to supervise entities dedicated to research and manipulation of genetic 
material;11 to require, as provided by law, a prior environmental impact study, which must be 
made public, on installation of works or activities that may cause significant degradation of 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
13
the environment;12 and to control the production, marketing, and employment of techniques, 
methods, and substances that carry a risk to life, the quality of life, and the environment.13 
 
B. Law No. 11,105 of March 24, 2005 
On March 24, 2005, Law No. 11,105 was issued to regulate article 225(§1)(II), (IV), and 
(V) of the Constitution by establishing safety norms and inspection mechanisms for the 
construction, cultivation, production, manipulation, transport, transfer, import, export, 
storage, marketing, research, consumption, environmental release, and discharge of GMOs 
and their by-products.14 
Educational activities and projects concerning GMO scientific research, technological 
development, and industrial production are restricted to the public and private entities 
responsible both for compliance with Law No. 11,105 and its regulation, Decree No. 5,591 of 
November 22, 2005,15 and for the eventual consequences resulting from noncompliance.16 
Individuals acting in an autonomous capacity are not allowed to develop activities and 
projects involving GMOs.17 
Law No. 11,105 also created the National Biosafety Council (Conselho Nacional de 
Biossegurança, CNBS),18 restructured the National Technical Commission on Biosafety 
(Comissão Técnica Nacional de Biossegurança, CTNBio),19 and provided for the National 
Biosafety Policy (Política Nacional de Biossegurança). 
Law No. 11,105 defines GMO as an organism whose genetic material (DNA/RNA) has 
been modified by any genetic engineering technique.20 It defines a GM by-product as a 
product obtained from a GMO that has no autonomous replication capacity or that does not 
contain a viable GM form.21 
 
C. Law No. 8,078 of September 11, 1990 
Law No. 8,078 of September 11, 1990, establishes the norms for the protection and 
defense of the consumer, public order, and social interest.22 Article 6(III) of Law No. 8,078 
determines that appropriate and clear information about different products and services; the 
correct specification of the quantity, characteristics, composition, quality, and price of 
products; and statements about the risks these products present are basic rights of 
consumers.23 
 
D. Decree No. 4,680 of April 24, 2003 
On April 24, 2003, Decree No. 4,680 was issued to regulate the right to information 
guaranteed by Law No. 8,078, regarding both food and food ingredients intended for human 
consumption and animal feed when they contain or are produced from GMOs.24 
 
 
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing 
 
A. Rules for Laboratories 
Pursuant to article 14(VI) of Law No. 11,105, CTNBio is responsible for establishing the 
biosafety requirements for the issuance of permits to operate laboratories, institutions, or 
companies carrying out activities related to GMOs and their by-products.25 
To this effect, on November 27, 2006, CTNBio issued Normative Resolution No. 2, 
which establishes the GMO risk classification and biosafety levels to be applied in 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
14
containment regimes involving the creation, cultivation, production, handling, storage, quality 
control, and disposal of GMOs, and the research, technological development, and educational 
activities related to GMOs. The Resolution provides details on, inter alia, the presentation of 
proposals for GMO-related projects and activities, GMO risk classification and biosafety 
levels, laboratory specifications and design, and containment equipment.26 
 
B. Rules for Authorizing Research, Production, and Marketing 
Those interested in performing the activities provided for in Law No. 11,105 must apply 
for a permit with CTNBio.27 For the purposes of Law No. 11,105, research activity is defined 
as “activity carried out in a laboratory, containment regime, or field as part of the production 
process of GMOs and their by-products, or of biosafety assessment of GMOs and their by-
products, which encompasses, within the experimental ambit, the construction, growing, 
handling, transportation, transfer, import, export, storage, release into the environment, and 
disposal of GMOs and their by-products.”28 
An activity that does not fit the criteria for a research activity is considered a commercial 
use of GMOs and their by-products, which involves the “cultivation, production, handling, 
transportation, transfer, marketing, import, export, storage, use, release, or disposal of GMOs 
and their by-products for commercial purposes.”29 
In addition to a permit, those interested in researching GMOs and producing 
and marketing them must also follow the rules established in CTNBio Normative 
Resolution No. 2. 
 
C. Labeling Requirements for Distributed Products 
Pursuant to article 2(§1) of Decree No. 4,680, on December 22, 2003, the Ministry of 
Justice issued Administrative Act (Portaria) No. 2,658, which defines and depicts the 
“transgenic symbol” (see below) to be used in the marketing of foods and food ingredients 
intended for human consumption or animal feed containing or produced from GMOs.30 
 
 
Transgenic Symbol 
 
Interministerial Normative Instruction (Instrução Normativa Interministerial) No. 1 of 
April 1, 2004, defines in Technical Regulations (Regulamento Técnico) the supplemental 
procedures for the implementation of Decree No. 4,680, which provides for the right to 
information guaranteed by Law No. 8,078 of September 11, 1990. These Regulations are 
annexed to the Normative Instruction.31 
Law No. 11,105 further determines that foods and food ingredients for human 
consumption or animal feed containing or produced from GMOs or their by-products must 
contain information to this effect on their labels in accordance with the Law’s regulation 
(Decree No. 5,591).32 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
15
D.Bodies Involved in Implementation  
 
1. CTNBio 
CTNBio, which is part of the Ministry of Science and Technology, is a multidisciplinary 
collegial body of an advisory and deliberative character designed 
 
to provide technical support and advice to the federal government in the formulation, 
implementation, and updating of the National Biosafety Policy on GMOs and their by-
products, as well as in establishing technical safety standards and [providing] technical 
advice regarding the authorization of activities involving research and the commercial 
use of GMOs and their by-products, based on the assessment of their risk to human health 
and the environment [risco zoofitossanitário].33. . . 
. . . CTNBio must monitor the development of, and technical and scientific progress 
in the areas of biosafety, biotechnology, bioethics, and related areas, aiming to increase 
its capacity to protect human health, animals and plants, and the environment.34 
 
CTNBio is composed of members and alternates appointed by the Minister of Science 
and Technology, and must have twenty-seven Brazilian citizens of recognized technical 
abilities and outstanding scientific knowledge and performance. The members must have an 
academic doctoral degree with professional activity in the areas of biosafety, biotechnology, 
biology, human and animal health, or the environment.35 The functioning of CTNBio is 
defined by the regulation of Law No. 11,105.36 
 
2. CNBS 
The CNBS, which operates under the authority of the Presidency of the Republic, is a 
superior advisory body to the President for the preparation and implementation of the 
National Biosafety Policy.37 Although article 8 of Law No. 11,105 charges the CNBS with 
the duty of preparing and implementing the National Biosafety Policy, it appears that such a 
policy has yet to be prepared and implemented. 
The Council is charged with establishing principles and guidelines for the administrative 
actions of federal agencies and entities with jurisdiction on biosafety;38 analyzing applications 
for the commercial release of GMOs and their derivatives in matters regarding 
appropriateness, socioeconomic opportunity, and the national interest, upon the request of 
CTNBio;39 and deciding, as the final hearing body, administrative cases relating to the 
commercial use of GMOs and their by-products.40 
Decree No. 5,591 further regulates the activities, functioning, and composition of the 
CNBS, as well as the jurisdiction of the organs and entities in charge of registering, 
supervising, and authorizing proceedings related to GMOs and their derivatives.41 
 
3. CIBio 
Every institution that uses techniques and genetic engineering methods or conducts 
research on GMOs and their by-products must create an Internal Biosafety Commission 
(Comissão Interna de Biossegurança, CIBio), besides indicating a technician primarily 
responsible for each specific project.42 
 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
16
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment 
 
Law No. 11,105 prohibits the release into the environment of GMOs or their by-products 
 
• 
as part of research activities, without a favorable technical decision issued by 
CTNBio;  
• 
during trade operations, without a favorable technical opinion issued by CTNBio; 
• 
without a license issued by the appropriate agency or environmental entity when 
CTNBio considers the activity a potential cause of environmental degradation; or 
• 
without the approval of the CNBS, in accordance with the terms of Law No. 11,105 
and its regulations.43 
 
The CTNBio is the entity responsible for the establishment of technical standards 
regarding research and the commercial use of GMOs and their by-products based on the 
assessment of their risk to human health and the environment (risco zoofitossanitário).44 
Accordingly, on November 6, 2008, CTNBio issued Normative Resolution No. 6 with the 
norms applicable to the planned release into the environment of GM plants and their by-
products.45 
 
A. Protective Goals 
Upon the verification of adverse effects on the environment or on human and animal 
health, or even upon confirmation of new scientific knowledge, the authorization for the 
planned release of a GM plant and its by-products may be suspended or revoked at any time 
by CTNBio.46 
Any accidental release of a GM plant and its by-products must be immediately reported 
to the institution’s CIBio and to CTNBio. The CIBio has up to five days to send the report of 
corrective actions taken to CTNBio. The report must include the names of the persons or 
authorities that have been notified.47 The report of an accidental release of a GM plant and its 
by-products does not exempt the applicant from informing the competent authorities and the 
people who may be affected, so that they can adopt the appropriate measures in accordance 
with the laws in force.48 
 
B. Regimes for Cultivation 
According to Normative Resolution No. 6, the release of GM plants into the environment 
is subject to previous approval by CTNBio,49 and the regime of GMO cultivation must be 
closely monitored and reported.50 
On August 16, 2007, CTNBio issued Normative Resolution No. 4, which establishes the 
minimum isolation distances to be observed between genetically modified commercial corn 
crops and non-genetically modified corn crops to allow the coexistence of different 
production systems in the field.51 To allow coexistence, the distance between a genetically 
modified commercial corn crop and a non-genetically modified corn crop located in a nearby 
area should be no less than 100 meters (approximately 328 feet) or, alternatively, twenty 
meters (approximately sixty-five feet) provided that it is surrounded with at least ten rows of 
conventional corn plants of a similar size and vegetative cycle as the genetically modified 
corn.52 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
17
Normative Resolution No. 10 of October 2, 2013, determines that in the planned release 
of genetically modified citrus plants into the environment, the strategy of pollen competition 
should be observed by introducing three types of borders, comprising at least six lines of 
citrus plants, also subject to the conditions established in the Resolution.53 
 
C. Reporting Requirements 
The applicant (requerente)54 must maintain records of the individual who is monitoring 
the planned release of GM plants into the environment. These records must include, but are 
not limited to, information on security measures, agronomic practices, and data collection, as 
well as on the storage, material transfer, and eventual disposal of the GMOs and their by-
products.55 
Both the person responsible for the applicant company and its CIBio are charged with 
ensuring compliance with the provisions of Normative Resolution No. 6 with respect to the 
planned release of a GM plant and its by-products into the environment.56 Additionally, the 
company’s technical opinion concerning the planned release must inform CTNBio about any 
possible breach of the rules set out in Normative Resolution No. 6 and the biosecurity 
measures established by CTNBio.57 
 
D. Inspections 
According to article 16 of Law No. 11,105, the registration and inspection bodies of the 
Ministries of Health, Agriculture, and Environment, and the Special Secretariat for 
Aquaculture and Fisheries of the Presidency of the Republic are charged, inter alia, within the 
field of their respective expertise, while observing the technical decisions of CTNBio, the 
deliberations of the CNBS, and the mechanisms established by Law No. 11,105 and its 
regulation, with 
 
I – overseeing the research activities of GMOs and their derivatives; 
II – registering and monitoring the commercial release of GMOs and their by-
products[.]58 
 
E. Implementing Authorities and Authorizing Procedures 
After the proposal for the planned release of GM plants into the environment is approved 
by the company’s CIBio, the applicant must submit it for approval to CTNBio accompanied 
by 
 
I – A request for planned release; information on the institution, dated and signed by the 
legal representative of the company, according to Annex I of Normative Resolution No. 6; 
II – Information on the GMO plant, according to Annex II of Normative Resolution No. 
6; 
III – Information on the planned release of GMO plants, according to Annex III of 
Normative Resolution No. 6; 
IV – Maps and sketches for the planned release of GMO plants, in accordance with 
Annex IV of Normative Resolution No. 6; [and] 
V – A request for the import of vegetal material, when applicable.59 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
18
The proposal must be presented in Portuguese, with four copies, and accompanied by a 
digital file.60 
 
 
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs 
 
A. Assessment of Risks 
Normative Resolution No. 5 of March 12, 2008, defines assessment of risk as a 
combination of procedures or methods by which the potential effects of the planned release of 
GMOs and derived products on the environment and on human and animal health are 
assessed on a case-bycase basis.61 
The assessment of risk must identify and evaluate the potential adverse effects of GMOs 
and their by-products on human and animal health, on the environment, and on plants, while 
maintaining transparency, the scientific method, and the precautionary principle.62 
 
B. Implementing Authorities and Authorizing Procedures 
The commercial release of GMOs and their by-products must conform to the standards 
provided for in Normative Resolution No. 5, as well as the written permission issued by 
CTNBio in accordance with all the conditions imposed in the permit.63 
The authorization request for the commercial release of GMOs must be submitted to 
CTNBio with the information requested in Annexes I, II, III, and IV of Normative Resolution 
No. 5, which must be duly documented by scientific reports of the results obtained during the 
planned releases into the environment or other studies, without prejudice to other information 
deemed relevant by the CTNBio.64 
 
C. Fodder for Livestock 
The restrictions on GMOs and their by-products on foodstuffs are limited to their 
approval and authorization for human consumption or animal feed by the competent 
authorities, as described above. 
 
D. Labeling 
Law No. 11,105 determines that food and food ingredients for human consumption or 
animal feed containing or produced from GMOs or their by-products must provide 
information to this effect on their labels, in accordance with the regulation.65 
Consumers must be informed when more than 1% of a product marketed as food for 
human or animal consumption contains or is produced from GMOs.66 
 
 
VII. Liability Regime 
 
Without prejudice to the application of the penalties provided for in Law No. 11,105, 
those responsible for damage to the environment and to third parties are jointly liable for their 
compensation or full reparation, regardless of fault.67 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
19
A. Administrative Violations 
Any action or omission that violates the rules set forth in Law No. 11,105 and other 
relevant legislation is considered an administrative violation.68 Administrative violations must 
be punished as prescribed in the regulation of Law No. 11,105, regardless of precautionary 
measures to seize products, suspend the sales of products, and stop prohibited activities. The 
following sanctions are applicable: 
 
I –a warning; 
II – a fine; 
III – seizure of GMOs and their by-products; 
IV – suspension of the sale of GMOs and their by-products; 
V – halting of the activity; 
VI – partial or total interdiction of a business, activity or undertaking; 
VII – suspension of registration, license or authorization; 
VIII – cancellation of the registration, license or authorization; 
IX – loss or restriction on tax incentives and benefits granted by the government; 
X – loss or suspension of participation in government financed line of credit; 
XI – intervention in the establishment; 
XII – ineligibility to enter into contracts with public administration for a period of five 
years.69 
 
It is incumbent upon the registration and inspection agencies and entities referred to in 
article 16 of Law No. 11,105 to establish “criteria and values,” and impose fines ranging from 
R$2,000 (approximately US$870) to R$1,500,000 (approximately US$652,174), which must 
be established according to the seriousness of the offense.70 The fines may be applied 
cumulatively with other penalties provided for in article 22 of Law No. 11,105.71 In case of 
recidivism, the fine will be doubled.72 In case of continued violation, characterized 
by the continuation of the action or omission that was initially punished, the 
punishment will be applied daily until its cause ceases, without prejudice to the 
immediate stoppage of the activity or the interdiction of the laboratory, institution, 
or company responsible.73 
 
B. Criminal Offenses 
The release or disposal of GMOs into the environment in a way that is contrary to the 
standards established by CTNBio and by the agencies and entities of registration and 
inspection is punishable by one to four years in prison and a fine.74 The punishment is 
increased by one-sixth to one-third if the offense results in damage to another’s property; one-
third to one-half if harm is caused to the environment; one-half to two-thirds if the offense 
results in serious bodily injury to another person; and two-thirds to double if the offense 
results in death.75 
The production, storage, transport, sale, import, or export of GMOs or their by-products 
without authorization or in violation of the standards established by CTNBio and by 
registration and inspection agencies is punishable by one to two years in prison and a fine.76 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
20
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases 
 
The passage in 2005 of Brazil’s current Biosafety Law, Law No. 11,105, involved a 
decade-long history of legislative and judicial activity. On January 5, 1995, Brazil issued the 
first law designed to regulate activities involving GMOs and their by-products. Law No. 
8,974 was issued to regulate aspects of biosafety related to the development of GMOs and 
their by-products in the country.77 However, conflicts between the biosafety legislation and 
environmental legislation led to the need for a restructuring of the relevant legislation.78 
The problems regarding the application of Law No. 8.974 emerged in 1998 when 
CTNBio issued a technical opinion (parecer técnico prévio conclusivo) in which it approved 
the request for commercial release of a GM soybean tolerant to a glyphosate-based herbicide 
without requiring the completion of an Environmental Impact Report (Relatório de Impacto 
Ambiental, EIA/RIMA). 
The competence of CTNBio to remove the requirement was immediately challenged in 
court through a public civil action filed by the Office of Consumer Affairs (Instituto de 
Defesa do Consumidor, IDEC), which provoked an extensive and contentious process of 
discussions about the adoption of this technology in the country. 
The discussions involved all of Brazilian civil society and had repercussions within the 
judiciary, executive, and legislative branches. As a result, several laws were enacted 
generating a complex regulatory framework with little legal certainty. 
In an attempt to address these regulatory weaknesses, in late 2003 the federal government 
sent the Congress a bill that was the result of discussions with various stakeholders, proposing 
a new law. 
After a year and a half of discussions in the Congress, the bill was approved, and on 
March 24, 2005, the President of the Republic signed Law No. 11,105, which became 
Brazil’s new Biosafety Law. This Law in conjunction with Decree No. 5,591 of November 
22, 2005, which regulated Law No. 11,105, created a new legal framework for biosafety in 
the country. 
 
 
CANADA 
 
Tariq Ahmad 
Foreign Law Specialist 
 
Summary  
 
Canada regulates products derived from biotechnology processes as part of its 
existing regulatory framework for “novel products.” The focus is on the traits expressed 
in the products and not on the method used to introduce those traits. The Canadian Food 
Inspection Agency (CFIA) is responsible for regulating genetically modified (GM) plants 
and approving GM feed for animals. Health Canada is mandated to assess the safety of 
foods for human consumption, including genetically modified organisms (GMOs) in 
foodstuff, and for authorizing them to be sold in Canada. Advertising or labeling the 
presence of GMOs in particular food is voluntary unless there is a health or safety 
concern. 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
21
I. Introduction 
 
Canada is the third largest producer of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) in the 
world.1 It is one of the largest producers of GM canola oil and other GM crops include maize, 
soybean, and beet.2 
In 1993, the Canadian government established the Federal Regulatory Framework for 
Biotechnology. This framework resulted from an agreement between “federal regulatory 
departments on principles for an efficient, effective approach for regulating biotechnology.”3 
The Framework established that, rather than creating new regulations, novel products 
produced through biotechnology will be regulated under existing regulations that cover 
traditional products.4 The motive behind the Framework was to avoid the creation of a 
separate agency and separate legal framework for the regulation of biotechnology and to 
avoid duplication among regulatory agencies. 
In Canada, GMOs used either as food or animal feed must be approved before entering 
the market.5 The approval process is based on numerous regulations that are enforced by 
Health Canada for foods, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) for seeds and 
livestock feed, and Environment Canada “for new substances intended for environmental 
release.”6 Approvals for GMOs are required for both locally produced and imported products. 
As of 2012, over eighty-one genetically modified foods had been approved by CFIA.7 
Canada’s regulatory approach is essentially to review products rather than processes. In 
other words, the focus is on the traits expressed in the products and not on the method used to 
introduce those traits. This approach applies to both traditional breeding methods and genetic 
engineering. As noted by Professor Eric Montpetit: 
 
...the principle behind this so called product-based approach entails channelling all 
products, whether they are genetically modified or not, through a single risk management 
system. Since existing acts and regulations already provide for effective risk management 
systems, the product-based approach does not require any major legislative change.8 
 
Unlike other countries, “Canada relies on the concept of novelty to trigger regulatory 
oversight, thereby enabling the regulation of a wider array of novel seeds or foods.”9 
Some scholars also note that Canada generally espouses a permissive attitude10 towards 
GMOs and takes a far less precautionary approach to regulating GMOs than European 
countries.11 
 
 
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion  
 
A. Public Opinion 
Public opinion polls have consistently shown that a large majority of Canadians are 
concerned about GMOs. According to a 1999 Environics poll, 80 percent of Canadians want 
GM foods to be labeled.12 However, some assert that the polls are misleading since most 
consumers do not have a well-developed view of the products. Moreover, as press attention 
on GMOs has declined so has public opposition to them. According to a 2007 report, 
“[c]ompared to 29 OECD countries, Canadians see the least amount of media reporting on 
GMOs.”13 In a more recent poll, it was shown that “76 per cent of respondents said the 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
22
federal government has not provided them enough information to make an informed decision 
on GM foods. Another nine per cent said they’d never even heard of GM foods.”14 
A recent controversy over GM foods related to the development of a genetically modified 
apple that resists browning by a British Columbia company. The apple has been submitted to 
the CFIA for approval.15 
 
B. Scholarly Opinion 
According to one commentator “the official view in government is that transgenic 
organisms are not really all that different form non-GM food and crops.”16 This view is seen 
as being based on a “purely scientific assessment, backed by international expert 
consultations” and it is argued that it “should set the context for any policies dealing with 
GMOs.”17 
In 2001, the Royal Society of Canada (RSC), a senior national body of pre-eminent 
scholars, scientists, and artists published a report that contained “substantive critiques of 
Canadian regulatory processes and scientific capacity and concluded with 53 
recommendations to address issues in four areas: fundamental policies and principles; specific 
regulations and guidelines; the regulatory process itself; and scientific capacity for the 
regulation of food biotechnology.”18 
In 1999, a Biotechnology Advisory Committee (CBAC), an expert panel advising the 
Government of Canada, was set up to assess the regulation of GM foods between 1999 and 
2003. 
Some of the criticisms noted by scholars in respect to Canada’s regulatory framework 
include: “the perception of undue industry influence and the appearance of potential conflicts 
of interest”19 of the CFIA; lack of transparency regarding the scientific assessment procedure 
and the approval and evaluation process; lack of independent “peer reviews and scientific risk 
assessments;”20 heavy reliance on data and information provided by the biotech companies 
themselves “in making its scientific assessment;”21 and concerns about the application of the 
substantial equivalence standard by CFIA and Health Canada “for evaluating new products 
derived from biotechnology.”22 
 
 
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation 
 
Health Canada and the CFIA are both mandated to evaluate the safety and nutritional 
value of genetically modified foods released in Canada. 
Genetically modified (GM) or genetically engineered (GE) foods are primarily regulated 
by the Food and Drugs Act23 and its subordinate regulations.24 Health Canada is responsible, 
under the above legal framework: 
 
for provisions related to public health, food safety and nutrition. Through science-
based regulation, guidelines and public health policy, as well as health risk assessments 
concerning chemical, physical and microbiological contaminants, toxicants and allergens 
in the food supply, Health Canada works to protect the health and safety of Canadians. 
Health Canada also conducts pre-market evaluations to assess the safety and nutritional 
adequacy of novel foods proposed for sale in Canada, including foods derived from 
biotechnology.25 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
23
Under Canada’s regulations, GE and GM foods are classified as one class of “novel 
foods.” Health Canada “regulates the sale of novel foods in Canada through a pre-market 
notification requirement which is specified under Division 28 of Part B of the Food and 
Drugs Regulations.”26 
The CFIA “is responsible for regulating the environmental release of a plant with a novel 
trait (PNTs).”27 This mandate is authorized through the following laws and regulations: the 
Plant Protection Act28, Plant Protection Regulations29, the Seeds Act30 and Seed Regulations 
(Part V).31 
 
 
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing 
 
The development and planting of PNTs for research purposes is overseen by the CFIA’s 
Plant Biosafety Office (PBO). The PBO evaluates applications for confined research field 
trials and sets out the rules32 and conditions for how they are to be conducted.33 These 
confined research field trials of PNTs are assessed by government scientists to ensure that the 
trials do not endanger the environment.34 Stringent conditions are placed prior to conducting a 
confined research trial and developers are required to provide the government evaluators with 
“information about the plants (such as where they are being grown and the procedures being 
used) and must also work with the CFIA both during the field trial and after harvest.”35 
Before a GMO can be released into the environment more generally or sold for human 
consumption it must go through an authorization process as outlined below. The CFIA is 
mandated to assess GM plants and authorize their release into the environment. Health 
Canada, on the other hand, authorizes the sale of GM foods for human consumption. 
 
 
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment 
 
As noted above, the CFIA is responsible for regulating GM plants and approving GM 
feed for animals.36 Therefore, the CFIA is largely responsible for the regulation of the 
environmental release of PNTs. This oversight is conducted under the authority of the Plant 
Protection Act, Plant Protection Regulations, the Seeds Act, and Seed Regulations (Part V).37 
The CFIA’s responsibilities are performed through “an assessment of the GM plants’ 
impact on the environment and biodiversity, including assessing the possibility for gene flow 
and impact on non-target organisms, as well as ensuring the safety of livestock feed.”38 
The first step in the approval process requires the applicant to provide scientific data 
which includes information on the “nature of the novel trait, its stability in the plant, all test 
data pertinent to environmental and human risk assessment; and protocols that address 
preventing the establishment and spread into the environment of the genetic material, as well 
as monitoring and contingency plans to minimize any adverse effect of an accidental 
movement outside the confined release site.”39 
As stated by Thomas Moran, Nola M Ries and David Castle, in assessing a plant with a 
novel trait, 
 
the regulations require consideration of “all relevant matters, including [...] the 
potential impact on and risk to the environment, including the potential impact on and 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
24
risk to human health, posed by the proposed release” of a seed, including a seed with 
novel traits. The environmental and human health risks associated with release (ranging 
from minimal to unacceptable risk) must be assessed, which requires evaluation of 
scientific data and specialized knowledge. The regulations give authority to reject, 
approve and impose conditions on the release of seeds.40 
 
The CFIA applies the principle of substantial equivalence when comparing the 
characteristics in the novel food with its “conventional counterpart” in respect to its 
“molecular, compositional, toxicological and nutritional makeup”41 In other words, a product 
will be approved if it is substantially equivalent to its conventional counterpart. This has 
caused significant controversy since some critics believe the standard is a “decision-threshold 
standard in the decision-making process, rather than as a safety standard.”42 
Canada does not have a biosafety framework to track GMOs released into the 
environment or the food production system.43 
 
 
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs  
 
A. Safety Assessment 
Health Canada has the mandate to assess the safety of foods for human consumption, 
including GMOs in foodstuff, and for authorizing them to be sold in Canada. It does so in 
accordance with the Food and Drugs Act and its regulations. Health Canada’s process for 
assessing the safety of GM foods follows a “similar pattern” to the CFIA’s assessment 
process explained above.44 According to Division 28 of Part B of the Food and Drugs 
Regulations (Novel Foods), manufacturers and importers “who wish to sell or advertise a GM 
food in Canada, must submit data to Health Canada for a pre-market safety assessment.”45 
This safety assessment “provides assurance that the food is safe when prepared or consumed 
according to its intended use.”46 
The safety reviews are based on the concepts of “familiarity” and “substantial 
equivalence.” Familiarity is defined as “our knowledge of the characteristics of a plant 
species and experience with the use of that species in Canada.”47 Substantial equivalence is 
defined as “the equivalence of a novel trait within a particular plant species, in terms of its 
specific use and safety to the environment and human health, to those in that same species, 
that are in use and generally considered as safe in Canada, based on valid scientific 
rationale.”48 
According to Health Canada, it is a “seven to ten year process to research, develop, test 
and assess the safety of a new GM food” before it can be approved.49 
Since the government relies on scientific data provided by corporations there does not 
appear to be requirements for independent testing to be conducted. There is also no long-term 
testing or monitoring of approved products. The assessment and testing process is described 
by Health Canada as follows: 
 
1. Pre-submission consultation 
Health Canada encourages proponents to consult with the Novel Foods Section of the 
Food Directorate in advance of notifying a GM food to Health Canada for safety assessment. 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
25
This provides the opportunity for regulatory process requirements to be clarified and for any 
specific safety issues to be raised. 
 
2. Pre-market notification 
When the product’s proponent believes it has sufficient information about the safety of a 
GM food to address Health Canada’s criteria, a submission is made to the Novel Foods 
Section. This office coordinates a full safety assessment of the product, which involves a 
rigorous scientific evaluation by Health Canada scientific evaluators. These criteria are 
described in Health Canada's Guidelines for the Safety Assessment of Novel Foods. 
 
3. Scientific Assessment 
Scientific evaluators, with individual expertise in molecular biology, toxicology, 
chemistry, nutritional sciences and microbiology, assess the following: 
 
• 
development of the modified organism, including the molecular biological data that 
characterizes the genetic change; 
• 
composition of and nutritional information about the GM food compared to a non-
modified counterpart food; 
• 
the potential for production of new toxins in the food; 
• 
the potential for causing allergic reactions; 
• 
microbiological and chemical safety of the food; 
• 
the potential for any unintended or secondary effects; 
• 
key nutrients and toxicants; and, 
• 
major constituents (for example, fats, proteins, carbohydrates) and minor constituents 
(for example, minerals and vitamins). 
 
4. Requests for additional information 
If Health Canada evaluators find that any of the information provided about a GM food is 
insufficient, further documentation is requested from the proponent of the submission. Health 
Canada does not give any further consideration to the submission until all requested material 
is provided and deemed to be scientifically valid. 
 
5. Summary report of findings 
Once evaluators have completed their assessments, they summarize their findings and 
recommendations in a report. 
 
6. Preparation of food rulings proposal 
Once the evaluation of the product is completed, a Health Canada Food Rulings Proposal 
is prepared. This proposal is reviewed by senior staff (Directors and Director General) in the 
Food Directorate to ensure that all issues have been addressed. Once this has been done, a 
decision is made whether or not to approve the product. 
 
7. Letter of no objection 
If a product has successfully completed the evaluation process, and the other regulatory 
approvals such as environmental and feed safety are in place, a “Letter of No Objection” is 
sent to the product proponent. This letter indicates that the product can be sold in Canada for 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
26
the intended uses, as listed in the submission, and whether there are any restrictions or 
requirements associated with the Health Canada decision. 
 
8. Decision document on Health Canada Web site 
A decision document, describing the novel food and summarizing the safety information 
used to determine its safety as a food, is posted on the Novel Foods and Ingredients page of 
Health Canada’s Web site.50 
 
B. Labeling 
Health Canada and the CFIA have a joint mandate for federal food labeling policies 
under the Food and Drugs Act.51 Health Canada is “responsible for setting food labelling 
policies with respect to health and safety matters (i.e., nutritional content, special dietary 
needs, etc.). This applies to all foods, including foods that have been derived through genetic 
engineering.”52 The CFIA, on the other hand, “is responsible for the development of non-
health and safety food labelling regulations and policies and enforcement of all food labelling 
legislation. The CFIA sets standards for Canadian food labels so that they will be truthful and 
not misleading.”53 
Advertising or labeling of products containing GMOs or derived through GE processes is 
largely voluntary in Canada. There have been three major public consultation processes since 
1993 in Canada on the labeling of novel foods derived from genetic engineering. Based on 
these consultations, a set of guidelines for food importers and manufacturers was developed. 
The guidelines reflect a general consensus to 
 
• 
require mandatory labelling if there is a health or safety concern, i.e., from allergens 
or a significant nutrient or compositional change (these decisions will be made by 
Health Canada), in order to inform consumers of the allergen or change; 
• 
ensure labeling is understandable, truthful, and not misleading; 
• 
permit voluntary positive labeling on the condition that the claim is not misleading or 
deceptive and the claim itself is factual; and 
• 
permit voluntary negative labeling on the condition that the claim is not misleading 
or deceptive and the claim itself is factual.54 
 
Therefore, in Canada labeling is required “if there is a health or safety issue with the food 
which might be mitigated through labeling”55 (e.g., if the “nutritional value or composition 
has been changed or if an allergen is present”56). This rule applies to all novel foods, whether 
GM or not. In respect to the labeling of the majority of GMOs, there is only “a national 
standard for the voluntary labelling of foods derived through biotechnology.”57 
 
 
VII. Liability Regime 
 
According to health law experts Thomas Moran, Nola M Ries, and David Castle 
“Canadian jurisdictions have not enacted statutory compensation regimes for harms 
associated with GM crops, so liability flowing from GM activities must be assessed through 
the common law of torts.”58 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
27
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases 
 
One of the most well-known recent cases involving GMOs is Monsanto Canada Inc. v. 
Schmeiser,59 which largely involved property or patent rights in respect to GMOs. This case 
was a “patent infringement claim brought by [the agricultural biotech company] Monsanto 
against an arable farmer whose rapeseed crop had acquired its patented RT73 gene, either by 
wind drift and crosspollination or by any of a number of other unproved means.”60 
 
 
PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA 
 
Laney Zhang 
Foreign Law Specialist* 
 
 
Summary  
 
In China, restrictions on genetically modified organisms (GMOs) are primarily 
provided by the agricultural GMO regulations enacted by the State Council in 2001 and 
relevant administrative rules. The agricultural GMO regulations regulate not only crops, 
but also animals, microorganisms, and products derived from these sources. 
The testing, production, and marketing of GMOs in China are subject to government 
approval. Foreign companies that export GMOs to the PRC, including GMOs as raw 
materials, must apply to the Ministry of Agriculture and obtain GMO Safety Certificates. 
 
 
I. Introduction  
 
A. Policy Issues 
The agriculture biotech industry is supported by the central government of the People’s 
Republic of China (PRC or China) as an emerging sector of strategic importance.1 According 
to China’s 12th Five-Year Plan on National Economic and Social Development for 2011–
2015 (12th Five-year Plan), the country will “speed up the innovation and application of 
biotechnology breeding in agriculture,” “develop new biological variety with important 
application value and independent intellectual property rights,” and “foster a large and strong 
modern seed industry.”2 
Based on the 12th Five-year Plan and other plans supplementing it, the Ministry of 
Agriculture (MOA) released the 12th Five-Year Plan for Development of Agricultural 
Science and Technology (Agricultural S&T Plan), which provides more details on the 
development of agricultural science and technology. In this Plan, the MOA proposes to 
strengthen research involving genetically modified organisms (GMOs).3 Major research 
projects on breeding new varieties of GMOs will continue to be carried out in the 2011–2015 
period, according to the Agricultural S&T Plan.4 The plans also incorporate biosafety 
assessment and management as focus areas of biotech industry development.5 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
28
B. Legislative Purposes 
The country’s legislation attempts to balance the promotion of agricultural GMOs with 
concern for consumers and environmental safety. As early as 2002, the PRC Agriculture Law 
incorporated safety controls over the research, testing, production, processing, marketing, and 
other applications of agricultural GMOs.6 
When formulating the Regulations on Administration of Agricultural Genetically 
Modified Organisms Safety (GMO Regulations), currently China’s primary legislation on 
GMOs, the State Council outlined the purposes of the Regulations in article 1, as 
 
• 
strengthening the safety management of agricultural GMOs; 
• 
safeguarding the health of human bodies and the safety of animals, plants, and 
microorganisms; 
• 
protecting the ecological environment; and 
• 
promoting research into technologies of agricultural GMOs.7 
 
China is a party to the Convention on Biological Diversity, which became effective to 
China in 1993.8 China is also a party to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the 
Convention on Biological Diversity, which entered in force in 2005.9 
 
C. Approved GMOs 
According to the data published by the MOA on April 27, 2013, China has issued GMO 
Safety Certificates to seven domestically developed, genetically modified (GM) crops, 
including a varieties of tomato (1997), cotton (1997), petunia (1999), sweet pepper and chili 
pepper (1999), papaya (2006), rice (2009), and corn (2009). Among them, the approved 
cotton has been broadly cultivated in China. As of 2010, China grew 3.3 million hectares of 
the approved cotton and a few hectares of the papaya, while the other GM crops had not been 
cultivated broadly, according to the MOA.10 
An International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech Applications brief, Global 
Status of Commercialized Biotech/GM Crops: 2012, indicates that China grew 4.0 million 
hectares of GM crops, including cotton, papaya, poplar, tomato, and sweet pepper, as of 2012, 
which constituted the largest biotech crop area among developing countries, and the sixth 
largest around the world.11 
Licenses have been granted for the import into China of four foreign GM crops: cotton, 
soybean, corn, and rape. Among them, only the cotton is permitted to be grown in China; the 
other crops can only be used as raw materials, according to the MOA.12 In 2011, imported 
GM soybeans constituted two-thirds of the soybeans consumed domestically.13 
 
 
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion  
 
A. Public Opinion 
The safety of GMOs is hotly debated in China through traditional media and the 
emerging online social media, where the public expresses deep concerns about the safety of 
GMO foodstuffs. A study of a GM grain carried out in China in 2012 caused great concern to 
the public. In the study, a US researcher and her team were accused of feeding Chinese 
children a GM grain, golden rice, and measuring the effects without telling their parents. The 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
29
incident was widely reported in the Chinese media, and the public is reportedly “furious” 
about the study using children for tests.14 As a result, the Chinese government rapidly 
punished three Chinese coauthors of the study by removing them from their jobs. A year later, 
in September 2013, the home institute of the American researcher, Tufts University, 
announced that the researcher broke ethical rules while carrying out the study of GM golden 
rice in China.15 
Some nonprofit organizations have also alleged that GMOs generate food safety concerns 
and environmental dangers. Greenpeace China, for example, particularly focuses on GM rice 
sold in China. It has released multiple reports warning the public about the danger of GMOs 
and illegal sales of GM rice in China.16 
 
B. Scholarly Opinion 
Mainstream research institutes in China appear to share the government’s view in 
promoting GMO research. Major research institutes contribute funds and laboratory facilities 
to GMO research. Among them, the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences has 
established a Biotechnology Research Institute. The Institute not only supports GMO safety 
evaluations, but also carries out projects on GM plant research and production.17 
Some recent discussions have raised new concerns over GMOs other than threats to 
human health and the environment, suggesting GMOs may endanger the country’s food 
security. In September, a conference on “GMOs and National Security” was held in Beijing, 
where scholars warned that the issues relating to GMOs were not just about science or 
technology, but also about food security, ecological security, and even national security.18 
 
 
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation  
 
A. GMO Regulations and Rules 
China has not passed a national law specifically regulating GMOs. Restrictions are 
primarily on agricultural GMOs, which are provided by the GMO Regulations enacted by the 
State Council in 2001 and the administrative rules implementing the GMO Regulations. The 
GMO Regulations are designed to regulate not only crops, but also animals, microorganisms, 
and their products.19 
Agricultural GMO research, testing, production, processing, business operations, and 
import/export activities within the PRC’s territory are subject to the GMO Regulations.20 
The MOA and the General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and 
Quarantine (AQSIQ) have issued the following administrative rules implementing the GMO 
Regulations, which regulate, respectively, safety evaluations, processing, labeling, import, 
and entry and exit inspections and quarantine: 
 
• 
Administrative Measures for Safety Evaluations of Agricultural GMOs (Safety 
Evaluation Measures)21 
• 
Measures for Examination and Approval of the Processing of Agricultural GMOs22 
• 
Administrative Measures for Labeling Agricultural GMO Marks (Labeling 
Measures)23  
• 
Administrative Measures for Safety Control for Importing Agricultural GMO 
Products24 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
30
• 
Administrative Measures on the Entry and Exit Agricultural GMO Products 
Inspection and Quarantine25 
 
In addition, the Ministry of Forestry has issued a separate document regulating gene-
altered engineering of trees in forests (Forestry Measures).26 
 
B. Rules on GMO Foodstuffs 
The Ministry of Health (MOH) issued the Administrative Measures for Genetically 
Modified Food Hygiene in 2002,27 but those measures were abolished in 2007.28 GMO 
foodstuffs are now subject to the Agricultural GMO Safety Regulations. There is no separate 
legislation specifically regulating GMO foodstuffs today. 
 
C. Other GMO Provisions 
Apart from the aforementioned legislation, the PRC Law on Seeds,29 PRC Law on 
Fisheries,30 PRC Law on the Environment,31 and the Administrative Measures for Safety 
Control over Genetic Engineering32 contain provisions relating to GMOs. 
 
D. Local Rules 
Zhangye City in China’s Gansu Province recently issued a ban on growing, selling, or 
using any GM seeds. This is the first local ban on GM seeds in China.33 In a document 
released on October 25, 2013, the city government ordered that no organizations or 
companies may grow, trade, or use any GM seeds in the area.34 
 
E. Definition of Agricultural GMO 
Under the GMO Regulations, “agricultural GMO” refers to any plant, animal, or 
microorganism whose genome constitution has been changed by using genetic engineering 
technology, and their products, which includes 
 
• 
GM animals, plants (planting seeds, breed livestock, breed fowl, aquatic seedlings), 
and microorganisms; 
• 
GM animal, plant, and microorganism products; 
• 
products directly processed from GM agricultural products; and 
• 
planting seeds, breed livestock, breed fowl, aquatic seedlings, pesticides, veterinary 
medicines, fertilizers, and additives that contain GM animal, plant, or microorganism 
ingredients.35 
 
 
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing 
 
Under the GMO Regulations, testing, production, and marketing of GMOs in China are 
subject to government approval. Research involving Class III and IV GMOs must be reported 
to the MOA. 
 
 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
31
A. Responsible Agencies 
 
1. MOA 
The MOA is the primarily responsible agency for biosafety management of GMOs in 
China. Agricultural administrative departments of subnational governments above the county 
level are also responsible for biosafety management in their own jurisdictions.36 
 
2. GMO Biosafety Committee 
A national agricultural GMO Biosafety Committee was established in accordance with 
the GMO Regulations to evaluate applications for GMO Safety Certificates.37 The Committee 
consists of experts in GMO research, production, processing, inspection, quarantine, health, 
and environmental protection. The committee members serve three-year terms.38 
 
B. Research and Testing 
All institutes engaged in agricultural GMO research and testing are required to have 
facilities and measures commensurate with their GMO safety class to ensure safety.39 
Research into agricultural GMOs classified as Class III and IV need to report to the MOA 
before the research is carried out.40 
Under the GMO Regulations, testing is chronologically subdivided into three stages: 
medium testing (small-scale tests, also referred to as “restricted field tests”), environmental 
release, and product testing.41 After completing research in the laboratory, if the testing 
organization needs to proceed to medium testing, the testing organization must report to the 
MOA.42 Moving from one testing stage to the next requires approval from the MOA.43 
 
C. Production 
Upon the completion of the three testing stages, researchers may apply for a GMO Safety 
Certificate from the MOA.44 According to the GMO Regulations, organizations or individuals 
engaged in the production and processing of agricultural GMOs must obtain approval from 
the MOA or a provincial agricultural administrative department.45 
The production of GM planting seed, breed livestock, breed fowl, or aquatic seedlings 
requires a production license from the MOA.46 
 
D. Marketing 
 
1. Licenses and Permits 
Marketing GM planting seeds, breed livestock, breed fowl, and aquatic seedlings requires 
a marketing license from the MOA.47 Advertising agricultural GMOs requires a permit from 
the MOA as well.48 
Any foreign company that exports to the PRC GM planting seeds, breed livestock, breed 
fowl, and aquatic seedlings, or any of these items plus other products (pesticides, veterinary 
medicines, fertilizers, or additives) using GMOs or containing GM ingredients must submit 
an application to the MOA and obtain a GMO Safety Certificate.49 
Those who export GMOs as raw materials to the PRC must go through a similar process 
and obtain a GMO Safety Certificate.50 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
32
1. Labeling 
GMO products on the GMO list published by the state must be clearly labeled when sold 
within the PRC territory; unlabeled products may not be sold.51 The label should indicate the 
name of the GM materials and, if there are special restrictions on where it may be sold, the 
area in which it will be sold.52 
The list of the first group of GMO products to be included under the labeling system was 
published along with the Labeling Measures, and it appears that no additional products have 
been added to the list since the first group was published. The first group of products included 
soybean seeds, soybeans, soybean powder, soybean oil, and soybean meal; seed corn, corn, 
corn oil, and corn powder; planting seed of rape, rapeseed, rapeseed oil, rapeseed meal; cotton 
seed; and tomato seed, fresh tomatoes, and tomato paste.53 
 
 
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment 
 
The purposes of regulating GMOs in China, according to the GMO Regulations, include 
safeguarding the health of human bodies; safeguarding animals, plants, and microorganisms; 
and protecting the ecological environment. The classification of GMOs is also based on the 
nature of their potential danger to humans, animals, plants, microorganisms, and the 
ecological environment. 
 
A. Environmental Release 
Environmental release under the GMO Regulations refers to the medium-scale testing 
conducted under natural conditions with appropriate safety measures—the second testing 
stage after the restricted field tests and before the product testing.54 
Upon completion of the restricted field tests, an application must be submitted to the 
MOA in order to release the tested GMO into the environment. Only after the application 
passes a safety evaluation conducted by the GMO Biosafety Committee will the MOA 
approve product testing.55 When making the application, the applicant must also submit 
 
• 
a designation of the safety class of the GMO and the justifications for that 
designation, 
• 
a copy of the inspection report issued by a technical inspection body of agricultural 
GMOs,  
• 
a list of appropriate safety administration and precautionary measures, and 
• 
a summary report of the previous testing stage.56 
 
B. Reporting Requirements 
Individuals or organizations engaged in GMO production and processing must arrange 
their production in accordance with the approved varieties, scope, safety control 
requirements, and relevant technical standards. They are also required by the GMO 
Regulations to regularly report their production, processing, safety controls, and the products’ 
whereabouts to their local agricultural administrative department.57 Entities engaging in GMO 
tests and production are required to regularly report to the MOA and local agricultural 
administrative departments.58 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
33
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs 
 
GMO foodstuffs are regulated by the GMO Regulations as “GMO products.” Therefore, 
the restrictions mentioned in Part IV, above, apply to GMO foodstuffs. In addition to the 
MOA, the local governments above the county level are responsible for the safety 
management of GMO foodstuffs.59 
Fodder for livestock is also subject to the GMO Regulations.60 
 
 
VII. Liability Regime 
 
The GMO Regulations provide a chapter with thirteen articles on the penalties to be 
imposed for violations of those Regulations.61 Violators are mainly subject to administrative 
penalties, while civil or criminal penalties may also apply under certain circumstances 
(discussed below). 
 
A. Administrative Penalties 
Importing GMOs without a permit, or producing or processing GMOs without a permit, 
or with a permit but not in accordance with its terms concerning the permitted varieties, 
scope, safety control requirements, and technical standards, is punishable with a fine of up to 
RMB200,000 (about US$33,000), or up to five times the illegal gain if the gain is over 
RMB100,000.62 
Researching, testing, storing, or transporting agricultural GMOs without approval may 
also result in administrative penalties, such as suspension of activities, a demand to correct 
the problem, confiscation of illegal gains, or fines.63 
 
B. Civil Penalties 
Any damages caused by GMO accidents in the course of research, testing, production, 
processing, storage, transportation, sales, or import and export must be compensated, 
according to the GMO Regulations.64 
 
C. Criminal Penalties 
Under the GMO Regulations, whoever forges, falsifies, transfers, sells, or purchases 
GMO certifying documents may be criminally punished if such offense violates the Criminal 
Law.65 Government officials may also be criminally punished for issuing GMO certifying 
documents in violation of the Regulations, or for failing to perform their oversight duties.66 
 
 
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases 
 
The Chinese courts do not systematically report their judgments, and court decisions do 
not have precedential effect as in common law jurisdictions. Court decisions that have 
significantly influenced GMO regulations in China were not located. 
 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
34
EGYPT 
 
George Sadek 
Senior Legal Research Analyst 
 
 
Summary  
 
Egypt takes a permissive approach to genetically modified organisms (GMOs), and 
its public policy does not oppose growing, importing, and exporting genetically modified 
crops. Egyptian activists have voiced their rejection of this policy. Egyptian laws do not 
contain restrictions on researching, producing, or marketing genetically modified crops 
and food products. The country also has no restrictions on releasing genetically modified 
organisms into the environment. A draft law on biosafety was not approved by the 
Egyptian Parliament. 
 
 
I. Introduction 
 
In spite of Egypt’s announcement in 2009 that any agricultural import must have a 
certificate from the country of origin stating that the product is not genetically modified,1 the 
country takes a permissive approach to genetically modified organisms (GMOs), and its 
public policy does not oppose growing, importing, and exporting genetically modified crops. 
According to recent news reports, Egypt ranks third in Africa in planting and importing 
genetically modified crops.2 Since December 2010, genetically modified crops have been 
planted without restrictions in ten different Egyptian provinces,3 including one thousand 
hectares of genetically modified maize in 2012. In 2008, Egypt became the first North 
African country to grow genetically modified crops,4 and it is now one of the five countries 
worldwide to introduce biotech crops to other countries.5 
Egypt not only engages in growing and trading genetically modified crops, but also 
provides training to other countries to develop their capacity to produce such crops, one 
example being Tanzania, to which Egypt agreed to provide technical assistance in 2004.6 
 
 
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion 
 
Egyptian activists have voiced their rejection of the country’s policies of growing, 
importing, and exporting genetically modified crops. In May 2013, around one hundred 
activists protested in front of the Ministry of Agriculture to condemn the use of genetically 
modified food products.7 The protest was a result of news reports stating that genetically 
modified food products cause cancer.8 Previously, in August 2012, Egyptian scientists from 
Cairo University had announced that genetically modified crops planted in Egypt cause health 
hazards, including organ failure.9 
 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
35
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation 
 
In an attempt to curb the proliferation of genetically modified crops and food products, 
activists have collaborated with the Nature Protection Section of the Ministry of Environment 
to draft legislation, titled the Biosafety Law, that would regulate genetically modified crops 
and food products in Egyptian markets. In November 2011, the draft legislation was approved 
by the Council of Ministers. However, neither the People’s Assembly (the lower chamber of 
Egypt’s Parliament) nor the Shura Council (the upper chamber of the Parliament) has 
approved the measure.10 
 
 
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing 
 
Egypt does not have any restriction on researching, producing, or marketing genetically 
modified crops and food products. To the contrary, in 2011, Egypt commercialized 
genetically modified cotton.11 This initiative followed a research phase, which had begun in 
May 2007.12 
 
 
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment 
 
Egypt has no restrictions on releasing genetically modified organisms into the 
environment. In March 2008, the Ministry of Agriculture approved the domestic cultivation 
of genetically modified corn, and the Egyptian Ministry of Agriculture allowed the 
importation of twenty-eight tons of genetically modified corn seeds into Egyptian markets. 
However, in the spring of 2009, genetically modified corn seed imports were halted so that 
the National Biosafety Committee (NBC) could complete the country’s National Biosafety 
Framework (though the NBC continued to permit the planting of locally produced biotech 
seeds in newly reclaimed areas).13 
 
 
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs 
 
Ministerial Resolution 770-2005, issued by the Minister of Foreign Trade, bans canned 
tuna that is packed in genetically modified oil.14 It appears, however, that there are no other 
restrictions on GMOs in foodstuffs under Egyptian law. 
 
 
VII. Liability Regime 
 
Egyptian law provides for no liability or damages for the use of genetically modified 
crops or food products. 
 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
36
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases 
 
No judicial decisions or prominent cases on this topic have been located. 
 
 
ENGLAND AND WALES 
 
Clare Feikert-Ahalt 
Senior Foreign Law Specialist 
 
 
Summary  
 
The growth and sale of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) are permitted in 
England and Wales, subject to an intensive authorization process that occurs primarily at 
the European Union (EU) level. Most legislation in England and Wales that applies to 
GMOs is implementing legislation for EU law. The general attitude in England is averse 
to genetically modified (GM) products; however, a slight shift in attitude towards GM 
products has recently been reported, and the UK government’s policy indicates a more 
receptive attitude towards these products. 
 
 
I. Introduction 
 
The UK is generally viewed as having a restrictive approach towards genetically 
modified organisms (GMOs) and crops; however, recently there appears to have been a slow 
shift toward greater acceptance of them.1 Genetically modified (GM) crops are currently not 
grown commercially in the UK, but they are imported. These crops are primarily used in 
animal feed and a few food products.2 There is no general prohibition on the planting of GM 
crops, but planting them is only permitted “if a robust risk assessment indicates that it is safe 
for people and the environment.”3 The government has stated that if GM crops are 
commercially grown in the UK, it will implement “pragmatic and proportionate measures to 
segregate these from conventional and organic crops, so that choice can be exercised and 
economic interests appropriately protected.”4 In the past, there have been protests when GM 
crops have been planted, and anti-GM groups frequently destroy such areas. There are strict 
labeling rules in place that require the disclosure of GM products if they have been used. 
The primary purpose of the UK’s legislation and policy approach is the protection of 
people and the environment. Specifically, the government states that it will “only agree to the 
planting of GM crops, the release of other types of GM organism, or the marketing of GM 
food or feed products, if a robust risk assessment indicates that it is safe for people and the 
environment.”5 Each application for GM products is determined on a case-by-case basis, and 
includes consideration of all scientific information available, with the protection of public 
health and the environment being overriding priorities. 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
37
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion 
 
Newspaper reports generally depict the British public as averse to the use of genetically 
modified crops and food products, with newspapers describing Britain as a country that is 
impenetrable by biotech companies interested in developing and selling GM products.6 This 
strong resistance developed in the late 1990s when there was a move to introduce GM crops 
into the country. The public was not receptive to these crops and, over fears of cross 
pollination, staged demonstrations, and even pulled up known GM crops out of the ground to 
stop work.7 GM crops became widely known as “frankenfoods,” and the British public was 
strongly opposed to their growth, sale, and consumption.8 A newspaper report reflecting on 
this time noted that the opposition was largely aimed at the large multinational companies that 
were seen as heavy-handed in their approach to the public’s concern as to the safety of 
consuming such crops.9 Some newspaper reports even refer to this time as the “GM wars,” as 
activists, led on at least one occasion by a government minister, armed themselves with 
lawnmowers to shred crops while farmers fought back by using their tractors as battering 
rams.10 2007 and 2008 saw similar moves, when two fields planted with GM crops were 
subsequently raided overnight by activists, who pulled out the plants despite twenty-four-hour 
security guards, fencing, and court injunctions.11 More recent GM crop cultivation has been 
met with some resistance, but not quite the outrage that was seen in the 1990s.12 When anti-
GM groups in 2012 threatened to pull up the experimental GM crops of public-sector 
scientists, the scientists recorded a video plea to the protesters, asking them not to not destroy 
their work. In this instance, the media were sympathetic to the scientists and condemned the 
activists’ threat to pull up the crops as an act of vandalism.13 Because public opinion in both 
Britain and the EU remains generally opposed to GM crops, giant biotech seed producer 
Monsanto announced that it was withdrawing all applications for European Union (EU) 
approval for its GM crops as “the EU today is effectively a conventional seed market.”14 
The resistance of the UK to GM crops has been criticized by the government’s former 
chief science adviser, who estimated that Britain has lost around £4 billion (approximately 
US$7.2 billion) worth of revenue.15 The current government, led by the Environment 
Secretary and Science Minister, is reportedly moving to push the UK towards eating more 
GM foods,16 with the current policy statement on GM foods indicating support. Government 
policy states that, provided it is used safely, GM foods could be a tool with which to address 
global food security and climate change, and help with sustainable agricultural protection.17 
 
 
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation 
 
Legislation in England and Wales governing GMOs serves to implement EU law. The 
Environmental Protection Act 1990 is the primary piece of legislation that addresses GMOs 
and provides the Secretary of State with the authority and responsibility to control the 
deliberate release of GMOs in England.18 
 
A. Definition of GMO 
Part IV, section 6 of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 defines an organism as 
genetically modified if 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
38
(4) . . . any of the genes or other genetic material in the organism— 
 
[F4(a) have been artificially modified, or] 
(b) are inherited or otherwise derived, through any number of replications, from 
genes or other genetic material (from any source) which were so modified. 
 
[F5(4A) Genes or other genetic material in an organism are “artificially modified” for 
the purposes of subsection (4) above if they are altered otherwise than by a process which 
occurs naturally in mating or natural recombination.19 
 
B. Environmental Laws 
The laws that govern the environment and the use of GMOs are primarily based on EU 
law. As stated above, the main piece of national legislation that regulates the environment is 
the Environmental Protection Act, which provides the Secretary of State with the power and 
responsibility to control the deliberate release of GMOs in England. At the EU level, the main 
EU directive that regulates the release of GMOs across Member States is Directive 2001/18.20 
This was implemented in the national law of England through the Genetically Modified 
(Deliberate Release) Regulations 2002.21 
The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) is the lead 
government department in England for protecting the environment. How it conducts these 
responsibilities with regard to GMOs is detailed in Part V, below. 
 
C. Food Laws 
The laws that govern the use and labeling of GMOs in food are extensive, and are again 
primarily based upon EU law. The EU Regulations that govern the use of GMOs in food 
products across Member States are Regulations 1829/2003 and 1830/2003.22 These are 
implemented in England by the Genetically Modified Food (England) Regulations 2004,23 the 
Genetically Modified Animal Feed (England) Regulations,24 and the Genetically Modified 
Organisms (Traceability and Labelling) (England) Regulation.25 These laws are discussed 
further in Part VI, below. 
 
 
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing 
 
Any person who wishes to release a GMO into the environment must get formal 
authorization to do so. Whether the decision is made at the EU or national level depends upon 
the purpose of the release. The EU has the authority to approve the marketing of products 
(including crop seeds or food), while the national government has the authority to approve the 
release of GMOs for research and development purposes.26 The assessment of applications 
for marketing GMO products is discussed in Part VI, below. 
The regulatory regime that governs GMO research is extensive. According to the 
government, the “strict legislation controlling the deliberate release into the environment of 
genetically modified organisms (GMOs)” is based on the need “to protect human health and 
the environment and ensure consumer choice.”27 To obtain consent to release GMOs into the 
environment for research and development, an application must be made in writing to the 
Secretary of State.28 Within ten days of submitting the application, applicants must publish 
information in a national newspaper that includes their contact information, the description of 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
39
the GMO that will be released, and the location, date, and purpose of the release.29 The 
assessment process for research or release of GMOs is the responsibility of DEFRA, and 
undertaken by the Advisory Committee on the Release to the Environment (ACRE), an 
independent statutory advisory committee of experts appointed under the Environmental 
Protection Act.30 The Committee advises government ministers on the “risks to human health 
and the environment from the release and marketing of genetically modified organisms.”31 
The Committee considers a number of factors when assessing applications for GMO release 
or marketing, including safety factors such as toxicity, potential allergens, or the transfer of 
new genes to other organisms.32 
Prior to granting an application for research involving the deliberate release of a GMO, 
the Committee ensures that 
 
• 
the crops produced as a result of the research will not be put into the human food 
chain, 
• 
a barrier of crops will be planted around the GMO crops to prevent the transfer of 
any GMO crops, 
• 
any workers or farm machinery will be sanitized after handling the GMO crops, and  
• 
the field will be left fallow for one year after the research period.33 
 
 
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment 
 
As noted above, any person who wishes to release a GMO into the environment must get 
formal authorization to do so, at the EU level for marketing products, and at the national level 
for research and development purposes.34 The Genetically Modified Organisms (Deliberate 
Release) Regulations 2002 implemented in the national law of England EU Directive 
2001/18/EC regulating the release of GMOs into the environment.35 The release of GMOs 
into the environment in England and Wales is subject to any conditions that the Secretary of 
State wishes to impose that are necessary “for the purpose of ensuring that all appropriate 
measures are taken to avoid damage to the environment which may arise from the activity 
permitted by the consent.”36 
 
A. Reporting Requirements 
The regulations that govern GMOs require a great degree of transparency. As noted 
above, the application requires publishing in a national newspaper the applicant’s name and 
address, and the location and dates of the GM crop’s introduction. Any trials of GM crops 
require publishing in a register37 information that essentially reveals the locations of the 
crops. Many biotech corporations have expressed frustration at this regulation, as they 
consider that to be a “gift to the activists,” who learn exactly where the crops are planted and 
then come and destroy them. Farmers have also been intimidated by these activists and have 
pulled out of trials because of the fear of vandalism to the crops or concern from neighboring 
farmers about cross-pollination/ contamination. The requirement to provide the location of a 
GM crop is based on EU Directive 2001/18/EC; however, the manner in which the directive 
was implemented in the UK has reportedly been described by biotech firms as being 
“introduced in the most draconian way possibly by Michael Meacher, Tony Blair’s anti-GM 
former environment minister. Elsewhere in Europe, fields are not pinpointed so clearly, with 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
40
companies giving only the region in which a trial will take place, or submitting the details to a 
tightly-controlled public register.”38 
 
B. Inspections 
The Food and Environment Research Agency (FERA), an agency of DEFRA, is 
responsible under Part IV of the Environmental Protection Act for enforcing legislation in 
cases where GMOs have been deliberately released.39 FERA undertakes this responsibility 
through a program of inspections and audits of companies that have authorization to release 
GMOs into the environment. This Agency is also responsible for investigating any suspected 
unauthorized release of GMOs.40 
 
 
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs 
 
A. Approval for the Sale of GM Foods 
The approval regime for the evaluation and authorization of GM foods moved to the EU 
in 2003.41 Safety assessments are now conducted by the European Food Safety Authority 
(EFSA). The EFSA provides a case-by-case review of each GM food, and assesses their 
safety for human consumption to ensure that the foods do “not present a risk to health, [do] 
not . . . mislead consumers, and [are] not of less nutritional value than the foods they are 
intended to replace.”42 During any investigation into the safety of GM foods, the EFSA may 
consult the relevant body in each Member State. In the UK, the body responsible for food 
safety assessment is the Food Standards Agency.43 If the consultation in the UK also includes 
issues of cultivating GM crops, DEFRA must also be included.44 
 
B. Labeling GM Foods 
Foods containing or consisting of GMOs must comply with EU regulations that require 
any approved GM products to be clearly labeled.45 This requirement includes foods derived 
from GM crops, even if they do not have a detectable GM content. The labeling rules are 
extensive and require the disclosure of the presence of any GM material in the final product.46 
This brings such products as flour and oils under the labeling requirements, as any product 
from a GM source must be labeled as GM. However, foods produced with GM technology, 
such as cheese made with GM enzymes, are not required to be labeled, nor are products from 
animals that have been fed with GM products, such as milk or meat from cows fed with feed 
containing GM products.47 
Any intentional use of GM ingredients in foods must be labeled as GM; however, there is 
a threshold of 0.9% for the accidental presence of GM foods. This threshold only applies to 
GM food that has been approved for sale by the EU. Thus, foods that contain any GM 
ingredients that are not approved by the EU may not be sold in the EU.48 
 
C. Livestock Feed 
The assessment and authorization of GMOs in livestock feed is the same process as for 
human food (discussed above in Part VI(A)) and is governed at the EU level.49 
 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
41
VII. Liability Regime 
 
Legislation in England that governs environmental damage is largely based on EU 
regulations and the principal that the “polluter pays.”50 Liability for environmental damage in 
England is, in part, provided for by the Environmental Damage (Prevention and Remediation) 
Regulations.51 These regulations place the responsibility on the “operator of an activity” that 
poses an environmental threat, or that has caused environmental damage, to identify when 
there is an imminent threat, or that damage has been caused, and to act immediately to 
prevent or rectify this damage.52 Environmental liability is thus frequently described as a 
“backstop,” with emphasis on measures to prevent pollution, and to stop threats and damage 
from arising.53 
The regulations apply only to serious cases of environmental damage. Such cases include 
where the integrity of a site of special scientific interest has been adversely affected, surface 
or ground water has been adversely affected, or land has been contaminated, resulting in an 
adverse effect on human health.54 
Strict liability (liability without the need to show fault) applies in cases where GMOs are 
used and released, including during transportation.55 In the case of actual or imminent 
environmental damage, the operator is required to take steps to prevent damage, or any 
further damage, and notify the relevant authority,56 which in the majority of cases is the 
Environment Agency. The authority then determines whether the damage is environmental 
damage within the terms of the regulations and identifies the operator responsible. The 
authority then serves a remediation notice on the operator, who must then undertake the steps 
specified and pay any costs claimed by the authority for the environmental damage.57 
Operators have rights of appeal that arise if they believe that 
 
- 
the activity did not cause the damage 
- 
the authority has unreasonably decided that the damage is ‘environmental 
damage’  
- 
the damage was the result of an act of a third party 
- 
the operator was not at fault or negligent and the emission or event was: 
authorized and in accordance with a permit, or in accordance with the state of 
scientific knowledge (this ground for appeal is not available in Wales for 
damage caused by GMOs). 
 
Operators may also appeal against are [sic] mediation notice on the grounds that the 
contents of the remediation notice are unreasonable.58 
 
General civil liability rules may also come into play, such as the laws of negligence and 
nuisance. There do not appear to be any reported cases that involve GMOs and civil liability 
in England. A law review article from 2005 notes that liability for negligence is “of limited 
use in the field of genetic contamination” because 
 
it will be difficult to prove the absence of reasonable care for preventing cross-
pollination or other gene transfer. Moreover, liability is for damage to land and other 
property. While ‘failed’ crops or propagation of wild relatives of GM plants as weeds 
may be considered as property damage, gene flow that affects only commerciability of 
crops does normally not constitute an actionable damage. Pure pecuniary damage is not 
covered in most common law jurisdictions.59 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
42
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases 
 
The majority of judicial decisions concerning GMOs that affect England are at the EU 
level and involve other countries. There appear to be no reported cases involving GMOs in 
England. 
 
 
EUROPEAN UNION 
 
Theresa Papademetriou 
Senior Foreign Law Specialist 
 
 
Summary  
 
The European Union (EU) has in place a comprehensive and strict legal regime on 
genetically modified organisms (GMOs), food and feed made from GMOs, and food/feed 
consisting or containing GMOs. The EU’s legislation and policy on GMOs, based on the 
precautionary principle enshrined in EU and international legislation, is designed to 
prevent any adverse effects on the environment and the health and safety of humans and 
animals, and it reflects concerns expressed by skeptical consumers, farmers, and 
environmentalists. 
GMOs and food or feed made from GMOs can be marketed in or imported into the 
EU, provided that they are authorized after passing strict evaluation and safety 
assessment requirements that are imposed on a case-by-case basis. Authorizations are 
granted for a ten-year period by the European Commission through a centralized 
procedure, as provided for in Regulation No. 1829/2003, or by national competent 
authorities under Directive 2001/18/EC, which regulates the intentional release of GMOs 
into the environment. At the EU level, the European Food and Safety Authority (EFSA) 
conducts the required risk assessments. GMOs, or food and feed consisting of or 
containing GMOs, are assigned a unique identifier and are labeled as such to ensure 
traceability and enable consumers to make informed choices. 
Since 2001 the EU has had a de facto moratorium on GMO approvals. However, a 
September 2013 decision of the General Court of the EU, which requires the Commission 
to push forward a pending (since 2001) authorization proposal for marketing maize 1507, 
may put an end to the moratorium. 
While marketing and importing GMOs and food and feed produced with GMOs are 
regulated at the EU level, the cultivation of GMOs is an area left to the EU Members. EU 
Members have the right to prohibit or restrict the sale or cultivation of approved GMOs 
based on adverse effects on health and the environment. A pending Commission 
proposal, as amended by the European Parliament, will give EU Members more 
flexibility to invoke socioeconomic grounds and impacts on local or regional 
environments when imposing such measures. 
Liability issues and compensation schemes for individuals fall primarily within the 
domain of the EU Member States. In general, the EU espouses the principle that the 
polluter pays. The EU court system is used mainly for preliminary rulings regarding the 
interpretation of EU legislation on GMOs. 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
43
I. Introduction 
 
European Union (EU) legislation defines a genetically modified organism (GMO) as “an 
organism, with the exception of human beings, in which the genetic material has been altered 
in a way that does not occur naturally by mating and/or natural recombination.”1 The EU was 
prompted to adopt legislation on GMOs for two key reasons: (1) to protect human and animal 
health and welfare, consumer interests, and the environment, as required by articles 168 
(public health), 169 (consumer protection), and 191 (environment) of the Treaty on the 
Functioning of the European Union (TFEU);2 and (2) to ensure that authorized GMOs, or 
genetically modified (GM) products derived from a GMO may circulate freely within the EU 
and the European Economic Area to ensure their effective functioning.3 Based on the 
precautionary principle, which is embodied in EU legislation,4 the Cartagena Protocol on 
Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity,5 and other international instruments,6 
the EU and its Members are required to take measures to prevent adverse effects on human 
health and the environment that may occur owing to the intentional release of GMOs into the 
environment or the marketing of and import into the EU of GMOs or products made from 
GMOs. 
Since 2001, the EU has placed a de facto moratorium on approvals of GMOs.7 An official 
list of authorized GM plants is available at the EU public register of GM food and feed.8 The 
United States, Canada, and Argentina have in the past challenged before the World Trade 
Organization (WTO) the moratorium itself; the lack of action with respect to certain products; 
and the practice by EU Members of resorting to a safeguard clause, which allows them to 
restrict or ban the cultivation of GMOs in their territories. In 2006, the EC-Biotech Panel of 
the WTO found against the EU for violating the Sanitary and Phytosanitary Agreement.9 
Following the September 2013 decision of the General Court, which held that the 
Commission failed to act on a GM cultivation request for maize 1507, the Commission 
complied with the Court’s ruling in November 2013 by forwarding a proposal for approval of 
maize 1507 to the Council.10 The application for cultivation for maize 1507 was submitted 
initially in 2001 by Pioneer Hi-Bred International, Inc. under Directive 2001/18/EC on the 
Deliberate Release of GMOs into the Environment. Maize 1507 is currently approved in the 
EU only for food and feed uses. A number of EU Members, such as France, Austria, and 
Poland are expected to oppose the proposal, while Britain, Spain, and Sweden are expected to 
vote in favor.11 
GMO cultivation in the EU is limited because of concerns expressed by stakeholders 
about adverse effects on the environment, farmlands, and biodiversity.12 Under the current 
legal regime, EU Members may restrict or totally ban cultivation in their territories of those 
GMOs already authorized in the EU by resorting to the safeguard clause of Directive 
2001/18/EC, or by using the notification procedures under the rules on internal markets.13 
 
 
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion 
 
At the request of the European Commission, a 217-page report was commissioned to 
evaluate the effectiveness of the legal framework on authorization of GMOs in the EU,14 as 
provided for in Regulation (EC) Nos. 1829/200315 and 1830/2003.16 The report was based on 
a questionnaire, interviews, and surveys sent to stakeholders and competent authorities.17 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
44
The report found that the EU authorization procedure is generally considered to achieve 
the objectives of the protection of human and animal health through the use of science-based 
risk assessment, and that there were no cases of animal or human health problems resulting 
from GMOs to date. Concerns were expressed that the authorization procedure may not 
facilitate the effective functioning of the internal market as well as it could, because of 
different interpretations of the tolerance level for the adventitious and technically unavoidable 
presence of GMOs in food and feed.18 
On the question of whether EU GMO legislation promotes or inhibits the development of 
the agricultural biotechnology sector, given the fact that the main objective is to protect the 
environment and human health, 50% of respondents stated that the legislation is not adequate 
because potential benefits are not taken into account.19 
With regard to existing labeling rules, in general farmers and retailers were satisfied. In 
addition, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and consumer organizations were in favor 
of the rules, which allow the general public to make an informed choice. They stated that the 
mandatory labeling rules should also be expanded to include livestock products and products 
from microorganism fermentation, which are currently excluded. NGOs expressed the need to 
clarify even further that the 0.9% labeling threshold is not a tolerance level but applies only to 
the adventitious and technically unavoidable presence of GMOs.20 
The study also noted that, due to the lack of availability of GM-labeled products in the 
EU markets, it was not easy to evaluate public acceptance of GMOs.21 However, many 
respondents cited the general negative public attitude and suggested that consumers should be 
made more aware of the scientific risk assessment that GMOs undergo under the 
authorization procedure.22 
A US Council on Foreign Relations paper, The Regulation of GMOs in Europe and the 
United States: A Case-Study of Contemporary European Regulatory Politics, provides a 
comparison of the EU and US approaches to GMOs.23 The authors opine that the EU’s 
current regulatory approach on GMOs is more restrictive than that of the US, which in 
general was more stringent until the mid-1980s. The authors examine the divergent 
approaches between the two partners from the perspective of the cultural approach to GMOs 
and on economic grounds. They cite the case of Monsanto’s introduction of nonlabeled GM 
food in the EU and its purchase of a large number of seeds as an influential factor that to a 
large extent shaped the negative attitude of EU consumers and farmers against GMOs. The 
authors conclude that the EU’s adoption of strict rules on GMOs have less to do with culture 
or economic reasons and more with a different overall approach to risk management during 
the last decade and more reliance on the precautionary principle.24 
Finally, a study prepared for the European Commission by the Swiss Federal Institute of 
Technology and the University of Reading, titled Assessment of the Economic Performance of 
GM Crops Worldwide, provides an overview of financial and other benefits from growing 
GMOs.25 The study provides an overview of the economic performance of GM crops 
worldwide based on the current state of knowledge; it also examines the direct economic and 
other effects of growing GM crops that influence farmers’ income, as represented by the 
following economic parameters: crop yields, seed costs, pesticide and herbicide costs, labor 
costs, and gross margins.26 
 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
45
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation 
 
The EU and its twenty-eight Members share competence in the areas related or affected 
by the use of GMOs—that is, the environment, consumer protection, and public health 
matters.27 
At the EU level, two basic and comprehensive pieces of legislation regulate various 
aspects of GMOs: Regulation No. 1829/2003 on Genetically Modified Food and Feed,28 and 
Directive 2001/18/EC on the Deliberate Release into the Environment of Genetically 
Modified Organisms and Repealing Council Directive 90/220/EEC.29 Directive 2001/18/EC 
was amended by Directive 2008/27/EC.30 Implementation of Directive 2001/18/EC is also 
closely linked with Directive 91/414/EEC on the Placing of Plant Protection Products on the 
Market, as amended.31 In addition, Regulation (EC) No 1830/2003 governs traceability and 
labeling requirements of GMOs and amends Directive 2001/18/EC32 concerning the 
traceability and labeling of GMOs and the traceability of food and feed products produced 
from GMOs and amending Directive 2001/18/EC. 
Both Regulations No. 1829/2003 and 1830/2003 are directly applicable in the legal 
systems of the twenty-eight EU Member States. Concerning Directive 2001/18/EC, EU 
Members are required to comply with the requirements contained therein, but are free to 
choose the method of implementation. Exports of GMOs in general are governed by 
Regulation (EC) No. 1946/2003 on Transboundary Movements of Genetically Modified 
Organisms.33 
Moreover, in 2010, the Commission prepared its Guidelines for the Development of 
National Co-existence Measures to Avoid the Unintended Presence of GMOs in Conventional 
and Organic Crops.34 The guidelines urge EU Members to develop their own national 
measures based on their specific local and regional conditions in order to avoid the 
unintended presence of GMOs in conventional and organic crops.35 Another recommendation 
is the possibility for EU Members to exclude GMO cultivation from large areas of their 
territory (GM-free areas) to avoid the unintended presence of GMOs in conventional and 
organic crops. In such a case, EU Members should show that purity from GMO 
contamination cannot be achieved through other methods.36 
 
 
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing 
 
A. Research 
Directive 2001/18/EC requires EU Members and the Commission to ensure that research 
on GMOs is conducted prior to their being released into the environment or placed on the 
market.37 Each EU Member must allocate appropriate funding for such research, in 
compliance with budgetary procedures. Researchers must be granted access to all pertinent 
materials, provided that intellectual property rights are fully respected.38 
At the EU level, in 2010 the Commission published a compendium titled A Decade of 
EUFunded GMO Research, which summarizes the results of fifty research projects assessing 
the safety of GMOs for the environment and for animal and human health between 2001 and 
2010. The projects were funded to the amount of €200 million (approximately US$ 273 
million) from the EU.39 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
46
B. Cultivation 
Member States have the right to invoke the safeguard clause, as provided for in article 23 
of Directive 2001/18/EC, and to temporarily ban the cultivation or use of a GMO in their 
territory.40 Members have to substantiate their actions with new or additional information that 
an authorized GMO can pose a threat to the environment or human health. The Commission 
may ask EFSA to provide a scientific opinion on the information provided by Member States. 
In these cases, the GMO Panel of EFSA assesses the new evidence provided by the Member 
State in the form of a scientific opinion. A number of EU Members have prohibited individual 
authorized GMOs or GM seeds, including Austria, Hungary, France, Greece, Germany, and 
Luxembourg, all of which ban the cultivation of the GM maize MON810. Poland has enacted 
legislation that prohibits the marketing of all GM seeds. Since 2002 the Commission has 
repeatedly proposed that national safeguard measures on GMO cultivation be repealed, with 
no success. 
In addition, Austria, Hungary, and Luxembourg have notified the Commission of their 
ban on the cultivation of the approved Amflora potato.41 The company BASF Plant Science 
GmbH had submitted two authorization procedures for the Amflora potato that were 
subsequently adopted by the Commission in March 2010: (a) a procedure based on Directive 
2001/18/EC for cultivation and use for industrial purposes, and (b) a procedure based on 
Regulation 1829/2003 for the production of animal feed. On December 13, 2013, the General 
Court (GC)—based on a legal action instituted by Hungary in 2010 and assisted by Austria, 
France, Luxembourg, and Poland—annulled the Amflora authorization decisions adopted by 
the Commission. The GC held that the Commission had failed to comply with the 
authorization procedures by not requesting the opinion of the competent committees 
composed of representatives of the Member States.42 In this regard, the GC concluded that “if 
the Commission had complied with those rules, the result of the procedure or the content of 
the contested decisions could have been substantially different.”43 
In July 2010, at the request of a number of EU Members, the Commission introduced a 
proposal for a Regulation to amend the safeguard clause of Directive 2001/18/EC and to 
expand the legal grounds on GMO cultivation. When adopted, EU Member States will be able 
to restrict or prohibit GMO cultivation in part or all of their territory without recourse to the 
safeguard clause. While this proposal was approved by the Parliament in 2011, no agreement 
could be reached in the Council. The Parliament’s amendment includes grounds related to 
local and regional environments, such as the prevention of the development of pesticide 
resistance among weeds and pests, the prevention of negative impacts on the local 
environment due to changes in agricultural practices connected with the cultivation of GMOs, 
and the maintenance of local biodiversity. It also includes grounds relating to socioeconomic 
impacts, such as the need to preserve seed purity and to protect the diversity of agricultural 
production. These measures will stay in force for a period of five years.44 
 
 
C. Authorization under Directive 2001/18/EC 
 
The general objective of Directive 2001/18/EC is to harmonize the national legislation on 
GMOs in the twenty-eight EU Member States in compliance with the precautionary principle 
and to ensure that individuals and companies take necessary measures to safeguard the 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
47
environment and human health prior to intentionally releasing into the environment a GMO 
or placing in the EU market a GMO or GM products. 
The procedure for authorization for a GMO to be placed on the market is similar to that 
provided under Regulation No. 1829/2003. An individual or a company must notify the 
competent authority of a Member State where the GMO will be marketed for the first time. In 
turn, the competent authority will send the dossier with necessary documentation to the 
competent authorities of the EU Members and the Commission.45 The notification will 
contain (a) the information required in Annexes III and IV and results obtained from research 
on the potential impact on the environment and human health; (b) an environmental risk 
assessment pursuant to Annex II, section D, which must take into account the direct and 
indirect effects and immediate and delayed effects on human health and the environment, as 
prescribed in Annex II; (c) conditions for placing the item on the market; (d) consent for a 
period of up to ten years; (e) a monitoring plan; and (f) a proposal for labeling and packaging, 
and a summary of the dossier.46 
The Directive requires that the EU Members designate the competent authority or 
authorities to be in charge of monitoring the implementation of its provisions.47 The role of 
the national authorities is to examine notifications and carry out control and other measures.48 
The competent authority is required to prepare an assessment report within ninety days after 
receiving the notification, which will indicate whether or not the GMO is to be placed on the 
market and the conditions thereof.49 
 
 
V. Restrictions on Releasing GMOs into the Environment 
 
Directive 2001/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 March 2001 
on the Deliberate Release into the Environment of Genetically Modified Organisms and 
Repealing Council Directive 90/220/EEC requires EU Members to ensure that the intentional 
release of GMOs into the environment is possible only if it is in compliance with part B of 
Directive 2001/18/EC. “Deliberate release” is defined as “any intentional introduction into the 
environment of a GMO or a combination of GMOs for which no specific containment 
measures are used to limit their contact with and to provide a high level of safety for the 
general population and the environment.”50 In 2012, the Court of Justice held that the 
“location of release” of genetically modified organisms is determined by all the information 
relating to the location of the release submitted by the notifier to the competent authorities of 
the Member State on whose territory the release will occur.51 
Intentional release into the environment may occur, provided that prior to the release of a 
GMO or GMOs an individual in charge submits a notification to the national competent 
authority of the Member State where the release will take place. In addition, the following 
items must be prepared or obtained: 
 
• 
A dossier containing information, as provided for in Annex III of the Directive 
• 
An environmental risk assessment consistent with the requirements of Annex II of 
the Directive 
• 
Explicit consent prior to release 
• 
A monitoring plan pursuant to the requirements of Annex III designed to detect the 
adverse effects of the GMO(s) on human health and the environment 52 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
48
• 
Disclosure of information to the public on the release and results of the release and 
provide a reasonable time frame for the public to respond.53 
 
If there are modifications or unintended changes to the release of a GMO into the 
environment, or additional information emerges on new risks that could potentially affect 
human health after the competent authority has granted its consent, the individual in charge 
must take measures to avert such risks and must notify the competent national authorities.54 
 
 
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs 
 
Regulation No. 1829/2003 prohibits placing on the EU market a GMO for food use, or a 
food containing or consisting of GMOs or food products produced “from” GMOs, unless an 
authorization is granted. Food and feed produced “with” a GMO are excluded from the scope 
of this Regulation. The critical determining factor is whether material derived from a GMO is 
present in the food or feed; thus, if a GMO is not present in the food or feed, then such food 
or feed does not fall within the purview of Regulation 1829/2003.55 
To be marketed in or imported into the EU, any food or feed produced from a GMO, or 
food or feed that contains or consists of GMOs, must be previously authorized and must not 
cause any adverse effects on human and animal health and the environment, mislead 
consumers, or differ from the food it intends to replace to the extent that nutritionally it does 
not offer any advantage to consumers.56 
 
A. Authorization Under Regulation No. 1829/2003 
An application for authorization, which is sent to the national competent authority, must 
include the name and address of the applicant, designate the food and its specifications, and 
meet inter alia the following requirements: 
 
• 
Comply with Annex II to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, if applicable 
• 
Describe in detail the method of production and manufacturing 
• 
Include a copy of independent peer-reviewed studies 
• 
State that the food will not raise ethical or religious concerns of consumers 
• 
Indicate conditions for placing the GMO food or feed on the market 
• 
Provide for post-market monitoring, if the food is intended for human consumption57 
 
The application must also include the required technical dossiers in compliance with 
Annexes III and IV of Directive 2001/18/EC, a copy of the authorization decision if the GMO 
was approved under Part C of Directive 2001/18/EC, and a monitoring plan to evaluate 
environmental effects in compliance with this Directive.58 
Within fourteen days the national competent authority must inform the applicant that it 
received the application and forward all information to the EFSA. It must also inform the 
Commission and the EU Members of the application. The EFSA must then provide its 
opinion within a six-month deadline. The Commission, within three months after receiving 
the opinion, must submit to the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health a 
draft of its decision. The draft must include all the appropriate and relevant information, 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
49
including the name of the authorization holder and the unique identifier that is given to each 
GMO approved in the EU. 
The Commission’s decision is published in the Official Journal of the European Union.  
 
B. Labeling and Traceability Requirements 
The right of consumers to information is recognized in article 169 of the TFEU. Based on 
this article, the EU is obliged to promote this right in legislation affecting consumers.59 
Labeling requirements apply to foods delivered to the final consumers or mass caterers in 
the EU that either contain or consist of GMOs, or are produced from or contain ingredients 
produced from GMOs. Regulation No. 1829/2003 requires that the phrase “genetically 
modified” or “produced from genetically modified [name of the organism]” must appear 
clearly next to the ingredient list.60 When there is no list of ingredients the same phrase must 
appear on the label. In the case of nonpackaged food, the same labeling must appear on the 
food display or next to it.61 When GMOs are found in minute amounts in conventional food 
due to their adventitious or technically unavoidable presence during cultivation, harvest, or 
transport, the food is not subject to labeling provided that the amount present is less than 
0.9%.62 Similar labeling requirements are contained in Directive 2001/18/EC.63 
The traceability and labeling of GMOs and the traceability of food and feed products 
produced from GMOs are governed by Regulation (EC) No. 1830/2003.64 Directive 
2001/18/EC introduced a general traceability requirement, which obliges EU Members to 
ensure traceability at all stages of marketing for GMOs. 
When placing on the market a product consisting of or containing GMOs, operators 
(individuals or legal entities) are required to provide in writing two important items: (a) a 
statement that the product contains or consists of GMOs, and (b) the unique identifier 
assigned to each GMO (a numeric or alphanumeric code) in order to facilitate the 
identification of the GMO. This type of information must be forwarded from one operator to 
the next.65 
When placing on the market a product for food and feed produced from GMOs, operators 
must forward to those who will receive them, the following: 
 
• 
Each food ingredient produced from GMOs 
• 
Each of the feed materials or additives produced from GMOs 
• 
If there is no list of ingredients, an indication that the product is produced from 
GMOs66 
 
Operators must ensure that prepackaged products consisting of or containing GMOs carry 
a label with the words, “[t]his product contains genetically modified organisms” or “this 
product contains genetically modified [name of the organism].”67 For non-prepackaged 
products offered to consumers, the same phrase must appear on the product or where the 
product is displayed.68 
The traceability or labeling requirements do not apply when there are traces of GMOs of 
no higher than 0.9%, and the traces of GMOs are “adventitious or technically unavoidable.”69 
 
 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
50
VII. Liability Issues 
 
In general, liability issues arising from the use of food or feed produced from GMOs or 
consisting of or containing GMOs fall within the legal systems of the EU Member States, 
where producers and importers of GMOs may be subject to the general rules of civil 
liability.70 The specific question of liability and compensation schemes for damage due to the 
presence of GMOs in non-GM crops is the subject of a lengthy study by the European Centre 
of Tort and Insurance Law, which provides information on the individual EU Member 
States.71 
At the EU level, the scope of Directive 2004/35/EC on Environmental Liability with 
Regard to the Prevention and Remedying of Environmental Damage72 may be relevant to this 
discussion. The general EU principle is that the polluter pays for environmental damage. 
Directive 2004/35/EC extends the damage or imminent threats of damage to the 
environment––including protected species and their natural habitats, water, and land––due to 
a number of activities, including any deliberate release into the environment, transport, or 
placing on the market of GMOs, as defined by Directive 2001/18/EC.73 The scope appears to 
be limited, however, since biodiversity found in farmlands appears to fall outside its scope, 
unless such farmland is located within a protected area.74 
In 2011, the Court of Justice of the EU rendered a preliminary ruling in a case that could 
be influential in paving the way for biotech companies to be held accountable for GMOs 
released into the environment that cause damage to individuals. In this case, the Court upheld 
the right to compensation of a German beekeeper who instituted legal proceedings against the 
State of Bavaria when Monsanto’s GM corn (MON810), which was cultivated for research 
purposes in plots owned by the State of Bavaria, contaminated his honey. The Court found 
that the beekeeper suffered an economic loss by not being able to sell his product and that he 
ought to be compensated.75 
In 2013, the Parliament, in amending the Commission’s proposal on restrictions to the 
cultivation of GMOs, added a new article 26c related to liability requirements. This new 
article requires EU Members to establish a general mandatory system of financial liability and 
financial guarantees, such as through insurance. Such a liability and insurance scheme will be 
applicable to all operators and will ensure that the polluter pays for the unintended effects of 
damage that may occur due to the deliberate release or marketing of GMOs.76 
At the international level, the purpose of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the 
Convention on Biological Diversity is to ensure protection during the transfer, handling, and 
use of living modified organisms that may adversely affect the conservation of natural 
habitats or species. However, its application is limited to the transboundary movement of 
GMOs.77 In the implementation of article 27 of the Cartagena Protocol, the Nagoya-Kuala 
Lumpur Supplementary Protocol was adopted. It establishes international rules and 
procedures for liability and a means of redress in case of damage to biological diversity as a 
result of living modified organisms.78 The Supplementary Protocol applies to damage 
resulting from living modified organisms that originate in transboundary movement and 
extends to the following: 
 
• 
Direct use as food or feed, or for processing 
• 
Contained use 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
51
• 
Intentional release into the environment79 
• 
Damage resulting from any authorized use of the living modified organisms80 
 
The EU ratified the Supplementary Protocol on March 21, 2013, by depositing the 
instruments of approval.81 
 
 
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases 
 
The EU court system has played a significant role in the area of GMOs, by interpreting 
provisions of EU legislation on GMOs and by ensuring effective implementation when the 
Commission initiates action against certain EU Members for failing to comply with its 
requirements. The most recent judgment delivered in September 2013 terminates the EU’s de 
facto moratorium by requiring the Commission to take further action in a long-pending 
application for authorization. 
 
A. Case T-164/10: Pioneer Hi-Bred International, Inc. 
On September 26, 2013, the General Court issued a judgment in Case T-164/10 and 
found against the Commission for failing to act under Directive 2001/18/EC by not 
submitting to the Council a proposal under article 5(4) of the Comitology Decision 
1999/468/EC.82 The facts of this case involve the 2001 application for authorization of maize 
1507 for cultivation by Pioneer Hi-Bred International, Inc. under Directive 2001/18/EC on the 
deliberate release of GMOs into the environment. 
In 2007, Pioneer Hi-Bred International initiated a first action before the General Court of 
the European Union against the Commission for its failure to present a decision of 
authorization of that maize for vote to the Regulatory Committee. The General Court closed 
the case when the Commission presented a proposal for a draft authorization decision to the 
Regulatory Committee in February 2009. The Committee, however, failed to deliver an 
opinion. In 2010, following the absence of an opinion by the Regulatory Committee, Pioneer 
Hi-Bred International launched a second action for failure to act (Case T-164/10) against the 
Commission for not having referred to the Council a proposal for an authorization decision, in 
compliance with the comitology procedure applicable at the time. In November 2013 the 
Commission complied with the General Court’s decision.83 
 
B. Judgment in Case C-442/09: Karl Heinz Bablok and Others v. Freistaat Bayern 
In 1998 Monsanto received authorization for marketing the genetically modified 
MON810 maize. As noted in Part VII, above, a beekeeper in the State of Bavaria, Germany, 
claimed that his honey and the pollen that he produced for sale as a food supplement on land 
close to public land where MON810 maize was being cultivated for research purposes 
became contaminated by MON810 and therefore he could not sell his honey and pollen. He 
instituted a legal action before the Bavarian Higher Administrative Court. The latter requested 
that the EU Court of Justice issue a preliminary ruling as to whether the mere presence of 
genetically modified maize pollen that has lost its ability to reproduce prohibited the 
beekeeper from placing his products on the market without authorization.84 
The EU Court determined that products such as honey and food supplements containing 
GMO pollen constitute foodstuffs containing ingredients produced from GMOs within the 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
52
meaning of the regulation. Therefore, it concluded that the pollen in question was “produced 
from GMOs” and that it constituted an “ingredient” of the honey and pollen-based food 
supplements. The Court also noted that foodstuffs containing ingredients produced from 
GMOs are subject to the authorization procedure, irrespective of whether the GMO is 
introduced intentionally or adventitiously.85 
 
 
FRANCE 
 
Nicolas Boring 
Foreign Law Specialist 
 
 
Summary  
 
The production and sale of certain genetically modified organisms (GMOs) are legal 
in France, but are subject to very restrictive rules. French legislation regarding GMOs 
falls within the broader framework of European regulation, but France has supplementary 
national rules that provide additional restrictions. These rules are particularly focused on 
the potential release of GMOs in the environment, and on labeling requirements for GM 
products. French legislation also requires that the location of GM crops be public 
information, and establishes strict liability rules regarding the possible release of GM 
crops into non-GM fields. As a result of both public hostility to GMOs and these legal 
restrictions, there are currently no GM crops grown in France, even though France 
imports substantial amounts of GMOs from abroad. 
 
 
I. Introduction 
 
France is considered to be very restrictive on genetically modified organisms (GMOs).1 
Though some aspects of French legislation ostensibly promote a balanced approach to GMOs 
by guaranteeing the “freedom to consume and produce with or without genetically modified 
organisms,”2 French authorities have generally not been favorable to agricultural 
biotechnology.3 Although France remains very active in GMO laboratory research,4 and 
imports large amounts of GM crops to feed its livestock,5 there is a complete absence of 
commercially grown GMOs in French agriculture,6 and the last French open-field GMO 
research project ended in July 2013.7 
 
 
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion 
 
French opinion is quite divided on the issue of genetically modified organisms. The U.S. 
Department of Agriculture notes that “[m]arket acceptance of plant biotech products is high 
among stakeholders that need the products, i.e., importers, animal feed compounders, as well 
as poultry/swine/cattle ranchers who all depend upon largely imported soybean products.”8 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
53
Furthermore, many French scientists are favorable to continued biotechnology research.9 
However, anti-GMO nongovernmental organizations are very active in France,10 and a strong 
majority of consumers are hostile to GMOs. Indeed, a 2012 poll found that 79% of 
respondents said they were worried about the presence of GMOs in foodstuffs,11 and a 2011 
poll found that 80% opposed the cultivation of GMO crops in open fields.12 
 
 
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation 
 
A. EU Regulations 
As France is a member of the European Union, its laws and regulations regarding 
genetically modified organisms are strongly affected by EU-level rules.13 As is the case for 
other members of the EU, France’s national legislation is subordinate to EU regulation 
regarding consumer and environmental protection.14 However, as these are issues of shared 
competence between the EU and Member States, the French government has some latitude to 
enact and implement its own laws and regulations, as long as these are consistent with EU-
level regulations.15 Furthermore, the European authority in charge of approving GMOs may 
seek advice from national food safety agencies.16 In the case of France, the food safety 
agency is the Agence nationale de sécurité sanitaire, de l’alimentation, de l’environnement et 
du travail (National Agency on Sanitary, Food, Environmental, and Workplace Safety).17 
 
B. Domestic Provisions 
In France, at the national level, GMOs are principally regulated under a comprehensive 
2008 law on this matter.18 The provisions of this law were inserted in the French legal 
codes.19 Most of the provisions of the 2008 law were incorporated into the Code de 
l’environnement (Environmental Code), but several were inserted in the Code rural (Rural 
Code) and a couple of provisions were inserted in the Code de la santé publique (Public 
Health Code) and the Code de la recherche (Research Code).20 Most of the substance of the 
2008 law was put in the Environmental Code, but certain provisions dealing with the 
production, transportation, and sale of agricultural products were placed in the Rural Code. 
The provisions that were inserted in the Public Health Code have to do with GMOs in 
medication, and the article modifying the Research Code (art. 16 of the 2008 law) has to do 
with the evaluation of research and higher education.21 For greater ease of reference, the 
present report will cite to relevant provisions in these codes rather than to the 2008 law. 
One of the key elements of French legislation on GMOs is the establishment of a special 
high council called the Haut Conseil des biotechnologies (High Council for 
Biotechnologies).22 This high council is comprised of a number of experts and representatives 
from the political sphere, from community organizations, and from relevant advocacy and 
professional groups. It is divided into a scientific committee, and an economic, ethical, and 
social committee.23 As will be seen below, many French legislative provisions require the 
governmental authorities to seek advice from the Haut Conseil des biotechnologies on the 
topic of GMOs. 
At the local level, many mayors and town councils have tried to issue regulations 
prohibiting the cultivation of genetically modified organisms within their jurisdictions, but 
such measures have been systematically challenged by the prefects and struck down by 
administrative courts.24 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
54
C. Definition of GMO 
The French Code de l’environnement (Environmental Code) defines a genetically 
modified organism as an “organism, the genetic material of which has been modified in a 
manner other than by natural reproduction or recombination [organisme dont le matériel 
génétique a été modifié autrement que par multiplication ou recombinaison naturelles].”25 
This definition is essentially identical to the one given at the European level by Directive 
2001/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, according to which a genetically 
modified organism “means an organism, with the exception of human beings, in which the 
genetic material has been altered in a way that does not occur naturally by mating and/or 
natural recombination.”26 
 
 
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing 
 
French law requires that GMOs only be grown, sold, or used “in a manner that respects 
the environment and public health, agricultural structures, local ecosystems, production and 
commercial channels labeled as ‘without genetically modified organisms,’ and with full 
transparency.”27 To further these goals, French law subjects the research, production, and sale 
of GMOs to prior governmental authorization, and subjects the cultivation of GM crops to 
transparency rules. 
 
A. The Use of GMOs in Confined Environments 
The use of genetically modified organisms in confined spaces for research and 
educational purposes is subject to prior authorization from the ministry in charge of 
research.28 The ministry must receive the opinion of the Haut Conseil des biotechnologies 
before giving its authorization.29 Prior authorization is not necessary if potential risks for 
public health or the environment are inexistent or negligible, but the use of genetically 
modified organisms must be declared to the government even in such circumstances.30 The 
use of genetically modified organisms in confined environments for industrial purposes is 
subject to the same rules, except that the competent authority is the local prefect rather than 
the ministry in charge of research.31 
 
B. Deliberate Release of GMOs in Open Environments for Research Purposes 
The deliberate release of genetically modified organisms in open environments for 
research purposes is also subject to prior approval by the government (usually through the 
ministry in charge of the environment, although other executive bodies may be competent 
with regard to certain specific products).32 The government must receive the opinion of the 
Haut Conseil des biotechnologies regarding possible risks for public health and the 
environment before granting an authorization.33 The government must also consult the public 
at large through a website.34 Furthermore, the government must provide advance notice to the 
local authorities of areas where genetically modified organisms are to be disseminated.35 The 
authorization to disseminate genetically modified organisms may be amended or suspended if 
new information justifies it.36 
 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
55
C. Distribution and Release of GMOs for Commercial Purposes 
The marketing and release of genetically modified organisms for commercial purposes 
are subject to prior approval by the government (generally through the ministry in charge of 
the environment, although other government bodies may be competent with regard to certain 
specific products).37 Before granting its approval, the government must evaluate potential 
risks for the environment and for public health, and obtain the opinion of the Haut Conseil 
des biotechnologies.38 Article L533-6 of the Code de l’environnement states that an 
authorization issued by another EU Member State or by the competent EU authority in 
compliance with EU regulations is equivalent to a French governmental approval.39 However, 
even after an authorization has been issued, the government can suspend or prohibit the use or 
sale of a genetically modified product if new or additional information brings to light risks to 
the environment or public health.40 
 
D. Transparency Rules for GM Crops 
In addition to the authorization requirements described above, French legislation requires 
that the location where genetically modified crops are being grown be declared to the 
government.41 The government authorities then enter this information into a national register, 
which is made available online.42 This rule has been controversial, as the availability of this 
information can be used by anti-GMO activists seeking to destroy the crops in question.43 
French lawmakers therefore attempted to establish a compromise: on the one hand, failure to 
declare the location of genetically modified crops is punishable by a €30,000 fine 
(approximately US$41,000) and six months of incarceration,44 and on the other hand, the 
destruction or degradation of authorized GM crops is punishable by a €75,000 fine 
(approximately US$102,600) and two years of incarceration.45 The destruction or degradation 
of GM crops that were planted for research purposes is punished even more severely, by a 
€150,000 fine (approximately US$205,000) and three years of incarceration.46 
In addition to informing the government authorities, a GM farmer is required to notify the 
farmers of surrounding land of his intention to plant GM crops, prior to sowing.47 
 
 
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment 
 
Given the potential for GMOs to spread through the environment, the coexistence of 
genetically modified, conventional, and organic crops has become an important focus of 
regulation in Europe.48 The use and sale of GMOs are authorized at the EU level in 
accordance with Directive 2001/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council with 
regards to deliberate release of GMOs into the environment.49 European regulations prevent 
Member States from outright prohibiting the cultivation or sale of GMOs.50 However, 
Member States are allowed to take “appropriate measures to avoid the unintended presence of 
GMOs in other products.”51 France has therefore enacted certain measures towards that 
purpose. 
As mentioned earlier, article 531-2-1 of the Environmental Code requires that GMOs 
only be grown, sold, or used “in a manner that respects the environment and public health, 
agricultural structures, local ecosystems, production and commercial channels labeled as 
‘without genetically modified organisms,’ and with full transparency.”52 The same article 
guarantees the “freedom to consume and produce with or without genetically modified 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
56
organisms.”53 In order to promote these goals, French legislation aims to limit the spread of 
GMOs to areas outside of their intended fields. Article L663-2 of the Code rural thus states 
that the cultivation, harvest, storage, and transportation of genetically modified crops are 
subject to certain technical rules.54 These rules are established by the minister in charge of 
agriculture, after consultation with the Haut Conseil des biotechnologies and the minister in 
charge of the environment.55 Article L663-2 highlights rules governing distances between 
genetically modified crops and other fields as being particularly important to avoid the 
accidental presence of GMOs in other crops.56 Violations of these technical rules on 
separation distances can be punished by particularly serious penalties: article L671-15 of the 
Code rural states that the penalty for non-compliance is a fine of €75,000 and two years of 
incarceration.57 However, it is important to note that these distance rules, which are supposed 
to be set by the Minister of Agriculture, have not yet been defined.58 
In addition to the rules discussed above, French legislation provides for “biological 
monitoring” of French territory, to observe the health of plant life and watch for possible 
unforeseen consequences of agricultural practices, including the use of GMOs.59 This is 
coordinated by the Comité de surveillance biologique du territoire (Committee for Biological 
Monitoring of the Territory), which was created for that purpose by the 2008 law on GMOs.60 
This body gives an annual report to both houses of the French Parliament (the Senate and the 
National Assembly), and can alert the government if it finds that certain unintended 
consequences require special measures to be taken.61 
 
 
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs 
 
The sale of GMOs is authorized at the European level in accordance with Regulation 
(EC) 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council with regards to food for 
human or animal consumption.62 Additionally, rules on traceability and labeling are 
established through Regulation (EC) 1830/2003 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council concerning traceability and labeling of genetically modified organisms and the 
traceability of food and feed products produced from genetically modified organisms.63 
Beyond those EU-level regulations, some restrictions exist at the national level as well. 
Specifically, the marketing of foodstuffs containing genetically modified organisms is subject 
to prior governmental approval, as explained earlier.64 Furthermore, genetically modified 
products are subject to specific labeling rules. Some of these rules are set at the European 
level, as mentioned above. Specifically, food containing more than 0.9% of GMO per 
ingredient must be labeled as containing GMOs (food containing less that 0.9% of GMO per 
ingredient is only exempt from labeling to the extent that the GMO presence is adventitious 
or technically unavoidable).65 Similar rules apply to feed meant for livestock.66 In addition to 
these European rules, a 2012 French decree provides for a special, optional label for GMO-
free products.67 The “GMO-free” label can only be placed on the front of a product’s 
packaging when the GMO-free ingredient makes up 95% of the product. Otherwise, the 
“GMO-free” label can only be placed in the ingredients list at the back of the packaging, and 
must be written in the same size, color and font as the ingredients list.68 This labeling is 
separate from other, voluntary labeling initiatives that were previously put in place by the 
food industry and supermarket chains,69 but these voluntary private initiatives must now 
comply with the 2012 decree on “GMO-free” labeling.70 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
57
VII. Liability Regime 
 
The Code rural provides that a GMO cultivator will be automatically liable when the 
accidental spread of his or her GMO causes economic harm to a non-GMO cultivator.71 This 
liability arises even if the accidental spread occurred through no fault of the GMO 
cultivator.72 Under this law, if a non-GMO cultivator ends up having to label his or her crops 
as GM because of contamination from a nearby field, he or she can seek compensation for the 
resulting depreciation of his or her crop’s value.73 The Code rural also makes it mandatory for 
any cultivator who uses GMOs to obtain liability insurance coverage.74 In practice, this 
severely limits the use of GMOs in agriculture, as insurance companies have been unwilling 
to cover GM crops in France.75 
Furthermore, though this scenario has not happened yet, it may be possible for someone 
whose property was adversely affected by another’s use of GMOs to sue for damages through 
an “abnormal neighborhood disturbance” theory under European law.76 
 
 
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases 
 
As GMOs are highly controversial in France, they have been at the heart of several 
judicial cases over the last several years. Some of the most publicized cases have involved the 
trials of antiGMO activists charged with the destruction or degradation of GM crops. The first 
incident of GM crop destruction by a group of faucheurs volontaires (volunteer reapers), as 
these activists call themselves, happened in 1997.77 Many more similar incidents happened in 
the following years, to the point where these activists could claim to have destroyed 70% of 
GM research fields in 2004.78 Many of these incidents have led to arrests and criminal 
charges against some of these anti-GMO activists, but courts have been very inconsistent in 
their treatment of such cases, with results ranging from acquittals to prison sentences.79 
Despite these inconsistencies, however, and despite the fact that such trials have been used by 
activists to publicize their cause, defending against these criminal charges has also proven 
quite costly for anti-GMO groups over the long run. This has lead many of them to conduct 
their destructions of GM crops at night in order to avoid detection and arrest.80 
Aside from these trials, there have been other judicial decisions that have had a 
significant impact on the regulation of GMOs in France. The most recent case is a decision 
from the French Conseil d’Etat (Council of State, France’s highest court for administrative 
matters) of August 1, 2013.81 In this case, the Conseil d’Etat was asked to rule on the legality 
of a French governmental decree prohibiting the use of a GM maize called MON 810. 
Although the MON 810 maize had been approved by the European Commission, the French 
government had the authority to ban it in case of a situation of emergency or a “serious risk to 
human health, animal health, or the environment” under article 34 of European Regulation 
1829/2003.82 However, the Conseil d’Etat ruled that neither a serious risk, nor a situation of 
emergency, existed with regard to MON 810, and that the government therefore exceeded its 
authority in banning it. Thus, this decision essentially legalized that particular GMO in 
France. This result was received quite negatively by the French public, and the government 
expressed its intention to seek other ways to maintain the moratorium on MON 810 maize.83 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
58
GERMANY 
 
Edith Palmer 
Chief, Foreign, Comparative and International Law Division II 
 
 
Summary 
 
Germany discourages the cultivation of genetically modified (GM) crops to the 
extent possible within the already stringent European Union (EU) legislation on 
genetically modified organisms (GMOs). Germany imposes strict liability for accidental 
contamination with GMOs, and has tough and methodically enforced controls over the 
release of GMOs. In 2009 Germany banned MON810 maize from cultivation for 
agricultural purposes, even though the EU has approved it for release into the 
environment. The only other GM plant that the EU has approved for release, the 
Amphora potato, is currently not being grown as a crop in Germany. Since 2013 the 
experimental planting of GM plants has also been abandoned owing to persistent 
vandalism. 
German public opinion is averse to food that contains GMOs, and German scholarly 
councils have stressed the environmental risks emanating from the release of GMOs. 
German scientists, on the other hand, would like to continue researching GMOs. In 2010 
the German Federal Constitutional Court held that the restrictive German legislation is 
compatible with German constitutional principles. 
 
 
I. Introduction 
 
German legislation on genetically modified organisms (GMOs) operates within the 
framework of European Union (EU) law. Germany transposed EU Directive 18/2001 on the 
release of GMOs into the environment1 in 2004 by reforming the German Act on Genetic 
Engineering,2 while EU Regulation 1829/2003 on GMOs in foodstuffs took effect in 
Germany with its enactment at the EU level in 2003.3 Within the limits of EU law, the 
German laws and regulations on GMOs are characterized by restrictiveness, complexity, and 
rigorous requirements that allow for effective governmental oversight and enforcement and 
hold polluters responsible through civil liabilities. As a result of these stringencies and of the 
banning of MON810 maize in 2009,4 no genetically modified (GM) plants have been 
cultivated in Germany in recent years as agricultural crops.5 Even the number of plantings for 
research purposes has dwindled from about five hundred in the year 2000 to seventy-five in 
2012.6 In 2013 no experimental planting was carried out owing to persistent sabotage by anti-
GMO activists.7 
 
 
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion 
 
The German position on GMOs is characterized by a population that is averse to GM 
plants in foodstuffs and apprehensive of the release of GMOs into the environment on the one 
hand, and a scientific community that does not want to lose its ability to research GMOs8 on 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
59
the other. Some farmers also would find GM planting useful, in particular planting of the 
banned MON810 maize.9 The German Farmer’s Association, on the other hand, advises 
against the cultivation of GM crops in response to the popular aversion to foods containing 
GMOs.10 
The German debate on GMOs has been robust, with the adversaries of GMOs invoking 
the precautionary principle of protecting the environment against unforeseeable risks,11 while 
proponents of GMO research and GM plant cultivation stress economic advantages, 
particularly for the third world,12 and the lack of substantiated harm from GMOs13 after 
decades of intensive research.14 In 2008 a Council of Environmental Scholars weighed in on 
this debate, holding that a total avoidance of pollution from GM planting is technically not 
feasible.15 The Council sees the risks of GMOs as a threat not so much to human health as to 
the environment, citing the risks of contaminating natural areas and non-GM crops, 
dissemination through vertical and horizontal gene transfers, toxic effects on nontargeted 
organisms, and effects possibly resulting from changes in agricultural practices.16 
 
 
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation 
 
In Germany the research, production, marketing, and release of GM plants are governed 
by the Genetic Engineering Act.17 The Act deals with GMOs in both plants and animals but 
does not deal with food or feed containing GMOs. The latter are governed by directly 
applicable EU regulations, primarily Regulations 1829/2003 on GMOs in food or feed and 
1830/2003 on the traceability and labeling of GMOs and foods containing them,18 with 
German legislation limited to the implementation of the EU rules.19 Nor does the German 
Genetic Engineering Act deal with GMOs in pharmaceutical products. The Act on 
Pharmaceutical Drugs20 and various best-practice guidelines for producing pharmaceutical 
drugs apply to these.21 
Germany first enacted the Genetic Engineering Act in 1990, yet with respect to GM 
plants the current version is based on a reform of 200522 that transposes EU law, particularly 
Directive 2001/18, which deals with the release of GMOs into the environment. Germany had 
delayed transposition until the European Court of Justice declared Germany to be tardy in the 
discharge of its obligation.23 In compliance with the European mandate, the 2005 version of 
the Act became somewhat less restrictive than it formerly had been.24 Yet after the 2005 
reform, Germany had to reform the Act again in 2006 and 2008 to live up to EU 
requirements.25 
The purposes of the Genetic Engineering Act are threefold. First, the Act aims to protect 
the environment and human and animal health from risks emanating from GMOs. Second, the 
Act aims to guarantee that genetically modified, conventionally produced, and organically 
grown products, particularly food and feed, can be grown, produced, and marketed in 
coexistence with each other. Third, the Act creates the legal framework for research on and 
the development and economic use of GMOs.26 
Germany introduced the goal of coexistence between GM, non-GM, and organic 
plantings in 2005, in compliance with the common-market orientation of Directive 18/2001. 
At the same time, Germany changed the definition of a GMO to protect against 
environmental pollution through GM plants. Since then the German Act has defined a GMO 
not only as an organism whose genetic material has been altered in a way that does not occur 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
60
naturally by mating or natural recombination, but also as one that has come into existence 
through mating or natural recombination between a GMO and a non-GM organism.27 
Accordingly, plants that were accidentally bred through recombination with GMOs also fall 
under the restrictions of the Genetic Engineering Act, such as requiring a permit to be 
marketed or released.28 Rulings in German court cases based on this expanded definition have 
led to the destruction of many contaminated plantings.29 
The Genetic Engineering Act has a chapter on working with GMOs in enclosed spaces 
and another on marketing GMOs and releasing them into the environment. In addition, 
administrative procedural rules are provided, as are a civil liability regime and penal 
provisions. Given the preeminence of EU law in authorizing GM plants for release and 
marketing, the German Law focuses primarily on safety rules that must be observed in lab 
work or individual releases, particularly plantings, both experimental and agricultural.30 Yet 
in banning MON810 Germany has set aside the EU prerogative to approve GMOs31 under the 
German justification that this GMO poses a risk to health and the environment.32 
The Genetic Engineering Act is implemented by the German states33 and, at the federal 
level, by the Federal Office of Consumer Protection and Food Safety.34 The latter acts as an 
advisory and at times supervisory agency for the state agencies, and together they carry out 
the numerous approval processes that are required in researching, producing, and using 
GMOs. The Federal Office also acts as a liaison in consultations with and notification of EU 
authorities and the other EU member states, and thereby carries out the German part of these 
intertwined responsibilities.35 
Germany also has a Central Committee for Biological Safety, which is composed of 
scientists from various disciplines. The Committee participates in approval proceedings, 
advises the government on policy, monitors safety, and issues annual reports.36 
Even though genetic engineering law is federal in Germany, the states still have some 
possibilities of implementing their own policies, be it through strict enforcement of the 
federal laws, protection of state parks and forests, or state-wide quality labels of origin. The 
State of Baden-Württemberg, for instance, uses all these techniques to discourage GM 
planting and prides itself on being a GMO-free region.37 
 
 
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing 
 
Germany has a dense regulatory regime for the research and production of GMOs in 
enclosed spaces. The operator of the installation is responsible for proper risk assessment and 
adequate containment measures, and there is tight governmental oversight. The rules for 
handling GMOs in laboratories or production facilities differ, depending on the riskiness of 
the activity. Compliance is ensured through numerous reporting duties and the appointment of 
an internal monitoring official.38 In addition, permits are required for all installations and 
processes, and these are awarded only to properly qualified operators.39 If GMOs are released 
into the environment in the course of experimental plantings, the general rules on the release 
of GMOs apply (see Part V, below).40 
The rules for marketing GMOs fall largely into the domain of EU law, in that a GMO or 
a product containing GMOs must be approved at the EU level before being marketed 
throughout the EU. The approval process is governed by Directive 2001/18, and if the GMO 
or GMO product concerns food or feed, by Regulation 1829/2003. At times an applicant may 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
61
ask for approval under both regimes if the GMO is to be used for crop cultivation as well as 
food or feed.41 In compliance with the EU common-market principles, Germany permits the 
importation of the approximately fifty GMOs that the EU has approved as food or feed.42 Of 
the two EUapproved GMOs for release into the environment, Germany allows the marketing 
of only the Amphora potato, having banned MON810 maize in 2009, as explained above (see 
Part I). 
 
 
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment 
 
Although the approval of GMOs for release into the environment is primarily governed 
by EU law, the Member States still have much discretion over fashioning the regulatory 
systems to protect the environment from undue risk when GM plants are cultivated, and 
Germany has made use of this discretionary power to create a very stringent system to control 
any GMO releases. 
Releases are permitted only after governmental approval is obtained, and the permit 
criteria are as strict as those for the operator of a GMO-processing installation in that they 
insist on highly qualified operators and observance of state of the art techniques. Moreover, 
the law requires that approval be granted only after balancing and weighing the benefits of a 
release with any potential risks,43 and this statutory criterion is subject to conflicting 
interpretations.44 
The locations register for GM plantings is an important tool for transparency and 
governmental oversight, yet it also allows anti-GMO activists to locate plantings for the 
purpose of destroying them.45 Growers of GMO crops must notify the authorities three 
months prior to seeding or planting, and again three days prior to each release. The 
information must include a description of the GMO and the exact location of its release.46 
Portions of the register are available to the public on the Internet, whereas personal data are 
released only if the requester has a justifiable interest. The published portion of the register 
specifies the exact location of each planting,47 and researchers who conduct experimental 
plantings hold this publicity responsible for the destruction of virtually all research plantings 
since 2004.48 
To avoid contamination of adjacent plantings or the environment at large, various best 
practices must be observed in the cultivation of GM plants, among them separation zones for 
GM maize. The distance of a field of GM maize from a planting of conventional maize must 
be at least one hundred fifty meters, and from an organic planting of maize, three hundred 
meters.49 These are the only prescribed separation zones, yet there has been discussion on the 
need for a ten-kilometer zone to protect the beehives of beekeepers (see Part VIII, below, for 
the EU honey decision and its impact), and the State of Baden-Württemberg may be in the 
process of requiring a one-kilometer zone to protect nature preserves.50 
The authorities of the states enforce the laws and regulations on the release of GMOs so 
as to avoid accidental contamination of adjacent fields and harvested crops.51 For this 
purpose, the authorities may prohibit plantings52 and destroy contaminated plantings (see Part 
VIII, below). Some states pride themselves on the thoroughness of their oversight. The State 
of BadenWürttemberg, for instance, tests crops methodically for contamination.53 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
62
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs 
 
In compliance with the EU common-market principles, Germany permits the importation 
of the approximately fifty GMOs that the EU has approved for food or feed.54 Currently, 
GMOs are mostly used in Germany in feed for livestock. Little food labeled as containing 
GMOs is marketed for human consumption in Germany, yet given the EU labeling rules, the 
ingredients of such foods may still contain GMOs below the threshold level of 0.9%. In 
addition, dietary supplements and additives in such foods may contain GMOs, since these are 
not subject to the requirements of Regulations 1829/2003 on GMOs in food or feed and 
Regulation 1830/2003 on the traceability and labeling of GMOs and foods containing them.55 
To market food that is free of even traces of GMOs, Germany allows the use of a label 
indicating “No Genetic Engineering” (Ohne Gentechnik). Under the auspices of the German 
authorities, this label is administered by an association that supports GMO-free food.56 In 
order to qualify for this label, a food must be free of traces of GMOs, and the additives and 
dietary supplements in such foods must also be free of GMOs. For meat and meat products to 
qualify for the label, the animals must have been fed a GMO-free diet for lengthy periods 
before slaughter.57 
 
 
VII. Liability Regime 
 
The Act on Genetic Engineering contains a strict liability regime for damage caused by 
GMOs.58 Damages are capped at €85 million (about US$117,050,000), and the operators of 
research or production facilities must obtain liability insurance or coverage through 
governmental guarantees. Injunctive relief is also available. 
This liability regime also applies to the accidental pollution of adjacent properties. If a 
grower of GM plants contaminates a neighbor’s field and the neighbor’s planting must 
therefore be destroyed (owing to the unauthorized release of GMOs), then the grower of the 
GM plants is presumed to have caused this damage and is fully liable. Likewise, if food is 
produced from GMO-contaminated plants and therefore must be labeled as containing GMOs 
owing to the level of contamination, or can no longer qualify for the “No Genetic 
Engineering” label, then the grower presumed to have caused this contamination is fully 
liable for the reduction in marketability and value of the contaminated food.59 Damages can 
be considerable, considering the German preference for foods without GMOs. In fact, this 
liability regime has proven to be the biggest deterrent to the cultivation of GM crops in 
Germany, and has caused the German Farmer’s Association to advise against the cultivation 
of GM plants.60 
 
 
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases 
 
German judicial decisions have touched on many aspects of GMO legislation, both 
domestic and European. In 2009 the Administrative Court of Munich referred the Bablok case 
(honey case)61 to the European Court of Justice (ECJ).62 In 2010 the Federal Constitutional 
Court (FCC) upheld the Genetic Engineering Act.63 In 2012 and 2013 administrative courts 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
63
upheld destruction orders for GMO-contaminated plantings,64 while at various times anti-
GMO activists have been tried in the criminal courts.65 
The FCC decision of 2010 balances and weighs the potential risks of GMO releases with 
the interests of researchers and users of GMOs. A constitutional challenge had been brought 
by the government of the German State of Sachsen Anhalt, which objected to the publication 
of location register data (see Part V, above) on the grounds that this could invite vandalism by 
antiGMO activists. The State also objected to the strict liability regime for contamination of 
neighboring properties. The Court held that the Act on Genetic Engineering struck an 
appropriate balance between the purpose of protecting against GMO risks on the one hand, 
and the enhancement of research on and the development and proper use of GMOs on the 
other. The Court also pointed out that the data on the German locations of GM plantings 
could be viewed in Internet registers according to the Cartagena Protocol66 and in the EU’s 
Register of Genetically Modified Foodstuff and Animal Feed.67 With respect to the liability 
provisions contained in the Genetic Engineering Act regarding the contamination of 
neighboring properties, the Court held that the Act merely exemplified and clarified liabilities 
already existing in the German law of nuisance. 
The Bablok decision of the ECJ continues to generate follow-up decisions and legislative 
proposals in Germany. In Bablok, the EJC had held that GMO-contaminated honey and 
pollen fell under the restrictions of Regulation 1829/2003. In March 2012 the Bavarian 
Higher Administrative Court rejected in part claims of a beekeeper for additional measures to 
protect his bees from the risk of contamination by GMO plantings.68 In June 2012 a 
parliamentary minority party submitted a legislative draft calling for the introduction of ten-
kilometer separation zones between GM plantings and the location of beehives.69 
Acts of vandalism against GMO crops also generate court decisions that touch on various 
aspects of the law on GMOs. In May 2013 a Higher Regional Court rescinded and remanded 
a lower court’s conviction of destroyers of GM plantings because the lower court had failed 
to examine whether the permit for the planting had been given in violation of the law. The 
perpetrators had used the justification (defense) of necessity and had claimed that the permit 
had been in violation of the law.70 
 
 
ISRAEL 
 
Ruth Levush 
Senior Foreign Law Specialist 
 
 
Summary  
 
Israeli law permits the development and growth of genetically modified organisms 
(GMOs) for research purposes in accordance with requirements established by subsidiary 
legislation. Although GMO growth is not permitted for commercial purposes, GMO 
products may be imported, sold, and used in the production of food and pharmaceuticals 
in Israel. While Israeli scientists usually support the development of GMOs, 
environmental activists have expressed concerns regarding what they see as potential 
harm resulting from their use. Israel’s religious kashrut authority has determined that the 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
64
use of GMO ingredients in food does not affect its kosher status because GMOs are only 
used in “microscopic” proportions. This determination has been contested by some 
Jewish groups in Israel and the United States. All new food, including food that was 
genetically engineered, goes through a risk assessment process before being approved. 
Such assessment includes an evaluation of aspects related to its safety, nutrition, and 
consumption. To date, legislation specifically regulating the labeling of GMO 
components in food does not appear to have been passed. 
 
 
I. Introduction 
 
Israel is considered “an international center for studying genetically modified 
organisms.”1 Research involving genetically modified organisms (GMOs) concentrates on the 
development of seeds and is conducted in Israeli universities, in government research 
institutions,2 and by the private sector.3 Funding for GMO research and testing in Israel 
derives from Israeli and foreign sources, including the United States.4 
Israeli subsidiary legislation defines a GMO as “[a]n organism, including a 
microorganism, virus, viroid, and any single-celled or multi-celled entity, that has undergone 
a modification by genetic engineering and is involved with plants in any way during its life 
cycle.”5 A commentator has noted that while GMO research in Israel has focused on 
“developing and improving plants’ resistance to pests, diseases, and herbicides[,] . . . the 
research can only reach the ‘proof of concept’ stage, because of regulations.”6 
Accordingly, although the growth of GMOs is generally permitted in Israel for research 
purposes, subject to conditions enumerated by law, it is not authorized for commercial 
purposes.7 Ingredients derived from GMOs may, however, be imported, sold, and used in the 
production of food in Israel.8 GMO products are also “widely used in the pharmaceutical 
industry”9 in Israel. There are currently no requirements for the labeling of GMOs in Israel.10 
 
 
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion  
 
A. Government Policies 
In a December 2011 hearing of the 18th Knesset (Israel’s Parliament) Science and 
Technology Committee, experts testified in favor of research and development (R&D) 
involving genetic engineering in agriculture. Projecting a rise in global population and food 
shortages, Professor Yoram Kapolnik, head of agricultural research at the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD), testified on the need for Israel to prepare for 
2050, by which time he expects central food components to be depleted.11 Professor Amnon 
Lars, a researcher at the Agriculture Research Organization’s Volcani Center,12 also testified 
that genetic engineering proposed alternatives to the use of pesticides by developing 
vegetables that would be resistant to various viruses.13 
The hearing concluded with a call by Ronit Tirosh, the Committee’s Chair, to remove 
“the stigmas regarding the low level of safety [associated with] genetically engineered 
products; because it was proved that they are unjustified.”14 Calling on MARD to allocate 
funding “for marketing and for educating the public” on this issue, Ms. Tirosh stressed the 
need for closer cooperation between the Ministry of Health and MARD’s research 
institutions. Such cooperation is necessary, she stated, “so that regulations and directives that 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
65
are issued by the Ministry of Health will be considered in connection with every research 
project that is conducted, when the goal at the completion of the research is to open the 
products for wide distribution and trade.”15 Ms. Tirosh called for the introduction of a bill that 
would regulate the labeling of genetically engineered products and increase the number of 
inspectors to ensure compliance with quality standards.16 
A search for legislative developments since the December 2011 hearing has disclosed an 
amendment delaying the enforcement date of the Public Health (Food) (Nutritional Labeling) 
(Amendment) 5771-2011 Regulations to January 31, 2014. The text of these regulations, 
however, does not include reference to the labeling of GMO products.17 The absence of 
labeling requirements for GMO food components was criticized at a hearing conducted by the 
Knesset Committee for Labor, Welfare and Health on July 3, 2013.18 
 
B. Public Environmental Concerns 
Environmental activists have expressed concerns regarding the quality and the potential 
harm that they believe would result from the use of GMOs. Activists argue that “GM seeds 
produce sterile crops, so cross-pollination with wild plants could bring rapid extinction to 
those wild varieties. . . . GM plants are very weak and ‘spoiled’.”19 They have also expressed 
concerns about the long-term ecological effects of GMOs breeding with other plants.20 
Israeli scientists, however, have generally support the development of GMOs.21 
According to Professor Gad Galili of the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot, the 
development of genetically engineered crops can address “the global shortage of staple 
foods.” In response to concerns regarding the long-term impact of GMO use he opined that 
 
[a]lthough scientists do not know the long-term effects of genetically modified 
organisms’ consumption . . . they were safer than conventionally interbred ones because 
scientists had full control over all the variables in the gene transfer. As for the risk of 
contamination . . . [i]f you put a virus into GMO, it will spread. But we safeguard it, there 
are expert committees that approve GMO, and one thing is certain: If someone wanted to 
insert a virus genome, or there was a contamination risk, it would not be approved.22 
 
C. Religious Concerns 
Concerns have been raised both in Israel and among Jewish communities around the 
world23 regarding whether products that include GMO components are Kosher and thus fulfill 
strict Jewish dietary standards. The Epoch Times has reported that 
 
[t]he religious kashrut authority [which certifies products as Kosher] in Israel had 
ruled that genetic engineering “does not affect kosher status” because genetic material is 
“microscopic.” But there are Jewish groups that dispute this decision and consider GMOs 
a violation of the biblical prohibition against “kilayim,” mixed breeding both in crops and 
in livestock. Those believing GM products cannot be labeled kosher quote the well-
respected 13th century Kabbalist Rabbi Moshe ben Nachman (known as “the Ramban”), 
who said mankind should not disturb the fundamental nature of creation.24 
 
In the United States, the Natural Food Certifiers (NFC) Organization, announced that its 
Apple K Kosher Certification Program would no longer accept applications for products that 
contain GMOs.25 
According to a press release issued by the NFC: 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
66
While according to the strict letter of Kosher food law a GMO food ingredient is not 
prohibited, in our view it is not natural. Additionally, there is a Torah (religious)-based 
law to ‘guard your health’. GMOs are the number-one growing concern among health-
conscious consumers and for businesses in the natural and organic food market, as well 
as in the conventional food industry. . . .”26 
 
 
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation 
 
Israeli law currently does not include any primary legislation on GMOs. Responsibilities 
for GMO research, development, and use are shared by MARD and the Ministry of Health in 
accordance with regulations established by these ministries based on their respective 
authorities. 
 
A. Regulation of GMO Research 
The Seed Regulations (Genetically Modified Plants and Organisms) 5765– 200527 were 
issued in 2005 by the Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development based on general 
authorities provided under the Seeds Law, 5716-1956,28 and the Plant Protection Law, 5716-
1956.29 
MARD oversees all experimentation with transgenic plants and organisms that are 
involved in the life cycle of plants in accordance with the regulations. In addition, MARD 
handles the importation and exportation, handling and commercialization of genetically 
modified propagation material.30 
MARD’s activities in these areas are managed by the following bodies: 
 
1) The Plant Protection and Inspection Service (PPIS); 
2) The National Committee for Transgenic Plants (NCTP); and 
3) The Authorized Institutional Representative.31 
 
B. Regulation of GMO Use in Food 
According to information posted on the Ministry of Health website, 
 
[l]egislation regulating the rules regarding new food, including genetically 
engineered food and its labeling, is going through the final legislative steps. Every new 
food (including food that was genetically engineered) before being approved goes 
through risk assessment that includes aspects related to its safety, nutrition and 
consumption ... With the entry into force of the new food regulations a labeling 
requirement will apply to genetically engineered food components, in addition to the 
safety assessment that has been done until now.32 
 
Legislation specifically regulating labeling of GMO components in food does not appear 
to have been passed to date. 
 
 
 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
67
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing 
 
A. Rules for Authorizing Research and for Research Laboratories 
The Seed Regulations prohibit any experimentation with plants that have undergone a 
change by means of genetic modification without a permit issued by the Director of the 
PPIS.33 The regulations authorize the Director to grant experiment permits and to stipulate 
conditions and restrictions for their issue; including conditions for destroying plant material, 
organisms or regulated articles used during the experiment and requiring that testing be 
conducted in laboratories that have been approved by the Director. The Director may refuse 
to issue a permit for experiments that are to be carried out in a 
 
1) Containment facility, unless the applicant had proven that the containment facility is 
appropriate for its function and that all necessary means have been taken to prevent 
all risk to humans, animals and to plants; and to prevent unacceptable negative 
impacts on the environment; 
2) Field trial only, after consultation with the National Committee for Transgenic 
Plants.34 
 
The regulations authorize the Director to exempt applicants from needing to obtain an 
experiment permit if he or she is satisfied that the experiment will be conducted in a 
laboratory equipped with an autoclave facility and its operator and safety officer have ensured 
that “all experiment residues are destroyed in an incinerator or sterilized with material that the 
Director has approved.”35 
 
B. Marketing Rules 
The sale of transgenic plants requires permission from the Director in consultation with 
the NCTP and compliance with all the conditions enumerated in the experiment permit.36 The 
sale or export of transgenic propagation material or organism similarly requires a valid 
registration certificate or an approved label.37 
The regulations require an applicant who requests authorization to sell transgenic 
propagation material or transgenic organisms to submit a registration application that includes 
the following information: 
 
1) A description of the genetic modification and its characteristics, including complete 
data pertaining to the effects and potential effects on humans, animals, plants and the 
environment; 
2) Scientific publications on the results of experiments with the transgenic propagation 
material or the transgenic organism and their international use, including approved 
labels and translations to Hebrew (excluding English); 
3) A report of the results of experiments with transgenic propagation material or the 
transgenic organism under local conditions and the proposed utilization of the 
material; 
4) Examples of proposed labels for transgenic propagation material as regulated for in 
the Seed Law, with the addition of the words “Genetically Modified Material”; 
5) For transgenic organisms – the words “Genetically Modified Material” must appear 
on the label; 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
68
6) Imported transgenic propagation material or imported transgenic organisms – Import 
permit; 
7) Additional information as may be required by the Director, including a testing 
laboratory approved by him.38 
 
The Director is authorized to reject, restrict, or cancel a registration of transgenic 
propagation material or organisms for sale based on evidence that the plant material or 
organism may endanger plants, humans, or animals or have unacceptable negative impacts on 
the environment, or based on noncompliance with labeling requirements that have been 
authorized by the Director or deviation from the trait description that has been supplied at the 
time of registration application.39 
 
C. Labeling Requirements for Distributed Products 
As discussed above, labeling requirements apply to the marketing of transgenic plants, 
propagation material, and organisms. Labeling requirements for distribution of processed 
food products containing GMO components do not apply at this time. 
 
D. Agencies Involved in Implementation 
According to the regulations, the role of the NCTP is to advise the Director, in 
accordance with the instructions prescribed by the regulations, and “to determine if 
genetically modified plants or organisms or their sale, pose any risk to humans or animals or 
have unacceptable negative impacts on the environment.”40 
The thirteen committee members are appointed by the Minister of Agriculture and Rural 
Development and include the following persons: 
 
1) Two representatives from the Ministry; one of whom will act as chairman of the 
committee, and the second as deputy chairman; 
2) One representative from a list submitted by the Minister of the Environment; 
3) One representative from a list submitted by the Minister of Health; 
4) One representative from a list submitted by the Minister for Science, Culture and 
Sport; 
5) Eight representatives of the public from among the scientific and research 
community who have backgrounds in life sciences, nature or environmental 
protection, and from seed producers and variety breeders. 41 
 
 
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment 
 
As explained above, GMOs may be produced in Israel only for research purposes subject 
to conditions enumerated by the relevant regulations. GMO growth is not authorized for 
commercial purposes.42 
 
 
 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
69
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuff 
 
GMO products may be imported, sold, and used in the production of food in Israel,43 and 
are not required to be labeled in a way that identifies their GMO components.44 
 
 
VII. Liability Regime 
 
Israeli law does not contain a special liability regime in relation to the development, use, 
or release of GMOs. 
 
 
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases 
 
A search for case law concerning GMO research and use unconnected to patent rights has 
not identified any relevant court decisions. 
 
 
ITALY 
 
Dante Figueroa 
Senior Legal Information Analyst 
 
 
Summary  
 
As a member of the European Union, Italy has been implementing European 
directives concerning genetically modified organisms (GMOs) over the last two decades, 
but at a rather reluctant pace. In fact, as reflected by GMO legislation in Italy, Italian 
public opinion has shifted from a decidedly general opposition to the introduction of 
GMOs into a more recent open acceptance of them. Italy’s political and administrative 
structure relies on the powers of the central government and the governments of its 
twenty regions, which enjoy certain autonomy in the regulation of agriculture and crops, 
and in experimentation with GMOs. As a consequence, some regions have enacted 
slightly more permissive regimes than others. In addition, the Italian Constitutional Court 
has ruled that the national government is constrained from encroaching on the power of 
regional governments to establish their own regimes on GMOs. This factor, in 
conjunction with the more permissive regulations to which Italy is bound at the European 
level, creates a scenario where the decentralized and spontaneous growth of GMOs in 
agriculture will probably increase in the near future. 
 
 
I. Introduction 
 
Early regulations concerning genetically modified organisms (GMOs) in Italy were 
aimed at deterring their development in the country. However, the flow of European 
regulations from the late 1990s onward changed the legal framework for regulating GMOs. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
70
Pursuant to European Union (EU) Directive Nos. 219 and 220 of 1990, and 259 of 1997, Italy 
cannot limit the importation of GMOs, which are already approved at the European level. In 
2000, Italy for the first time enacted legislation to ban the use of certain GMOs used in foods 
for human consumption (see discussion, Part III(C), below). Two years later legislation 
imposed a moratorium on the mixture of GMO and non-GMO products. Finally, several 
pieces of legislation enacted since early 2003 have sought to more strictly regulate GMO 
experimentation, use, mixtures, and release into the environment, particularly concerning 
GMOs used for food crops. Thus, at this point, GMO cultivation is currently permitted in 
Italy, but subject to stringent regulations concerning the assessment of its impacts on human 
and animal health, and the environment. 
 
 
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion 
 
GMOs have received a mixed reception by the general public in Italy. For some 
observers, the incorporation of new technologies altering the genetic code of plants and 
animals has represented a success in the quest for maximization of food alternatives.1 For 
others, the introduction of GMOs in Italy has generated serious concerns related to food 
safety and consumer protection. 
For instance, the introduction of proteins and genes into GMOs that have not previously 
been consumed by animals or humans (e.g., scorpion genes in potatoes or bacteria in maize), 
and their subsequent impact on the food chain is a very controversial matter.2 Another 
common objection to GMOs arises over the dangers of GMOs escaping from their confined 
environments and mixing with populations living under natural conditions.3 
Overall, despite the European GMO regulations, the general public has strongly opposed 
the introduction of GMOs into Italy, and this opposition has had an impact on Italian 
legislation since at least 2000.4 
Only recently, on July 12, 2013, the Italian government banned the cultivation of 
Monsanto Corn 810 (Mon810), as the first of a series of measures designed to define a new 
more restrictive framework for the cultivation of GMOs in Italy.5 However, fresh opinion 
polls indicate that the Italian public is now adopting a slightly more pro-GMO stance.6 
 
 
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation  
 
A. Definition of “GMO” 
In Italy, GMOs (Organismi Geneticamente Modificati) are defined as “organisms whose 
genetic material has been altered in a way that does not occur naturally for fertilization and/or 
natural recombination. GMOs can be plants, animals, or microorganisms, such as bacteria, 
parasites and fungi.”7 GMOs from both plants and animals are used in food, agriculture, 
animal husbandry, and medicine.8 Nonetheless, the scientific community uses the 
terminology “GMO” mainly to describe plants whose hereditary patrimony has been altered 
by receiving genes, thereby transforming their cells or tissues.9 
Specifically, Legislative Decree (L.D.) No. 224 of 2003 defines a GMO as “an organism, 
different from a human being, whose genetic material has been altered in a way that does not 
occur in nature through coupling or intersection or natural recombination.”10 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
71
B. EU Law 
The complexity of the ethical and economic questions involved in the production of 
GMOs has caused the EU to regulate this field through Directive Nos. 90/219, 259/97, and 
2001/18, which replaced Directive 90/22011 As a consequence of these directives, Italy may 
neither limit the importation of GMOs authorized at the European level nor prohibit their 
cultivation for reasons other than those scientifically supported. 
European GMO legislation, which rests on the precautionary principle,12 comprises the 
following instruments: 
 
• 
Regulation (EC) No. 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 
September 2003 on genetically modified food and feed 
• 
Regulation (EC) No. 1830/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 
September 2003 concerning the traceability and labeling of genetically modified 
organisms and the traceability of food and feed products produced from genetically 
modified organisms and amending Directive 2001/18/EC 
• 
Directive 2001/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 March 
2001 (amended by Regulation (EC) No. 1830/2003) on the deliberate release into the 
environment of genetically modified organisms and repealing Council Directive 
90/220/EEC (which had required producers to demonstrate to authorities that a new 
product abided by certain security standards) 
• 
Commission Recommendation 2003/556/EC of 23 July 2003 on guidelines for the 
development of national strategies and best practices to ensure the coexistence of 
genetically modified crops with conventional and organic farming13 
 
C. Domestic Legislation 
The first attempt to block the entry of GMOs into Italy took place in 2000 with the 
issuance by the President of the Council of Ministers of the Decreto Amato,14 which banned 
the use of foods derived from GMO Corn 4. This provision was adopted pursuant to a 
safeguard clause included in European Regulation 258/97, which had authorized the use of 
GMO Corn 4 at the European level. The Decreto Amato was repealed, however, by a court in 
2004 for lack of evidence that GMO Corn 4 caused a health hazard. In consequence, this 
GMO may now be freely cultivated and used in Italy. 
The debate over transgenic products continued in Italy when in 2000 a group of more 
than 1,500 Italian scientists—including Nobel Prize recipients—signed a letter opposing a 
total ban on scientific research on GMOs.15 The Decreto Alemanno, adopted in 2002, 
contained rules for the coexistence of GMO, conventional, and organic agriculture. This 
instrument established a moratorium on mixing GMO and conventional seeds, with severe 
penalties for violators, and suspended the GMO experimentation that the government was 
conducting in accordance with regulations of the Ministry of Agricultural, Food, and Forestry 
Policies.16 
As already stated, Italy had for many years adopted a zero-tolerance policy concerning 
GMO seeds. In fact, in 2003, there was an incident in the Piedmont Region where the local 
government ordered the destruction of areas destined for GMO-crop cultivation based on the 
fact that the ratio of GMO seeds to conventional seeds exceeded the maximum ratio allowed 
by European and Italian regulations. This decision was not echoed at the national level or in 
other regions of the country, however. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
72
In addition, European Directive 2001/18/EC was implemented in Italy by Legislative 
Decree No. 224 of 2003.17 Along with the existing required standards and evaluations for 
conducting experiments with GMOs, this Decree mandated the prior assessment of, among 
other activities, 
 
a) the abandonment or replacement of crops that, owing to the impact of GMOs, have 
become no longer appropriate or economically convenient, particularly regarding 
local varieties; 
b) damage to the image of local products and/or the release area and the costs involved 
to defend the image; 
c) a change of market patterns caused by products originating in the release area due to 
the impossibility of purchasing GMO-free products, or other commercial impacts; 
d) modifications of the landscape with negative impacts on agro-tourism activities; and 
e) abandonment or marginalization of the release area caused by the impairment of 
agricultural practices in the area that have become less profitable owing to GMO 
impacts.18 
 
Decree-Law No. 279 of 2004,19 which was amended and enacted as legislation by Law 
No. 5 of 2005,20 provided for equality between different types of agriculture but imposed on 
the regions and autonomous provinces a “plan of coexistence” to prevent the commingling of 
GMO products and non-GMO products. Before its conversion into law in 2005, Decree-Law 
No. 279 was declared partially unconstitutional with regard to the coexistence of crops and 
the jurisdiction of the Italian regions (see the analysis of this decision in Part VIII, below). As 
a consequence, the twenty regions (political-administrative divisions) of the country are now 
free to determine their own policies concerning the coexistence of GMO and non-GMO 
agriculture, but to conform with European regulations they may not prohibit GMO crops 
altogether. Currently, thirteen of the regions have issued provisions imposing de facto 
restrictions on the cultivation of GMOs in their territories. 
In sum, GMO cultivation in Italy is taking place at an experimental level only. At the 
same time, most of the fodder used on Italian farms is produced from genetically modified 
soy and corn imported from the United States, Canada, and Latin America. 
 
 
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing 
 
L.D. No. 224 of 2003 provided that information about GMOs must be made available to 
the general public on a transparent and continuous basis,21 with some exceptions related to the 
confidentiality of the concerned information.22 L.D. No. 70 of 200523 established a three-year 
moratorium on including GMOs in foods or feeds in a ratio greater than 0.5% of the non-
GMO content.24 In addition, L.D. No. 224 of 2003 mandated that companies authorized to 
release GMOs engage in post-release monitoring and research activities,25 and created a 
digital public registry to inventory the localization of authorized GMOs released around the 
country.26 Finally, L.D. No. 224 of 2003 established a procedure for the exchange of 
information on GMOs with the European Commission and other EU member states.27 
These statutory authorities are complemented by Presidential Decree No. 433 of 2001,28 
which contains provisions related to data protection relevant for GMO cultivation.29 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
73
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment 
 
L.D. No. 124 of June 25, 201030 (L.D. No. 124) sets forth mandatory criteria concerning 
the release of GMOs into the stream of commerce; that is, notification, environmental impact 
assessment, and public consultation requirements.31 L.D. No. 124 charges the Ministry of 
Agricultural, Food, and Forestry Policies with the main responsibility for determining 
national policies on agriculture, food security, and forests.32 L.D. No. 124 also permits the 
release of materials into the food chain that will cause the multiplication of fruit plants 
designed to contribute to genetic diversity.33 In addition, L.D. No. 124 provides that labeling 
for GM fruit plants must clearly indicate that the variety has been genetically modified and 
must specify the organism that has been genetically modified.34 Moreover, L.D. No. 124, 
which does not apply to the transportation of GMOs over railroads, streets, internal navigable 
waters, or by sea or air,35 creates an interministerial commission charged with reviewing 
GMO authorizations.36 
Complementing L.D. No. 124, Presidential Decree No. 433 of 2001 provides that no 
additives may be released without the previous appropriate authorizations,37 and that such 
authorizations must include the pertinent permits issued by EU authorities.38 
 
 
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs 
 
L.D. No. 224 of 2003,39 (L.D. No. 224) which does not apply to GM substances and 
medicinal preparations for human use, reinforces compliance with labeling and packaging 
requirements for GMOs that have been authorized for marketing and distribution.40 L.D. No. 
224 authorizes the Ministries of the Environment, of Health, and of Agricultural, Food, and 
Forestry Policies to limit or temporarily suspend the commercialization of GMOs based on 
new scientific information concerning risks to humans, animals, or the environment.41 
Complementing L.D. No. 224, Presidential Decree No. 433 of 2001 includes other norms 
related to the labeling, packaging, and commercial distribution of GMO additives,42 and 
regulates their monitoring and control.43 
 
 
VII. Liability Regime and Criminal Penalties 
 
The civil liability regime for damages arising from GMO-related activities in Italy is that 
set forth in the Civil Code, and therefore reflects the negligence-based liability structure that 
applies to torts.44 
In particular, L.D. No. 224 contains provisions for damage to human health and the 
environment, 
environmental 
remediation 
and 
restoration, 
and 
compensation 
for 
environmental damage. L.D. No. 224 specifically provides that anyone who by an act or 
omission, in violation of L.D. No. 224, causes damage to water, soil, subsoil, or other 
environmental resources that leads to a real and present danger of environmental pollution 
must, at their own expense, implement measures for safety and for the remediation and 
environmental restoration of the polluted areas.45 
In turn, L.D. No. 70 of 200546 establishes penalties for those who, without the proper 
government authorizations, commercially distribute a GMO designed for human nutrition or a 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
74
food that contains or has been produced with GMOs. Those who fail to take the appropriate 
measures to monitor the performance of the GMO, or who do not inform the authorities about 
ensuing developments affecting the security of the GMO, are also subject to penalties.47 
L.D. No. 70 of 2005 also provides additional penalties for those who release GMOs into 
the market without complying with labeling requirements, or who release food that contains a 
higher concentration of GMOs than that authorized by law or the authorities.48 Furthermore, 
penalties are imposed on those who release GMOs designed as animal food or feed without 
complying with the Law’s specified authorizations and labeling requirements.49 
 
 
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases 
 
Perhaps the most important judicial decision concerning GMOs in Italy is that issued by 
the Constitutional Court in 200650 on the constitutionality of Decree-Law No. 279 of 2004. 
The Court partially annulled this Decree-Law based on procedural irregularities in the 
legislative process that led to its enactment, and considered its powers as an encroachment by 
the national government on the powers of the regions. Furthermore, the Court held that the 
executive branch did not hold “consultation and wide debate” prior to adopting the measure 
as required by the Constitution. In addition, the Court considered arguments concerning the 
alleged irreversibility of the potential damage posited by the admixture of GMO products and 
non-GMO products. The effect of this decision was to allow for a decentralization of the 
national government’s policy-making powers concerning GMOs and an increase in regional 
power. The practical result has been a lack of uniform national policies concerning GMOs in 
Italy. 
 
 
JAPAN 
 
Sayuri Umeda 
Foreign Law Specialist 
 
 
Summary  
 
Japan enacted the Cartagena Act in 2003 to implement the Cartagena Protocol on 
Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity. The Act classifies genetically 
modified organisms (GMOs) according to two types of uses: use with containment 
measures and use in open space. Both uses are regulated by the Act, but the latter use is 
the more regulated of the two. 
Although it is legal to plant genetically modified (GM) crops in Japan if certain 
procedures are followed, no commercial planting of GM crops (aside from ornamental 
flowers) is occurring in Japan at this time, mainly because the general public is skeptical 
about the safety of GM crops. Nevertheless, Japan is one of largest importers of GMO 
foods, though labeling is required if GM crops are used in food in certain cases. 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
75
I. Introduction 
 
Japan enacted the Act on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Biological Diversity 
Through Regulations on the Use of Genetically Modified Organisms (Cartagena Act) in 
2003.1 This Act aims to ensure the precise and smooth implementation of the Cartagena 
Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity (Cartagena Protocol).2 A 
person who follows the procedures under the Act and, if necessary, obtains approval from the 
government is permitted to create, import, or use a genetically modified organism (GMO). 
However, because of the general public’s negative views on GMOs, genetically modified 
(GM) crops are not commercially planted in Japan (see Part II, below). Some prefectures have 
enacted ordinances that place restrictions on planting GM crops within their jurisdictions (see 
Part III, below). The only exception is the blue rose, which was genetically engineered by a 
Japanese company together with an Australian company, and is allowed to be planted and 
sold in Japan.3 
Despite the public’s disapproval of GMOs, the government has conducted safety tests 
and approved 238 foods and food additives that are derived from GMOs.4 Japan has become 
one of the world’s biggest GM crop importers.5 
 
 
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion 
 
The general public’s skepticism about the safety of GM crops and foods has found 
expression in a number of social forums. In a written request to the government regarding the 
“promotion of knowledge based on science among Japanese people,” the Japanese Society of 
Plant Physiologists, in conjunction with other organizations, provided an analysis of why 
consumers persist in their negative views on GM crops.6 There are many blog sites and 
websites of private groups that post negative information on GMOs and warn of the dangers 
of using them.7 In some quarters there is suspicion that the government is hiding information 
on GMOs,8 and newspapers sometimes publish articles that introduce negative views on 
GMOs.9 
 
 
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation 
 
As stated in Part I, the Cartagena Act implements the Cartagena Protocol. Domestic food 
laws regulate the safety of GM food crops (see Part VI, below). Additionally, the 
Pharmaceutical Affairs Act regulates the assessment of pharmaceuticals that use GMOs. 
GMOs are defined in the laws and regulations in slightly different ways, depending on 
the purpose of the laws and regulations. The definition of a GMO under the Cartagena Act is 
as follows: 
 
(2) In this Act, “living modified organism” shall mean an organism that possesses 
nucleic acid, or a replicated product thereof, obtained through use of the any of the 
following technologies. 
(i) Those technologies, as stipulated by the ordinance of the competent ministries, for 
the processing of nucleic acid extracellularly. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
76
(ii) Those technologies, as stipulated by the ordinance of the competent ministries, 
for fusing of the cells of organisms belonging to different taxonomical families.10 
 
The Act obligates the government to adopt general measures (known as “Basic Matters”) 
that are designed to prevent adverse effects caused by the use of GMOs and ensure their 
proper use.11 The government established these Basic Matters in the form of an ordinance in 
2003.12 
In addition to national legislation, there are local ordinances that regulate GM crops. 
Eleven prefectures and three municipalities have enacted ordinances or issued guidelines for 
restrictions on the planting of genetically modified crops within their jurisdictions that go 
beyond the restrictions established in the Cartagena Act.13 Local residents’ groups concerned 
about the safety of GM crops have demanded that such ordinances be passed by their local 
governments.14 
Although it is legal to grow government-approved GM crops commercially so long as 
procedures under the Act and local ordinances are followed, no GM crops (aside from 
ornamental flowers) are commercially grown in Japan at this time.15 
 
 
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing 
 
The intended use of GMOs dictates the level of restrictions imposed on them under the 
Cartagena Act. Uses undertaken with the intention of preventing “the dispersal of GMOs into 
the air, water or soil outside facilities, equipment or other structures” that can prevent such 
dispersal of GMOs are classified as Type 2 uses and are subject to fewer restrictions.16 Type 2 
uses may include research activities in a laboratory.  
For Type 2 uses, the government ministries with jurisdiction over the use of GMOs might 
issue ordinances that establish containment measures for the GMOs during their use. The 
nature of the use dictates which ministry has jurisdiction. When such ordinances have been 
issued, the users must implement any containment measures during the period of use.17 Thus 
far, two such ordinances have been issued, one that establishes containment measures for 
industrial use,18 and one that pertains to the research and development of GMOs.19 The 
following examples illustrate which government entities are in charge of Type 2 uses: 
 
Improvements to crops conducted within facilities, 
development of live vaccines for animals, etc. 
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries (MAFF) 
Viruses for gene therapy, etc. 
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare 
(MHLW) 
Uses in the experiments of gene recombination in 
University, etc. 
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, 
Science and Technology (MEXT) 
Uses in the process of production of industrial 
enzymes, etc. 
Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry 
(METI) 
Yeast used in the production of alcoholic 
beverages, etc. 
National Tax Agency 
Source: MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT (MOE), BIOSAFETY REGULATIONS IN JAPAN 5 
(2010), http://www. bch.biodic.go.jp/english/cartagena/images/e cartagena.pdf. 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
77
If an intended use does not fall within the purview of an existing ordinance, the user must 
draft containment measures and obtain confirmation, in advance, from the competent 
minister.20 
In order to make sure that the containment measures are properly followed, the Basic 
Matters obligate Type 2 users of GMOs to endeavor to set up a committee to consider the safe 
handling of the GMOs in their place of use, according to the characteristics and mode of their 
use, so that measures for the prevention of adverse effects on biological diversity are 
appropriately carried out.21 
If an accident occurs and the Type 2 user cannot take containment measures, the user 
must immediately take emergency measures and promptly notify the competent minister 
about the accident and outline the measures taken. The competent minister may then order the 
user to take emergency measures if they have not as yet been taken.22 
 
 
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment 
 
The use of a GMO in a field or other open space (Type 1 use) is approved only when the 
competent minister decides the GMO will not cause any adverse effects on biological 
diversity. The competent ministries (depending on the purpose and use of GMOs) and the 
Ministry of the Environment (MOE) jointly manage Type 1 use cases. The MOE is in charge 
of Type 1 use in all fields because it has the responsibility of deciding whether the uses in an 
open system will affect biological diversity or not. A Type 1 use applicant must submit a 
biological diversity risk assessment report that evaluates the extent that the GMO may affect 
biological diversity.23 If there is a native species that could be affected, the evaluation 
examines the possible effects and to what extent the species will be affected. In the case of 
crops, the possibilities of the GMO’s competition with native wild species, hybridization with 
native wild species, and production of harmful substances are examined.24 
A person who wishes to create, import, or use GMOs for Type 1 use must devise a Type 
1 Use Rule—that is, draft rules for the use of each type of GMO—and obtain the approval of 
the competent minister. However, if the GMO is designated by the competent minister as an 
organism that clearly causes no adverse effect on biological diversity through Type 1 use, the 
user is not required to draft rules of use.25 The competent minister must approve the 
applicant’s Type 1 Use Rule if the minister determines, after consultation with experts, that 
there would be no unacceptable risks to the preservation of species or populations of wild 
fauna or flora, or any other adverse effect on biological diversity.26 
In order to appropriately carry out measures for the prevention of adverse effects on 
biological diversity, the Type 1 user, like the Type 2 user, must endeavor to set up a 
committee to consider the safe handling of the GMOs in their place of use, according to the 
characteristics and mode of their use.27 
If a person engages in a Type 1 use without a proper Type 1 Use Rule, the competent 
minister may order the person to take steps to recall the GMOs or take other necessary 
measures to prevent adverse effects on biological diversity.28 If an accident occurs and the 
Type 1 user cannot comply with the Type 1 Use Rule, and an adverse effect on biological 
diversity could arise, the user must immediately take emergency measures to prevent such an 
adverse effect. The user must also promptly notify the competent minister of the accident and 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
78
outline the measures taken. The competent minister may then order the user to take additional 
emergency measures, if necessary.29 
When there is a high likelihood that unapproved GMOs have been inadvertently 
imported, in view of the situation of the producing area or other circumstances, an importer 
must notify the competent minister to that effect on each occasion.30 The competent minister 
may then order the importer to have these organisms tested by a registered inspector.31 
The Cartagena Act obligates the government to collect, arrange, and analyze information 
on GMOs, as well as research the effects of their use on biological diversity.32 The Ministry 
of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries (MAFF) has annually monitored the spread of escaped 
imported GM seeds (canola and soy) and their contamination of domestic plants around major 
shipping ports and roads nearby. In the most recent report (2012), GM canola and soy were 
observed around the ports, but no contamination of domestic plants was found.33 
 
 
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs  
 
A. Safety 
The safety evaluation standards and production standards of new GM crops to be used for 
food or food additives are under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Health, Labour and 
Welfare (MHLW). The relevant standards are stipulated in MHLW circulars and notifications 
based on the Food Sanitation Law.34 Once the MHLW receives an application for the use of a 
GMO food, the Food Safety Commission (FSC) evaluates the safety of the GM food in terms 
of human health based on the Food Safety Basic Law.35 The Expert Committee on 
Genetically Modified Foods within the FSC conducts safety assessments based on the 
following standards and policies:36 
 
1) Standards for the Safety Assessment of Genetically Modified Foods (Seed Plants); 
2) Policies Regarding the Safety Assessment of Stacked Varieties of Genetically 
Modified Plants 
3) Standards for the Safety Assessment of Food Additives Produced Using Genetically 
Modified Microorganisms 
4) Policies Regarding the Safety Assessment of Highly Purified Nonprotein Food 
Additives, Including Amino Acids Produced Using Genetically Modified 
Microorganisms 
 
According to the Food Sanitation Law, “[i]n order to prevent distribution of GM foods 
that have not been assessed in Japan, food products are analyzed at quarantines.”37 The Food 
Sanitation Law obligates importers of foods, food additives, “apparatuses,” or 
containers/packages for sale or for use in business to notify the Minister of Health, Labour, 
and Welfare on each occasion.38 When such notification is submitted, the food sanitation 
inspector at the quarantine station inspects the product to examine whether the item meets the 
regulations under the Food Sanitation Law.39 
The MAFF is responsible for approving new GM crops for feed use in order to keep 
livestock safe. The safety test is conducted in accordance with the Act on Feed Safety and 
Improvement of Quality.40 The safety of food derived from livestock that are fed GM crops is 
examined by the FSC.41 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
79
B. Labeling 
As a part of the legal safety assessment system under the Food Sanitation Law, there is a 
labeling system for GM foods and two corresponding laws that include provisions on 
labeling: the Japanese Agricultural Standards Law (JAS Law)42 and the Food Sanitation 
Law.43 The two labeling systems are almost the same, and only one label is required.44 Eight 
crops/vegetables/fruits (soy, corn, potato, canola, cotton seed, alfalfa, beet, and papaya) and 
thirty-three processed foods45 that include more than 5% of these eight foods in weight are 
subject to labeling.46 The 5% tolerance applies only to GM varieties that have been approved 
in Japan. A summary of the labeling system follows.47 
 
1. Mandatory Labeling 
GM products whose compositions or nutritional values are the same as their conventional 
counterparts, and processed food in which genetically modified DNA or proteins derived 
from the DNA can be detected even after processing of GM products, are subject to 
mandatory GM labeling. There are two types of cases: 
 
a) GM products that have been handled to preserve their identity by segregating them 
from non-GM products (“IP handling”) 
b) Products for which IP handling has not been conducted (e.g., in the case of voluntary 
labeling, discussed below, soybeans are labeled “GM Ingredients,” “GM Ingredients 
Not Segregated,” or “Non-GM”)48 
 
In addition, food items that are considerably different in composition or nutritional value 
from their conventional counterparts and the processed foods made from them, which require 
labeling (e.g., soybeans with high oleic acid, labeled “soybeans (High Oleic Acid/GMO),” 
and corn with a high lysine content)49 
 
2. Voluntary Labeling 
Food in which genetically modified DNA or proteins derived from such DNA cannot be 
detected after processing, such as oil and soy sources, are not subject to mandatory GM 
labeling and can be labeled as not containing GM products. In addition, products certified as 
being free of GM products through IP handling can be labeled as not containing GM 
products.50 
 
3. Prohibited Labeling 
Agricultural products that have no variety developed by recombinant DNA techniques, 
and foods processed from such products, cannot have a term on their labels that suggests they 
are nonGM.51 The reason is that if such labeling were allowed, consumers might think that 
GM versions of such products exist in Japan and that they are thus buying a non-GM version. 
In such cases, it is possible to add a description about the product to prevent 
misunderstandings. For example, it is permissible to add a description to a bag of rice, next to 
the legally required labeling, stating that “[a]t present, there is no GM rice on the market.”52 
 
 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
80
VII. Liability Regime 
 
There is no special civil liability regime in relation to the development, use, or release of 
GMOs. The Cartagena Act provides administrative and criminal sanctions against violators of 
the Act. 
 
 
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases 
 
There was a case in 2005 in which farmers in a city sued a research institution that owned 
lands in the same city to stop the experimental planting of genetically modified rice outside a 
building on that land. The institution was planting rice, in conformity with Cartagena Act 
regulations, that is supposed to create a protein to kill a rice pathogen. The plaintiffs claimed 
that a pathogen that is immune to the protein may be created and thereby endanger humans 
and the environment. However, the courts held that the plaintiffs had not successfully proved 
their claims and dismissed the case.53 
 
 
LEBANON 
 
Issam M. Saliba 
Senior Foreign Law Specialist 
 
 
Summary  
 
Although Lebanon ratified the Convention on Biological Diversity in 1994 and the 
Cartagena Protocol in 2008, it has not yet adopted policies dealing with genetically 
modified organisms. While there are some existing laws that are indirectly relevant to this 
subject matter it is fair to say that no comprehensive legal regime on this issue exists at 
this time. 
 
 
I. Introduction 
 
Lebanon is a small country but has a lot of biodiversity due to its geography, which 
includes mountains, plains, and seashores, with at least three different climates. However, 
Lebanon appears to have not yet adopted any policies or legislation, either restrictive or 
permissive, on genetically modified organisms (GMOs), despite having ratified the 
Convention on Biological Diversity by Law No. 360 of 19941 and the Cartagena Protocol on 
Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity by Law No. 31 of 2008.2 
 
 
 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
81
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion 
 
The public in Lebanon has apparently not been seriously engaged on issues of national 
biosafety. When the Ministry of Environment collaborated with the United Nations 
Development Program (UNDP) on a project for the development of a National Biosafety 
Framework for Lebanon in 2004/2005 they conducted, as stated in the final report on the 
project, 
awareness-raising 
activities 
in 
universities, 
government 
agencies, 
and 
nongovernmental organizations in order to ensure public participation.3 However, no 
information is available regarding public views on the development or use of GMOs. 
There has also not been much discussion of the subject matter in scholarly literature 
produced in Lebanon. A search for such materials located reference to one recent paper, 
which was prepared by a professor of the faculty of Agricultural Sciences at the Lebanese 
University and presented at the Conference on Biosecurity and Biosafety Strategy in Case of 
Biological, Chemical or Nuclear Crisis held in Beirut from January 22 to 26, 2013.4 
A similar paper by the same author was included in a 2010 report prepared in conjunction 
with a Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) regional project entitled “Strengthening 
capacities towards the establishment of a regional platform for the detection of genetically 
modified organisms.” In this paper the author confirms that “there is no official policy or 
strategy for biotechnology in Lebanon”5 and identifies the main gaps affecting the 
development of genetic engineering as follows: 
 
• 
The absence of a national strategy addressing the use of biotechnology in the 
agricultural sector. 
• 
The lack of cooperation between academia, research, industry and government. 
• 
The absence of biosafety legislations. 
• 
The absence of appropriate infrastructure (glasshouses and others) to pursue the 
studies on GM plants after the first laboratory tests vis-à-vis transgenes. 
• 
The deficiency of human skills specialized in genetic engineering. 
• 
The lack of funds.6 
 
 
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation 
 
As mentioned above, Lebanon has not yet adopted a comprehensive national policy on 
GMOs. However, there are laws that may be indirectly related to the subject matter. For 
example, the National Biosafety Framework report identifies the following legislative 
instruments as relevant to biosafety:7 
 
• 
Ordinance No. 3044 of 1925, which authorizes control of insects and diseases 
affecting plants; 
• 
Decree No. 4396 of 1939, which provides for the compulsory fight against insects 
and diseases affecting citrus fruits; 
• 
A law dated June 10, 1948 and Ministerial Ordinance No. 283/1 of 1998 related to 
agricultural quarantine; and 
• 
Ministerial Ordinance No. 18/1 of 1997 concerning the vaccination of imported live 
animals. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
82
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing 
 
There are apparently not yet any specific restrictions on the research, production, or 
marketing of food, feed, or medicines containing GMOs. A presentation about Lebanon at the 
1st International Workshop on Harmonisation of GMO Detection and Analysis in MENA 
Region, held in Jordan on June 4 and 5, 2012, asserted that “[p]resently there is no laws or 
decrees against the consumption of food or feed containing GMOs or the use of medicines 
containing GMOs.”8 
 
 
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment 
 
As mentioned above, it does not appear that Lebanon has specific legislative instruments 
related to the releasing of GMOs into the environment. However, the Environmental 
Protection Law No. 444 of 2002 has provisions that may be relied upon to order such 
restrictions. For example, chapter 8 of that Law requires the protection of biodiversity, nature 
and genetic heritage from any influencing activity.9 
 
 
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuff 
 
The only restriction located on GMOs in foodstuff is provided for in paragraph 4 of 
article 14 of the Law on Plant Quarantine and Phytosanitary Measures No. 778 of 2006.10 
This instrument prohibits the importation of genetically modified plants or their derivative 
products if such modifications endanger or cause damage to humans, animals, or plants. 
 
 
VII. Liability Regime 
 
Lebanon does not have a special liability regime to compensate for damages caused by 
GMOs. Any such damages are to be addressed through tort law as contained in the 
Obligations and Contracts Code, articles 121 to 139.11 
 
 
VIII. Judicial Decisions 
 
No relevant judicial decisions were located in the limited number of court reports 
available as a part of the Lebanese collection at the Law Library of Congress. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
83
MEXICO 
 
Gustavo Guerra 
Senior Foreign Law Specialist 
 
 
Summary  
 
Mexico’s Law on Biosecurity of Genetically Modified Organisms (GMO Law) is the 
main federal statute pertaining to these organisms. It provides rules on research 
concerning, and the release, commercialization, exportation, and importation of, GMOs, 
and is aimed at preventing, avoiding, or reducing the risks that these activities may cause 
to human health, the environment, biological diversity, or the health of plants and 
animals. It also provides that the policy pertaining to biosecurity of GMOs is to ensure 
that these organisms are released, commercialized, exported, and imported with an 
adequate level of safety. Approval of GMOs for human consumption requires a study of 
the possible risks that consumption of the GMO may present for human health. Prior to 
their release, GMOs must be subject to risk studies and successful approval of 
experimental releases. Authorization for release may be denied if it is determined that the 
risks posed by a GMO may negatively affect human health; biological diversity; or the 
health of animal, plants, or water organisms by causing them grave or irreversible harm. 
The GMO Law provides that violations of its provisions or its regulations are punishable 
with civil penalties. Mexico’s Federal Criminal Code provides that an individual who, in 
contravention of applicable law, commercializes, transports, stores, or releases into the 
environment a GMO that negatively alters or may alter the components, structure, or 
functioning of natural ecosystems is punishable with imprisonment of one to nine years 
and a fine. 
 
 
I. Introduction 
 
Mexico’s Law on Biosecurity of Genetically Modified Organisms (GMO Law) provides 
rules on research concerning, and the release, commercialization, exportation, and 
importation of, Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs), and is aimed at preventing, 
avoiding, or reducing the risks that these activities may cause to human health, the 
environment, biological diversity, or the health of plants and animals.1 
Furthermore, the GMO Law provides that the purpose of, and the policy pertaining to, 
biosecurity of GMOs, is to ensure that these organisms are released, commercialized, 
exported, and imported with an adequate level of safety, which requires an evaluation of risks 
prior to their release and oversight of their effects after release.2 Mexico’s Department of 
Health has approved approximately 130 GMOs for human consumption.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
84
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion 
 
A. Public Opinion 
While reliable public opinion data on GMOs in Mexico were not located, the fact that 
some Mexicans have expressed concern with respect to some aspects of GMOs can be 
inferred from a “Frequently Asked Questions” section on the website of Mexico’s 
Commission on Biosecurity of GMOs.4 A number of these questions, including the following, 
reflect concern about issues related to GMOs: 
 
• 
Whether national producers have support from the government in order to compete 
with transnational companies, and whether these companies are the sole beneficiaries 
from GMOs in Mexico.5 
• 
Whether GMOs will adversely affect human and animal health, as well as the 
genetics of native crops.6 
• 
Whether Mexico’s environmental authorities are taking measures to prevent GMOs 
from damaging the environment.7 
 
B. Scholarly Opinion 
The Mexican Academy of Science (MAS) has published a number of studies that explain 
technical aspects and the generally positive effects of GMOs and biotechnology.8 For 
example, one of the studies published by MAS argues that GMOs currently utilized as 
foodstuffs have been subject to several evaluations that have proved that they do not harm 
human health.9 Studies conducted by the MAS reportedly were instrumental in the approval 
and enactment of the GMO Law.10 Conversely, the Mexican organization Semillas de Vida 
(Seeds of Life) has produced studies criticizing GMOs in Mexico.11 
 
 
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation 
 
The GMO Law is the main federal statute pertaining to these organisms. It provides rules 
on research, releases into the environment, commercialization, exportation, and importation 
of GMOs, and is concerned with preventing, avoiding, or reducing the risks that these 
activities may cause to human health, the environment, biological diversity, or the health of 
plants and animals.12 It provides that one of the principles that guides the policy pertaining to 
biosecurity of GMOs is to ensure that these organisms are released, commercialized, 
exported, and imported with an adequate level of protection for human health, biodiversity 
and the environment, which requires an evaluation of risks prior to their release.13 
The GMO Law defines GMOs as any living organism (except human beings) that has 
acquired a novel genetic combination generated through the use of modern biotechnology 
techniques, so long as such techniques are recognized by the GMO Law or its regulations.14 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
85
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing 
 
A. General 
The GMO Law provides that protection of human health, the environment, and biological 
diversity requires the control of possible risks derived from activities related to GMOs 
through an evaluation of such risks prior to their release.15 
The Mexican government has established a National Network of Laboratories for the 
Detection, Identification and Quantification of GMOs.16 This network conducts research on 
GMOs in order to provide Mexican authorities with technical information necessary to 
determine whether these organisms pose risks to Mexico’s biosecurity.17 
 
B. Labeling Requirements for Distributed Products 
Labels of genetically modified seeds or plants for agricultural production must indicate 
that these products are GMOs, and must describe their genetically acquired characteristics, 
special requirements for their cultivation, and changes in reproductive capabilities.18 
 
 
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment 
 
The GMO Law provides that the purpose of, and the policy pertaining to, biosecurity of 
GMOs are to ensure that these organisms are released with an adequate level of safety.19 Prior 
to their release, GMOs must be subject to risk studies and successful approval of 
experimental releases.20 The basic steps to be followed in the study and evaluation of risks 
include the following: 
 
• 
Identification of new characteristics of a particular GMO that may put biological 
diversity at risk 
• 
Evaluation of the consequences if potential risks materialize 
• 
An estimate of the potential global risk that the GMO poses, based on the evaluation 
of the probability that the possible risks and identified consequences may occur 
• 
A conclusion indicating whether or not the possible risks are acceptable or 
manageable, including strategies to handle those risks21 
 
Risk analysis is conducted primarily by Mexico’s Departments of Environment and 
Agriculture.22 Authorization for the release of a GMO may be denied if these agencies 
determine that the risks posed may negatively affect human health or biological diversity, or 
cause grave or irreversible harm to the health of animals, plants, or water organisms.23 In 
order to ensure compliance with the GMO Law, the Mexican government has the authority to 
conduct inspections as deemed necessary.24 
The Mexican government also has the authority to take a number of measures in order to 
manage the accidental release of unauthorized or prohibited GMOs, including the following: 
 
• 
Temporary closure of places and/or facilities where the organisms are stored or 
processed 
• 
Precautionary seizure of GMOs and the property, vehicles, utensils, and instruments 
directly related to the unauthorized release 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
86
• 
Repatriation of GMOs to their country of origin 
• 
Destruction of GMOs25 
 
 
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs 
 
An application for approval of GMOs for human consumption (which includes fodder for 
livestock where such livestock may be consumed by human beings) requires a study of the 
possible risks that consumption of the GMO may represent for human health.26 Such a study 
must include scientific and technical information pertaining to the harmlessness of the 
GMO.27 The application and study must be presented to Mexico’s Department of Health 
(DOH) (Secretaría de Salud) for its analysis and review.28 If the review finds no evidence of 
risks to human health, the GMO may be approved by the DOH for commercialization and 
importation.29 
GMOs or products that contain GMOs authorized for human consumption by Mexico’s 
Department of Health must display on their labels information on their nutritional value and 
ingredients, in those cases where these characteristics are significantly different from 
conventional products.30 This information must be objective, clear, useful for the consumer, 
and based on scientific and technical information.31 
 
VII. Liability Regime 
 
The GMO Law provides that violations of its provisions or its regulations are punishable 
with the following civil penalties: 
 
• 
Temporary or permanent closure of the facilities where the infraction took place if 
the violation causes possible risks or adverse effects to human health; biological 
diversity; or the health of animals, plants, or aquatic organisms 
• 
Seizure of instruments, organisms, or other products obtained as a direct result of the 
violation 
• 
Suspension or revocation of permits and authorizations granted by the government  
• 
Arrest of up to thirty-six hours 
• 
Fines32 
 
In addition, the GMO Law provides that any person who causes damage to third parties 
as a result of the illegal uses of GMOs may be held responsible and forced to repair the 
damage under federal tort law.33 Furthermore, Mexico’s Federal Criminal Code provides that 
an individual who, in contravention of applicable law, commercializes, transports, stores, or 
releases into the environment a GMO that negatively alters or may alter the components, 
structure, or the functioning of natural ecosystems is punishable with imprisonment of one to 
nine years and a fine.34 
 
 
 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
87
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases 
 
In October 2013, a federal judge in Mexico City issued a preliminary injunction whereby 
Mexico’s Departments of Agriculture and Environment were ordered to temporarily stop 
authorizations for releasing any genetically modified species of corn.35 This measure was 
ordered in legal proceedings derived from a lawsuit filed earlier in the year by a group of 
activists who want to stop the proliferation of transgenic corn in Mexico on health and 
environmental grounds.36 In December 2013, this lawsuit was reportedly dismissed on a 
number of grounds, including lack of standing of the plaintiffs.37 News reports indicate that 
the plaintiffs have appealed the dismissal.38 
 
 
NETHERLANDS 
 
Wendy Zeldin 
Senior Legal Research Analyst* 
 
 
Summary  
 
Although the Netherlands was the first European Union Member State to have legal 
coexistence guidelines on genetically engineered (GE) crops, commercial production of 
genetically modified (GM) crops has not yet taken place there, and there are no GE 
livestock. While the government and the agriculture sector take a pragmatic approach 
toward the import and use of GM products, public opinion is divided as to whether GM 
foods pose health risks, and the complex regulatory environment and effective pressure 
from environmental groups have worked to hamper the commercial manufacture of 
genetically modified organisms (GMOs). 
Activities involving GMOs are for research purposes in laboratories or field trials, 
and are tightly regulated, in particular through EU Directives made applicable in the 
Netherlands. The Ministry of Infrastructure and Environment oversees the GMO-related 
activities in the Netherlands; its Bureau for Genetically Modified Organisms carries out 
licensing. Prior risk assessment and subsequent monitoring and reporting are necessary 
for all GMO-related activities. Criminal penalties and administrative sanctions may be 
applied to violations of licensing requirements. 
The Netherlands Food and Consumer Product Safety Authority and the Institute of 
Food Safety are responsible for determining the safety of GMO food and feed, 
respectively. Labeling of pre-packaged food products for sale in the Netherlands requires 
conformity with the Food Labeling (Commodities Act) Decree and the relevant EU 
Regulation on food and feed. Contained-use license holders must ensure, if making 
GMOs available to another party, that the GMO packaging label or the document 
accompanying the GMOs clearly indicates the presence of GMOs. 
 
 
I. Introduction 
 
Commercial production of genetically modified (GM) crops has not yet occurred in the 
Netherlands.1 According to a report on biotechnology in the Netherlands issued by the US 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
88
Department of Agriculture (USDA) in June 2013, “there are no genetically engineered (GE) 
crops under development that will be on the market in the next five years.”2 However, the 
Netherlands does import large quantities of GE crops and derived products.3 It also transships 
such imported crops and products to other European Union (EU) countries, or exports them to 
non-EU countries, using the requisite documentation and labeling required under EU law.4 
Because cultivation of GE crops is not permitted, GE seed is not imported.5 Additionally, 
because GE products for consumers must be labeled, imported quantities of the products are 
small.6 The main imported GE crops and derived products are soybeans from Brazil and the 
United States and soybean meal from Brazil and Argentina.7 In accordance with EU 
legislation, the Netherlands has a Low Level Presence policy for unapproved GE varieties in 
feed.8 According to the USDA report, “the Dutch livestock sector depends on feed imports 
from third countries [that consist] mainly of GE soybean meal. The livestock sector does not 
include any GE animals nor do Dutch agricultural research institutes have them for research 
purposes.”9 
 
 
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion 
 
The Dutch government and parliament view GM crop varieties as “a very important field 
of development for the economy and civil society at large.”10 While the government and the 
agricultural sector have been characterized as taking a pragmatic approach towards the import 
and use of GE agricultural products, because of “cumbersome regulations” and the specter of 
protests from environmental groups, crop trials and the cultivation of biotech crops for 
commercial purposes are viewed as being effectively blocked.11 There are other 
considerations as well. According to a 2008 report published by the Commission on Genetic 
Modification (Commissie Genetische Modificatie, COGEM), an independent scientific 
advisory committee12 on the environmental and economic impact of GM crops on Dutch 
agriculture,13 “given the small area of land used for agriculture in the Netherlands, the GM 
crops currently available are not particularly attractive for Dutch farming,” and properties 
added thus far “offer few advantages to [a Dutch farmer of arable land].”14 
Awareness of GM foods and of animal cloning is relatively high in the Netherlands; it 
was reported in 2010 that some 93% of the Dutch public had heard of the GM foods and 87% 
were aware of animal cloning.15 Public opinion is divided as to whether GM foods are good 
for people, with 43% of persons surveyed of the view that such foods are not good, 44% 
disagreeing with that view, and 13% not sure.16 Although the majority of respondents 
believed that GMO foods were not safe for future generations, a higher proportion of the 
Dutch (34%) compared to other Europeans held that the products would be safe.17 On the 
whole, in the view of one study, the Dutch general public’s perceptions on conventional crop 
and food safety “are grounded more in culture and tradition than in scientific safety testing.”18 
Among political parties, it appears that the Party for the Animals has recently been active 
against the use of GMOs. In January 2013, it put forward a proposal to make Amsterdam a 
GMO-free zone.19 Some of the other organizations and institutions active on GMO issues 
(chiefly against GMOs) in the Netherlands are Gentech-NL – ASEED (which called for a 
march against MonsantoS on October 30, 2013);20 Milieudefensie (Friends of the Earth 
Netherlands); Greenpeace Netherlands; Nederlands Platform Genetechnologie; De 
Gentechvrije Burgers; GoedeWaar.nl; and Burgers voor gentechvrij voedsel.21 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
89
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation  
 
A. Definition of GMOs 
Under the Decree on Genetically Modified Organisms in the Environment (hereinafter 
GMO Decree),22 “genetically modified organisms” (genetisch gemodificeerde organismen) 
are defined as organisms, with the exception of human beings, in which the genetic material 
has been altered in a way that is not possible in nature through mating or through natural 
recombination.23 Genetic material is defined as DNA and RNA; genetic modification, as the 
alteration of genetic material in a way that is not possible in nature through reproduction or 
recombination; and organisms, as microorganisms and other biological entities with the 
capacity for multiplication or transmission of genetic material.24 
 
B. Regulation of GMOs 
GMOs in the Netherlands are regulated at the international, European Union, national, 
and local levels. The Netherlands is a party to the Convention on Biological Diversity,25 the 
Cartagena (Biosafety) Protocol,26 and the Aarhus Convention on Access to Information, 
Public Participation in Decision-Making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters.27 
The Netherlands signed The Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on Liability and 
Redress to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety on March 7, 2011.28 
In the case of EU regulation, Directive 90/219/EEC on the contained use of GM 
microorganisms as amended by Directive 98/81/EC (the Contained Use Directive)29 and 
Directive 2001/18 on the deliberate release of GMOs into the environment (the Deliberate 
Release Directive)30 have been implemented in Dutch law by the GMO Decree. Other key EU 
legislation includes Directive 2009/41/EC on the framework for laboratory experiments using 
GM microorganisms,31 Regulation EC No. 178/2002 on general principles and requirements 
of food law and procedures for food safety,32 Regulation EC No. 258/97 on novel foods and 
novel food ingredients,33 Regulation EC No. 1829/2003 on GM food and feed,34 and 
Regulation EC No. 1830/2003 on the traceability and labeling of GMOs and traceability of 
GMO derived food products.35 Regulation 1946/2003 applies to transboundary movements of 
GMOs.36 
The basic purpose of current Dutch legislation on GMOs is to implement European 
Union directives on the subject, which seek to balance the promotion of scientific progress 
with protection of the environment and consumer safety. This is mainly accomplished in the 
GMO Decree. The overarching national law on which the GMO Decree is based is the 
Environmentally Hazardous Substances Act.37 In addition to the GMO Decree, key items of 
legislation implementing the EU law in the Netherlands are the Regulation on GMOs,38 the 
Environmental Management Act,39 the Food and Commodities Act,40 and the Decree on 
Novel Foods.41 
At the local level, cities and provinces have taken action against GMOs. For example, on 
January 26, 2011, Friesland Province became the first GMO-free region in the Netherlands, 
and in July of that year the Community Council of Nijmegen declared the city to be GMO-
free.42 
 
 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
90
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing  
 
A. Licenses and Risk Assessments 
Prior risk assessment and authorization is required in order to engage in activities 
involving GMOs. The Dutch Environment Management Act provides that anyone who by 
virtue of his profession manufactures a substance, preparation, or genetically modified 
organism; imports it into or administers, prepares, processes, or makes it available to others in 
the Netherlands; and who knows or reasonably could have guessed that by his actions the 
substance, preparation, or organism may pose a threat to human health or the environment, 
must take all measures that can reasonably be demanded of him to avoid or reduce the risks as 
far as possible.43 Under Dutch law, as part of the permit process for such activities, COGEM 
is responsible for assessing the risks they might pose to health and the environment44 and 
reporting its findings to the Minister of Infrastructure and the Environment.45 
GMOs are classified into three groups under Dutch law. Group I comprises GM 
microorganisms that meet the rules for GMO classification laid down by the Minister of 
Infrastructure and Environment, as well as such microorganisms manufactured using 
organisms and vectors not designated as suitable for the production of Group I organisms but 
that, upon application to the Minister, are found to meet the classification criteria. Group II is 
other GM microorganisms, and Group III is GMOs other than microorganisms.46 
The GMO Decree requires that a license be obtained for the genetic modification of 
plants and microorganisms.47 The Decree allows for various types of licenses, which may be 
roughly divided into the three categories of contained use, market introduction, and other 
purposes such as field trials.48 In general, the GMO permit is to include the following 
information: the purpose of the genetic modification; the name of the host(s), vector(s), and 
insert(s); the safety level; and the exact place of the work.49 The specific kinds of information 
required for each type of permit are set forth in Annex 4 of the GMO Decree. 
The Bureau for Genetically Modified Organisms (Bureau Genetisch Gemodificeerde 
Organismen, or Bureau GGO), on behalf of the Ministry of Infrastructure and the 
Environment, handles the granting of licenses (vergunningverlening) to work with GMOs.50 
The government maintains a database of licenses that have been granted as well as those that 
are pending. In addition, the database website includes information from 2008 on the 
locations of field trials in the Netherlands and the registration of GM crops.51 
 
B. Contained Use (Ingeperkt Gebruik) 
Anyone who intends to engage in the contained use of GMOs must conduct an analysis 
beforehand of possible risks to humans or the environment and keep available a summary 
report for the Minister of Infrastructure and the Environment, and for the authority that has 
jurisdiction over the establishment where the activities in question take place.52 It is 
prohibited to carry out contained use of GMOs without a permit issued in response to an 
application for a license.53 
For purposes of standard laboratory research or manufacturing involving procedures on a 
small scale (generally up to ten liters of culture fluid per unit), a Group I Class A permit is 
required.54 
Class A covers laboratories, animal housing, storage rooms, or greenhouses intended for 
(1) genetic modification of organisms or (2) education, research, development or the non-
industrialpurpose reproduction, storage, use, possession, transport, disposal, or destruction of 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
91
GMOs.55 Group I Class A permit holders must prepare a report before June 1 every year on 
the previous year’s activities and keep it for five years, at the disposal of the Minister.56 There 
is also a Group I Class B permit, for “other operations” involving Group I organisms.57 Such 
permits might involve procedures on a large scale (use of more than ten liters)58 or work not 
covered by small-scale or large-scale operations.59 
All work carried out under a contained use license is to be monitored by a Biological 
Safety Officer (Biologische-veiligheidsfunctionaris, BVF). The BVF must be authorized by 
the State Secretary of Infrastructure and the Environment.60 The license holder charges the 
BVF with such tasks as drafting and modifying detailed internal procedures and rules for the 
safe handling of GMOs, and conducting internal monitoring of compliance with the relevant 
legal provisions as well as those procedures and rules.61 
 
 
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment  
 
A. Conditions for Deliberate Release into the Environment 
For activities involving the release of GMOs into the environment, adherence to 
procedures set forth under EU Directive 2001/18/EC (the Deliberate Release Directive) is 
required.62 An application for a license to place GMOs on the market must contain, among 
other material, information required by the Directive, an environmental risk assessment, the 
desired duration of the license, and a monitoring plan.63 In general, a marketing license is 
granted for up to ten years.64 An application for a permit for deliberate release of GMOs into 
the environment for other purposes (e.g., for field trials) must include information needed to 
carry out an environmental risk assessment, in accordance with Annex III of the Directive as 
well as the environmental risk assessment itself.65 
It is prohibited without a license to produce GMOs to use, hold, or be made available to 
another party, to introduce or discard them in the Netherlands, or to transport GMOs that are 
not microorganisms.66 Exceptions to this ban include, for example, GMOs for contained 
use;67 the transport of GMOs, other than microorganisms, for other purposes in accordance 
with ministerial rules;68 operations for other purposes involving medicinal substances and 
preparations for human use that consist of or contain GMOs, if certain conditions are met;69 
GMOs as or in products or marketed products, or insofar as they meet certain conditions;70 
GMOs as or in marketed products if the competent authority of another Member State has 
provided for their market placement or otherwise been granted prior written permission;71 and 
traces of a GMO in products marketed and intended for direct use as food or feed, or for 
processing.72 
Material derived from GMOs for which a permit or written permission has been granted 
by a competent authority of another EU Member state is prohibited from placement on the 
market unless a license or written consent has been granted for such a purpose.73 
Violation of the GMO Decree’s licensing requirements is deemed a criminal offense in 
conformity with article 1a of the Dutch Act on Economic Offenses, with maximum penalties 
ranging from imprisonment for six years for intentional acts and fines up to €78,000 
(approximately US$106,018).74 The Minister for Infrastructure and the Environment may also 
apply certain “standard” administrative sanctions, such as revocation of the license.75 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
92
B. Reporting and Transparency 
Licensees are responsible for providing various types of reports. Before a licensee begins 
work, he or she should provide a description of the proposed work (Beschrijving van 
Voorgenomen Werkzaamheden) for the coming year.76 The report must be approved, with 
written confirmation, by the Bureau GGO.77 As was noted above in connection with 
contained use licensees, at the end of the work year, a report of work performed (Verslag van 
Verrichte Werkzaamheden) must be submitted.78 Once a field trial is terminated, a final report 
must be prepared, in conformity with the fixed format required by the European 
Commission.79 
If the applicant or the holder of a license for placing GMOs on the market or for other 
purposes becomes aware of new information on the risks that the GMO or the operations 
involving it may pose to humans or the environment, or if there is a modification or 
unintended change in the deliberate release of GMOs into the environment, the person must 
immediately notify the Minister of Infrastructure and the Environment, take any measures 
needed to protect humans and the environment from the risks, and revise the relevant 
information in the authorization application and submit it to the Minister.80 If a significant 
potential risk is involved, the Minister must publicize the new information,81 as is also 
required if the Minister becomes aware of the release without a license of GMOs into the 
environment.82 
An authorization that has been obtained for GMO-related activities also applies when 
there is a change in the location of those activities, if the change does not lead to different or 
greater risks to humans or the environment than those posed by the licensed activities.83 
Among other conditions for granting such authorization, the Minister of Infrastructure and the 
Environment, in concert with the Minister of Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries, 
must state in writing to the licensee that the proposed change meets the necessary criteria and 
there is no reason to amend the license.84 The Minister of Infrastructure and Environment is to 
issue a notice, containing all the key relevant information, in one or more daily newspapers, 
or at least the Government Gazette (Staatscourant).85 
 
C. Monitoring 
All work carried out under a permit for GMO release into the environment must be 
monitored by an Environmental Safety Officer (Milieuveiligheidsfunctionaris), who must be 
authorized by the Minister of Infrastructure and the Environment.86 In conformity with the 
GMO Decree, a register of the location of GMOs must be maintained.87 
 
D. Coexistence 
The Netherlands was the first country in the EU to have legal coexistence guidelines, the 
stakeholders having reached a consensus in 2005.88 In agriculture, coexistence “refers to the 
possibility of cultivating GM crops alongside conventional and organic farming without one 
excluding the other.”89 On July 13, 2010, the European Commission decided on new rules for 
coexistence that now permit Member States to enforce their own conception of the term.90 In 
the past, the Member States could only arrange for gene technology-free zones on the basis of 
voluntary agreements; under the new rules, they can prohibit the cultivation of certain GM 
plants.91 Previously, a Member State’s mandatory measures were required to be “appropriate” 
to maintain the admixture of GMOs in conventional crops under the EU-wide threshold value 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
93
of 0.9%. With the adoption of the new guidelines, “national cultivation regulations can be so 
constructed to prevent much lower GMO proportions.”92 
 
 
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs  
 
A. Regulatory Agencies and Risk Assessments 
EC Regulations 1829/2003 on GM food and feed, 1830/2003 on the traceability and 
labeling of GMOs, and 1946/2003 on the transboundary movement of GMOs set rules at the 
EU level for the use of GMOs in foodstuffs. The European Food Safety Agency (EFSA) is 
responsible for providing “objective scientific advice on all matters with a direct or indirect 
impact on food and feed safety in the EU,”93 and it has issued guidance documents for risk 
assessment of GM plants and derived food and feed.94 The Ministry of Health, Welfare and 
Sports and the Ministry of Economic Affairs, Agriculture and Innovation are responsible for 
the implementation of Directives 1829/2003 and 1830/2004 in the Netherlands. 
In addition, Regulation 882/200495 provides for institutes within EU Member States to 
serve as National Reference Laboratories for purposes of GMO analysis. In the Netherlands, 
there are two Routine Field Laboratories that conduct GMO sample analysis for the 
government: the Netherlands Food and Consumer Product Safety Authority (Nederlandse 
Voedsel-en Warenautoriteit, NVWA) for food, and the Institute of Food Safety (RIKILT) for 
feed.96 The NVWA is “an independent agency in the Ministry of Economic Affairs and a 
delivery agency for the Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport.”97 The NVWA’ s Office for 
Risk Assessment “identifies early warning signs of troubling aspects of innovations in GM 
agriculture, screens potential threats to human and animal health, evaluates public 
perceptions, and commissions necessary research.”98 The Office is said to have become the 
“front office” for GMO regulation, even though it “confines its duties to weighing the risks 
and benefits of a particular GM crop and does not engage in policy enactment, decision 
making, or food law enforcement.”99 
 
B. Labeling 
In general, labeling of prepackaged food products for sale in the Netherlands requires 
conformity with the Food Labeling (Commodities Act) Decree (Warenwetbesluit Etikettering 
van levensmiddelen). It is obligatory under the Decree to provide, among other information, 
the product name; the net quantity; the minimum best-before date or latest consumption date; 
and information on the manufacturer, packager, or seller.100 If a foodstuff product makes any 
claims as to its nutritional value, benefit to health, or medical advantages, the producer must 
comply with certain rules that differ according to the claim and the product.101 The Decree on 
Novel Foods (Warenwetbesluit Nieuwe Voedingsmiddelen)102 may also apply to GMOs. 
For GM foods, Dutch labeling requirements are also based on articles 12–13 of EU 
Regulation 1829/2003. The requirements are applicable to foods that are “to be delivered as 
such to the final consumer or mass caterers” and that contain or consist of GMOs or that are 
“produced from or contain ingredients produced from GMOs.”103 They are not applicable to 
foods with material that “contains, consists of or is produced from GMOs in a proportion no 
higher than 0,9 per cent of the food ingredients considered individually or food consisting of a 
single ingredient, provided that this presence is adventitious or technically unavoidable.”104 In 
addition, the labeling must mention any characteristic or property where (a) a food differs 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
94
from its conventional counterpart in terms of its composition, nutritional value or effects, 
intended use, or health implications for certain population groups, and/or (b) ethical or 
religious concerns may arise from the food.105 For those foods that lack a conventional 
counterpart, the labeling must contain appropriate information about their nature and 
characteristics.106 There are also labeling requirements for contained-use license holders that 
make GMOs available to another party.107 According to a USDA report, “since the 
Netherlands follows EU legislation, standard U.S. labels fail to comply with Netherlands 
labeling requirements.”108 
The Decree on Novel Foods states that the reference “made without genetic engineering” 
is used only for food or drink that (1) does not consist of or is not derived from GMOs; (2) is 
not prepared with the aid of substances that consist of or are derived from GMOs or produced 
using technical processing aids derived from GMOs; and (3) is not derived from animals that 
are fed with GM feed or feed with GM additives; produced using modern biotechnology, with 
certain exceptions; or that contain traces of GM DNA, except when unintentional and 
unavoidable.109 
It may be noted that new EU food labeling rules will generally apply from December 13, 
2014, but with some requirements to apply from January 1, 2014, or December 13, 2016.110 
The new EU Regulation 1169/2011111 will repeal Directive 2000/13/EC,112 article 3 of which 
sets forth general requirements for the labeling of foodstuffs.113 
 
VII. Liability Regime 
The Netherlands apparently has no special regime for liability or compensation for 
damage in connection with GMO crops.114 Under Dutch law, there is a distinction between 
strict liability and fault-based liability for wrong acts.115 Strict liability falls into the two main 
categories of strict liability for unlawful acts of other individuals and strict liability for 
defective objects and substances, with possibility two relevant sources: vicarious liability 
(Civil Code art. 6:170, on tortious acts by employees) and strict liability for hazardous 
substances (Civil Code art. 6:175).116 The Civil Code covers fault-based liability in article 
6:162.117 
To establish a causal link between alleged damage and the presence of a GM crop, Dutch 
law is said to rely on a two-stage test: the condition sine qua non (“but for”) test, whereby the 
GMO’s presence is a necessary condition for the existence of the damage, and the imputation 
test.118 This test is based on the Civil Code, Book 6, article 98, which states that compensation 
can only be claimed insofar as the damage related to the event creating liability can be 
imputed to the debtor as a result of the event.119 Dutch case law had further developed the 
imputation test to include the requirement of “reasonable imputability” now codified in article 
98.120 
 
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases  
No key judicial decisions or prominent cases were found. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
95
NEW ZEALAND 
 
Kelly Buchanan 
Chief, Foreign, Comparative, and International Law Division I 
 
 
Summary  
 
The importation, development, testing, and release of genetically modified 
organisms are strictly regulated in New Zealand. Such activities must be approved by the 
Environmental Protection Authority, which is required to take into account various 
factors related to the potential risks and benefits of the proposal. These include 
environmental, economic, social, cultural, and public health considerations. Public 
notification of applications is generally required under the legislation. 
Genetic modification techniques have been approved for use in research involving 
both plants and animals. These projects are subject to various controls and are conducted 
in contained research facilities. The relevant legislation provides for inspections to be 
conducted as well as including other enforcement powers. Criminal and civil penalties 
may be applied in relation to breaches of the legislation, and offenders may be ordered to 
mitigate or remedy any adverse effect on people or the environment. 
There are currently no genetically modified commercial crops in New Zealand, and 
no fresh produce or meat sold that has been genetically modified. Imported food and 
ingredients derived from GMOs must be approved by a food safety authority and those 
that are approved for use must be clearly labeled on food packaging. 
The development and use of GMOs is a topic that has generated considerable debate 
and controversy in New Zealand. The current regulatory approach is largely based on the 
findings and recommendations of the Royal Commission on Genetic Modification that 
were released in 2001. The government’s decision to proceed cautiously with allowing 
for genetic modification was met with public demonstrations and there continue to be 
challenges to various proposals and calls for New Zealand to be “GM free.” 
 
 
I. Introduction 
 
According to the United States Department of Agriculture, New Zealand “maintains one 
of the most comprehensive and rigorous approval regimes for genetically modified organisms 
in the world.”1 Genetic modification techniques have been approved for use in specific field 
research in contained outdoor environments, for example in relation to pest control, 
pharmaceutical research, and the enhancement of the production capacity of crops and 
animals.2 However, there have not yet been any applications for the release of resulting 
products. An imported, genetically engineered equine influenza vaccination is currently the 
only product containing live modified organisms that has been approved for use in the 
country.3 There are no genetically modified commercial crops being grown in New Zealand at 
this time, and no fresh produce or meat sold that is genetically modified.4 Processed food 
containing imported, genetically modified ingredients are assessed for safety and must 
comply with labeling requirements.5 
The importation, development, field testing, and release of “new organisms,” including 
genetically modified organisms (GMOs), are regulated by the Hazardous Substances and New 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
96
Organisms Act 1996 (HSNO Act).6 Various aspects of the HSNO Act relating to GMOs were 
incorporated through amending legislation that was passed in 2003, including provisions 
relating to the conditional release of new organisms, a civil liability and pecuniary penalties 
regime, as well as a requirement to establish an advisory committee to inform decision 
makers about matters of concern to the Māori people.7 The amendments resulted from the 
government’s response8 to the report of a Royal Commission on Genetic Modification, which 
was established in 2000 and completed its report in July 2001.9 The major conclusion of the 
Royal Commission was that New Zealand should proceed cautiously with genetic 
modification, but not completely “close the door” to it.10 
Although there is also some discussion in the country about the potential impact of the 
strict controls on GMOs on scientific and economic development,11 “there have been no 
official changes to the heavily regulated and cautious policy settings operated by the New 
Zealand Government in relation to products derived from biotechnology.”12 
 
 
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion 
 
More than 10,000 written submissions from organizations and members of the public 
were received as part of the Royal Commission process in the early 2000s.13 During the 
process, a two-year moratorium on applications to release GMOs was in effect.14 The 
moratorium expired on October 29, 2003, when the HSNO Act amendments relating to 
GMOs came into force.15 Protesters held marches and rallies against the lifting of the 
moratorium, while the biotechnology industry and farmers welcomed the move.16 
The Royal Commission recommended the establishment of a Bioethics Council to 
“provide advice and promote ongoing dialogue among New Zealanders” regarding the 
cultural, ethical, and spiritual aspects of biotechnology.17 This body began work in 2002 and 
was disestablished in March 2009.18 
There remains a relatively high level of controversy in New Zealand relating to the 
development and use of GMOs in the context of crops and farm animals.19 The debate 
includes public opinion and political stances regarding the economic benefits20 of genetic 
engineering as opposed to those gained from protecting New Zealand’s “clean, green 
image,”21 as well as questions about the environmental risks from genetic modification, the 
impact on human health, and consideration of spiritual and cultural values, particularly the 
perspectives of Māori.22 As a result of this discussion, and the regulatory approaches that 
have been developed in an attempt to address and balance the various concerns and interests, 
there is a large amount of information and analysis available on the subject of genetic 
modification, ethics, and the law in New Zealand.23 This includes information produced by 
governmental bodies, academics, and NGOs, as well as reporting and commentary in the 
media. 
 
 
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation 
 
Matters related to the regulation of GMOs are governed by national legislation. There has 
recently been controversy regarding the ability for local authorities to impose a more 
restrictive approach on the release of GMOs under their official planning documents, which 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
97
are developed under the rules set out in the Resource Management Act 1991 (RMA).24 The 
RMA is currently under review and the government has stated that it may seek to amend the 
legislation to clarify that such authorities cannot establish their own rules regarding GMOs.25 
As with the RMA, which is New Zealand’s core environmental legislation, the 
preliminary provisions in the HSNO Act are of central importance in its interpretation and 
application. Section 4 states that the purpose of the legislation is “to protect the environment, 
and the health and safety of people and communities, by preventing or managing the adverse 
effects of hazardous substances and new organisms.”26 
Other preliminary provisions set out key principles and relevant matters that must be 
taken into account in the exercise of decision-making functions under the Act. The wording 
of these provisions reflects the various societal interests and concerns associated with new 
and genetically modified organisms, and requires a detailed assessment of risks and benefits. 
For example, “the maintenance and enhancement of the capacity of people and communities 
to provide for their own economic, social, and cultural well-being and for the reasonably 
foreseeable needs of future generations” is a matter that must be taken into account in 
achieving the purpose of the Act.27 Section 6 of the Act lists several other considerations, 
including sustainability; “the intrinsic value of ecosystems”; public health; the relationship of 
Maori with their ancestral lands, water, valued flora and fauna, etc.; and the economic costs 
and benefits of a particular new organism.28 In addition, the legislation states that “[a]ll 
persons exercising powers and functions under this Act shall take into account the principles 
of the Treaty of Waitangi (Te Tiriti o Waitangi).”29 
Furthermore, section 7 of the Act explicitly requires persons exercising functions and 
powers under the Act to take a precautionary approach, stating that they must “take into 
account the need for caution in managing adverse effects where there is scientific and 
technical uncertainty about those effects.”30 Different parts of the Act regarding application 
and approval procedures for the importation, development in containment, field testing, and 
release of GMOs contain additional considerations relating to the potential risks, costs, and 
benefits of the activity. 
The HSNO Act is administered by the Ministry for the Environment, while the 
Environmental Protection Authority (EPA) is responsible for implementing the provisions 
relating to the application and assessment process for new organisms.31 The Ministry for 
Primary Industries has a range of responsibilities related to HSNO Act enforcement and 
compliance as well as food safety regulations.32 
Apart from the HSNO Act and associated regulatory instruments, other legislation that 
relates to the control of genetically modified organisms includes the following:33 
 
• 
The Biosecurity Act 1993,34 which provides for the exclusion, eradication and 
management of pests and other unwanted organisms in New Zealand, and includes 
provisions relating to import and border controls and various powers of relevance to 
the release of GMOs.35 In addition to the inspection and clearance procedures in this 
law, relevant provisions on importation36 are also contained in the Imports and 
Exports (Living Modified Organisms) Prohibition Order 2005.37 
• 
The Australia New Zealand Food Safety Code38 (applicable in New Zealand under 
the Food Act 198139), which requires that any food that is genetically modified or 
contains genetically modified material must be approved by Food Standards 
Australia New Zealand40 and be clearly labeled. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
98
• 
The Animal Welfare Act 1999,41 which regulates the use of animals in research and 
testing, requires that every project be approved and monitored by an animal ethics 
committee and only be conducted by organizations that follow an approved ethical 
code of conduct.42 
• 
The Agricultural Compounds and Veterinary Medicines Act 199743 and Medicines 
Act 1981,44 which also contain restrictions relevant to the importation, manufacture, 
sale, and use of medicines and compounds containing genetically modified 
organisms. 
 
 
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing 
 
Section 25 of the HSNO Act states that no new organism shall be imported, developed, 
field tested, or released unless approval is granted under the Act. Section 27 sets out the types 
of approval that may be granted by the EPA, including for the import for release or release 
from containment of any new organism, and for the import of any new organism into 
containment, or to field test or develop any new organism in containment. 
Section 39 allows the EPA to approve the importation, development, or field testing of 
any new organism in containment. Applications for such approval must cover a number of 
matters, including providing information on “all the possible adverse effects of the organism 
on the environment.”45 In making determinations on applications to develop or field test 
genetically modified organisms in containment, in addition to the considerations discussed 
above, the EPA must take into account any adverse effects on “human health and safety” and 
“the environment, in particular ecosystems and their constituent parts,” as well as alternative 
methods for achieving the research objective and “any effects resulting from the transfer of 
any genetic elements to other organisms in or around the site of the development or field 
test.”46 
Procedures relating to notification and public submissions apply to applications to import, 
field test, or release of GMOs, and public hearings may be held on an application.47 However, 
a rapid assessment process is available for research activities in indoor containment that are 
considered to be low risk. This process can be delegated to a lower-level body and does not 
involve public notification of the application.48 
 
 
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment 
 
Any approval to develop or field test new organisms must include controls that address 
particular matters set out in Schedule 3 of the HSNO Act,49 including facility and access 
requirements aimed at limiting the likelihood of any accidental release, monitoring and 
phytosanitary requirements, eradication plans for escaped organisms, and inspection and 
monitoring of facilities.50 In addition, an approval must include controls to ensure that the 
genetically modified organism and any heritable material is removed or destroyed at the end 
of the development or field test.51 Part 7 of the HSNO Act contains detailed provisions 
relating to inspections and other enforcement powers with respect to activities involving the 
importation, development, field testing, or release of new organisms. 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
99
Applications can be made for approval to release new organisms (either from 
containment or through importation).52 The HSNO Act lists minimum standards that allow 
the EPA to decline such an application where the new organism is likely to 
 
a) cause any significant displacement of any native species within its natural habitat; or 
b) cause any significant deterioration of natural habitats; or 
c) cause any significant adverse effects on human health and safety; or 
d) cause any significant adverse effect to New Zealand’s inherent genetic diversity; or 
e) cause disease, be parasitic, or become a vector for human, animal, or plant disease, 
unless the purpose of that importation or release is to import or release an organism 
to cause disease, be a parasite, or a vector for disease.53 
 
In addition, the EPA must take into account “the ability of the organism to establish an 
undesirable self-sustaining population” and the ease with which the organism could be 
eradicated if such a population was established.54 
As a result of the 2003 changes to the HSNO Act, the EPA may grant approval for 
“conditional release” with controls.55 The various controls that can apply to any approval 
include controlling the “extent or purposes for which organisms could be used”; imposing 
requirements for monitoring, record-keeping, and reporting; “requiring contingency plans to 
be developed to manage potential incidents”; limiting the proximity of the organism to other 
organisms; and imposing obligations on those that hold approvals, such as compliance with 
relevant codes of practice or standards and requiring certain levels of training or knowledge.56 
 
 
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs 
 
New Zealand currently imports more than fifty varieties of genetically modified food 
ingredients, including ingredients derived from GM crops such as corn and soybeans.57 In 
order to be sold in the country, each GM food or ingredient must be evaluated by Food 
Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) and determined to be safe for consumption, then 
approved by the FSANZ Board and by all Australian and New Zealand ministers responsible 
for food regulation.58 A particular standard, Standard 1.5.2 – Food Produced Using Gene 
Technology,59 which is part of the Australian New Zealand Food Standards Code,60 contains 
the regulations for food containing GMOs and lists the ingredients that have been given 
approval. 
Standard 1.5.2 also contains rules relating to the labeling of foods, ingredients, additives, 
or processing aids that contain novel DNA or protein, or where genetic modification has 
resulted in an altered characteristic in the food. These labeling requirements have been in 
place since 2001. Such products or ingredients must be labeled with the words “genetically 
modified” either next to the name of the food or in the ingredient list.61 Labeling is not 
required where “there is no more than 1% (per ingredient) of an approved GM food 
unintentionally present as an ingredient or processing aid in a non-GM food.”62 The 
requirements do not apply to food prepared in restaurants.63 
Animal feed containing genetically modified ingredients is not subject to the same 
labeling requirements, and meat and dairy products from animals fed such feed also does not 
need to be labeled under the food regulations.64 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
100 
VII. Liability Regime 
 
Various criminal offenses are set out in section 109 of the HSNO Act, including, in 
contravention of the Act, developing or field testing a new organism; knowingly importing or 
releasing a new organism; knowingly, recklessly, or negligently possessing or disposing of a 
new organism illegally imported, manufactured, developed, or released; failing to comply 
with any controls imposed by any approval granted under the Act; and failing to report any 
new information of any adverse effect of a new organism.65 The penalties for such offenses 
are set out in section 114 and include fines ranging from up to NZ$5,000 (about US$4,100) to 
up to NZ$500,000 (about US$414,000), depending on the offense. The court can also order a 
person to mitigate or remedy any adverse effect on people or the environment or pay the costs 
of doing so and may order the destruction of any new organism.66 
The Act specifies that some of the offenses listed in section 109 are strict-liability 
offenses where it is not necessary to prove that the defendant intended to commit the 
offense.67 However, several defenses are available. 
Part 7A of the HSNO Act, which was inserted by the 2003 amendments, provides for 
pecuniary penalty orders and civil liability for breaches relating to new organisms. Pecuniary 
penalty orders may be granted by the High Court where it is satisfied that the person 
 
a) developed, field tested, imported, or released a new organism in breach of this Act; 
or 
b) possessed or disposed of any new organism imported, developed, or released in 
breach of this Act; or 
c) failed to comply with any controls relating to a new organism— 
I. 
imposed by any approval granted under this Act; or 
II. 
specified in regulations made under this Act.68 
 
The standard of proof that applies under this part is that which applies in civil 
proceedings. Under the Act, an individual may be ordered to pay a pecuniary penalty of up to 
NZ$500,000, while a company may be required to pay up to NZ$10 million (about US$8.3 
million). Alternatively, a company may be ordered to pay three times the commercial gain 
resulting from the contravention, or 10% of the company’s turnover. The court can take 
various considerations into account in determining the level of the penalty.69 It can also order 
that a person mitigate the adverse effects on people or the environment.70 
The Act also provides that a person is liable in damages for any loss or damage caused by 
an act or omission while, for example, developing, field testing, importing, or releasing a new 
organism in breach of the Act. Liability may be incurred regardless of whether a person 
intended the act, omission, or breach, or was taking reasonable care. Civil proceedings for 
damages are in addition to any other action.71 A defendant can prove one or more listed 
defenses in order to avoid liability under these provisions.72 
 
 
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases 
 
Since the completion of the Royal Commission process, there have been various 
controversies relating to the development and potential release of genetically modified 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
101 
organisms. For example, there has been public debate and legal proceedings related to 
research involving farm animals,73 including in 2009–2010 in relation to approvals granted 
for trials involving putting synthetic human genes into goats, sheep, and cows to see if they 
would produce human proteins in their milk.74 
In terms of plants and other organisms, during the mid-2000s, authorities investigated the 
importation and possible planting of certain seeds (particularly maize and corn) that 
potentially contained genetically modified material.75 Other incidents that have generated 
some controversy have involved containment breaches. For example, in March 2013 it was 
reported that a genetically modified fungus had been discovered outside containment facilities 
at a university.76 Some groups raised concerns, but government authorities investigating the 
incident indicated that it presented very low biological risks.77 There have also been reports of 
various activities by anti-GM protestors. For example, genetically modified pine trees that 
had been contained at a research center were destroyed by protesters in 2012.78 
Most recently, an environmental group has initiated court proceedings seeking to 
overturn an exemption from HSNO Act rules that was granted to a research institute in 
relation to a new DNA manipulation technique. The case will be heard by the High Court in 
November 2013.79 
 
 
NORWAY 
 
Elin Hofverberg 
Foreign Law Research Consultant 
 
 
Summary  
 
Norway is one of the most restrictive importers of GM products and does not 
produce GMOs. As Norway is only part of the European Economic Area and not a full 
European Union Member it is not bound by EU Directives but generally implements EU 
Directives nonetheless. There are several EU-approved GMOs that are specifically illegal 
in Norway. Following a recent regime shift in Norway it is yet unclear whether Norway’s 
position on GMOs might change. 
 
 
I. Introduction 
 
Norway is one of the most restrictive countries with regard to the importation of 
genetically modified organisms (GMOs) and does not allow for GMO production. It has yet 
to approve an application for the import of foodstuffs that include GMOs.1 Norway applies 
the precautionary principle2 when vetting GMOs and in addition requires any user or importer 
of a GMO to show that the use is ethically and socially justifiable, requiring proof both that 
the GMO is not harmful and that its use will benefit society.3 
The industry that is most concerned by GMOs is the fishing industry, and salmon 
producers in particular. Yet, four fisheries have been exempted from applying for a license for 
genetically modified (GM) fodder, which was not subject to the application process until a 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
102 
more strict application process also made EU-approved GMOs subject to application in 
2005.4 
 
 
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion 
 
The public is generally very averse to GMOs and Norwegians are considered, together 
with the Swiss, the most GMO skeptical in Europe.5 
 
 
A. Government Position 
Norway had a change in government following the September 9, 2013, elections. On 
October 16, 2013, Høyre and Fremskrittpartiet formed a government with Erna Solberg from 
Høyre as the prime minister. Høyre has been regarded as holding the most GMO-friendly 
position of all the political parties in Norway, in particular, by advocating for more research 
on GMOs.6 It is too soon to tell whether this will affect Norway’s GMO policy. 
 
B. Position of the Opposition 
The current opposition parties—Arbeiderpartiet, Sosialistisk Venstreparti, and 
Senterpartiet— were in government between October 2005 and October 2013.7 During this 
time no GMO was approved for food consumption. 
 
C. Scholarly Opinion 
Some scholars argue that it is better to genetically modify a plant than to use pesticides,8 
especially as high volumes of pesticides have been proven to cause cancer.9 Yet, the 
Norwegian population at large is reluctant to change the laws, causing researchers to claim, 
“we cannot get [the research] financed, the farmers don’t want it and the consumers don’t 
want it.”10 Other GMO-related negative research that has received more traction includes a 
study on rats, which found that rats who eat GM corn are fatter than rats fed with normal 
corn.11 Another study in pigs showed that “GMO-fed” pigs were less healthy than pigs fed 
with non-GMO fodder.12 
 
D. Position of Industry 
Norwegian fishermen were critical of the US decision in 2010 to allow GM salmon.13 
Still, fisheries are unsatisfied with how Norway has handled the GMO issue previously, 
arguing that the fear of GMOs is not proportional to other risks connected to food and human 
health.14 
 
E. NGO Positions 
 
1. Norsk Landbrukssamvirke 
The Norwegian NGO Norsk Landbrukssamvirke, representing sixteen producers on the 
Norwegian food market, also favors the precautionary principle.15 
 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
103 
2. Norges Bygdekvinnelag 
Prior to the 2013 election there was a move by NGOs, including Norges Bygdekvinnelag 
(Norway’s Rural Women), a women’s association that advocates a strong rural community 
and local sourcing,16 to push the then Stoltenberg government to deny the new GM corn 
applications that Norway had received.17 
 
 
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation 
 
Norway is not part of the European Union but has a strong record of implementing 
legislation based on EU directives and regulations, including EU Regulation 1829/2003. It 
has, however, adopted a much stronger stance against GMOs than the European Union, 
specifically making imports of certain EU-approved GMOs illegal.18 
 
A. Genteknologiloven 
Norway has chosen to issue a stand-alone act for its GMO regulation. The Norwegian 
Gene Technology Act (Genteknologiloven),19 adopted in 1993, covers the following issues: 
contained use of GMOs (ch. 2), release of genetically modified organisms (ch. 3), and cloning 
(ch. 3a). 
The goal of the legislation is to ensure that all production and use of GMOs is ethically 
and socially justifiable, taking into account the goal of sustainable development without harm 
to health or the environment.20 By requiring that GMOs be both safe and contribute to the 
community, the legislation ensures that GMOs will face an uphill battle to enter the 
Norwegian market. 
 
B. Definition of GMO 
“Genetically modified organisms” are defined in section 4(b) of the Gene Technology 
Act as “organisms altered through the use of gene technology or cell technology 
[cellteknologi].”21 
 
C. National Food Act 
In addition to the Gene Technology Act, Norway also has a national Food Act 
(Matloven) regulating the use of GMOs in food.22 
 
D. Special Instructions/Ordinances 
Norway has also adopted six instructions on the topic of GMO use issued by the Ministry 
for the Environment (FOR 2000-12-15 1268, 2001-12-21 1600, 2001-12-21-1602, 2001-12-
21-1603, FOR 2005-09-02 1609) as well as a number of GMO regulations, which are listed 
on the Environment Agency website.23 These instructions focus on labeling, transportation, 
import, export, production, fodder use, and contained use of GMs, as well as impact reports 
and internal controls. 
Certain EU-approved GMO products are specifically illegal in Norway and cannot be 
given an import license.24 All other GMOs are subject to a case-by-case application process 
whereby the pertinent license is granted by either the Food Safety Authority or the 
government. 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
104 
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing  
 
A. Research 
The contained use of GMOs is regulated in FOR 2001-12-21-1600.25 For use in 
laboratories, the use as well as the laboratory itself must be approved prior to commencing the 
use.26 The relevant oversight agency is the Ministry of Health and Social Affairs unless 
otherwise specified. 
 
B. Labeling Requirements 
Products that include GMOs must be labeled unless the GMO content is less than 0.9%.27 
 
C. Relevant Agencies  
 
1. Bioteknologinemnda 
The Norwegian Biotechnology Advisory Board (Bioteknologinemnda)28 oversees the use 
of biotechnology in general and issues statements and gives advice on the use of 
biotechnology (including GMOs).29 The Norwegian Biotechnology Advisory Board is an 
independent body with members appointed by the Norwegian government.30 It includes 
biotechnology experts and representatives from affected industries. It currently has no 
outright political representatives.31 
In a recent communication with an applicant seeking to import GM soy, the board made a 
list of queries to the importer indicating that Norway is very restrictive towards GMOs and 
that approval of an application requires a showing of the effects of the import both short term 
(five years) and long term (twenty years).32 This is a showing that goes beyond that which the 
EU calls for, thus requiring applicants to make a separate application for Norway. 
The Board has published a report in English on how it conducts its interpretation of the 
Gene Technology Act.33 In June 2013, a majority of members of the Board argued that 
Norway generally ought to deny applications for the import of GM corn into Norway.34 The 
overarching reason was that there was no justifiable benefit to society associated with the 
import that would outweigh the potential risks.35 Thus, the Board relies heavily on the 
precautionary principle. 
Although the Board leaves the final decision to the government, which also consults the 
Norwegian Scientific Committee for Food Safety, the Food Safety Authority, the Norwegian 
Environment Agency, and the Ministry of the Environment, the Board’s position clearly 
reflects some reluctance with regard to GMOs. 
 
2. Norwegian Food Safety Authority 
The Norwegian Food Safety Authority36 is the inspection agency for both GM food and 
GM fodder (see Part VI(B)(1), below). 
 
3. Norwegian Scientific Committee for Food Safety 
According to its website, “[t]he Norwegian Scientific Committee for Food Safety 
(VKM)[37] carries out independent risk assessments for the Norwegian Food Safety Authority 
(Mattilsynet) across the Authority’s field of responsibility as well as environmental risk 
assessments of genetically modified organisms for the Norwegian Environment Agency.”38 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
105 
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment 
 
The release of organisms into the environment is regulated by the Gene Technology Act, 
which requires a permit and an impact analysis.39 
The Norwegian Directorate for Nature Management (part of the Norwegian Environment 
Agency) is responsible for the administrative aspects and coordination of applications for 
release of GMOs into the environment.40 
Prior approval is required for the transport of most GM material.41 Examples of GMOs 
that do not require approval for transport are genetically altered animals that do not have wild 
relatives with whom cross-fertilization may occur.42 Records must be kept of all transports of 
GMOs.43 The Norwegian Environment Agency should be informed and if the GMO is 
classified as a hazardous good the local fire department must also be informed.44 In addition 
the transporter of the GMO must ensure that all handling of the GMO is done without risks to 
health or the environment.45 
 
 
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs 
 
A. Assessment of Risks 
Because Norway adheres to the precautionary principle,46 the assessment of risk is central 
to the granting of GMO licenses in the country.47 The applicant for a GMO license must show 
that its intended use is consistent with the legal requirement, “ethically and socially 
justifiable, taking into account the goal of sustainable development without harm to health or 
the environment.”48 
 
B. The Role of the Norwegian Food Safety Authority 
Each application for a GMO license requires that an environmental impact report be sent 
to the Norwegian Food Safety Authority.49 The Food Safety Authority is the authority on both 
GMOs in foodstuffs and in fodder. In addition to the general Gene Technology Act, GMOs in 
food are also regulated by Lov 19 des 2003 nr 124 om matproduksjon og mattrygghet mv. 
(Matloven). So far the Food Safety Authority has not approved any use of GMO in fodder or 
food. It has, however, granted the fishing industry an exemption from GMO-related permit 
requirements (see Part VI(D), below). 
 
C. Fodder for Livestock 
Fodder for livestock is regulated under FOR 2002-11-07 nr 1290: Forskrift om fôrvarer 
(Regulation Relating to Fodder).50 GM fodder must be labeled and approved by the National 
Food Safety Authority.51 Currently, there is no fodder that has gained approval for use with 
livestock.52 
 
D. Fodder for Fish 
Although Norwegian salmon were not fed GM fodder when the rules for fodder changed 
in September of 2005, they may well be in the future.53 In 2008, the Fiskeri og 
Havsbruksnaeringens Landsforening (FNL) acknowledged it was becoming more difficult to 
find GMO-free fodder.54 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
106 
Prior to 2005 Norway had less stringent rules on the importation of EU-approved GMOs 
that were processed and used as fodder for fish; however, through recent legislation Norway 
no longer accepts these blanket imports, but instead requires permits for each GMO imported. 
Because some players on the fishing market may find it impossible to find GMO-free fodder 
Norway granted an exemption until 2008, which has now been extended into 2014.55 The 
exemption only applies to the need to apply for a permit, not to the requirement to label such 
imports. A list of the GM products (corn and soy) that the fisheries may use as of September 
15, 2013, is available on the Food Safety Authority website.56 
 
E. Labeling 
All products containing GMOs must be labeled “contains genetically modified 
[‘organisms’ or name of product]” in either Norwegian or English.57 The information should 
be stated on the packaging if the product is packaged, or in accompanying documentation if it 
is not.58 The information must be accompanied by information to the distributor, as well as 
information that identifies which GMOs it includes.59 For those products that it is impossible 
to adequately label as GM, directly or through supporting documentation, prior approval is 
needed.60 
 
F. Inspections 
Inspections of GMOs in plants are conducted by the Food Safety Authority.61 As of 2012 
there were few illegal GMOs reported in foodstuffs.62 However, a genetically modified 
aquarium fish, the so-called zebra fish (Danio Rerio), was found in Norway in 2012.63 
 
 
VII. Liability Regime 
 
Damages and liability for GMO are regulated in chapter 4, section 23 of the Gene 
Technology Act.64 A person (legal or physical) who releases a GMO is responsible for any 
damage, inconvenience, or loss that it may cause, regardless of his or her own culpability. In 
addition, violations of the Gene Technology Act may result in a fine or imprisonment for up 
to one year.65 
 
 
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases 
 
There are no prominent court cases in Norway on GMOs. In 2013 the Food Safety 
Authority discovered that GM corn was illegally imported and distributed as popcorn.66 The 
Food Safety Authority had previously stopped the sale of popcorn containing GMOs.67 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
107 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION 
 
Peter Roudik 
Director of Legal Research* 
 
 
Summary  
 
Cultivation of transgenic plants for commercial use is not allowed in the Russian 
Federation. However, several types of genetically modified (GM) food and feed lines that 
have passed the procedure of state registration and control are allowed to be imported, 
processed, and used for food or feed production. Research on genetically engineered 
animals is not supported by the government. Russia recently adopted an approval 
procedure for release of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) into the environment, 
which brings the country closer to possible cultivation of GM plants. Currently, eighteen 
GM food lines and fourteen GM feed lines are approved and registered in Russia. 
 
 
I. Introduction 
 
Recently, the Russian Federation initiated legislative attempts to frame the policy of 
modernization and innovation in the field of genetic engineering. The Comprehensive 
Program for Development of Biotechnology in the Russian Federation through 2020 was 
approved in 2012. This document acknowledges that Russia is falling behind of many other 
countries and demonstrates that the Russian Government is interested in promoting the further 
development of agricultural biotechnology.1 The government-approved Plan of Measures for 
the Development of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering2 proposes substantial measures 
that should be implemented within the next two or three years in biomedicine and industrial 
and agricultural biotechnology.3 
Neither the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, nor the Aarhus Convention on Access to 
Information, Public Participation in Decision-Making and Access to Justice in Environmental 
Matters have been ratified by Russia. However, after joining the WTO in 2012, Russia took 
some steps to develop a legislative framework for the cultivation of biotech crops and use of 
GMOs, including a procedure for the state registration of GMOs for release into the 
environment. In June 2012, the main Russian authority responsible for the state control over 
genetically engineered foods, Rospotrebnadzor, expressed its intention to promote a positive 
image of GMO products in Russian society.4 
On November 19, 2006, the Russian Federation and the United States signed an exchange 
letter on agricultural biotechnology during the course of the bilateral negotiations on Russia’s 
Accession to the WTO. According to the letter, Russia agreed to maintain an approval and 
registration system for products of modern biotechnology used for cultivation, food, feed, 
processing, and import, which will enable the use and trade of such products within the WTO 
framework. The letter also provided that Russia must grant the US the opportunity to 
comment on issues related to biotechnology regulation and will take those comments into 
account.5 After the letter was signed, some anti-GMO activists in Russia called it a lobbying 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
108 
mechanism that virtually guarantees the US the right to directly influence decision making in 
the field of consumer rights and biosafety in Russia.6 
In 2012, Russia was among the thirteen states endorsing an International Statement on 
Low Level Presence (LLP) in order to avoid the disruption of global trade due to national 
restrictions on the import of agricultural commodities with traces of GMOs. By signing this 
international statement, Russia committed to continue to work collaboratively with other 
signatory countries to address the overarching problem of asynchronous approvals of biotech 
products, while trying to mitigate the impact of LLP situations in food and feed.7 
Following instructions from the Russian President, the government entrusted responsible 
agencies with determining whether to ban imports of products containing GMOs into the 
country.8 Russian agencies responsible for the policy in this field were expected to report to 
Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev by October 15, 2013.9 Previously, products that 
contained Monsanto’s genetically engineered corn NK603 were banned from importation into 
Russia.10 
 
 
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion 
 
Agricultural producers and scientists generally support GMO production in Russia and 
advocate for pro-GMO legislation.11 On the other hand, some environmentalists claim that the 
penetration of agricultural biotechnology and GMO-oriented production is dangerous for the 
environment, public health, and national food security. In their opinion, Russia should use its 
huge potential for the domestic production of organic food, which they argue has higher 
demand and is more environmentally friendly.12 
Surveys indicate that Russian consumers prefer to buy GMO-free food products. 
According to analytical surveys of food markets, the number of people concerned with the 
quality of their food choices has been steadily growing. Around 80% of survey respondents 
who bought food in Moscow stated that they would not purchase a product if it contained GM 
components.13 However, the actual purchasing behavior of the Russian population is affected 
by the price of products.14 
 
 
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation 
 
The Russian legal framework governing the safety of GMO products and the control over 
their circulation on the market consists mainly of several federal laws and government 
resolutions that regulate agricultural biotech policy. These include the Federal Law on State 
Regulation in the Field of Genetic Engineering Activities (amended in 2010),15 Federal Law 
on the Sanitary-Epidemiological Well-Being of the Population,16 Federal Law on the Quality 
and Safety of Food Products,17 and Federal Law on Consumer Rights Protection.18 
In 2010, Russia entered into a Customs Union with Belarus and Kazakhstan. The Union 
formed the basis of the Eurasian Economic Commission, a trilateral government authority in 
charge of harmonizing trade tariffs. Russian trade legislation is now subordinated to norms 
and procedures of the Customs Union and regulations issued by the Commission.19 The 
Customs Union has adopted Technical Regulations on Food Safety (TR TS 021/2011), on 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
109 
Food Labeling (TR TS 022/2011), and on the Safety of Grain (TR TS 015/2011).20 These 
regulations came into force on July 1, 2013. 
The Technical Regulation on Food Safety is a key Customs Union umbrella regulation 
covering standards and requirements for all food products and their processing. The Technical 
Regulation on Food Product Labeling is designed to establish uniform requirements for food 
products labeling to ensure the free movement of food products released for circulation in the 
territory of the Customs Union member states. The Technical Regulation on the Safety of 
Grain covers standards and requirements for grain and oilseeds produced and traded in the 
territory of the Customs Union, including imported and exported grains and oilseeds.21 A 
Technical Regulation on Feed, which will address genetically engineered feed, is under 
consideration.22 
In September 2013, the government approved the Resolution on the State Registration of 
Genetically Engineered/Modified Organisms Intended for Release into the Environment and 
Products Derived from the Use of Such Organisms or Containing Such Organisms (the 
Resolution).23 The Resolution established a registration process for GMOs released into the 
environment for such purposes as the production of raw food materials and foodstuffs; feed 
and feed additives for animals; and breeding and growing modified plants, animals, and 
microorganisms for agricultural use in the territory of the Russian Federation.24 
The Rules approved by the Resolution define the functions of different government 
agencies in the registration and oversight of GMOs. For example, the Federal Service for 
Surveillance of Consumer Rights Protection will register modified organisms used for the 
production of raw food materials, while modified plants and animals intended for breeding in 
Russia and modified agricultural microorganisms will be registered and monitored by the 
Federal Service for Veterinary and Phytosanitary Surveillance.25 Consolidated registration of 
all GMOs and GM products will be maintained by the Ministry of Health.26 Registration will 
require a positive assessment of the environmental impact of the released organisms and 
products conducted by the Federal Service for Surveillance in the Sphere of Environmental 
Management.27 The Rules will come into effect on July 1, 2014.28 
According to a US Department of Agriculture report, before this Resolution was adopted, 
Russia did not have a procedure for the release of GM plants into the environment, which 
amounted to a de facto ban on the cultivation of any such crop. The Resolution lifts this ban, 
and while it will not have any immediate effect on the cultivation of biotech crops in Russia, 
it creates an approval process to make cultivation of such crops possible.29 
 
 
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing 
 
A. Regulation of Research 
Laboratory research on genetically engineered crops has not reached the stage of field 
trials. While field trials are not specifically prohibited, special permission is required from the 
Variety Testing Commission at the Ministry of Agriculture,30 and some companies report that 
such permission is no longer granted.31 Reportedly, research on genetically engineered 
animals was conducted at the Russian Academy of Agricultural Sciences. No information on 
the continuation of this research since 2012 is available.32 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
110 
B. Labeling Requirements 
In accordance with the Federal Law of the Russian Federation on Consumers Rights 
Protection, all organizations that import to, produce in, or trade food and foodstuffs with 
Russia must inform consumers about the presence of GM components in their products if 
each individual biotech element exceeds 0.9% of product composition.33 This legal provision 
is in line with the Technical Regulations of the Customs Union that came into effect on July 
1, 2013.34 
Several Russian regions and producers have implemented voluntary labeling showing 
that their products are GMO free. However, such voluntary labeling is in some cases viewed 
by Russian authorities as contrary to rules of competition.35 For example, in 2007 GMO-free 
labeling requirements were introduced by the Moscow City Government that allowed food 
producers to test their products for the absence of GMO ingredients at the city government’s 
laboratories and receive a special, green label issued by the City Government stating that the 
product “Does not Contain GMO!” Following a request from the Federal Antimonopoly 
Service, the Moscow City Government abolished this program.36 
Labeling of GMOs in animal feed is not required. Information on GMOs in grain and 
oilseeds and their products must be included in the accompanying shipping documents.37 
 
C. Responsible Agencies 
There is no single unified authority competent to make decisions on matters relating to 
the security of growing GM crops and the use of GMOs in food and animal feed. Currently, 
several Russian government agencies are responsible for the development of Russian 
biotechnology policy and controlling the use of genetically engineered crops and foodstuffs. 
They include the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Healthcare, the Federal Service for 
Surveillance of Consumer Rights Protection, the Federal Service for Veterinary and 
Phytosanitary Surveillance, and some others. 
The Ministry of Agriculture is the country’s leading agency in charge of regulating the 
veterinary and phytosanitary sphere. It is responsible for mitigating any negative effects of 
GMOs on agricultural animals, plants, and the environment. Starting July 1, 2014, the 
Ministry of Healthcare will be responsible for the maintenance of the consolidated register of 
all GMOs and GM products intended for release into the environment. The Federal Service 
for Surveillance of Consumer Rights Protection (Rospotrebnadzor) surveys and controls the 
turnover of GM food products. It also conducts state registration of new food products 
containing GMOs, including imports, and keeps a state register of GM food products 
authorized for sale and production in, and import into, Russia. The Federal Service for 
Veterinary and Phytosanitary Surveillance (VPSS) is subordinated to the Ministry of 
Agriculture of the Russian Federation. With regard to GMOs, it controls the safety of feed 
and feed additives derived from GMOs.38 
 
 
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment 
 
GMOs designed for release into the environment and the products obtained from or 
containing such organisms are subject to state registration.39 In accordance with the newly 
adopted Rules on State Registration of GMOs and GMO-Containing Products for Release 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
111 
into the Environment that will come into effect on July 1, 2014, the registering authorities 
will issue certificates on the state registration of GMO and GMO-containing products on the 
basis of an application from a legal entity. GMOs used for research work are exempt from 
registration if they are produced in accord with the existing sanitary norms and procedures. 
Similarly exempt from registration are the products obtained by the combination or 
processing of registered GMO-containing products if the genetic material of these products is 
not changed.40 
Registration of GMOs and GMO-containing products will have no expiration date. 
However, in the case of a negative impact of a registered GMO product on human or animal 
health and/or the environment, the registration certificate may be revoked or special 
conditions for its use may be imposed.41 
 
 
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs  
 
A. General Requirements 
According to the Federal Law on State Regulation in the Field of Genetic Engineering, 
those working in the field of GMOs are responsible for the safety of the public and of the 
environment, accessibility of information on the safety of genetic engineering activities, 
certification of products containing the results of genetic engineering, state registration of 
GMOs intended for release into the environment, and state registration of products derived 
from the use of such organisms or containing such organisms.42 The Law requires that 
certificates provide full details regarding the methods of obtaining the product in question and 
its properties. It also states that products and services developed by means of genetic 
engineering must meet the requirements of environmental safety, public health, and 
pharmacopoeia provisions.43 
Certain types of new food products, materials, and articles manufactured and intended for 
sale in the territory of the Russian Federation or imported for the first time into the territory of 
the Russian Federation are subject to state registration.44 A special export control procedure 
with regard to genetically modified microorganisms (GMMs) has been established by the 
government.45  
Following this procedure, the periodically updated list of GMMs and genetic elements 
allowed for export from Russia was approved by the President of the Russian Federation in 
2007.46 The most recent updates to the list were made in July 2013.47 
The list of foodstuffs containing GMOs subject to sanitary and epidemiological 
monitoring and state registration was approved by the Decision of the Customs Union 
Commission on the Application of Sanitary Measures within the Customs Union.48 
As of September 2012, Russia approved and registered eighteen GM food lines (four 
soybean lines, ten lines of corn, two types of potatoes, one line of rice and one line of beet) 
and fourteen GM feed lines (four lines of soybean and ten lines of corn).49 
 
B. Risk Assessment 
Food and foodstuffs derived from GM sources are subject to a safety assessment 
procedure, which includes a 180-day toxicity study in animals and the application of modern 
methods of analysis.50  

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
112 
Products with properties that do not differ from counterparts obtained by traditional 
methods and that pass medical and biological assessments are deemed safe for human health 
and are authorized for sale to the public and use in the food industry without restrictions.51 
 
C. Fodder for Livestock 
Feed derived from GMOs is subject to compulsory state registration.52 Plant-origin feed 
imports require a letter stating that the feed is biotech free. Feed may be classified as biotech 
free if the presence in such feed of each nonregistered biotech line does not exceed 0.5% and 
the presence of each registered biotech line does not exceed 0.9%. If the feed contains 
genetically engineered ingredients and is not declared as biotech free, the shipment must 
include a copy of the certificate indicating that the biotech components in the feed are 
registered with the Federal Service for Veterinary and Phytosanitary Surveillance. 
Feed registration is issued for five years with the possibility of renewal.53 
 
 
VII. Liability Regime 
 
In Russia, while administrative liability for violations of the requirements related to 
GMOs has been established, the amount of financial penalties is rather insignificant. 
Individuals, officials, and legal entities that do not comply with the requirements of law with 
respect to sanitary and epidemiological standards are punishable by a fine in the amount up to 
20,000 rubles (approximately US$620) or administrative suspension of operations for up to 
ninety days (in the case of legal entities).54 
The sale of products in the absence of required information or proper GMO labeling 
entails a warning or a fine in an amount of up to 40,000 rubles (approximately US$1,240).55 
Violations of rules related to the transportation, sale, or release of products with GMOs 
are punishable by a fine in an amount of up to 300,000 rubles (approximately US$9,400). 
Violations that cause harm to the lives or health of people, property, or the environment, or 
that pose a threat of such harm, entail a larger fine in an amount of up to 600,000 rubles 
(approximately US$19,000), and may be accompanied by confiscation of the product in 
question.56 
 
 
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases 
 
Russia does not have significant court decisions that have influenced the application of 
law or the practice of law enforcement in the field of GMO regulation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
113 
SOUTH AFRICA 
 
Hanibal Goitom 
Foreign Law Specialist* 
 
 
Summary 
 
The primary legislation in South Africa dealing with genetically modified organisms 
(GMOs), including their contained use, trial release, commercial release, and import and 
export is the Genetically Modified Organisms Act of 1997 (GMO Act) and its subsidiary 
legislation. This Act established three regulatory authorities—an Executive Council, 
Registrar, and an Advisory Committee—for effective implementation of its objectives. 
The GMO Act places various restrictions on the research, production, and marketing 
of GMOs. For instance, it requires a permit for conducting most GMO-related activities, 
and conducting such activities entails putting in place scientifically-based risk assessment 
measures and notifying the public before the release of GMOs into the environment. If 
the EC deems it fit to do so, an applicant for a permit for a GMO-related activity may 
also be required to conduct an environmental risk assessment. The Act also requires the 
registration of all facilities where GMO-related activities take place. It further requires 
that safety to the environment be demonstrated before GMOs can be approved for 
release. 
The GMO Act imposes civil liability on people who conduct GMO-related activities 
for damage they cause and criminalizes various acts, including violations of its provisions 
or refusing to cooperate with the regulatory bodies. 
In addition to the primary legislation and regulatory institutions, South Africa also 
has in place other laws and institutions regulating specific issues relating to GMOs. The 
Department of Health, specifically the Food Control Section, tasked with the 
responsibility to ensure food safety in the country, has issued regulations requiring that 
foodstuffs obtained through certain genetic modification techniques be labeled as such 
before being offered for sale in the marketplace. Further labeling requirements are 
imposed by the Consumer Protection Act and its subsidiary legislation. 
 
 
I. Introduction 
 
Relative to other African countries, South Africa embraced biotechnology early on. The 
first field trials of genetically modified crops in the country were conducted in 1989.1 South 
Africa first approved the commercial release of genetically modified, insect-resistant cotton 
and maize in 1997.2 Today, South Africa is the world’s eighth largest producer of GMO 
crops. The statistics for the 2011–12 maize production season illustrate the scale of GMO 
penetration in the country. During this period, genetically modified maize accounted for 79% 
(2.1 million hectares) of the commercial land planted with maize, with white maize 
accounting for 78% (1.3 million hectares) and yellow maize accounting for 81% (863,277 
hectares) of the total maize planted in their respective classes.3 
South Africa has a fairly vigorous regulatory regime governing various aspects of GMO 
use, including contained use, trial release, commercial release, and transboundary movement. 
The primary legislation governing the issue is the Genetically Modified Organisms Act of 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
114 
1997 (GMO Act)4 and its subsidiary legislation (GMO Regulations).5 The GMO Act was 
amended in 2006 (although the amendment did not take effect until 2010) in part to give 
effect to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, which South Africa ratified in 2003.6 There are 
also a number of other laws imposing additional rules on GMO-related activities, including 
the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act (NEMBA),7 the Consumer 
Protection Act,8 and the Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act.9 
This report briefly discusses key aspects of the GMO regulatory regime, including 
relevant legislation, regulatory bodies, and available case law on the subject. 
 
 
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion 
 
The most recent statistical data located regarding public sentiment toward GMOs in 
South Africa is contained in a 2005 study, which found that only a small segment of South 
Africa’s public had an understanding of and held an opinion about GMOs.10 The study found 
that eighty percent of those surveyed had limited understanding of biotechnology, and more 
than two-thirds had never heard of GMOs before.11 
However, various key organizations have shown interest in the process of overhauling the 
GMO regulatory regime. In 2006, during the public hearings it conducted on the GMO 
Amendment Bill, the Agriculture and Land Affairs Portfolio Committee of South Africa’s 
Parliament received over ten submissions from a range of pro- and anti-GMO activists, 
including farmers unions, nongovernmental organizations, governmental agencies, and 
academics.12 For example, the African Centre for Biosafety, as part of its submission, 
demanded that biotech companies assume liability for any adverse impact of a GMO-related 
activity on human health and the environment, a demand that was later incorporated into the 
GMO Act as part of the 2006 amendment (see the Liability Regime section below).13 
Similarly, one of the farmers unions called for the introduction of labeling requirements for 
foods containing GMOs.14 
Despite the recognition of the risks involved, GMO-related activities appear to enjoy 
support within scientific and academic circles, with supporters believing that the risks are 
manageable. Nevertheless, opposition and skepticism persists among various groups, 
including rights groups, trade unions, and religious organizations.15 
 
 
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation 
 
The GMO Act, which is administered by the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries (DAFF), and three institutions established under its provisions (the Registrar, the 
Executive Council (EC), and the Advisory Council (AC)), has a number of objectives. These 
include promoting responsible GMO-related activities; limiting harm to the environment as 
well as to human and animal health; and establishing standards for conducting risk 
assessments for GMO-related activities.16 
The Act defines a GMO as “[a]n organism the genes or genetic material of which has 
been modified in a way that does not occur naturally through mating or natural recombination 
or both. . . .”17 The application of the GMO Act is limited to 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
115 
a) the genetic modification of organisms; 
b) the development, production, release, use and application of genetically modified 
organisms (including viruses and bacteriophages); and 
c) the use of gene therapy.18 
 
As noted above, the GMO Act established three regulatory bodies with specific 
functions: the EC, the Registrar, and the AC. The EC, a juristic person, has a number of key 
functions in the application and approval process for GMO-related activities.19 Some of its 
functions include 
 
• 
advising the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries on GMO-related 
activities and monitoring these activities to ensure that they follow the rules and 
procedures set under the GMO Act; 
• 
determining whether an applicant should submit an environmental assessment report; 
and 
• 
approving applications for the use of facilities for conducting GMO-related activities 
in consultation with the AC.20 
 
The EC may have up to ten members, who are appointed by the Minister of Agriculture, 
Forestry and Fisheries.21 Members must include representatives from various departments 
listed in the GMO Act, including the Department of Science and Technology and the 
Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, who are well versed on the impact of 
GMOs in their respective fields/sectors and applicable law and policy.22 All decisions of the 
EC require unanimous support of its members, and anything short of that amounts to 
rejection.23 
The Registrar is appointed by the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries in 
consultation with the EC. He or she is in charge of administering the GMO Act and exercises 
the powers delegated and duties assigned to the position by the GMO Act or the EC.24 Among 
the Registrar’s functions are 
 
• 
examining applications for GMO-related activity;  
• 
issuing permits or extensions; 
• 
amending or withdrawing permits; 
• 
ensuring that all users take the necessary measures to protect the environment as well 
as human and animal health; and 
• 
addressing any matter related to GMO-related activities.25 
 
The Registrar is required by law to keep a register of all facilities used for the contained 
use of GMOs, all trial release sites, and the names and addresses of all users (individuals 
involved in GMO-related activities).26 The Registrar is also required to arrange for inspection 
of facilities where GMO-related activities take place and order the cessation of an activity that 
he or she has established or reasonably suspects is in violation of the GMO Act or a condition 
set under a permit.27 
Inspections are conducted by inspectors appointed by the Registrar. The GMO Act 
authorizes the inspectors to investigate and, among other things, seek and obtain warrants to 
search for and seize various items, including GMOs and documents, whenever the inspectors 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
116 
have reason to believe that the GMO Act has been violated.28 In addition, inspectors have the 
power to conduct routine, unannounced, and warrantless inspections of facilities registered 
for conducting GMOrelated activities, and take samples of GMOs.29 
The AC is a national advisory body on all matters having to do with GMO-related 
activities, including the introduction of GMOs into the environment, contained use, 
transboundary movement, and drafting of GMO-related laws and guidelines.30 It is also 
mandated to liaise with international bodies concerned with biosafety through relevant 
national departments.31 It consists of up to ten members appointed by the Minister of 
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, eight of whom must be knowledgeable in the field of 
science applicable to GMO-related activities.32 Two of the members must be from the public 
sector. One of these members must be knowledgeable on ecological matters and GMOs, 
while the other must be well versed on the effects of GMOs on human and animal health.33 
 
 
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing 
 
A GMO-related activity may not be conducted in South Africa without a permit.34 This 
includes “activity with genetically modified organisms but it is not limited to the importation, 
exportation, transit, development, production, release, distribution, use, storage and 
application of genetically modified organisms only.”35 However, a permit is not required for 
organisms under conditions of contained use at containment level 1 or 2 in a registered 
facility.36 
A person interested in carrying out a GMO-related activity may make an application to 
the Registrar, and the application must include 
 
• 
a scientifically-based risk assessment;  
• 
proposed risk assessment measures; 
• 
a copy of public notices as required under the GMO Regulations; and 
• 
if the EC deems it appropriate, an environmental risk assessment.37 
 
There are strict rules on how a scientifically-based risk assessment is to be conducted. 
The assessment should take into account current national, regional, and international risk-
assessment methods.38 The steps of the assessment should include the following: 
 
a) Identification of any potential adverse effect resulting from the novel genotypic 
and/or phenotypic characteristics of the genetically modified organism. 
b) An evaluation of the likelihood of these adverse effects being realized, taking into 
account the level and kind of exposure of the potential receiving environment to the 
genetically modified organism. 
c) An evaluation of the consequences should these adverse effects be realized. 
d) An estimate of the overall risk proposed by the genetically modified organism based 
on the evaluation of the likelihood and consequences of the identified adverse effects 
being realized.39 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
117 
Once an application is submitted, the EC may approve the application, reject it, or request 
that the applicant provide additional information; the EC must provide reasons for every 
decision.40 
If the EC approves an application, it must include all applicable terms and conditions that 
the Registrar may then attach to a permit.41 
All facilities (any place where contained use of a GMO takes place) must be registered 
with the Registrar.42 The application for registration must include the name of the person 
taking responsibility for the facility; a map of the facility showing the different units within 
the facility; a locality map that includes geographic coordinates; a science-based risk 
assessment of the activity within the facility; and the proposed risk-management mechanism, 
measures, and strategies.43 
Any applicant aggrieved by a decision or action of the EC, the Registrar, or an inspector 
may appeal before the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries within thirty days of the 
issuance of the decision or action in question.44 
 
 
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment 
 
There is a strict application and approval process for the release of GMOs, including a 
trial release and a general release.45 If the release of a GMO “may pose a threat to an 
indigenous species or the environment no permit for such a release may be issued unless an 
environmental impact assessment has been conducted” under the terms of the relevant law.46 
In effect, a GMO would not be approved for any form of release if “safety to the environment 
cannot be demonstrated.”47 
The law also imposes a public notification requirement for the release of GMOs. An 
applicant who seeks to undertake a general or commodity release must publish a notice in at 
least three national newspapers; a proposed trial release requires publication of a notice in at 
least two local newspapers and one national newspaper.48 Where there are no newspapers 
circulating in the immediate area in which the proposed trial release will take place, the 
applicant has to inform the public through other means of effective communication, document 
the means of communication employed, and submit it to the Registrar as proof.49 The notice 
must include, among other things, information about the applicant, the objective of the 
application, the general description of the GMOs, and the place of release.50 
If there is an accident involving unintentional environmental release or transboundary 
movement of GMOs, the user must notify the Registrar both verbally and in writing by 
providing relevant information, including the estimated quantities, date of the release, and 
possible adverse effect on the environment and on human and animal health and safety.51 
Once released, the impact of GMOs on the environment is monitored by a separate 
institution, the South African National Biodiversity Institute, a juristic person established 
under NEMBA.52 One of the functions of this institution is to “monitor and report regularly” 
to the Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs on the effects of any released GMO, 
including the impact on “non-target organisms and ecological processes, indigenous 
biological resources and biological diversity of species used for agriculture.”53 (For 
information on cleanup costs and liability when damage occurs, see the Liability Regime 
section below.) 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
118 
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs 
 
The task of ensuring food safety in South Africa is under the jurisdiction of the 
Department of Health (DoH), specifically the Food Control Section.54 As part of its functions, 
this section oversees the administration of food legislation, which includes publicizing 
regulations for food safety, labeling food, and evaluating risk assessments for DAFF that are 
related to agricultural chemicals and food produced through biotechnology.55 
South Africa requires that foodstuffs obtained through certain techniques of genetic 
modification be labeled as such before they are offered for sale in the marketplace.56 The law 
imposes this requirement if the composition, nutritional value, mode of storage, preparation, 
or cooking “of the foodstuff differs significantly from the characteristic composition of the 
corresponding existing foodstuff. . . .”57 
A different law imposes additional, specific labeling requirements. The Consumer 
Protection Act requires that “[a]ny person who produces, supplies, imports or packages any 
prescribed goods must display on, or in association with the package or those goods, a notice 
in the prescribed manner and form that that discloses the presence of any genetically modified 
ingredients or components of those in accordance with applicable regulations.”58 Goods 
covered by this requirement are all goods approved for consumption by the EC and 
containing at least 5% GMOs.59 
 
 
VII. Liability Regime 
 
The GMO Act imposes two forms of liability: civil and criminal liability. Under the 
GMO Act, users have a duty to take appropriate measures to avoid an adverse impact on the 
environment and on human and animal health from the use of GMOs.60 When damage occurs, 
users are responsible for cleanup costs. They are required to take a number of actions, 
including ceasing the act causing the damage, containing/minimizing the spread of the 
GMOs, eliminating the source of the damage, and remedying the damage caused.61 If the user 
fails to take any such measures, the EC may step in and take all the necessary actions at the 
user’s expense.62 In addition, users are subject to liability for damage caused by GMO-related 
activity, unless the GMO was in the possession of an inspector and the user could not have 
foreseen or prevented the damage.63 
The GMO Act and its subsidiary legislation also impose criminal liability for certain 
actions. A person commits an offense if he contravenes any of the GMO Act’s provisions or 
any condition, restriction, ban, or instruction imposed under its provisions.64 A person also 
commits a crime if he refuses to cooperate with or provides false or misleading information to 
an inspector, the Registrar, the EC, or the AC.65 A person who impersonates any officer 
appointed under the GMO Act also commits a crime.66 In addition, a person who violates any 
of the GMO Regulations commits an offense.67 A conviction for any of these crimes is 
punishable by a fine or up to two years imprisonment; a second or subsequent conviction may 
result in up to four years imprisonment.68 
The Consumer Protection Act, which imposes labeling requirements on food items 
containing a certain level of GMOs, also criminalizes certain acts. It makes it an offense for 
anyone to “alter, obscure, falsify, remove or omit . . . labeling . . . without authority.”69 This 
offense is, on conviction, punishable by a fine and/or up to one year imprisonment.70 In 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
119 
addition, a violation under the Consumer Protection Act may result in a civil action and/or 
administrative fines.71 
 
 
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases 
 
In 2005, questions regarding access to information on GMO-related activities were 
litigated in court.72 Biowatch Trust, a nongovernmental organization engaged in monitoring 
and publicizing issues of genetic modification, made a number of requests for information 
regarding the use of GMOs in South Africa, including locations of GMO field trials and risk-
assessment data.73 When the Registrar refused to release information on the grounds that the 
request was too broad and that part of the information sought was proprietary in nature, 
Biowatch instituted a legal action before the High Court against the Registrar, the EC, and 
others.74 The court, in its decision, noted that access to information in South Africa is not an 
absolute right and that it should be weighed against justifiable governmental and private 
concerns for maintaining confidentiality of certain information.75 However, the Court held 
that Biowatch was entitled to access some information and that the Registrar’s refusal to grant 
access to such information violated Biowatch’s constitutional rights.76 The Court also found 
unacceptable the Registrar’s claim that Biowatch’s request was too broad, noting that the 
Registrar had a legal obligation to work with Biowatch to identify the relevant information 
sought.77 
Matters pertaining to cost were litigated further on appeal and settled by the 
Constitutional Court.78 
 
 
SOUTH KOREA 
 
Sayuri Umeda 
Foreign Law Specialist* 
 
 
Summary  
 
Korea signed the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety in 2000 and enacted implementing 
legislation, the Act on Transboundary Movements of Living Modified Organisms and 
Other Related Matters (LMO Act), the following year. The LMO Act regulates overall 
issues concerning genetically modified organisms (GMOs). Importing, cultivating, 
researching, and developing GMOs are permitted under the LMO Act, as long as 
applicable procedures are observed. However, even though more and more research on 
GMOs is being performed, people are still concerned about undiscovered side effects and 
unanticipated adverse effects on the environment. As yet, there has been no authorized 
GMO cultivation within Korea. 
Restrictions on GMO food include a safety assessment under the Food Sanitation 
Act in addition to a risk assessment and approval procedure under the LMO Act. Sellers 
of genetically modified food must follow labeling requirements under the Food 
Sanitation Act. 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
120 
I. Introduction 
 
South Korea signed the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological 
Diversity (Cartagena Protocol) in 2000 and ratified it in 2007.1 The Cartagena Protocol 
became effective for Korea at the beginning of 2008. To implement the Protocol, Korea 
enacted the Act on Transboundary Movements of Living Modified Organisms and Other 
Related Matters (LMO Act) in 2001 and it became effective when the Protocol became 
effective in Korea.2 The LMO Act aims to improve the living conditions of people by 
protecting public health and the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity from any 
adverse effects posed by genetically modified organisms (GMOs).3 As of today, while 
research and development related to GMOs is actively conducted, there has been no 
authorized GMO cultivation within Korea.4 There is no social or political consensus 
regarding the safety of GMOs for cultivation or consumption in Korea. However, stopping 
the importation of genetically modified (GM) grains, such as soybeans and corn, is nearly 
impossible because Korea has a low level of self-sufficiency with regard to grains and non-
GM grains are becoming less available. As of 2012, for example, GM soybeans occupied 
81% of the total soybean cultivation area in the world.5 
 
 
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion 
 
Public awareness of GMOs has generally been high in South Korea. The Korea Biosafety 
Clearing House (KBCH) has issued annual statistical analyses on public perception and 
knowledge levels of GMOs since 2004.6 The KBCH was established as a legal institute for 
the management and exchange of information on GMOs and promoting international 
coordination.7 According to a statistical analysis conducted in 2013, 80.2% of the general 
public in Korea is aware of GMOs and they learn and acquire knowledge and information 
mainly from television, the Internet, newspapers, and friends and acquaintances. However, 
the level of understanding of the current status of domestic distribution and risk assessment 
procedures for GMOs, among other issues, is low.8 
The public sentiment trends against GMOs. Generally, people are more tolerant of the 
pharmaceutical or medical use of GMOs, but unwilling to accept GMOs in food or livestock, 
according to the KBCH’s 2012 survey.9 In terms of the necessity of restricting GMOs, more 
than 83% of the survey respondents said it was necessary to impose strict regulations on 
GMO handling, storage, distribution, and labeling.10 
 
 
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation 
 
The Biotechnology Support Act, which was enacted to promote biotechnology in 1983,11 
was the first law in Korea that required implementing measures to prevent potential risks 
involved in the development of biotechnology. In September 2000, Korea signed the 
Cartagena Protocol and in March 2001 enacted the LMO Act as a general law to establish the 
legal basis for domestic implementation of the Protocol.12 However, the LMO Act does not 
apply to GMOs used as medicines for the human body.13 The Enforcement Decree of the 
LMO Act14 and ministerial ordinances15 provide detailed provisions for the effective 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
121 
enforcement of the LMO Act. The Unified Enforcement Regulation of the LMO Act (Unified 
Enforcement Regulation) was prepared in 2007 in order to provide detailed and technical 
measures to implement the LMO Act.16 The Unified Enforcement Regulation regulates 
different areas such as GMO use in food, medicine, agriculture, and intentional introduction 
of GMOs into the environment. 
The LMO Act designates a competent national authority, a national focal point, and 
relevant central administrative agencies. The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy 
(MOTIE) is the designated competent national authority and is in charge of GMO regulations 
in the industrial sector. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MOFA) is the national focal point.17 
Jurisdictions of the ministries designated as relevant central authorities are as follows: 
 
Ministry 
Jurisdictional Area Under the LMO Act 
Ministry of Science, Information, 
Communication, Technology & Future Planning 
(MSIP) 
GMOs used in research and development 
Ministry of Health & Welfare (MW) 
GMO research facilities related to health, medical 
sectors 
Ministry of Environment (ME) 
Environmental issues related to GMOs 
Ministry of Agricultural, Food & Rural Affairs 
(MAFRA) 
GMOs in agricultural, forestry, livestock sectors, 
and in animal health improvement 
Ministry of Oceans & Fisheries (MOF) 
GMOs in oceans, inland bodies of water 
Ministry of Food and Drug Safety (MFDS) 
GMOs in food, medicine, medical devices 
Source: LMO Act art. 2, para. 5; Enforcement Decree art. 2, para. 1. 
 
MOTIE established the Biosafety Committee based on the LMO Act.18 The vice-minister 
of each relevant central authority is a member of the Committee.19 The Committee deliberates 
on matters concerning implementation of the Cartagena Protocol, establishment and 
implementation of risk management plans, reassessment of risks for previously denied 
GMOs, prevention, and plans for countering any damage caused by GMOs, among other 
things.20 
The LMO Act obligates relevant central authorities to establish and enforce risk 
management plans. The plans include basic policies of safety management concerning the 
import and export of GMOs, matters on safety management for employees and facilities that 
deal with GMOs, and matters on GMO technology development and related support 
measures. Such risk management plans should be approved in advance by the Biosafety 
Committee.21 
The LMO Act has a definition of GMOs, which is substantially the same as definitions 
appearing in other acts: 
 
Living modified organisms means any organism that possesses a novel combination 
of genetic material obtained through the use of the following modern biotechnology(ies) ; 
 
(1) technologies for artificially recombining genetic materials or directly injecting 
nucleic acid constituting genetic materials into cells or organelles; 
(2) technologies for cell fusion which is beyond the family under taxonomy.22 
 
A GM agricultural or marine product is defined in the Agricultural Act as an agricultural 
or marine product that possesses targeted features made through the artificial separation or 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
122 
recombination of genes.23 Under the Food Sanitation Act, genetically modified food is any 
food or food additive produced or processed with raw ingredients that are cultivated with the 
technologies for recombining genetic materials.24 
 
 
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing 
 
Research on and the development of GMOs must meet the requirements and permission 
procedures under the LMO Act and accord with social values, as discussed below. 
 
A. Risk Assessment 
A person who intends to import, produce, use, or develop GMOs must follow the risk 
assessment procedure through the relevant central authority before the person applies for 
permission to import, produce, or use a GMO.25 The risk assessment process is designed to 
identify and evaluate the possible adverse effects of GMOs on the conservation and 
sustainable use of biodiversity, taking into account risks to human health.26 The minister of 
the relevant central authority should establish the criteria for the assessment and publicize it.27 
A minister of the relevant central authority must consult with the Ministry of Health and 
Welfare (MW) when risks to human health are examined. When the GMOs are to be released 
into the environment, other ministers are involved in addition to the relevant central authority, 
as described in Part V, below.28 The applicant and the general public are notified of the results 
of the risk assessment.29 If the risk is too high, the import, production, use, or development of 
the GMO may be restricted. 
 
B. Prior Approval for Production, Import, or Export of GMOs 
A person who intends to import GMOs must obtain the approval of the minister of the 
related central authority.30 When the sole purpose of importing GMOs is for experimentation 
on, research into, or exhibition of GMOs, only reports to the relevant central authorities are 
required.31 However, approval is required if the GMOs fall into one of the following 
categories: 
 
• 
GMOs obtained using microorganisms for which the human pathogenic capability is 
unknown and the taxonomic name is not specified 
• 
GMOs with the ability to produce toxins against vertebrates, as determined and 
published by the Minister of MW 
• 
GMOs intentionally introduced with a drug-resistant gene, excluding ones with drug-
resistant genes that the Minister of MW publishes 
• 
GMOs obtained using pathogenic micro-organisms that the Minister of MW 
publishes because management by the state is necessary in view of public health 
concerns.32 
 
A person who intends to produce GMOs must also obtain approval from the related 
central authority.33 As of September 2013, one GM microorganism had been approved for 
production.34 
The minister of the relevant central authority may prohibit or restrict the importation or 
production of GMOs if he or she determines that such GMOs have adverse effects on public 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
123 
health or the preservation of biodiversity and sustainable use, and also if he or she determines 
that such GMOs have or may have negative effects on social or economic values with regard 
to domestic biodiversity.35 
A person who intends to export GMOs must notify the relevant central authority of the 
items, quantity, importing country, and other required information under Annex II of the 
Protocol.36 Anyone who intends to unload and export GMOs via a domestic port or airport 
must give a transit report to the relevant central authority.37 
 
C. Laboratory Permission 
A person who intends to establish a laboratory that conducts GMO research or conduct 
such research at an existing laboratory must acquire an approval for laboratory use from, or 
report the laboratory use to, the relevant central authorities in accordance with the level of 
safety of the research.38 Levels of safety are classified from 1 (safest) to 4 (highest risk).39 A 
person who establishes or runs a laboratory that carries out research that falls under levels 3 
or 4 must obtain permission from the Minister of Science, Information, Communication, 
Technology & Future Planning in terms of environmental risk assessment or from the 
Minister of MW in terms of the risk assessment for the human body.40 Level 3 research is 
research or experimentation involving GMOs that may cause serious but curable disease to 
the human body or serious but curable danger to the environment. Level 4 research is research 
or experimentation involving GMOs that may cause fatal disease to the human body or 
irreparable danger to the environment.41 Laboratories that conduct level 1 and 2 research must 
only submit a report to the Minister of Science, Information, Communication, Technology & 
Future Planning.42 As of July 2013, reported and permitted research facilities numbered 2,608 
in total and of that number 1,985 were schools.43 
 
D. Laboratory Research Approval 
Separate from research laboratory permission, a laboratory must obtain approval to 
conduct experiments from the relevant central authority if the GMOs that are developed or 
used in the experiments are considered highly dangerous.44 Experiments that fall within this 
category include the following: 
 
• 
Experiments involving GMOs obtained using microorganisms for which the human 
pathogenic potential is unknown and the taxonomic name is not specified 
• 
Experiments using GMOs that have the ability to produce toxins against vertebrates, 
as determined and published by the Minister of MW 
• 
Experiments using GMOs intentionally introduced with a drug-resistant gene, 
excluding ones with drug-resistant genes that the Minister of MW publishes 
• 
Experiments involving GMOs obtained using pathogenic micro-organisms that the 
Minister of MW publishes because management by the state is necessary in view of 
public health concerns 
• 
Experiments related to releasing GMOs into the environment 
• 
Experiments involving, or the development of, GMOs classified as highly dangerous 
by the minister of the relevant central authority through deliberation of the relevant 
committee45 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
124 
E. Labeling Requirements for GMOs 
The LMO Act imposes labeling obligations upon anyone who develops, imports, exports, 
or produces GMOs. A person who develops, imports, exports, or produces GMOs must label 
the GMOs, the package containing GMOs, or the import invoice concerning the GMOs with 
the following information: 
 
• 
Name, type, use, and character of the GMOs 
• 
Precautions on the safe handling of the GMOs 
• 
Name, address, and phone number of the GMO developer, producer, exporter, and 
importer 
• 
The fact that such product is GM 
• 
Whether such GMOs are to be released into the environment46 
 
A person who fails to label GMOs according to these guidelines, or who falsely labels or 
intentionally changes or removes a GMO label is subject to imprisonment not exceeding one 
year or a fine not exceeding 20,000,000 Korean won (KRW) (about US$20,000).47 
When there is a special labeling regulation, the labeling regulation under the LMO Act 
does not apply. For example, there is a special labeling regulation for GMO food. (See Part 
VI, below, for a discussion of approved GMOs for food and feed.) 
 
 
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment 
 
A person who intends to import GMOs for discharge into the environment must obtain 
approval from the minister of the relevant central authority through the Minister of MOTIE.48 
The minister of the relevant central authority must consult with the Minister of MW when 
potential risks to human health are examined. When the GMOs are to be released into the 
environment, other ministers are involved in addition to the relevant central authority: 
MAFRA for risks to the cultivation of crops, ME for risks to the ecosystem, and MOF for 
risks to the marine environment and marine ecosystem.49 The minister of the relevant central 
authority considers any potential social and economic effect upon the value of domestic 
biodiversity resulting from approval.50 Necessary documentation for applications includes the 
following:51 
 
• 
A consent form on the import of GMOs for the purpose of intentional release into the 
environment issued by the Minister of MOTIE upon request from the importer 
• 
An importing agreement, handling agreement, or self-handling schedule 
• 
A safety management policy addressing the handling of, professional manpower for, 
and facility where the GMO is to be used/processed 
 
Once the minister of the relevant central authority completes the evaluation, he or she 
notifies the Minister of the MOTIE. The Minister of MOTIE, via the Korea Biosafety 
Clearing House, announces the results to the exporting nation and to the Biosafety Clearing 
House under the Protocol.52 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
125 
The cultivation of GM crops in a field is allowable under the LMO Act if it is approved 
by the relevant central authority.53 However, there has been no authorized GMO cultivation 
within Korea thus far.54 
 
 
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs 
 
A. Food 
The safety of GM food is assessed under the Food Sanitation Act, in addition to the risk 
assessment and approval procedure under the LMO Act.55 MFDS established the Safety 
Assessment Committee to review materials submitted for assessment.56 The committee 
performs risk assessments of the effect of GMOs on the human body, upon request. Once the 
committee reaches a conclusion, MFDS must announce that conclusion via the Internet and 
gather opinions from the public. If a reasonable opinion with scientific support is received, 
MFDS may reflect that opinion in its conclusion. MFDS notifies the applicants of the final 
conclusion and publicizes it via the Internet and the official gazette.57 As of September 2013, 
ninety-six GMOs had been approved for food and food additives, including soybean, maize, 
cotton, canola, potato, alfalfa, sugar beet, and one microorganism.58 
 
B. Fodder for Livestock 
A person who wants to import or produce GMO feed may apply for the environmental 
risk assessment separately before he applies for an approval to import.59 MAFRA is the 
designated ministry for this risk assessment and approval. MAFRA has established the 
Environmental Risk Expert Committee, and that Committee has in turn established a risk 
assessment procedure.60 Once the Committee issues the results of a risk assessment, the 
Minister of MAFRA must announce it and gather opinions via the Internet or the official 
gazette.61 When making a decision on importing or producing GMO feed, the Minister may, 
if necessary, consult with an advisory committee that evaluates the socio-economic effects of 
GMOs.62 As of September 2013, eighty-eight GMO feeds had been approved, including 
soybean, maize, cotton, canola, and alfalfa.63 
 
 
C. Labeling 
 
To share information and guarantee the public’s right to know and the right of choice, 
GM food (including agricultural products and processed foods) and GM feed may have to be 
labeled in accordance with all the relevant laws: the LMO Act,64 the Food Sanitation Act,65 
the Agricultural and Marine Products Quality Control Act,66 and the Control of Livestock and 
Fish Feed Act.67 Food is subject to labeling as follows: 
 
 
Agricultural Products 
Processed Foods 
Subject to 
Every GM agricultural product 
approved 
Food containing GM ingredients 
labeling 
for importation by MFDS 
derived from agricultural products that are subject to 
labeling 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
126 
(Continued) 
 
 
Agricultural Products 
Processed Foods 
 
 
Food containing GM ingredient(s) as main 
ingredient(s)68 
 
 
Processed food that tests positive for foreign 
heterologous proteins 
Not 
1. Agricultural products separately 
1. Using agricultural products separately 
subject to 
handled from non-GMOs 
handled from non-GMOs 
labeling 
2. GMO content of less than 3% 
2. GMO content of less than 3% 
 
(considered as unintentional 
inclusion) 
(considered as unintentional inclusion) 
Source: Labeling Guideline for Agricultural Products art. 3, paras. 2 & 3 (agricultural products); 
Yujeonja Jaejohab Sikpoom Deung-ui Pyoshi Kijoon [Labeling Guideline for Genetically 
Modified Food by Ministry of Food and Drug Safety (Labeling Guideline for Processed Food)], 
Enforcement Regulation, No. 2000-43, Aug. 30, 2000, amended by Enforcement Regulation, No. 
2013-165, Apr. 5, 2013 (processed foods). 
 
When labeling is required for agricultural products, the label should be one of following: 
 
• 
“Genetically modified [name of agricultural product]” 
• 
“Partially contains genetically modified organism” 
• 
“Possibly contains genetically modified organisms”69 
 
The label for the GM agricultural product should be on the package, the container, or the 
storage facility of the product. The label must be eye-catching, with a different color from the 
background color.70 
When labeling is required for processed food, the label should be one of followings: 
 
• 
“Genetically modified food” 
• 
“Partially contains genetically modified organism” 
• 
“Possibly contains genetically modified organisms” 
 
The label for processed food should be created with a non-erasable ink in an eye-catching 
form on the package or container of GM food.71 
A person who sells, displays, transfers, or imports GM food without a label or with a 
false label is subject to cancellation of approval, suspension from producing such item, and 
imprisonment not exceeding three years or a fine not exceeding 30,000,000 KRW (about 
US$30,000).72 
 
 
VII. Liability Regime 
 
There is no existing law or regulation that specifically regulates liability issues with 
regard to damage caused by GMOs. Academics have been actively discussing the necessity of 
creating a liability scheme through amendments to existing laws or supplemental laws. There 
have been several attempts to apply other existing legal principles, such as the product 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
127 
liability regime or the no-fault liability regime, or reversing/easing the burden of proof.73 
However, the question of liability with regard to GMOs remains unsettled. 
 
 
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases 
 
No court decision that directly deals with GMOs has yet been issued by the Supreme 
Court or the Constitutional Court. 
 
 
SWEDEN 
 
Elin Hofverberg 
Foreign Law Research Consultant 
 
 
Summary  
 
Swedes, both consumers and producers, are very conscious of genetically modified 
organisms (GMOs). GMO use is limited and almost exclusively used in animal fodder 
products. The use of GMOs in food is a sensitive topic that generates strong public 
opinion. A majority of Swedes consider it important or very important that their milk is 
GMO free, and dairy farmers therefore avoid GMOs in their fodder. Sweden, as a 
European Union Member, has adopted a case-by-case analysis for each GMO. One GM 
potato for industrial use has been approved for cultivation in Sweden, but currently no 
GMOs are being produced. 
 
 
I. Introduction 
 
Sweden is generally seen as being reluctant to use genetically modified organisms 
(GMOs). Only one genetically modified (GM) product, the GM Amflora potato, has been 
specifically approved for commercial production in Sweden. The potato is currently not being 
cultivated. Adhering to European Union (EU) regulations, two types of corn are also 
approved for cultivation although no application or notification for production of GM corn 
has been received in Sweden. While the Swedish government has adopted a case-by-case 
approach guided by the precautionary principle in accordance with the EU position, several 
local municipalities have taken a hard stance against GMOs and declared themselves “GMO 
free.” Imported GMOs are used almost exclusively in fodder. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
128 
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion  
 
A. Public Opinion and Its Effect on the Market 
Swedes are generally very wary of GM products, especially in food. In a study conducted 
by milk farmers, 63% of the respondent consumers held that it was important or very 
important for the milk they consumed to be GMO free.1 Another study conducted by the 
National Food Agency found that the big players in the Swedish agricultural market try to 
avoid GMOs and any association of GMOs with their brands. The National Food Agency 
study also showed that one corporation was willing to sell GMOs, but only if it could do so 
under a brand not associated with its own.2 The perception that GMOs are dangerous or at 
least commercially undesirable is further evidenced by the small number of GM products 
available for human consumption on the Swedish market. In a 2006 survey the National Food 
Agency found only one item (out of the ninety-six surveyed products) that contained GMOs 
and was so labeled, whereas ten products were labeled as free from GMOs.3 As part of its 
environmental policy the Swedish Food Industry continues to strive to reduce and eliminate 
GMOs.4 The GMO Project conducted by the National Food Agency continued into 2009 and 
is still ongoing. 
Public opinion against GMOs is powerful in Sweden. In 2011, market forces compelled 
Scan, the largest Swedish meat retailer, to go back to its GMO-free standard for fodder.5 
 
B. Position of the Government and the Opposition 
The official position of the government is that it is neither in favor of nor opposed to 
GMOs, and the government has implemented a system whereby every use of a GMO should 
be judged on its own risks and merits.6 However, the official policy on GMOs also varies 
between different governmental agencies as they have a different focuses (promoting 
research, protecting the environment, etc.).7 
The opposition (comprised of the Social Democrats, Leftist Party, and Green Party) holds 
a more restrictive view of GMOs than the center-right coalition government.8 The Swedish 
Green Party in particular strongly opposes the use of GMOs.9 
A slight shift in public opinion may be deduced from the language describing GMOs, as 
GMOs during the 1990s were commonly referred to as “manipulated foods” and are now 
referred to as “genetically modified foods.”10 This change could be related to the change of 
government that occurred in 2006. There are also vocal members of the public who favor 
GMOs.11 
 
C. Scholars and NGOs 
Swedish scientists have not agreed on a firm conclusion concerning the effects GMOs 
have on health and the environment.12 Therefore, in accordance with the general policy of 
Sweden, the precautionary principle is applied on a case-by-case basis. 
Some NGOs favor and some oppose GMOs. The greatest opponents of GMO use are 
environmental activists (such as those belonging to the Green Party and Greenpeace), while 
the strongest supporters are farmers, who want to use the cheaper GMO fodder. Even the 
agricultural community is divided. The industry organization Federation of Swedish Farmers 
favors GMOs.13 However, in 2003 LRF Dairy Sweden (which is part of the Federation of 
Swedish Farmers) decided to continue to exclusively use non-GM fodder for its milk-

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
129 
producing cows.14 The reason was a fear of losing the public’s trust, as most milk consumers 
consider that it is important or very important for their milk to be GMO free.15 
 
 
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation 
 
An overview in English of the pertinent Swedish legislation and responsible government 
agencies can be found at a government-run webpage called GMO.nu.16 Relevant information 
is summarized below. 
 
A. European Union Law 
As a member of the European Union, Sweden is bound by the EU Directives on GMOs. 
Sweden has implemented Directives 2009/41/EG and 2001/18/EG, as well as Regulations 
1829/2003, 1830/2003, 1946/2003, and 726/2004, through amendments to the Environmental 
Act and standalone legislation.17 
 
B. National Legislation and Definition of GMO 
The overarching Swedish legislation on GMOs is found in chapter 13 of the 
Environmental Code and its accompanying regulations. Where so designated in the Code, 
certain government agencies or authorities may also issue instructions that regulate GMOs. 
A genetically modified organism is defined as “an organism where the genetic material 
has been altered in a way that does not happen naturally through mating or natural 
recombination.”18 
There is special GMO legislation for food, fodder, medical use, release into water, and 
release into the general environment. There are also instructions on the protection of workers 
handling GMOs, contingency plans for hazardous GMOs, etc. There are in total ten different 
pieces of legislation and thirteen agency instructions addressing GMOs.19 The government 
agencies that issue the instructions are the same as the enforcing government agencies. 
 
C. Local Municipality Instructions and “GMO-Free Zones” 
A county or municipality cannot issue a local GMO instruction for its municipality. Thus, 
any municipality that desires to be “GMO free” must come to an agreement with the farmers 
in the region, and entry into such an agreement must be voluntary. A municipality cannot 
prevent a farmer from cultivating or using an otherwise allowed GMO. 
 
 
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing 
 
A. General Provisions 
All use of GMOs is regulated by chapter 13 of the Swedish Environmental Code, and all 
use, whether in a contained laboratory setting or in nature, must receive prior approval from 
the relevant government authority.20 The inspection and oversight required by the 
Environmental Code is regulated in a special oversight regulation.21 The Environmental Code 
also includes area-specific legislation with more strenuous provisions for GMO use, such as 
their use in water (chapter 2) and chemicals (chapter 14).22 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
130 
B. Licensing and Oversight Agencies 
Several authorities are part of the process of granting mandatory permits for the use, 
release, or production of GM products, as well as the oversight and inspections of pertinent 
GMO use.23 
 
1. Swedish Gene Technology Advisory Board 
A special Gene Technology Advisory Board has been set up to “monitor developments in 
the field of gene technology, oversee ethical issues, and give advice on use of gene 
technology.”24 It receives copies of and recommends decisions for all applications for the use 
of new GMOs.25 The government controls the composition of the Board.26 Currently, the 
composition includes lawyers, political representatives, and experts.27 
 
2. National Environmental Protection Agency 
The National Environmental Protection Agency is responsible for field studies of GMOs. 
It focuses on the need for increased research on GMOs and their long-term effects on the 
environment.28 
 
3. Swedish Agency for Marine and Water Management 
The Swedish Agency for Marine and Water Management is responsible for the use of 
GMOs in waterliving organisms, the deliberate placement of waterliving GM organisms, and 
the release of products that contain waterliving GM organisms.29 
 
4. Swedish Board of Agriculture 
The Swedish Board of Agriculture is responsible for the approval and oversight of the 
intentional release of GMOs into the environment through GM plants, land-based organisms 
not covered by the Swedish Chemicals Agency, and GM fodder.30 
 
5. The National Board of Forestry 
The National Board of Forestry is responsible for the intentional release of GM forest 
trees intended for timber production.31 
 
6. Swedish Chemicals Agency 
The Swedish Chemicals Agency processes applications for approval for studies 
deliberately releasing GM microorganisms, nematodes, arachnids, and insects into the 
environment. The Swedish Chemicals Agency lists one approved study for cultivation of a 
GM product on its webpage.32 The Swedish Chemicals Agency also preapproves the use of 
biological pesticides.33 
 
7. Swedish Civil Contingency Agency 
The Swedish Civil Contingency Agency is responsible for the transportation of such GM 
material that is classified as “dangerous goods.”34 
 
8. The National Food Agency 
The National Food Agency is responsible for “the GMO project,” through which 
producers are tested concerning GMO use and educated on GMO rules.35 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
131 
9. Medical Products Agency 
The Medical Products Agency is responsible for the intentional release of drugs that 
contain GMOs as well as the release into the environment of GMOs.36 There is currently no 
medical GMO on the market. Clinical testing in humans is generally considered as a release 
of GMOs into the environment.37 Tests that do not necessitate a release into the environment, 
such as certain animal tests, require GMO approval from the Swedish Work Environment 
Authority rather than the Medical Products Agency.38 All medical products containing GMOs 
must be labeled “This product contains genetically modified organisms.”39 
 
10. Swedish Work Environment Authority 
The Swedish Work Environment Authority oversees the issuance of permits and the 
registration of use of GMOs in a contained setting (such as laboratory use), and the work 
conditions for all workers handling GMOs. Based on the classification of harm to the people 
working with the product the use will require registration or a permit from the user.40 
 
C. Labels 
Fodder, food, and pharmaceuticals that include GMOs must be labeled.41 Products from 
livestock that have been fed GMO fodder need not be labeled. 
 
 
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment  
 
A. General Provisions 
The release of GMOs into the environment is regulated by EU Directive 2001/18/EG as 
implemented through Regulation SFS 2002:1086. Release is restricted and requires a 
license.42 Agencies must apply the precautionary principle and ensure that appropriate 
measures are taken to avoid negative effects on human health or the environment that may 
result from the intentional release of GMOs into the environment.43 Additional guidelines 
may be issued by the relevant agency, and the release must be ethically justifiable to be 
granted a permit.44 Before an application for use of GMO is approved, the public is offered an 
opportunity to comment on the application.45 The agency must also send a copy of the 
application to the European Commission, the National Environmental Protection Agency, and 
the Gene Technology Advisory Board.46 Once a release is approved and has commenced, it 
must be followed by a report by the GMO user describing the effects of the release and all 
other requirements dictated by the relevant authority.47 All GMO studies conducted in 
Sweden can be found on the EU website, according to which there has been a total of forty-
eight studies with plants48 and nine studies with nonplants.49 
 
B. Reporting Requirements and Inspections 
Inspections are carried out by the relevant authority as specified in the Environmental 
Oversight Regulation.50 Each authority issues its own instructions for the inspections but they 
must be in compliance with the Environmental Code. 
 
C. Protection of Neighboring Cultivation 
EU Member States set their own policies and regulations for cultivating GMOs in the 
proximity of another non-GM product. In Sweden a farmer must maintain a distance of fifty 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
132 
meters between GM and non-GM corn and three meters between GM and non-GM potatoes.51 
As mentioned above, only the GM Amflora potato has been approved for cultivation in 
Sweden, but is currently not being produced. The Swedish Board of Agriculture regulates the 
distance required between GM and non-GM products.52 The Swedish Board of Agriculture 
has issued an instruction as a guide for application of the precautionary principle in the 
cultivation of GMOs.53 
 
D. Development of “GMO Free Zones” 
Although there are restrictions on releasing and cultivating GM products, there is no legal 
basis for a Swedish municipality to proclaim itself to be GMO free.54 A municipality may 
reach an agreement with its farmers not to produce GMOs, provided these agreements are 
voluntary. Several Swedish municipalities and one county have declared themselves “GMO 
free.”55 
Other municipalities source locally and organically without calling themselves GMO-free 
zones because they deemed it “practically impossible” to rid an area of GM organisms.56 
Regardless of the municipality’s approach to GMOs, the granting of GMO licenses for 
agriculture is still carried out by the Swedish Board of Agriculture on a national level. 
Municipalities can thus not prevent local farmers from producing or using EU-approved 
GMOs. 
 
 
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs 
 
A. The Precautionary Principle 
As mentioned above, Sweden together with the EU previously relied on the precautionary 
principle when restricting GMOs in food and animal fodder.57 Although GMOs are now 
allowed in the EU, the principle is applied to each application on a case-by-case basis.58 
 
B. Implementing Authorities and Authorizing Procedures 
The Swedish Board of Agriculture oversees the use of GMOs in fodder, and the National 
Food Agency oversees GMOs in food intended for human consumption.59 
 
C. GMOs in Food for Human Consumption 
GMOs in food is regulated in Livsmedelslagen60 and Livsmedelsförordningen,61 
implementing EU Regulations 852/2004, 178/2002, and 853/2004.62 Foods that contain 
GMOs need to be labeled.63 However, animal products intended for human consumption 
originating from animals raised on GM fodder need not be labeled (such as eggs from hens, 
beef, etc.). Swedish honey is not tested for GMOs.64 GMOs that have not been approved by 
the EU may not be used in food products. It is the European Food Safety Agency that decides 
which GMOs are fit for human consumption and which are not. The Swedish National Food 
Agency merely implements the European Food Safety Agency’s decision. 
 
D. Fodder for Livestock 
GMOs are mainly used for fodder for livestock in Sweden, as evidenced by the 
applications for the use of GMOs.65 A list of GMOs approved to be used in fodder can be 
found at the Swedish Board of Agriculture website.66 The rules governing fodder can also be 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
133 
found there.67 The approved GMOs include eight strands of cotton, twenty-seven types of 
corn, three strands of colza, one sugar beet, seven types of soybeans, and one potato.68 For a 
fee, a survey of the Swedish GM fodder market can be accessed at the Swedish Board of 
Agriculture’s website.69 
 
E. “GMO Free” and Commonly Used Labels Indicating Green Products 
GMO-free labels are technically not allowed in Sweden but are common.70 Following an 
inspection by the National Food Agency they have been replaced by other labels such as 
“organically grown” and “KRAV” (indicating approval by a special labeling organization by 
the same name).71 Products do not live up to the labeling standard if they contain genetically 
modified products.72 As mentioned above, animal products from animals fed with GM 
produce do not require a special label.73 The Leftist and Green Parties argue that this makes it 
impossible for consumers who want to avoid GMO products to do so, and therefore these 
parties want to limit all imports of GM colza.74 The use of the Svenskt Sigill (Swedish Seal) 
requires the use of GMO-free fodder.75 
 
F. Recent Licenses for GMO Use 
Despite public resistance to GMOs, all of the most recent (seven out of seven) 
applications for import licenses for GM products have been approved by the Swedish Gene 
Technology Advisory Board.76 The Board’s general position on GMOs can be found in its 
annual GMO reports.77 
The Swedish Board of Agriculture lists all approved GM products.78 Out of forty-eight 
products only the GM Amflora potato is approved for cultivation.79 Note that this potato is 
not suitable nor intended for human consumption.80 Forty-five of the other forty-seven 
products are suitable only for fodder. All but eight are suitable for import.81 Current field 
studies of GM plants in Sweden include oil cabbage, potato, aspen, cress, and apple and pear 
trees.82 
 
 
VII. Liability Regime 
 
Breaches of the Environmental Code are regulated in its chapter 29. Beginning 
November 5, 2013, violations of the stipulated precautions in relation to the release of GMOs 
into the environment are subject to a fine and up to two years of imprisonment.83 Also, 
obstructions of environmental inspections may result in fines or imprisonment for up to two 
years.84 Fines may also be issued for failure to comply with GMO-specific legislation, such as 
observing the mandatory distance between GM and non-GM products; failing to label 
products as GM when required to do so; and failing to inform, identify, and document the 
transport of GMOs.85 There is no liability for minor breaches.86 Animals, plants, etc. used in 
these violations can be confiscated.87 There is currently no special legislation granting a 
private cause of action for others’ GMO violations. Thus, the general culpability rules for 
torts apply.88 
 
 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
134 
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases 
 
There are no prominent cases on the national level that directly control the use of GMOs. 
The most prominent EU case applicable also to Sweden is the EU honey case.89 
 
A. Misleading Advertisement (“GMO Free”) 
In 2004 the Market Court found that an advertisement for chicken stating, among other 
things, that it was GMO free was improper and misleading as the chicken included up to 2% 
GMO, whereas Swedish custom at the time defined “free from GMO” as including less than 
1% GMO.90 The advertisement was therefore banned. 
 
B. Municipalities’ Control over Leased Land 
In a January 15, 2013, decision the Göta Court of Appeals found that a municipality 
could generally change the terms of a lease for land only if the change in terms did not lead to 
unreasonable burdens on the lessee (farmer).91 However, in this case the Court found that the 
desired change into an ecological, GMO-free type of agriculture would be unreasonably 
burdensome for the farmer and therefore prevented the municipality from placing such a 
burden on the farmer. The lessee terms could therefore not be changed and the farmer was not 
required to farm ecologically. 
 
 
UNITED STATES 
 
Luis Acosta 
Senior Legal Information Analyst 
 
 
Summary  
 
GMOs are regulated in the United States under the Coordinated Framework for 
Regulation of Biotechnology, published in 1986, pursuant to previously existing statutory 
authority regulating conventional products, with a focus on the nature of the products 
rather than the process in which they are produced. 
Plant GMOs are regulated by the US Department of Agriculture’s Animal and Plant 
Health Inspection Service under the Plant Protection Act. GMOs in food, drugs, and 
biological products are regulated by the Food and Drug Administration under the Federal 
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and the Public Health Service Act. GMO pesticides and 
microorganisms are regulated by the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the 
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act and the Toxic Substances Control 
Act. The form of regulation varies depending on the type of GMO involved. 
 
 
I. Introduction 
 
The United States does not have any federal legislation that is specific to genetically 
modified organisms (GMOs). Rather, GMOs are regulated pursuant to health, safety, and 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
135 
environmental legislation governing conventional products. The US approach to regulating 
GMOs is premised on the assumption that regulation should focus on the nature of the 
products, rather than the process in which they were produced.1 
Compared to other countries, regulation of GMOs in the US is relatively favorable to 
their development. GMOs are an economically important component of the biotechnology 
industry, which now plays a significant role in the US economy.2 For example, the US is the 
world’s leading producer of genetically modified (GM) crops. In 2012, of the 170.3 million 
hectares of biotech crops globally, the United States accounted for 69.5 million, over 40% of 
the total.3 For several crops grown in the US, genetically engineered varieties now make up 
the vast majority of the crop. In 2013, 93% of the soybeans, 90% of the cotton, and 90% of 
the corn grown in the US were genetically engineered for either herbicide tolerance or insect 
resistance.4 
The US is not a party to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety.5 As a signatory but a 
nonparty to the parent Convention on Biological Diversity, it cannot become a party to the 
Protocol.6 It has participated in meetings as a nonparty observer, however.7 
 
 
II. Public and Scholarly Opinion  
 
A. Public Opinion 
Public opinion on GMOs in the US is mixed. A series of polls conducted over five years, 
from 2001 to 2006, found that public understanding of biotechnology was relatively low, and 
that consumers were relatively unaware of the extent to which their foods included 
genetically modified ingredients.8 Support for the introduction of genetically modified foods 
into the food supply held steady at 26 to 27% of respondents in favor over that time period, 
while opposition to the introduction of such foods fell from 58 to 46% over the period.9 
Polls indicate strong support for labeling of GMO foods; one recent poll found 93% of 
respondents supporting mandatory labeling.10 The same poll found three-fourths of 
Americans expressing concern regarding GMOs in food; nearly half indicating they were 
aware that many processed or packaged foods contain genetically modified ingredients; 
around half saying they would not eat genetically modified vegetables, fruits, and grains; 
three-quarters stating they would not eat genetically modified fish; and two-thirds saying they 
would not eat genetically modified meat.11 
 
B. Scholarly Opinion 
Several scientific organizations in the US have issued studies or statements regarding the 
safety of GMOs indicating that there is no evidence that GMOs present unique safety risks 
compared to conventionally bred products. These include the National Research Council,12 
the American Association for the Advancement of Science,13 and the American Medical 
Association.14 
Groups in the US opposed to GMOs include some environmental organizations,15 organic 
farming organizations,16 and consumer organizations.17 A substantial number of legal 
academics have criticized the US’s approach to regulating GMOs.18 
 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
136 
III. Structure of Pertinent Legislation 
 
There is no comprehensive federal legislation specifically addressing GMOs. GMOs are 
regulated under the general statutory authority of environmental, health, and safety laws. 
A policy statement published in 1986 by the Executive Office of the President, Office of 
Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) entitled the Coordinated Framework for Regulation 
of Biotechnology (Coordinated Framework)19 sets forth the basic approach to the regulation 
of GMOs in the US. The Coordinated Framework was the outgrowth of efforts by an 
interagency working group formed in 1984 to address whether the regulatory framework that 
pertained to conventional products was adequate for products derived from biotechnology. 
The working group concluded that existing laws as then implemented, supplemented with 
new regulations, were adequate to address regulatory needs.20 A proposed notice was 
published and comments were requested.21 The final Coordinated Framework policy notice 
confirmed that the regulatory jurisdiction over biotechnology products would be allocated in 
the same manner as conventional products, using existing laws governing conventional 
products.22 
The three main agencies involved in regulating GMOs are the US Department of 
Agriculture’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
 
A. Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
APHIS regulates the planting, importation, or transportation of GM plants pursuant to its 
authority under the Plant Protection Act (PPA),23 which authorizes the Secretary of 
Agriculture to “prohibit or restrict the importation, entry, exportation, or movement in 
interstate commerce of any plant, plant product [etc.] if the Secretary determines [it] is 
necessary to prevent the introduction . . . of a plant pest or noxious weed within the United 
States.”24 By regulation, APHIS classifies most GM plants as plant pests or potential plant 
pests and as “regulated articles.”25 Under the PPA, a regulated article must receive prior 
approval from APHIS before it is introduced.26 
APHIS grants authorization to use GM plants in three ways: through a notification 
process, a permitting process, or a determination of nonregulated status. 
 
1. Notification Procedure 
The notification procedure is available to plants that are not classified as noxious weeds, 
or weeds in the release area, if certain criteria and performance standards are met.27 The 
criteria include that the plant must be a species that APHIS has determined may be safely 
introduced; the genetic material must be stably integrated; the expression of the genetic 
material must not result in plant disease; etc.28 The performance standards govern shipment, 
storage, planting, and testing, and are intended to prevent the plant from being released from 
containment.29 When the applicant sends a notification to APHIS, APHIS will respond within 
a prescribed time with an acknowledgement or a denial.30 If the notification is denied, the 
applicant may apply for a permit.31 
 
2. Permit Procedure 
The permit procedure requires an applicant to submit information concerning, among 
other things, the donor organism, the recipient organism, the composition of the regulated 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
137 
article; the expression of altered genetic material in the regulated article and the molecular 
biology of the system used to produce the article; the locality where the donor and recipient 
organisms and the regulated article were developed; the purpose of the regulated article; the 
quantity to be introduced; processes to prevent release; the intended destination, use, and 
distribution; and the final disposition of the regulated article.32 If APHIS grants the permit, it 
is subject to conditions designed to ensure both that the regulated article remains contained 
and that APHIS can maintain regulatory oversight.33 Failure to comply with the conditions 
can result in withdrawal of the permit.34 
 
3. Determination of Nonregulated Status 
GM plants that have been tested and have been shown not to pose a risk may be eligible 
for a determination of nonregulated status.35 A petition for determination of nonregulated 
status must include detailed biological information on the regulated article and the recipient 
organism, published and unpublished scientific studies, data from field tests, and other 
information designed to assist APHIS in determining whether the plant constitutes a pest.36 
Upon receipt of a petition, APHIS publishes a notice in the Federal Register and allows sixty 
days for public comment.37 APHIS has 180 days to approve in whole or part or deny the 
petition.38 
 
B. Food and Drug Administration 
The FDA regulates the safety of all human and animal food products in the US (other 
than meat, poultry, and eggs), as well as drugs and biological products. 
 
1. Food 
The FDA’s primary statutory authority is the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act 
(FFDCA),39 which authorizes the agency to regulate, among other things, “adulterated 
food,”40 defined as food that “contains any poisonous or deleterious substance that may 
render it deleterious to health,”41 and “food additives,”42 which include “any substance [that 
may] becom[e] a component or otherwise affect[] the characteristics of any food.”43 The 
FFDCA prohibits the sale of adulterated or misbranded food.44 
Under the FFDCA, substances added to food can be classified either as “food additives,” 
which require approval from the FDA that they are safe before they can be marketed,45 and 
substances added to food classified as “generally recognized as safe” (GRAS), as to which 
preapproval is not needed.46 
In a 1992 policy statement, the FDA reaffirmed that in most cases it would treat foods 
derived from GMOs like those derived from conventionally bred plants, and that most foods 
derived from GM plants would be presumptively GRAS. However, with respect to a GMO 
product “that differs significantly in structure, function, or composition from substances 
found currently in food,” premarket approval of the substance as a food additive would be 
required.47 
The FDA encourages developers of new plant varieties intended for food use, including 
GMOs, to engage in a consultation procedure with the FDA, in order “to ensure that human 
food and animal feed safety issues or other regulatory issues (e.g. labeling) are resolved prior 
to commercial distribution.”48 The consultation procedure is meant to enable the FDA to 
determine if regulatory action is needed with respect to food derived from the new variety 
such as “significantly increased levels of plant toxicants or anti-nutrients, reduction of 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
138 
important nutrients, new allergens, or the presence in the food of an unapproved food 
additive.”49 Among the issues subject to consultation is the food safety of new proteins in 
new plant varieties, including those developed through genetic engineering.50 The FDA 
makes detailed information regarding completed consultations publicly available.51 
 
2. Animals 
The FDA also asserts jurisdiction over genetically engineered animals, pursuant to its 
authority to regulate “new animal drugs” (NADs) under the FFDCA.52 Under the FFDCA, 
NADs are deemed generally unsafe unless the FDA has approved a New Animal Drug 
Application (NADA) for the particular use of the drug.53 Except in cases in which the FDA 
exercises discretion to decline to require compliance,54 or where the drug is only for 
investigational use and thus need only conform to specified exemptions,55 the FDA requires a 
genetically engineered (GE) animal to be the subject of an approved NADA based on a 
demonstration that it is safe and effective for its intended use.56 A NADA for a GE animal 
must include information on the animal’s identification; chemistry; clinical purpose; labeling; 
components and composition; manufacturing methods, facilities, and controls; safety and 
effectiveness; environmental impact; and other information.57 
 
3. Drugs 
The FDA also has regulatory authority over drugs generally. Companies interested in 
introducing a new drug into the US market in most cases must submit a New Drug 
Application (NDA) to the FDA, which must include extensive information and data on the 
drug’s safety and effectiveness, such as the drug’s chemistry, manufacture, animal and in 
vitro studies, clinical data, and the like.58 Drugs developed through genetic engineering must 
go through the same NDA process as other types of drugs. 
 
4. Biological Products 
The FDA also regulates medical products classified as “biological products,” which 
includes vaccines, serums, blood products, and the like, under relevant provisions of the 
Public Health Service Act (PHSA).59 Biological products, whether involving genetic 
modification or not, must be licensed by the FDA before they can be introduced. The 
licensing procedure for biological products requires submission to the FDA of detailed 
information on laboratory and clinical studies, manufacturing methods, and other information 
relevant to whether they are safe and effective for their intended purpose.60 
U.S.C. § 321(v). The FDA reasons that the “rDNA construct in a GE animal that is 
intended to affect the structure or function of the body of the GE animal, regardless of the 
intended use of products that may be produced by the GE animal,” and thus all GE animals 
are NADs for purposes of regulation. GE Animals Guidance at 6. While the FDA could 
regulate all GE animals, it has determined it will decline to regulate those that are under the 
jurisdiction of other agencies. Id. at 7. 
 
C. Environmental Protection Agency 
The EPA regulates pesticides and microorganisms developed through genetic 
engineering.  
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
139 
1. Pesticides 
The EPA regulates the manufacture, sale and use of pesticides under the Federal 
Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA).61 Under FIFRA, pesticides must not 
cause “unreasonable adverse effects on the environment,”62 which is defined to include both 
safety to the environment and safety in food for consumption.63 FIFRA requires all pesticides 
to be registered with the EPA before they can be distributed commercially.64 Pesticides must 
be tested and shown to be safe before they can be registered.65 A registration application must 
include information regarding testing, identity of the product, draft labeling, information on 
tolerance of residues, and other safety-related information.66 
Pursuant to its authority under FIFRA, the EPA regulates plants that are genetically 
modified to produce substances intended to control pests as to both their environmental safety 
and their safety in food, termed plant-incorporated protectants (PIPs).67 The standard 
registration procedures for pesticides apply to PIPs, unless they are made exempt by 
regulation.68 PIPs are exempt from FIFRA registration if the PIP is used in a crop used in 
food and its residues are exempt from regulation under the FFDCA,69 if the PIP is an inert 
ingredient listed as exempt by the EPA,70 or if the PIP is from a plant that is sexually 
compatible with the recipient plant.71 With respect to those PIPs that are exempt, if the 
producer of the PIP obtains information regarding adverse effects from the PIP on human 
health or the environment, it must share it with the EPA.72 
 
2. Microorganisms 
The EPA also has authority to regulate GMOs under the Toxic Substances Control Act 
(TSCA).73 The TSCA authorizes the EPA to regulate chemical substances that may present an 
unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment.74 Manufacturers of covered 
substances must submit a premanufacture notification to the EPA.75 The EPA has determined 
that GMO microorganisms are chemical substances subject to regulation under the TSCA.76 
The EPA has established regulations specifically for microorganisms that require submission 
of a Microbial Commercial Activity Notice (MCAN) before they are used for commercial 
purposes.77 The Notice must include information describing the microorganism’s 
characteristics and genetic construction; byproducts of its manufacture, use, and disposal; 
health and environmental effects data; and other information.78 
 
D. National Environmental Policy Act 
The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)79 requires federal agencies in some 
cases to prepare Environmental Assessments (EAs) of federal actions, such as adopting a 
policy or approving a permit, to determine if they are likely to significantly impact the 
environment.80 If a federal action is likely to have a significant impact, the agency must 
prepare a more detailed evaluation called an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS).81 Federal 
agency approvals of GMOs may require an EA or an EIS in some circumstances.82 
 
E. State Law 
State law generally plays little role in the regulation of GMOs in the US. The federal 
preemption doctrine, which bars conflicting state regulation when Congress intends federal 
regulation to occupy a particular field, precludes many aspects of state regulation of GMOs.83 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
140 
A rare example in which one state’s law is more stringent than federal law on GMOs 
involves a bioengineered tropical aquarium fish known as the GloFish, which is unregulated 
at the federal level,84 but has been banned by the California Fish and Game Commission.85 
Some municipal governments in the US have banned GMO crops. For example, in 
California, the counties of Marin and Mendocino have enacted ordinances forbidding the 
cultivation of GMOs.86 In Hawaii, Kauai County and Hawaii County similarly have banned 
the cultivation of most GMO crops.87 
 
 
IV. Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing 
 
The nature of restrictions on GMOs with respect to research, production and marketing in 
the US vary with the different regulatory regimes that cover various aspects of genetic 
modification. 
 
A. Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service 
The introduction of GM plants requires prior approval from APHIS, by means of a 
notification, permitting, or a determination of nonregulated status procedure. (See Part III(A), 
above.) 
 
B. Food and Drug Administration 
 
1. Foods 
The FDA regards most GMO foods as presumptively falling within the category of 
“generally regarded as safe,” thus not needing premarket approval, but a GMO product “that 
differs significantly in structure, function, or composition from substances found currently in 
food” requires premarket approval as a food additive. (See Part III(B)(1), above.) 
 
2. Animals 
In most cases, the FDA requires a genetically engineered animal to be approved by 
means of a New Animal Drug Application based on a demonstration that it is safe and 
effective for its intended use. (See Part III(B)(2), above.) 
 
3. Drugs 
FDA requires those wishing to introduce a new drug into the US market, whether it 
involves genetic modification or not, to submit a New Drug Application (NDA) to the FDA, 
with detailed information on the drug’s safety and effectiveness. (See Part III(B)(3), above.) 
 
4. Biological Products 
The FDA requires all biological products, regardless of whether or not they are developed 
by genetic modification, to be licensed by FDA before they can be introduced, with detailed 
information on whether they are safe and effective for their intended purpose. (See Part 
III(B)(4), above.) 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
141 
C. Environmental Protection Agency 
Under FIFRA, the EPA requires all pesticides to be registered prior to commercial 
distribution, and the registration must include information on their safety. The EPA also 
requires PIPs to comply with the pesticide registration procedures, unless they meet the 
criteria for exemption from these procedures. (See Part III(C)(1), above.) 
Under TSCA, the EPA requires those wishing to use microorganisms for commercial 
purposes to submit a Microbial Commercial Activity Notice (MCAN). (See Part III(C)(2), 
above.) 
 
D. Labeling of GMOs 
There is no law in the US requiring that GMO foods or foods with GMO ingredients be 
labeled to so indicate. Proposed federal legislation, the Genetically Engineered Food Right-
to-Know Act,88 which would mandate labeling of any GMO food or food with a genetically 
modified ingredient, has been introduced in the last several Congresses, but has never 
advanced beyond the committee stage in either chamber. At the state level, a 2012 California 
initiative mandating labeling of GMO foods, and a similar 2013 Washington State initiative, 
both failed.89 
The FDA has regulatory authority to prevent false and misleading labeling of foods and 
drugs. With respect to genetically engineered foods, the FDA has stated in policy documents 
that if a GM food product is not materially different from its traditional counterpart, there is 
no need to label or change the name of the product, but name changes are appropriate when a 
food from a GM plant is so different from its traditional counterpart that the usual name no 
longer adequately describes the new food, or if there is a safety issue to which consumers 
should be alerted, such as the presence of allergens.90 
 
 
V. Restrictions on Releasing Organisms into the Environment 
 
Because US regulation of GMOs focuses on the nature of the products, rather than the 
process in which they were produced, the extent to which there are restrictions on releases of 
GMOs into the environment depends on the GMOs in question. (See the discussion of the 
different regulatory regimes for different types of GMOs, Part III, above.) 
 
 
VI. Restrictions on GMOs in Foodstuffs 
 
GMOs are not restricted categorically from the US food supply. As discussed above, the 
FDA treats foods derived from GMOs like those derived from conventionally bred plants, and 
therefore most foods derived from GM plants are classified as presumptively “generally 
recognized as safe.” However, with respect to a GMO product “that differs significantly in 
structure, function, or composition from substances found currently in food,” premarket 
approval of the product is required. (See Part III(B)(1), above.) 
 
 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
142 
VII. Liability Regime 
 
All of the various statutory schemes under which GMOs are regulated in the US provide 
for civil and criminal penalties. For example, violations of the PPA are subject to substantial 
civil or criminal penalties;91 knowingly importing or moving any regulated article for sale or 
distribution in violation of the PPA is punishable by a fine, imprisonment up to five years, or 
both.92 The liability provisions of the FFDCA list several practices that can lead to significant 
civil or criminal penalties, including imprisonment.93 Violations of FIFRA and TSCA 
similarly are subject to civil or criminal penalties.94 
 
 
VIII. Judicial Decisions / Prominent Cases 
 
A landmark case of significance in the early development of the US biotechnology 
industry was the US Supreme Court’s 1980 decision in Diamond v. Chakrabarty,95 holding 
that genetically engineered microorganisms can be patented. This decision “contributed to a 
revolution in biotechnology that has resulted in the issuance of thousands of patents, the 
formation of hundreds of new companies, and the development of thousands of bioengineered 
plants and food products.”96 
Outside of patent law, however, the role of the US courts in shaping regulatory policy 
with respect to GMOs has been limited. A common theme among many court decisions on 
GMOs has been the judiciary’s deference to agency expertise in determining how to regulate 
them. 
The Supreme Court’s decision in Monsanto Co. v. Geertson Seed Farms97 involved a 
challenge under NEPA to APHIS’s decision to issue a determination of nonregulated status to 
Monsanto’s Roundup Ready Alfalfa (RRA), a genetically engineered variety of alfalfa, after 
making a “finding of no significant impact” determination instead of preparing an 
environmental impact statement (EIS). The district court ruled that an EIS was required, and 
as a remedy enjoined APHIS from deregulating RRA, in whole or in part, pending 
completion of the EIS, and also enjoining almost all planting of RRA nationwide.98 The 
Supreme Court reversed, ruling that the district court exceeded its authority in enjoining 
APHIS from partially deregulating RRA and enjoining the planting of RRA. It concluded that 
APHIS should be allowed to structure a partial deregulation order while completing the EIS.99 
In Alliance for Bio-Integrity v. Shalala,100 the plaintiffs challenged the FDA’s 1992 
policy statement that GMO foods that are similar to conventional varieties would be 
presumptively deemed “generally recognized as safe” (GRAS)101 and that they need not be 
labeled.102 The district court declined to rule that the FDA’s decision that genetic 
modification does not “materially” alter foods and to presume GMO foods are GRAS was 
arbitrary and capricious, stating that “the rational for [court] deference [to agency decision 
making] is particularly strong when the [agency] is evaluating scientific data within its 
technical expertise.”103 As to labeling, it said that given FDA’s decision on the GRAS issue, it 
would also find that the FDA’s interpretation of the FFDCA’s labeling requirement was 
reasonable.104 
Other GMO cases have similarly displayed the tendency of US courts to defer to agency 
decision making.105 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
143 
INTERNATIONAL PROTOCOLS 
 
Constance A. Johnson 
Senior Legal Research Analyst 
 
 
Summary  
 
There are two major international protocols that address genetically modified 
organisms, the Cartagena Protocol of 2000 and the Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur 
Supplementary Protocol of 2010. They are attached to the Convention on Biological 
Diversity of 1993. They apply only to transboundary actions; they do not apply to use or 
transit of GMOs within countries. 
 
 
I. Cartagena Protocol 
 
The major international instrument on genetically modified organisms (GMOs) is the 
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (the Protocol)1 to the Convention on Biological Diversity.2 
The Protocol was adopted on January 29, 2000,3 and became effective on September 11, 
2003. It is designed to protect both biological diversity and human life from any adverse 
effects of organisms modified by technology.4 There are at present 166 parties to the 
Protocol; the United States is not a party.5 
Biosafety was one of the key issues addressed by the Convention on Biodiversity, which 
stressed the need to protect human health and the environment from the possibility of 
negative outcomes of modern biotechnology, while at the same time seeing the potential for 
good results of innovation in such areas as improving food supplies through agricultural 
development. In November 1995, the Conference of the Parties to the Convention, at its 
second meeting, established a working group on biosafety. The goal of the working group 
was to create a protocol on the topic that would focus on transboundary movement of GMOs, 
when there may be an adverse impact on “the conservation and sustainable use of biological 
diversity.”6 The Protocol was the result of several years of negotiations, including six 
meetings held between July 1996 and February 1999, concluding in January 2000 at a 
meeting on the Conference of Parties held in Montreal. 
When the Protocol was accepted, the decision was made to set up an “open-ended ad hoc 
Intergovernmental Committee for the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (ICCP)” that would 
organize the initial meetings of parties to the Protocol.7 
 
A. Purpose and Definitions 
The Protocol “provides an international regulatory framework to reconcile the respective 
needs of trade and environmental protection with respect to a rapidly growing global industry, 
the biotechnology industry.”8 
The Protocol itself states that its objective is 
 
to contribute to ensuring an adequate level of protection in the field of the safe 
transfer, handling and use of living modified organisms resulting from modern 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
144 
biotechnology that may have adverse effects on the conservation and sustainable use of 
biological diversity, taking also into account risks to human health, and specifically 
focusing on transboundary movements.9 
 
The Protocol defines “living modified organism” as “any living organism that possesses a 
novel combination of genetic material obtained through the use of modern biotechnology.”10 
“Modern biotechnology” is defined as: 
 
the application of: 
a. In vitro nucleic acid techniques, including recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid 
(DNA) and direct injection of nucleic acid into cells or organelles, or 
b. Fusion of cells beyond the taxonomic family, 
that overcome natural physiological reproductive or recombination barriers and that 
are not techniques used in traditional breeding and selection . . . .11 
 
The Protocol’s scope includes the transboundary movement, transit, handling, and use of 
GMOs, but it explicitly does not apply to the movement across borders of GMO 
pharmaceuticals for human use that are covered in other international agreements or 
addressed by international organizations. Nothing in the document, however, limits a party to 
it from applying its own decisions on GMO pharmaceuticals. Furthermore, any party can 
make its own assessment and decisions on import standards for GMOs for contained use 
within the party’s own borders.12 
 
B. Basic Principles for Planned Transport of GMOs 
One of the principles on which the Protocol is based is the precautionary principle, a way 
of determining whether regulation should be used in uncertain circumstances. It was outlined 
in the 1992 Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, which states that “[w]here 
there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty shall not be 
used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental 
degradation.”13 This principle, which favors imposing methods to prevent damage, so long as 
they are “cost-effective,” has been applied to a number of environmental issues; it is 
considered a useful way to balance the sometimes conflicting interests of protecting the 
environment while not overly inhibiting scientific advances and international trade.14 
The wording of the precautionary principle in some parts of the Protocol was 
controversial, and States have interpreted its meaning in various ways. While the document 
authorizes nations to take precautionary decisions even when scientific evidence is unclear as 
to potential harm from GMOs, there is still disagreement on how to apply this principle.15 
Under the World Trade Organization’s dispute mechanisms, a 2006 panel said that states 
could not generally rely on nongovernmental organizations’ reports or peer-reviewed journal 
articles as the basis for applying the precautionary principle in a way that restricted trade.16 
Under the Protocol, the basic mechanism for regulating transit of GMOs across borders is 
advance informed agreement, which requires that when there is a plan to move such products 
across a boundary, parties will be notified in advance.17 There is a 270-day period in which 
the party can decide whether to allow the transit and what conditions to impose if permission 
is granted.18 The decisions are based on assessment of risk under recognized 
assessment techniques.19 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
145 
C. Unintended Transboundary Transmission and Information Sharing 
The Protocol also contains provisions on accidental movement of GMOs across borders. 
It specifies that if a party becomes aware that something has occurred that “leads, or may 
lead, to an unintentional transboundary movement” of a living GMO and if that movement 
would “have significant adverse effects on the conservation and sustainable use of biological 
diversity” that may include a risk to human health, then that party has the obligation to notify 
any affected countries, relevant international organizations, and the Biosafety Clearing 
House.20 The Protocol establishes the Biosafety Clearing House to facilitate the exchange of 
all kinds of information about GMOs and to help parties to the Protocol implement its 
provisions.21 The Protocol also states that each participating country should establish a 
“national focal point” to be responsible for the administrative functions required by the 
Protocol; information on the designated focal point is available to all parties through the 
Biosafety Clearing House.22 
 
D. Handling and Labeling 
The Protocol also specifies that measures must be taken such that GMOs being 
transported are properly handled, packaged, and safely moved. In addition, documentation 
must accompany all shipments of GMOs that states that the items may contain GMOs, as well 
as indicating a contact point for information about the shipment.23 
 
E. Illegal Transboundary Transmissions 
The Protocol does not include specific penalties for improper transmission of GMOs 
across borders. Instead it states that parties “shall adopt appropriate domestic measures aimed 
at preventing and, if appropriate, penalizing transboundary movements” of GMOs when done 
in a manner that violates Protocol provisions. It also states that parties affected by illegal 
transmissions may request that the party of origin bear the expense of disposal of such 
illegally transmitted GMOs, either through repatriation or destruction as appropriate. 
Furthermore, such cases must be reported to the Biosafety Clearing House.24 
 
 
II. Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol 
 
Following years of negotiations over the question of liability for GMO-produced 
damages, on October 15, 2010, the Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on 
Liability and Redress to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (the Supplementary Protocol) 
was adopted.25 As of March 2013, only eleven parties to the Protocol had ratified the 
Supplementary Protocol; it will enter into force ninety days after the fortieth country ratifies 
or otherwise accepts it.26 
The Supplementary Protocol provides international rules and procedure on liability and 
redress for damage to biodiversity resulting from living modified organisms. René Lefeber, 
one of the co-chairs of the Group of the Friends who facilitated the negotiations of the text of 
the Supplementary Protocol, spoke about the importance of the adoption of the document and 
the timing of the move, stating, “[t]he adoption of [a] new supplementary Protocol during the 
International Year Biodiversity will give new impetus to multilateral environmental 
negotiations. This agreement will also make important contribution to the on-going work 
under the Convention on Biological Diversity to protect life on earth.”27 He has also 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
146 
described the need for the Supplementary Protocol by pointing out that “[s]ince adverse 
effects may occur in spite of risk-management measures or as a result of the failure to identify 
the risk of adverse effects, the allocation of the costs of such effects should be anticipated and 
regulated.”28 
 
A. Purpose and Definitions 
The Supplementary Protocol states that its objective is to “contribute to the conservation 
and sustainable use of biological diversity, taking also into account risks to human health, by 
providing international rules and procedures in the field of liability and redress relating to 
living modified organisms.”29 It applies to damage from GMOs that cross borders and defines 
“damage” as 
 
an adverse effect on the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, 
taking also into account risks to human health that: 
(i) Is measurable or otherwise observable taking into account, wherever available, 
scientifically-established [sic] baselines recognized by a competent authority that takes 
into account any other human induced variation and natural variation; and 
(ii) Is significant . . . .30 
 
The Supplementary Protocol further states that whether an adverse effect is significant is 
determined based on a number of factors, including whether it causes long-term or permanent 
change, the extent of the qualitative or quantitative change that results, whether it reduces the 
way in which natural diversity provides goods and services, and the scope of any adverse 
impact on human health.31 
 
B. Basic Principles 
The basic principle underlying the Supplementary Protocol is that the polluter must pay 
for any damage caused. Lefeber notes that this principle has an economic origin, but, he 
argues, it is not clear whether it applies only to the person or organization in control of the 
polluting activity or whether liability extends to the state in charge of the area in which the 
activity occurred.32 While suggesting that liability of the state could be justified in 
international law, he notes that it has not been directly supported by existing international 
instruments.33 In fact the Supplementary Protocol explicitly provides that it does not affect 
“the rights and obligations of States under the rules of general international law with respect 
to the responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts.”34 
An additional basic principle is that, for the provisions to apply, a causal link must be 
established between the damage incurred and the GMO in question.35 
 
C. Response Requirements 
Under the Supplementary Protocol, parties must require those responsible for damages to 
immediately inform the authorities, evaluate the damage, and take appropriate response 
measures. The authorities must also evaluate the damage, as well as identifying the operator 
that caused the damage and determining needed response measures. If there is a likelihood 
that damage will occur without timely intervention, the operator of the organization involved 
is required to take appropriate measures so that damage is avoided. An assessment as to 
whether damage is likely must be based on available scientific information, including 
information collected by the Biosafety Clearing House. Authorities may also directly 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
147 
implement response measures when operators of businesses fail to do so. In such cases, the 
authorities may recover costs from the operators. The decision by a government authority to 
take action should be relayed to the operator. Response measures must be implemented in 
accordance with domestic law.36 
 
D. Additional Applications of Domestic Law 
The Supplementary Protocol allows parties to make specific provisions under their 
domestic law. It permits exemptions from responsibility when there are acts of war or civil 
unrest, or acts of God (force majeure), and parties may add other exemptions as they deem 
appropriate.37 Domestic law can also be used to establish the time and financial limits of 
liability for costs incurred in response to damaging GMO events.38 
Domestic law is also the source for rules and procedures to address the civil liability from 
damage caused by GMOs. It permits parties to either develop specific civil liability law for 
GMOs or to apply their existing general laws to such liability.39 
 
E. Assessment and Review 
Once the Supplementary Protocol has been in force for five years, and at five-year 
intervals thereafter, the effectiveness of the agreement will be reviewed by the Conference of 
the Parties. The Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the parties for the 
Cartagena Protocol serves as the Conference of the Parties to the Supplementary Protocol.40 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
Constance A. Johnson 
Senior Legal Research Analyst 
 
This bibliography lists selected, recent English-language works on restrictions on 
genetically modified organisms. The first section contains discussions of aspects of the topic 
in general and in international law. The second section has materials discussing the issue in 
particular jurisdictions and is divided into sections on Africa, the Americas, Asia, and Europe. 
 
 
General Works 
 
Albert, Janice, ed. New Technologies and Food Labelling: The Controversy over Labelling of 
Foods Derived from Genetically Modified Crops in INNOVATIONS IN FOOD 
LABELLING. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2010. 
http://www.fao.org/docrep/018/i0576e/i0576e10.pdf 
Andersen, Regine. Governing Agrobiodiversity: Plant Genetics and Developing Countries. 
420 pp. Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2008. 
K3876.A95 2008 
 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
148 
ANDRÉE, PETER. GENETICALLY MODIFIED DIPLOMACY: THE GLOBAL 
POLITICS OF AGRICULTURAL BIOTECHNOLOGY AND THE ENVIRONMENT. 
324 pp. Vancouver: UBC Press, 2007. 
S494.5.B563A53 2007 
Ashford, Nicholas A. & Ralph P. Hall. Biotechnology: Genetically Modified Organisms in 
TECHNOLOGY, GLOBALIZATION, AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT: 
TRANSFORMING THE INDUSTRIAL STATE § 11.2.6. Nicholas A. Ashford & Ralph 
P. Hall eds. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2011. 
HC79.E5 A84 2011 
Baram, Michael & Mathilde Bourrier. Governing Risk in GM Agriculture: An Introduction in 
GOVERNING RISK IN GM AGRICULTURE 1–12. Michael Baram & Mathilde 
Bourrier eds. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2011. 
K3927.G68 2011 
Bevilacqua, Dario. The International Regulation of Genetically Modified Organisms: 
Uncertainty, Fragmentation, and Precaution. 16 EUR. ENERGY & ENVTAL L. REV. 
314–36. 2007. 
KJC6242.A13 E97 
Bodiguel, Luc & Michael Cardwell. Genetically Modified Organisms and the Public: 
Participation, Preferences, and Protest in THE REGULATION OF GENETICALLY 
MODIFIED ORGANISMS: COMPARATIVE APPROACHES 11–36. Luc Bodiguel & 
Michael Cardwell eds. New York: Oxford University Press, 2010. 
K3927.R44 2010 
Casabono, Carlos M., Leire Escajedo San Epifanio & Aitziber Emaldi Cirión, eds. GLOBAL 
FOOD SECURITY – ETHICAL AND LEGAL CHALLENGES: EURSAFE 2010, 
BILBAO, SPAIN, 16–18 SEPTEMBER 2010. 532 pp. Wageningen: Wageningen 
Academic Pub., 2010. 
HD9000.6 .E97 2010 
Charlier, Christophe & Egizio Valceschini. The Importance and Limits of Cost-Benefit 
Analysis in the Regulation of Genetically Modified Organisms in THE REGULATION 
OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS: COMPARATIVE APPROACHES 
37–53. Luc Bodiguel & Michael Cardwell eds. New York: Oxford University Press, 
2010. 
K3927.R44 2010 
Chen, Christophe Chao-Hung. Labeling Genetically Modified Food: Comparative Law 
Studies from Consumer’s Perspective. 1 NAT’L TAIWAN U. L. REV. 1–44. 2006. 
K14.A8644 
Curtis, Kynada R., Jill J. McCloskey & Thomas I. Wahl. Consumer Acceptance of 
Genetically Modified Food Products in the Developing World. 7 AGBIOF. 2004. 
http://www.AgBioF..org/v7n12/v7n12a13-mccluskey.htm 
Clapp, Jennifer. Transnational Corporate Interests in International Biosafety Negotiations in 
THE INTERNATIONAL POLITICS OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED FOOD: 
DIPLOMACY, TRADE AND LAW 34–47. Robert Falkner ed. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2007. 
TP48.65.F66I595 2007 
Dawkins, Kristin & Josh DuBois. Toward a Liability and Compensation Regime Under the 
Biosafety Protocol in GENETICALLY ENGINEERED CROPS: INTERIM POLICIES, 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
149 
UNCERTAIN LEGISLATION 289–302. Iain E.P. Taylor ed. New York: Haworth Food 
& Agricultural Products Press, 2007. 
SB106.B56G46 2007 
Duall, E. A Liability and Redress Regime for Genetically Modified Organisms Under the 
Cartagena Protocol. 36 GEO. WASH. INT’L L. REV. 173–201. 2004. 
K10.O87 
Endicot, Martin. The Cartagena Protocol and the Regulation of Genetically Modified Food 
Aid in LEGAL ASPECTS OF IMPLEMENTING THE CARTAGENA PROTOCOL ON 
BIOSAFETY 502–13. Marie-Claire Cordonier Segger, Frederic Perron-Welch & 
Christine Frison eds. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013. 
K3925.B56L45 2013 
Esposti, Roberto & Alessandro Sorrentino. The Rationale Behind WTO Agreements and 
Agricultural GMO Controversy in THE REGULATION OF AGRICULTURAL 
BIOTECHNOLOGY 67–77. R.E. Evenson & V. Santaniello eds. Cambridge, MA: CABI 
Publishing, 2004. 
K3925.B56R44 2004 
Falker, Robert. International Cooperation Against the Hegemon: The Cartagena Protocol on 
Biosafety in THE INTERNATIONAL POLITICS OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED 
FOOD: DIPLOMACY, TRADE AND LAW 15–33. Robert Falkner ed. New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2007. 
TP48.65.F66I595 2007 
Falkner, Robert, ed. THE INTERNATIONAL POLITICS OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED 
FOOD: DIPLOMACY, TRADE AND LAW. 265 pp. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2007. 
TP48.65.F66I595 2007 
French, Duncan. The Regulation of Genetically Modified Organisms and International Law: 
A Call for Generality in THE REGULATION OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED 
ORGANISMS: COMPARATIVE APPROACHES 355–74. Luc Bodiguel & Michael 
Cardwell eds. New York: Oxford University Press, 2010. 
K3927.R44 2010 
GILLESPIE, 
ALEXANDER. 
CONSERVATION, 
BIODIVERSITY 
AND 
INTERNATIONAL LAW. 600 pp. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Pub., 2011. 
K3585.G555 2011 
Heumueller, Dirk & Tim Josling. Trade Restrictions on Genetically Engineered Foods: The 
Application of the TBT Agreement in THE REGULATION OF AGRICULTURAL 
BIOTECHNOLOGY 79–88. R.E. Evenson & V. Santaniello eds. Cambridge, MA: CABI 
Publishing, 2004. 
K3925.B56R44 2004 
Isaac, Grant E. & William A. Kerr. The Biosafety Protocol and the WTO: Concert or 
Conflict? in THE INTERNATIONAL POLITICS OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED 
FOOD: DIPLOMACY, TRADE AND LAW 195–212. Robert Falkner ed. New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2007. 
TP48.65.F66I595 2007 
Katz, Philip, Penny Macdonald & Gordon Mackenzie. The Evolving GMO Food Trade Policy 
Debate: Towards a Global Regulatory Regime? in THE REGULATION OF 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
150 
AGRICULTURAL BIOTECHNOLOGY 25–34. R.E. Evenson & V. Santaniello eds. 
Cambridge, MA: CABI Publishing, 2004. 
K3925.B56R44 2004 
Koch, Bernhard A., ed. DAMAGE CAUSED BY GENETICALLY MODIFIED 
ORGANISMS: COMPARATIVE SURVEY OF REDRESS OPTIONS FOR HARM TO 
PERSONS, PROPERTY, OR THE ENVIRONMENT. 954 pp. New York: De Gruyter, 
2010. 
K955.D355 2010 
Ludlow, Karinne. Pure Economic Loss and Non-Adopters: Comparing Liability in Australia, 
Canada, and the United States. 15 AGBIOF. 2012. 
http://www.AgBioF..org/v15n1/v15n1a02-ludlow.htm 
Mackenzie, Ruth. The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety and the Development of International 
Environmental Law in THE INTERNATIONAL POLITICS OF GENETICALLY 
MODIFIED FOOD: DIPLOMACY, TRADE AND LAW 213–28. Robert Falkner ed. 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007. 
TP48.65.F66I595 2007 
MARCHANT, GARY E., GUY A. CARDINEAU & THOMAS P. REDICK. THWARTING 
CONSUMER CHOICE: THE CASE AGAINST MANDATORY LABELING FOR 
GENETICALLY MODIFIED FOODS. 96 pp. Washington, DC: AEI Press, 2010. 
TP374.5.M36 2010 
Paarlberg, Robert L., Raymond F. Hopkins & Lisa Ladewski. Regulation of GM Crops: 
Shaping an International Regime in THE REGULATION OF AGRICULTURAL 
BIOTECHNOLOGY 1–24. R.E. Evenson & V. Santaniello eds. Cambridge, MA: CABI 
Publishing, 2004. 
K3925.B56R44 2004 
POLLACK, MARK A. & GREGORY C. SHAFFER. WHEN COOPERATION FAILS: THE 
INTERNATIONAL LAW AND POLITICS OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED FOODS. 
439 pp. New York: Oxford University Press, 2009. 
K3927.P65 2009 
Redick, Thomas P. The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety: Precautionary Priority in Biotech 
Crop Approvals and Containment of Commodities Shipments. 28 COLO. J. INT’L 
ENVTAL. L. & POL’Y 51–111. 2007. 
K3.O3459 
Strauss, D.M. Genetically Modified Organisms in Food: A Model of Labeling and Monitoring 
with Positive Implications for International Trade. 40 INT’L LAW 95-119. 2006. 
K9.N853 
Street, Paul. Constructing Risks: GMOs, Biosafety and Environmental Decision-Making in 
THE REGULATORY CHALLENGE OF BIOTECHNOLOGY: HUMAN GENETICS, 
FOOD AND PATENTS 95–117. Han Somsen ed. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar, 
2007. 
K3925.B56R444 2007 
Van der Meulen, Bernd. Regulating GM Food: Three Levels, Three Issues in THE 
REGULATORY CHALLENGE OF BIOTECHNOLOGY: HUMAN GENETICS, FOOD 
AND PATENTS 139–55. Han Somsen ed. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar, 2007. 
K3925.B56R444 2007 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
151 
WALTERS, REECE. ECO CRIME AND GENETICALLY MODIFIED FOOD. 165 pp. New 
York: Routledge, 2011. 
K3927.W35 2011 
Winickoff, David, et. al. Adjudicating the GM Food Wars: Science, Risk, and Democracy in 
World Trade Law. 30 YALE J. INT’L L. 81–123 (2005). 
K29.A445 
Zepeda, Lydia. Genetically Engineered Food Labelling: Global Policy Polarization in THE 
REGULATION OF AGRICULTURAL BIOTECHNOLOGY 53–58. R.E. Evenson & V. 
Santaniello eds. Cambridge, MA: CABI Publishing, 2004. 
K3925.B56R44 2004 
Zivian, Anna Milena, Alessandra Sensi, Carmen Bullón Caro, et. al. Legal Aspects in 2 
BIOSAFETY RESOURCE BOOK. 104 pp. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations, 2011. 
TP248.2.B37499 2011 
 
 
Works on Individual Jurisdictions  
 
Africa 
Birhanu, Fikremarkos Merso. Genetically Modified Organisms in Africa: Regulating a Threat 
or an Opportunity in THE REGULATION OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED 
ORGANISMS: COMPARATIVE APPROACHES 227–53. Luc Bodiguel & Michael 
Cardwell eds. New York: Oxford University Press, 2010. 
K3927.R44 2010 
Thomson, Jennifer A. Regulatory Regimes for GE Crops in Africa in GENETICALLY 
ENGINEERED CROPS: INTERIM POLICIES, UNCERTAIN LEGISLATION 265–71. 
New York: Ian E.P. Taylor ed. Haworth Food & Agricultural Products Press, 2007. 
SB106.B56G46 2007 
Welgemoed, Anton Christo. Genetically Modified Organisms: Tamed Kitten or Tiger by the 
Tail? 40 COMP. & INT’L L. J. S. AFR. 259–79. 2007. 
K3.O4 
 
The Americas 
Abergel, Elisabeth. Trade, Science, and Canada’s Regulatory Framework for Determining 
the Environmental Safety of GE Crops in GENETICALLY ENGINEERED CROPS: 
INTERIM POLICIES, UNCERTAIN LEGISLATION 173–206. Iain E.P. Taylor ed. 
New York: Haworth Food & Agricultural Products Press, 2007.  
SB106.B56G46 2007 
Baram, Michael. Governance of GM Crop and Food Safety in the United States in 
GOVERNING RISK IN GM AGRICULTURE 15–55. Michael Baram & Mathilde 
Bourrier eds. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2011. 
K3927.G68 2011 
Farias, Paulo José Leite & Juliana Mezzomo Allain. Evolution of the Regulatory System for 
GM Crops in Brazil in GOVERNING RISK IN GM AGRICULTURE 113–36. Michael 
Baram & Mathilde Bourrier eds. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2011. 
K3927.G68 2011 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
152 
Gilli, Rosario Silva. Genetically Modified Organisms in Mercosur in THE REGULATION 
OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS: COMPARATIVE APPROACHES 
274–98. Luc Bodiguel & Michael Cardwell eds. New York: Oxford University Press, 
2010. 
K3927.R44 2010 
(covers Argentina, Uruguay, Paraguay, Brazil) 
Glenn, Jane Matthews. The Coexistence of Genetically Modified and Non-Genetically 
Modified Agriculture in Canada: A Courtroom Drama in THE REGULATION OF 
GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS: COMPARATIVE APPROACHES 254–
73. Luc Bodiguel & Michael Cardwell eds. New York: Oxford University Press, 2010. 
K3927.R44 2010 
Grossman, Margaret Rosso. Genetically Modified Crops and Food in the United States: The 
Federal Regulatory Framework, State Measures, and Liability in Tort in THE 
REGULATION OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS: COMPARATIVE 
APPROACHES 299–334. Luc Bodiguel & Michael Cardwell eds. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2010. 
K3927.R44 2010 
Hochstetler, Kathryn. The Multilevel Governance of GM Food in Mercosur in THE 
INTERNATIONAL 
POLITICS 
OF 
GENETICALLY 
MODIFIED 
FOOD: 
DIPLOMACY, TRADE AND LAW 157–73. Robert Falkner ed. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2007. 
TP248.65.F66I595 2007 
Homer, Michael Bennett. Frankenfish . . . It's What's for Dinner: The FDA, Genetically 
Engineered Salmon, and the Flawed Regulation of Biotechnology. 45 COLUM. J.L. & 
SOC. PROBS 83–137. 2011. 
K3.O3485 
Koutouki, Kostantia & Paula Honorato Marin. The Use of GMOs in Chile and the Protection 
of Indigenous Culture in LEGAL ASPECTS OF IMPLEMENTING THE CARTAGENA 
PROTOCOL ON BIOSAFETY 433–43. Marie-Claire Cordonier Segger, Frederic 
Perron-Welch & Christine Frison eds. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013. 
K3925.B56L45 2013 
Medaglia, Jorge Cabrera. The Costa Rican Legal Framework on Agricultural Genetically 
Modified Organisms in LEGAL ASPECTS OF IMPLEMENTING THE CARTAGENA 
PROTOCOL ON BIOSAFETY 388–401. Marie-Claire Cordonier Segger, Frederic 
Perron-Welch & Christine Frison eds. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013. 
K3925.B56L45 2013 
Merrigan, Kathleen. Principles Driving U.S. Governance of Agbiotech in GENETICALLY 
ENGINEERED CROPS: INTERIM POLICIES, UNCERTAIN LEGISLATION 207–28. 
Iain E.P. Taylor ed. New York: Haworth Food & Agricultural Products Press, 2007. 
SB106.B56G46 2007 
Nutti, Marília Regini, Maria José Amstalden Sampaio & Edson Watanabe in GEO Research 
and Agribusiness in Brazil: Impact of the Regulatory Framework. GENETICALLY 
ENGINEERED CROPS: INTERIM POLICIES, UNCERTAIN LEGISLATION 273–88. 
Iain E.P. Taylor ed. New York: Haworth Food & Agricultural Products Press, 2007. 
SB106.B56G46 2007 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
153 
Wozniak, Chris A. & Alan McHughen, eds. REGULATION OF AGRICULTURAL 
BIOTECHNOLOGY: THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA. 393 pp. New York: 
Springer, 2012. 
KF1893.B56R44 2012 
 
Asia 
FALKNER, ROBERT. International Sources of Environmental Policy Change in China: The 
Case of Genetically Modified Food. 19 PAC. REV. 473-94. 2006.  
DU29.P24 
Gruère, Guillaume P. & S.R. Rao. A Review of International Labeling Policies of Genetically 
Modified Food to Evaluate India’s Proposed Rule. 10 AGBIOF. 2007.  
http://www.AgBioF..org/v10n1/v10n1a06-gruere.htm 
RAJU, K.D. GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS: EMERGING LAW AND 
POLICY IN INDIA. 288 pp. New Delhi: The Energy and Resources Institute, 2007. 
QH442.6 .G468 2007 
Wan Talaat, Wan Izatul Asma, Norhayati Mohd Tahir & Mohd Lokman Husain. Liability and 
Redress of Trans-Boundary Movements of Genetically Modified Organisms and the 
Biosafety Law in Malaysia. 4 J. SUSTAINABLE DEV. 2011. 
http://www.ccsenet.org/journal/index.php/jsd/article/view/10330/8238  
 
Europe 
Balias, G. Seeds of Distrust: The Co-Existence of Genetically Modified and Conventional or 
Organic Crops in Greece. 14 EUR. ENERGY & ENVTAL L. REV. 318–25. 2005. 
KJC6242.A13 E97 
Bodiguel, Luc et al. Co-Existence of Genetically Modified, Conventional, and Organic Crops 
in the European Union: National Implementation in THE REGULATION OF 
GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS: COMPARATIVE APPROACHES 163–
97. Luc Bodiguel & Michael Cardwell eds. New York: Oxford University Press, 2010. 
K3927.R44 2010  
(covers France, Italy, Spain, UK) 
Christoforou, Theofanis. Genetically Modified Organisms in European Union Law in 
IMPLEMENTING THE PRECAUTIONARY PRINCIPLE: APPROACHES FROM 
THE NORDIC COUNTRIES, EU AND USA 197–228. Nicolas de Sadeleer ed. Sterling, 
VA: Earthscan, 2007. 
KJC6242.I485 2006 
Collavin, Elena. Participation in Italy: The Public and Genetically Modified Crops in 
DEMOCRATIC TRANSGRESSIONS OF LAW: GOVERNING TECHNOLOGY 
THROUGH PUBLIC PARTICIPATION 183–205. Alfons Bora & Heiko Hausendorf 
eds. Boston: Brill, 2010. 
K487.T4D46 2010 
Fauchald, Ole Kristian. Genetically Modified Organisms and Precaution in Norwegian Law 
in IMPLEMENTING THE PRECAUTIONARY PRINCIPLE: APPROACHES FROM 
THE NORDIC COUNTRIES, EU AND USA 229–47. Nicolas de Sadeleer ed. Sterling, 
VA: Earthscan, 2007. 
KJC6242.I485 2006 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
154 
Federici, Valery. Genetically Modified Food and Informed Consumer Choice: Comparing 
U.S. and E.U. Labeling Laws. 35 BROOK. J. INT’L L. 515-61. 2010. 
K2.R64 
Forsmann, Z. Community Regulation of Genetically Modified Organisms: A Difficult 
Relationship Between Law and Science. 10 EUR. L.J.: REVIEW OF EUROPEAN LAW 
IN CONTEXT 580–94. 2004. 
K5.U728 
Friant-Perrot, Marine. The European Union Regulatory Regime for Genetically Modified 
Organisms and Its Integration into Community Food Law and Policy in THE 
REGULATION OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS: COMPARATIVE 
APPROACHES 79–100. Luc Bodiguel & Michael Cardwell eds. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2010. 
K3927.R44 2010 
Grossman, Margaret Rosso. Coexistence of Genetically Modified, Conventional, and Organic 
Crops in the European Union: The Community Framework in THE REGULATION OF 
GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS: COMPARATIVE APPROACHES 123–
62. Luc Bodiguel & Michael Cardwell eds. New York: Oxford University Press, 2010. 
K3927.R44 2010 
Iványi, Zauzsanna, András Kertész & Kornéliq Marinecz in Communicating Quasi-
Citizenship? Public Participation in GMO-Release Permitting Procedures in Hungary – 
A Conversation Analytic Approach in DEMOCRATIC TRANSGRESSIONS OF LAW: 
GOVERNING TECHNOLOGY THROUGH PUBLIC PARTICIPATION 207–35. 
Alfons Bora & Heiko Hausendorf eds. Boston: Brill, 2010. 
K487.T4D46 2010 
Kauppila, Jussi. Genetically Modified Organisms and Precaution in Finnish and Swedish 
Law in IMPLEMENTING THE PRECAUTIONARY PRINCIPLE: APPROACHES 
FROM THE NORDIC COUNTRIES, EU AND USA 248–69. Nicolas de Sadeleer ed. 
Sterling, VA: Earthscan, 2007. 
KJC6242.I485 2006 
Lee, Maria. Multi-Level Governance of Genetically Modified Organisms in the European 
Union: Ambiguity and Hierarchy in THE REGULATION OF GENETICALLY 
MODIFIED ORGANISMS: COMPARATIVE APPROACHES pp. 101–22. Luc 
Bodiguel & Michael Cardwell eds. New York: Oxford University Press, 2010. 
K3927.R44 2010 
LEE, MARIA. EU REGULATION OF GMOS: LAW AND DECISION MAKING FOR A 
NEW TECHNOLOGY. 274 pp. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar, 2008. KJE6778.5.L44 
2008 LEVIDOW, LES & SUSAN CARR. GM FOOD ON TRIAL: TESTING 
EUROPEAN DEMOCRACY. 309 pp. New York: Routledge, 2010. 
TP248.65.F66 L48 2010 
Noteborn, Hubert P.J.M. & Freija H. van Duijne. The Dutch Approach to Safety Governance 
of GM Agriculture in GOVERNING RISK IN GM AGRICULTURE 85–111. Michael 
Baram & Mathilde Bourrier eds. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2011. 
K3927.G68 2011 
Poli, Sara. Restrictions on the Cultivation of Genetically Modified Organisms: Issues of EU 
Law in THE REGULATORY CHALLENGE OF BIOTECHNOLOGY: HUMAN 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
155 
GENETICS, FOOD AND PATENTS 156–73. Han Somsen, ed. Northampton, MA: 
Edward Elgar, 2007. 
K3925.B56R444 2007 
Rodgers, Christopher. Implementing the Community Environmental Liability Directive: 
Genetically Modified Organisms and the Problem of Unknown Risk in THE 
REGULATION OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS: COMPARATIVE 
APPROACHES 198–224. Luc Bodiguel & Michael Cardwell eds. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2010. 
K3927.R44 2010 
Schauzu, Marianna. The European Union’s Regulatory Framework: Developments in 
Legislation, Safety Assessment, and Public Perception in GOVERNING RISK IN GM 
AGRICULTURE 57–84. Michael Baram & Mathilde Bourrier eds. New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2011. 
K3927.G68 2011 
Spök, Armin. Biotechnology Policy in the European Union in GENETICALLY 
ENGINEERED CROPS: INTERIM POLICIES, UNCERTAIN LEGISLATION 229–63. 
Iain E.P. Taylor ed. New York: Haworth Food & Agricultural Products Press, 2007. 
SB106.B56G46 2007 
Steinz, Rudolf & Jan Kalbheim. The Legal Situation for Genetically Engineered Food in 
Europe in GENETICALLY ENGINEERED FOOD 133–53. Knut J. Heller ed. 
Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH, 2006. 
TP248.65.F66G457 2006 
Weimer, M. Applying Precaution in EU Authorisation of Genetically Modified Products – 
Challenges and Suggestions for Reform. 16 EUR. L.J.: REVIEW OF EUROPEAN LAW 
IN CONTEXT 624–57. 2010. 
K5.U728 
 
 
End Notes for Argentina 
 
1 Rosario Silva Gilli, Genetically Modified Organisms in Mercosur, in THE REGULATION OF GENETICALLY 
MODIFIED ORGANISMS: COMPARATIVE APPROACHES 274, 281 (Luc Bodiguel & Michael Cardwell 
eds., 2010). 
2 Eduardo J. Trigo, Fifteen Years of Genetically Modified Crops in Argentine Agriculture 4 (Consejo Argentino 
para la Información y el Desarrollo de la Biotecnología, Nov. 2011), http://www.argenbio.org/adc/uploads/ 
15_years_ Executive_summary_of_GM_crops_in_Argentina.pdf. 
3 Moises Burachik, Regulation of GM Crops in Argentina, 3 GM CROPS & FOOD: BIOTECHNOLOGY AGRIC. 
& FOOD CHAIN 48 (2012), https://www.landesbioscience.com/journals/gmcrops/2011GMC0034R.pdf. 
4 Trigo, supra note 2, at 4. 
5 Id. 
6 ALICIA DIAMANTE & JUAN IZQUIERDO, MANEJO Y GESTIÓN DE LA BIOTECNOLOGÍA AGRÍCOLA 
APROPIADA PARA PEQUEÑOS PRODUCTORES: ESTUDIO DE CASO ARGENTINA 59 (Apr. 2004), 
http://www.argenbio.org/adc/uploads/pdf/ manejo_y_gestion.doc. 
7 Id. at 60–61. 
8 Id. 
9 Liberaron a los Ambientalistas y Monsanto Suspende la Obra, LA VOZ (Sept. 30, 2013), http://www.lavoz.com. 
ar/politica/liberaron-las-ambientalistas-y-monsanto-suspende-la-obra. 
10 Blockade Against Monsanto in Malvinas Argentinas, REVOLUTION NEWS (Oct. 15, 2013), http://revolution-
news.com/blockade-against-monsanto-in-malvinas-argentina/. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
156 
11 Id. 
12 Ley de Semillas y Creaciones Fitogéneticas [L.S.] [Law on Seeds and Phytogenetic Creations], Ley 20247, 
BOLETIN OFICIAL [B.O.], Mar. 30, 1973, http://www.infoleg.gob.ar/infolegInternet/anexos/30000- 
34999/34822/texact.htm. 
13 Ley de Promoción del Desarrollo y Producción de la Biotecnología Moderna [L.B.] [Law on the Promotion of the 
Development and Production of Modern Biotechnology], Ley 20270, B.O., July 25, 2007, 
http://www.infoleg.gob. ar/infolegInternet/anexos/130000-134999/130522/norma.htm. 
14 L.S. art. 1. 
15 Id. art. 2. 
16 Id. arts. 11–15. 
17 Id. arts. 16–30. 
18 Id. art. 7. 
19 Id. arts. 9, 16–18. 
20 
Resolución 
46/2004 
de 
Organismos 
Vegetales 
Geneticamente 
Modificandos, 
Jan. 
28, 
2004, 
http://www.infoleg.gob.ar/infolegInternet/verNorma.do;jsessionid=578413824CD6FF46DB9979BD5F4EDD8
6?id=92241. 
21 Id. art. 1. 
22 Id. art. 3. 
23 Id. art. 4. 
24 L.B. arts. 6, 7, 13, 14. 
25 Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity, Jan. 29, 2000, 39 I.L.M. 1027, 
available at http://bch.cbd.int/protocol/text/. 
26 MARÍA CRISTINA RODRÍGUEZ, MODERNA BIOTECNOLOGÍA AGRÍCOLA: NORMATIVA Y 
JURISPRUDENCIA NACIONAL, COMUNITARIA E INTERNACIONAL 21 (2009), bibliographic 
information available at http://lccn.loc.gov/ 2010503912. 
27 Biosafety Protocol, GREENPEACE, http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/campaigns/agriculture/solution-
ecological-farming/biosafety-protocol/ (last visited Dec. 2, 2013). 
28 See Posición de ASA con respect a la ratificación del Protocolo de Cartagena sobre Bioseguridad, 
ASOCIACIÓN 
SEMILLEROS 
ARGENTINOS 
(July 
2006), 
http://www.asa.org.ar/pdf/ 
posicion_ 
protocolo_06.pdf. 
29 Decreto 1366/2009, B.O., Oct. 2, 2009, Anexo art. 4.20, http://www.infoleg.gob.ar/infolegInternet/anexos 
/155000-159999/158298/texact.htm. 
30 Moisés Burachik, Organismos Geneticamente Modificados: Marco Regulatorio en Argentina, Conferencia 
Ministerial sobre el Uso de la Ciencia y la Tecnologia para Mejorar la Competitividad en el Sector Agrícola 
(May 2004), http://www.fas.usda.gov/icd/stconf/event5/MBurachik.pdf. 
31 Id.; Burachik, supra note 3, at 48–49. 
32 Burachik, supra note 31. 
33 Id. 
34 Burachik, supra note 3, at 49. 
35 Id. 
36 Id. 
37 Id. 
38 Id. 
39 Resolución 412/2002, sobre Alimentos derivados de Organismos Geneticamente Modificados [On Food Derived 
from GMOs], B.O., May 17, 2002, http://www.infoleg.gob.ar/infolegInternet/anexos/70000- 74999/ 
74376/norma.htm. 
40 RODRIGUEZ, supra note 26, at 190. 
41 Resolución 412/2002, supra note 39. 
42 See, e.g., Information al Consumidor sobre Etiquetado de Alimentos y Bebidas Transgenicos o que Contengan 
Organismos Geneticamente Modificados, Proyecto de Ley 2324-D-2013 (2013), HONORABLE CÁMARA 
DE DIPUTADOS DE LA NACIÓN, http://www1.hcdn.gov.ar/proyxml/ expediente.asp?fundamentos= 
si&numexp=2324-D2013, 
and 
Proyecto 
de 
Ley 
D 
8307-D-2010, 
http://www.diputados.gov.ar/ 
frames.jsp?mActivo=proyectos&p= http://www1.hcdn.gov.ar/proyectos_ search/bp.asp. 
43 Dispute Settlement: Dispute DS291: European Communities – Measures Affecting the Approval and Marketing of 
Biotech Products (Feb. 2010), http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e/cases_e/ds291_e.htm. 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
157 
44 Ley 25675, B.O., Nov. 28, 2002, http://www.infoleg.gob.ar/infolegInternet/anexos/75000-79999/79980/ 
norma.htm. 
45 Id. art. 27. 
46 Id. art. 4, 6. 
47 Id. art. 28. 
48 Id. art. 29. 
49 Ley 24051de Residuos Peligrosos [on Hazardous Products] B.O. Jan. 17, 1992, arts. 55–58, http://www.infoleg. 
gob.ar/infolegInternet/anexos/0-4999/450/norma.htm. 
50 Dario Aranda, Trial Against Use of Agrochemicals in Ituzaingó (Argentina): Spraying is a Crime, JUICIO A LA 
FUMIGACIÓN (Sept. 6, 2012), http://www.juicioalafumigacion.com.ar/trial-against-use-of-agrochemicals-in-
ituzaingo-argentina-spraying-is-a-crime/. 
 
 
End Notes for Belgium 
 
1 Frédéric Varone & Nathalie Schiffino, Conflict and Consensus in Belgian Biopolicies: GMO Controversy Versus 
Biomedical Self-regulation, in THE POLITICS OF BIOTECHNOLOGY IN NORTH AMERICA AND 
EUROPE 198 (Eric Montpetit, Christine Rothmayr & Frédéric Varone eds., 2007). 
2 Id. 
3 Id. at 200. 
4 Nathalie Schiffino & Frédéric Varone, La régulation politique des OGM, COURRIER HEBDOMADAIRE DU 
CRISP, 2005/35 N° 1900 (2005), 16. 
5 EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR COMMUNICATION, SPECIAL EUROBARO-
METER 295: ATTITUDES OF EUROPEAN CITIZENS TOWARDS THE ENVIRONMENT 65 
(Publications 
Office 
of 
the 
European 
Union, 
Mar. 
2008), 
http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/ 
archives/ebs/ebs_295_en.pdf. 
6 See also EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR RESEARCH, EUROPEANS AND 
BIOTECHNOLOGY IN 2010: WINDS OF CHANGE? 40 (Office for Official Publications of the European 
Communities, Oct. 2010), http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/ebs/ebs_341_winds_en.pdf 
7 SPECIAL EUROBAROMETER 295, supra note 5. 
8 Schiffino & Varone, supra note 4, at 11. 
9 Consolidated Version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, arts. 2 & 4, 2012 O.J. (C 326) 50– 
51, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:12012E/TXT:EN:PDF. 
10 Id. art. 2. 
11 Regulation (EC) 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2003 on Genetically 
Modified Food and Feed, 2003 O.J. (L 268) 1, http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/animalnutrition/labelling/ 
Reg_1829_2003_en.pdf. 
12 Directive 2001/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 March 2001 on the Deliberate Release 
into the Environment of Genetically Modified Organisms and Repealing Council Directive 90/220/EEC, 2001 
O.J. (L 106) 1, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2001:106:0001:0038:EN:PDF. 
13 Arrêté royal du 21 février 2005 réglementant la dissémination volontaire dans l’environnement ainsi que la mise 
sur le marché d’organismes génétiquement modifiés ou de produits en contenant [Royal Executive Order of 
February 21, 2005, Regulating the Voluntary Release into the Environment as well as the Marketing of 
Genetically Modified Organisms or Products Containing Genetically Modified Organisms] (Feb. 21, 2005), 
MONITEUR BELGE [M.B.], Feb. 24, 2005, 7,129; Schiffino & Varone, supra note 4, at 5. 
14 Schiffino & Varone, supra note 4, at 29. 
15 Accord de coopération entre l’Etat fédéral et les Régions relatif à la coordination administrative et scientifique en 
matière de biosécurité [Agreement for Cooperation Between the Federal State and the Regions Regarding 
Administrative and Scientific Coordination for Biosecurity Issues] (Apr. 25, 1997), confirmed by the Loi 
portant assentiment à l’accord de coopération entre l’Etat fédéral et les Régions relatif à la coordination 
administrative et scientifique en matière de biosécurité [Law Approving the Agreement for Cooperation 
Between the Federal State and the Regions Regarding Administrative and Scientific Coordination for 
Biosecurity Issues] (Mar. 3, 1998), M.B., July 14, 1998, 22,773 . 
16 Royal Executive Order of Feb. 21, 2005, art. 2(2); Directive 2001/18/EC, supra note 12. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
158 
17 Council Directive 98/81/EC of 26 October 1998 on the Contained Use of Genetically Modified Micro-organisms, 
1998 O.J. (L 330) 13, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:1998:330: 0013: 
0031:EN:PDF. 
18 For Wallonia, see Arrêté du Gouvernement wallon déterminant les conditions sectorielles relatives aux 
utilisations confinées d’organismes génétiquement modifiés ou pathogènes [Executive Decision of the 
Walloon Government Establishing the Sector-specific Conditions for the Contained Use of Genetically 
Modified Organisms or Pathogenes] (July 4, 2002), M.B., Sept. 21, 2002, 41,711; for Flanders, see Besluit van 
de Vlaamse Executieve houdende vaststelling van het Vlaams reglement betreffende de milieuvergunning 
[Executive Decision of the Flemish Government Establishing the Regulations Regarding Environmental 
Authorizations] (Feb. 6, 1991), M.B., June 26, 1991, 14,343; for Brussels-Capital, see Arrêté du 
Gouvernement de la Région de Bruxelles-Capitale relatif à l’utilisation confinée d’organismes génétiquement 
modifiés et/ou pathogènes et au classement des installations concernées [Executive Decision of the 
Government of the Brussels-Capital Region Regarding the Contained Use of Genetically Modified Organisms 
and/or Pathogenes and the Classification of Related Installations] (Nov. 8, 2001), M.B., Feb. 26, 2002, 7,209. 
19 Id. (Wallonia, Flanders, and Brussel-Capital Region Executive Decisions). 
20 Royal Executive Order of Feb. 21, 2005, art. 3. 
21 Id. art. 15. 
22 Id. arts. 15 & 16. 
23 Id. art. 17. 
24 Id. art. 18. 
25 Id. 
26 Id. art. 20. 
27 Id. art. 4. 
28 Id. 
29 Id. arts. 6§2, 30 & 31. 
30 Id. art. 32. 
31 Id. art. 6§2. 
32 Id. art. 34§3. 
33 Id. art. 36. 
34 Id. art. 39. 
35 Besluit van de Vlaamse Regering houdende de vaststelling van algemene maatregelen voor de co-existentie van 
genetisch gemodificeerde gewassen met conventionele gewassen en biologische gewassen [Executive Order of 
the Flemish Government Establishing General Measures for the Coexistence of Genetically Modified Crops 
and Conventional and Organic Crops] (Oct. 15, 2010), art. 3, M.B., Nov. 30, 2010, 73,420. 
36 Flemish Executive Order of Oct. 15, 2010, for the Coexistence of Crops, art. 4; Decreet houdende de organisatie 
van co-existentie van genetisch gemodificeerde gewassen met conventionele gewassen en biologische 
gewassen [Decree Organizing the Coexistence of Genetically Modified Cultures and Conventional and 
Organic Cultures] (Apr. 3, 2009), art. 5, M.B., May 4, 2009, 34, 847. 
37 Decree of Apr. 3, 2009, art. 11. 
38 Flemish Executive Order of Oct. 15, 2010, for the Coexistence of Crops, art. 17. 
39 Id. 
40 Décret relatif à la coexistence des cultures génétiquement modifiées avec les cultures conventionnelles et les 
cultures biologiques [Decree on the Coexistence of Genetically Modified Crops and Conventional and Organic 
Crops] (June 19, 2008), art. 4, M.B., Aug. 8, 2008, 41,481. 
41 Id. art. 5. 
42 Id. art. 13. 
43 Flemish Executive Order of Oct. 15, 2010, for the Coexistence of Crops, art. 2. 
44 Besluit van de Vlaamse Regering houdende de vaststelling van specifieke maatregelen voor de co-existentie van 
genetisch gemodificeerde maïsgewassen met conventionele maïsgewassen en biologische maïsgewassen 
[Executive Order of the Flemish Government Establishing Specific Measures for the Coexistence of 
Genetically Modified Maize and Conventional and Organic Maize] (Oct. 15, 2010), art. 5, M.B., Nov. 30, 
2010, 73,435. 
45 Besluit van de Vlaamse Regering houdende de vaststelling van specifieke maatregelen voor de co-existentie van 
genetisch gemodificeerde suikerbieten met conventionele suikerbieten en biologische suikerbieten [Executive 
Order of the Flemish Government Establishing Specific Measures for the Coexistence of Crops of Genetically 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
159 
Modified Sugar Beets and Conventional and Organic Sugar Beets] (Nov. 10, 2011), art. 5, M.B., Dec. 23, 
2012, 80,271. 
46 Décret relatif à la coexistence des cultures génétiquement modifiées avec les cultures conventionnelles et les 
cultures biologiques [Decree on the Coexistence of Genetically Modified Crops and Conventional and Organic 
Crops] (June 19, 2008), M.B., Aug. 8, 2008, 41,481. 
47 Arrêté du Gouvernement wallon relatif à la coexistence des cultures génétiquement modifiées avec les cultures 
conventionnelles et les cultures biologiques [Executive Decision of the Walloon Government Regarding the 
Coexistence of Genetically Modified Crops and Conventional and Organic Crops] (Mar. 27, 2009), Annex 1, 
M.B., May 19, 2009, 37,964. 
48 Id. arts. 9–16. 
49 Regulation (EC) 1829/2003, supra note 11. 
50 See Part IV(C), “Distribution and Release of GMOs for Commercial Purposes.” 
51 Regulation (EC) 1829/2003, supra note 11, arts. 12–14. 
52 GUIDE D’APPLICATION DE LA RÉGLEMENTATION RELATIVE AUX OGM [GUIDE ON THE 
APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS REGARDING GMOS] 22 (June 24, 2010), http://economie.fgov.be/ 
fr/modules/publications/general/ guide ogm.jsp. 
53 Decreet betreffende de oprichting en de werking van het Fonds voor Landbouw en Visserij [Decree Regarding 
the Creation and Functioning of the Fund for Agriculture and Fishing] (May 19, 2006), M.B., July 18, 2006, 
35,701. 
54 Id. art. 4§1(11); Decree of Apr. 3, 2009, art. 7. 
55 Executive Order of Oct. 15, 2010, art. 10. 
56 Décret-programme du 18 décembre 2003 portant diverses mesures en matière de fiscalité régionale, de trésorerie 
et de dette, d’organisation des marchés de l’énergie, d’environnement, d’agriculture, de pouvoirs locaux et 
subordonnés, de patrimoine et de logement et de la fonction publique [Program-Decree of December 18, 2003, 
Regarding Various Measures on Regional Taxes, Treasury and Debt, Organization of Energy Markets, 
Environmental Matters, Agricultural Matters, Local and Subordinate Authorities, Patrimony and Housing, and 
the Public Service] (Dec. 18, 2003), M.B., Feb. 6, 2004, 7,196. 
57 Decree of June 19, 2008, art. 26§1. 
58 Id. art. 26§5. 
59 Nathalie Schiffino & Frédéric Varone, supra note 4, at 21. 
60 Id. 
61 Id. 
62 Id. 
63 Champ d’OGM saccagé à Wetteren: les auteurs condamnés à 25 000 euros de dédommagements, RTBF (Feb. 12, 
2013), http://www.rtbf.be/info/belgique/detail_champ-d-ogm-saccage-a-wetteren-les-prevenus-devront-verser-
25- 000-euros-de-dedommagements?id=7926257. 
 
 
End Notes for Brazil 
 
1 Lei No. 11.105, de 24 de Março de 2005, art. 1, http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_Ato2004-2006/2005/Lei/ 
L11105.htm#art42. 
2 “The precautionary principle is a legal and policy principle addressing the problem of scientific uncertainty in 
environmental decision-making. Although numerous formulations have been advanced, the core idea is 
expressed in the familiar adage, better safe than sorry. The principle has implications for both the timing and 
substance of environmental measures: states should anticipate and respond to potential environmental harms, 
rather than only known or proven harms, and environmental risks should be managed with a margin of error in 
case they are more serious than originally expected.” Daniel Bodansky, Precautionary Principle, OXFORD 
REFERENCE, 
http://www. 
oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/acref/9780195324884.001.0001/acref-
9780195324884-e-191 (last visited Dec. 11, 2013). 
The most widely cited international formulation of the precautionary principle is Principle 15 of the 1992 Rio 
Declaration on Environment and Development, which generally viewed the precautionary principle as a 
protection against as yet unidentified but potential environmental risks. Specifically, Principle 15 states that “ 
[i]n order to protect the environment, the precautionary approach shall be widely applied by States according 
to their capabilities. Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
160 
shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation.” 
(United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, Braz., June 3–14, 1992, Rio 
Declaration on Environment and Development, U.N. Doc. A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. 1), Annex I (Aug. 12, 
1992), available at http://www.un.org/ documents/ga/conf151/aconf15126-1annex1.htm. For further 
information on the precautionary principle, see the EU survey, infra at 65, nn.4, 6. 
3 Brasil é Vive-Líder em Produção de Transgênicos, AGÊNCIA CÂMARA DE NOTÍCIAS (Oct. 19, 2012), 
http://www2. 
camara.gov.br/camaranoticias/noticias/AGROPECUARIA/428224-BRASIL-E-VICE-LIDER-
EM-PRODUCAODE-TRANSGENICOS.html. 
4 Id. 
5 Id. 
6 Id. One hectare is equivalent to 10,000 square meters. 
7 Embrapa was established on April 26, 1973, as a federal agency under the authority of the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Livestock and Supply. Its mission is to solve problems of sustainable agriculture using research, development, 
and 
innovation 
in 
order 
to 
benefit 
Brazilian 
society. 
Missão 
e 
Atuação, 
EMBRAPA, 
http://www.embrapa.br/a_embrapa/ missao_e_atuacao (last visited Dec. 3, 2013). 
8 Embrapa Meio Ambiente, Desenvolvimento de Comunicação Estratégica sobre Biossegurança de Plantas 
Geneticamente Modificadas – O Caso do Projeto LAC - Biosafety no Brasil (Aug. 2011), 
http://www.cnpma.embrapa.br/download/documentos_85.pdf. 
9 Id. at 13. 
10 
CONSTITUIÇÃO 
FEDERAL 
art. 
225, 
http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/constituicao/constituicao 
compilado.htm. 
11 Id. art. 225(§1)(II). 
12 Id. art. 225(§1)(IV). 
13 Id. art. 225(§1)(V). 
14 Lei No. 11.105 art. 1. 
15 Decreto No. 5.591, de 22 de Novembro de 2005, https://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_Ato2004-2006/2005/ 
Decreto/D5591.htm. 
16 Lei No. 11.105 art. 2. 
17 Id. art. 2(§2). 
18 Id. art. 8. 
19 Id. art. 10 et seq. 
20 Lei No. 11.105 art. 3(V). 
21 Id. art. 3(VI). 
22 Lei No. 8,078, de 11 de Setembro de 1990, art. 1, http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/Leis/L8078.htm. 
23 Id. art. 6(III). 
24 Decreto No. 4.680, de 24 de Abril de 2003, art. 1, http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/decreto/2003/ 
D4680.htm#art8. 
25 Lei No. 11.105 art. 14(VI). 
26 Resolução Normativa No. 2, de 27 de Novembro de 2006, art. 1, available on the website of CTNBio, at 
http://www.ctnbio.gov.br/index.php/content/view/3913.html (last visited Dec. 3, 2013). 
27 Lei No. 11.105 art. 2(§3). 
28 Id. art. 1(§1). 
29 Id. art. 1(§2). 
30 Portaria No. 2.658, de 22 de Dezembro de 2003, available on the website of the Ministry of Justice, at 
http://portal.mj.gov.br/main.asp?View={4521CE7B-732B-40EB-B529-F9200C365E93} (search by “Tipos: 
Portarias” or go to Página 2 de 3) (last visited Dec. 3, 2013). 
31 Instrução Normativa Interministerial No. 1, de 1 de Abril de 2004, http://portal.mj.gov.br/main.asp?View={452 
1CE7B-732B-40EB-B529-F9200C365E93} (last visited Dec. 3, 2013). 
32 Lei No. 11.105 art. 40. 
33 Id. art. 10 (translation by the author). 
34 Id. art. 10(sole para.) (translation by the author). 
35 Id. art. 11. 
36 Id. art. 12. See also Decreto No. 5.591 art. 5 et seq. 
37 Id. art. 8. 
38 Id. art. 8(§1)(I). 
39 Id. art. 8(§1)(II). 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
161 
40 Id. art. 8(§1)(III). 
41 Decreto No. 5,591 arts. 48 et seq. 
42 Lei No. 11.105 art. 17. 
43 Id. art. 6(VI). 
44 Id. art. 10. 
45 Resolução Normativa CTNBio No. 6, de 6 de Novembro de 2008, http://www.ctnbio.gov.br/index.php/ 
content/view/12510.html (last visited Dec. 3, 2013). Article 2(VII) defines “planned release” as “a release into 
the environment of GM plants or their by-products for experimental evaluations under monitoring, in 
accordance with the provisions of Normative Resolution No. 6.” 
46 Id. art. 3. 
47 Id. art. 6. 
 
48 Id. art. 6(sole para.). 
49 Id. art. 7(I). 
50 Id. art. 4. 
51 Resolução Normativa CTNBio No. 4, de 16 de Agosto de 2007, art. 1, http://www.ctnbio.gov.br/index. 
php/content/view/4687.html. 
52 Id. art. 2. 
53 Resolução Normativa CTNBio No. 10, de 2 de Outubro de 2013, art. 1, http://www.ctnbio.gov.br/index. 
php/content/view/18494.html. 
54 Article 2(IV) of Resolução Normativa CTNBio No. 6 defines “applicant” as “any company that has obtained a 
legal Biosafety Quality Certificate [Certificado de Qualidade em Biossegurança] – CQB [–] that intends to 
make a planned release, according to the terms of Normative Resolution No. 6.” 
55 Id. art. 4. 
56 Id. art. 5. 
57 Id. art. 5(sole para.). 
58 Lei No. 11.105, art. 16 (translation by the author). 
59 Resolução Normativa CTNBio No. 6, art. 7. 
60 Id. art. 7(sole para.). 
61 Resolução Normativa CTNBio No. 5, de 12 de Março de 2008, art. 6(I), http://www.ctnbio.gov.br/index.php/ 
content/view/11444.html (last visited Dec. 3, 2013). 
62 Id. art. 19. 
63 Id. art. 1. 
64 Id. art. 20. 
65 Lei No. 11.105 art. 40. 
66 Decreto No. 4.680 art. 2. 
67 Lei No. 11.105 art. 20. 
68 Id. art. 21. 
69 Id. art. 21(sole para.) (translation by the author). 
70 Id. art. 22. 
71 Id. art. 22(§1). 
72 Id. art. 22(§2). 
73 Id. art. 22(§3). 
74 Id. art. 27. 
75 Id. art. 27(§2). 
76 Id. art. 29. 
77 Ministério da Saúde, Organização Pan-Americana de Saúd, Marco Legal Brasileiro sobre Organismos 
Geneticamente Modificados (2010), http://www2.fcfar.unesp.br/Home/CIBio/MarcoLegalBras.pdf. 
78 Id. 
 
 
End Notes for Canada 
 
1 Genetically Modified Organisms, ENVIRONMENT CANADA, http://www.ec.gc.ca/inrenwri/default.asp?lang= 
En&n=E8A9C49D-1 (last updated July 23, 2013). 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
162 
2 Bio-tech Crop Countries and Mega-Countries, 2010, in CLIVE JAMES, 2010 ISAAA REPORT ON GLOBAL 
STATUS 
OF 
BIOTECH/GM 
CROPS 
slide 
8, 
http://www.isaaa.org/resources/publications/ 
briefs/42/pptslides/default.asp. 
3 CANADIAN FOOD INSPECTION AGENCY (CFIA), REGULATION OF AGRICULTURAL BIOTECHNO-
LOGY 
IN 
CANADA: 
A 
POST-SECONDARY 
EDUCATOR’S 
RESOURCE 
13 
(2007), 
http://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2007/cfiaacia/A104-24-2007E.pdf. 
4 Sara J MacLaughlin, Food for the Twenty-First Century: An Analysis of Regulations for Genetically Engineered 
Food in the United States, Canada, and the European Union ,14 IND. INT’L & COMP. L. REV. 375, 383 
(2003–2004). 
5 
Regulation 
of 
Genetically 
Modified 
Organisms 
(GMOs), 
FOOD 
SCIENCE 
NETWORK, 
https://www.uoguelph.ca/ foodsafetynetwork/regulation-genetically-modified-organisms-gmos (last updated 
July 31, 2012). 
6 Id. 
7 Frequently Asked Questions - Biotechnology and Genetically Modified Foods, HEALTH CANADA, 
http://www.hcsc.gc.ca/fn-an/gmf-agm/fs-if/faq_1-eng.php (last updated July 24, 2012). 
8 Eric Montpetit, A Policy Network Explanation of Biotechnology Policy Differences Between the United States and 
Canada, 25(3) J. PUB. POL’Y 339, 341 (Sept.–Dec. 2005), http://www.jstor.org/stable/pdfplus/4007834.pdf. 
9 Id. at 346. 
10 Id. 
11 Peter Andrée, An Analysis of Efforts to Improve Genetically Modified Food Regulation in Canada, 33(5) SCI. & 
PUB. POL’Y 377, 389 (June 2006), http://spp.oxfordjournals.org/content/33/5/377.full.pdf. 
12 Genetically Modified Foods: A Primer, CBCNEWS ONLINE (May 11, 2004), http://www.cbc.ca/news2/ 
background/genetics_modification/. 
13 Lorraine Chan, GMOs Next Global Lightning Rod Issue, UBC REPORTS (July 5, 2007), 
http://www.publicaffairs.ubc.ca/ubcreports/2007/07jul05/gmo.html. 
14 Joe Fries, Poll Indicates Lack of Information on Genetically Modified Food, PENTICTON WESTERN NEWS 
(July 5, 2012), http://www.pentictonwesternnews.com/news/161480125.html. For the actual poll see Leger 
Marketing, 
Canadian 
Public 
Opinion 
Poll 
Arctic 
Apple 
Issue, 
14522-004 
(July 
3, 
2012), 
http://www.bcfga.com/files/file/Report%20on%20GE%20survey%20-%20July%203%202012.pdf . 
15 Barb Glen, GM Apple Variety Submitted to CFIA for Approval, THE WESTERN PRODUCER (May 31, 2012), 
http://www.producer.com/daily/gm-apple-variety-submitted-to-cfia-for-approval/. 
16 Peter Andrée, The Biopolitics of Genetically Modified Organisms in Canada, 37(3) J. CAN. STUD. 163 (Fall 
2002), http://www.ask-force.org/web/Regulation/Andree-Biopolitics--GMO-Canada.pdf. 
17 Id. 
18 Id. at 379. 
19 Moran et al., A Cause of Action for Regulatory Negligence? The Regulatory Framework for Genetically Modified 
Crops in Canada and the Potential for Regulator Liability, 6 UNIV. OTTAWA L. & TECH. J. 10 (2009), 
http://www.uoltj.ca/articles/vol6.1-2/2009.6.1-2.uoltj.Moran%20.1-23.pdf. 
20 Scott Prudham & Angela Morris, Making The Market “Safe” for GM Foods: The Case of the Canadian 
Biotechnology Advisory Committee, 78 STUD. POL. ECON. 148, http://spe.library.utoronto.ca/index.php/spe/ 
article/view/5216/2108. 
21 Jane Matthews Glen, The Coexistence of Genetically Modified and Non-genetically Modified Agriculture in 
Canada: A Courtroom Drama, in THE REGULATION OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS: 
COMPARATIVE APPROACHES 267 (Luc Bodiguel & Michael Cardwell eds., 2010). 
22 Moran et al., supra note 19, at 7. 
23 Food and Drugs Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. F-27, http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/F-27/index.html. 
24 Food and Drug Regulations, C.R.C., c. 870, http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/regulations/C.R.C.%2C_c._870/. 
25 
The 
Regulation 
of 
Genetically 
Modified 
Food, 
HEALTH 
CANADA, 
http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/sr-
sr/pubs/biotech/reg_gen_mod-eng.php (last updated Dec. 12, 2012). 
26 Id. 
27 Plants with Novel Traits, CANADIAN FOOD INSPECTION AGENCY (CFIA), http://www.inspection.gc.ca/ 
plants/plants-with-novel-traits/eng/1300137887237/1300137939635 (last updated Sept. 8, 2012). 
28 Plant Protection Act, S.C. 1990, c. 22, http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/P-14.8/. 
29 Plant Protection Regulations, SOR/95-212, http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/regulations/SOR-95-212/. 
30 Seeds Act, R.S.C., 1985, c. S-8, http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/S-8/. 
31 Seeds Regulations, C.R.C., c. 1400, http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/regulations/C.R.C.,_c._1400/index.html. 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
163 
32 CFIA, Directive Dir2000-07: Conducting Confined Research Field Trials of Plant with Novel Traits in Canada, 
http://www.inspection.gc.ca/plants/plants-with-novel-traits/applicants/directive-dir2000- 
07/eng/1304474667559/1304474738697 (last updated May 3, 2011). 
33 Confined Research Field Trials for Plants With Novel Traits (PNTs), CFIA http://www.inspection.gc.ca/plants/ 
plants-with-novel-traits/general-public/field-trials/eng/1338138305622/1338138377239 (last updated May 27, 
2012). 
34 Id. 
35 Id. 
36 Alexander Singh, Proceed with Precaution: The Statutory, Legal, and Consumer Influence on Genetically 
Modified Foods in Canada, 14(3) CAN. J.L. & TECH. 182, http://cjlt.dal.ca/vol4_no3/pdfarticles/singh.pdf. 
37 Plants with Novel Traits, supra note 27. 
38 Singh, supra note 36, at 182. 
39 Id. 
40 Moran et al., supra note 19, at 6. 
41 Singh, supra note 36, at 182. 
42 Id. 
43 John Fagan, Monitoring GMOs Released into the Environment and the Food Production System, in BIOSAFETY 
FIRST 1 (T. Traavik & L.C. Lim eds., 2007), http://genok.no/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/Chapter-33.pdf. 
44 Andrée, supra note 16. 
45 The Regulation of Genetically Modified Food, supra note 25. 
46 Id. 
47 Id. 
48 Id. 
49 Id. 
50 Id. 
51 Labelling of Genetically Engineered Foods in Canada, CFIA, http://www.inspection.gc.ca/food/labelling/other-
requirements/method-of-production/ge-factsheet/eng/1333373177199/1333373638071 (last updated Nov. 19, 
2012). 
52 Id. 
53 Id. 
54 Id. 
55 The Regulation of Genetically Modified Food, supra note 25. 
56 Maria Lusser & Emilio Rodríguez Cerezo, Comparative Regulatory Approaches for New Plant Breeding 
Techniques: Workshop Proceedings, EUR 25237 EN 7 (JRC Scientific & Technical Reports, 2012), 
ftp://ftp.jrc.es/pub/EURdoc/JRC68986.pdf. 
57 Id. 
58 Moran et al., supra note 19, at 4. 
59 Monsanto Canada Inc. v. Schmeiser, 2004 S.C.C. 34, http://scc.lexum.org/decisia-scc-csc/scc-csc/scc-
csc/en/item/2147/index.do. 
60 Christopher P. Rodgers, Liability for the Release of GMOS into the Environment: Exploring the Boundaries of 
Nuisance, 62(2) CAMBRIDGE L.J. 375 (July 2003). 
 
 
End Notes for People’s Republic of China 
 
* This report was prepared with the assistance of Law Library intern Bing Jia. An earlier version of the report was 
prepared in 2003 by the then Chief of the Eastern Law Division, Tao-tai Hsia, and Legal Research Analyst 
Wendy Zeldin. 
1 JOSHUA E. LAGOS & MA JIE, USDA FOREIGN AGRICULTURAL SERVICE, CHINA – PEOPLES 
REPUBLIC OF: AGRICULTURAL BIOTECHNOLOGY ANNUAL 2013, GAIN Report No. CH13033 (July 
15, 2013), http://gain.fas.usda. gov/Recent%20GAIN%20Publications/Agricultural%20Biotechnology%20 
Annual_Beijing_China%20- %20Peoples%20Republic%20of_8-12-2013.pdf. 
2 中华人民共和国国民经济和社会发展第十二个五年规划纲要 [12th Five-Year Plan], Central Government of 
the People’s Republic of China website (Mar. 16, 2011), http://www.gov.cn/2011lh/content_1825838.htm (in 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
164 
Chinese). Excerpt of China’s 12th Five-Year Plan––Agriculture Part, Ministry of Agriculture website (Apr. 
28, 2012), http://english.agri.gov.cn/hottopics/five/201301/t20130115_9545.htm. 
3 For the purpose of this report, zhuan ji yin in the Chinese context is translated as “genetically modified,” which 
literally means “transgenic.” 
4 农业科技发展十二五规划 [12th Five-year Plan for Development of Agricultural Science and Technology] 
(issued by the MOA Dec. 30, 2011), http://www.moa.gov.cn/zwllm/zcfg/nybgz/201112/ t20111231_ 
2449779.htm, translated in National Modern Agriculture Development Plan (2011–2015) (Apr. 21, 2013), 
http://english.agri. gov.cn/hottopics/five/201304/t20130421_19483.htm. 
5 Id. See also 生物产业发展规划 [Plan for Development of Biology Industry] (issued by the State Council, Dec. 
29, 2012), http://www.gov.cn/zwgk/2013-01/06/content_2305639.htm. 
6 中华人民共和国农业法 [PRC Agriculture Law] (promulgated by the Standing Committee of the NPC, July 2, 
1993, rev’d Dec. 28, 2002, last amended Dec. 28, 2012), art. 64, 2013 XIN FAGUI HUIBIAN, 62. 
7 农业转基因生物安全管理条例 [Regulations on Administration of Agricultural Genetically Modified Organisms 
Safety (hereinafter GMO Regulations)] (promulgated by State Council May 23, 2001, revised Jan. 8, 2011), 
2001 
FAGUI 
HUIBIAN 
1072, 
English 
translations 
available 
at 
http://english.agri.gov.cn/ 
hottopics/bt/201301/t201 30115_9551.htm; and http://www.fas.usda.gov/gainfiles/200106/110681034.pdf. 
8 Convention on Biological Diversity (signed by China June 11, 1992, ratified Jan. 5, 1993, effective Dec. 29, 
1993), http://www.cbd.int/information/parties.shtml. 
9 Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity (signed by China Aug. 8, 2000, 
approved June 8, 2005, effective Sept. 6, 2005), http://bch.cbd.int/protocol/parties/. 
10 我国发t了哪些转基因作物生产应用安全证书?其种植情况如何? [Which GM Crops are Granted GMO Safety 
Certificates? How is Their Cultivation?] (Apr. 27, 2013), http://www.moa.gov.cn/ztzl/zjyqwgz/zswd/ 
201304/t20130427_3446853.htm. 
11 ISAAA Brief No. 44 (2012): Executive Summary, ISAAA, http://isaaa.org/resources/publications/briefs/ 
44/executivesummary/default.asp (last visited Nov. 26, 2013). 
12 
我国已批准进口用做加工原料的转基因作物有哪些?可以在国内种植ll? 
[Which 
Genetically 
Modified 
Agricultural Plants are Permitted to Import to be Used as Raw Materials? Are They Permitted to Cultivate 
Domestically?] (Apr. 27, 2013), http://www.moa.gov.cn/ztzl/zjyqwgz/zswd/201304/t20130427_3446861.htm. 
13 DEPARTMENT OF HIGH-TECH INDUSTRY OF NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND REFORM 
COMMISSION OF PRC & CHINESE SOCIETY OF BIOTECHNOLOGY, ANNUAL REPORT ON 
BIOINDUSTRY IN CHINA: 2011, 235 (Ma Youzhi et al. eds., Huaxue Gongye Chubanshe, 2012). 
14 Dan Charles, In A Grain Of Golden Rice, A World Of Controversy Over GMO Foods, NPR (Mar. 7, 2013), 
http://www.npr.org/blogs/thesalt/2013/03/07/173611461/in-a-grain-of-golden-rice-a-world-of-controversy-
overgmo-foods. 
15 Dan Charles, Golden Rice Study Violated Ethical Rules, Tufts Says, NPR (Sept. 17, 2013), 
http://www.npr.org/blogs/thesalt/2013/09/17/223382375/golden-rice-study-violated-ethical-rules-tufts-says; 
Elizabeth Renter, Potentially Dangerous GMO ‘Golden Rice’ Fed to Chinese Children Without Warning, 
NATION OF CHANGE(Oct. 20, 2013), http://www.nationofchange.org/potentially-dangerous-gmo-golden-
rice-fed-chinesechildren-without-warning-1382281851. 
16 See Safeguarding Food & Agriculture, http://www.greenpeace.org/eastasia/campaigns/food-agriculture/ (last 
visited Nov.26, 2013). See also Genetically Engineered Rice: Illegal and Unwanted in China, GREENPEACE 
(Apr. 
2005), 
http://www.greenpeace.org/eastasia/publications/reports/food-agriculture/2005/genetically-
engineered-rice-i/. 
17本所简介[Institute Introduction], CAAS, http://bri.caas.net.cn/bsgk/index.aspx (last visited Nov. 26, 2013). 
18 高度重视转基因问题，粮食安全要靠自己[GMO Issues Need High Attention, Food Security Relies on 
Ourselves], XINHUANET (Sept. 30, 2013), http://news.xinhuanet.com/world/2013-09/30/c_125474948.htm. 
19 GMO Regulations, supra note 7, art. 3. 
20 Id. art. 2. 
21 农业转基因生物安全评价管理办法 [Administrative Measures for Safety Evaluation Agricultural GMO] 
(hereinafter Safety Evaluation Measures) (issued by MOA Jan. 5, 2002, effective Mar. 20, 2002, revised July 
1, 2004), http://www.moa.gov.cn/ztzl/zjyqwgz/zcfg/ 201007/t20100717_1601305.htm. 
22 农业转基因生物加工审批办法 [Measures for Examination and Approval of Processing Agricultural GMO] 
(issued 
by 
MOA 
Jan.16, 
2006, 
effective 
July 
1, 
2006), 
http://www.gov.cn/flfg/2006-
03/02/content_215830.htm. 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
165 
23 农业转基因生物标识管理办法 [Administrative Measures for Labeling Agricultural Genetically Modified 
Organisms Marks] (hereinafter Labeling Measures) (issued by MOA Jan. 5, 2002, effective Mar. 20, 2002, 
revised July 1, 2004), 2002 JAN-JUNE FALÜ QÜANSHU 1689. For an unofficial English translation of the 
above three sets of Measures, see USDA FOREIGN AGRICULTURAL SERVICE GAIN REPORT #CH2002 
(Jan. 14, 2012), http://www.fas. usda.gov/gainfiles/200201/135683205.pdf. 
24 农业转基因生物进口安全管理办法 [Administrative Measures for Safety Control of Importing Agricultural 
GMO Products] (issued by MOA Jan. 5, 2002, effective Mar. 20, 2002, revised July 1, 2004), 
http://www.moa.gov. cn/ztzl/zjyqwgz/zcfg/201007/t20100717_1601304.htm. 
25 进出境转基因产品检验检疫管理办法 [Administrative Measures on the Entry and Exit Agricultural GMO 
Products 
Inspection 
and 
Quarantine] 
(issued 
by 
AQSIQ 
Sept. 
5, 
2001), 
http://www.moa.gov.cn/ztzl/zjyqwgz/zcfg/ 201007/t20100717_1601300.htm. 
26 国家林业局开展林木转基因工程活动审批管理办法 [Administrative Measures for Gene-altered Engineering 
over Forestry] (issued by MOF May 11, 2006, effective July 1, 2006), art. 6, 6 2006 XIN FAGUI HUIBIAN 
201. 
27 转基因食品卫生管理办法 [Administrative Measures for Genetically Modified Food Hygiene] (promulgated by 
MOH Apr. 8, 2002, effective July 1, 2002, repealed July 2, 2007), 2002 JAN-JUNE FALÜ QÜANSHU 626. 
28 新资源食品管理办法 [Administrative Measures for Novel Food] (promulgated by MOH July 2, 2007, effective 
Dec. 1, 2007, repealed May 31, 2013), arts. 27–28, 2007 MAY-AUG. FALÜ QÜANSHU 560. 
29 中华人民共和国种子法 [Law on Seeds of the People’s Republic of China] (promulgated by Standing 
Committee of NPC July 8, 2000, effective Dec. 1, 2000, amended June 29, 2013), 2013 XIN FAGUI 
HUIBIAN Vol. 7, 149. 
30 中华人民共和国渔业法 [Law on Fishery of the People’s Republic of China] (promulgated by Standing 
Committee of NPC Jan. 20, 1986, effective July 1, 1986, amended Aug. 28, 2004), 2004 FAGUI HUIBIAN 
1068. 
31 中华人民共和国环境保护法 [Law on Environment of the People’s Republic of China] (promulgated by 
Standing Committee of NPC Dec. 26, 1989), 1989 FAGUI HUIBIAN 419. 
32 基因工程安全管理办法 [Administrative Measures for Safety Control over Genetic Engineering] (promulgated 
by Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) Dec. 24, 1993), http://www.gene.gov.cn/news/7643809.html 
(in Chinese) (last visited Nov. 18, 2013). 
33 Chen Ximeng, Gansu City China’s first to Ban GM Seeds (Oct. 31, 2013), http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/ 
821781.shtml#.UpPWV3Lh-So. 
34 Id. 
35 GMO Regulations, supra note 7, art. 3(1). 
36 Id. art. 4. 
37 Safety Evaluation Measures, supra note 21, art. 5. 
38 Id. 
39 GMO Regulations, supra note 7, art. 11. 
40 Id. art. 12. 
41 Id. art. 13. 
42 Id. art. 14. 
43 Id. art. 15. 
44 Id. art. 16. 
45 Id. art. 21. 
46 Id. art. 19. 
47 Id. art. 26. 
48 Id. art. 30. 
49 Id. art. 32. 
50 Id. art. 33. 
51 Id. art. 28. 
52 Id. art. 29. 
53 Labeling Measures, supra note 23, App. See also 我国目前规定对哪些转基因产品进行标识? [Which GMOs 
are Required to Be Labelled in China?], MOA (Apr. 27, 2013), http://www.moa.gov.cn/ztzl/zjyqwgz/zswd/ 
201304/t20130427_3446072.htm. 
54 GMO Regulations, supra note 7, art. 13. 
55 Id. art. 15. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
166 
56 Id. 
57 Id. art. 23. 
58 Safety Evaluation Measures, supra note 21, art. 34. 
59 GMO Regulations, supra note 7, art. 4; 国务院关于废止和修改部分行政法规的决定 [Decision of the State 
Council on Abolishing and Amending Some Administrative Regulations] (State Council Decree [2011] No. 
588, Jan. 8, 2011), item 94, http://www.gov.cn/flfg/2011-01/17/content_1786304.htm. 
60 Id. art. 3. 
61 Id. arts. 43–55. 
62 Id. arts. 47 & 50. 
63 Id. ch. 7. 
64 Id. art. 54. 
65 Id. art. 53. 
66 Id. art. 55. 
 
 
End Notes for Egypt 
 
1 Maha El Dahan, Egypt Says No GM Food Exports or Imports, REUTERS (Aug. 12, 2009), 
http://www.reuters.com /article/2009/08/12/us-egypt-food-idUSTRE57B3VS20090812. 
2 Louise Sarant, Biotechnology Report: 1000 Hectares of Genetically Modified Maize Grows in Egypt, EGYPT 
INDEPENDENT (Mar. 14, 2013), http://www.egyptindependent.com/news/biotechnology-report-1000-
hectaresgenetically-modified-maize-grows-egypt. 
3 Louise Sarant, Tests on Rats Suggest Genetically Modified Foods Pose Health Hazards, EGYPT INDEPENDENT 
(Aug. 12, 2012), http://www.egyptindependent.com/news/tests-rats-suggest-genetically-modified-foods-pose-
healthhazards. 
4 ADEMOLA A. ADENLE, BMC RESEARCH NOTES – RESPONSE TO ISSUES ON GM AGRICULTURE IN 
AFRICA: ARE TRANSGENIC CROPS SAFE? (2011), http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/pdf/1756-
0500-4-388.pdf. 
5 CLIVE JAMES, ISAAA BRIEF 39 – GLOBAL STATUS OF COMMERCIALIZED BIOTECH/GM CROPS: 
2008 (2008), http://isaaa.org/resources/publications/briefs/39/download/isaaa-brief-39-2008.pdf. 
6 Deodatus Balile, Egypt Will Help Tanzania with “Inevitable” GM Crops, SCIDEVNET (June 18, 2004), 
http://www.scidev.net/global/gm/news/egypt-will-help-tanzania-with-inevitable-gm-crop.html. 
7 Marwa Hussein, Egyptian Activists Launch First Protest Against Genetically Modified Food, AHRAMONLINE 
(May 26, 2013), http://english.ahram.org.eg/NewsContent/3/12/72305/Business/Economy/Egyptian-activists-
launch-firstprotest-against-ge.aspx. 
8 American Company Exports Carcinogenic Genetically Modified Crops to Egypt, AL-NAHAR (May 26, 2013), 
http://www.alnaharegypt.com/t127804 (in Arabic). 
9 Louise Sarant, Tests on Rats Suggest Genetically Modified Foods Pose Health Hazards, EGYPT INDEPENDENT 
(Aug. 12, 2012), http://www.egyptindependent.com/news/tests-rats-suggest-genetically-modified-foods-pose-
healthhazards. 
10 Haytham Khayri, Biosafety Law Protecting Citizens from Chaos Caused by Genetically Modified Food Products, 
AL-SHOROUK (Oct. 8, 2011), http://www.shorouknews.com/news/view.aspx?cdate=08102011&id=49170 
ffe-e4f9- 420f-9ecf-479b41a34f23. 
11 Phillip De Wet, The Tide Turns in Favor of Biotech Foods, MAIL&GUARDIAN (May 2, 2012), http://mg.co.za 
/article/2012-05-02-the-tide-turns-in-favour-of-biotech-foods. 
12 USDA FOREIGN AGRICULTURAL SERVICE, EGYPT: FOOD AND AGRICULTURAL IMPORT 
REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS NARRATIVE – FAIRS COUNTRY REPORT (July 28, 2009), 
http://gain.fas.usda.gov/Recent%20GAIN%20Publications/Food%20and%20Agricultural% 
20Import%20Regulations%20and%20Standards%20-%20Narrative Cairo Egypt 7-28-2009.pdf. 
13 Id. 
14 Ministerial Resolution 770-2005, Al-Waqa’a Al-Masriyyah (supp.), vol. 234, p. 2, available in English on the 
official website of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Industry, at http://www.mfti.gov.eg/english/laws.htm 
(click on Executive Regulation to Implement Import and Export Law). 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
167 
End Notes for England and Wales 
 
1 See, e.g., Adam Vaughn, Public Concern over GM Food Has Lessened, Survey Shows, THE GUARDIAN (Mar. 
9, 2012), http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/mar/09/gm-food-public-concern; Martin Robbins, 
Hulk Smash GM Crops, THE GUARDIAN (May 30, 2012) (accessed via Lexis). 
2 Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs (DEFRA), Making the Food and Farming Industry More 
Competitive While Protecting the Environment: Genetic Modification, GOV.UK (July 24, 2013), 
https://www.gov. uk/government/ policies/making-the-food-and-farming-industry-more-competitive-while-
protecting-theenvironment/supporting-pages/genetic-modification. 
3 Id. 
4 Id. 
5 Id. 
6 Ian Sample, Special Report: The Return of GM: Biotech Firm Mans Barricades as Campaigners Vow to Stop 
Trials, THE GUARDIAN, Feb. 16, 2008, at 6 (accessed via Lexis). 
7 Ian Sample, The ‘Frankenfood’ Experiments, THE GUARDIAN (May 28, 2012) (accessed via Lexis). 
8 Michael Cardwell, The Release of Genetically Modified Organisms into the Environment: Public Concerns and 
Regulatory Responses, 4 ENVTL. L. REV. 156–58 (2002) (accessed via Lexis). 
9 Phil Angell, Director of Corporate Communications for Monsanto, was quoted in the New York Times on October 
25, 1998, as stating that “Monsanto should not have to vouchsafe the safety of biotech food. . . . Our interest is 
in selling as much of it as possible. Assuring its safety is the FDA’s job.” Press Release, Michael F. Jacobson, 
Ph.D., 
Executive 
Director, 
Center 
for 
Science 
in 
the 
Public 
Interest 
(Nov. 
18, 
1999), 
http://cspinet.org/new/genetics_ fda.html . 
10 Sample, supra note 6. 
11 Id. 
12 Ian Sample, Scientists Send Video Plea to Anti-GM Crop Campaigners, THE GUARDIAN, May 2, 2012, at 11 
(accessed via Lexis). 
13 Sample, supra note 7. 
14 Christopher Hope, Major GM Food Company Monsanto Pulls Out of Europe, THE TELEGRAPH, July 18, 2013, 
at 13 (accessed via Lexis); Sample, supra note7. 
15 Sample, supra note 6. 
16 Hope, supra note 14; Sample, supra note 7. 
17 DEFRA, supra note 2. 
18 Environmental Protection Act 1990, c. 43, http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1990/43/contents. 
19 Id. pt. VI. 
20 Directive 2001/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council art. 2(2), 2001 O.J. (L 106) 1, http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2001:106:0001:0038:EN:PDF. 
21 Genetically Modified (Deliberate Release) Regulations 2002, SI 2002/2443, http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/ 
2002/2443/introduction/made#f00003. 
22 Regulation (EC) 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council, 2003 O.J. (L 268) 1, http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2003:268:0001:0023:EN:PDF; 
Regulation 
(EC) 
1830/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council, 2003 O.J. (L 268) 24, http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUri Serv.do?uri=OJ:L:2003:268:0024:0028:EN:PDF. 
23 Genetically Modified Food (England) Regulations 2004, SI 2004/2335, http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/ 
2004/2335/contents/made. 
24 Genetically Modified Animal Feed (England) Regulations 2004, SI 2004/2334, http://www.legislation.gov. 
uk/uksi/2004/2334/contents/made. 
25 Genetically Modified Organisms (Traceability and Labelling) (England) Regulations 2004, SI 2004/2412, 
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2004/2412/contents/made. 
26 DEFRA, supra note 2. 
27 DEFRA, Genetically Modified Organisms: Applications and Consents, GOV.UK (updated Nov. 22, 2013), 
https://www.gov.uk/genetically-modified-organisms-applications-and-consents. 
28 Genetically Modified (Deliberate Release) Regulations 2002, 2002/2443,  10(1), http://www.legislation.gov. 
uk/uksi/2002/2443/introduction/made#f00003. 
29 Id.  12. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
168 
30 Environmental Protection Act 1990, c. 43, § 124, http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1990/43/part/VI. See also 
Advisory Committee on Releases to the Environment, DEFRA, http://www.defra.gov.uk/acre/ (last visited Oct. 
30, 2013). 
31 Advisory Committee on Releases to the Environment, DEFRA, supra note 30. 
32 Id. 
33 Advisory Committee on Releases to the Environment, Advice on an Application for Deliberate Release of a 
GMO for Research and Development Purposes: Advice of the Advisory Committee on Releases to the 
Environment to the Secretary of State Under Section 124 of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 (Sept. 5, 
2011), http://www.defra. gov.uk/acre/files/acre-advice-11r801.pdf. 
34 DEFRA, supra note 2. 
35 Genetically Modified Organisms (Deliberate Release) Regulations 2002, SI 2002/2443, http://www.legislation. 
gov.uk/uksi/2002/2443/contents/made. 
36 Environmental Protection Act 1990, c. 43, § 112, http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1990/43/section/112. 
37 The latest register, dated April 20, 2013, details the grid sites of GMO crop sites. Sites with Consent for Part B 
Release of GMOs, GOV.UK, https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/ 
200516/partb-consent-sites-list-20130420.pdf. 
38 Sample, supra note 6. 
39 GM Inspectorate, THE FOOD & ENVIRONMENT RESEARCH AGENCY (FERA), http://www.gm-
inspectorate.gov. uk/index.cfm (last visited Nov. 19, 2013). 
40 FERA, GMO Risk Assessment and Regulation, DEFRA, http://www.fera.defra.gov.uk/landUseSustainability/ 
gmCrops.cfm (last visited Nov. 19, 2013). 
41 Regulation (EC) 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council, 2003 O.J. (L 268) 1, http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2003:268:0001:0023:EN:PDF. 
42 Evaluating GM Goods, FOOD STANDARDS AGENCY, http://www.food.gov.uk/policy-advice/gm/evaluating 
(last visited Oct. 23, 2013). 
43 Id. 
44 Id. 
45 Regulation (EC) 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council, 2003 O.J. (L 268) 1, http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2003:268:0001:0023:EN:PDF. 
46 Id. 
47 Id. 
48 Id. 
49 Id. 
50 DEFRA, THE ENVIRONMENTAL DAMAGE REGULATIONS, PREVENTING AND REMEDYING 
ENVIRONMENTAL DAMAGE (May 2009), available at http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/ 
20130321224818/http://archive. defra.gov.uk/environment/policy/liability/pdf/quick-guide-regs09.pdf. 
51 The Environmental Damage (Prevention and Remediation) Regulations 2009, SI 2009/153, http://www. 
legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2009/153/made. 
52 Id. pt. 2. See also DEFRA, supra note 50, at 2. 
53 DEFRA, supra note 50, at 4. 
54 Environmental Damage (Prevention and Remediation) Regulations 2009, SI 2009/153, 4, http://www. 
legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2009/153/made. 
55 Id. sched. 2. See also DEFRA, supra note 50, at 3. 
56 Environmental Damage (Prevention and Remediation) Regulations 2009, SI 2009/153, 4, http://www. 
legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2009/153/made. 
57 DEFRA, supra note 50, at 4. 
58 Id. at 8 (referring to Environmental Damage (Prevention and Remediation) Regulations 2009,  19(3), SI 
2009/153, http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2009/153/regulation/19/made). 
59 International Court of Environmental Arbitration and Conciliation, Consultative Opinion on Liability of Public 
and Private Actors for Genetic Contamination of Non-GM Crops, 7 ENVTL L. REV. 253, 253–56 (2005) 
(accessed via Lexis). 
 
 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
169 
End Notes for European Union 
 
1 Directive 2001/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 March 2001 on the Deliberate Release 
into the Environment of Genetically Modified Organisms and Repealing Council Directive 90/220/EEC, art. 
2(2), 2001 O.J. (L 106) 1, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2001:106:0001: 
0038:EN:PDF. Directive 2001/18/EC was amended by Directive 2008/27/EC, 2008 O.J. (L 81) 45/EC, 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/ LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2008:081:0045:0047:EN:PDF. 
2 Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), 2012 O.J. (C 326) 47, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUri 
Serv/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2012:326:0047:0200:EN:PDF. 
3 Regulation (EC) No. 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2003 on 
Genetically Modified Food and Feed, art. 1, 2003 O.J. (L 268) 1, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUri 
Serv.do?uri=OJ:L:2003:268:0001:0023:EN:PDF. 
4 Article 191 of the TFEU, supra note 2, which refers to the precautionary principle without defining it, aims to 
safeguard the environment. The principle also applies to areas related to food, human and animal health, and 
consumer interests. A 2000 Communication from the Commission provides common guidelines on the 
precautionary principle’s application, stating that it applies “where scientific evidence is insufficient, 
inconclusive or uncertain and there are indications through preliminary objective scientific evaluation that 
there are reasonable grounds for concern that the potentially dangerous effects on the environment, human, 
animal or plant health may be inconsistent with the chosen level of protection.” Communication from the 
Commission on the Precautionary Principle, COM (2000) 0001 final, para. 3 (Feb. 2, 2000), http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?ur i=CELEX:52000DC0001:EN:NOT. 
5 Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity Concerning the Safe Transfer, 
Handling and Use of Living Modified Organisms Resulting from Modern Biotechnology, art. 10, Jan. 29, 
2000, http://www.cbd.int/doc/legal/cartagena-protocol-en.pdf. The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the 
Convention on Biological Diversity was signed by the Community and its Member States in 2000. The 
Council concluded the Protocol on behalf of the Community through the adoption of Decision 2002/628/EC: 
Council Decision of 25 June 2002 Concerning the Conclusion, on behalf of the European Community, of the 
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, 2002 O.J. (L 201) 48, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do? 
uri=CELEX:32002D0628:EN:HTML. 
6 The precautionary principle has been consolidated in international law and the EU and its Members are bound by 
it. It was first recognized in Principle No. 15 of the Rio Declaration adopted at the 1992 UN Conference on the 
Human Environment and Development. Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, Annex I, princ. 
15, UN Doc. A/CONF.151/5/Rev.1, June 3–14, 1992, 31 I.L.M. 874, http://www.unep.org/Documents. 
Multilingual/Default. asp? documentid=78&articleid=1163. In addition, article 3 of the 1992 UN Framework 
Convention on Climate Change refers to the precautionary principle. United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change, May 9, 1992, 1771 U.N.T.S. 107, http://treaties.un.org/pages/ ViewDetailsIII.aspx? 
&src=TREATY&mtdsg_no=XXVII~7& chapter=27&Temp=mtdsg3&lang=en. It was also referenced in the 
Preamble to the 1992 Convention of Biological Diversity. UN Convention on Biological Diversity, June 5, 
1992, 1760 U.N.T.S. 79, http://treaties.un.org/pages/ ViewDetails.aspx?src= TREATY&mtdsg_no=XXVII-
8&chapter=27&lang=en. The precautionary principle is also indirectly recognized in article 5.7 of the WTO 
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Agreement. WTO Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary 
Measures (SPS Agreement), Apr. 15, 1994, http://www.wto.org/english/ tratop e/sps e/spsagr e.htm. 
7 MARIA LEE, EU REGULATION OF GMOS: LAW AND DECISION MAKING FOR A NEW TECHNOLOGY 
3 (2006). 
8 As of today, the list of forty-nine authorized GMOs for food and feed use includes twenty-seven maizes, eight 
cottons, seven soybeans, three oilseed rapes, one sugar beet, one potato, and two microorganisms. Press 
Release, European Commission, Memo, Questions and Answers on EU’s Policies on Cultivation and Imports 
of GMOs (Nov. 6, 2013), http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-13-952_en.htm (citing EU Register of 
Authorized GMOs, EUROPEAN COMMISSION, HEALTH AND CONSUMERS, http://ec.europa.eu/food/ 
dyna/gm_register/ index_en.cfm (last visited Dec. 11, 2013). 
9 LEE, supra note 7, at 189. 
10 Charlie Dunmore, EU Prepares New GMO Maize Cultivation Approval: Draft, REUTERS (Oct. 31, 2013), 
http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/10/31/us-eu-gmo-cultivation-idUSBRE99U0W820131031. 
11 Id. 
12 Within the EU, a number of countries—the Czech Republic, Germany, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, and 
Spain—planted MON810, a genetically modified maize variety sold by Monsanto, on a commercial basis in 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
170 
2008. The total acreage for the seven countries increased from 88,673 hectares in 2007 to 107,719 hectares in 
2008. Spain planted more than others. However, in 2009, the EU acreage decreased by 9% compared to 2008 
because of Germany’s prohibition on MON810. TIMO KAPHENGST ET AL., ASSESSMENT OF THE 
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE OF GM CROPS WORLDWIDE 1 (Ecologic Institute Mar. 2011), 
http://ec.europa.eu/food/plant/gmo/reports_studies/ docs/economic_performance_report_en.pdf. 
13 Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council Amending Directive 2001/18/EC as 
Regards the Possibility for the Member States to Restrict or Prohibit the Cultivation of GMOs in Their 
Territory, at 3, COM (2010) 375 final (July 13, 2010), http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/biotechnology/ 
docs/proposal_en.pdf. 
14 EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE GENERAL FOR HEALTH AND CONSUMERS, 
EVALUATION OF THE EU LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK IN THE FIELD OF GM FOOD AND FEED 
(FINAL 
REPORT) 
(July 
12, 
2010), 
http://ec.europa. 
eu/food/food/biotechnology/evaluation/docs/ 
evaluation_gm_report_en.pdf. 
15 Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003, supra note 3. 
16 Regulation (EC) No 1830/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2003 Concerning 
the Traceability and Labeling of Genetically Modified Organisms and the Traceability of Food and Feed 
Products Produced from Genetically Modified Organisms and Amending Directive 2001/18/EC, 2003, O.J. (L 
268) 24, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2003:268:0024:0028:EN:PDF. 
17 EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE GENERAL FOR HEALTH AND CONSUMERS, supra note 14, 
at XIV. 
18 Id. at XV. 
19 Id. at 76. 
20 Id. at 105. 
21 Id. at 144. 
22 Id. at 52. 
23 DIAHANNA LYNCH & DAVID VOGEL, THE REGULATION OF GMOS IN EUROPE AND THE UNITED 
STATES: A CASE-STUDY OF CONTEMPORARY EUROPEAN REGULATORY POLITICS (Council on 
Foreign Relations Apr. 5, 2001), http://www.cfr.org/ agricultural-policy/regulation-gmos-europe-united-states-
case-study-contemporary-europeanregulatory-politics/p8688. 
24 Id. 
25 KAPHENGST ET AL., supra note 12, at II. 
26 Id. 
27 TFEU, supra note 2, art. 4. 
28 Regulation (EC) No. 1829/2003, supra note 3, art. 1. 
29 Directive 2001/18/EC, supra note 1. 
30 Directive 2008/27/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2008 Amending Directive 
2001/18/EC on the Deliberate Release into the Environment of Genetically Modified Organisms, as Regards 
the Implementing Powers Conferred on the Commission, 2008 O.J. (L 81) 45, http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/Lex UriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2008:081:0045:0047:EN:PDF. 
31 Directive 91/414/EEC on the Placing of Plant Protection Products on the Market, 1991 O.J. (L 230) 1, http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:1991:230:0001:0032:EN:PDF, 
as 
amended 
by 
Commission Directive 
1999/80/EC, 
O.J. 
(L 
210) 13, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUri 
Serv.do?uri=OJ:L:1999:210: 0013:0015:EN:PDF. 
32 Regulation (EC) No. 1830/2003, supra note 16. 
33 Regulation (EC) No. 1946/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 July 2003 on 
Transboundary Movements of Genetically Modified Organisms, 2003 O.J. (L 287) 1, http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUri Serv.do?uri=OJ:L:2003:287:0001:0010:EN:PDF. 
34 Commission Recommendation of 13 July 2010 on Guidelines for the Development of National Co-existence 
Measures to Avoid the Unintended Presence of GMOs in Conventional and Organic Crops, 2010 O.J. (C 200) 
1, http://ecob.jrc.ec.europa.eu/documents/CoexRecommendation.pdf. 
35 Id. at 4. 
36 Id. at 5. 
37 Directive 2001/18/EC, supra note 1, Recital 21. 
38 Id. 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
171 
39 EUROPEAN COMMISSION, EUROPEAN RESEARCH AREA, FOOD, AGRICULTURE & FISHERIES & 
BIOTECHNOLOGY, 
A 
DECADE 
OF 
EU-FUNDED 
GMO 
RESEARCH 
(2001–2010), 
http://ec.europa.eu/research/biosociety/pdf/a_decade_of_eufunded_gmo_research.pdf. 
40 Directive 2001/18/EC, supra note 1, art. 23, para. 1. 
41 Press Release, European Commission, supra note 8. 
42 Press Release No. 160/13 of the General Court, The General Court Has Annulled the Commission’s Decisions 
Concerning Authorisation to Place on the Market the Genetically Modified Potato Amflora (Dec. 13, 2013), 
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_CJE-13-160_en.htm. 
43 Id. 
44 See Article 26b added by the European Parliament to the Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament 
and of the Council Amending Directive 2001/18/EC as Regards the Possibility of the Member States to 
Restrict or Prohibit the Cultivation of GMOs in Their Territory, 2013 O.J. (C 33) E/350. 
45 Directive No. 2001/18/EC, supra note 1, art. 13, para. 1. 
46 Id. art. 13, para. 2. 
47 Id. art. 4, para. 4. 
48 Id. art. 4, paras. 4 & 5. 
49 Id. art. 14, paras. 1–3. 
50 Directive 2001/18/EC, supra note 1, art. 2(3). 
51 Case C-552/07, 2001/18 Judgment of the Court (Fourth Chamber) of 17 February 2009 (reference for a 
preliminary ruling from the Conseil d’État (France))—Commune de Sausheim v. Pierre Azelvandre, 
http://curia. 
europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf;jsessionid=9ea7d2dc30dbc3b29977a1134bcfb724c51ba 
52915a8.e34KaxiLc3qMb40Rch0SaxuMaNb0?text=&docid=72933&pageIndex=0&doclang=en&mode 
=lst&dir=&occ=first&part=1&ci d=929369. 
52 Directive 2001/18/EC, supra note 1, art. 6. 
53 Id. art. 9. 
54 Id. art. 8, para. 1. 
55 Reg. (EC) No. 1829/2003, supra note 3, Recital 16. 
56 Id. art. 4, para. 1. 
57 Id. art. 5, paras. 1–3. 
58 Id. art. 5, para. 5(a), (b). 
59 TFEU, supra note 2. 
60 Reg. No. 1829/2003, supra note 3, art. 13, para. 1(a). 
61 Id. art. 13, para. 1(c). 
62 Id. art. 12, para. 2. 
63 Directive 2001/18/EC, supra note 1, arts. 21 & 26. 
64 Regulation (EC) No. 1830/2003, supra note 16. 
65 Id. arts. 1, 6, 8. 
66 Id. art. 6, para. 1. 
67 Id. art. 4, para. 6(a). 
68 Id. art. 4, para. 6(b). 
69 Id. art. 7 (amending Directive 2001/18/EC art. 21). 
70 See also para. 2.5 of Commission Recommendation of 13 July 2010 on Guidelines for the Development of 
National Co-existence Measures to Avoid the Unintended Presence of GMOs in Conventional and Organic 
Crops, 2010 O.J. (C 200) 1, at 5, http://ecob.jrc.ec.europa.eu/documents/CoexRecommendation.pdf. 
71 EUROPEAN CENTRE OF TORT AND INSURANCE LAW, LIABILITY AND COMPENSATION SCHEMES 
FOR DAMAGE RESULTING FROM THE PRESENCE OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS IN 
NON-GM CROPS REPORTS (Bernhard A. Koch ed., Apr. 2007). 
72 Directive 2004/35/CE of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 2004 on Environmental 
Liability with Regard to the Prevention and Remedying of Environmental Damage, 2004 O.J. (L 143) 56, 
http://eur-lex. europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2004:143:0056:0075:EN:PDF. 
73 Id. Annex III(11). 
74 CANADIAN INSTITUTE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW AND POLICY, GMO STATUTORY LIABILITY 
REGIMES: AN INTERNATIONAL REVIEW 11 (2004). 
75 Rady Ananda, EU High Court Rules on GMO Contamination; Opens Door to Biotech Liability, FOOD 
FREEDOM 
(Sept. 
6, 
2011), 
http://foodfreedom.wordpress.com/2011/09/06/eu-court-rules-on-gmo-
contamination/. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
172 
76 Article 26c, Position of the European Parliament Adopted at First Reading on July 5, 2011, with a View to the 
Adoption of Regulation (EU) No. .../2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council Amending Directive 
2001/18/EC as Regards the Possibility for the Member States to Restrict or Prohibit the Cultivation of GMOs 
in Their Territory, 2013 O.J. (C 33) E/350. 
77 Cartagena Protocol, supra note 5. 
78 Nagoya–Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on Liability and Redress to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, 
Oct. 15, 2010, http://bch.cbd.int/protocol/NKL_text.shtml. 
79 1999/468/EC: Council Decision of 28 June 1999 laying down the Procedures for the Exercise of Implementing 
Powers Conferred on the Commission, 1999 O.J. (L 184) 23, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/Notice.do?val=329852: 
cs&lang=en&list=335859:cs,329853:cs,329852:cs,&pos=3&page=1&nbl=3&pgs=10&hwords=&checktexte=
check box&visu=#texte. Article 2, para. (b) and article 5 of this decision specify that when the Commission 
adopts implementing legislation concerning the health and safety of humans, animals, and plants it has to do so 
with the assistance of a regulatory committee, composed of representatives of the EU Members and chaired by 
a representative of the Commission. The representative prepares a draft, which is voted on by the 
representatives of the Member States. 
80 Id. art. 3(1) & (2). 
81 Press Release, United Nations Decade on Biodiversity, Convention on Biological Diversity Communique, 
European Union Approves Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on Liability and Redress Montreal 
(Mar. 26, 2013), http://www.cbd.int/doc/press/2013/pr-2013-03-26-eu-en.pdf. 
82 Case T‑164/10, Pioneer Hi-Bred International, Inc., Judgment of the General Court (Seventh Chamber), Sept. 26, 
2013, 
http://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document_print.jsf?doclang=EN&text=&pageIndex=0&part=1&mode= 
lst&docid=142241&occ=first&dir=&cid=127901. 
83 See Dunmore, supra note 10. 
84 Case C-442/09, Karl Heinz Bablok and Others v. Freistaat Bayern, Judgment of the Court (Grand Chamber), 
Sept. 
6, 
2011, 
http://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=109143&pageIndex=0& 
doclang=en& mode=lst&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=780715. 
85 Id. para. 109. 
 
 
End Notes for France 
 
1 USDA FOREIGN AGRICULTURAL 
SERVICE, GAIN REPORT: FRANCE: AGRICULTURAL 
BIOTECHNOLOGY ANNUAL 2, 14–15 (June 10, 2013). 
2 CODE DE L’ENVIRONNEMENT art. L531-2-1. 
3 FRANCE: AGRICULTURAL BIOTECHNOLOGY ANNUAL, supra note 1, at 14–15. 
4 Id. at 5. 
5 Id. at 8–11. 
6 Id. at 8. 
7 Marc Mennessier, Fin de la recherche sur les OGM en France, LE FIGARO (July 15, 2013), 
http://www.lefigaro.fr/environnement/2013/07/15/01029-20130715ARTFIG00419-il-n-y-a-plus-de-recherche-
sur-les-ogm-en-france.php. 
8 FRANCE: AGRICULTURAL BIOTECHNOLOGY ANNUAL, supra note 1, at 23–24. 
9 Pour un débat raisonné sur les OGM, LE MONDE (Sept. 27, 2012), http://www.lemonde.fr/idees/article/ 
2012/09/27 /pour-un-debat-raisonne-sur-les-ogm_1766673_3232.html. 
10 FRANCE: AGRICULTURAL BIOTECHNOLOGY ANNUAL, supra note 1, at 15. 
11 IFOP, Les Francais et les OGM (Sept. 2012), http://www.ifop.com/media/poll/1989-1-study_file.pdf. 
12 IFOP, Les Francais et les OGM (Dec. 2011), http://www.ifop.com/media/poll/1697-1-study_file.pdf. 
13 FRANCE: AGRICULTURAL BIOTECHNOLOGY ANNUAL, supra note 1, at 13. 
14 Consolidated Version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, arts. 2 & 4, 2012 O.J. (C 326), 
50–51, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:12012E/TXT:EN:PDF. 
15 Id. art. 2. 
16 Regulation (EC) 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council, arts. 6(2)(b) & 18(3)(b), 2003 O.J. (L 
268) 8, 14, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2003:268:0001:0023:EN:PDF. 
17 CODE DE LA SANTE art. 1313-1. 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
173 
18 Loi 2008-595 du 25 juin 2008 relative aux organismes génétiquement modifiés [Law 2008-595 of June 25, 2008, 
regarding genetically modified organisms], JOURNAL OFFICIEL DE LA REPUBLIQUE FRANÇAISE 
[J.O.] [OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF FRANCE], June 26, 2008, p. 10218. 
19 Id. 
20 Id. 
21 Id. 
22 CODE DE L’ENVIRONNEMENT art. L531-3. 
23 Id. 
24 BIRGIT MÜLLER, LA BATAILLE DES OGM, COMBAT VITAL OU D’ARRIÈRE-GARDE? 88 (Ellipses, 
2008). 
25 CODE DE L’ENVIRONNEMENT art. L531-1. 
26 Directive 2001/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, art. 2(2), 2001 O.J. (L 106) 4, http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2001:106:0001:0038:EN:PDF. 
27 CODE DE L’ENVIRONNEMENT art. L531-2-1. 
28 Id. arts. L532-3 & R532-5. 
29 Id. 
30 Id. 
31 Id. art. L532-25. 
32 Id. arts. L533-3 & R533-1. 
33 Id. art. L533-3-3. 
34 Id. art. L533-3-2. 
35 Id. art. L533-3-4. 
36 Id. art. L533-3-5. 
37 Id. arts. L533-5 & R533-25. 
38 Id. arts. L533-5 & L533-5-1. 
39 Id. art. L533-6. 
40 Id. art. 533-8. 
41 CODE RURAL [RURAL CODE] art. L663-1. 
42 Id. art. L663-1. 
43 Luc Bodiguel et al., Coexistence of Genetically Modified, Conventional, and Organic Crops in the European 
Union: National Implementation, in THE REGULATION OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS: 
COMPARATIVE APPROACHES 172 (Luc Bodiguel & Michael Cardwell eds., Oxford University Press, 
2010). 
44 CODE RURAL art. L671-14. 
45 Id. art. L671-15. 
46 Id. 
47 Id. art. L663-1. 
48 Margaret Rosso Grossman, Coexistence of Genetically Modified, Conventional, and Organic Crops in the 
European Union: The Community Framework, in THE REGULATION OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED 
ORGANISMS: COMPARATIVE APPROACHES, supra note 43, at 122–62. 
49 Directive 2001/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, art. 2(2), 2001 O.J. (L 106) 1, http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2001:106:0001:0038:EN:PDF. 
50 Grossman, supra note 48, at 131. 
51 Id. (citing the 2001/18/EC Deliberate Release Directive, art. 26a(1), as amended by the (EC) 1829/2003 Food and 
Feed Regulation). 
52 CODE DE L’ENVIRONNEMENT art. L531-2-1. 
53 Id. 
54 CODE RURAL art. L663-2. 
55 Id. 
56 Id. 
57 Id. art. L671-15. 
58 Bodiguel et al., supra note 43, at 173. 
59 CODE RURAL art. L251-1. 
60 Loi 2008-595 du 25 juin 2008 relative aux organismes génétiquement modifiés [Law 2008-595 of June 25, 2008, 
Regarding Genetically Modified Organisms] art. 9, J.O., June 26, 2008, p. 10221. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
174 
61 CODE RURAL art. L251-1; see also the webpage of the Ministry of Agriculture regarding the Comité de 
surveillance biologique du territoire, http://agriculture.gouv.fr/CSBT-missions-et-avis,1645 (last visited Sept. 
27, 2013). 
62 Regulation (EC) 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council, 2003 O.J. (L 268) 1, http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2003:268:0001:0023:EN:PDF. 
63 Id. at 24 Grossman, supra note 48, at 129. 
64 See Part IV, “Restrictions on Research, Production, and Marketing,” supra. 
65 Grossman, supra note 48, at 129; Regulation (EC) 1829/2003, supra note 62, arts. 12–13. 
66 Regulation (EC) 1829/2003, supra note 62, arts. 24–25. 
67 Décret n° 2012-128 du 30 janvier 2012 relatif à l'étiquetage des denrées alimentaires issues de filières qualifiées « 
sans organismes génétiquement modifiés » [Decree No. 2012-128 of January 30, 2012, Regarding the 
Labeling of Food Products Emanating from Channels Deemed “Without Genetically Modified Organisms”], 
J.O., Jan. 31, 2012, p. 1770. 
68 Id. arts. 8–13. 
69 FRANCE: AGRICULTURAL BIOTECHNOLOGY ANNUAL, supra note 1, at 19–20. 
70 Décret n° 2012-128 du 30 janvier 2012 art. 2. 
71 CODE RURAL art. L663-4.-I. 
72 Id. 
73 Id. 
74 Id. art. L663-4.-III. 
75 MÜLLER, supra note 24, at 124. 
76 BROU AKPOUÉ, DROIT PRIVÉ DE L’ENVIRONNEMENT 46–50 (Atelier National de Reproduction des 
Theses, 2009). 
77 MÜLLER, supra note 24, at 116. 
78 Id. at 117. 
79 Id. at 121. 
80 Id. at 121–23. 
81 CE, Aug. 1, 2013, Association génerale des producteurs de maïs (AGPM) et autres, http://www.conseil-etat.fr/fr 
/selection-de-decisions-du-conseil-d-etat/ce_1er_aout_2013_association_generale-producteurs_mais_agpm_et 
autres.html. 
82 Regulation (EC) 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council, 2003 O.J. (L 268) 19, http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2003:268:0001:0023:EN:PDF. 
83 Sophie Louet, Le Conseil d’Etat suspend l’interdiction du maïs MON810 [The Conseil d’Etat Suspends the Ban 
on MON810 Maize], REUTERS (Aug. 1, 2013), http://fr.reuters.com/article/topNews/idFRPAE97004 
F20130801? pageNumber=2&virtualBrandChannel=0&sp=true. 
 
 
End Notes for Germany 
 
1 See EU report. 
2 Gesetz zur Neuordnung des Gentechnikrechts [Act Restructuring the Genetic Engineering Act], Dec. 21, 2004, 
BUNDESGESETZBLATT [BGBL.] 2005 I at 186. 
3 See EU Report. 
4 Verwaltungsgericht [Regional Administrative Court] Braunschweig, May 4, 2009, docket no. 2 B 111/09, 
available at https://www.juris.de (by subscription). 
5 INES HÄRTEL, HANDBUCH DES FACHANWALTS AGRARRECHT 726 (2012). 
6 BERLIN-BRANDENBURGISCHE AKADEMIE DER WISSCHENSCHAFTEN, GRÜNE GENTECHNO-
LOGIE. AKTUELLE WISSENSCHAFTLICHE WIRTSCHAFTLICHE UND GESELLSCHAFTLICHE 
ENTWICKLUNGEN 
– 
THEMENBAND 
DER 
INTERDISZIPLINÄREN 
ARBEITSGRUPPE 
“GENTECHNOLGIEBERICHT”: 
KURZFASSUNG 
11 
(2013), 
available 
at 
http://www.gentech 
nologiebericht.de/bilder/Kurzfassung_Internet.pdf; AGRICULTURAL BIOTECHNOLOGY. CURRENT 
SCIENTIFIC, ECONOMIC AND SOCIETAL DEVELOPMENTS – SUPPLEMENT OF THE 
INTERDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH GROUP “GENE TECHNOLOGY REPORT”: SUMMARY 27 (2013), 
available at http://www.gentech nologiebericht.de/bilder/Kurzfassung_Internet.pdf. 
7 Justus Bender, Regenwürmer würden reichen, FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE ZEITUNG, at 3 (Feb. 15, 2014). 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
175 
8 BERLIN-BRANDENBURGISCHE AKADEMIE DER WISSCHENSCHAFTEN, SUPPLEMENT “GM 
PLANTS” 
(2007): 
SUMMARY 
AND 
CORE 
STATEMENTS 
3 
(Oct. 
2008), 
available 
at 
http://www.gentechnologiebericht.de/gen/bilder/ Summary_GM%20plants_2007.pdf. 
9 Jost Maurin, “Die Technik wird verteufelt,” TAZ, DIE TAGESZEITUNG, Feb. 19, 2014, at 4, available at 
http://www. taz.de/Landwirt-ueber-den-Anbau-von-Gen-Mais-/!133307/. 
10 HÄRTEL, supra note 5, at 726. 
11 Bundesverfassungsgericht [Federal Constitutional Court], Nov. 24, 2010, ENTSCHEIDUNGEN DES 
BUNDESVERFASSUNGSGERICHTS [BVerfGE] 128 /1 [hereafter BVerfGE 128/1]  135, https://www. 
bundesverfassungsgericht.de/entscheidungen/2010/11/24; see also Press Release, Federal Constitutional 
Court, Application for Judicial Review in the Matter of the Genetic Engineering Act is Unsuccessful (Nov. 24, 
2010), https://www.bundesverfassungsgericht.de/pressemitteilungen/bvg10-108en.html. 
12 BERLIN-BRANDENBURGISCHE AKADEMIE, supra note 6. 
13 
Grüne 
Gentechnik, 
BUNDESMINISTERIUM 
FÜR 
ERNÄHRUNG 
UND 
LANDWIRTSCHAFT, 
http://www.bmel.de/DE/ Landwirtschaft/Pflanze/Gentechnik/gentechnik_node.html (last visited Mar. 4, 2014). 
14 HÄRTEl, supra note 5, at 759. 
15 SACHVERSTÄNDIGENRAT FÜR UMWELTFRAGEN, UMWELTGUTACHTEN 2008, at 502 (2008), 
http://www. 
umweltrat.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/01_Umweltgutachten/2008_Umweltgutachten_BTD. 
pdf?__blob=publicat ionFile. 
16 Id. at 489. 
17 Gentechnikgesetz [Genetic Engineering Act], repromulgated Dec. 16, 1993, BGBL. I at 2066, 
http://www.gesetzeim-internet.de/gentg/index.html. 
18 See EU Report. 
19 EG-Gentechnik-Durchführungsgesetz [EC Genetic Engineering Implementation Act], June 22 2004, BGBL. I S. 
1244, http://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/eggentdurchfg/BJNR124410004.html. 
20 Arzneimittelgesetz [Act on Pharmaceutical Drugs], repromulgated Dec. 12, 2005, BGBL. I at 3394, as amended, 
translation at http://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/englisch_amg/index.html. 
21 ARZNEIMITTELRECHT 1022 (Stefan Furhmann & Andreas Fleischfresser eds., 2010). 
22 Gesetz zur Neuordnung des Gentechnikrechts [Act Restructuring the Genetic Engineering Act], Dec. 21, 2004, 
BGBL. 2005 I at 186. 
23 Case C-420/03, Commission v. Germany, July 15, 2004, available at http://curia.europa.eu/juris/documents. 
jsf?pro=&lgrec=en&nat=or&oqp=&lg=&dates=&language=en&jur=C%2CT%2CF&cit=none%252CC%252
CCJ% 
252CR%252C2008E%252C%252C%252C%252C%252C%252C%252C%252C%252C%252Ctrue% 
252Cfalse%252Cfalse&num=C-420%252F03&td=ALL&pcs=Oor&avg=&page=1&mat=or&jge=&for =&cid 
=548564 (click on “Curia” to select language). 
24 128 BVerfGE 1  25. 
25 SACHVERSTÄNDIGENRAT, supra note 15, at 496. 
26 Genetic Engineering Act § 1. 
27 Id. § 3 no. 3. 
28 Id. § 3 no. 6; BVerfGE 128/1 8. 
29 Martin Brandt, Vernichtung gentechnisch veränderter Pflanzen, JURIS-PR (2012), available at 
http://www.juris.de (by subscription); Bayerischer Verwaltungsgerichtshof [Bavarian Higher Administrative 
Court], Nov. 14, 2013, http://www.gesetze-bayern.de/jportal/portal/page/bsbayprod.psml?doc.id= MWRE 
130003444&st=ent&showdoccase =1&paramfromHL=true#focuspoint. 
30 Grüne Gentechnik, supra note 13. 
31 Verwaltungsgericht [Regional Administrative Court] Braunschweig, May 4, 2009, docket no. 2 B 111/09, 
available at http://www.juris.de (by subscription). 
32 Genetic Engineering Act § 16(1). 
33 Id. § 31. 
34 BUNDESAMT FÜR VERBRAUCHERSCHUTZ [FEDERAL OFFICE OF CONSUMER PROTECTION AND 
FOOD SAFETY], http://www.bvl.bund.de/DE/Home/homepage_node.html (last visited Mar. 4, 2014). 
35 See EU report. 
36 ACTIVITY REPORT OF THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE ON BIOLOGICAL SAFETY 2010, GERMAN 
FEDERAL OFFICE OF CONSUMER PROTECTION AND FOOD SAFETY (Aug. 18, 2011), 
http:www.bvl.bund.de/EN/06_Genetic_Engineering/ 
ZKBS/05_Taetigkeitsberichte/Ordner_Taetigkeitsberichte/Taet_2010.html?nn=1414304 (click on the link to 
access the report). 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
176 
37 Press Release, Baden-Wuerttemberg, Ministerium für Ländlichen Raum und Verbraucherschutz, Bonde begrüßt 
Ablehnung von Gen-Mais durch Europaparlament und Bundesländer (Jan. 17, 2014), http://www.baden-
wuerttemberg.de/de/service/presse/pressemitteilung/pid/bonde-begruesst-ablehnung-von-gen-mais-durch-
europaparlament-und-bundeslaender/. 
38 Genetic Engineering Act § 6. 
39 Id. §§ 7–14. 
40 GENTECHNIK UND LEBENSMITTEL: DIE WICHTIGSTEN FAKTEN, BUNDESMINISTERIUM FÜR 
ERNÄHRUNG, 
LANDWIRTSCHAFT 
UND 
VERBRAUCHERSCHUTZ, 
http://www.bmelv.de/ 
SharedDocs/Downloads/Landwirtschaft/Pflanze/GrueneGentechnik/OhneGTSiegel/HintergrundIn 
formationenOhneGTSiegel.pdf?__blob=publicationFile (last visited Mar. 7, 2014). 
41 Felix Sinn & Thomas Gross, Schwerpunktbereich: Einführung in das Gentechnikrecht, JURISTISCHE 
SCHULUNG 797 (2011). 
42 GENTECHNIK UND LEBENSMITTEL, supra note 40. 
43 Genetic Engineering Act § 16(1). 
44 Sinn & Gross, supra note 41, at 797. 
45 Bender, supra note 7. 
46 Genetic Engineering Act § 16a. 
47 Id. 
48 Bender, supra note 7. 
49 Gentechnik-Pflanzenerzeugungsverordnung [GM Crop Production Regulation], Apr.7, 2008, BGBL. I at 655, 
Anhang [Appendix]. 
50 Press Release, supra note 37. 
51 Sinn & Gross, supra note 41, at 800. 
52 Genetic Engineering Act § 26(4). 
53 Press Release, supra note 37. 
54 GENTECHNIK UND LEBENSMITTEL, supra note 40. 
55 See EU Report. 
56 VERBAND LEBENSMITTEL OHNE GENTECHNIKE, http://www.ohnegentechnik.org/. 
57 EG-Gentechnik-Durchführungsgesetz [EC Genetic Engineering Implementation Act], June 22, 2004, BGBl. I S. 
1244, as amended, § 3a, http://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/eggentdurchfg/BJNR124410004.html. 
58 Genetic Engineering Act §§ 32–36a. 
59 Id. § 36a. 
60 HÄRTEL, supra note 5, at 726. 
61 Case C-442/09, Karl Heinz Bablok and Others v. Freistaat Bayern, Judgment of the Court (Grand Chamber), 
Sept. 6, 2011, http://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=109143&pageIndex=0&doc 
lang=en& mode=lst&dir=&occ=first&part=1&cid=780715 (click on “Curia” to select language); see also EU 
report. 
62 See EU Report. 
63 BVerfGE 128/1, supra note 11. 
64 Brandt, supra note 29; Bayerischer Verwaltungsgerichtshof, supra note 29. 
65 OLG [Oberlandesgericht, Higher Regional Court] Naumburg, May 8, 2013, docket no. 2Ss58/12, available at 
http://www.juris.de (by subscription). 
66 See Report on the Cartagena Protocol. 
67 EU Regulation 1829/2003 art. 28. 
68 Bayerischer Verwaltungsgerichtshof [Bavarian Higher Administrative Court], Mar. 27, 2012, docket no. 22 BV 
11.2175, 
http://www.gesetze-bayern.de/jportal/portal/page/bsbayprod.psml?doc.id=JURE120008921&st= 
ent&showdoccase=1&paramfromHL=true#focuspoint. 
69 Deutscher Bundestag, Drucksachen und Protokolle, Imkerei vor der Agro-Gentechnik schützen, June 13, 2012, 
http://dipbt.bundestag.de/dip21/btd/17/099/1709985.pdf. 
70 OLG Naumburg, supra note 65. 
 
 
 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
177 
End Notes for Israel 
 
1 Marlene-Aviva Grunpeter, GMOs, A Global Debate: Israel a Center for Study, Kosher Concerns, EPOCH TIMES 
(Aug. 5, 2013), http://www.theepochtimes.com/n3/229556-gmos-a-global-debate-israel-a-center-for-study-
kosherconcerns/. 
2 See Agricultural Research Organization (ARO), Volcani Center: Plant Pathology and Weed Research, 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT (MARD), http://www.agri.gov.il/en/ 
departments/12.aspx (last visited Sept. 12, 2013). 
3 See, e.g., Hagai Amit, Homegrown Israeli Idea for Conquering the World Food Shortage, HAARETZ (Apr. 12, 
2012), http://www.haaretz.com/weekend/week-s-end/homegrown-israeli-idea-for-conquering-the-world-food-
shortage-1.423959. 
4 Id. (stating, for example, that the US government was helping to fund pre-field trial tests conducted by an Israeli 
startup company). For general information on life sciences research in Israel, see Tova Cohen & Steven 
Scheer, Analysis: After Tech Success, Israel Seeks Life Sciences Growth, REUTERS (June 6, 2013), 
http://www.reuters.com/ article/2013/06/06/us-israel-biomed-idUSBRE9550IU20130606. 
5 Seed Regulations (Genetically Modified Plants and Organisms) 5765-2005, KOVETZ HATAKANOT [KT] 
[Subsidiary Legislation] No. 6391 p. 782. An unofficial translation of the regulations is available on the 
MARD 
website 
at 
http://www.ppiseng.moag.gov.il/PPISENG/GeneticallyModifiedPlants/Licensingand 
analysisofGMplants/ 
6 Grunpeter, supra note 1. 
7 Id. 
8 
Genetically 
Engineered 
Food, 
MINISTRY 
OF 
HEALTH, 
http://www.health.gov.il/unitsoffice/ 
hd/ph/fcs/novelfood/ pages/engfood.aspx (last visited Sept. 12, 2012). 
9 Grunpeter, supra note 1. 
10 Id. 
11 THE KNESSET COMMITTEE FOR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, THE 18TH KNESSET, USE OF 
GENETIC ENGINEERING IN AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH IN ISRAEL (Hearing in the Committee, 
Protocol No. 112: Summary of the Committee’s Activity, Part B, p. 50 (Aug. 2011–Nov. 2012), 
http://www.knesset.gov.il/committees/heb/docs/ mada_18b.pdf (in Hebrew). 
12 For information on the Center’s research activities, see Agriculture Research Organization (ARO) Volcani 
Center, MARD, http://www.agri.gov.il/units/institutes/default.aspx (last visited Sept. 16, 2013). 
13 THE KNESSET COMMITTEE FOR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, supra note 11, at 51. 
14 Id. (translated by author, R.L.). 
15 Id. 
16 Id. 
17 Public Health (Food) (Nutritional Labeling) (Amendment) 5771-2011 Regulations, KT No. 7019, p. 1198 (July 
31, 2011), as amended by KT No. 7160, p. 1661 (Aug. 30, 2012). 
18 See The 19th Knesset Committee for Labor, Welfare and Health Meeting (Protocol No. 47, July 3, 2013) pp. 18– 
21, http://www.knesset.gov.il/protocols/data/rtf/avoda/2013-07-03.rtf (in Hebrew). 
19 Grunpeter, supra note 1. 
20 Gal Tziperman Lotan, Scientists, Activists Debate if Genetically Modified Foods are Panacea or Plague, THE 
JERUSALEM POST (Apr. 30, 2008), http://www.jpost.com/Health-and-Sci-Tech/Science-And-Environment/ 
Scientistsactivists-debate-if-genetically-modified-foods-are-panacea-or-plague. 
21 Id. 
22 Id. 
23 See Natural Food Certifiers, GREENERCHOICES, http://www.greenerchoices.org/eco-labels/label.cfm? 
LabelID=198 (last visited Sept. 16, 2013). 
24 Grunpeter, supra note 1. 
25 The NFC has been certifying products as organic since 2002 and is accredited as an organic certifier by the 
USDA. See GREENERCHOICES, supra note 23. 
26 Daisy Luther, Kosher Certification Program Bans All GMO Ingredients, THE ORGANIC PREPPER (Apr. 25, 
2013), http://www.theorganicprepper.ca/kosher-certification-program-bans-all-gmo-ingredients-04252013. 
27 Seed Regulations (Genetically Modified Plants and Organisms) 5765–2005, KT No. 6391, p. 728. 
28 Seeds Law, 5716-1956, 10 LAWS OF THE STATE OF ISRAEL [LSI] 99 (5716-1955/56), as amended. 
29 Plant Protection Law, 5716-1956, 10 LSI 75, as amended. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
178 
30 Genetically Modified Plants & Organisms, MARD PLANT PROTECTION AND INSPECTION SERVICES, 
http://www.ppiseng.moag.gov.il/PPISENG/GeneticallyModifiedPlants/LicensingandanalysisofGMplants/ 
(click on “[l]earn more about the service . . . ”; last visited Nov. 1, 2013). 
31 Id. 
32 Genetically Engineered Food, MINISTRY OF HEALTH, http://www.health.gov.il/unitsoffice/hd/ph/fcs/ 
novelfood/pages/engfood.aspx (last visited Sept. 18, 2012) (translated by author, R.L.). 
33 Seed Regulations (Genetically Modified Plants and Organisms) 5765-2005, § 3. 
34 The National Committee for Transgenic Plants is a committee appointed by the Minister of Agriculture and Rural 
Development for matters concerning experiments with transgenic plants and organisms and their sale. See id. § 
2(a). 
35 Id. § 2(b)–(c). 
36 Id. § 7(a). 
37 Id. § 7(b)–(c). 
38 Id. § 8(b). 
39 Id. §§ 9–15. 
40 Id. § 2(b). 
41 Id. § 2(a). 
42 Id. 
43 MINISTRY OF HEALTH, supra note 32. 
44 See discussion, Part II(A), above. 
 
 
End Notes for Italy 
 
1 OGM: una nuova tecnologia che ha avuto troppo successo [GMO: A New Technology That Has Had Much 
Success], CONFAGRICOLTURA ROVIGO, http://www.salmone.org/ogm-cosa-sono/ (last visited Nov. 20, 
2013). 
2 OGM: Organismi geneticamente modificati: una definizione [GMO: Genetically Modified Organisms: A 
Definition], MINERVA OSSERVATORIO SULL’INDUSTRIA ALIMENTARE, http://www.minerva. 
unito.it/Alimentare/ OGM/OGMdef.htm (last visited Nov. 20, 2013). 
3 OGM, TRECCANI.IT: L’ENCICLOPEDIA ITALIANA [ITALIAN ENCYCLOPEDIA], http://www.treccani.it/ 
enciclopedia/ogm/ (last visited, Nov. 20, 2013). 
4 Il Paradosso della sfiducia negli OGM [The Paradox of the Distrust of GMOs], LE SCIENZE (EDIZIONE 
ITALIANA DI SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN) (Sept. 11, 2013), http://www.lescienze.it/ news/2013/ 
09/11/news/ogm_sicurezza_ controlli_percezione_rischio-1804408/. 
5 Press Release, Ministero delle politiche agricole, alimentari e forestali [Ministry of Agricultural, Food, and 
Forestry Policies], Ogm, De Girolamo: firmato decreto che vieta la coltivazione del mais MON810 in Italia 
[GM, De Girolamo: Signed Decree Prohibiting the Cultivation of MON810 Corn in Italy] (July 12, 2013), 
http://www. politicheagricole.it/flex/cm/pages/ServeBLOB.php/L/IT/IDPagina/6560. 
6 Pro o contro: sugli Ogm è facile cambiare opinione [For or Against: It is Easy to Change Opinions About GMOs], 
CORRIERE 
DELLA 
SERA.IT 
AMBIENTE 
(Sept. 
13, 
2013), 
http://www.corriere.it/ambiente/ 
13_settembre_13/ogm-facilecambiare-opinione_bce7ca28-1c49-11e3-8df2-24a872f62c06.shtml. 
7 Organismi Geneticamente Modificati [Genetically Modified Organisms], AUTORITÀ EUROPEA PER LA 
SICUREZZA ALIMENTARE [EUROPEAN AUTHORITY FOR FOOD SAFETY], http://www.efsa.europa. 
eu/it/topics/topic/gmo.htm (last visited Nov. 20, 2013). 
8 TRECCANI.IT, supra note 3. 
9 Id. 
10 Decreto Legislativo 8 luglio 2003, n. 224, Attuazione della direttiva 2001/18/CE concernente l’emissione 
deliberata nell’ambiente di organismi geneticamente modificati [Legislative Decree No. 224 of July 8, 2003, 
Implementing Directive 2001/18/CE Concerning the Deliberate Release of Genetically Modified Organisms 
into the Environment] [L.D. No. 224 of 2003] art. 1(b), Gazzetta Ufficiale della Repubblica Italiana [G.U.] 
[OFFICIAL 
JOURNAL 
OF 
THE 
REPUBLIC 
OF 
ITALY], 
No. 
194, 
Aug. 
22, 
2003, 
http://www.normattiva.it/uri-res/N2Ls?urn:nir:stato: decreto.legislativo:2003;224. 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
179 
11 Directive 2001/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 March 2001 on the deliberate release 
into the environment of genetically modified organisms and repealing Council Directive 90/220/EEC, 2001 
O.J. (L 106) 1, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2001:106:0001:0038:EN:PDF. 
12 For a discussion of the precautionary principle, which generally allows for preventative decision making in the 
face of environmental risk, see The Precautionary Principle, EUROPA: SUMMARIES OF EU 
LEGISLATION, 
http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/consumers/consumer_safety/l32042_en.htm 
(last 
visited Nov. 20, 2013). 
13 Id. 
14 Decreto del Presidente del Consiglio dei Ministri 4 agosto 2000 Sospensione cautelativa della 
commercializzazione e dell’utilizzazione di taluni prodotti transgenici sul territorio nazionale, a norma dell’art. 
12 del regolamento (CE) n. 258/97 [Decree of the President of the Council of Ministers of August 4, 2000, 
Concerning the Precautionary Suspension of the Commercialization and Use of Certain Transgenic Products 
on the National Territory, in Accordance with Article 12 of Regulations (EC) No. 258/97], 
http://www.arpa.emr.it/cms3/documenti/ alimenti/normativa/DPCM_04ago2000.pdf. 
15 Pusztai Rebuttal to “GM Myths”; Italian Scientists Blast, AGBIOWORLD, http://www.agbioworld.org/ 
newsletter_ wm/index.php?caseid=archive&newsid=886 (last visited Nov. 20, 2013). 
16 Ogm, il decreto Alemanno è legge “Mai più commistioni nei campi,” LA REPUBBLICA.IT (Jan. 25, 2005), 
http://www.repubblica.it/2004/j/sezioni/politica/ogmo/okogm/okogm.html. 
17 Decreto Legislativo 8 luglio 2003, n. 224 Attuazione della direttiva 2001/18/CE concernente l'emissione 
deliberata nell'ambiente di organismi geneticamente modificati [Legislative Decree No. 224 of July 8, 2003, 
Implementing Directive 2001/18/EC on the Deliberate Release of Genetically Modified Organisms], G.U., No. 
194, Aug. 22, 2003, http://www.normattiva.it/uri-res/N2Ls?urn:nir:stato:decreto.legislativo:2003;224. 
18 Id. arts. 8, 15, 19 & 22. 
19 Decreto-Legge 22 novembre 2004, n. 279, Disposizioni urgenti per assicurare la coesistenza tra le forme di 
agricoltura transgenica, convenzionale e biologica [Decree-Law No. 279 of November 22, 2004, Containing 
Urgent Measures to Ensure the Coexistence Between Transgenic, Conventional, and Biological Forms of 
Agriculture], G.U., No. 280, Nov. 29, 2004, http://www.normattiva.it/uri-res/N2Ls?urn:nir:stato:decreto-
legge:2004;279. 
20 Legge 28 gennaio 2005, n. 5 Conversione in legge, con modificazioni, del decreto-legge 22 novembre 2004, n. 
279, recante disposizioni urgenti per assicurare la coesistenza tra le forme di agricoltura transgenica, 
convenzionale e biologica [Law No. 5 of January 28, 2005, Converting into Law, with Amendments, Decree-
Law No. 279 of November 22, 2004, Containing Urgent Measures to Ensure the Coexistence Between 
Transgenic, Conventional, and Biological Forms of Agriculture], G.U., No. 22, Jan. 28, 2005, 
http://www.normattiva.it/uri-res/N2Ls?urn: nir:stato:legge:2005;5. 
21 L.D. No. 224 of 2003 art. 26. 
22 Id. art. 27. 
23 Decreto Legislativo 21 marzo 2005, n. 70, Disposizioni sanzionatorie per le violazioni dei regolamenti (CE) 
numeri 1829/2003 e 1830/2003, relativi agli alimenti ed ai mangimi geneticamente modificati [Legislative 
Decree No. 70 of March 21, 2005, Penalties for the Violation of Regulation (EC) Nos. 1829/2003 and 
1830/2003, Related to Genetically-Modified Food and Feed] [L.D. No. 70 of 2005], G.U., No. 98, Mar. 21, 
2005, 
http://www. 
normattiva.it/uri-res/N2Ls?urn:nir:stato:decreto.legislativo:2005;070 
(implementing 
Regulation (EC) No. 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of September 22, 2003, on 
Genetically Modified Food and Feed). 
24 Id. art. 9. 
25 Id. art. 22. 
26 Id. art. 30. 
27 Id. art. 14. 
28 Decreto del Presidente della Repubblica 2 novembre 2001, n. 433, Regolamento di attuazione delle direttive 
96/51/CE, 98/51/CE e 1999/20/CE in materia di additivi nell’alimentazione degli animali [Presidential Decree 
No. 433 of November 2, 2001, Implementing Regulations of Directives 96/51/CE, 98/51/CE and 1999/20/CE 
Concerning Additives to Animal Feeds] [Presidential Decree No. 433 of 2001], G.U., No. 291, Dec. 15, 2001, 
http://www.normattiva.it/atto/caricaDettaglio 
Atto?atto.dataPubblicazioneGazzetta=2001-12-15&atto.codice 
Redazionale=001G0484. 
29 Id. art. 7. 
30 Decreto Legislativo 25 giugno 2010, n. 124 Attuazione della direttiva 2008/90 relativa alla commercializzazione 
dei materiali di moltiplicazione delle piante da frutto destinate alla produzione di frutti (refusione) [Legislative 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
180 
Decree No. 124 of June 25, 2010, Implementing Directive 2008/90 Related to the Commercialization of 
Propagating Materials of Fruit Plants Intended for Fruit Production (Reimbursement)], G.U., No. 180, Aug. 4, 
2010, http://www. normattiva.it/uri-res/N2Ls?urn:nir:stato:decreto.legislativo:2010;124. 
31 Id. art. 3(c)–(i). 
32 Id. art. 3. 
33 Id. art. 4(5)(c). 
34 Id. art. 8. 
35 Id. art. 4. 
36 Id. art. 6. 
37 Presidential Decree No. 433 of 2001 art. 3, G.U., No. 291, Dec. 15, 2001, http://www.normattiva.it/atto/carica 
DettaglioAtto?atto.dataPubblicazioneGazzetta=2001-12-15&atto.codiceRedazionale=001G0484. 
38 Id. art. 6. 
39 L.D. No. 224 of 2003 art. 7, G.U., No. 194, Aug. 22, 2003, http://www.normattiva.it/uri-res/N2Ls?urn:nir:stato: 
decreto.legislativo:2003;224. 
40 Id. art. 24. 
41 Id. art. 25. 
42 Presidential Decree No. 433 of 2001 arts. 14–19, G.U., No. 291, Dec. 15, 2001, http://www.normattiva.it/atto/ 
carica DettaglioAtto?atto.dataPubblicazioneGazzetta=2001-12-15&atto.codiceRedazionale=001G0484. 
43 Id. art. 20. 
44 CODICE CIVILE [CIVIL CODE] art. 2043. 
45 L.D. No. 224 of 2003 art. 36(2), G.U., No. 194, Aug. 22, 2003, http://www.normattiva.it/uri-res/N2Ls?urn:nir: 
stato:decreto.legislativo:2003;224. 
46 L.D. No. 70 of 2005 art. 1, G.U., No. 98, Mar. 21, 2005, http://www.normattiva.it/uri-res/N2Ls?urn:nir:stato: 
decreto.legislativo:2005;070 (implementing Regulation (EC) No. 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and 
of the Council of September 22, 2003, on Genetically Modified Food and Feed). 
47 Id. art. 3. 
48 Id. art. 4. 
49 Id. art. 5. 
50 Corte Costituzionale, 8 marzo 2006, sentenza n. 116 [Constitutional Court, March 8, 2006, Decision No. 116], 
http://www.cortecostituzionale.it/actionSchedaPronuncia.do?anno=2006&numero=116. 
 
 
End Notes for Japan 
 
1 Act on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Biological Diversity through Regulations on the Use of Living 
Modified Organisms (Cartagena Act), Act No. 97 of June 18, 2003. An English translation of this Law is 
available 
on 
a 
website 
managed 
by 
the 
Ministry 
of 
Justice, 
at 
http://www.japaneselaw 
translation.go.jp/law/detail_main?re= 02&vm=02&id=132 (last visited Oct. 22, 2013). 
2 Id. art. 1 (citing the Cartagena Protocol, Jan. 29, 2000, http://treaties.un.org/doc/Treaties/2000/01/20000129% 
2008-44%20PM/Ch_XXVII_08_ap.pdf). 
3 Shokubutsu: Sekai hatsu! baiotekunorogi de “aoi bara” no kaihatsu ni seikou! [Plants: First in the World! 
Success of Development of “Blue Rose” by Biotechnology!], SUNTORY, http://www.suntory.co.jp/ 
company/research/high tech/blue-rose/history.html (last visited Nov. 18, 2013). 
4 Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, Pharmaceutical and Food Dept., Food Safety Sec., Chart of GM Foods 
and Food Additives that Went Through Safety Examinations (Oct. 17, 2013), http://www.mhlw.go.jp/topics/ 
idenshi/dl/list.pdf. 
5 Tony C. Dreibus & Rudy Ruitenberg, Wheat Falls as Japan Suspends U.S. Imports on Biotech Crop Find, 
BLOOMBERG (May 30, 2013), http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-05-30/wheat-drops-as-global-crop-
outlookcounters-u-s-planting-delays.html. 
6 Japanese Society of Plant Physiologists, Teigen: “idenshi kumikae shokubutsu no shakai ni okeru tekisetsu na juyō 
o susumeru taisei o motomu” [Proposal: “Requesting System to Support Adequate Acceptance of GM Food by 
the Society”] at 3, http://www.s.affrc.go.jp/docs/commitee/gm/4kai/pdf/siryo1.pdf (last visited Oct. 18, 2013). 
7 Blogs are very popular in Japan. See Chris Salzberg, Japan: Number 1 Language of Bloggers Worldwide, 
GLOBAL VOICES (Apr. 16, 2007), http://globalvoicesonline.org/2007/04/16/japan-number-1-language-of-
bloggersworldwide/. 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
181 
8 See GM shokuhin, shohisha no “shiru kenri” ni dou kotaeruka [GM Foods, How to Respond to Consumers’ 
“Right to Know”], JAPAN AGRICULTURAL COMMUNICATIONS (June 11, 2013), http://www.jacom.or. 
jp/news/2013/06/news 130611-21193.php. 
9 Yoshiyuki Ashida, Mainichi shinbun no rensai shokutaku doko e: idenshi kumikae [How Foods on Table at Home 
Change According to Mainichi Newspaper: Genetically Modified Food], YASASHII BAIO TEKUNOROJI 
[EASY BIOTECHNOLOGY] (Nov. 10, 2009), http://yoshibero.at.webry.info/200911/article_23.html. The 
author, Yoshiyuki Ashida, is a professor who comments on articles from the Mainichi Newspaper on his blog 
site. 
10 Cartagena Act, Act No. 97 of June 18, 2003, art. 2, para. 2, http://www.japaneselawtranslation.go.jp/law/detail_ 
main?re=02&vm=02&id=132. 
11 Id. art. 3. 
12 Basic Matters Under the Provisions of Article 3 of the Law Concerning the Conservation and Sustainable Use of 
Biological Diversity Through Regulations on the Use of GMOs (Basic Matters), MOF, MEXT, MHLW, 
MAFF & MOE Ordinance No. 1 of 2003, http://www.bch.biodic.go.jp/english/law.html (click “Word” icon 
next to the title). 
13 Yoshiko Sasaki, Idenshi kumikae gijutsu to shoku no anzen / anshin [Safety and Feeling of Safety on GM 
Technology and Foods], 1st and 2nd Meetings for Food Safety and Feeling of Safety, Yamanashi Pref. (Nov. 
15 & Dec. 20, 2012), at 25, http://www.pref.yamanashi.jp/shoku-portal/communication/documents/ 
tudoikouensassa_1.pdf. 
14 Many resident groups’activity reports are available through general Internet searches. See, e.g., Jiro Urushihara, 
Jorei de chiiki no anzen/anzhin o kakuho suru—idenshi kumikae o meguru ho (5) [Securing Safety/Feeling of 
Safety of Residents by Local Ordinances—Laws Concerning GM (5)], Kagaku gijutsu no anekudoto 
[Anecdote of Science and Technology] (June 11, 2012), http://sci-tech.jugem.jp/?eid=2416. 
15 Idenshi kumikae sakumotsu wa nihon de jissai ni saibai sarete iru no desu ka? [Are GM Crops Actually Grown in 
Japan?], MONSANTO JAPAN, http://www.monsanto.co.jp/question/03/03/ (last visited Nov. 1, 2013). 
16 Cartagena Act, Act No. 97 of June 18, 2003, art. 2, paras. 5 & 6, arts. 4 & 12, http://www.japaneselawtranslation. 
go.jp/law/detail_main?re=02&vm=02&id=132. 
17 Id. art. 12. 
18 Ordinance to Designate Measures to Prevent Dispersal of GMOs During Their Industrial Use Among Type 2 Use, 
Ministry of Finance, MHLW, MAFF, METI & MOE Ordinance No. 1 of 2004. 
19 Ordinance to Designate Measures to Prevent Dispersal of GMOs During Their Type 2 Use for Research and 
Development Purposes, MEXT & MOE Ordinance No. 1 of 2004. 
20 Cartagena Act art. 13. 
21 Basic Matters, supra note 12, § II, 2. 
22 Cartagena Act art. 15. 
23 Id. art. 4, para. 2. 
24 MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT (MOE), BIOSAFETY REGULATIONS IN JAPAN 9–10 (2010), 
http://www. bch.biodic.go.jp/english/cartagena/images/e_cartagena.pdf. 
25 Cartagena Act art. 4, para. 1. 
26 Id. art. 4, para. 5. 
27 Basic Matters, supra note 12, § II, 2. 
28 Cartagena Act art. 10, para. 1. 
29 Id. art. 11. 
30 Id. art. 16. 
31 Id. art. 17. 
32 Id. art. 34. 
33 Press Release, MAFF, “Heisei 24 nendo idenshi kumikae shokubutsu jittai chōsa” no kekka ni tsuite [Regarding 
the Result of “Research on GM Plants in Fields in Fiscal Year 2012”] (Sept. 24, 2013), 
http://www.maff.go.jp/j/ press/syouan/nouan/130924.html. 
34 Food Sanitation Law, Act No. 233 of 1947, last amended by Act No. 70 of 2013, art. 7, para. 1; Standards of 
Foods and Food Additives, Ministry of Health and Welfare Notification No. 370 of 1959, amended by MHLW 
Notification No. 232 of 2000, http://www.mhlw.go.jp/topics/idenshi/anzen/kokuji.html. 
35 Food Safety Basic Law, Act No. 48 of 2003, last amended by Act No. 74 of 2011, arts. 11 & 23, English 
translation available at http://www.fsc.go.jp/english/basic act/fs basic act.pdf. 
36 Procedure for Safety Assessment, MHLW, http://www.mhlw.go.jp/english/topics/foodsafety/dna/01.html (last 
visited Oct. 23, 2013). 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
182 
37 Foods Produced by Recombinant DNA Techniques, MHLW, http://www.mhlw.go.jp/english/topics/foodsafety/ 
dna/index.html (last visited Oct. 25, 2013). 
38 Food Sanitation Law art. 27. 
39 Id. art. 28. See Development of Imported Foods Monitoring and Guidance Plan for FY 2013, MHLW Notice No. 
0318 Article 1 of the Department of Food Safety (Mar. 18, 2013), http://www.mhlw.go.jp/ 
topics/yunyu/keikaku/ 13_en.html. 
40 Act on Feed Safety and Improvement of Quality, Act No. 35 of 1953, last amended by Act No. 8 of 2007, art. 3. 
Ordinance on Act on Feed Safety and Improvement of Quality, MAFF Ordinance No. 35 of 1976, last 
amended by MAFF Ordinance No. 60 of 2013, Tables 1, 1(1)(shi)(su) & (2)(ko), 2 & 3(8). 
41 Ideas for Safety Evaluations of Feed and Feed Additives That Are or Include GMOs, Food Safety Commission 
Decision (May 6, 2004), http://www.fsc.go.jp/senmon/idensi/gm_siryoukijyun.pdf. 
42 Law Concerning Standardization and Proper Labeling of Agricultural and Forestry Products (JAS Law), Act No. 
175 of 1950, last amended by Act No. 70 of 2013, art. 19-13, translated by MAFF at 
http://www.maff.go.jp/e/jas/pdf/jaslaw01.pdf; 
Processed 
Food 
Quality 
Labeling 
Standards, 
MAFF 
Notification No. 513 of 2000, last amended by Consumer Affairs Agency Notification No. 5 of 2012, art. 7, 
para. 1; Fresh Produce Quality Labeling Standards, MAFF Notification No. 514 of 2000, last amended by 
MAFF Notification No. 126 of 2008, art. 7, para. 1; Labeling Standards on GM Food Set by Minister of 
MAFF Based on Article 7, Paragraph 1 of Processed Food Quality Labeling Standards and Article 7, 
Paragraph 1 of Fresh Produce Quality Labeling Standards (Labeling Standards on GM Food Set by Minister of 
MAFF), MAFF Notification No. 517 of 2000, last amended by MAFF Notification No. 9 of 2011, 
http://www.caa.go.jp/jas/hyoji/pdf/kijun_03.pdf, available in English translation (as last amended by MAFF 
Notification No. 1173 of October 1, 2007), at http://www.maff.go.jp/e/jas/labeling/pdf/ modi01.pdf. 
43 Food Sanitation Law, art. 19, para. 1, Cabinet Office Ordinance on Labeling Standards Based on Food Sanitation 
Law (Cabinet Office Ordinance on Labeling Standards), art. 19, para. 1, Cabinet Office Ordinance No. 45 of 
2011, art. 1, para. 1, item 12 & Table 1, http://www.cao.go.jp/consumer/history/02/kabusoshiki/ 
syokuhinhyouji/doc/ 130530_shiryou2-1.pdf. 
44 Consumer Affairs Agency, Food Labeling Sec., Shokuhin hyōji ni kansuru kyōtsū Q&A (dai 3 shū: idenshi 
kumikae shokuhin ni kansuru hyōji ni tsuite) [Common Q&A on Food Labeling (Part 3: Regarding Labeling 
of GM Food)] (Dec. 2003, amended Oct. 2007 & Mar. 2010), http://www.caa.go.jp/foods/pdf/ 
syokuhin244.pdf. 
45 Labeling Standards on GM Food Set by Minister of MAFF Based on Article 7, Paragraph 1 of Processed Food 
Quality Labeling Standards and Article 7, Paragraph 1 of Fresh Produce Quality Labeling Standards (Labeling 
Standards on GM Food Set by Minister of MAFF), MAFF Notification No. 517 of 2000, last amended by 
MAFF Notification No. 9 of 2011; Cabinet Office Ordinance on Labeling Standards, supra note 43. 
46 Cabinet Office Ordinance on Labeling Standards, supra note 45, art. 14, item 1. 
47 See Labeling Scheme for Genetically Modified Foods in Japan, MAFF, http://www.maff.go.jp/e/jas/labeling/pdf/ 
modi02.pdf (last visited Oct. 30, 2013). 
48 Labeling Standards on GM Food Set by Minister of MAFF, supra note 45, art. 3, para. 1(1) & para. 2(1); Cabinet 
Office Ordinance on Labeling Standards, supra note 45, art. 1, para. 2, item 40. 
49 Labeling Standards on GM Food Set by Minister of MAFF, supra note 45, art. 3, para. 1(2) & para. 2(2). 
50 Id. arts. 3 & 4; Cabinet Office Ordinance on Labeling Standards, supra note 45, art. 1, para. 7. 
51 Labeling Standards on GM Food Set by Minister of MAFF, supra note 49, art. 5. 
52 Consumer Affairs Agency, Food Labeling Sec., Shokuhin hyōji ni kansuru kyōtsū Q&A (dai 3 shū: idenshi 
kumikae shokuhin ni kansuru hyōji ni tsuite) [Common Q&A on Food Labeling (Part 3: Regarding Labeling 
of GM Food)] (Dec. 2003, amended Oct. 2007 & Mar. 2010), at 42. 
53 Ine jikken chushi, baisho mitomezu: idenshi kumikae sosho [Injunction of Rice Experiment and Damages Were 
Not Awarded: Genetically Modified Rice Case], 47NEWS (Oct. 1, 2009), http://www.47news.jp/CN/200910/ 
CN2009100101000504.html. See also KINDAN NO KAGAKU SAIBAN [TRIAL OF FORBIDDEN 
SCIENCE], http://inesaiban.com/ (last visited Oct. 23, 2013). 
 
 
End Notes for Lebanon 
 
1 Law No. 360 of 1994, http://www.moe.gov.lb/getattachment/2270bcc2-d961-426b-b780-8055b1a6dd18/رارق-قـرم-  360-ماربا-
ةيقافتـــــــا-ممالا-ةدحت مال-عونتلــــل-.الaspx (in Arabic). 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
183 
2 Law No. 31 of 2008, AL-JARIDAH AL-RASMIYAH [OFFICIAL GAZETTE] No. 44 of 2008, 
http://www.pcm.gov.lb/Cultures/ar-LB/Menu//ةقباســـــــــال تارادصإلا/ةيمســـــــــرال ةديـــــــــرجالPages/jolist.aspx 
(in 
Arabic; select relevant date and volume number). 
3 E.J. SATTOUT, D. JAMALI & W. NASSER, NATIONAL BIOSAFETY FRAMEWORK 7 (2005), 
http://www.unep.org/ biosafety/files/LBNBFrep.pdf. 
4 Lamis Chalak Soukarie, Genetically Modified Organisms and Biosafety: Current Status in Lebanon, Presentation 
at the Conference on Biosecurity & Biosafety Strategy in Case of a Biological, Chemical or Nuclear Crisis, 
Beirut 
(Jan. 
2013), 
http://www.bbic-network.org/Uploads/Document/Genetically%20 
Modified%20 
Organisms%20 (GMOs)%20and%20Biosafety%20Current%20Status%20in%20Lebanon.pdf. 
5 Lamis Chalak, Lebanon, in MAGDY MADKOUR, STATUS AND OPTIONS FOR REGIONAL GMOS 
DETECTION PLATFORM: A BENCHMARK FOR THE REGION 47 (2010), http://www.fao.org/docrep/ 
012/al310e/al310e00.htm. 
6 Id. at 57. 
7 SATTOUT ET AL., supra note 3, at 34; see also Chalak, supra note 5, at 59–62, listing various existing laws 
related to agriculture and animal health, environment and biodiversity, health protection, food safety, and trade 
and customs the implementation of which “could have beneficial repercussions on biosafety in Lebanon.” Id. 
at 59. 
8 Gretta Abou Sleymane & Lamis Chalak, Status and Experiences Related to the Implementation of GMO 
Legislation in Lebanon, Presentation at the 1st International Workshop on Harmonisation of GMO Detection 
and Analysis in MENA Region, Dead Sea, Jordan (June 2012), http://gmo-crl.jrc.ec.europa.eu/capacity 
building/docsworkshops/Jordan-2012/LEBANON.pdf. 
9 SATTOUT ET AL., supra note 3, at 34. 
10 Law on Plant Quarantine and Phytosanitary Measures No. 778 of 2006, OFFICIAL GAZETTE No. 58 of 2008, p. 
6577, http://www.pcm.gov.lb/Cultures/ar-LB/Menu//ةقباســــــال تارادصإلا/ةيمســــــرال ةديــــــرجالPages/jolist.aspx (in 
Arabic; select relevant date and volume number). 
11 Obligations and Contracts Code, available at http://www.aproarab.org/Down/Lebanon/24.doc (in Arabic). 
 
 
End Notes for Mexico 
 
1 Ley de Bioseguridad de Organismos Genéticamente Modificados [Law on Biosecurity of Genetically Modified 
Organisms (hereinafter GMO Law)], art. 1, DIARIO OFICIAL DE LA FEDERACIÓN [D.O.], Mar. 18, 2005, 
http://www.diputados.gob.mx/LeyesBiblio/pdf/LBOGM.pdf. 
2 Id. art. 9(III), (V). 
3 Cuales son los principales cultivos utilizados en la generación de OMGs/ [What are the Main Crops Utilized in 
the Production of GMOs?], COMISIÓN FEDERAL PARA LA PROTECCIÓN CONTRA RIESGOS 
SANITARIOS (COFEPRIS) [FEDERAL COMMISSION FOR THE PROTECTION AGAINST SANITARY 
RISKS], http://www.cofepris.gob.mx/AZ/ Paginas/OGMS/Cultivos.aspx (last visited Nov. 19, 2013). See also 
Preguntas Frecuentes [Frequently Asked Questions on GMOs], COMISIÓN INTERSECRETARIAL DE 
BIOSEGURIDAD DE LOS ORGANISMOS GENÉTICAMENTE MODIFICADOS (CIBIOGEM) 
[COMMISSION 
ON 
BIOSECURITY 
OF 
GMOS] 
questions 
34, 
37, 
http://www.cibiogem. 
gob.mx/Paginas/FAQs.aspx (last visited Nov. 15, 2013). 
4 CIBIOGEM, supra note 3. 
5 Id. questions 9 & 20. 
6 Id. questions 30 & 15. 
7 Id. question 29. 
8 ACADEMIA MEXICANA DE CIENCIAS [MEXICAN ACADEMY OF SCIENCES], http://www.amc.mx/ 
(click on “Publicaciones”; last visited Nov. 20, 2013). Please cite a couple of studies by name. 
9 ACADEMIA MEXICANA DE CIENCIAS [MEXICAN ACADEMY OF SCIENCES], POR UN USO 
RESPONSABLE DE LOS ORGANISMOS GENÉTICAMENTE MODIFICADOS, 2011, at 12, 100, 
http://www.amc.mx/. 
10 FAUSTO KUBLI-GARCÍA, Capítulo Quinto, Bioseguridad de los Organismos Genéticamente Modificados en 
México, in RÉGIMEN JURÍDICO DE LA BIOSEGURIDAD DE LOS ORGANISMOS GENÉTICAMENTE 
MODIFICADOS 197, 199, 200, 204 (Institute of Legal Research, National Autonomous University, 2009), 
http://biblio.juridicas.unam.mx/libros/6/ 2637/9.pdf. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
184 
11 SEMILLAS DE VIDA, http://www.semillasdevida.org.mx/index.php/documentos (last visited Nov. 20, 2013). 
12 Ley de Bioseguridad de Organismos Genéticamente Modificados art. 1. 
13 Id. art. 9(III), (V). 
14 Id. art. 3(XXI). 
15 Id. art. 9(V). 
16 Red Nacional de Laboratorios de Detección, Identificación y Cuantificación de Organismos Genéticamente 
Modificados [National Network of Laboratories for the Detection, Identification and Quantification of 
GMOs], CIBIOGEM, http://www.cibiogem.gob.mx/redes/RNLD-OGM/Paginas/default.aspx (last visited Nov. 
19, 2013). 
17 Id. 
18 GMO Law art. 101, D.O., Mar. 18, 2005, http://www.diputados.gob.mx/LeyesBiblio/pdf/LBOGM.pdf. 
19 Id. art. 9(III), (V). 
20 Id. art. 9(IX). 
21 Id. art. 62. 
22 Id. arts. 11–15, 66. 
23 Id. art. 34(II)(C). 
24 Id. art. 113. 
25 Id. art. 115(III). 
26 Id. arts. 91, 92. 
27 Id. art. 92(I). 
28 Id. arts. 16(II), 94. 
29 Id. arts. 96, 97. See also Evaluación de la Inocuidad de un OMG [Evaluation of Harmlessness of a GMO], 
COFEPRIS, http://www.cofepris.gob.mx/AZ/Paginas/OGMS/Evaluacion-ogms.aspx (last visited Nov. 19, 
2013). 
30 GMO Law art. 101, D.O., Mar. 18, 2005, http://www.diputados.gob.mx/LeyesBiblio/pdf/LBOGM.pdf. 
31 Id. 
32 Id. art. 120. 
33 Id. art. 121. 
34 CÓDIGO PENAL FEDERAL [FEDERAL PENAL CODE] as amended, art. 420 ter, Aug. 14, 1931, 
http://www.dipu tados.gob.mx/LeyesBiblio/pdf/9.pdf. 
35 Press Release, Semillas de Vida, Tribunal Federal suspende toda la siembra de maíz transgénico (Oct. 10, 2013), 
http://www.semillasdevida.org.mx/index.php/documentos/articulos/93-boletines-de-prensa/86-articulo-2-
muestra. 
36 Id. 
37 María del Pilar Martínez, Juez rechaza demanda contra transgénicos, EL ECONOMISTA (Dec. 19, 2013), 
http://eleconomista.com.mx/sociedad/2013/12/19/juez-rechaza-demanda-contra-transgenicos. 
38 Press Release, Semillas de Vida, Se mantiene la suspensión de emisión de permisos para la siembra de 
transgénico 
en México (Dec. 
20, 
2013), 
http://www.semillasdevida.org.mx/index.php/documentos/ 
articulos/93- boletines-de-prensa/143-boletin-de-prensa-10-oct-13 (last visited Jan. 27, 2014). 
 
 
End Notes for Netherlands 
 
* This report was prepared chiefly on the basis of materials available in English in the Law Library collection and 
online. At present the Law Library does not have staff with Dutch language skills. 
1 Country Reports: GMOs in EU Member States: The Netherlands, GMO COMPASS (Mar. 23, 2007), http://www. 
gmo-compass.org/eng/news/country_reports. 
2 BOB FLACH, NETHERLANDS: AGRICULTURAL BIOTECHNOLOGY ANNUAL 1 (June 12, 2013), 
http://gain. 
fas.usda.gov/Recent%20GAIN%20Publications?Agricultural%20Biotechnology%20Annual_ 
The%Hague_Netherla nds_6-12-2013.pdf (or conduct search using “GAIN Report NL3019” on Mozilla 
Firefox) (copy on file with author). The report notes that Wageningen University was slated to start a trial in 
2013 with a GE potato whose market introduction was unlikely to be within five years. Three groups—public 
research institutes, biotechnology firms, 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
185 
and potato breeding companies—have been directly involved in breeding a GE potato in the Netherlands. W.J. 
Bijman, The Development and Introduction of Genetically Modified Potatoes in the Netherlands, 
http://www.access excellence.org/RC/AB/BA/Potatos_in_Netherlands.php (last visited Nov. 13, 2013). 
3 FLACH, supra note 2. 
4 Id. 
5 Id. 
6 Id. 
7 Id. 
8 Id. at 5. 
9 Id. at 1. 
10 Hubert P.J.M. Noteborn & Freija H. van Duijne, The Dutch Approach to Safety in Agriculture, in GOVERNING 
RISK IN GM AGRICULTURE 88 (Michael Baram & Mathilde Bourrier eds., Cambridge University Press 
2011); Maggie Delano, Key Players: Farmers – Monsanto – Government – Non-Government Organizations, 
ROUNDUP READY CROPS (Spring 2009), http://web.mit.edu/demoscience/Monsanto/players.html. 
11 FLACH, supra note 2. 
12 COGEM, COMMISSIE GENETISCHE MODIFICATIE: COGEM, http://www.cogem.net/index.cfm/en/cogem/ 
(last visited Nov. 5, 2013). 
13 COGEM, SOCIO-ECONOMIC ASPECTS OF GMOS: BUILDING BLOCKS FOR AN EU SUSTAINABILITY 
ASSESSMENT OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED CROPS 34 (Jan. 5, 2010), http://www.rijksoverheid. 
nl/documenten-en-publicaties/ 
kamerstukken/2010/01/15/sociaal-economische-aspecten-van-genetisch-
gemodificeerde-gewassen-rapportengels.html. 
14 Id. 
15 TNS OPINION & SOCIAL, EUROBAROMETER: BIOTECHNOLOGY REPORT 13 & 52 (Oct. 2010), 
http://ec.europa.eu/ public_opinion/archives/ebs/ebs_341_en.pdf. 
16 Id. at 20–21. 
17 Id. at 23. 
18 Noteborn & van Duijne, supra note 10, at 86. 
19 Netherlands, GMO-FREE EUROPE 2012, http://www.gmo-free-regions.org/gmo-free-regions/netherlands.html 
(last visited Oct. 25, 2013). For the text of the proposal, see PARTIJ VOOR DE DIEREN, AMSTERDAM 
GENTECHVRIJ 
(Jan. 
28, 
2013), 
http://amsterdam.partijvoordedieren.nl/downloads/amsterdam/ 
2013/01/1359384683_Initiatiefvoorstel_ Amsterdam_gentechvrij_Partij_voor_de_Dieren_-_28012013.pdf. 
20 30 October 2013: March Against MonsantoS, ASEED, http://aseed.net/en/topic/gmos-2/ (last visited Nov. 6, 
2013). 
21 Netherlands, GMO-FREE EUROPE 2012, supra note 19. 
22 Besluit genetisch gemodificeerde organismen milieubeheer [hereinafter GMO Decree] (Jan. 25, 1990, as last 
amended June 24, 2010, in force on Oct. 1, 2010), http://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR0004703/ 
geldigheidsdatum_25- 10-2013. 
23 Id. art. 1(f). This is essentially the same definition as in EU Directive 2001/18/EC; for the citation see note 30 
below. 
24 Id. art. 1(b, c, & e). 
25 Convention on Biological Diversity (opened for signature June 5, 1993, in force from Dec. 29, 1993), 
http://www. cbd.int/doc/legal/cbd-en.pdf (English text). The Netherlands signed the treaty on June 5, 1992; the 
treaty entered into force for the country on July 12, 1994. List of Parties, CONVENTION ON BIOLOGICAL 
DIVERSITY, http://www. cbd.int/convention/parties/list/default.shtml (last visited Nov. 5, 2013). 
26 The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (Jan. 29, 2000; in force from Sept. 11 2003), http://bch.cbd.int/protocol/ 
(click on left-side column for text of protocol). The Netherlands deposited its instrument of acceptance of the 
Protocol on January 8, 2002; the Protocol entered into force in the Netherlands on September 11, 2003. Parties 
to the Protocol and Signature and Ratification of the Supplementary Protocol, CONVENTION ON 
BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY, http://bch.cbd.int/protocol/parties/ (last visited Sept. 19, 2013). The Netherlands 
has not yet ratified the Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on Liability and Redress to the 
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (Oct. 15, 2010). For the English text of the Supplementary Protocol, see 
http://bch.cbd.int/protocol/nkl_text.shtml (last visited Nov. 5, 2013). 
27 Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-Making and Access to Justice in 
Environmental 
Matters 
(done 
at 
Aarhus, 
Denmark, 
June 
25, 
1998), 
http://www.unece.org/ 
fileadmin/DAM/env/pp/ documents/cep43e.pdf. The Netherlands signed the Convention on June 25, 1998, and 
deposited its instrument of acceptance on December 29, 2004. Chapter XXVII: Environment, Status as at 05-

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
186 
11-2013, UNITED NATIONS TREATY COLLECTION, http://treaties.un.org/ Pages/ViewDetails.aspx?src= 
TREATY&mtdsg_no=XXVII-13& chapter=27&lang=en (last visited Nov. 25, 2013). 
28 Press Release, United Nations, Press Conference on Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on Liability 
and Redress to Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (Mar. 7, 2011), http://www.un.org/News/briefings/docs/2011/ 
110307_Biosafety.doc.htm; Press Release, The Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on Liability 
and Redress to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (Oct. 16, 2010), http://bch.cbd.int/protocol/ 
nkl_pressrelease.shtml; for the text of the Supplementary Protocol, see http://bch.cbd.int/protocol/ 
nkl_text.shtml (last visited Nov. 5, 2013). 
29 Council Directive 90/219/EEC of 23 April 1990 on the Contained Use of Genetically Modified Micro-Organisms, 
1990 O.J. (L 117), http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31990L0219:EN:HTML; 
Council Directive 98/81/EC of 26 October 1998 Amending Directive 90/219/EEC on the Contained Use of 
Genetically Modified Micro-Organisms, 1998 O.J. (L 330), http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ. 
do? uri=CELEX:31998L0081:EN:HTML. 
30 Directive 2001/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 March 2001 on the Deliberate Release 
into the Environment of Genetically Modified Organisms and Repealing Council Directive 90/220/EEC – 
Commission Declaration, 2001 O.J. (L 106), http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX: 
32001L0018:EN:HTML. Art. 2(2) of the Directive defines “genetically modified organism (GMO)” as “an 
organism, with the exception of human beings, in which the genetic material has been altered in a way that 
does not occur naturally by mating and/or natural recombination.” 
31 Directive 2009/41/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 May 2009 on the Contained Use of 
Genetically Modified Micro-Organisms (Recast) Text with EEA Relevance, 2009 O.J. (L 125), http://eur-lex. 
europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2009:125:0075:01:EN:HTML. 
32 Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 January 2002 Laying Down 
the General Principles and Requirements of Food Law, Establishing the European Food Safety Authority and 
Laying Down Procedures in Matters of Food Safety, 2002 O.J. (L 31), http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/ 
LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2002:031:0001:0024:EN:PDF. 
33 Regulation (EC) No 258/97 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 January 1997 Concerning Novel 
Foods and Novel Food Ingredients, 1997 O.J. (L 43), http://eur-lex.europa.eu/smartapi/cgi/sga_doc?smartapi! 
celexapi!prod!CELEXnumdoc&lg=EN&numdoc=31997R0258&model=guichett. 
34 Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2003 on 
Genetically Modified Food and Feed (Text with EEA Relevance), 2003 O.J. (L 268), http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/Lex UriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32003R1829:EN:HTML. 
35 Regulation (EC) No 1830/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2003 Concerning 
the Traceability and Labelling of Genetically Modified Organisms and the Traceability of Food and Feed 
Products Produced from Genetically Modified Organisms and Amending Directive 2001/18/EC, 2009 O.J. (L 
268), http://eurlex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32003R1830:EN:HTML. 
36 Regulation (EC) No 1946/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 July 2003 on Transboundary 
Movements of Genetically Modified Organisms, 2003 O.J. (L 287), http://eur-lex.europa.eu/Lex 
UriServ/LexUri Serv.do?uri=OJ:L:2003:287:0001:0010:EN:PDF. 
37 Wet milieugevaarlijke stoffen (Dec. 5, 1985, as last amended effective Oct. 17, 2007), http://wetten.overheid. 
nl/BWBR0003892/geldigheidsdatum_31-05-2008. 
38 Regeling Genetisch Gemodificeerde Organismen [Regulation on GMOs] (May 28, 1998, as last amended 
effective Oct.1, 2010), http://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR0009653/Hoofdstuk1/geldigheidsdatum_05-11-2013. 
39 Wet milieubeheer (June 13, 1979, as last amended effective July 1, 2013), http://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR 
0003245/geldigheidsdatum_05-11-2013; Environmental Management Act (English translation as of May 1, 
2004), http://www.asser.nl/upload/eel-webroot/www/documents/national/netherlands/EMA052004.pdf. 
40 Warenwet (Dec. 28, 1935, as last amended Dec. 20, 2012, in force on Jan. 1, 2013), http://wetten.overheid.nl/ 
BWBR0001969/geldigheidsdatum_13-11-2013; see also Charles-Emmanuel Côté, European Commission: 
Health and Consumer Protection Directorate-General, The Practical Application of Council Directive 
92/59/EEC on General Product Safety: 
The Netherlands (Feb. 2000), http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/ 
health_consumer/library/ surveys/sur13_13_en.pdf. 
41 Besluit van 29 april 1997, houdende regels voor nieuwe voedingsmiddelen en nieuwe voedselingrediënten 
(Warenwetbesluit Nieuwe voedingsmiddelen) (as last amended Jan. 17, 2007, in force on Feb. 7, 2007), 
http://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR0008643/geldigheidsdatum_13-11-2013. 
42 Netherlands, GMO-FREE EUROPE 2012, supra note 19. 
43 Wet milieubeheer art. 9.2.1.2. 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
187 
44 A recent example of COGEM advice on the importation of a GMO into the Netherlands is available on the 
COGEM website, at 28.10.2013: Additional Advice on Import of T25 Maize (CGM/131028-01), COGEM, 
http://www.cogem.net/index.cfm/nl/publicaties/publicatie/additional-advice-on-import-of-t25-maize. 
45 Noteborn & van Duijne, supra note 10, at 89. The Ministry of Infrastructure and Environment (Ministerie van 
Infrastructuur en Milieu) was formerly the Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning, and the Environment 
(Ministerie van Volkshuisvesting, Ruimtelijke Ordening en Milieu, VROM). 
46 GMO Decree arts. 2(1) & 2(4). 
47 Han Somsen, GMO Regulation in the Netherlands, in UNCERTAIN RISKS REGULATED 195 (Michelle 
Everson & Ellen Vos eds., Routledge-Cavendish 2009). 
48 Id. 
49 Piet de Wildt, Enforcement and Inspections: “Contained Use”/”Field Trails” [sic]: Dutch Case, Workshop on 
Biosafety, 
Kiev 
(Apr. 
2012), 
available 
at 
http://ec.europa.eu/enlargement/taiex/dyn/taiex-
events/library/detail_en. jsp?EventID=46779 (click on “Enforcement and Inspections” under “Mr Petrus 
Jacobus de Wildt”). 
50 BUREAU GGO, http://www.ggo-vergunningverlening.nl/ (last visited Nov. 25, 2013). 
51 
Vergunningendatabase 
[Permit 
Database], 
BUREAU 
GGO, 
http://www.ggo-vergunningverlening. 
nl/Vergunningen database (last visited Nov. 15, 2013). Click on vergunningdatabase biotechnologie hyperlink 
to view the granted and pending licenses. 
52 GMO Decree art. 5. 
53 Id. art. 17(1). Articles 8–11 are on different types of permit applications. 
54 Groep I Categorie A (IA) Aaanvraag [Group I Class A (IA) Application], BUREAU GGO, http://ggo-vergunning 
verlening.nl/Vergunningverlening/Ingeperkt_gebruik/Groep_I_categorie_A_IA_aanvraag (last visited Nov. 
15, 2013). 
55 GMO Decree art. 3.1(a). 
56 Id. art. 8(3). 
57 Id. art. 3.1(b). 
58 Ingeperkt gebruik [Contained Use], BUREAU GGO, http://ggo-vergunningverlening.nl/Vergunningverlening/ 
Ingeperkt_gebruik (last visited Nov. 15, 2013). 
59 Id. 
60 Toelating BVF [BVF Admission], BUREAU GGO, http://www.ggo-vergunningverlening.nl/Vergunning 
verlening/Ingeperkt_gebruik/Toelating_BVF (last visited Nov. 25, 2013). 
61 Regulation on GMOs art. 4 (on “Internal Organization”). 
62 Wetten en Regels, COGEM, http://www.cogem.net/index.cfm/nl/genetische-modificatie/wetten-en-regels/ (last 
visited Nov. 5, 2013). 
63 GMO Decree art. 28(1). 
64 Id. art. 31. 
65 Id. art. 24(1)(a) & (b). 
66 Id. art. 23(1); exceptions are listed in art. 23(2). 
67 Id. art. 23(2)(a). 
68 Id. art. 23(2)(c). 
69 Id. art. 23(2)(d). 
70 Id. art. 23(2)(e) & (f). 
71 Id. art. 23(2)(g). 
72 Id. art. 23(2)(h). 
73 Id. art. 23(3). 
74 J. H. Jans, GMO Regulation in the Netherlands, Avosetta Meeting, Siena (Sept. 2006), at 3, http://www-user.uni-
bremen.de/~avosetta/netherlands_06.pdf; Wet op de economische delicten (June 22, 1950, as last amended 
Nov. 6, 2013), art. 1a(1) & art. 6, http://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR0002063/geldigheidsdatum_25-11-2013; 
Wetboek van Strafrecht [Criminal Code] (Mar. 3, 1881, as last amended Nov. 6, 2013, in force on Nov. 15, 
2013), art. 23(4), http://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR0001854/EersteBoek/TitelII/geldigheidsdatum_25-11-2013. 
75 Jans, supra note 74. 
76 Verplichtingen op afgegeven vergunningen [Obligations of Permits Issued], BUREAU GGO, http://ggo-
vergunning 
verlening.nl/Vergunningverlening/Introductie_in_het_milieu/Verplichtingen_op_afgegeven_vergunningen 
(last visited Nov. 15, 2013). 
77 Id. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
188 
78 Id.; GMO Decree art. 23c. 
79 Verplichtingen op afgegeven vergunningen, supra note 76. 
80 GMO Decree art. 23a(1). 
81 Id. art. 23a(2). 
82 Id. art. 23b. 
83 Id. art. 24a. 
84 Id. art. 24a(1). 
85 Id. art. 24b(3). 
86 Toelating MVF [MVF Admission], BUREAU GGO, http://ggo-vergunningverlening.nl/Vergunningverlening/ 
Introductie_in_het_milieu/Toelating_MVF (last visited Nov. 15, 2013); Regulation on GMOs art. 11. 
87 Regulation on GMOs art. 12. 
88 Country Reports, supra note 1. 
89 Somsen, supra note 47, at 201. 
90 New Coexistence – Guidelines in the EU: Cultivation Bans Are Now Permitted, GMO SAFETY (July 27, 2010), 
http://www.gmo-safety.eu/news/1205.coexistence-guidelines-cultivation-bans-permitted.html. 
91 Id. 
92 Id. 
93 GMOs in a Nutshell, EUROPEAN COMMISSION, http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/biotechnology/qanda/a3_en. 
htm#a (last visited Nov. 18, 2013). 
94 Id. For a detailed description of the EFSA, with charts and diagrams, see Yi Liu, GMO Food Safety Assessment 
in the European Union, Workshop on GMOs in Global Perspective, Wageningen (May 16, 2013), http://www. 
selamat.net/en/show/Workshop-on-GMOs-in-global-perspective-safety-assessment-and-traceability-1.htm. 
95 Regulation (EC) No 882/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on Official 
Controls Performed to Ensure the Verification of Compliance with Feed and Food Law, Animal Health and 
Animal 
Welfare 
Rules, 
2004 
O.J. 
(L 
165), 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ. 
do?uri=CELEX:32004 R0882:en:NOT. 
96 I.M.J. SCHOLTENS-TOMA ET AL., GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS IN FOOD AND FEED: 
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE DUTCH NATIONAL REFERENCE LABORATORY 7–8 (May 2012), 
http://edepot.wur.nl/217728. See also, in connection with RIKILT, GMOs, WANGENINGENUR, 
http://www.wageningenur.nl/en/Expertise-Services/ResearchInstitutes/rikilt/Research/GMOs.htm (last visited 
Nov. 19, 2013). 
97 About the Netherlands Food and Consumer Product Safety Authority, NEDERLANDSE VOEDSEL- EN 
VARENAUTORITEIT, http://www.vwa.nl/english/about-the-netherlands-food-and-consumer-product-safety-
authority (last visited Nov. 19, 2013). 
98 Noteborn & van Duijne, supra note 10, at 106. 
99 Id. 
100 
Labelling 
of 
Food, 
ANSWERS 
FOR 
BUSINESS 
(official 
Dutch 
government 
website) 
http://www.answersforbusiness. nl/regulation/labelling-food (last visited Dec. 5, 2013); Food Labeling 
(Commodities Act) Decree [Warenwetbesluit Etikettering van levensmiddelen] arts. 3–5. 
101 Labelling of Food, supra note 100. 
102 Warenwetbesluit Nieuwe Voedingsmiddelen (Apr. 29, 1997, as last amended effective Feb. 7, 2007), 
http://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR0008643/geldigheidsdatum 18-11-2013. 
103 Regulation (EC) 1829/2003 art. 12(1). 
104 Id. art. 12(2). 
105 Id. art. 13(2). 
106 Id. art. 13(3). 
107 GMO Decree art. 22a, in accordance with Annex 4 of Directive 2001/18. 
108 MARCEL HENDRIKUS PINCKAERS, NETHERLANDS: FOOD AND AGRICULTURAL IMPORT 
REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS – NARRATIVE: FAIRS COUNTRY REPORT (Mar. 8, 2013), 
http://gain.fas.usda.gov/Recent%20GAIN 
%20Publications/Food%20and%20Agricultural%20Import%20Regulations%20and%20Standards%20- 
%20Narrative_The%20Hague_Netherlands_3-8-2013.pdf. 
109 Warenwetbesluit Nieuwe voedingsmiddelen art. 3a. 
110 PINCKAERS, supra note 108. 
111 Regulation (EU) No 1169/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2011 on the 
Provision of Food Information to Consumers, Amending Regulations (EC) No 1924/2006 and (EC) No 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
189 
1925/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council, and Repealing Commission Directive 87/250/EEC, 
Council Directive 90/496/EEC, Commission Directive 1999/10/EC, Directive 2000/13/EC of the European 
Parliament and of the Council, Commission Directives 2002/67/EC and 2008/5/EC and Commission 
Regulation (EC) No 608/2004, 2011 O.J. (L 304), http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/ LexUriServ.do? 
uri=OJ:L:2011:304:0018:0063:EN:PDF. 
112 Directive 2000/13/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 March 2000 on the Approximation of 
the Laws of the Member States Relating to the Labelling, Presentation and Advertising of Foodstuffs, 2000 
O.J. (L 109), http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2000:109:0029:0042:EN:PDF. 
113 PINCKAERS, supra note 108. 
114 Melissa Moncada Castillo & Willem H. van Boom, Netherlands, in LIABILITY AND COMPENSATION 
SCHEMES FOR DAMAGE RESULTING FROM THE PRESENCE OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED 
ORGANISMS IN NON-GM CROPS: ANNEX I: COUNTRY REPORTS 306 (Bernhard A. Koch ed., 
European 
Centre 
of 
Tort 
and 
Insurance 
Law 
Apr. 
2007), 
http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/ 
analysis/external/liability_gmo/annex1.pdf. See also Ingrid Greveling & Willem H. van Boom, Damage 
Caused by GMOs Under Dutch Law, in DAMAGE CAUSED BY GENETICALLY MODIFIED 
ORGANISMS 
(Bernard 
A. 
Koch 
ed., 
De 
Gruyter 
2010), 
http://www.professorvanboom.eu/ 
pdf_files/2010_Greveling_ VanBoom_GMO_Netherlands.pdf. 
115 Castillo & van Boom, supra note 114. 
116 Id. at 312. Burgerlijk Wetboek [Civil Code], Book 6: General Part of the Law of Obligations, Title 3: Torts § 2: 
Liability for Persons and Things arts. 170 & 175, http://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR0005289/Boek6/ 
geldigheidsdatum_19-11-2013. For an English translation of the Civil Code as of 2009, see HANS 
WARENDORF, RICHARD THOMAS & IAN CURRY-SUMNER, THE CIVIL CODE OF THE 
NETHERLANDS 679–80, 681–82 (Kluwer Law International 2009). 
117 Castillo & van Boom, supra note 114, at 306–07; Burgerlijk Wetboek, Book 6, Title 3, § 1: General Provisions 
art. 162, supra note 116; WARENDORF, THOMAS & CURRY-SUMNER, supra note 116, at 677. 
118 Castillo & van Boom, supra note 114, at 308. 
119 Id.; Burgerlijk Wetboek, Book 6, Title 1, art. 98, http://wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR0005289/Boek6/Titel1/ 
Afdeling10/Artikel98/geldigheidsdatum_19-11-2013; WARENDORF, THOMAS & CURRY-SUMNER, 
supra note 116, at 660. 
120 Castillo & van Boom, supra note 114, at 308. 
 
 
End Notes for New Zealand 
 
1 USDA FOREIGN AGRICULTURAL SERVICE, GAIN REPORT: NEW ZEALAND – BIOTECHNOLOGY – 
GE 
PLANTS 
AND 
ANIMALS 
(July 
15, 
2010), 
http://gain.fas.usda.gov/Recent%20GAIN% 
20Publications/Biotechnology%20- %20GE%20Plants%20and%20Animals_Wellington_New%20Zealand_7-
15-2010.pdf. 
2 About GM in New Zealand, MINISTRY FOR THE ENVIRONMENT (MFE), http://www.mfe.govt.nz/issues/ 
managingenvironmental-risks/organisms/gm-in-nz/about.html (last updated May 17, 2013). See also Field 
Tests and Outdoor Developments of Genetically Modified Organisms, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
AUTHORITY (EPA), http://epa.govt.nz/new-organisms/popular-no-topics/Pages/GM-field-tests-in-NZ.aspx 
(last visited Oct. 25, 2013). 
3 USDA FOREIGN AGRICULTURAL SERVICE, GAIN REPORT: NEW ZEALAND BIOTECHNOLOGY 
ENVIRONMENT (July 15, 2013), http://gain.fas.usda.gov/Recent%20GAIN%20Publications/ Agricultural% 
20Biotechnology %20Annual_Wellington_New%20Zealand_7-15-2013.pdf; New Microorganisms in New 
Zealand, EPA, http://www.epa.govt.nz/new-organisms/popular-no-topics/Pages/GM-EI-vaccine.aspx (last 
visited Oct. 25, 2013). 
4 See Labelling & Safety – Questions & Answers, MINISTRY FOR PRIMARY INDUSTRIES (MPI), 
http://www.food 
smart.govt.nz/whats-in-our-food/genetically-modifed-food/labelling/questions-answers.htm 
(last visited Oct. 25, 2013). 
5 About GM in New Zealand, supra note 2. 
6 Hazardous Substances and New Organisms Act 1996, http://www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/1996/0030/latest/ 
DLM381222.html. “New organism” is defined in section 2A to include genetically modified organisms. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
190 
7 See 2003 Law Changes in Response to the Royal Commission on Genetic Modification, MFE, 
http://www.mfe.govt.nz/issues/managing-environmental-risks/organisms/regulation/hsno-law-
changes/2003.html (last updated May 21, 2013). 
8 See Government Response to the Royal Commission’s Report, MFE, http://www.mfe.govt.nz/issues/managing-
environmental-risks/organisms/gm-in-nz/commission/government-response.html (last updated May 17, 2013). 
9 REPORT OF THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON GENETIC MODIFICATION (2002), available at 
http://www.mfe. govt.nz/publications/organisms/royal-commission-gm/index.html. 
10 About the Royal Commission on Genetic Modification, MFE, http://www.mfe.govt.nz/issues/managing-
environmental-risks/organisms/gm-in-nz/commission/about.html (last updated May 17, 2013). See also Allan 
Coukell, A Step Forward for Genetic Engineering in New Zealand, N.Y. TIMES (Aug. 21, 2001), 
http://www.nytimes.com/2001/08/21/science/a-step-forward-for-genetic-engineering-in-new-zealand.html. 
11 See, e.g., Paul Gorman, GM Trials’ Failure ‘Not Law’s Fault’, STUFF.CO.NZ (Apr. 12, 2012), 
http://www.stuff.co.nz/business/farming/6732484/GM-trials-failure-not-laws-fault; David Fisher, GE Law 
Probe a Big Surprise, NEW ZEALAND HERALD (Nov. 20, 2011), http://www.nzherald.co. 
nz/nz/news/article.cfm?c_id=1 &objectid=10767413; Press Release, McGuinness Institute, Time for New 
Zealand to Revisit the Genetic Modification Debate (Aug. 29, 2013), http://www.mcguinness 
institute.org/site/publications/media_releases/ media_release_29_august_2013.aspx. 
12 GAIN REPORT: NEW ZEALAND BIOTECHNOLOGY ENVIRONMENT, supra note 3. 
13 About the Royal Commission on Genetic Modification, supra note 10. 
14 See Press Release, Hon. Pete Hodgson, GM Research Moratorium Keeps NZ’s Options Open (Apr. 17, 2000), 
http://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/gm-research-moratorium-keeps-nz039s-options-open. 
15 Press Release, Hon. Marian Hobbs, New GM Legislation in Force as Moratorium Expires (Oct. 29, 2003), 
http://www.beehive.govt.nz/node/18221. 
16 See Kevin Taylor, Government Opens Door to GE Despite Protests, Polls and Threats, NEW ZEALAND 
HERALD (Oct. 29, 2003), http://www.nzherald.co.nz/nz/news/article.cfm?c_id=1&objectid=3531306. 
17 Spiritual, Cultural and Ethical Issues in Genetic Modification, in MFE, GENETIC MODIFICATION – THE 
NEW ZEALAND APPROACH (June 2004), http://www.mfe.govt.nz/publications/organisms/gm-nz-
approachjun04/html/page5.html. 
18 See Toi Te Taiao: The Bioethics Council, MFE, http://www.mfe.govt.nz/website/closed-sites/bioethics.html (last 
updated Jan. 14, 2010). 
19 See, e.g., GM Fight Still Rages 20 Years On, TVNZ (Nov. 29, 2008), http://tvnz.co.nz/health-news/gm-fight-still-
rages-20-years-2340450; Editorial, The Genetic Modification Debate, OTAGO DAILY TIMES (Sept. 27, 
2013), http://www.odt.co.nz/opinion/editorial/227675/genetic-modification-debate. 
20 See THE TREASURY, ECONOMIC RISKS AND OPPORTUNITIES FROM THE RELEASE OF 
GENETICALLY 
MODIFIED 
ORGANISMS 
IN 
NEW 
ZEALAND 
(Apr. 
17, 
2003), 
http://www.treasury.govt.nz/economy/reports/gmo. 
21 See Joanna Gamble, Genetic Engineering: The New Zealand Public’s Point of View, THE UNIVERSITY OF 
AUCKLAND (2001), https://researchspace.auckland.ac.nz/handle/2292/863; Doug Ashwell & Su Olsson, “To 
Be or Not To Be”: An Analysis of Political Rhetoric in the New Zealand Debate on Genetic Modification, 
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND COMMUNICATION ASSOCIATION ONLINE JOURNAL (2002), 
http://www.hss.bond.edu.au/ANZCA/papers/SOlssonDAshwellPaper-.pdf; Pauline Hamilton, GE or Not GE: 
The Genetic Engineering Debate in New Zealand, 31(12) CHEMICAL INNOVATION 59 (Dec. 2001), 
http://pubs.acs.org/subscribe/archive/ci/31/i12/html/ 12vp.html. 
22 See generally Parliamentary Library, Background Note: Genetic Modification (Feb. 21, 2002), 
http://www.parliament.nz/NR/rdonlyres/42B8A108-0670-4C7E-B242-5D430E6BC1AF/370/0201 
Geneticmodification1.pdf; Dana Rachelle Peterson, Genetic Modification: A Resource Document for MPs 
(Parliamentary 
Library 
Background 
Paper 
No. 
26, 
Feb. 
2002), 
http://www.parliament.nz/ 
NR/rdonlyres/4CA0C507- 3047-486B-8E6C-DFEBE9AB761E/416/BP26_GeneticModification3.pdf. 
23 For general background information, see MFE, GENETIC MODIFICATION: THE NEW ZEALAND 
APPROACH (June 2004), http://www.mfe.govt.nz/publications/organisms/gm-nz-approach-jun04/genetic-
modification-nzapproach.pdf. A list of government publications on new and genetically modified organisms is 
available on the MFE website at http://www.mfe.govt.nz/publications/organisms/ (last visited Oct. 25, 2013). 
24 See, e.g., Keri Molloy, Genetic Modification a Hot Topic, NORTHERN NEWS (May 22, 2013), 
http://www.stuff.co.nz/auckland/local-news/northland/northern-news/8699303/Genetic-modification-a-hot-
topic; Julie Moffett & Felix Marwick, Tighter Rules on Genetic Modification in Auckland, NEWSTALKZB 
(Sept. 24, 2013), http://www.newstalkzb.co.nz/auckland/news/nbnat/1571363499-tighter-rules-on-genetic-

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
191 
modification-in-auckland. For information on GMOs and the RMA, see Genetic Modification (GM) and Local 
Government, MFE, http://www.mfe.govt.nz/issues/managing-environmental-risks/organisms/regulation/gm-
local-govt.html (last updated May 17, 2013). 
25 [2013] 691 NZPD 11175 (Questions to Ministers, No. 10.), http://www.parliament.nz/en-nz/pb/business/qoa/ 
50HansQ_20130625_00000010/10-genetically-modified-organisms%E2%80%94regulation-of-release; Marty 
Sharpe, Minister’s GM Move Dismays Opponents, THE DOMINION POST (June 27, 2013), 
http://www.stuff.co.nz/ dominion-post/news/hawkes-bay/8846254/Ministers-GM-move-dismays-opponents. 
26 Hazardous Substances and New Organisms Act 1996, s 4. 
27 Id. s 5(b). 
28 Id. s 6. 
29 Id. s 8. Similar “Treaty clauses” are included in various pieces of legislation in New Zealand and have both legal 
and symbolic meaning. The clause prevents the Crown and its representatives from acting inconsistently with 
obligations to Māori and related principles that have been interpreted as applying under the Treaty of Waitangi 
signed between Māori tribes and the British Crown in 1840. See Principles of the Treaty, WAITANGI 
TRIBUNAL, http://www.waitangi-tribunal.govt.nz/treaty/principles.asp (last visited Oct. 25, 2013). 
30 Hazardous Substances and New Organisms Act 1996, s 7. 
31 New Organisms and the HSNO Act, MFE, http://www.mfe.govt.nz/issues/managing-environmental-
risks/organisms/regulation/hsno.html (last updated May 17, 2013); What We Do: Hazardous Substances and 
New 
Organisms, 
EPA, 
http://www.epa.govt.nz/about-us/what/Pages/Hazardous-substances-and-new-
organisms.aspx (last visited Oct. 25, 2013). 
32 See New Organisms and the HSNO Act, supra note 31; About Us – Our Organisation, MPI, 
http://www.biosecurity.govt.nz/biosec/org (last updated May 8, 2012); Our Role in Enforcement, EPA, 
http://www.epa.govt.nz/about-us/what/Pages/EPA-role-enforcement.aspx (last visited Oct. 25, 2013). 
33 NZ Laws Regulating New Organisms, MFE, http://www.mfe.govt.nz/issues/managing-environmental-
risks/organisms/regulation/nz-laws.html (last updated May 17, 2013). 
34 Biosecurity Act 1993, http://www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/1993/0095/latest/DLM314623.html. 
35 See Biosecurity Act 1993, MPI, http://www.biosecurity.govt.nz/biosec/pol/bio-act (last updated Oct. 19, 2012). 
36 
See 
generally, 
Importing 
Genetically 
Modified 
Organisms, 
MPI, 
http://www.biosecurity.govt.nz/ 
regs/imports/plants/gmo (last updated Oct. 10, 2012). 
37 Imports and Exports (Living Modified Organisms) Prohibition Order 2005, http://www.legislation.govt.nz/ 
regulation/public/2005/0012/latest/DLM311538.html. 
38 New Zealand (Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code) Food Standards 2002, available at 
http://www.foodsafety.govt.nz/elibrary/industry/zealand-australia-zealand-food-standards/ (last visited Oct. 
25, 2013). 
39 Food Act 1981, http://www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/1981/0045/latest/DLM48687.html. See New Zealand 
Food Legislation, MPI, http://www.foodsafety.govt.nz/policy-law/food-regulation/nz-food-legislation/ (last 
visited Oct. 25, 2013). 
40 FOOD STANDARDS AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND (FSANZ), http://www.foodstandards.gov.au/ 
Pages/default.aspx. See Australia-New Zealand Co-operation, MPI, http://www.foodsafety.govt.nz/policy-
law/food-regulation/australianz-cooperation/ (last visited Oct. 25, 2013). 
41 Animal Welfare Act 1999, pt 6, http://www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/1999/0142/latest/DLM49664.html. 
42 Animals in Research, MPI, http://www.biosecurity.govt.nz/regs/animal-welfare/research (last updated Sept. 13, 
2013). 
43 Agricultural Compounds and Veterinary Medicines Act 1997, http://www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/1997/ 
0087/latest/DLM414577.html. 
44 Medicines Act 1981, http://www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/1981/0118/latest/DLM53790.html. 
45 Hazardous Substances and New Organisms Act 1996, s 40(2)(a)(v) & 40(2)(b)(v). 
46 Id. s 44A. 
47 Id. ss 53–54, 60–61; What Types of New Organism Applications are Publicly Notified and Open for Submission?, 
EPA, http://www.epa.govt.nz/about-us/have-your-say/Pages/notified-applications.aspx (last visited Oct. 25, 
2013). 
48 Id. ss 41–42B; Hazardous Substances and New Organisms (Low-risk Genetic Modification) Regulations 2003, 
http://www.legislation.govt.nz/regulation/public/2003/0152/latest/DLM195215.html. See generally, Are you 
Importing, Developing, Regenerating or Fermenting Low Risk Genetically Modified Organisms in an Indoor 
Containment Facility in New Zealand?, EPA, http://www.epa.govt.nz/new-organisms/find-application-
form/application-finder/Pages/low-risk-applications.aspx (last visited Oct. 25, 2013). 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
192 
49 Hazardous Substances and New Organisms Act 1996, s 45(2). 
50 Id. sch 3. 
51 Id. s 45A. 
52 Id. ss 34 & 38. 
53 Id. s 36. 
54 Id. s 37. 
55 Id. ss 38A & 38B. 
56 Id. s 38D. 
57 See GM Current Applications and Approvals, FSANZ, http://www.foodstandards.govt.nz/consumer/gmfood/ 
applications/pages/default.aspx (last updated Sept. 2013). 
58 For general information on the rules and requirements, see Genetically Modified Food – Overview, MPI, 
http://www.foodsmart.govt.nz/whats-in-our-food/genetically-modifed-food/overview/ (last visited Oct. 25, 
2013); Genetically Modified Food – Labelling & Safety – Questions and Answers, MPI, 
http://www.foodsmart.govt.nz/whats-in-our-food/genetically-modifed-food/labelling/questions-answers.htm; 
MPI, 
GENETICALLY 
MODIFIED 
FOOD 
AND 
INGREDIENTS 
(updated 
Apr. 
2013), 
http://www.foodsafety.govt.nz/elibrary/industry/Genetically_ModifiedExpectations_Importers.pdf. 
59 Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code - Standard 1.5.2 - Food Produced Using Gene Technology, 
http://www.comlaw.gov.au/Details/F2013C00199. 
60 See Food Standards Code, FSANZ, http://www.foodstandards.govt.nz/code/Pages/default.aspx (last visited Oct. 
25, 2013). 
61 See GM Food Labelling, FSANZ (Aug. 2013), http://www.foodstandards.govt.nz/consumer/gmfood/ 
labelling/Pages/default.aspx. 
62 Id. 
63 Id. 
64 GAIN REPORT: NEW ZEALAND BIOTECHNOLOGY ENVIRONMENT, supra note 3. 
65 Hazardous Substances and New Organisms Act 1996, s 109. 
66 Id. s 114(5) & (6). 
67 Id. s 117(1). 
68 Id. s 124B. 
69 Id. s 124C. 
70 Id. s 124D. 
71 Id. s 124G. 
72 Id. s 124H. 
73 
Branwen 
Morgan, 
New 
Zealand’s 
GM 
Cattle 
Under 
Fire, 
NATURE 
(Mar. 
27, 
2010), 
http://www.nature.com/news/ 2010/100327/full/news.2010.155.html; Jeff Neems, Anti-GE Backers File 
Appeal 
Against 
Trials, 
WAIKATO 
TIMES 
(June 
25, 
2010), 
http://www.stuff.co.nz/waikato-
times/news/3853353/Anti-GE-backers-file-appeal-against-trials. 
74 Eloise Gibson, Human Genes to be Injected into Goats, Cows, and Sheep, NEW ZEALAND HERALD (Apr. 16, 
2010), http://www.nzherald.co.nz/nz/news/article.cfm?c_id=1&objectid=10638717; Eloise Gibson, Mutant 
Cows Die in GM Trial, NEW ZEALAND HERALD (May 1, 2010), http://www.nzherald.co.nz/ 
nz/news/article.cfm?c_id= 1&objectid=10642031. 
75 See, e.g., Press Release, MPI (previously Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF)), MAF Releases Imported 
Corn Seed Report (Feb. 1, 2007), http://www.biosecurity.govt.nz/media/01-02-07/gm-corn.htm; Press Release, 
MAF, 
MAF 
Investigation 
into 
GM 
Maize 
Nears 
Completion 
(May 
28, 
2004), 
http://www.biosecurity.govt.nz/media/ 28-05-06/gm-maize. 
76 Thomas Mead, Genetically Modified Fungus Leaked, 3NEWS (Mar. 20, 2013), http://www.3news.co.nz/ 
Genetically-modified-fungus-leaked/tabid/423/articleID/291058/Default.aspx.  
77 Press Release, MPI, MPI Investigates GM Breach at Lincoln University (Mar. 19, 2013), 
http://www.mpi.govt.nz/ news-resources/news/mpi-investigates-gm-breach. 
78 Hundreds of GM Trees Destroyed, STUFF.CO.NZ (Apr. 13, 2012), http://www.stuff.co.nz/national/6735584/ 
Hundreds-of-GM-trees-destroyed. 
79 Isaac Davison, American Chemical Giant out of NZ Court Case, THE NEW ZEALAND HERALD (Oct. 10, 
2013), http://www.nzherald.co.nz/business/news/article.cfm?c id=3&objectid=11137661. 
 
 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
193 
End Notes for Norway 
 
1 See generally MATTILSYNET, http://www.mattilsynet.no (Norwegian Food Safety Authority website; last 
visited Nov. 13, 2013). 
2 For a discussion of the precautionary principle, which generally allows for preventative decision making in the 
face of environmental risk, see The Precautionary Principle, EUROPA: SUMMARIES OF EU 
LEGISLATION, 
http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/consumers/consumer_safety/l32042_en.htm 
(last 
visited Nov. 20, 2013); see also discussion in EU survey, supra at 65, nn. 4, 6. 
3 GENTEKNOLOGILOVEN [GENE TECHNOLOGY ACT ], LOV APRIL 2, 1993 NO. 38 OM FRAMSTILLING 
OG BRUK AV GENMODIFISERTE ORGANISMER M.M., ch. 1:1 §, http://lovdata.no/dokument/ 
NL/lov/1993-04-02-38. 
4See Faar norske produksjondyr genmodifisert for?, MATTILSYNET (Nov. 27, 2012), http://www.mattilsynet. 
no/planter_og_dyrking/genmodifisering/faar_norske_produksjonsdyr_genmodifisert_for.4024. 
5 Pressmeddelande SLU, EU-konsumenter mindre negativa till GMO än man trott, FORSKNING.SE (Sept. 11, 
2013), 
http://www.forskning.se/nyheterfakta/nyheter/pressmeddelanden/eukonsumentermindrenegativat 
illgmoan mantrott.5.14577fce1410af7f17532.html. 
6 Hoyre mest positive till genmodifiserte mat, DAGEN.NO, http://www.dagen.no/Default.aspx?ModuleId= 
62582&articleView=true&tabId=248 (last visited Oct. 26, 2013); see also GMO – hva svarar partiene?, 
OIKOS (Aug. 20, 2009), http://www.renmat.no/newsread/page.aspx?docid=11328. 
7 
REGJERINGEN, 
http://www.regjeringen.no/nb/om_regjeringen/tidligere/oversikt/ministerier_regjeringer/ 
nyere_tid/regjeringer/jens-stoltenbergs-andre-regjering.html?id=449424 (last visited Nov. 22, 2013). 
8 Bedre å sette inn et gen enn å sprøyte, NRK (Oct. 2, 2012), http://www.nrk.no/fordypning/forskere-positive-til-
gmo-mat-1.8333629. 
9 Id. 
10 Id. 
11 Rotter fetere av genmat, FORSKNING.NO (July 11, 2012), http://www.forskning.no/artikler/2012/juli/327547. 
12 Griser far darligere helse med genmodifisert mat, NHI.NO (June 13, 2013), http://nhi.no/forside/griser-far-
darligere-helse-med-genmodifisert-mat-40051.html. 
13 Nå kommer den genmodifiserte laksen, NRK.NO (Nov. 19, 2010), http://www.nrk.no/nordnytt/na-kommer-den-
genmodifiserte-laksen-1.7388437. 
14 Advarer mot en ensidig negative holdning till GMO, DAGEN (July 19, 2013), http://www.dagen.no/ 
Default.aspx?ModuleId=62582&articleView=true&tabId=248. 
15 Genmodifisering i landbruket, NORSK LANDBRUKSSAMVIRKE, http://www.landbruk.no/Naeringspolitikk/ 
Internasjonalt/Genmodifisering-i-landbruket (last visited Oct. 21, 2013). 
16Bygdekvinnelaget – en modern møtesplass, BYGDEKVINNELAGET, http://bygdekvinnelaget.no/om-
bygdekvinnelaget (last visited Dec. 1, 2013). 
17 GMO-forbudet må på plass nå, BONDEBLADET (Oct. 4, 2012), http://www.bondebladet.no/rammebetingelser/ 
2012/10/04/gmo-forbudet-maa-paa-plass-naa.aspx. 
18 See FOR 2000-12-15 1268, FORSKRIFT OM FORBUD MOT OMSETNING I NORGE AV BESTEMTE 
GENMODIFISERTE PRODUKTER [REGULATION ON THE PROHIBITION ON USE IN NORWAY OF 
SPECIFIED GENETICALLY MODIFIED (GM) PRODUCTS], http://www.lovdata.no/for/sf/md/xd-
20001215-1268.html. 
19 GENE TECHNOLOGY ACT, supra note 3. An overview of pertinent legislation is available at Norsk regelverk 
om GMO, MILJODIREKTORATET (Feb. 19, 2010; rev’d June 14, 2013), http://www.miljodirektoratet.no/ 
no/Regelverk/Lov/Genteknologiloven/Norsk-regelverk-om-GMO/. 
20 Id. 
21 Id. 4 § (translation by the author). 
22 LOV 19 DES 2003 NR 124 OM MATPRODUKSJON OG MATTRYGGHET MV. (MATLOVEN [FOOD 
ACT]), http://lovdata. no/dokument/NL/lov/2003-12-19-124?q=matloven. 
23 Nasjonale forskrifter, MILJODIREKTORATET (Feb. 19, 2010; rev’d June 14, 2013), http://www.miljodirekto 
ratet. no/no/Regelverk/Lov/Genteknologiloven/Norsk-regelverk-om-GMO/Nasjonale-forskrifter/. 
24 REGULATION ON THE PROHIBITION ON USE OF SPECIFIED GM PRODUCTS, supra note 18. 
25 
FOR 
2001-12-21-1600 
FORSKRIFT 
OM 
INNESLUTTET 
BRUK 
AV 
GENMODIFISERTE 
MIKROORGANISMER [REGULATION ON THE CONTAINED USE OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED 
MICROORGANISMS], http://www.lovdata.no/for/sf/ho/xo20011221-1600.html. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
194 
26 Id. 7 § st. 1. Note that not all uses need prior approval. The use of GMOs in Risk Classes 1 and 2 only requires 
notification. Id. 10 §. 
27 GENE TECHNOLOGY ACT, supra note 3, 4:14 §; FOR 1993-12-21 NR 1385: FORSKRIFT OM MERKING 
MV 
AV 
NÆRINGSMIDLER 
[REGULATION 
ON 
FOOD 
LABELING] 
ch. 
III:10c, 
http://www.lovdata.no/cgi-wift/ldles?doc=/sf/sf/sf19931221-1385.html#10c; FOR 2002-11-07 NR 1290 
FORSKRIFT 
OM 
FÔRVARER 
[REGULATION 
RELATING 
TO 
FODDER] 
ch. 
III:4b 
§, 
http://www.lovdata.no/cgi-wift/ldles?doc=/sf/sf/sf-20021107-1290.html#4b. 
28 BIOTEKNOLOGINEMNDA, http://www.bion.no (last visited Nov. 22, 2013). 
29 GENE TECHNOLOGY ACT, supra note 3, ch. 5:26 §. 
30 Id. 
31 A list of members can be found on the Board’s website, http://www.bion.no/om-oss/nemndsmedlemmer/ (last 
visited Nov. 22, 2013). 
32 2013/110, Genmodifisert, sprøytemiddelresistent soya DAS-444 ø6-6, June 21, 2013, http://www.bion.no/ 
filarkiv/ 2013/06/Hoeringssvar-EFSA_GMO_NL_2012_106-soya-DAS-444%C3%986-6-21.06.13.pdf. 
33 BIOTEKNOLOGINEMNDA, SUSTAINABILITY, BENEFIT TO THE COMMUNITY AND ETHICS IN THE 
ASSESSMENT OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS: IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 
CONCEPTS SET OUT IN SECTIONS 1 AND 10 OF THE NORWEGIAN GENE TECHNOLOGY ACT (2d 
rev. ed. 2009), http://www.bion.no/filarkiv/2010/07/2009_ 11_18_diskusjonsnotat_baerekraft_engelsk.pdf. 
For more on this subject, see G. KRISTIN ROSENDAL, COMPETING KNOWLEDGE CLAIMS AND 
GMO ASSESSMENT BY THE NORWEGIAN BIOTECHNOLOGY ADVISORY BOARD, FNI Report 
5/2007 (Aug. 2007), http://www.fni.no/doc&pdf/FNI-R0507.pdf. 
34 Press Release, Bioteknologinemnda, Noreg bør avslå 27 søknader om å få godkjent genmodifisert mais til import, 
vidareforedling og bruk i mat og fôr, tilrår eit fleirtal i Bioteknologinemnda (Sept. 10, 2013), 
http://www.bion.no/ 2013/07/nei-til-genmodifisert-mais/. 
35 Id. 
36 MATTILSYNET, http://www.mattilsynet.no (last visited Nov. 22, 2013). 
37 VITENSKAPSKOMITEEN FOR MATTRYGGHET (VKM), http://www.vkm.no (last visited Nov. 22, 2013). 
38 VKM, http://www.english.vkm.no/; see also GMO overview at http://www.vkm.no/dav/adfb158238.pdf (both 
last visited Nov. 22, 2013). 
39 GENE TECHNOLOGY ACT, supra note 3, 10 & 11 §§. 
40 FOR 2005-12-16-1495, FORSKRIFT OM KONSEKVENSUTREDNING ETTER GENTEKNOLOGILOVEN 
[REGULATION ON IMPACT ASSESSMENT ACCORDING THE GENE TECHNOLOGY ACT] § 3. 
41 FOR 2005-09-02-1009 § 7, FORSKRIFT OM MERKING, TRANSPORT, IMPORT OG EKSPORT AV 
GENMODIFISERTE ORGANISMER [REGULATION ON LABELING, TRANSPORT, IMPORT AND 
EXPORT OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS], http://www.lovdata.no/for/sf/md/xd-20050902-
1009.html#map004. 
42 Id. 
43 Id. § 9. 
44 Id. § 20. 
45 Id. § 4. 
46 Id. (referencing the legislative history of the Norwegian Gene Technology Act). 
47 
BIOTEKNOLOGINEMNDA 
[THE 
NORWEGIAN 
BIOTECHNOLOGY 
ADVISORY 
BOARD], 
SUSTAINABILITY, BENEFIT TO THE COMMUNITY AND ETHICS IN THE ASSESSMENT OF 
GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS: IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONCEPTS SET OUT IN 
SECTIONS 1 AND 10 OF THE NORWEGIAN GENE TECHNOLOGY ACT 8 (2d rev. ed. 2009), 
http://www.bion.no/filarkiv/2010/07/2009_11_18_diskusjonsnotat_baerekraft_engelsk.pdf. 
48 GENE TECHNOLOGY ACT, supra note 3, 1 § (translation by author). 
49 See FORSKRIFT OM KONSEKVENSUTREDNING ETTER GENTEKNOLOGILOVEN, supra note 40; LOV 
19 DES 2003 NR 124 OM MATPRODUKSJON OG MATTRYGGHET MV. (MATLOVEN), 
http://lovdata.no/dokument/NL/lov/2003-12-19- 124?q=matloven; FORSKRIFT OM FÔRVARER, supra note 
27. More information on the Norwegian Food Safety Authority (Mattilsynet) is available on its website, 
http://www.mattilsynet.no (last visited Nov. 22, 2013). 
50 FORSKRIFT OM FÔRVARER, supra note 27. 
51 Id. 4a & 4b §§. 
52 See MATTILSYNET, http://www.mattilsynet.no/planter_og_dyrking/genmodifisering/ (last visited Nov. 22, 
2013). 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
195 
53 Laks kan få genmodifisert mat, NRK.NO (Aug. 1, 2006), http://www.nrk.no/nordland/laks-kan-fa-genmodifisert-
mat-1.792575. 
54 Henrik Stenwig, Op-ed., Oppgjør med bonde-topp, FHL.NO (Mar. 27, 2008), http://fhl.no/oppgjor-med-bonde-
topp/. 
55 Press Release, Mattilsynet, Fire virksomheter har fått dispensasjon fra kravet om godkjenning av genmodifisert 
fiskefôr (Sept. 17, 2013), http://www.mattilsynet.no/planter_og_dyrking/genmodifisering/fire_virksomheter_ 
har_faatt_dispensasjon_fra_kravet_om_godkjenning_av_genmodifisert_fiskefor.10951. 
56 Genmodifiserte fôrprodukter som fiskefôrvirksomhetene Biomar, Ewos, Skretting og Polarfeed kan omsette på det 
norske markedet inntil 15. september 2014, forutsatt at de er merket “genmodifisert,” MATTILSYNET, 
http://www. mattilsynet.no/planter_og_dyrking/genmodifisering/oversikt_over_tillatte_gmproduktgrupper_pr_ 
15_september_20 13.10952/BINARY/Oversikt%20over%20tillatte%20GM-produktgrupper%20pr%2015%20 
september%202013. 
57 FORSKRIFT OM MERKING, TRANSPORT, IMPORT OG EKSPORT AV GENMODIFISERTE 
ORGANISMER, supra note 41, § 19. 
58 Id. 
59 Id. § 19 st. 2–3. 
60 Id. § 7e. 
61 FORSKRIFT OM FÔRVARER, supra note 27, § 18. 
62 Faa funn av ulovlig genmodifisert materiale paa det norske markedet, MATTILSYNET (Apr. 29, 2013), 
http://www.mattilsynet.no/planter_og_dyrking/genmodifisering/faa_funn_av_ulovlig_genmodifisert_materiale
_paa_ det_norske_markedet.9246. 
63 Fant ulovlig genmodifisert fisk, MILJODIREKTORATET.NO (Nov. 30, 2012; rev’d May 23, 2013), 
http://www.miljodirektoratet.no/no/Nyheter/Nyheter/Nyhetsarkiv/2012/11/Fant-ulovlig-genmodifisert-fisk/. 
64 GENE TECHNOLOGY ACT, supra note 3, 4:23 §. 
65 Id. ch. 4:25 §. 
66 Mattilsynet stanser salg av genmodifisert mais ti popcorn, MATTILSYNET.NO (Sept. 18, 2013), http://www. 
mattilsynet.no/planter_og_dyrking/genmodifisering/mattilsynet_stanser_salg_av_genmodifisert_mais_til_popc
orn.1 0901. 
67 Mattilsynet stanser salg av genmodifisert popcorn, MATTILSYNET.NO (June 18, 2013), http://www.mattilsy 
net.no/planter og dyrking/genmodifisering/mattilsynet stanser salg av genmodifisert popcorn.9920. 
 
 
End Notes for Russian Federation 
 
* This report was prepared with the assistance of Foreign Law Consultant Svitlana Vodyanyk. 
1 Comprehensive Program for Development of Biotechnology in the Russian Federation through 2020, Adopted by 
the Resolution of the Government of the Russian Federation No. 1853p-P8 of April 24, 2012, available at the 
RF Ministry of the Economy website, http://www.economy.gov.ru/minec/activity/sections/innovations/ 
development/doc20120427_06 (in Russian; last visited Nov. 4, 2013). 
2 Action Plan for Development of Biotechnologies and Genetic Engineering (“Roadmap”), approved by the Order 
of 
the 
Government 
of 
the 
Russian 
Federation 
No. 
1247-p 
of 
July 
18, 
2013, 
http://government.ru/media/files/41d 47b5e0ae078ee508b.pdf (official government portal; in Russian).  
3 Id. 
4 Rospotrebnadzor Will Save the Image of GMO, BUSINESS FM.RU (June 7, 2012), http://www.bfm.ru/news/ 
183095?doctype=news (in Russian; last visited Nov. 4, 2013). 
5 Agreement on Trade and Agricultural Biotechnology, U.S.-Russ., Nov. 19, 2006, T.I.A.S. No. 06-1119.1, 
available at http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/189168.pdf. 
6 Russia Adopted Mechanism for Direct Lobbying of the U.S. Interests in GMO Regulation, TECHEXPERT, 
http://www.cntd.ru/458201982.html (in Russian; last visited Nov. 20, 2013). 
7 Thirteen Countries Endorse International Statement on Low Level Presence, INTERNATIONAL SERVICE FOR 
THE ACQUISITION OF AGRI-BIOTECH APPLICATIONS, http://www.isaaa.org/kc/cropbiotechupdate/ 
article/default. asp?ID=10370 (last visited Nov. 4, 2013). 
8 Instruction of the Prime Minister of the Russian Federation on Enforcement of the Orders of the President of the 
Russian Federation Made During the Meeting on Social and Economic Development of Rostov Region (Sept. 
18, 2013), http://government.ru/orders/6131 (in Russian). 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
196 
9 As of the date this report, no information on further developments regarding this issue was available. 
10 LEVIN FLAKE & YELENA VASSILIEVA, USDA FOREIGN AGRIC. SERV., GAIN REP. NO. RS1345, 
RUSSIAN 
FEDERATION: 
AGRICULTURAL 
BIOTECHNOLOGY 
ANNUAL 
14 
(2013), 
http://gain.fas.usda.gov/Recent%20GAIN%20Publications/Agricultural%20Biotechnology%20Annual 
Moscow Russian%20Federation 7-15-2013.pdf. 
11 Anna Skripka, Farmers Ask for Permission to Produce Genetically Modified Products, ROSSIYSKAYA 
GAZETA [ROS. GAZ.], Mar. 26, 2013, at http://www.rg.ru/2013/03/26/reg-cfo/zerno.html (in Russian). 
12 LEGALIZED MUTANTS (IN RUSSIAN), EKOREPORTER.RU, HTTP://ECOREPORTER.RU/NODE/1966 
(LAST VISITED NOV. 4, 2013). 
13 Sergey Golubchikov et al., GMO Problem in Russia, GMO.RU (Nov. 19, 2006), http://www.gmo.ru/sections/15 
(in Russian). 
14 USDA FOREIGN AGRIC. SERV., GAIN REP. NO. RS1345, supra note 10, at 20. 
15 Federal Law No. 86-FZ on State Regulation in the Field of Genetic Engineering Activities, SOBRANIE 
ZAKONODATELSTVA 
ROSSIISKOI 
FEDERATSII 
[SZ 
RF] 
[COLLECTION 
OF 
RUSSIAN 
FEDERATION LEGISLATION (official gazette)] 1996, No. 28 (in Russian). 
16 Federal Law No 52-FZ on Sanitary-Epidemiological Well-Being of the Population, SZ RF 1999, No. 14. 
17 Federal Law No. 29-FZ on Quality and Safety of Food Products, SZ RF 2000, No. 2. 
18 Federal Law No. 2300-I on Consumer Rights Protection, ROS. GAZ., Apr. 7, 1992 (official publication). 
19 For information on the Eurasian Economic Commission, see http://www.eurasiancommission.org/ru/Pages/ 
default.aspx (last visited Nov. 20, 2013). 
20 Technical Regulations of the Customs Union in Force (Dec. 9, 2011), http://www.eurasiancommission.org/ 
ru/act/texnreg/ deptexreg/tr/Pages/TRVsily.aspx (in Russian). 
21 CHRISTOPHER RIKER ET AL., USDA FOREIGN AGRIC. SERV., GAIN REP. NO. RS1343, CUSTOMS 
UNION FOOD TECHNICAL REGULATIONS IN FORCE AS OF 1 JULY 2013 (July 5, 2013), 
http://gain.fas.usda.gov/Recent%20GAIN%20Publications/Customs%20Union%20Food%20Technical%20Re
gulati 
ons%20in%20Force%20as%20of%201%20July%202013_Moscow_Russian%20Federation_7-5-
2013.pdf. 
22 USDA FOREIGN AGRIC. SERV., GAIN REP. NO. RS1345, supra note 10, at 7. 
23 Resolution of the Russian Federation Government No. 839 on State Registration of Genetically 
Engineered/Modified Organisms Intended for Release into the Environment and Products Derived from the 
Use of Such Organisms or Containing Such Organisms, http://government.ru/docs/6128 (in Russian). 
24 Id., Rules art. 11. 
25 Id., Rules art. 3. 
26 Id. , Rules art. 22. 
27 Id., Rules art. 12(“c”). 
28 Id., Resolution. 
29 LEVIN FLAKE & YELENA VASSILIEVA, USDA FOREIGN AGRIC. SERV., GAIN REP. NO. RS1366, 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: GOVERNMENT RESOLUTION ON GMO REGISTRATION FOR 
ENVIRONMENTAL RELEASE 1–2 (2013), http://gain.fas.usda.gov/Recent%20GAIN%20Publications/ 
Government%20Resolution%20on%20GMO%20Registr 
ation%20for%20Environmental%20Release_Moscow_Russian%20Federation_9-25-2013.pdf. 
30 Information about the Commission is available at the Russian Ministry of Agriculture official website, 
http://www.mcx.ru/. 
31 USDA FOREIGN AGRIC. SERV., GAIN REP. NO. RS1345, supra note 10, at 3. 
32 Id. at 20. 
33 Federal Law on Consumers Rights Protection, supra note 18, art. 10. 
34 Uniform Sanitary, Epidemiological, and Hygienic Requirements for Goods Subject to Sanitary and 
Epidemiological Control § 1, “Safety Requirements and Nutritional Value of Foods,” approved by the decision 
of the Commission of the Customs Union No. 299, May 28, 2010, http://www.tsouz.ru/KTS/KTS17/ 
Pages/P2_299.aspx (in Russian). 
35 Marina Sheina et al., Economic and Social Impact on Treatment of Food Products Containing GMOs, an 
Example of the Russian Market, Materials of International Scientific Practical Conference on Economy and 
Management: 
Theoretical 
and 
Practical 
Aspects 
(Russia, 
Novosibirsk, 
Aug. 
22, 
2011), 
http://sibac.info/konferentsii-uchenykh2/ekonomika-i-menedzhment/203-203 (in Russian). 
36 LEVIN FLAKE & YELENA VASSILIEVA, USDA FOREIGN AGRIC. SERV., GAIN REP. NO. RS1230, 
RUSSIAN FEDERATION: MOSCOW GOVERNMENT STOPS REQUIRING GMO-FREE LABELING OF 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
197 
FOOD 
PRODUCTS 
(2012), 
http://gain.fas.usda.gov/Recent%20GAIN%20Publications/ 
Moscow%20 
Government%20Stops%20Requiring%20G 
MO-Free%20Labeling%20of%20%20Food%20%20Produc_ 
Moscow_Russian%20Federation_5-7-2012.pdf. 
37 USDA FOREIGN AGRIC. SERV., GAIN REP. NO. RS1345, supra note 10, at 18. 
38 For more information on the structure and functions of the government institutions dealing with GMO issues, see 
USDA FOREIGN AGRIC. SERV., GAIN REP. NO. RS1345, supra note 10, at 6–7, and USDA FOREIGN 
AGRIC. SERV., GAIN REP. NO. RS1366, supra note 29, at 2. 
39 Federal Law on State Regulation in the Field of Genetic Engineering Activities, supra note 15, art. 5. 
40 Resolution of the Russian Federation Government No. 839, supra note 23. 
41 Id. 
42 Federal Law on State Regulation in the Field of Genetic Engineering Activities, supra note 15, art. 5. 
43 Id. art. 11. 
44 Federal Law on Quality and Safety of Food Products, supra note 17, art. 10. 
45 Regulation of the Russian Federation Government No. 634 on Control over Microorganisms, Toxins, Equipment 
and Technologies in the Course of Foreign Economic Activity, SZ RF 2001, No. 37 (in Russian). 
46 Decree of the Russian Federation President No. 1087 on Approval of the List of Microorganisms, Toxins, 
Equipment and Technologies Subject to Export Control, SZ RF 2007, No. 35 (in Russian). 
47 Decree of the Russian Federation President No. 612 on Amendments to the List of Microorganisms, Toxins, 
Equipment and Technologies Subject to Export Control approved by the Decree of President of the Russian 
Federation No. 1087 of August 20, 2007, SZ RF 2013, No. 28 (in Russian). 
48 Resolution No. 299 of the Customs Union Commission on Application of Sanitary Measures in the Customs 
Union Member States (May 28, 2010), http://www.tsouz.ru/KTS/KTS17/Pages/R_299.aspx (in Russian). 
49 Recommendations No. 15-3.5 of the Parliamentary Hearings on Legal Regulation of GMO Circulation in the 
Russian Federation, approved by the State Duma Science and Technology Committee, Sept. 17, 2012, 
http://komitet2-8.km.duma.gov.ru/site.xp/052053124052055054.html (in Russian). 
50 Id. 
51 Letter of Rospotrebnadzor No. 0100/3572-06-32 on Improving the Supervision of Food Products Containing 
GMOs, Apr. 3, 2006, http://89.rospotrebnadzor.ru/documents/ros/103/print/ (in Russian). 
52 Decree of the Russian Federation Government No. 26 on State Registration of Feed Derived from Genetically 
Modified Organisms, http://www.fsvps.ru/fsvps/laws/243.html.  
53 Administrative Regulation on the State Function of the Federal Service for Veterinary and Phytosanitary 
Surveillance for State Registration of Feed Produced from GMOs, approved by the Order of the Ministry of 
Agriculture of the Russian Federation No. 466 of October 6, 2009, http://www.mcx.ru/documents/document/ 
v7_show/11682.285.htm (in Russian). 
54 Code of Administrative Violations of the Russian Federation, SZ RF 2001, No. 1, art. 6.3. 
55 Id. arts. 14.5, 14.8. 
56 Id. art. 14.43. 
 
 
End Notes for South Africa 
 
* This report was prepared with the assistance of Law Library intern Antoinette Ofosu-Kwakye. 
1 Rosemary A. Wolson, Assessing the Prospects for the Adoption of Biofortified Crops in South Africa, 10(3) 
AGBIOFORUM 184 (2007), available at https://mospace.umsystem.edu/xmlui/bitstream/handle/10355/57/ 
Biofortified %20Crops%20in%20South%20Africa.pdf?sequence=1. 
2 Id. at 185. 
3 DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES, TRENDS IN THE AGRICULTURAL 
SECTOR – 2012 at 11 (2013), http://www.nda.agric.za/docs/statsinfo/Trends2012.pdf. 
4 Genetically Modified Organisms Act (GMO Act) No. 15 of 1997, as amended, 2 BUTTERWORTHS STATUTES 
OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA [BSRSA] (rev. ed. 2012). The 1997 GMO Act is available on the 
Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (DAFF) website, at http://www.daff.gov.za/ 
doaDev/sideMenu/acts/15%20 GMOs%20No15%20% 281997%29.pdf. The Genetically Modified Organisms 
Amendment Act No. 23 of 2006 (Apr. 17, 2007) is available on the South Africa government portal, at 
http://www.info.gov.za/view/DownloadFileAction?id=67850. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
198 
5 Genetically Modified Organisms Act, 1997, Regulations, 2010, GOVERNMENT NOTICES [GN] No. 32966 
(Feb. 26, 2010), http://www.info.gov.za/view/117972; Genetically Modified Organisms Act, 1997, 
Regulations Amendments, 2010, GN No. 33007 (Mar. 12, 2010), http://www.info.gov.za/view/123130; 
Genetically Modified Organisms Act, 1997, Regulations Amendments, 2011, GN No. 34020 (Feb. 18, 2011), 
http://www.info.gov.za /view/142060; Genetically Modified Organisms Act, 1997, Regulations Amendments, 
2011, GN No. 35007 (Feb. 10, 2012), http://www.info.gov.za/view/159582; Genetically Modified Organisms 
Act, 1997, Regulations Amendments, 2011, GN No. 36124 (Feb. 8, 2013), http://www.info.gov. 
za/view/183647 (hereinafter collectively referred to as GMO Regulations, as amended). 
6 Genetically Modified Organisms Amendment Act No. 23 of 2006, Preamble; Country Profile – South Africa, 
BIOSAFETY CLEARING HOUSE, CONVENTION ON BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY, http://bch.cbd.int/ 
about/countryprofile .shtml?country=za (last visited Oct. 30, 2013). 
7 National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act No. 10 of 2004 [NEMBA], 20 BSRSA (rev’d through 
2012). 
8 Consumer Protection Act No. 68 of 2008, 526 GOVERNMENT GAZETTE [GG], No. 467 (Apr. 29, 2009), 
http://www .info.gov.za/view/DownloadFileAction?id=99961. 
9 Foodstuffs, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act No. 54 of 1972 (May 19, 1972), available on the South African 
Department of Health website, at http://www.doh.gov.za/docs/legislation/acts/2011/Act-541972.pdf. 
10 Wolson, supra note 1, at 3. 
11 Id. 
12 Parliamentary Monitoring Group (PMG), Genetically Modified Organisms Amendments Bill: Hearings (Jan. 17, 
2006), 
http://www.pmg.org.za/minutes/20060116-genetically-modified-organisms-gmo-amendment-bill-
hearings. 
13 Id., Submission by African Centre for Biosafety; GMO Act § 17. 
14 PMG, Genetically Modified Organisms Amendments Bill: Hearings, Submission by Kwangwanase Farmers 
Union, supra note 12. 
15 Wolson, supra note 1, at 188. 
16 Legislation, DAFF, http://www.daff.gov.za/# (click on “Agricultural Production, Health & Food Safety Branch,” 
then “Biosafety,” then “Legislation”) (last visited Oct. 30, 2013); GMO Act, Preamble. 
17 GMO Act § 1. 
18 Id. § 2. The GMO Act also provides a list of activities to which it does not apply, including techniques involving 
human gene therapy. Id. 
19 Id. §§ 3 & 5. 
20 Id. §§ 4 & 5. 
21 Id § 3. 
22 Id. 
23 Id. § 7. 
24 Id. § 8. 
25 Id. § 9. 
26 Id. 
27 Id. § 8. 
28 Id. § 15. 
29 Id. § 16. 
30 Id. § 11. 
31 Id. 
32 Id. § 10. 
33 Id. 
34 GMO Regulations § 2, as amended. 
35 GMO Act § 1. 
36 GMO Regulations § 2, as amended. 
37 Id. § 3. 
38 Id. § 4. 
39 Id. 
40 Id. § 3. 
41 Id. 
42 Id. § 8. 
43 Id. 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
199 
44 GMO Act § 19; GMO Regulations § 11, as amended. 
45 Department of Agriculture, Application for Intentional Introduction (Conduct a Trial Release) of a Genetically 
Modified 
Organism 
into 
the 
Environment 
of 
South 
Africa, 
http://www.services.gov.za 
/services/webdav/Documents /Agriculture/trial_release.pdf (last visited Oct. 30, 2013). 
46 NEMBA § 78. Release means “release into the environment and includes a trial release, conditional release and 
general release.” GMO Act § 1. 
47 Understanding Genetically Modified Organisms: What Are the Issues of Concern for the Environment?, DAFF, 
http://www.nda.agric.za/doaDev/sideMenu/biosafety/doc/understandingGMOs.pdf (last visited Oct. 30, 2013). 
48 GMO Regulations § 9, as amended. 
49 Id. § 9. 
50 Id. 
51 Id. § 10. 
52 NEMBA § 10. 
53 Id. § 11. 
54 Food Control, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, http://www.doh.gov.za/healthtopics .php?t=FoodControl (click on 
“Food Control” under “Health Topics”) (last visited Oct. 30, 2013). 
55 Id. 
56 Regulations Relating to the Labelling of Foodstuffs Obtained Through Certain Techniques of Genetic 
Modification, 
GG 
No. 
25908 
(Feb. 
26, 
2010), 
http://www.doh.gov.za/docs/foodcontrol/ 
advertising/2004/fcr25.pdf. 
57 Id. § 2. The term “significantly different” means “in respect of a foodstuff obtained through certain techniques of 
genetic modification, that characteristics scientifically assessed through an appropriate analysis of data are 
different from those of a corresponding existing foodstuff, taking into account accepted limits on natural 
variation of that foodstuff.” Id. 
58 Consumer Protection Act No. 68 of 2008, § 24, 526 GG No. 467 (Apr. 29, 2009), http://www.info.gov.za/view/ 
DownloadFileAction?id=99961. 
59 The Consumer Protection Act Regulations, No. 293, § 7, GN No. 34180 (Apr. 1, 2011), http://www.info.gov.za/ 
view/DynamicAction?pageid=623&myID=292342. 
60 GMO Act § 17. 
61 Id. 
62 Id. 
63 Id. 
64 Id. § 21. 
65 Id. 
66 Id. 
67 GMO Regulations § 13, as amended. 
68 GMO Act § 21. 
69 Consumer Protection Act No. 68 of 2008, § 110, 526 GG No. 467 (Apr. 29, 2009), http://www.info.gov.za/view/ 
DownloadFileAction?id=99961. 
70 Id. 
71 Id. §§ 112 & 113. 
72 Trustees, Biowatch v. Registrar: Genetic Resources, and Others 2005 (4) SA 111 (T), available on the Southern 
Africa 
Legal 
Information 
Institute 
(SAFLII) 
website, 
at 
http://www.saflii.org/za/cases/ 
ZAGPHC/2005/135.html. 
73 Id. at 113; About Us, BIOWATCH SOUTH AFRICA, http://www.biowatch.org. za/main.asp? 
include=about/about.html (last visited Oct. 30, 2013). 
74 Trustees, Biowatch v. Registrar: Genetic Resources, and Others, at 119–26. See also a summary of the case at 
Trustees For the Time Being of the Biowatch Trust v. Registrar Genetic Resources and Others, RIGHT2INFO, 
http://www.right2info.org/cases/r2i-trustees-for-the-time-being-of-the-biowatch-trust-v.-registrar-genetic-
resourcesand-others (last visited Oct 30, 2013). 
75 Trustees, Biowatch v. Registrar: Genetic Resources, and Others at 137. 
76 Id. at 145–46. 
77 Id. 
78 Biowatch Trust v Registrar Genetic Resources and Others 2009 (6) SA 232 (CC), available at http://www.saflii 
.org/za/cases/ZACC/2009/14.pdf. 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
200 
End Notes for South Korea 
 
* This report was prepared with the assistance of Law Library intern Sojin Park. 
1 Country Profile: Republic of Korea, BIOSAFETY CLEARING-HOUSE, CONVENTION ON BIOLOGICAL 
DIVERSITY, http://bch.cbd.int/about/countryprofile.shtml?country=kr (last visited Dec. 9, 2013). 
2 Yujeonja Byunhyung Saengmulchae-ui Kookakan Idongdeung-e Kwanhan Beobryul [Act on Trans-boundary 
Movements of Living Modified Organisms and Other Related Matters (LMO Act)], Act No. 6448, Mar. 28, 
2001, last amended by Act No. 11536, Dec.11, 2012. The last amendment of the LMO Act became effective 
on December 12, 2013. 
3 Id. art. 1. 
4 Domestic Data, KOREA BIOSAFETY CLEARING HOUSE, http://www.biosafety.or.kr/01_basic/sub0301.asp 
(last visited Dec. 9, 2013). 
5 KOREA BIOSAFETY CLEARING HOUSE, YUJEONJA BYUNHYUNG SAENGMULCHAE KWALYUN 
JUYO 
TONGYE 
(YO-YAK) 
[STATISTICS 
ON 
GENETICALLY 
MODIFIED 
ORGANISMS 
(SUMMARY)] 13 (Apr. 9, 2013), http://www.biosafety. or.kr/bbs/mboard.asp?exec=view&strBoardID=bsn_ 
064&intPage=1&intCategory=0&strSearchCategory=|s_name|s 
_subject|&strSearchWord=&intSeq=69104 
(click the pdf file name next to a floppy disk mark). 
6 Current Status of Public Awareness, KOREA BIOSAFETY CLEARING HOUSE, http://www.biosafety.or.kr/ 
03_data/sub0501.asp (last visited Dec. 2, 2013) (in Korean). 
7 LMO Act art. 32. 
8 KOREA BIOSAFETY CLEARING HOUSE, supra note 5, at 16. 
9 Id. 
10 Id. at 18. 
11 Biotechnology Support Act, Act No. 3718, Dec. 31, 1983, last amended by Act No. 11683, Mar. 23, 2013. 
12 LMO Act art. 4. 
13 Id. art. 3. 
14 Yujeonja Byunhyung Saengmulchae-ui Kookakan Idongdeung-e Kwanhan Beob Sihaengryung [Enforcement 
Decree of the Act on Trans-boundary Movements of Living Modified Organisms and Other Related Matters 
(Enforcement Decree)], Presidential Decree No. 19062, Sept. 30, 2005, as amended by Presidential Decree 
No. 24442, Mar. 23, 2013. 
15 Yujeonja Byunhyung Saengmulchae-ui Kookakan Idongdeung-e Kwanhan Beob Sihaengyuchick [Ministerial 
Ordinance of the Act on Trans-boundary Movements of Living Modified Organisms and Other Related 
Matters], Ministry of Commerce, Industry & Energy Ordinance No. 327, Mar. 10, 2006, last amended by 
Ordinance of Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE) No. 5, Apr. 30, 2013. 
16 Yujeonja Byunhyung Saengmulchae-ui Kookakan Idongdeung-e Kwanhan Tonghap Goshi [Unified Enforcement 
Regulation of the Act on Trans-boundary Movements of Living Modified Organisms and Other Related 
Matters (Unified Enforcement Regulation)], Enforcement Regulation of Ministry of Science, Information, 
Communication, Technology & Future Planning No. 2007-19, Enforcement Regulation of Ministry of 
Agricultural, Food & Rural Affairs No. 2007-80, Enforcement Regulation of MOTIE No. 2007-153, 
Enforcement Regulation of Ministry of Health & Welfare No. 2007-105, Enforcement Regulation of Ministry 
of Environment No. 2007-189, Enforcement Regulation of Ministry of Oceans & Fisheries No. 2007-115, 
Enforcement Regulation of Ministry of Food and Drug Safety No. 2007-78, Dec. 27, 2007. 
17 LMO Act art. 6, para. 1. 
18 LMO Act art. 31, para. 1. 
19 Id. art. 31, para. 3. 
20 Id. art. 31, para. 1. 
21 Id. art. 7. 
22 Id. art. 2, para. 2. 
23 Nongsusanmul Poomjil Kwali Beob [Agricultural and Marine Products Quality Control Act (Agricultural Act)], 
Act No. 5667, Jan. 21, 1999, last amended by Act No. 12064, Aug. 13, 2013, art. 2, para. 1(11). 
24 Sikpoon Weesaeng Beob [Food Sanitation Act], Act No. 1007, Jan. 20, 1962, last amended by Act No. 11819, 
May 22, 2013, art. 12-2. 
25 LMO Act art. 7-2, para. 1. 
26 Id. art. 7-2, para. 3. 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
201 
27 Id. art. 7-2, para. 4; Unified Enforcement Regulation, Annex 1-3: General Principles and Method of Risk 
Assessment Under Annex II of the Protocol and Annex 10-1: Criteria and Required Materials for Risk 
Assessment. 
28 LMO Act art. 7-2, para. 3. 
29 Id. art. 7-2, para. 7. 
30 Id. art. 8, para. 1. 
31 Id. art. 9, para. 1. 
32 Id. 
33 Id. art. 12. 
34 Kuknae Weehaesung Simsa Hyunhwang [Domestic Risk Assessment Status], KOREA BIOSAFETY CLEARING 
HOUSE, 
http://www.biosafety.or.kr/bbs/mboard.asp?exec=view&strBoardID=bsn_065&intPage=1&int 
Category=0&strSearc hCategory=|s_name|s_subject|&strSearchWord=&intSeq=71872 (last visited Dec. 4, 
2013). 
35 LMO Act art. 14, para. 1. 
36 Id. art. 20; Enforcement Decree art. 21. 
37 LMO Act art. 21. 
38 Id. art. 22. 
39 Enforcement Decree art. 23, para. 1 & table 1. 
40 Id. art. 23, para. 2 & table 1. 
41 Id. art. 23, para. 1 & table 1. 
42 Id. art. 23, para. 4 & table 1. 
43 Status of Approval and Registration, KOREA BIOSAFETY CLEARING HOUSE, http://www.biosafety.or. 
kr/03_ data/sub0304.asp (last visited Dec. 4, 2013) (in Korean). 
44 LMO Act art. 22-2. 
45 Id.; Enforcement Decree art. 23, para. 6. 
46 LMO Act art. 24; Enforcement Decree art. 24. 
47 LMO Act art. 42. 
48 Id. art. 8, para.2; Enforcement Decree arts. 8 & 9; Unified Enforcement Regulation ch. 2. 
49 LMO Act art. 7-2, para. 3. 
50 Id. art. 8, para. 4. 
51 Id. art. 8, para. 2; Enforcement Decree arts. 8 & 9; Unified Enforcement Regulation ch. 2. 
52 LMO Act art. 8, para. 5; Enforcement Decree art. 9, para. 5. 
53 LMO Act art. 12. 
54 Domestic Laws, KOREA BIOSAFETY CLEARING HOUSE, http://www.biosafety.or. kr/03_data/ 
sub0102_3.asp%20 (last visited Dec. 9, 2013) (in Korean). 
55 Food Sanitation Act art. 18, para. 2. 
56 Sikpoom Weesaeng Beob Sihaengryung [Enforcement Decree of the Food Sanitation Act], Cabinet Order No. 
811, June 12, 1962, last amended by Presidential Decree No. 24800, Oct. 16, 2013, art. 10. 
57 Yujeonja Jaejohab Sikpoom Deung-ui Anjeonseong Pyungga Simsa Deung-e Gwanhan Gyujeong [Regulation on 
Risk Assessment for Genetically Modified Food], Enforcement Regulation of Ministry of Food and Drug 
Safety, No. 2007-60, Aug. 30, 2007, last amended by No. 2013-80, Apr. 5, 2013, art. 9. 
58 KOREA BIOSAFETY CLEARING HOUSE, supra note 34. 
59 Unified Enforcement Regulation art. 4-1, para. 2. 
60 Id. art. 4-11. 
61 Id. art. 4-8, para. 9. 
62 Id. art. 4-6. 
63 KOREA BIOSAFETY CLEARING HOUSE, supra note 34. 
64 LMO Act art. 24. 
65 Food Sanitation Act art. 12-2; Sikyakcheo Goshi Yujeonja Byunhyung Nongsusanmul Pyoshiyoryung [Labeling 
Guideline for Genetically Modified Agricultural and Marine Product by Ministry of Food and Drug Safety 
(Labeling Guideline for Agricultural Products)], Enforcement Regulation of Ministry for Food, Agriculture, 
Forestry and Fisheries, No. 2012-75, July 22, 2012, amended by Enforcement Regulation of Ministry of Food 
and Drug Safety No. 2013-143, Apr. 5, 2013. 
66 Agricultural Act art. 56; Enforcement Decree of the Food Sanitation Act art. 20; Labeling Guideline for 
Agricultural Products, supra note 65. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
202 
67 Saryo Kwali Beob [Control of Livestock and Fish Feed Act], Act No. 1393, Aug. 14, 1963, last amended by Act 
No. 11690, Mar. 23, 2013. 
68 A “main ingredient” is defined as one of the top five ingredients contained in the processed food or food additive. 
Yujeonja Jaejohab Sikpoom Deung-ui Pyoshi Kijoon [Labeling Guideline for Genetically Modified Food by 
Ministry of Food and Drug Safety (Labeling Guideline for Processed Food)] art. 2, para. 4, Enforcement 
Regulation, No. 2000-43, Aug. 30, 2000, amended by Enforcement Regulation, No. 2013-165, Apr. 5, 2013. 
69 Labeling Guideline for Agricultural Products, supra note 65, art. 3, para. 2. 
70 Id. art. 4. 
71 Labeling Guideline for Processed Food, supra note 68, art. 5. 
72 Food Sanitation Act art. 12-2, para. 2, arts. 75, 76 & 97. 
73 Sang Hyuk Moon, A Study of Regulation and Liability Relating to Genetically Modified Organisms 101 (Feb. 
2010) (unpublished PhD thesis, Sung Kyun Kwan University) (on file with National Assembly Library). 
 
 
End Notes for Sweden 
 
1 Frågor och svar om GMO-fritt foder, LANTBRUKARNAS RIKSFÖRBUND, http://www.lrf.se/PageFiles/137 
196/20130913_fos_gmofritt_foder.pdf (revised Sept. 13, 2013). 
2 LIVSMEDELSVERKET, UNDERSÖKNING AV TILLÄMPNING AV LAGSTIFTNINGEN RÖRANDE 
GENETISKT MODIFIERADE LIVSMEDEL (GMO) [INVESTIGATION OF THE APPLICATION OF 
LEGISLATION ON GMOS] (Feb. 14, 2007), http://www. slv.se/upload/dokument/rapporter/genteknik/ 
gmorapport tillynsavdelningen 20070214.pdf. 
3 Id. 
4 Id. at 11. 
5 Enbart GMO-fritt foder till Scans grisar, CISION.COM (Mar. 23, 2011), http://news.cision.com/se/scan-
ab/r/enbartgmo-fritt-foder-till-scans-grisar,c556350. 
6 Genetiskt modifierade organismer, REGERINGSKANSLIET, http://www.regeringen.se/sb/d/6421/a/58280 (last 
updated July 1, 2013). 
7 For one view, see a study by the Environmental Protection Agency (Naturvårdsverket). EKOLOGISKA 
EFFEKTER AV GMO, NATURVÅRDSVERKET (Sept. 2006), available at http://www.popgen.su.se/pdf/ 
GMO620-5597-6.pdf. 
8 The largest coalition party, the Moderaterna, does not specifically mention GMOs in its manifesto, which is 
available at MODERATERNA.SE, http://www.moderat.se/jordbruk/mat. The Green Party position is available 
at MILJOPARTIET, http://www.mp.se/sala/just-nu/sala-gmo-fri-kommun. The Social Democrats want the EU 
Member States to have the opportunity to ban the cultivation of GMO plants and oppose their use for health 
reasons. 
See 
SOCIALDEMOKRATERNA, 
http://www.socialdemokraterna.se/Webben-for-alla/EU/EU/ 
Ledamoterna-/maritaulvskog/ Mediany/Nyheter/GMO-grodor-ar-upp-till-medlemslanderna/ (last visited Oct. 
18, 2013). 
9 See, e.g., Carl Schlyter, Op-Ed., Genmanipulation ger inte ett uthålligt jordbruk, SVENSKA DAGBLADET (Mar. 
26, 2012), http://www.svd.se/opinion/brannpunkt/genmanipulation-ger-inte-ett-uthalligt-jordbruk_6951821. 
svd, and Kew Nordqvist’s voting record on the Board, Addendum 1 of each of the following: 040/2013-4.1.1., 
034/2013- 4.1.1., 007/2013-4.1.1., 007/2013-4.1.1., 005/2013-4.1.1., 004/2013-4.1.1., 104/2012-4.1.1, 
103/2012-4.1.1., available at GENTEKNIKNÄMNDEN, http://www.genteknik.se/sv/2013---yttranden (last 
visited Oct. 18, 2013). 
10 Genmanipulerade vs. Genmodifierade (translation by author). 
11 See, e.g., Nyttig genmanipulerad mat stoppas av skräckpropaganda, DAGENS NYHETER (Mar. 11, 2009), 
http://www.dn.se/debatt/nyttig-genmanipulerad-mat-stoppas-av-skrackpropaganda/. 
12 Lars Brander, Kan genmanipulerad föda ge skador?, ALLTOMVETENSKAP MAGAZINE (May 4, 2010), 
http://www. alltomvetenskap.se/nyheter/kan-genmanipulerad-foda-ge-skador. 
13 LRFs genpolicy, LANTBRUKARNAS RIKSFÖRBUND, http://www.lrf.se/Medlem/Politik--Paverkan/Miljo--
vatten/ Genteknik/LRFs-genpolicy/ (last visited Nov. 15, 2013). 
14 Fortsatt GMO-fritt till svenska mjölkkor, LANTBRUKARNAS RIKSFÖRBUND, http://www.lrf.se/Om-
LRF/KontaktaLRF/Press/Pressmeddelanden/2013/Fortsatt-GMO-fritt-till-svenska-mjolkkor/ (last visited Sept. 
25, 2013). 
15 Frågor och svar om GMO-fritt foder, LANTBRUKARNAS RIKSFÖRBUND, supra note 1. 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
203 
16 Welcome Page, GMO REGULATIONS IN SWEDEN, http://www.gmo.nu/gmoenglish. 4.778a5d1001f2 
9869a7fff 935.html (last visited Sept. 25, 2012). 
17 MILJÖBALK [MB] [ENVIRONMENTAL CODE] (Svensk författningssamling [SFS] 1998:808) 13:4. For a 
more detailed discussion of EU law, see the survey of EU law included in this report. 
18 ENVIRONMENTAL CODE 13:4. 
19 See also Part IV(B), below. For a list of GMO legislation see the official website of the Swedish gene technology 
authorities, at http://www.gmo.nu/toppmeny/lagstiftning.4.1d07c3f108381dd74480001062.html (last visited 
Nov. 12, 2013). 
20 See Part IX(B), below. 
21 MILJÖTILLSYNSFÖRORDNING [REGULATION ON ENVIRONMENTAL OVERSIGHT] (SFS 2011:13), 
issued with delegation through ch. 26 of the Environmental Code, http://www.notisum.se/rnp/sls/lag/ 
20110013.htm. 
22 MILJÖTILLSYNSFÖRORDNING [REGULATION ON ENVIRONMENTAL OVERSIGHT] (SFS 2011:13) 
chs. 2, 14. 
23 Id. 2 ch. 12–18 §§. 
24 The Swedish Gene Technology Advisory Board, GENTEKNIKNÄMNDEN, http://www.genteknik.se/sv/in-
english (last visited Nov. 12, 2013). 
25 FÖRORDNING OM UTSÄTTNING AV GENETISKT MODIFIERADE ORGANISMER I MILJÖN 
[REGULATION ON THE RELEASE OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS INTO THE 
ENVIRONMENT] (SFS 2002:1086) ch. 2:11st2. 
26 ENVIRONMENTAL ACT ch. 13:19 §. 
27 Gentekniknämndens ledamöter och personliga ersättare, GENTEKNIKNÄMNDEN, http://www.genteknik.se/sv/ 
ledamoter (last visited Oct. 23, 2013). 
28 Genetiskt modifierade organismer i Sverige, NATURVÅRDSVERKET, http://www.naturvardsverket.se/ 
Miljoarbete-i-samhallet/Miljoarbete-i-Sverige/Uppdelat-efter-omrade/Naturvard/Genetiskt-modifierade-
organismer/GMO-i-Sverige/ (last updated Feb. 4, 2013). 
29 
FISKERIVERKETS 
FÖRESKRIFTEROM 
GENETISKT 
MODIFIERADE 
VATTENLEVANDE 
ORGANISMER 
[FISHERY 
MINISTRIES 
REGULATIONS 
ON 
GENETICALLY 
MODIFIED 
ORGANISMS LIVING IN WATER] (Fiskeriverkets föreskrifter [FIFS] 2004:2), amended by Havs- och 
vattenmyndighetens författningssamling [HVMFS] 2011:3, available at https://www.havochvatten.se/ 
download/18.312592e0130 
1d753523800017708/1348912773023/ 
HVMFS+-+FIFS+ 
+2004-2-keu-
1107...pdf. 
30 JORDBRUKSVERKET, http://www.jordbruksverket.se/amnesomraden/odling/genteknikgmo.4.373db8e013d 
4008b3a 18000378.html (last visited Nov. 15, 2013). 
31 MILJÖTILLSYNSFÖRORDNING [REGULATION ON ENVIRONMENTAL OVERSIGHT] (SFS 2011:13), 
ch. 2:17 §; SKOGSSTYRELSEN, http://www.svo.se (last visited Nov. 12, 2013). 
32 
Genmodifierade 
organismer, 
GMO, 
KEMIKALIEINSPEKTIONEN, 
http://www.kemi.se/Innehall/ 
Bekampningsmedel/ Genmodifierade-organismer-GMO/ (last visited Nov. 12, 2013). 
33 Id. 
34 SWEDISH CIVIL CONTINGENCY AGENCY, https://www.msb.se/en/ (last visited Nov. 12, 2013). 
35 See annual reports on the GMO project in Swedish at LIVSMEDELSVERKET, http://www.slv.se/sv/grupp3/ 
Rapporter/Genteknik/ (last visited Oct. 23, 2013). 
36 Governed by SFS 2011:13, ch. 2:16 §, which implements 2001/18/EG. 
37 LÄKEMEDELSVERKETS FÖRESKRIFTER OCH ALLMÄNNA RÅD OM AVSIKTLIG UTSÄTTNING VID 
KLINISK PRÖVNING AV LÄKEMEDEL SOM INNEHÅLLER ELLER BESTÅR AV GENETISKT 
MODIFIERADE ORGANISMER [MEDICAL PRODUCTS AGENCY’S REGULATION ON ADVICE ON 
INTENTIONAL RELEASE DURING CLINICAL TRIALS OF DRUGS CONTAINING GENETICALLY 
MODIFIED ORGANISMS] (Livsmedelsverkets föreskrifter [LVFS] 2004:10) 4 § 3p, available at 
http://www.lakemedelsverket.se/upload/lvfs/LVFS 2004-10.pdf. 
38 Id. at 4 §. Läkemedelsverket still requires a general application for all medical testing, but does not oversee the 
GMO aspect of the testing. 
39 Translation by author of “Denna produkt innehåller genetiskt modifierade organismer.” LVFS 2004:10 12 §. 
40 INNESLUTEN ANVÄNDNING AV GENETISKT MODIFIERADE MIKROORGANISMER [CONTAINED 
USE OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS] (Arbetsmiljöverkets Föeskrifter [AFS] 2011:2) at 14–
16 §§. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
204 
41 See Instruction LVFS 2004:10 12 §, and The National Food Agency Instruction, both issued under the delegation 
in ENVIRONMENTAL CODE ch. 13:18 §. 
42 ENVIRONMENTAL CODE ch. 13:12–14 §§, FÖRORDNING OM UTSÄTTNING AV GENETISKT 
MODIFIERADE ORGANISMER I MILJÖN (SFS 2002:1086) ch. 2:2 and 3:2. 
43 FÖRORDNING OM UTSÄTTNING AV GENETISKT MODIFIERADE ORGANISMER I MILJÖN 
[REGULATION 
ON 
RELEASE 
OF 
GENETICALLY 
MODIFIED 
ORGANISMS 
INTO 
THE 
ENVIRONMENT] ch.1:3 §. 
44 ENVIRONMENTAL CODE ch. 13:13 §, http://www.riksdagen.se/sv/Dokument-Lagar/Lagar/Svenskforfattnings 
samling/Miljobalk-1998808_sfs-1998-808/. 
45 FÖRORDNING OM UTSÄTTNING AV GENETISKT MODIFIERADE ORGANISMER I MILJÖN ch. 2:10 §. 
46 Id. chs. 2:9, 2:11, 2:11 st2. 
47 Id. ch. 2:17. 
48 Deliberate Release and Placing on the EU Market of GMOs – GMO Register, EUROPEAN COMMISSION, 
http://gmoinfo.jrc.ec.europa.eu/gmp_browse.aspx (last visited Oct. 23, 2013). 
49 Id. 
50 MILJÖTILLSYNSFÖRORDNING (SFS 2011:13) ch. 2:11–18 §§, http://www.notisum.se/rnp/sls/lag/ 
20110013.htm. 
51 4 § FÖRSIKTIGHETSÅTGÄRDER VID ODLING AV GENETISKT MODIFIERADE GRÖDOR 
[PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES FOR CULTIVATION OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED PLANTS] 
(Statens jordbruksverks föreskrifter [SJVFS] 2008:34). 
52 9 § FÖRSIKTIGHETSÅTGÄRDER VID ODLING OCH TRANSPORT M.M. AV GENETISKT 
MODIFIERADE GRÖDOR (SFS 2007:273). 
53 FÖRSIKTIGHETSÅTGÄRDER VID ODLING AV GENETISKT MODIFIERADE GRÖDOR (SJVFS 
2008:34), 
http://www. 
jordbruksverket.se/download/18.26424bf71212ecc74b080001053/1242046883569/2008-034.pdf. 
54 Compare with Latvia, which allows its municipalities to decide about GMO use. GMO i nordisk perspektiv, 
BYGDEKVINNELAGET (Nov. 6, 2012), http://bygdekvinnelaget.no/gmo-i-nordisk-perspektiv. 
55 See, e.g., Östersunds kommun är Sveriges första GMO-fria kommun, HEJ DÅ GMO! (Mar. 30, 2009), 
http://hejdagmo.se/2009/03/30/ostersunds-kommun-ar-sveriges-forsta-gmo-fria-kommun/; 
NORDANSTIG, 
http://www.nordanstig.se/Kommunen/Kost-och-stad/Kost/GMO-fri-kommun.html (last visited Nov. 11, 
2013); GREENPEACE, http://www.greenpeace.org/sweden/se/nyheter/nyheter/aennu-en-kommun-blir-gmo-
fri/ (last visited Nov. 11, 2013). Jämtland County has declared itself GMO free as a benchmark, hoping that 
farmers will follow suit. So far no GMO has been produced in Jämtland. Jämtland vill vara GMO-fri zon, ATL 
(May 7, 2009), http://www.atl.nu/lantbruk/jamtland-vill-vara-gmo-fri-zon. 
56 E.g., Meeting Minutes, City Council, GOTLAND (Apr. 24, 2006), http://www.gotland.se/25174. 
57 Ordlistan, försiktighetsprincipen, EUROPA, http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/glossary/precautionary_ 
principle_sv.htm (last visited Nov. 12, 2013). 
58 GMO-potatis och försiktighetsprincipen, RIKSDAGEN (June 22, 2011), http://www.riksdagen.se/sv/Dokument-
Lagar/Fragor-och-anmalningar/Svar-pa-skriftliga-fragor/GMO-potatis-och-forsiktighetsp_GY12585/. 
59 MILJÖTILLSYNSFÖRORDNING (SFS 2011:13) at 15, 18 §§. 
60 LIVSMEDELSLAG [FOOD ACT] (SFS 2006:804), http://www.riksdagen.se/sv/Dokument-Lagar/Lagar/Svensk 
forfattningssamling/Livsmedelslag-2006804_sfs-2006-804/. 
61 LIVSMEDELSFÖRORDNING [FOOD REGULATION] (SFS 2006:813), http://www.riksdagen.se/sv/ 
DokumentLagar/Lagar/Svenskforfattningssamling/Livs medelsforordning-2006813_sfs-2006-813/ 
62 FOOD ACT (SFS 2006:804); FOOD REGULATION (SFS 2006:813). 
63 See Instruction by the Livsmedelsverket, issued after specific designation in SFS 2006:804 ch.1:6 § st1. p2, and 
ENVIRONMENTAL CODE ch. 13:18 §. 
64 Honung med pollen från GMO, LIVSMEDELSVERKET, http://www.slv.se/sv/grupp1/Markning-av-mat/Gen 
modifierad-mat-GMO/Honung-med-pollen-fran-GMO/ (last updated Apr. 29, 2013). 
65 See Gene Technology Board applications, Yttranden 2013, http://www.genteknik.se/sv/2013---yttranden, and 
LIVSMEDELSVERKET, UNDERSÖKNING AV TILLÄMPNING AV LAGSTIFTNINGEN RÖRANDE 
GENETISKT MODIFIERADE LIVSMEDEL (GMO) [INVESTIGATION OF THE APPLICATION OF 
LEGISLATION 
ON 
GMOS] 
(Feb. 
14, 
2007), 
http://www.slv.se/upload/dokument/rapporter/ 
genteknik/gmorapport_tillynsavdelningen_20070214.pdf. 
66 For a list of all approved GMOs, see Godkända genetiskt modifierade växter, JORDBRUKSVERKET, 
http://www. 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
205 
jordbruksverket.se/amnesomraden/djur/foder/genteknikgmo/godkandagenetisktmodifieradevaxter.106.7c4ce2e
813d eda4d30780001930.html (last updated Apr. 15, 2013). 
67 
Genteknik 
och 
foder, 
JORDBRUKSVERKET, 
http://www.jordbruksverket.se/amnesomraden/ 
djur/foder/genteknik gmo.4.207049b811dd8a513dc80004212.html (last modified Apr. 16, 2013). 
68 Godkända genetiskt modifierade växter, JORDBRUKSVERKET, supra note 66. 
69 JORDBRUKSVERKET, GMO PÅ FODERMARKNADEN, Rapport 2009:17, http://webbutiken.jordbru 
ksverket.se/sv/ artiklar/gmo-pa-fodermarknaden.html. 
70 See Annual GMO project reports, available at http://www.slv.se/sv/grupp3/Rapporter/Genteknik/ (last visited 
Nov. 12, 2013). 
71 Id. 
72 See Svenskt Sigill och gentekniken, SVENSKT SIGILL (Mar. 26, 2013), http://www.svensktsigill.se/Om-
Sigill/Intres senter/Svenskt-Sigill-och-gentekniken/; KRAV, http://www.krav.se/ar-krav-certifierad-mat-fri-
fran-gmo. 
73 GENTEKNIKNÄMNDEN, Yttrande 2013-0417, Diarienr 034/2013-4.1.1 Bilaga 1, http://www.genteknik.se/ 
Uploads/ Files/034_2013_raps_MS8xRF3xGT73.pdf. 
74 Id. 
75 See SVENSKT SIGILL, supra note 72. 
76 Decision Nos. 040/2013-4.1.1, 034/2013-4.1.1, 007/2013-4.1.1, 007/2013-4.1.1, 005/2013-4.1.1, 004/2013-4.1.1, 
104/2012-4.1.1, and 103/2012-4.1.1, available at http://www.genteknik.se/sv/2013---yttranden. 
77 Genteknikens utveckling 2007-2012, GENTEKNIKNÄMNDEN, http://www.genteknik.se/sv/--2012 (last visited 
Nov. 12, 2013). 
78 Godkända genetiskt modifierade växter, JORDBRUKSVERKET, http://www.jordbruksverket.se/amnesomraden/ 
odling/genteknikgmo/kommersiellanvandning/godkanda.4.300b18bd13d103e79ef80002529.html (last updated 
July 31, 2013). 
79 
For 
more 
information 
on 
the 
potato, 
see 
Stärkelsepotatisen 
Amflora, 
JORDBRUKSVERKET, 
http://www.jordbruks 
verket.se/amnesomraden/odling/genteknikgmo/kommersiellanvandning/starkel 
spotatisenamflora.4.300b18bd13d103 e79ef80002589.html (last updated May 16, 2013). 
80 Id. 
81 
Godkända 
genetiskt 
modifierade 
växter, 
JORDBRUKSVERKET, 
http://www.jordbruksverket.se/ 
amnesomraden/djur/foder/genteknikgmo/godkandagenetisktmodifieradevaxter.106.7c4ce2e813deda4d 
30780001930.html (last updated Apr. 15, 2013). 
82 See List of 2013 field studies of GMO plants, Försök med genetiskt modifierade växter, JORDBRUKSVERKET, 
http://www.jordbruksverket.se/amnesomraden/odling/genteknikgmo/faltforsok/2013arsforsok.4.300b18bd13d
103e7 9ef80002609.html (last updated July 8, 2013). A list of all EU-approved GMOs can be found on the EU 
Register 
of 
Authorised 
GMOs, 
EUROPEAN 
COMMISSION, 
http://ec.europa.eu/food/dyna/gm_ 
register/index_en.cfm (last visited Nov. 12, 2013). 
83 ENVIRONMENTAL CODE ch. 29:4 § 1st h & i. 
84 Id. ch. 29:5 § 4. 
85 Id. ch. 29:9 §§ 5–8. 
86 Id. ch. 29:11. 
87 Id. ch. 29:12. 
88 See SKADESTÅNDSLAGEN [TORTS LIABILITY ACT] (SFS 1972:207). For a full discussion of the liability 
issue with regard to cultivation of GMO plants, see Statens Offentliga Utredningar [SOU] 2007: 46 
Ansvarsfrågan vid odling av genmodifierade grödor [government report series]. 
89 Case C-442/09, Karl Heinz Bablok and Others v. Freistaat Bayern (Sept. 6, 2011), http://curia.europa.eu/juris/ 
document/document.jsf?text=&docid=109143&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=lst&dir=&occ=first&part
=1&ci d=809490, case summary available at http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/legal_service/arrets/09c442_en.pdf. See 
also case discussion in EU survey, supra at 78. 
90 Marknadsdomstolen [Market Court], MD 2004:8, Mar. 24, 2004 (on file with author). 
91 Decision from Göta Court of Appeals, Jan. 15, 2013, No. ÖÄ 2956-12 (on file with author). 
 
 
 
 
 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
206 
End Notes for United States 
 
1 PEW INITIATIVE ON FOOD AND BIOTECHNOLOGY, GUIDE TO U.S. REGULATION OF 
GENETICALLY MODIFIED FOOD AND AGRICULTURAL BIOTECHNOLOGY PRODUCTS 6 (Sept. 
2001), http://www.pewtrusts.org/uploadedFiles/www pewtrustsorg/Reports/Food_and_Biotechnology/hhs_ 
biotech_0901.pdf. 
2 The Biotechnology Industry in the United States, SELECT USA, http://selectusa.commerce.gov/print/industry-
snapshots/biotechnology-industry-united-states (last visited Nov. 5, 2013) (stating there are 1300 firms and 1.3 
million employees in biosciences in the US, and 5.8 million employees in related industry sectors). 
3 INT’L SERV. FOR THE ACQUISITION OF AGRI-BIOTECH APPLICATIONS, ISAAA BRIEF NO. 44-2012, 
GLOBAL STATUS OF COMMERCIAL BIOTECH/GM CROPS, Executive Summary, http://www.isaaa.org/ 
resources/publications/briefs/44/ executivesummary/default.asp (last visited Nov. 5, 2013). 
4 Economic Research Service, Adoption of Genetically Engineered Crops in the US, Recent Trends in GE Adoption, 
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, http://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/adoption-
of-geneticallyengineered-crops-in-the-us/recent-trends-in-ge-adoption.aspx#.UobvBXL92Dk (July 9, 2013). 
5 Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity, Jan. 29, 2000, 39 I.L.M. 1027, 
http://bch.cbd.int/protocol/text/; Parties to the Protocol and Signature and Ratification of the Supplementary 
Protocol, CONVENTION ON BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY, http://bch.cbd.int/protocol/parties/ (last updated 
Sept. 10, 2012). 
6 Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs, Frequently Asked Questions on the 
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (CPB), U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE (Feb. 23, 2004), http://2001-
2009.state.gov/g/ oes/rls/or/2004/29751.htm. 
7 See, e.g., id. (noting participation as nonparty in first Meeting of the Parties to the Protocol). 
8 Memorandum from the Mellman Group to the Pew Initiative on Food and Biotechnology, Review of Public 
Opinion Research 1 (Nov. 16, 2006), http://www.pewtrusts.org/uploadedFiles/wwwpew trustsorg/ 
Public_Opinion/ Food_and_Biotechnology/2006summary.pdf. 
9 Id. at 3. 
10 Allison Kopicki, Strong Support for Labeling Modified Foods, N.Y. TIMES (July 27, 2013), http://www.nytimes. 
com/2013/07/28/science/strong-support-for-labeling-modified-foods.html; see also U.S. Polls on GE Food 
Labeling, 
CENTER 
FOR 
FOOD 
SAFETY, 
http://www.centerforfoodsafety.org/issues/976/ge-food-
labeling/us-polls-on-ge-foodlabeling# (last visited Nov. 12, 2013) (citing multiple polls showing support for 
mandatory labeling ranging from 93 to 96% percent). 
11 Kopicki, Strong Support for Labeling Modified Foods, supra note 10. 
12 COMMITTEE ON IDENTIFYING AND ASSESSING UNINTENDED EFFECTS OF GENETICALLY 
ENGINEERED FOODS ON HUMAN HEALTH, NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL, SAFETY OF 
GENETICALLY ENGINEERED FOODS: APPROACHES TO ASSESSING UNINTENDED HEALTH 
EFFECTS 180 (2004), http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?isbn=0309092094 (“[N]o adverse health effects 
attributed to genetic engineering have been documented in the human population.”); COMMITTEE ON 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS ASSOCIATED WITH COMMERCIALIZATION OF TRANSGENIC 
PLANTS, BOARD ON AGRICULTURE AND NATURAL RESOURCES, NATIONAL RESEARCH 
COUNCIL, ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS OF TRANSGENIC PLANTS: THE SCOPE AND ADEQUACY 
OF REGULATION 49 (2002), http://www.nap.edu/openbook. php?isbn=0309082633 (“The transgenic 
process presents no new categories of risk compared to conventional methods of crop improvement, but 
specific traits introduced by both approaches can pose unique risks.”) 
13 AAAS Issues Statement on Labeling of Genetically Modified Foods, CALIFORNIA COUNCIL ON SCIENCE 
AND TECHNOLOGY (Nov. 1, 2012), http://www.ccst.us/news/2012/1101aaas.php. (“[C]rop improvement 
by the modern molecular techniques of biotechnology is safe. . . . [C]onsuming foods containing ingredients 
derived from GM crops is no riskier than consuming the same foods containing ingredients from crop plants 
modified by conventional plant improvement techniques.”) 
14 American Medical Association, Policy No. H-480.958, Bioengineered (Genetically Engineered) Crops and 
Foods, http://www. ama-assn.org/resources/doc/PolicyFinder/policyfiles/HnE/H-480.958.HTM (last visited 
Nov. 10, 2013) (reaffirming prior conclusion that “no evidence that unique hazards exist either in the use of 
rDNA techniques or in the movement of genes between unrelated organisms”). 
15 See, e.g., Support Sustainable Agriculture, GREENPEACE USA, http://www.greenpeace.org/usa/en/campaigns/ 
genetic-engineering/ 
(last 
visited 
Nov. 
12, 
2013); 
Genetic 
Engineering, 
SIERRA 
CLUB, 
http://www.sierraclub. org/biotech/ (last visited Nov. 12, 2013). 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
207 
16 See, e.g., Policy, ORGANIC SEED GROWERS & TRADE ASSOCIATION, http://www.osgata.org/policy/ (last 
visited Nov. 12, 2013). 
17 See, e.g., Genetic 
Engineering 
and Biotechnology, ORGANIC CONSUMERS ASSOCIATION, 
http://www.organic consumers. org/gelink.cfm (last visited Nov. 12, 2013); GE Foods, CENTER FOR FOOD 
SAFETY, http://www.center forfoodsafety.org/issues/311/ge-foods (last visited Nov. 12, 2013). 
18 See, e.g., Gregory N. Mandel, Toward Rational Regulation of Genetically Modified Food, 4 SANTA CLARA J. 
INT’L L. 21 (2006), http://digitalcommons.law.scu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1015&context=scujil; 
Maria R. Lee-Muramoto, Reforming the “Uncoordinated” Framework for the Regulation of Biotechnology, 17 
DRAKE J. AGRIC. L. 311 (2013), available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2175622; 
Debra M. Strauss, Defying Nature: The Ethical Implications of Genetically Modified Plants, 3 J. FOOD L. & 
POL’Y 1 (2007), available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1302506; Sheryl Lawrence, 
What Would You Do With a Fluorescent Green Pig?: How Novel Transgenic Products Reveal Flaws in the 
Foundational Assumptions for the Regulation of Biotechnology, 34 ECOLOGY L.Q. 201 (2007), 
http://www.boalt.org/elq/documents/elq34-1-05- lawrence-2007-0430.pdf. 
19 Coordinated Framework, 51 FED. REG. 23,302 (June 26, 1986), available in manuscript format at http://www. 
aphis.usda.gov/brs/fedregister/coordinated_framework.pdf. 
20 Id. at 3 (PDF manuscript pagination). 
21 OSTP, Proposal for a Coordinated Framework for Regulation of Biotechnology, 49 FED. REG. 50,856 (Dec. 31, 
1984). 
22 Coordinated Framework, supra note 19, at 6–8. 
23 7 U.S.C. §§ 7701–7786 (2012), http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title7/chapter104& 
edition=prelim. 
24 7 U.S.C. § 7712(a) (2012), http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title7-section 
7712&num=0&edition=prelim. 
25 7 C.F.R. § 340.1 (2013), http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2013-title7-vol5/pdf/CFR-2013-title7-vol5-sec340- 
1.pdf. 
26 7 U.S.C. § 7711(a) (2012), http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title7-section7711& 
num=0&edition=prelim; 
7 
C.F.R. 
§ 
340.0 (2013), 
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2013-title7-
vol5/pdf/CFR2013-title7-vol5-sec340-0.pdf. 
27 7 C.F.R. § 340.3 (2013), http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2013-title7-vol5/pdf/CFR-2013-title7-vol5-sec340- 
3.pdf. 
28 7 C.F.R. § 340.3(b). 
29 7 C.F.R. § 340.3(c). 
30 7 C.F.R. § 340.3(e). 
31 7 C.F.R. § 340.3(e)(5). 
32 7 C.F.R. § 340.4(b) (2013), http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2013-title7-vol5/pdf/CFR-2013-title7-vol5- 
sec340-4.pdf. 
33 7 C.F.R. § 340.4(f). 
34 7 C.F.R. § 340.4(g). 
35 7 C.F.R. § 340.6 (2013), http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2013-title7-vol5/pdf/CFR-2013-title7-vol5-sec340- 
6.pdf. 
36 7 C.F.R. § 340.6(c). 
37 7 C.F.R. § 340.6(d). 
38 Id. 
39 
21 
U.S.C. 
§§ 
301–399f 
(2012), 
http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title21/chapter9& 
edition=prelim. 
40 21 U.S.C. § 342 (2012), http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title21-section342& 
num=0&edition=prelim. 
41 21 U.S.C. § 342(a). 
42 21 U.S.C. § 348 (2012), http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title21-section348& 
num=0&edition=prelim. 
43 21 U.S.C. § 321(s) (2012), http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title21-section321& 
num=0&edition=prelim. 
44 21 U.S.C. § 331 (2012), http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title21-section331& 
num=0&edition=prelim. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
208 
45 21 U.S.C. § 348 (2012), http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title21-section348& 
num=0&edition=prelim. 
46 21 U.S.C. § 321(s) (excluding substances from definition of “food additive” that are “generally recognized . . . to 
be safe.”). 
47 FDA, Statement of Policy: Foods Derived from New Plant Varieties, 57 Fed. Reg. 22,984 (May 29, 1992), 
available 
at 
http://www.fda.gov/Food/GuidanceRegulation/GuidanceDocumentsRegulatoryInformation/ 
Biotechnology/ucm096095.htm. 
48 FDA, Guidance on Consultation Procedures: Foods Derived from New Plant Varieties (rev. Oct. 1997), 
http://www.fda.gov/Food/GuidanceRegulation/GuidanceDocumentsRegulatoryInformation/Biotechnology/uc
m0961 26.htm. 
49 Id. 
50 FDA, Guidance for Industry: Recommendations for the Early Food Safety Evaluation of New Non-Pesticidal 
Proteins 
Produced 
by 
New 
Plant 
Varieties 
Intended 
for 
Food 
Use 
(June 
2006), 
http://www.fda.gov/Food/Guidance 
Regulation/GuidanceDocumentsRegulatoryInformation/Biotechnology/ 
ucm096156.htm. 
51 FDA, Completed Consultations on Bioengineered Foods, http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/fcn/fcn 
Navigation.cfm?rpt=bioListing (last updated May 31, 2013). 
52 FDA, Guidance for Industry: Regulation of Genetically Engineered Animals Containing Heritable rDNA 
Constructs (rev. May 17, 2011), http://www.fda.gov/downloads/AnimalVeterinary/GuidanceCompliance 
Enforcement/GuidanceforIndustry/UCM113903.pdf (hereinafter GE Animals Guidance). The FFDCA 
definition of “new animal drug” includes articles “intended to affect the structure or function of the body of . . 
. animals.” 21 
53 
21 
U.S.C. 
§ 
360b(a) 
(2012), 
http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title21-
section360b& num=0&edition=prelim. 
54 GE Animals Guidance, supra note 52, at 7–9. 
55 Id. at 9–12. 
56 Id. at 12–13. 
57 Id. at 14–20. 
58 21 C.F.R. § 314.50 (2013), http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2013-title21-vol5/pdf/CFR-2013-title21-vol5- 
sec314-50.pdf. 
59 42 U.S.C. §§ 262 to 263a-7 (2012), http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title42/chapter6A/ 
subchapter2/partF&edition=prelim. 
60 21 C.F.R. § 601.2 (2013), http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CFR-2013-title21-vol7/pdf/CFR-2013-title21-vol7- 
part601-subpartA.pdf. 
61 7 U.S.C. §§ 136–136y (2012), http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title7/chapter6/subchapter2 
&edition=prelim. 
62 7 U.S.C. § 136a(c)(5) (2012), http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title7-section136a 
&num=0&edition=prelim. 
63 7 U.S.C. § 136(bb) (2012), http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title7-section136& 
num=0&edition=prelim. 
64 7 U.S.C. § 136a(a) (2012). 
65 7 U.S.C. § 136a(c)(5) (2012). 
66 40 C.F.R. § 152.50 (2013), http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=9f032ce863baf7cb8c325ee059e49510 
&node=40:25.0.1.1.3&rgn=div5#40:25.0.1.1.3.3.1.6. 
67 40 C.F.R. pt. 174 (2013), http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=9f032ce863baf7cb8c325ee059e49510& 
node=40:25.0.1.1.23&rgn=div5. 
68 40 C.F.R. § 174.1 (2013), http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=c72e2a2a61e1ad7b08706bfe11c90051& 
node=40:25.0.1.1.23&rgn=div5#40:25.0.1.1.23.1.19.1 (“Unless otherwise superseded by this part, the 
regulations in parts 150 to 180 of this chapter apply to plant-incorporated protectants.”). 
69 40 C.F.R. § 174.21(b) (2013), http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=8263e366359fd60abf234c5e03b502f 
5&node=40:25.0.1.1.23&rgn=div5#40:25.0.1.1.23.2.19.1. 
70 40 C.F.R. § 174.21(c) (2013). 
71 40 C.F.R. § 174.25 (2013), http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=8263e366359fd60abf234c5e03b502f5& 
node=40:25.0.1.1.23&rgn=div5#40:25.0.1.1.23.2.19.2. 
72 40 C.F.R. § 174.71 (2013), http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=8263e366359fd60abf234c5e03b502f5& 
node=40:25.0.1.1.23&rgn=div5#40:25.0.1.1.23.4.19.1. 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
209 
73 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601–2695d (2012), http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title15/chapter53& 
edition=prelim. 
74 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a) (2012), http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title15-section 
2605&num=0&edition=prelim. 
75 15 U.S.C. § 2604 (2012), http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title15-section2604& 
num=0&edition=prelim. 
76 40 C.F.R. § 725.1(a) (2013), http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=7c33b229782bc824885546d25f6cf057& 
node=40:32.0.1.1.13&rgn=div5#40:32.0.1.1.13.1.1.1. 
77 40 C.F.R. § 725.100 (2013), http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=7c33b229782bc824885546d25f6cf057& 
node=40:32.0.1.1.13&rgn=div5#40:32.0.1.1.13.4.1.1. 
78 40 C.F.R. §§ 725.155, 725.160 (2013), http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=7c33b229782bc824885546d 
25f6cf057&node=40:32.0.1.1.13&rgn=div5#40:32.0.1.1.13.4.1.5. 
79 42 U.S.C. §§ 4321–4370h (2012), http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title42/chapter55& 
edition=prelim. 
80 40 C.F.R. § 1508.9 (2013), http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=d1401a6ba0ae88ac9dc35920b0670960& 
node=40:34.0.3.3.9&rgn=div5#40:34.0.3.3.9.0.29.9. 
81 40 C.F.R. §§ 1502.1–1502.25 (2013), http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=d1401a6ba0ae88ac9dc35920b 
0670960&node=40:34.0.3.3.3&rgn=div5. 
82 See, e.g., GE Animals Guidance, supra note 52, at 19 (describing EA requirement in New Animal Drug 
Application to enable FDA to either prepare an EIS or make a finding of no significant impact). 
83 Doug Farquhar & Liz Meyer, State Authority to Regulate Biotechnology Under the Federal Coordinated 
Framework, 12 DRAKE J. AGRIC. L. 439, 461–71 (2007), http://students.law.drake.edu/aglaw 
journal/docs/agVol12 No3-Farquhar.pdf. 
84 FDA Statement Regarding GloFish (Dec. 9, 2003), http://www.fda.gov/AnimalVeterinary/Development 
ApprovalProcess/GeneticEngineering/GeneticallyEngineeredAnimals/ucm161437.htm (“In the absence of a 
clear risk to the public health, FDA finds no reason to regulate these particular fish.”). 
85 Kenneth R. Weiss, State Takes Dim View of GloFish, Bans Sale, L.A. TIMES (Dec. 4, 2003), 
http://articles.latimes. com/2003/dec/04/local/me-glofish4. 
86 
MARIN 
COUNTY, 
CAL. 
CODE 
ch. 
6.92 
(2013), 
available 
at 
http://library.municode.com/ 
index.aspx?clientID=16476 (select title 6, then select chapter 6.92); MENDOCINO COUNTY, CAL. CODE 
ch. 10A.15 (2013), available at http://library.municode.com/index.aspx?clientId=16484 (select title 10A, then 
select chapter 10A.15). 
87 Andrew Pollack, Limits Approved for Genetically Modified Crops in Kauai, Hawaii, N.Y. TIMES (Oct. 16, 
2013), 
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/17/business/limits-approved-for-genetically-modified-crops-in-
kauai-hawaii. html?_r=0; Christopher D’Angelo, Hawaiian Islands Take More Steps to Limit Spread of GMO 
Crops, 
REUTERS 
(Dec. 
6, 
2013), 
http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/12/07/usa-gmos-hawaii-
idUSL2N0JL1RL20131207. The Hawaii County ordinance permits GM papaya to be grown on the island. Id. 
88 S. 809, 113th Cong. (2013), http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS-113 s809is/pdf/BILLS-113s809is.pdf. 
89 Mark Lifsher, Prop. 37 Backers Vow to Continue Food Regulation Efforts, L.A. TIMES (Nov. 7, 2012), 
http://articles.latimes.com/2012/nov/07/business/la-fi-prop37-genetic-food-labeling-20121108; 
Stephanie 
Strom, Food Companies Claim Victory Against Labeling Initiative in Washington State, N.Y. TIMES (Nov. 6, 
2013), 
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/07/us/politics/food-companies-claim-victory-against-labeling-
initiative-inwashington-state.html. 
90 FDA, Statement of Policy: Foods Derived from New Plant Varieties, supra note 47, § VI, Labeling. 
91 7 U.S.C. § 7734 (2012), http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title7-section7734& 
num=0&edition=prelim. 
92 7 U.S.C. § 7734(a)(1)(B) (2012). 
93 21 U.S.C. § 333 (2012), http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title21-section333& 
num=0&edition=prelim. 
94 7 U.S.C. § 136l (2012), http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title7-section136l& 
num=0&edition=prelim (civil and criminal penalties for violating FIFRA); 15 U.S.C. § 2615 (2012), 
http://uscode. house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title15-section2615&num=0&edition=prelim 
(civil and criminal penalties for violating TSCA). 
95 Diamond v. Chakrabarty, 447 U.S. 303 (1980), available at http://laws.findlaw.com/us/447/303.html. 

Staff of the Global Legal Research Center 
210 
96 Douglas Robinson & Nina Medlock, Diamond v. Chakrabarty: A Retrospective on 25 Years of Biotech Patents, 
INTELL. PROP. & TECH. L.J., Oct. 2005, at 12, available at http://www.bannerwitcoff.com/_ 
docs/library/articles/ Chakrabarty.pdf. 
97 Monsanto Co. v. Geertson Seed Farms, 130 S. Ct. 2743 (2010), slip op. available at http://www.supremecourt. 
gov/opinions/09pdf/09-475.pdf. 
98 Id., slip op. at 2–6. 
99 Id., slip op. at 16–24. 
100 Alliance for Bio-Integrity v. Shalala, 116 F. Supp. 2d 166 (D.D.C. 2000), available at http://scholar.google. 
com/scholar_case?case=9837177635976803502&q=116+F.+Supp.+2d+166+&hl=en&as_sdt=20006. 
101 See discussion supra, Part III(B)(1). 
102 See discussion supra, Part IV(D). 
103 Alliance for Bio-Integrity v. Shalala, 166 F. Supp. 2d at 177. 
104 Id. at 178–79. 
105 See, e.g., Center For Food Safety v. Vilsack, 636 F.3d 1166 (9th Cir. 2011), slip op. available at 
http://cdn.ca9.us courts.gov/datastore/opinions/2011/03/03/10-17719.pdf (in case challenging APHIS’s 
deregulation of Roundup Ready sugar beets, finding absence of irreparable harm to justify injunction); Center 
For 
Food 
Safety 
v. 
Vilsack, 
718 
F.3d 
829 
(9th 
Cir. 
2013), 
slip 
op. 
available 
at 
http://cdn.ca9.uscourts.gov/datastore/opinions/2013/ 05/17/12- 15052.pdf (in case challenging APHIS’s 
deregulation of Roundup Ready alfalfa, deferring to agency determination that RRA was not a “plant pest”). 
 
 
End Notes for International Protocols 
 
1 
The 
Cartagena 
Protocol 
on 
Biosafety, 
CONVENTION 
ON 
BIOLOGICAL 
DIVERSITY, 
http://bch.cbd.int/protocol/; Protocol text in English, http://bch.cbd.int/protocol/text/ (both last visited Oct. 24, 
2013). 
2 Convention on Biological Diversity, June 5, 1992, in force Dec. 29, 1993, 1760 U.N.T.S. 79, 
http://www.cbd.int/convention/text/default.shtml. 
3 EXCOP 1 Decision EM-I/3, Adoption of the Cartagena Protocol and Interim Arrangements, 
http://www.cbd.int/decision/cop/default.shtml?id=7174 (last visited Sept. 30, 2013). 
4 The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, supra note 1. 
5 Parties to the Protocol and Signature and Ratification of the Supplementary Protocol, CONVENTION ON 
BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY, http://bch.cbd.int/protocol/parties/ (last visited Sept. 19, 2013). 
6 Introduction, Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, supra note 1. 
7 EXCOP 1 Decision EM-I/3, § II no. 5, supra note 3. 
8 Id.; About the Protocol: History, CONVENTION ON BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY, http://bch.cbd.int/protocol/ 
background/#history (last visited Sept. 20, 2013). 
9 Cartagena Protocol art. 1. 
10 Id. art. 3(g). 
11 Id. art. 3(i). 
12 Id. arts. 4-6. 
13 Rio Declaration of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Principle 15 (June 14, 
1992), http://www.un.org/documents/ga/conf151/aconf15126-1annex1.htm. 
14 For an example of a discussion of the role of the precautionary principle in balancing these conflicting interests, 
see John S. Applegate, The Prometheus Principle: Using the Precautionary Principle to Harmonize the 
Regulation of Genetically Modified Organisms, 9 INDIANA J. GLOBAL LEGAL STUD. 207 (2001). 
15 Ruth Mackenzie, The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety and the Development of International Environmental 
Law, THE INTERNATIONAL POLITICS OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED FOOD: DIPLOMACY, TRADE 
AND LAW 213, 217 (2007). 
16 World Trade Organization, European Communities – Measures Affecting the Approval and Marketing of Biotech 
Products: Panel Report, Dispute 291 (2006), http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/ dispu_e/cases_e/ds291_e. 
htm, discussed in Marie-Claire Cordonier Segger & Markus Gehring, Trade and Investment Implications of 
Implementing the Cartagena Protocol, LEGAL ASPECTS OF IMPLEMENTING THE CARTAGENA 
PROTOCOL ON BIOSAFETY 471, 482 (2013). 
17 Cartagena Protocol, arts. 6-8. 

Restrictions on Genetically Modified Organisms 
211 
18 Id. art 10 § 3. 
19 Mackenzie, supra note 15, at 214; see Cartagena Protocol arts. 15 & 16, for provisions on risk assessment. 
20 Cartagena Protocol art. 17 § 1. 
21 Id. art. 20 § 1. 
22 Id. art. 19. 
23 Id. art. 18. 
24 Id. art. 25. 
25 Press Release, The Nagoya – Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on Liability and Redress to the Cartagena 
Protocol on Biosafety (Oct. 16, 2010), http://bch.cbd.int/protocol/nkl_pressrelease.shtml; Supplementary 
Protocol text, http://bch.cbd.int/protocol/nkl_text.shtml (last visited Sept. 19, 2013); René Lefeber, The Legal 
Significance of the Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol: The Result of a Paradigm Evolution, 
Amsterdam 
Law 
School 
Research 
Paper 
No. 
2012-87 
(Sept. 
24, 
2012), 
available 
at 
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm? abstract_id=2151282. 
26 The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, and its Nagoya—Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on Liability and 
Redress, CONVENTION ON BIODIVERSITY, http://www.cbd.int/undb/media/factsheets/undb-factsheet-
biosafety-en.pdf (last visited Oct. 23, 2013); Supplementary Protocol, art. 18. 
27 Press Release, supra note 25. 
28 René Lefebar, The Legal Significance of the Nagoya-Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol: The Result of a 
Paradigm Evolution, Centre for Environmental Law & Sustainability Research Paper No. 2012-02, 
Amsterdam Law School Research Paper No. 2012-87 (2012), available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=2151282 
(click on “Download This Paper”). 
29 Supplementary Protocol art. 1. 
30 Id. art. 2 § 2 (b) & art. 3. 
31 Id. art. 2 § 3. 
32 Lefebar, supra note 28, at § 2. 
33 Id. 
34 Supplementary Protocol art. 11. 
35 Id. art. 4. 
36 Id. art. 5. 
37 Id. art. 6. 
38 Id. arts. 6 & 7. 
39 Id. art. 12. 
40 Id. arts. 13–14. 
 


In: Genetically Modified Organisms 
ISBN: 978-1-63484-287-7 
Editor: Morris Bishop 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 
 
 
 
LEGAL ISSUES WITH FEDERAL LABELING  
OF GENETICALLY ENGINEERED FOOD: IN BRIEF∗ 
 
 
Emily M. Lanza 
 
 
SUMMARY 
 
Genetically engineered (GE) foods, sometimes referred to as genetically modified 
foods (GMO foods), are foods that are derived from scientific methods used to introduce 
new traits or characteristics to an organism. The labeling of GE foods has been the 
subject of debate among members of the general public and federal and state 
governments since the introduction of GE foods to the food supply in the 1990s. 
Federal law does not impose specific labeling requirements on a food just because it 
may or may not contain GE ingredients or was derived using GE techniques. The Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) has yet to issue formal regulations and policies on the 
labeling of GE food. However, this absence of direct federal regulation does not mean 
that GE foods are free from any federal oversight. Instead, labels of GE foods follow the 
same federal labeling requirements and guidelines outlined in the Federal Food, Drug, 
and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) as non-GE foods. These labeling requirements prohibit false 
or misleading labels and address material information that may be relevant to the 
consumption of that food. However, some states have enacted laws that specifically 
demand manufacturers disclose the presence of GE ingredients in certain foods on the 
label. The United States Department of Agriculture’s (USDA’s) oversight over organic 
meat and poultry products involves the regulation of GE ingredients. However, the 
discussion of such oversight is beyond the scope of this report. 
In the context of this regulatory ambiguity, consumer claims in litigation concerning 
GE food often focus on allegedly misleading or deceptive terms on the label when the 
food contains GE ingredients. Defendants in these cases typically make a motion to 
dismiss the case on the basis of deference to the FDA’s expertise in this area as 
articulated in the primary jurisdiction doctrine. However, courts have not consistently 
interpreted the primary jurisdiction doctrine (court deference to an agency when deciding 
an issue of first impression) in the context of GE labeling. This inconsistency has created 
further ambiguity concerning the broader issue of when courts should defer to the FDA’s 
                                                        
∗ This is an edited, reformatted and augmented version of a Congressional Research Service publication R43705, 
prepared for Members and Committees of Congress, dated September 22, 2015. 

Emily M. Lanza 
214 
expertise if the FDA has repeatedly declined to take action on a particular regulatory 
issue. 
Several bills have been introduced in the 114th Congress that address labeling of GE 
foods, including Genetically Engineered Food Right-to-Know Act (H.R. 913, S. 511) and 
Safe and Accurate Food Labeling Act of 2015 (H.R. 1599). Generally these bills would 
amend the FFDCA to impose specific labeling requirements disclosing information about 
GE techniques used in the production of a particular food product. 
 
The labeling of genetically engineered (GE) foods, sometimes referred to as genetically 
modified foods (GMO foods), has been the subject of debate among members of the general 
public and federal and state governments. Certain state legislatures have responded to public 
demand for GE labeling by enacting state laws requiring such a labeling scheme. The Federal 
Food, Drug, & Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) does not impose specific labeling requirements on a 
food just because it may or may not contain GE ingredients or was derived using GE 
techniques. Additionally, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has yet to issue formal 
regulations and policies on the labeling of GE food. 
However, this absence of direct federal regulation does not mean that GE foods are free 
from any federal oversight. Instead, labels of GE foods follow the same federal labeling 
requirements and guidelines outlined in the FFDCA and implementing regulations as non-GE 
foods. Despite this regulation, parties have brought claims against manufacturers of GE foods 
alleging that such products are mislabeled as “natural.” But, the courts, when faced with these 
claims, have inconsistently balanced the expectations of consumers and manufacturers with 
deference to FDA expertise in the context of GE food labeling. The United States Department 
of Agriculture (USDA)’s oversight over organic meat and poultry products involves the 
regulation of GE ingredients. However, the discussion of such oversight is beyond the scope 
of this report. 
This report analyzes the federal laws and policies impacting the labeling of GE foods and 
the legal ambiguities that have arisen in the courts concerning this area of regulation. The 
report begins with a brief discussion about GE foods and the wider controversy of consuming 
foods derived from these techniques. The report then examines the current federal regulatory 
framework for food labeling and how these provisions may impact the labeling of GE foods. 
Next, the report analyzes legal issues relating to judicial deference to the FDA when claims 
involving the labeling of GE foods appear in court. The report concludes with a discussion 
about legislation introduced during the 114th Congress that would impose federal labeling 
requirements for GE foods. 
 
 
GENETICALLY ENGINEERED FOODS 
 
“Genetic engineering” refers to the scientific methods “use[d] to introduce new traits or 
characteristics to an organism.”1 These procedures can create a tolerance to herbicides, 
promote resistance to viruses, increase yields, and alter acidic content.2 “Genetically 
engineered foods” (GE foods), also referred to as “genetically modified foods” (GMO 
foods),3 are foods that are derived from these methods or include ingredients that are derived 
from these methods. Food and ingredients from GE plants were first introduced into the food 
supply in the mid-1990s.4 Common GE plants include corn, canola, soybean, and cotton. 

Legal Issues with Federal Labeling of Genetically Engineered Food: In Brief 
215
These plants, in the form of cornstarch, corn syrup, canola oil, and soybean oil, are used as 
ingredients in common food products, such as salad dressings, cereals, soups, breads, and 
snack foods. 
The FDA has found that GE foods are generally as nutritious as traditionally bred plants.5 
The World Health Organization has reported that GE foods currently on the market are not 
likely to present human health risks.6 However, some members of the public generally oppose 
GE foods and have demanded specific labeling requirements for food products containing GE 
ingredients.7 
 
 
LABELING REQUIREMENTS IMPACTING GE FOODS 
 
Federal law does not impose specific labeling requirements on food just because it may 
or may not contain GE ingredients or was derived using GE techniques. Labels of GE foods 
follow the same federal labeling requirements and guidelines outlined in the FFDCA as non-
GE foods. The FDA has issued informal policy statements emphasizing its position that 
specific labeling requirements for GE foods are unnecessary because the general labeling 
provisions in the FFDCA will guide and protect consumers. However, some states have 
enacted laws that specifically demand manufacturers disclose the presence of GE ingredients 
in certain foods on the label. 
This section first examines the federal statutory requirements that the FDA has 
highlighted as particularly relevant to the labeling of GE foods. The section then reviews the 
informal policy statements issued by the FDA concerning GE food labeling and the state laws 
enacted to address this particular issue. The section concludes with a brief discussion about 
the use of the word “natural” on GE food labels. 
 
 
The Federal Food, Drug, & Cosmetic Act 
 
While the FFDCA does not differentiate between GE and non-GE foods regarding 
labeling requirements, the FDA has specifically highlighted Sections 403 and 201 as 
provisions that may potentially impact the labeling of GE foods. These sections enable the 
FDA to expressly require that specific information must appear on the food label.8 Sections 
403 and 201 were both enacted in 1938 before GE foods entered the food supply.9 
In prohibiting misbranded foods, Section 403 enables consumers to choose foods wisely 
by ensuring that the labels communicate essential and accurate information. Section 403(a) 
states that a food is misbranded if its labeling is false or misleading in any particular.10 Section 
403(i) requires each ingredient listed in the label’s ingredient statement to bear the common or 
usual name.11 Therefore, under these sections, if a GE food is significantly different from its 
traditional counterpart such that the common name no longer adequately describes the GE 
food, the name or the label should describe this difference; otherwise the label may mislead the 
consumer.12 
Similarly, Section 201(n) states that a label is misleading if it fails to reveal facts that are 
material in the light of representations made on the label, or in light of consequences that may 
result from the use of the food.13 The legislative history reveals little about the meaning or 

Emily M. Lanza 
216 
scope of “material” in this provision. In the past, the FDA has required specific labeling on 
the basis of it being “material” information if the absence of such information would “(1) 
pose special health or environmental risks ... ; (2) mislead the consumer in light of other 
statements made on the label ... ; or (3) in cases where a consumer may assume that a food, 
because of its similarity to another food, has nutritional ... , or functional characteristics of the 
food it resembles when in fact it does not.”14 
The FDA has concluded that the presence of GE ingredients/methods itself is not material 
information requiring explicit disclosure on a food label because “the agency is not aware of 
any information showing that foods derived by [GE] methods differ from other foods in any 
meaningful or uniform way.”15 However, the FDA has highlighted scenarios where GE food 
may differ from its traditional counterparts in some fashion such as a different nutritional 
property.16 According to the FDA, this difference, but not the fact that GE was used, may be 
material to the consumer under Section 201(n). For example, if the GE food includes an 
allergen that the consumers would not expect to be present based on the name of the food, the 
presence of that allergen must be disclosed on the label as “material” information, enabling 
the consumer to avoid certain health risks.17 
 
“Natural” Labels 
The use of the word “natural” on labels of GE foods is often the source of deceptive and 
misleading legal complaints. Similar to the term “genetically engineered foods,” neither the 
FFDCA nor the corresponding regulations directly define “natural” in the labeling context. 
The FDA has issued an informal policy that ultimately defines “natural” through exclusion. 
According to the FDA, “natural” on a food label “mean[s] that nothing artificial or synthetic 
(including all color additives regardless of source) has been included in, or been added to, a 
food that would not normally be expected to be in the food.”18 The FDA has declined to 
establish a formal definition for “natural” through rulemaking.19 
 
 
FDA Policy 
 
The FDA has not yet adopted a formal policy on the labeling of GE food, but has issued 
nonbinding guidance on this topic in 1992 and 2001. 
The FDA’s 1992 policy statement addressed foods derived from new plant varieties, 
including plants developed using GE techniques.20 This policy statement responded to 
requests received by the FDA from industry representatives, other government agencies, 
academia, and the general public, seeking clarification about the regulation of foods derived 
using GE techniques.21 Under this policy, foods derived from GE are “regulated within the 
existing framework of the [FFDCA], the FDA’s implementing regulations, and current 
practice, utilizing an approach identical in principle to that applied to foods developed by 
traditional plant breeding.”22 The FDA supported this position on GE regulation by 
emphasizing that the regulatory status of any food depends upon certain objective 
characteristics and the intended use of the food, irrespective of the method by which the food 
was developed.23 
In 2001, the FDA issued draft guidance reaffirming its position that GE foods do not 
require special labeling.24 The 2001 statement, however, also acknowledged public comments 
on the 1992 policy that emphasized the need for more information available to consumers 

Legal Issues with Federal Labeling of Genetically Engineered Food: In Brief 
217
about GE foods.25 Responding to this request, the FDA’s 2001 guidance encourages 
manufacturers to voluntarily label food products that have or have not been developed using 
GE “so that the labeling statement is truthful, not misleading, and scientifically valid” as 
already required by FFDCA provisions on food labeling.26 
 
 
State Laws 
 
Several states have recently passed laws imposing specific labeling requirements on GE 
food.27 Enacted in 2013; Connecticut’s Act Concerning the Labeling of Genetically-
Engineered Food provides that certain food items are misbranded unless labeled as “Produced 
with Genetic Engineering.”28 These foods include wholesale and retail food, raw agricultural 
commodities, and seeds or seed stock that are, or may have been, at least partially produced 
by GE. 
In 2014, Maine enacted Act to Protect Maine Food Consumers’ Right to Know about 
Genetically Engineered Food and Seed Stock, which requires any GE food or seed stock to be 
labeled as “Produced with Genetic Engineering.”29 GE foods that do not follow this 
requirement are subject to sanctions for misbranding. The act exempts restaurants, alcoholic 
beverages, and medical food from these labeling requirements.30 
Enacted in 2014, Vermont’s Act Relating to the Labeling of Food Produced With Genetic 
Engineering requires food that was produced either entirely or partially by GE to be labeled as 
such.31 Labeling may include the phrases: “partially produced with genetic engineering,” “may 
be produced with genetic engineering,” or “produced with genetic engineering.” The act also 
prohibits manufacturers from labeling the food as “natural” if produced entirely or in part 
from GE.32 Foods exempted from these requirements include alcoholic beverages, processed 
food with GE materials that do not account for more than 0.9% of the food’s total weight, 
medical food, and food served in restaurants.33 
Vermont’s GE labeling act will take effect on July 1, 2016.34 However, both the 
Connecticut and Maine statutes contain a provision stating that the state will not enforce the 
labeling requirements outlined in the respective acts until a requisite number of states pass 
similar legislation.35 These state laws raise various legal issues, such as whether the state 
labeling requirements violate the First Amendment rights of the manufacturers; whether the 
state laws are preempted by federal labeling requirements; and whether these laws place an 
impermissible burden on interstate commerce. Trade organizations have filed a lawsuit 
challenging the constitutionality of Vermont’s labeling law on these and other grounds.36 
However, potential legal issues with these state laws are beyond the scope of the report. 
 
 
LITIGATION & LABELING OF GE FOODS 
 
Consumer claims in litigation concerning GE food often focus on allegedly misleading or 
deceptive terms on the label when the food contains GE ingredients. Defendants in these 
cases typically make a motion to dismiss the case based on deference to the FDA’s expertise 
in this area as articulated in the primary jurisdiction doctrine. However, courts have not 
consistently interpreted the primary jurisdiction doctrine in the context of GE labeling, 

Emily M. Lanza 
218 
creating some ambiguity as to when courts should defer to the FDA’s expertise if the FDA 
has repeatedly declined to take action on this particular labeling issue. 
Consumers tend to bring these legal claims under state unfair competition laws and not 
the FFDCA, despite similarities in statutory language, because the FFDCA prohibits private 
litigants from suing to enforce compliance with the statute. Only the federal government may 
enforce the provisions under the FFDCA.37 
This section begins with an explanation of the primary jurisdiction doctrine and the 
factors a court considers when applying this doctrine. Then, this section examines the role of 
the primary jurisdiction doctrine in cases where consumers have brought misleading and 
deceptive labeling claims against a defendant’s use of the term “natural” on GE foods labels. 
 
 
Primary Jurisdiction Doctrine 
 
Courts invoke the primary jurisdiction doctrine when a controversy requires an agency’s 
expertise and uniformity of ruling. The primary jurisdiction doctrine permits courts to stay 
proceedings or dismiss a complaint without prejudice “if a claim ‘requires resolution of an 
issue of first impression, or of a particularly complicated issue that Congress has committed 
to a regulatory agency.’”38 Usually technical or policy issues that should be addressed in the 
first instance by the agency to which Congress has granted that particular regulatory authority 
trigger the primary jurisdiction doctrine.39 
Courts weigh four factors when determining whether to apply this doctrine: “(1) the need to 
resolve an issue that (2) has been placed by Congress within the jurisdiction of an administrative 
body having regulatory authority (3) pursuant to a statute that subjects an industry or activity to 
a comprehensive regulatory authority that (4) requires expertise or uniformity in 
administration.”40 After a court has invoked the primary jurisdiction doctrine, the court may 
“refer” the issue to the relevant agency. This referral permits parties to then seek an 
administrative ruling.41 However, a formal transfer mechanism between the court and the 
administrative agency does not exist as it is the parties’ responsibility to initiate the 
administrative proceeding.42 
 
 
Application of the Primary Jurisdiction Doctrine to GE Food  
Labeling Claims 
 
Lawsuits brought by consumers against manufacturers of GE foods generally focus on 
the allegedly misleading use of the word “natural” on labels of GE foods. Consumers claim 
that the use of “natural” and similar phrases such as “100% natural” are misleading under 
state unfair competition laws because the food contains GE ingredients, which, according to 
the claimants, are not “natural.”43 In these suits, defendants often file motions to dismiss 
based upon the doctrine of primary jurisdiction. Courts, however, have inconsistently applied 
this doctrine to these types of claims. While courts have at times deferred to the FDA and 
dismissed or stayed the proceedings, in other cases courts have found that the primary 
jurisdiction doctrine does not apply to natural/GE misleading claims, for primarily two 
reasons: (1) the misleading/deceptive claims are legal questions within the province of the 

Legal Issues with Federal Labeling of Genetically Engineered Food: In Brief 
219
courts and not the FDA, and (2) the FDA has refused to consider referrals by the courts to the 
agency in the past. 
The primary jurisdiction doctrine triggers deference to the agency when the claim 
involves an issue of first impression more appropriately considered by the agency with its 
expertise in that particular area. Courts, which have refused to invoke this doctrine in GE 
labeling cases, have generally maintained that questions of deceptive labeling belong in the 
courts, and do not involve the expertise of the FDA as the questions are legal in nature 
requiring consideration of whether the defendant has violated a particular law. For example, 
in Bohac v. General Mills, Inc., the plaintiff brought a class action suit against General Mills 
claiming that the company’s inclusion of “100% Natural” on its products’ labeling was 
deceptive and misleading under California unfair competition laws because of the presence of 
GE ingredients.44 General Mills moved to stay the case on the grounds that the FDA has 
primary jurisdiction over the term “natural.” The court disagreed, stating that defining 
“natural” is not an issue of first impression.45 The court further explained that “determining 
whether a term is false or misleading is within the province of the courts” and does not 
require the expertise of the FDA.46 Reaching a similar conclusion, the court in Ault v. J.J. 
Smucker Co. stated that a definition of “natural” from the FDA would not necessarily help to 
determine whether the consumer is deceived by “All Natural” on the food label when 
evaluating the plaintiff’s claim.47 Similarly, the court in Rojas v. General Mills, Inc. stated 
that the FDA’s position on certain food labels may be relevant to the analysis of consumer 
deception, but it is not the “sole or dispositive factor.”48 
As discussed above, when a court finds that the agency has primary jurisdiction over a 
particular issue, the court will “refer” the case to the agency. However, the FDA’s refusal to 
consider similar referrals in the past has discouraged certain courts from referring misleading 
“natural” claims. For example, in Re Frito-Lay North America, Inc., the plaintiff claimed that 
Frito-Lay products were deceptively labeled as “All Natural” when the products contained 
GE ingredients.49 Frito-Lay responded that the case should be dismissed or stayed pending a 
referral to the FDA pursuant to the primary jurisdiction doctrine.50 The court disagreed and 
declined to apply the primary jurisdiction doctrine because the “FDA is unlikely to respond in 
a timely manner to any referral from this [c]ourt.”51 The court in Ault v. J.J. Smucker Co. 
expanded upon this position, declaring that FDA’s past refusals of a referral for the plaintiff’s 
particular claim weighs against the court’s invocation of the doctrine of primary 
jurisdiction.52 
Despite the arguments that these misleading claims are legal questions for the courts to 
consider, at least one court has deferred to the agency’s authority in this area. In Cox v. 
Gruma Corp., the plaintiff brought a class action suit alleging that the defendant’s labeling of 
its food was false and misleading because the defendant indicated that the food was “natural,” 
when it contained corn grown from GE seeds.53 The court dismissed the case on primary 
jurisdiction grounds finding that the FDA has regulatory authority over food labeling as 
granted by Congress.54 Citing the Ninth Circuit decision in Pom Wonderful v. Coca-Cola, the 
court deferred to the FDA regulatory authority in this area.55 Nevertheless, the court 
recognized that there is a regulatory “gaping hole” regarding natural claims and GE foods, 
where further clarification from the FDA may help both consumers and manufacturers.56 
When making the motion to dismiss under the primary jurisdiction doctrine, defendants in 
these cases have argued that the primary jurisdiction doctrine should apply as the agency should 
receive deference in the food labeling area. The defendants in Rojas v. General Mills and Cox v. 

Emily M. Lanza 
220 
Gruma cite the Ninth Circuit decision of Pom Wonderful v. Coca-Cola, in which the court 
deferred to the FDA and its authority and expertise in food labeling, as support for their 
motions to dismiss.57 The U.S. Supreme Court, in June 2014, overturned the Ninth Circuit 
decision in Pom Wonderful v. Coca-Cola,58 holding that FDA regulation in the particular area 
of juice labeling does not extend deference to the FDA that would preclude a competitor from 
bringing a federal unfair competition claim.59 At the time of this report, it is unclear how the 
Court’s holding in this case will impact GE food labeling and lower court deference to the 
FDA when the FDA has not yet promulgated specific regulations regarding these types of 
labels. 
 
 
LEGISLATION IN THE 114
TH CONGRESS 
 
Several bills have also been introduced in the 114th Congress that address labeling of GE 
foods. 
The Genetically Engineered Food Right-to-Know Act would amend the FFDCA to 
classify any food as misbranded that has been GE or contains one or more GE ingredients, 
unless such information is clearly disclosed.60 The bill would exempt any food that (1) is 
served in restaurants or other similar eating establishments, (2) is a medical food, (3) would 
be subject to such requirement solely because it was produced using a GE vaccine, or (4) 
would be subject to such requirement solely because it includes the use of a GE processing 
aid or enzyme.61 The bill defines “genetically engineered” food as a material intended for 
human consumption that is an organism produced through the intentional use of GE, or the 
progeny of intended sexual or asexual reproduction (or both) of organisms that are the 
product of GE.62 
The Safe and Accurate Food Labeling Act of 2015 would establish different certification 
programs and labeling requirements under the oversight of both the FDA and the USDA.63 
First, Section 101 of the bill would direct the FDA to continue its current premarket 
consultation process for food derived from new plant varieties, including GE plants.64 Under 
the bill, the FDA may require that the labeling of food produced from, containing, or 
consisting of a GE plant display a statement to inform consumers of a difference between 
food so produced and a comparable non-genetically engineered food.65 Under this proposed 
requirement, the FDA may require such labeling if the agency has determined that there is a 
material difference between the two foods and the disclosure of such difference is necessary 
to protect public health or to prevent the label from being false or misleading. Additionally, 
the bill would amend the Plant Protection Act66 to create a notification program requiring 
those who plan to introduce into interstate commerce GE plants for the use of food to notify 
the Secretary of Health and Human Services, who must then evaluate the food under the 
premarket consultation process described above. The bill would then require the entity to 
submit the evaluation to the Secretary of Agriculture.67 The bill’s Section 201 would establish 
a voluntary GE food certification program within the USDA to govern label claims with 
respect to the use or non-use of GE in the production and process of food.68 Section 301 of 
the bill would amend Section 403 of the FFDCA to deem a food misbranded if its labeling 
contains an express or implied claim that food is “natural” unless the claim uses terms that 

Legal Issues with Federal Labeling of Genetically Engineered Food: In Brief 
221
have been defined by regulations promulgated by the FDA.69 The bill also contains several 
provisions that would impact a state’s regulation of GE food labeling.70 
 
 
End Notes 
 
1 FDA, “Questions & Answers on Food from Genetically Engineered Plants,” http://www.fda.gov/food/ 
foodscienceresearch/biotechnology/ucm346030.htm (last visited Aug. 11, 2014) [hereinafter “FDA, Q & A”]. 
2 Valery Federici, Genetically Modified Food and Informed Consumer Choice: Comparing U.S. and E.U. Labeling 
Laws, 35 BROOK. J. INT’L L. 515, 523 (2010). 
3 The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) considers “genetic engineering” to be a more precise term than 
“genetic modification.” This report will generally use variations of the term “genetic engineering.” FDA, Q & 
A, supra note 1. 
4 Federici, supra note 2, at 520. 
5 FDA, Q & A, supra note 1. 
6 World Health Organization, “20 Questions on Genetically Modified Foods,” http://www.who.int/foodsafety/ 
publications/biotech/20questions/en/ (last visited Aug. 19, 2014). 
7 For example, the Center for Food Safety, a national nonprofit advocacy organization, has petitioned Congress and 
state legislatures to require mandatory labeling of GE foods. The organization has reported that over 1.4 
million people have submitted comments in support of the petition. Center for Food Safety, “GE Food 
Labeling: States Take Action,” http://www.centerforfoodsafety.org/issues/976/ge-food-labeling/fact-sheets/ 
3067/ge-food-labeling-states-take-action (last visited Aug. 11, 2014). The Non-GMO Project, a nonprofit 
organization, reports that more than 60 countries do not consider GE foods to be safe. Non-GMO Project, 
“GMO Facts,” http://www.nongmoproject.org/learn-more/ (last visited Aug. 11, 2014). 
8 Draft Guidance for Industry: Voluntary Labeling Indicating Whether Foods Have or Have Not Been Developed 
Using Bioengineering, 66 Fed. Reg. 4839-42 (Jan. 18, 2001) [hereinafter 2001 Policy]. 
9 P.L. 75-717, The Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (1938), 52 Stat. 1040. 
10 21 U.S.C. §343(a). 
11 21 U.S.C. §343(i). 
12 See 2001 Policy, 66 Fed. Reg. 4839. 
13 21 U.S.C. §321(n). 
14 FDA, “Draft Guidance For Industry: Voluntary Labeling Indicating Whether Foods Have or Have Not Been 
Developed Using Bioengineering,” http://www.fda.gov/food/guidanceregulation/ guidancedocumentsre 
gulatoryinformation/labelingnutrition/ucm059098.htm (last visited Aug. 22, 2014). 
15 Statement of Policy: Foods Derived From New Plant Varieties, 57 Fed. Reg. 22991 (May 29, 1992) [hereinafter 
1992 Policy]. 
16 2001 Policy, 66 Fed. Reg. 4839. 
17 See 2001 Policy, 66 Fed. Reg. 4839. 
18 Food Labeling: Nutrient Content Claims, General Principles, Petitions, Definition of Terms; Definitions of 
Nutrient Content Claims for the Fat, Fatty Acid, and Cholesterol Content of Food, 58 Fed. Reg. 2407 (Jan. 6, 
1993). 
19 Id. 
20 1992 Policy, 57 Fed. Reg. 22984-01. 
21 1992 Policy, 57 Fed. Reg. 22984. 
22 Id. 
23 Id. 
24 2001 Policy, 66 Fed. Reg. 4840. 
25 Id. 
26 2001 Policy Fed. Reg. 4841. 
27 This report addresses only state laws that have been enacted at the writing of this report and not bills that have 
been introduced. 
28 CONN. GEN. STAT. §21a-92c (2013). 
29 ME. REV. STAT. tit. 22, §2592 (2014). 
30 ME. REV. STAT. tit. 22, §2593 (2014). 
31 VT. STAT ANN. tit. 9 §3043 (2014). 

Emily M. Lanza 
222 
32 Id. 
33 VT. STAT ANN. tit. 9 §3044 (2014). 
34 2014, Vt. Acts, No. 120, §7. 
35 CONN. GEN. STAT. §21a-92c (2013); ME. REV. STAT. tit. 22, §2595 (2014). 
36 See, e.g., Niraj Chokshi, Vermont just passed the nation’s first GMO food labeling law. Now it prepares to get 
sued, WASH. POST, May 9, 2014, http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/govbeat/wp/2014/04/29/how-
vermont-plans-todefend-the-nations-first-gmo-law/. 
37 21 U.S.C. §337(a) ("all such proceedings for the enforcement ... of this chapter shall be by and in the name of the 
United States.”) 
38 Clark v. Time Warner Cable, 523 F.3d 1110, 1114 (9th Cir. 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
39 Id. 
40 Syntek Semiconductor Co., Ltd. v. Microchip Technology Inc., 307 F.3d 775, 781 (9th Cir. 2002). 
41 Clark, 523 F.3d at 1115 (internal citation omitted). 
42 Id. 
43 Case law has not addressed whether GE food labels using the term “natural” is deceptive and misleading as courts 
rarely consider the merits of the deceptive labeling claim for GE foods in these cases. 
44 Bohac v. General Mills, Inc., No. 12-CV-05280-WHO, 2013 WL 5587924, at *1 (N.D. Cal. Oct. 10, 2013). 
45 Id. at *3. 
46 Id. 
47 Ault v. J. M. Smucker Co., No. 13-Civ-3409, 2014 WL 1998235, at *5 (S.D.N.Y. May 15, 2014). 
48 Rojas v. General Mills, Inc., No. 12-CV-05099-WHO, 2013 WL 5568389, at *4 (N.D. Cal. Oct. 9, 2013). 
49 In re Frito-Lay North America, Inc., All Natural Litigation, No. 12-MD-2413, 2013 WL 4647512, at *1 
(E.D.N.Y. Aug. 29, 2013). 
50 Id. at *7. 
51 Id. at *9. 
52 Ault, 2014 WL 1998235, at *4. 
53 Cox v. Gruma Corp., No. 12-CV-6502 YGR, 2013 WL 3828800, at *1 (N.D. Cal. July 11, 2013). 
54 Id. 
55 Id. at *2. 
56 Id. at *1. 
57 Cox, 2013 WL 3828800, at *2; Rojas, 2013 WL 5568389, at *4-5 (court denied this motion, declaring that the 
court’s consideration of this claim would not undercut FDA authority). 
58 For more information about Pom Wonderful v. Coca-Cola, see CRS Report R43670, Juice Labeling and Pom 
Wonderful v. Coca-Cola: A Legal Overview, by Emily M. Lanza. 
59 See Pom Wonderful LLC v. Coca-Cola Co., No. 12-761, slip op., at 2 (2014). 
60 H.R. 913, 114th Cong. (1st Sess. 2015), § 3; S. 511, 114th Cong. (1st Sess. 2015), § 3. 
61 Id. 
62 Id. 
63 H.R. 1599, 114th Cong. (1st Sess. 2015). This bill passed the U.S. House of Representatives on July 24, 2015, by 
recorded vote: 275-150. 
64 H.R. 1599, § 101. This certification process was established under the FDA’s policy statement “Food Derived 
from New Plant Varieties” (57 F.R. 22984). 
65 H.R. 1599, § 101. 
66 7 U.S.C. § 7701 et seq. 
67 Id., § 111. 
68 Id., § 201. 
69 Id., § 301. 
70 Id., §§ 113, 203, 303. Currently, Vermont, Connecticut, and Maine are the only states with GE food labeling 
laws. Vermont’s GE labeling act will take effect on July 1, 2016. However, both the Connecticut and Maine 
statutes contain a provision stating that the state will not enforce the labeling requirements outlined in the 
respective acts until a requisite number of states pass similar legislation. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEX 
 
 
A 
access, 9, 45, 98, 119, 175, 185 
accessibility, 111 
accounting, 113 
acid, 144 
acidic, 214 
acquired characteristics, 85 
Activists, 65, 166, 177 
additives, 30, 31, 49, 62, 73, 94, 99, 216 
adverse effects, 16, 18, 42, 43, 47, 48, 76, 77, 86, 97, 
98, 99, 100, 116, 119, 120, 122, 139, 143, 144, 
145, 146 
advisory body, 15, 116 
advocacy, 53, 221 
Africa, 34, 113, 114, 119, 147, 151, 199 
agencies, 15, 19, 53, 60, 81, 85, 108, 109, 110, 114, 
121, 128, 129, 136, 138, 139, 216 
agricultural exports, 3 
agricultural market, 128 
agricultural sector, 81, 88 
agriculture, 2, 27, 52, 56, 57, 64, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 
87, 88, 92, 93, 117, 121, 132, 134, 156, 159, 160, 
164, 174, 183, 189 
alfalfa, 79, 125, 142, 210 
alimentation, 53 
allergens, 22, 26, 39, 138, 141 
allergic reaction, 25 
alters, 83, 86 
animal husbandry, 70 
aquarium, 106, 140 
Argentina, vii, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 43, 88, 152, 155, 156, 
157 
arrest(s), 57 
Asia, 147, 153 
assessment, 3, 4, 12, 14, 15, 16, 18, 22, 23, 24, 25, 
27, 38, 39, 40, 42, 47, 64, 66, 70, 72, 73, 75, 79, 
91, 97, 98, 105, 109, 111, 113, 115, 116, 117, 
119, 122, 123, 125, 144, 146, 188 
assessment techniques, 144 
assets, 5 
attachment, 168 
audits, 40 
Austria, 43, 46 
autonomy, 69 
aversion, 59 
avoidance, 59 
awareness, 81, 120 
B 
background information, 190 
bacteria, 70 
ban, 30, 43, 46, 57, 70, 71, 91, 108, 109, 118, 202 
barriers, 144 
beef, 132 
Beijing, 29, 163 
Belarus, 108 
Belgium, vii, 1, 6, 7, 8, 10, 157 
beneficiaries, 2, 84 
benefits, 2, 19, 44, 61, 93, 95, 97 
beverages, 76, 217 
bilateral, 107 
biodiversity, 23, 43, 46, 50, 80, 82, 84, 120, 122, 
123, 124, 145, 183 
bioethics, 15, 190 
biosafety, 3, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 20, 24, 27, 31, 34, 
81, 108, 116, 143, 156, 183, 199, 200, 201, 211 
biosciences, 206 
biotechnology, 2, 3, 4, 6, 11, 12, 15, 20, 21, 22, 26, 
27, 44, 52, 53, 81, 84, 87, 94, 96, 104, 107, 108, 
110, 113, 114, 118, 120, 121, 135, 136, 142, 143, 
144, 166, 170, 184, 188, 206, 221 
blogs, 164, 222 
blood, 5, 138 

Index 
224 
border control, 97 
Brazil, vii, 1, 2, 11, 12, 20, 88, 151, 152, 159 
breeding, 21, 27, 65, 109, 144, 185, 216 
Britain, 37, 43 
businesses, 66, 147 
by-products, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 161 
C 
cabbage, 133 
Cabinet, 182, 201 
Cairo, 34, 166 
campaigns, 156, 164, 206 
cancer, 2, 34, 102 
capacity building, 183 
carbohydrates, 25 
case law, 69, 94, 114 
cattle, 52 
cell fusion, 121 
certificate, 34, 67, 111, 112 
certification, 111, 177, 220, 222 
CFIA, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 162, 163 
CFR, 207, 208 
challenges, 95 
cheese, 40 
chemical(s), 2, 22, 25, 118, 129, 139 
chicken, 134 
children, 2, 5, 28 
Chile, 152 
China, vii, 1, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 153, 163, 
164, 165 
Chinese government, 29 
circulation, 108, 109 
cities, 89 
citizens, 6, 15 
civil action, 20, 119 
civil society, 20, 88 
classes, 113 
classification, 3, 13, 32, 90, 131 
cleaning, 9 
cleanup, 117, 118 
climate(s), 37, 80 
climate change, 37 
cloning, 88, 103 
closure, 85, 86 
color, 56, 126, 216 
commerce, 4, 73, 136, 206, 217, 220 
commercial, 4, 8, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 
54, 55, 63, 64, 68, 72, 73, 74, 87, 88, 95, 100, 
107, 113, 127, 137, 139, 141, 169 
commercial crop, 95 
commodity, 117 
common law, 26, 33, 41 
communication, 12, 104, 117 
community(s), 12, 53, 58, 65, 68, 70, 97, 103, 128 
compensation, 18, 26, 42, 50, 57, 73, 94 
competition, 17, 77, 110, 218, 219, 220 
complexity, 58, 71 
compliance, 13, 17, 45, 46, 47, 48, 51, 55, 56, 59, 61, 
62, 65, 67, 73, 85, 91, 97, 99, 131, 138, 218 
composition, 13, 15, 25, 26, 79, 94, 110, 118, 130, 
136, 137, 138, 140, 141 
compounds, 98 
conception, 92 
conference, 29 
confidentiality, 72, 119 
conflict, 7, 12 
conformity, 80, 87, 91, 92, 93 
Congress, 1, 11, 20, 82, 139, 213, 214, 218, 219, 
220, 221 
consensus, 26, 92, 120, 157 
consent, 38, 39, 47, 48, 91, 124, 168 
conservation, 50, 120, 122, 143, 144, 145, 146 
constituents, 25 
Constitution, 11, 12, 13, 74 
constitutional principles, 11, 58 
construction, 2, 13, 14, 139 
consumer choice, 38 
consumer protection, 43, 45, 70 
consumers, 3, 6, 13, 21, 26, 28, 40, 42, 44, 48, 49, 
53, 66, 75, 79, 88, 102, 108, 110, 127, 128, 129, 
133, 135, 141, 179, 193, 207, 214, 215, 216, 218, 
219, 220 
consumption, 5, 10, 11, 13, 14, 18, 20, 23, 24, 37, 
40, 56, 62, 64, 65, 66, 70, 82, 83, 86, 93, 99, 102, 
118, 120, 128, 132, 133, 139, 213, 220 
containers, 78 
contaminated food, 62 
contamination, 10, 39, 41, 45, 57, 58, 61, 62, 63, 65, 
78, 171 
contingency, 23, 99, 129 
controversial, 6, 10, 55, 57, 70, 144 
controversies, 100 
convention, 185, 210 
Convention on Biological Diversity, 28, 43, 50, 74, 
75, 80, 89, 120, 135, 143, 145, 156, 164, 169, 
172, 185, 206, 210 
conviction, 63, 118 
cooking, 118 
cooperation, 7, 8, 64, 81, 191 
coordination, 7, 8, 105, 120, 157 
cost, 119, 144, 160 
Costa Rica, 152 
cotton, 2, 12, 28, 32, 35, 79, 113, 125, 133, 135, 214 
Council of Ministers, 35, 71, 179 
country of origin, 34, 86 

Index 
225
Court of Appeals, 5, 134, 205 
covering, 109 
CPB, 206 
crimes, 118 
Criminal Offenses, 19 
cross-fertilization, 105 
cultivation, vii, 2, 4, 9, 11, 13, 14, 16, 35, 37, 42, 43, 
45, 46, 49, 50, 51, 53, 54, 55, 56, 58, 59, 61, 62, 
70, 71, 72, 85, 88, 92, 107, 109, 119, 120, 124, 
125, 127, 130, 132, 133, 140, 169, 188, 202, 205 
cultural values, 96 
culture, 44, 88, 90 
Customs Union, 108, 109, 110, 111, 196, 197 
Czech Republic, 169 
D 
damages, 11, 33, 35, 57, 73, 82, 100, 145, 146 
danger, 29, 32, 73, 123 
data collection, 17 
database, 90, 187 
decentralization, 74 
decision makers, 96 
decision-making process, 24 
defects, 2 
defendants, 218, 219 
deficiency, 81 
DEFRA, 39, 40, 167, 168 
degradation, 12, 55, 57 
demonstrations, 2, 37, 95 
denial, 136 
Denmark, 185 
deoxyribonucleic acid, 144 
Department for Environment, Food and Rural 
Affairs (DEFRA), 38 
Department of Agriculture, 88, 95, 109, 114, 134, 
136, 197, 199, 213, 214 
depreciation, 57 
deregulation, 142, 210 
derivatives, 15, 17 
destruction, 55, 57, 60, 61, 63, 71, 90, 100, 145 
detectable, 40 
detection, 4, 57, 81 
developing countries, 28 
deviation, 68 
dichotomy, 6 
diet, 62 
directives, 64, 69, 71, 89, 103 
disclosure, 36, 40, 216, 220 
diseases, 64, 81 
displacement, 99 
disposition, 137 
distribution, 2, 6, 8, 65, 68, 73, 78, 116, 120, 137, 
141, 142 
diversity, 12, 46, 50, 77, 78, 83, 84, 85, 86, 117, 143, 
144, 145, 146 
DNA, 13, 79, 89, 94, 99, 101, 144, 182 
draft, 11, 34, 35, 48, 51, 63, 77, 139, 172, 216 
dressings, 215 
drugs, 59, 131, 134, 137, 138, 141 
Duma, 197 
E 
early warning, 93 
ecological processes, 117 
economic damage, 10 
economic development, 96 
economic losses, 10 
economic performance, 44 
Economic Research Service, 206 
economic values, 123 
ecosystem, 3, 4, 124 
education, 90 
EEA, 186 
Egypt, v, vii, 1, 34, 35, 166 
EIS, 139, 142, 209 
election, 103 
emergency, 57, 77 
emission, 41 
employees, 94, 121, 206 
employment, 13 
enforcement, 3, 26, 58, 60, 65, 95, 97, 98, 121, 191, 
222 
engineering, 30, 64, 111, 190, 206, 214, 217, 221 
England, vii, 1, 36, 37, 38, 39, 41, 42, 167 
enlargement, 187 
environmental degradation, 16, 144, 160 
environmental effects, 48 
environmental impact, 12, 73, 105, 109, 117, 138, 
142 
environmental impact statement (EIS), 142 
environmental issues, 144 
environmental organizations, 135 
environmental policy, 128 
environmental protection, 7, 31, 53, 68, 143 
Environmental Protection Act, 37, 38, 39, 40, 167, 
168 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 97, 98, 99, 
130, 131, 134, 136, 138, 139, 141, 189, 191, 202 
environmental resources, 73 
enzyme(s), 40, 76, 220 
equality, 72 
equipment, 9, 14, 76 
ethical issues, 130 

Index 
226 
ethics, 96, 98 
Europe, 39, 44, 55, 102, 147, 153, 155, 167 
European Commission, 8, 42, 43, 44, 57, 72, 92, 131, 
169, 171, 186 
European Community, 169 
European Court of Justice, 59, 62 
European Parliament, 7, 10, 42, 47, 54, 55, 56, 71, 
157, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 179, 
180, 186, 188, 189 
European Union, v, vii, 1, 5, 6, 7, 36, 37, 42, 43, 49, 
51, 53, 58, 69, 70, 87, 88, 89, 101, 103, 127, 129, 
153, 154, 155, 157, 162, 169, 172, 173, 188 
evidence, 46, 68, 71, 86, 135, 144, 169, 206 
exclusion, 97, 216 
executive branch, 74 
Executive Order, 157, 158, 159 
exercise(s), 97, 115, 138 
expertise, 17, 25, 142, 213, 214, 217, 218, 219, 220 
export control, 111 
exporter, 124 
exports, 4, 31, 88, 124 
exposure, 2, 116 
extinction, 65 
F 
families, 76 
farmers, 2, 3, 9, 10, 37, 39, 42, 44, 55, 59, 80, 96, 
102, 114, 127, 128, 129, 132, 204 
farmland, 50 
farms, 72 
fauna, 77 
fear(s), 37, 39, 102, 129 
federal agency, 160 
federal government, 7, 15, 20, 22, 218 
federal law, 11, 60, 108, 140, 214 
Federal Register, 137 
feed additives, 109, 110 
fencing, 37 
fermentation, 44 
fertilization, 70 
fertilizers, 30, 31 
field tests, 31, 32, 137 
field trials, 4, 23, 87, 90, 91, 109, 113, 119 
financial, 44, 50, 112, 147 
First Amendment, 217 
fish, 106, 135, 140, 209 
fisheries, 101, 102, 106 
fishing, 101, 105, 106 
flex, 178 
flexibility, 42 
flora, 77, 97 
flora and fauna, 97 
flour, 40 
flowers, 74, 76 
fluid, 90 
food additive(s), 3, 75, 78, 122, 125, 137, 138, 140, 
202, 208 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 134, 136, 
137, 138, 140, 141, 142, 152, 167, 208, 209, 213, 
214, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222 
food chain, 39, 70, 73 
food industry, 56, 66, 112 
food production, 24 
food products, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 48, 68, 78, 87, 89, 
93, 108, 109, 110, 111, 132, 137, 142, 215, 217 
food safety, 4, 22, 29, 40, 53, 70, 88, 89, 95, 97, 113, 
118, 138, 183 
food security, 29, 37, 73, 108 
force, 16, 28, 46, 66, 96, 109, 145, 147, 162, 185, 
186, 187, 210 
formation, 142 
France, vii, 1, 6, 43, 46, 52, 53, 55, 57, 153, 171, 172 
free trade, 3 
freedom, 52, 55 
fruits, 79, 81, 135 
funding, 45, 64 
funds, 29, 81 
fungi, 70 
fungus, 101, 192 
G 
gene therapy, 76, 115, 198 
gene transfer, 41, 59, 65 
genes, 38, 39, 70, 101, 114, 122, 123, 206 
genetic code, 70 
genetic diversity, 73, 99 
genetic engineering, 13, 15, 21, 26, 30, 60, 64, 65, 
81, 94, 96, 107, 111, 138, 206, 217, 221 
genetics, 84, 162, 167 
genome, 30, 65 
geography, 80 
Germany, vii, 1, 6, 46, 51, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 
155, 169, 174, 175 
global trade, 108 
God, 147 
goods and services, 146 
google, 210 
governments, 31, 69, 140, 213, 214 
grants, 136, 137 
GRAS, 137, 142 
Greece, 46, 153 
greenhouses, 3, 4, 90 
growth, 36, 37, 63, 64, 68, 69 
guidance, 93, 216 

Index 
227
guidelines, 4, 11, 15, 22, 26, 45, 59, 71, 76, 87, 92, 
116, 124, 131, 169, 188, 213, 214, 215 
guilty, 10 
H 
habitat, 99 
Hawaii, 140, 209 
hazardous substance(s), 94, 97 
hazards, 34, 206 
health and environmental effects, 139 
Health and Human Services, 220 
health effects, 206 
health risks, 24, 87, 216 
herbicide, 2, 5, 20, 44, 135 
higher education, 53 
history, 20, 180, 182, 194, 210, 215 
host, 90 
hostility, 6, 52 
House, 120, 124, 145, 146, 222 
House of Representatives, 222 
housing, 90 
human body, 120, 123, 125 
human health, 11, 15, 16, 24, 29, 38, 41, 43, 44, 45, 
46, 47, 48, 57, 59, 73, 78, 83, 84, 85, 86, 90, 96, 
98, 99, 102, 112, 114, 122, 124, 131, 139, 143, 
144, 145, 146, 215 
Hungary, 46, 154 
hybridization, 77 
I 
icon, 181 
identification, 49, 138 
identity, 3, 79, 139 
image(s), 72, 76, 96, 107, 181 
imported products, 21 
imports, 5, 35, 52, 88, 90, 99, 103, 106, 108, 110, 
112, 118, 124, 126, 133, 191 
imprisonment, 83, 86, 91, 106, 118, 124, 126, 133, 
142 
in vitro, 138 
incarceration, 55, 56 
income, 44 
India, 153 
indirect effect, 47 
individuals, 31, 42, 46, 49, 50, 94, 115 
industry(s), 22, 27, 64, 81, 96, 101, 104, 105, 128, 
135, 142, 143, 167, 191, 192, 206, 216, 218 
influenza, 95 
infrastructure, 81 
ingredients, 3, 11, 13, 14, 18, 30, 31, 40, 49, 51, 56, 
62, 64, 86, 89, 93, 95, 99, 110, 112, 118, 122, 
125, 135, 141, 177, 202, 206, 213, 214, 215, 216, 
217, 218, 219, 220 
injury, 19, 139 
insects, 81, 130 
inspections, 11, 29, 40, 85, 95, 98, 116, 130, 131, 
133 
inspectors, 65, 115 
institutions, 13, 88, 113, 114, 197 
integrity, 12, 41 
intellectual property, 27, 45 
intellectual property rights, 27, 45 
internal controls, 103 
international law, 146, 147, 169 
international trade, 3, 144 
intervention, 19, 146 
intrinsic value, 97 
isolation, 4, 16 
Israel, vii, 1, 63, 64, 65, 68, 69, 177 
issues, 4, 7, 22, 25, 29, 40, 42, 50, 53, 60, 81, 84, 88, 
103, 104, 107, 113, 119, 120, 121, 125, 126, 131, 
137, 143, 174, 189, 190, 191, 197, 206, 207, 217, 
221 
Italy, vii, 1, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 153, 178 
J 
Japan, vii, 1, 74, 75, 76, 78, 79, 180, 181, 182 
Jordan, 82, 183 
judiciary, 20, 142 
jurisdiction(s), 15, 72, 76, 78, 90, 118, 121, 136, 138, 
151, 213, 217, 218, 219 
justification, 60, 63 
K 
Kazakhstan, 108 
kill, 80 
Korea, 119, 120, 124, 125, 200 
L 
laboratory tests, 81 
landscape, 72 
language skills, 184 
Latin America, 72 
Latvia, 204 
law enforcement, 93, 112 
laws, vii, 7, 8, 12, 16, 20, 23, 34, 38, 41, 53, 58, 61, 
75, 79, 80, 81, 82, 102, 113, 114, 116, 125, 126, 

Index 
228 
136, 147, 162, 166, 183, 190, 191, 197, 209, 213, 
215, 217, 218, 219, 222 
laws and regulations, 7, 23, 53, 58, 61, 75 
lawyers, 130 
lead, 38, 57, 92, 134, 142, 145 
Lebanon, vii, 1, 80, 81, 82, 182, 183 
legal issues, vii, 214, 217 
legality, 57 
legislative proposals, 63 
liability insurance, 57, 62 
life cycle, 64, 66 
life sciences, 68, 177 
light, 8, 10, 55, 215 
litigation, 213, 217 
livestock, 21, 23, 30, 31, 33, 40, 44, 52, 56, 62, 65, 
78, 86, 87, 88, 105, 120, 121, 131, 132 
living conditions, 120 
lobbying, 107 
local authorities, 54, 96 
local conditions, 67 
local government, 33, 71, 76 
localization, 72 
low risk, 98 
LSI, 177 
lysine, 79 
M 
machinery, 39 
majority, 21, 26, 41, 42, 53, 88, 104, 127, 135 
Malaysia, 153 
management, 21, 27, 28, 31, 33, 97, 117, 120, 121, 
122, 123, 124, 146 
manipulation, 11, 12, 13, 101 
manpower, 124 
manufacturing, 48, 90, 138 
marches, 96 
marginalization, 72 
marine environment, 124 
marketability, 62 
marketing, 3, 7, 11, 12, 13, 14, 27, 28, 30, 31, 34, 35, 
36, 38, 39, 42, 43, 46, 49, 50, 51, 55, 56, 59, 60, 
64, 68, 73, 82, 91, 113, 140 
marketplace, 113, 118 
MAS, 84 
mass, 49, 93 
materials, 32, 45, 49, 73, 81, 109, 111, 121, 122, 
125, 147, 184, 217 
matter, 3, 8, 53, 70, 80, 81, 97, 115 
meat, 40, 62, 95, 99, 128, 135, 137, 213, 214 
media, 21, 28, 37, 96, 172, 190, 192, 195, 211 
mediation, 41 
medical, 5, 93, 112, 120, 121, 129, 131, 138, 203, 
217, 220 
medication, 53 
medicine, 70, 121 
Mexico, vii, 1, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 183 
microorganism(s), 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, 44, 64, 70, 89, 
90, 91, 109, 111, 122, 123, 125, 130, 134, 138, 
139, 141, 142, 169 
Ministry of Education, 76 
miscarriages, 2 
mission(s), 160, 174 
mixing, 70, 71 
modernization, 107 
modifications, 48, 72, 82 
modules, 159 
molecular biology, 25, 137 
Moon, 202 
moratorium, 42, 43, 51, 57, 70, 71, 72, 96, 190 
Moscow, 108, 110, 196, 197 
MPI, 189, 191, 192 
multinational companies, 37 
multiplication, 7, 54, 73, 89 
N 
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), 139 
national policy, 81 
National Research Council, 135 
national security, 29 
national strategy, 81 
native species, 77, 99 
natural habitats, 50, 99 
negative effects, 110, 123, 131 
negative outcomes, 143 
NEPA, 142 
Netherlands, vii, 1, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 
184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189 
New Zealand, vii, 1, 95, 96, 97, 99, 189, 190, 191, 
192 
NGOs, 44, 96, 103, 128 
Nobel Prize, 71 
nonprofit organizations, 29 
North Africa, 34 
North America, 219, 222 
Norway, vii, 1, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 193 
NPC, 164, 165 
NPR, 164 
nucleic acid, 75, 121, 144 
nuisance, 41, 63 
nutrient(s), 25, 26, 137 
nutrition, 22, 64, 66, 73 

Index 
229
O 
oceans, 121 
OECD, 21 
offenders, 5, 95 
officials, 33, 112 
oil, 21, 32, 35, 79, 133, 215 
oilseed, 169 
oleic acid, 79 
omission, 19, 73, 100 
operations, 16, 29, 91, 92, 112 
opinion polls, 21, 70 
opposition parties, 102 
organ(s), 15, 34 
organelles, 121, 144 
organic food, 66, 108 
organism, vii, 7, 13, 25, 36, 37, 38, 43, 49, 54, 59, 
64, 67, 68, 70, 73, 75, 77, 84, 90, 97, 98, 99, 100, 
114, 116, 121, 126, 129, 136, 137, 144, 186, 189, 
213, 214, 220 
organize, 143 
oversight, 23, 33, 58, 60, 61, 83, 104, 109, 129, 130, 
213, 214, 220 
P 
Paraguay, 152 
parasite(s), 70, 99 
parents, 28 
Parliament, 7, 34, 35, 46, 50, 56, 64, 114, 167, 171, 
172, 189 
patents, 142 
peer review, 22 
penalties, 18, 19, 33, 56, 71, 73, 74, 83, 86, 87, 91, 
95, 96, 100, 112, 142, 145, 209 
permission, 18, 67, 91, 109, 122, 123, 144 
permit, 14, 18, 26, 31, 33, 35, 41, 60, 61, 63, 67, 68, 
90, 91, 92, 105, 106, 113, 115, 116, 117, 131, 
136, 139, 187 
perpetrators, 63 
pesticide, 44, 46, 141 
pests, 46, 64, 97, 136, 139 
pharmaceutical(s), 59, 63, 64, 75, 95, 120, 131, 144 
pigs, 102 
plant disease, 99, 136 
platform, 81 
Poland, 43, 46, 169 
policy, 6, 15, 22, 34, 36, 37, 42, 60, 71, 74, 81, 83, 
84, 85, 88, 93, 96, 102, 107, 108, 110, 115, 124, 
128, 136, 137, 139, 141, 142, 159, 168, 170, 191, 
207, 215, 216, 218, 222 
policy issues, 218 
political parties, 88, 102 
politics, 170, 209 
pollen, 17, 51, 63, 204 
pollination, 37, 39, 41, 65 
polluters, 58 
pollution, 5, 41, 59, 62, 73 
population, 2, 47, 58, 64, 94, 99, 102, 108, 206 
population group, 94 
Portugal, 169 
potato, 46, 58, 61, 79, 125, 127, 132, 133, 169, 184, 
185, 205 
potential benefits, 44 
poultry, 52, 137, 213, 214 
PRC, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 164 
Precautionary Principle, 132, 159, 169, 179, 193, 
210 
prejudice, 18, 19, 218 
preparation, 15, 90, 118 
preservation, 11, 77, 123 
president, 12, 15, 20, 71, 108, 111, 136, 179, 195, 
197 
prevention, 46, 77, 121 
principles, 11, 15, 21, 22, 61, 62, 84, 89, 97, 126, 
144, 191 
private sector, 4, 64 
probability, 85 
procedural rule, 60 
producers, 3, 10, 21, 50, 68, 71, 84, 101, 102, 108, 
110, 127, 130 
product market, 18 
project, 12, 15, 52, 65, 81, 98, 130, 203, 205 
proliferation, 35, 87 
propagation, 3, 41, 66, 67, 68 
protection, 11, 13, 36, 37, 44, 50, 60, 72, 82, 84, 85, 
89, 129, 143, 159, 169, 183 
proteins, 25, 70, 79, 101, 126, 138 
public administration, 19 
public health, 5, 8, 22, 36, 43, 45, 54, 55, 95, 97, 
108, 111, 120, 122, 123, 209, 220 
Public Health Service Act, 134, 138 
public opinion, vii, 6, 12, 37, 58, 69, 84, 87, 96, 127, 
128 
public policy, 34 
public sector, 116 
publishing, 39 
punishment, 11, 19 
purity, 45, 46 
Q 
quality control, 14 
quality of life, 13 
quality standards, 65 

Index 
230 
questionnaire, 43 
R 
rape, 28, 32 
raw materials, 27, 28, 31 
recall, 77 
reception, 70 
recidivism, 19 
recognition, 11, 114 
recombinant DNA, 79 
recombination, 7, 38, 43, 54, 60, 70, 76, 89, 114, 
122, 129, 144, 186 
recommendations, 22, 25, 95 
reform, 59, 155 
Registry, 3 
regulatory agencies, 21 
regulatory bodies, 113, 114, 115 
regulatory framework, 20, 22, 136, 143, 214 
regulatory oversight, 21, 137 
regulatory system(s), 61 
reimburse, 10 
rejection, 34, 115 
relatives, 41, 105, 158 
relevance, 9, 97 
relief, 62 
REM, 168 
remediation, 41, 73 
repair, 86 
reparation, 18 
replication, 13 
reproduction, 54, 89, 90, 220 
research facilities, 95, 121, 123 
research institutions, 64 
researchers, 6, 31, 61, 63, 102 
residues, 67, 139 
resistance, 37, 46, 64, 133, 135, 214 
resolution, 218 
resources, 5, 117, 162, 164, 166, 192, 206 
response, 59, 65, 90, 146, 147, 190 
restaurants, 99, 217, 220 
restoration, 73 
restrictions, 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 18, 26, 27, 32, 33, 34, 35, 
50, 52, 56, 60, 63, 67, 72, 75, 76, 82, 98, 108, 
112, 113, 132, 140, 141, 147 
restructuring, 11, 20 
retail, 217 
revenue, 37 
rights, 6, 13, 27, 41, 69, 108, 114, 119, 146, 217 
risk assessment, 5, 22, 23, 36, 42, 44, 47, 60, 64, 66, 
77, 87, 90, 91, 93, 104, 113, 114, 116, 117, 118, 
119, 120, 122, 123, 125, 211 
risk management, 4, 21, 44, 121 
RNA, 13, 89 
Romania, 169 
Royal Society, 22 
Russia, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 195, 196 
S 
sabotage, 58 
salmon, 101, 102, 105 
sanctions, 19, 80, 87, 91, 217 
school, 123 
science, 22, 27, 29, 37, 44, 75, 116, 117, 190, 206 
scientific knowledge, 15, 16, 41 
scientific method, vii, 18, 213, 214 
scientific progress, 15, 89 
scope, 32, 33, 48, 50, 144, 146, 213, 214, 216, 217 
scripts, 208 
Secretary of Agriculture, 1, 3, 136, 220 
security, 17, 29, 37, 71, 74, 110 
security guard, 37 
seed, 2, 3, 4, 24, 27, 31, 32, 35, 37, 44, 46, 68, 79, 
88, 217 
seeding, 9, 61 
seedlings, 30, 31 
seizure, 19, 85 
self-sufficiency, 120 
seller, 93 
Senate, 56 
September 11, 13, 14, 143, 185 
services, 13, 111, 199 
SFS, 131, 203, 204, 205 
sheep, 101 
shortage, 65 
showing, 104, 110, 117, 206, 216 
side effects, 119 
signs, 93 
Slovakia, 169 
society, 101, 104, 107, 160 
South Africa, vii, 1, 113, 114, 116, 117, 118, 119, 
197, 198, 199 
South Korea, vii, 1, 119, 120, 200 
sowing, 3, 55 
soybeans, 2, 28, 32, 79, 88, 99, 120, 133, 135, 169 
Spain, 43, 153, 169 
species, 3, 24, 50, 77, 87, 117, 136 
specifications, 14, 48 
specter, 88 
Spring, 185 
stability, 23 
stakeholders, 20, 43, 52, 92 
state(s), 6, 7, 8, 32, 36, 37, 41, 44, 55, 56, 60, 61, 72, 
91, 92, 94, 97, 98, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 
122, 123, 139, 140, 141, 143, 144, 145, 146, 159, 

Index 
231
170,  195, 206, 209, 213, 214, 215, 217, 218, 221, 
222 
state control, 107 
state laws, 214, 215, 217, 221 
state legislatures, 214, 221 
statistics, 113 
statutes, 217, 222 
statutory authority, 134, 136, 137 
sterile, 65 
stock, 217 
storage, 2, 9, 13, 14, 17, 19, 33, 56, 90, 116, 118, 
120, 126, 136 
stress, 59 
structure, 69, 73, 83, 86, 137, 138, 140, 141, 142, 
197, 208 
sugar beet, 9, 125, 133, 169, 210 
supervision, 11 
suppliers, 2 
Supreme Court, 127, 142, 220 
surveillance, 56, 174 
sustainability, 97 
sustainable development, 103, 105 
Sweden, vii, 1, 43, 127, 128, 129, 131, 132, 133, 
134, 202 
T 
Tanzania, 34, 166 
target, 23, 117 
tax incentive, 3, 19 
taxes, 2 
taxonomy, 121 
technical assistance, 34 
technical support, 15 
technician, 15 
techniques, 13, 15, 60, 61, 79, 84, 95, 113, 118, 144, 
198, 199, 206, 213, 214, 215, 216 
technology(s), 2, 20, 27, 28, 29, 30, 40, 70, 75, 76, 
92, 103, 121, 122, 130, 143, 203 
territory, 29, 32, 45, 46, 47, 56, 109, 111 
test data, 23 
testing, 3, 12, 24, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 64, 67, 
68, 88, 95, 97, 98, 100, 131, 136, 139, 203 
threats, 29, 41, 50, 93, 144, 159 
threshold level, 62 
timber production, 130 
time frame, 48 
tourism, 72 
toxic effect, 59 
toxicity, 39, 111 
toxicology, 25 
trade, 4, 5, 16, 30, 65, 107, 108, 110, 114, 143, 144, 
183 
trade union, 114 
training, 9, 34, 99 
traits, vii, 20, 21, 24, 162, 163, 206, 213, 214 
translation, 160, 161, 165, 175, 177, 180, 181, 182, 
186, 189, 193, 194, 202 
transmission, 89, 145 
transparency, 6, 9, 18, 22, 39, 54, 55, 61 
transport, 13, 19, 49, 50, 90, 91, 105, 133 
transportation, 9, 14, 33, 41, 53, 56, 73, 103, 112, 
130, 136 
Treasury, 159 
treaties, 169, 180, 186 
treatment, 57 
trial, 23, 40, 67, 92, 113, 115, 117, 157, 177, 184, 
199 
triggers, 219 
turnover, 100, 110 
U 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, 52 
unacceptable risk, 24, 77 
uniform, 74, 109, 216 
unions, 114 
United Nations, 81, 147, 151, 160, 169, 172, 186, 
210 
United Nations Development Program (UNDP), 81 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change, 169 
United States, vii, 1, 2, 6, 12, 43, 44, 64, 65, 72, 88, 
95, 107, 134, 135, 136, 143, 150, 151, 152, 162, 
206, 213, 214, 222 
universities, 6, 64, 81 
updating, 15 
urban, 9 
Uruguay, 152 
USA, 153, 154, 206 
USDA, 88, 94, 163, 165, 166, 172, 177, 189, 196, 
197, 213, 214, 220 
V 
vaccine, 189, 220 
vandalism, 37, 39, 58, 63 
variables, 65 
variations, 221 
varieties, 27, 28, 32, 33, 65, 72, 79, 88, 99, 135, 137, 
142, 216, 220 
vector, 90, 99 
vegetables, 64, 79, 135 
vehicles, 85 
ventilation, 2 

Index 
232 
vertebrates, 122, 123 
viruses, 64, 115, 214 
vitamins, 25 
vote, 43, 51, 222 
voting, 202 
voting record, 202 
W 
Wales, vii, 1, 36, 37, 39, 41, 167 
war, 147 
Washington, 141, 150, 209 
water, 5, 41, 50, 73, 76, 83, 85, 97, 121, 129 
web, 162, 185 
websites, 75 
welfare, 43, 191 
well-being, 97 
wholesale, 217 
withdrawal, 137 
workers, 39, 129, 131 
World Health Organization (WHO), 215, 221, 222 
World Trade Organization (WTO), 5, 43, 107, 144, 
149, 169, 210 
worldwide, 34, 44 
Y 
Yale University, 148 
yin, 164 
 

