GENETIC ENGINEERING
A Reference Handbook
Second Edition

Other Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Cults, James R. Lewis
Forest Fires, Philip N. Omi
Gun Control in the United States, Gregg Lee Carter
Hate Crimes, Donald Altschiller
Human Rights Worldwide, Zehra F. Kabasakal Arat
Hurricanes, Patrick J. Fitzpatrick
Illicit Trafficking, Robert J. Kelly, Jess Maghan, Joseph DiSerio
International Environmental Disputes, Aaron Schwabach
Invasion of Privacy, Kevin M. Keenan
Juvenile Justice, Donald J. Shoemaker and Timothy W. Wolfe
Native American Issues, William N. Thompson
New Slavery, Kevin Bales
Punishment in America, Cyndi Banks
U.S. Homeland Security, Howard Ball
United Nations System, The, Chadwick F. Alger
Violence in the Media, Nancy Signorielli
Upcoming Titles
Childhood Sexual Abuse, Karen L. Kinnear
Conflicts over Natural Resources, Jacqueline Vaughn
Illegal Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Internet and Society, The, Bernadette H. Schell
U.S. Military Service, Cynthia A. Watson
World Population, Geoffrey Gilbert

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital 
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies, an-
notated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to have a better under-
standing of the social, political, environmental, and economic 
issues facing the world today.


GENETIC ENGINEERING
A Reference Handbook
Second Edition
Harry LeVine, III
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England

Copyright 2006 by ABC-CLIO, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Le Vine, Harry.
Genetic engineering : a reference handbook / Harry LeVine III. —
2nd ed.
p.
cm. —  (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-85109-860-7 (hardcover : alk. paper) — ISBN 1-85109-861-5
(ebook)
1. Genetic engineering—Handbooks, manuals, etc.
I. Title.
II. Series.
[DNLM:  1. Genetic Engineering—Handbooks.     QU 39 L433g 2006]
TP248.6.L4 2006
660.6’5—dc22
2006011074
09
08
07
06
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. Visit
abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116–1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Manufactured in the United States of America
∞

Contents
Preface to the Second Edition, xi
Preface to the First Edition, xiii
1
Overview of Genetic Engineering, 1
What Is Genetic Engineering, and Why Is It 
Important Today? 1
The Brief History of the Genetic Engineering 
Revolution, 2
Nuts and Bolts of Genetic Engineering, 5
The Structure of DNA, 7
The DNA Code, 9
Cloning Technology, 11
Polymerase Chain Reaction, 12
Chip Technologies, 13
Information Management and the Rise of 
Bioinformatics, 14
Gene Mapping, 15
Pharmacogenomics, 16
Bioinformatics, 17
Genetically Modified Animals and Plants, 18
Nuclear Transplantation, 19
Stem Cell Regenerative Therapy, 20
Applications of Genetic Engineering, 23
Biomanufacturing, 25
Agriculture, 26
Industry, 28
Bioremediation, 32
Medicine and Health, 35
Gene Therapy, 37
Pharmacogenomics, 38
vii

DNA and the Law, 39
Biological Warfare and Bioterrorism, 40
Conclusion, 43
References, 45
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 47
Problems and Controversy, 47
Safety of Genetic Engineering, 48
Genetic Engineering and Health, 48
Genetic Testing, 49
Health Privacy, 51
Insurance and Employment, 52
Human Cloning, 54
Religious Implications of Genetic Engineering, 55
Embryonic Stem Cells, 58
Impact of Genetic Engineering on Health and 
Privacy, 58
Possibilities for Action, 62
Impact of Genetically Modified Foods, 63
Genetic Engineering of Food Animals, 64
Environmental Safety, 65
Agribusiness Control of Agriculture, 66
Possibilities for Action, 68
Impact of Bioindustrial Engineering, 71
Possibilities for Action, 71
Impact of Bioremediation, 72
Possibilities for Action, 73
Impact of Genetic Engineering on DNA and the Law, 74
Where Is Genetic Engineering Today? 74
Scientists and Physicians, 75
Industry, 76
Universities, 77
Ecological Activists, 78
Politicians, 79
References, 80
3
Worldwide Perspective, 83
International Impact of Genetic Engineering, 83
Status of Genetic Engineering around the World, 84
Impact on Developing Countries, 85
Possible Impact of Genetic Engineering, 90
Recommendations for Action, 91
viii
Contents

Biowarfare and Bioterrorism, 91
International Mirror of Controversies in the 
United States, 92
Genetically Modified Foods, 92
International Regulation of Genetic Engineering, 93
References, 94
4
Chronology of Genetic Engineering, 95
5
Biographical Sketches, 119
William French Anderson, 119
Paul Berg, 120
Herbert Wayne Boyer, 121
Ananda Mohan Chakrabarty, 122
John William Coleman, 123
Francis Sellers Collins, 123
Francis Harry Compton Crick, 124
Rosalind Franklin, 125
Albert Gore, Jr., 126
Leroy E. Hood, 127
Edward Moore Kennedy, 128
Michael Martin, 129
Barbara McClintock, 129
Louis Pasteur, 131
Jeremy Rifkin, 132
Marian Lucy Rivas, 134
Maxine Frank Singer, 135
Robert Swanson, 135
James Alexander Thomson, 136
J. Craig Venter, 137
James Dewey Watson, 138
6
Facts, Data, and Opinion,, 141
Statistical Data, 141
Understanding and Acceptance of Genetic 
Engineering, 141
Genetic Engineering as a Business, 146
The Cycle of Ideas, 155
Medical Applications, 156
Agriculture and Manufacturing, 158
Bioremediation, 170
Safety, 175
Contents
ix

Ethics, 177
Bioterrorism, 178
Genetic Testing, 179
Employment and Insurance, 183
DNA Forensics, 188
Human Cloning, 190
Stem Cells, 195
Summary, 197
References, 198
7
Directory of Organizations, Associations, 
and Agencies, 201
8
Selected Print and Nonprint Resourrces, 217
Books, 217
General, 217
Ethics, 227
International, 232
Legal, 235
Business, 238
Agriculture, 239
Environment, 244
Science, 245
Books on Genetic Engineering (Young Adult Sources), 249
U.S. Government Publications, 254
Office of Technology Assessment Documents, 254
Congressional Reports, 256
Other Government Agency Reports, 257
Nongovernment Reports, 258
Periodicals and Newsletters, 259
Directories, 266
Selected Nonprint Resources, 269
Videocassettes, 270
Computer Programs and Other Electronic Resources, 275
Databases, 277
Internet Sources on Genetic Engineering, 279
Appendix: Acronyms, 283
Glossary, 285
Index, 295
About the Author, 313
x
Contents

Preface to the Second Edition
The second edition of Genetic Engineering covers accelerating ad-
vances in DNA technology and its applications since the first edi-
tion. The science continues to outstrip the ability of Western soci-
eties to fit the new capabilities with the philosophical and
political expectations of their people and institutions. Many of
the basic social and ethical issues raised at the outset remain.
Legislative guidelines favored by most to provide basic protec-
tions of individual privacy and against genetic discrimination of
various sorts are being established in many nations. The moral
and ethical questions remain particularly divisive in the United
States, reflecting the deep philosophical differences on many is-
sues that polarize this nation.
Over the past six years, the nucleotide sequence of the entire
human genome was determined; a furor over reproductive cloning
sparked by the cloning of Dolly, a Finn Dorset lamb, crested and
then subsided; and a new ethical controversy emerged—and is still
growing—over the use of embryonic stem cells in regenerative
medicine. The first generation of genetically modified crops is now
established in world agriculture, and a second generation is in de-
velopment that promises new questions about the role of agribusi-
ness versus the traditional farmer. We are now able to assess the
worldwide impact of early policies regulating genetically modified
crops and reproductive cloning. Previously, there were no data,
only sheer confidence—or fear. DNA testing, controversial at the
O. J. Simpson trial, is now the gold standard for identifying indi-
viduals, and anthrax-laced envelopes revealed our vulnerability to
bioterrorism.
The first chapter of the second edition provides an introduc-
tion to the science of genetic engineering, a history of the field,
and a survey of the applications of genetic engineering. The new
xi

technologies driving progress are then described, including gene
mapping, transgenic animals, gene chips, electronic information
integration (or bioinformatics), the potential for personalized
medicine (pharmacogenomics), and clonal stem cell technology
for regenerative medicine. Chapters 2 and 3 discuss the prob-
lems, controversies, and solutions of the past and present from
the U.S. and worldwide standpoint, respectively. Chapter 4 pre-
sents a chronology of discoveries that have led to genetic engi-
neering and milestone accomplishments. Chapter 5 describes the
lives and accomplishments of some of the contributors to the
field. Chapter 6 is a collection of data and statistics about the ap-
plications and issues, and the last two chapters are a collection of
resources for more information on topics covered in this book. A
list of acronyms and a glossary of commonly used terms are also
provided.
xii
Preface to the Second Edition

Preface to the First Edition
As nomadic peoples settled down, they brought useful plants
under cultivation and gathered herds of animals. They learned to
interbreed varieties to get larger, faster-growing stocks. These
traditional means of genetic improvement culminated in the
Green Revolution of the 1960s, in which high-yield and disease-
resistant varieties of plants seemed capable of eliminating the
specter of famine from much of the world.
In the early and middle 1970s, yet another revolution was
brewing, one that had the potential to take genetic manipulation
beyond people’s wildest dreams. Human-mediated rearrange-
ment of isolated pieces of genetic material comprising genes from
different species, dubbed “recombinant DNA,” was achieved in
university laboratories. The awesome (or to some, awful) poten-
tial power of this genetic engineering caused scientists, in the fall
of 1975 at Asilomar, California, to consider for the first time a self-
imposed moratorium on certain types of experiments until the
risks of the new technology were better understood.
The furor over regulation and application of genetic engi-
neering continues today. Along with uncertainty over effects on
the environment, application of genetic engineering emphasizes
humankind’s demonstrated lackluster competence in addressing
social issues posed by new technologies, particularly before a cri-
sis is reached. These range from heartfelt general questions of
morality and ethics to privacy issues and access to information or
fairness to different groups of people impacted by that informa-
tion. Despite the often extreme positions taken by the media and
various special interest groups, there is room on all of these issues
for honest differences of opinion. No single point of view holds all
of the “right” answers. The purpose of this book is to provide suf-
ficient background on the issues involved with the application of
xiii

genetic engineering to allow concerned citizens to participate in
the decisions that must be made to fulfill the considerable
promise of this new technology while avoiding both ecological
disaster and the type of control over human life depicted in 1932
in Aldous Huxley’s Brave New World.
The first two chapters of this book provide background ma-
terial for understanding the technical basis of the science and a
historical account of the evolution of genetic engineering and the
issues surrounding its application. The third chapter sketches the
lives of important contributors to the knowledge and the dialog.
Chapter 4 collects data and documents and opinions central to
the genetic engineering controversy. Chapters 5 through 7 pro-
vide a list of resources for those wishing to delve deeper into the
subject, including organizations, print, nonprint, and electronic
references. A glossary of genetic engineering terms provides ex-
planations of the technical jargon.
xiv
Preface to the First Edition

1
Overview of 
Genetic Engineering
What Is Genetic Engineering, 
and Why Is It Important Today?
In the early 1970s, a scientific experiment changed the relationship
of humankind to the fundamental processes of nature. For the first
time, DNA from one species of organism, Xenopus laevis, the
African clawed frog, was purposefully transferred into another
species, Escherichia coli, the common human intestinal bacterium.
Nothing exciting happened. The bacteria grew normally, blithely
replicating the piece of foreign DNA from another species inserted
into a carrier plasmid of bacterial DNA in their cytoplasm. Al-
though this experiment was in itself only an incremental extension
of previous work, the workers in Stanley Cohen’s and Herbert
Boyer’s laboratories had prepared the frog-bacteria plasmid in a
test tube using isolated bacterial enzymes to cut and paste the
DNA fragments together in a specific order. They had become ge-
netic engineers, rearranging the DNA code for their own purpose.
This simple demonstration ushered in the age of genetic engineer-
ing, where optimists foresaw that bacteria, yeast, plants, and ani-
mals could be modified to produce raw materials for industry, to
improve food, to discover new medicines, to remove environmen-
tal contaminants, to recycle waste, and to provide permanent cures
for inherited diseases.
But there was a cloud over this vision. To some people’s
minds, genetic engineering changed the world’s natural order.
1

Ahead lay catastrophic disruption of the earth’s ecosystem, un-
controlled spread of microorganism antibiotic resistance with at-
tendant new plagues, and the corruption of the ideal of sanctity
of life itself.
The Brief History of the 
Genetic Engineering Revolution
Immediately following these groundbreaking experiments came a
call for a moratorium from both the lay public and some scientists
to halt certain types of DNA transfer. This was an unprecedented
turn of events in the scientific research community. During the
summer of 1971, Robert Pollack at the Cold Spring Harbor Labo-
ratories on Long Island convinced Paul Berg and others working
on the monkey SV40 tumor virus to put off experiments transfer-
ring SV40 DNA, which was potentially tumorigenic to humans,
into E. coli. Berg and Pollack subsequently organized the pivotal
Conference on Biohazards in Cancer Research in January 1973 at
Asilomar, California (Asilomar I), which was to set the tone for re-
combinant DNA research in the United States and much of the
world.
The Asilomar Conference, sponsored by the National Sci-
ence Foundation, the National Cancer Institute, and the Ameri-
can Cancer Society, all major government-funding agencies, was
a rude awakening for the scientific community. For the first time,
scientific policy was going to be decided, not through the tradi-
tional peer-review process by fellow scientists based on the sci-
entific merit of the research, but by people who had a very dif-
ferent approach, lacked specific training in technical issues, and
were pursuing a different agenda. The public feeling was that the
potential impact of the new technology on society and the envi-
ronment was too far-reaching for only scientists to decide what
should be done. After all, some reasoned, what had scientists
done with the knowledge of how to split the atom. A significant
number of scientists were also worried. At the urging of Maxine
Singer, the 1973 Gordon Research Conference on Nucleic Acids
held a discussion on the moral and ethical issues of biohazards.
A letter signed by all but 20 of the 142 Gordon conferees was sent
to the president of the National Academy of Sciences and the
president of the Institute of Medicine. It was eventually pub-
2
Overview of Genetic Engineering

lished in the trade journal Science, urging the establishment of a
study committee to recommend specific guidelines “if the Acad-
emy and the Institute deemed it appropriate.”
Reacting to the public concern and the mandate from the sci-
entific community, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) formed
the Recombinant DNA Molecule Program Advisory Committee
in October 1974 and charged the group with framing guidelines to
govern recombinant DNA research and with reviewing gene ther-
apy protocols. Further discussions at the Asilomar Conference
held in February 1975 (Asilomar II) led to a 16-month moratorium
on recombinant DNA experiments until the NIH Guidelines be-
came available in mid-1976. Strangely, human genetic engineer-
ing was specifically excluded from discussion at this time because
it was considered too emotionally charged and was too far from
realization at that point. Human engineering remains a sticky
topic; witness the furor in February 1997 over the cloning of a
sheep from a single adult udder cell in Scotland.
In the meantime, Senator Edward Kennedy and the Sub-
committee on Health of the Committee on Labor and Public Wel-
fare began the first public debate on recombinant DNA in April
1975. This discussion was echoed at the local level as communi-
ties such as Cambridge, Massachusetts, with industrial or acade-
mic recombinant DNA practitioners held town meetings seeking
to regulate the technology in their jurisdiction. Only concerted
public relations efforts and information exchanges between the
universities and the public averted a fear-driven shutdown of the
research institutions. As a result of the early concern, sixteen bills
were introduced in Congress to regulate recombinant DNA re-
search; none were passed into law. A U.S. National Academy of
Sciences forum on industrial applications of recombinant DNA
technology held in Washington, D.C., March 7–9, 1977, was
turned from panel discussions into a debate and media event.
Dissenters in the audience disrupted the proceedings in Vietnam
War protest style. Nevertheless, by that time, it was becoming ap-
parent that the doomsday scenarios had been exaggerated and
that working with the technology under the NIH Guidelines was
generally safe. In the ensuing years. the restrictions of the guide-
lines were gradually relaxed as data accumulated on safety con-
cerns, suggesting that the technology could be controlled.
In October 1990, the Department of Energy began the Human
Genome Project, a massive endeavor to determine the nucleotide
sequence of the genome, all 3 billion nucleotides of the DNA in
The Brief History of the Genetic Engineering Revolution
3

the 23 human chromosomes, and to put into place the technologies
required to use that information in scientifically, medically, and
ethically responsible ways. The project had seven major goals: 1)
map and sequence the human genome with an emphasis on iden-
tifying genes; 2) map and sequence the genomes of five model lab-
oratory organisms—the laboratory mouse, the bacterium Es-
cherichia coli, the roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans, and the fruit
fly Drosophila melanogaster; 3) identify social, legal, and societal is-
sues to anticipate and plan for problems (Task Force on Ethical,
Legal, and Social Implications); 4) develop information and analy-
sis systems to allow the genome project information to be used
worldwide by researchers; 5) improvement of technologies for
genome study such as DNA sequencing; 6) support transfer of
genome project technology to industry and other areas where it
might be useful; and 7) support training of students and scientists
in the various skills needed for genome research. The need for
genome sequencing was hotly debated. Critics opposed the drain-
ing of resources away from other, more creative science; ques-
tioned the wisdom of determining DNA sequence, 98% of which
does not appear to encode a genetic message; and finally, asked
whose DNA would be sequenced. Most people, however, believed
that locating the human counterpart of a protein for which the
function had been determined in other animal systems would
enormously advance scientific and medical understanding. Such
understanding was expected to lead to effective therapies, thereby
saving lives and reducing suffering.
The International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium
published a first-draft, 90%-complete sequence of the human
genome in the February 15, 2001, issue of Nature, which was fol-
lowed up by the complete sequence on April 14, 2003. The big
surprise was that the human genome had a smaller number of
genes than expected—indeed, it had fewer than some “lower”
organisms, 30,000–40,000. The smaller number of genes was com-
pensated for, however, by more complex processing to give more
versions of each gene product.
Although the apprehension over handling recombinant
DNA technology eased with the increased knowledge about
safety and with familiarity, concern over the impact of applica-
tions of the technology continued to build. There remains sub-
stantial controversy over the ecological impact of widespread dis-
semination of genetically modified organisms. What may very
well turn out to be the real hazard, however, is the social impact
4
Overview of Genetic Engineering

of what can be done with genetic engineering technology. Debate
has shifted from the dangers of the technology itself to what soci-
eties will do with the information and the ability to manipulate
genes. The consequences of the economic changes wrought by the
new industries born of genetic engineering on developing coun-
tries are yet another area of concern. What was once a scientific
problem is now a social one. How will we use and control the use
of our newfound abilities? It is unsettling to know that it is en-
tirely in our hands to make the world better—or worse.
Nuts and Bolts of Genetic Engineering
Many scientists contributed to developing the ideas and methods
crucial for making recombinant DNA a useful technology. Some
of those providing the most insightful ideas were honored by the
awarding of the Nobel Prize to recognize the accomplishment.
The number of winners whose contributions benefited genetic en-
gineering (Table 1.1) testifies to the development in scientific un-
derstanding required for the technology to exist. As with all good
explanations, it turns out that the ideas required to understand
Nuts and Bolts of Genetic Engineering
5
TABLE 1.1
Nobel Prize Winners Contributing to Genetic Engineering
1905
Robert Koch
M&P
Elucidation of pathology of tuberculosis and
principles of culture of microorganisms
1910
Albrecht Kossel
M&P
Studies on chemistry of the cell distinguishing
proteins and nucleic acids
1915
Sir William Henry Bragg
Physics
Analysis of structure by X-ray crystallography
1915
Sir William Lawrence Bragg
Physics
Analysis of structure by X-ray crystallography
1933
Thomas Hunt Morgan
M&P
Role of chromosome in heredity
1958
George Wells Beadle
M&P
Gene control of cellular chemical synthesis
1958
Edward Lawrie Tatum
M&P
Gene control of cellular chemical synthesis and
genetic recombination
1958
Joshua Lederberg
M&P
Sexual transfer of genes between bacteria, leading
to early genetic engineering
1958
Frederick Sanger
Chem
Structure of proteins—insulin
1959
Severo Ochoa
M&P
Biosynthesis of RNA and DNA
1959
Arthur Kornberg
M&P
DNA polymerase and DNA synthesis
1962
Francis Harry Compton Crick
M&P
Structure of DNA, genetic code
1962
James Dewey Watson
M&P
Structure of DNA, viral structure, protein
biosynthesis
1962
Maurice Hugh Frederick Wilkins
M&P
Structure of DNA
continues

6
Overview of Genetic Engineering
TABLE 1.1
continued
1965
Jacques Lucien Monod
M&P
Mechanisms by which genes are regulated and
proteins manufactured
1965
Francois Jacob
M&P
Action of regulator genes, bacterial genetics
1965
Andre Michael Lwoff
M&P
Replication and genetics of viruses and bacteria
1968
Robert William Holley
M&P
structure of nucleic acids, sequence of phenylalanine
tRNA
1968
Har Gobind Khorana
M&P
Synthesis of polynucleotides, the genetic code
1968
Marshall Warren Nirenberg
M&P
Method for deciphering genetic code, determining
protein amino acid sequence from DNA
1969
Max Delbrück
M&P
Genetics of bacteriophage recombination
1969
Alfred Day Hershey
M&P
Replication, genetics, and mutation of
bacteriophages
1969
Salvador Edward Luria
M&P
Replication, genetics, and mutation of
bacteriophages
1972
Christian Boehmer Anfinsen
Chem
Control of protein folding by amino acid sequence
1972
Stanford Moore
Chem
Automatic amino acid analyzer and the sequence of
ribonuclease
1972
William Howard Stein
Chem
Automatic amino acid analyzer and the sequence of
ribonuclease
1975
Howard Martin Temin
M&P
Interaction between tumor viruses and cellular
genetic material, and reverse transcriptase
1975
Renato Dulbecco
M&P
Molecular biology of tumor viruses
1975
David Baltimore
M&P
Interaction between tumor viruses and cellular
genetic material, and reverse transcriptase
1977
Rosalyn Yalow
M&P
Radioimmunoassay technique
1978
Daniel Nathans
M&P
Development of restriction endonucleases
1978
Hamilton Othanel Smith
M&P
Development of restriction endonucleases
1978
Werner Arber
M&P
Development of restriction endonucleases
1980
Paul Berg
Chem
Biochemistry of nucleic acids
1980
Walter Gilbert
Chem
Method for DNA sequencing
1980
Frederick Sanger
Chem
Method for DNA sequencing
1982
Sir Aaron Klug
Chem
Electron microscopy of nucleic acids
1983
Barbara McClintock
M&P
Chromosomal exchange of genetic information and
mobile genetic elements
1984
Robert Bruce Merrifield
M&P
Chemical synthesis on a solid support
1984
Niels K. Jerne
M&P
Specificity in the immune system and principles for
monoclonal antibodies
1984
Georges J. F. Köhler
M&P
Specificity in the immune system and principles for
monoclonal antibodies
1984
César Milstein
M&P
Specificity in the immune system and principles for
monoclonal antibodies
1990
Sidney Altman
Chem
Discovery of catalytic RNA—“ribozymes”
1990
Thomas R. Cech
Chem
discovery of catalytic RNA—“ribozymes”
1993
Kerry B. Mullis
Chem
Invention of polymerase chain reaction to amplify
DNA
1993
Michael Smith
Chem
Oligonucleotide-based mutagenesis of DNA
M&P = medicine and physiology; Chem = chemistry.

the basic principles of molecular biology and genetic engineering
are elegantly simple in concept if not in practice to utilize.
The Structure of DNA
Recombinant DNA technology is the science of handling and ma-
nipulating the genetic material of cells. The word recombinant
means “new combinations” and refers to the shifting of genetic
material from one organism into another of either the same or a
different species. Nature can also move genetic information from
one cell into another by viruses or by “jumping genes,” first de-
scribed by Barbara McClintock in 1951, but it happens (fortu-
nately) only rarely under normal circumstances. Scientists called
molecular biologists have learned how to speed up and to control
the transfer process as well as how to transfer DNA between
species. The genetic material is made of a chemical polymer called
deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA. The DNA polymer consists of
similar types of units connected end to end like a string of beads,
with each bead representing a deoxyribonucleic acid unit. DNA is
very long and thin. Stretched out, the DNA contained in a human
cell would be 6 feet long, but it is so thin that 500 pieces laid side
by side could pass through the eye of a sewing needle. A cham-
pion for DNA is the lungfish. Its cells contain DNA that could
stretch 1,138 feet, almost two-tenths of a mile, wrapped up in a re-
gion of the cell called a nucleus only about a hundred thousandth
of an inch across. A regular microscope can’t see a strand of DNA;
it’s too thin. An electron microscope magnifying nearly a million
times is needed to see a DNA strand clearly. To fit into the nucleus
of a human skin cell one-hundredth the size of a grain of rice, the
DNA is wound tightly to form chromosomes. There are 23 pairs
of chromosomes in the nucleus of normal human cells. They be-
come visible in a regular light microscope when the cell copies its
genome as it prepares to divide into two daughter cells.
The chemical units strung together in a DNA strand are even
tinier, so small that the most powerful electron microscope can’t
make them visible. These beadlike units come in four “flavors,”
designated by the letters A, C, G, and T, which represent the nu-
cleic acid bases adenine, cytidine, guanine, and thymine, respec-
tively. The backbone of each strand is formed by a phosphate
ester link between the 3' and 5' positions of successive sugar
residues. The two single strands of DNA are wound in a helical
arrangement around each other as shown in Figure 1.1.
Nuts and Bolts of Genetic Engineering
7

The bases form a hydrogen-bonded core, like rungs on a lad-
der, with the backbone phosphates facing the outside similar to
the rails of the ladder. Twisting the ladder lengthwise forms a
helix. The letters signifying all of the bases in the DNA of a human
cell would fill a 1,000-volume encyclopedia. It is the sequence of
these units, read left to right (or 5-prime to 3-prime along the de-
oxyribose sugar-phosphate backbone, 5' to 3', in molecular biolo-
8
Overview of Genetic Engineering
C
C
C
C
C
A
A
A
G
G
G
C
C
C
T
T
T
T
5'
3'
5'
3'
G
G
G
G
G
T
T
A
T
A
A
A
FIGURE 1.1 
The DNA helix

gese) that is important. Groupings of these strings are the DNA
code, instructing a restriction enzyme to cut the DNA at one place
or a protein to bind to the DNA somewhere else. Three-letter
arrangements (codons) code for proteins that form the cell and
manufacture its chemical parts.
Having two of these DNA strands wound around each other
in the cell helps to prevent cells from erring when making new
DNA for a daughter cell. New DNA is always copied from old
DNA, which accounts for how information about hair or eye
color or blood type is accurately passed from parent to child. The
intertwined DNA strands of the chromosome are “complemen-
tary” copies of the same code. Where one strand has an A, the
other has a T, and where one strand has a C the opposite has a G.
A-T’s and C-G’s pair up, sharing hydrogen bonds between the
strands and holding them together (see Figure 1.1).
The DNA Code
Although at first glance the DNA sequence seems random, in fact
the DNA units are grouped in “words,” the length of which de-
pends on the meaning. Sometimes the words overlap so the mes-
sage depends on where you start reading. Four-, five-, six-letter,
and longer words are read by parts of the cell that control what
the DNA sequence is being used for. Some of the longer words
specify binding of certain proteins to that site such as a tran-
scription factor binding to start messenger RNA (mRNA) pro-
duction by an RNA polymerase or for binding of DNA poly-
merase to start DNA replication (Figure 1.2).
Nuts and Bolts of Genetic Engineering
9
Transcription
factor
Polymerase
FIGURE 1.2 
Recognition Sites for Proteins on DNA

There are three-letter words for amino acids, which are
chemicals found in cells. DNA words are grouped into “sen-
tences” called genes, which specify one protein molecule. Clever
experimentation eventually deciphered the code. These special
words are first copied in sequence from the DNA into another
chain, this time made of ribonucleic acid units that are strung to-
gether similarly to DNA called messenger RNA (mRNA).
A cell often makes many copies of a particular RNA mes-
sage, unlike DNA. This message is disposable and is destroyed
when it isn’t needed anymore. The message instructs another
part of the cell, known as a ribosome, to join the 20 varieties of an
amino acid “bead” in a specified order end to end into polymers
to make proteins. There are thousands of ribosomes in a cell, on
which many different proteins are being made inside a cell at any
one time. Proteins conduct the business of life in a cell. Although
the DNA is like the card or computer catalog of a library forming
a list of all of the books therein, proteins are like the people who
use the library. In multicellular organisms each cell contains all of
the genetic information required to specify a whole organism.
Only a small part of the DNA of a cell is in use at any one time,
with the particular part depending on the type of cell. The un-
used DNA is wound up tightly out of the way on spool-like
structures and twisted onto the scaffold of the chromosome.
Proteins act as catalysts and building blocks to manufacture
the other components of a cell, including carbohydrates (sugars)
for energy, the cellular protein skeleton, and lipids for mem-
branes as well as the DNA and RNA. Protein catalysts known as
enzymes also construct small molecule metabolites from chemi-
10
Overview of Genetic Engineering
A
A
C
C
DNA
replication
Protein
Messenger
RNA
T
T
G
G
FIGURE 1.3 
Coding for Protein Synthesis and DNA Replication

cals in their environment. These are intermediates that transfer
needed energy and chemical groups within the cell and help the
cell survive and carry out its function. In industrial applications
with bacteria or fungi, some of these metabolites are useful to hu-
mans as food (sugars, vinegar), for manufacturing (ethylene gly-
col, polymers), or as medicines (antibiotics).
All animal, plant, and microbe cells use universal code words
for the amino acids. Thus, the same protein will be made from the
same messenger RNA code in all living things. This is what makes
biotechnology work. Whatever type of cell makes the protein,
bacterial, fungal, plant, snake, or human, it will be the same. It is
the order or sequence of the amino acid beads in a protein’s
polypeptide chain that sets the shape of the protein and deter-
mines what it does.
Cloning Technology
Recombinant DNA technology allows the DNA sequence infor-
mation coding for making a protein (called an insert) such as the
enzyme adenosine deaminase (or ADA) to be placed into a small
circular piece of DNA called a plasmid vector. The process is de-
picted in Figure 1.4.
The plasmid and insert are treated with the same restriction
endonuclease, such as BamHI, which generates complementary
or “sticky” ends by hydrolyzing the phosphate ester backbone
connecting the nucleotides at specific sites (arrowhead). The en-
donuclease recognizes the nucleotide sequence GGATCC and
cuts between the GG pair on the 5' end of each strand. After mix-
ing the insert and vector, a DNA-joining enzyme, DNA ligase, is
added to reconnect the phosphate ester backbone of the helix. A
cell (microbial or a cell from a multicellular organism) is then
made to take in the vector (transformed) with the DNA, which
now codes for the ADA protein. The vector plasmid with its ADA
gene is copied when the cell multiplies so that every cell has a
copy of the ADA information. The vector contains DNA se-
quences that direct the host cell’s machinery to make mRNA
from the insert sequence, which is then translated into the actual
ADA protein in the cell. This technique is routinely used to pro-
duce a protein in a laboratory for study. It can also be used to pro-
vide gene therapy to replace a deficient gene product in a seri-
ously ill patient. W. French Anderson and his fellow medical
scientists used just such a trick to repair the white blood cells of
Nuts and Bolts of Genetic Engineering
11

two children who were always getting infections because their
white blood cells could not make the important ADA protein.
Polymerase Chain Reaction
In addition to the enzymes and vectors used to manipulate DNA
in a test tube, a technique called polymerase chain reaction, or
PCR, is used to make an unlimited number of copies of a chosen
DNA sequence. This technique won a Nobel Prize for its origina-
tor, Kary Mullis, in 1993 and launched another revolution within
the recombinant DNA revolution. The principle behind the tech-
nique is stunningly simple, yet immensely powerful. PCR selec-
12
Overview of Genetic Engineering
GGATCC
CCTAGG
3’
3’
5’
5’
G
CCTAG
GATCC
G
3’
5’
3’
5’
+
DNA
ligase
GGATCC
CCTAGG
3’
3’
5’
5’
BamHI
endonuclease
GGATCC
CCTAGG
3’
3’
5’
5’
GGATCC
CCTAGG
3’
3’
5’
5’
G
CCTAG
GATCC
G
3’
5’
3’
5’
G
CCTAG
GATCC
G
3’
5’
3’
5’
+
DNA
ligase
GGATCC
CCTAGG
3’
3’
5’
5’
GGATCC
CCTAGG
3’
3’
5’
5’
BamHI
endonuclease
FIGURE 1.4 
DNA cloning with the BamHI restriction endonuclease
5'
3'
5'
3'
5'
3'
3'
5'
3'
5'
3'
5'

tively copies a single DNA sequence from among a mixture of
millions of DNA sequences and amplifies it for further use. The
simplicity comes from the use of a heat-stable DNA polymerase
from a microorganism that lives near the boiling point of water
in hot springs and near superheated undersea volcanic vents.
This enzyme catalyzes multiple rounds of replication of the cho-
sen DNA template.
In PCR, short sequences (15–25 nucleotides) called primers
are supplied by the investigator as chemically synthesized short
nucleotide sequences complementary to (matches) the two ends
of a DNA sequence (template) that is to be copied. The choice of
these primer sequences determines the part of the whole DNA se-
quence to be copied by serving as the starting and ending points.
After waiting long enough for active polymerase to copy the
DNA sequence starting at the primer-DNA matched sequences,
the mixture is heated to separate the new DNA strands from the
old and to inactivate the polymerase temporarily. After cooling,
the cycle is repeated, more primers bind, and the reactivated poly-
merase makes another copy of the DNA. After the first few
rounds, most of the target DNA sequences in the sample are PCR
copies of the original sequence bounded by the primers, and this
number increases exponentially with the number of copy cycles.
After 32 cycles, a typical amplification, the number of copies of
the target DNA sequence have increased 232-fold or more than 4
billion-fold!
PCR’s enormous capability to amplify specific sequences
from among many others in a sample is particularly useful in
forensics where DNA samples from a crime scene are frequently
limited. The copies are subjected to analysis by the standard
forensic DNA methods. PCR can also be used to engineer cloned
sequences precisely instead of having to rely on finding restric-
tion endonuclease sites nearby. Limited primarily by the ingenu-
ity of the user, modified PCR techniques can create changes to in-
sert or delete DNA sequences from a target sequence or measure
levels of an RNA message in cells.
Chip Technologies
The Human Genome Project stimulated the application of high-
throughput, high-density technologies in use in the microelec-
tronics industry to the analysis of genes and their nucleic acid
products. These are known as chip technologies because they are
Nuts and Bolts of Genetic Engineering
13

generally array-based and printed on a microscale on glass slides
or chips. A small number of chip arrays (and soon a single chip
array) contain complementary sequences for each of the 30,000 or
so genes of the human genome. Based on the ability of nucleic
acid sequences to recognize complementary nucleic acid se-
quences and coupled to PCR amplification methods, the utility of
the chips depends on the ingenuity of designers to formulate
questions. They can also be used to deduce the sequence of a
stretch of DNA or search for marker sequences in gene mapping
projects. By measuring messenger RNA levels, they can deter-
mine patient responses to a therapeutic regimen (pharmacoge-
nomics) and assess prognostic indicators for a patient (Friend
and Stoughton 2002). As a diagnostic, they can rapidly identify
microorganisms responsible for an infection using chips contain-
ing specific pathogen-derived DNA sequences.
Information Management 
and the Rise of Bioinformatics
The immense scope of the sequencing effort of the Human
Genome Project fostered the development of new technologies.
They needed to generate the raw sequence data, to process, to
check for errors, to align the sequences, and to assign them to the
23 human chromosomes. An integral part of the Genome Project
was the development of sophisticated data management systems
to process the sequences and to put the final data in a form that
would be accessible to many types of users. The Genome Project
ushered in the serious application of bioinformatics, which is dis-
cussed separately because it has changed the way biomolecular
science is done.
Once the human genome sequencing was finished other
genomes were moved up in the list for sequencing. For the
human genome, however, the focus changed to information
management. Because only 2% of the human (and other mam-
mals) genome sequence codes for functional genes, connecting
the DNA sequence data with identified genes was quite a chore.
Suspecting this, the sequencers started with gene-rich regions
and filled in the other parts later. Called “junk DNA” by some,
the history of the evolution of the human genome is recorded in
this noncoding DNA because those portions were never ex-
pressed to be selected for or against.
14
Overview of Genetic Engineering

In the database, the DNA sequence is laid out along the linear
chromosomes with the positions of known genes and the regions
of chromosomes associated with genetic diseases or disease risk
mapped onto the sequence. The mandate for the project was that
all of the incredible amount of information was to be made widely
available. The World Wide Web was the answer to disseminating
the information to anyone who wanted it. You can access the
human genome sequence as well as the genomes of an increasing
number of organisms at http://www3.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov, as well as
a variety of educational opportunities. Much of that information is
annotated and connected with other databases with information
about function, linkage to genetic diseases, and information of use
to the scientists who use the genome sequence in their work. The
genomes of agriculturally and industrially important plants, ani-
mals, and microorganisms, as well as those of medical importance,
are also available from that Web site. Key animal models for re-
search such as Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly) and the zebrafish
have their own systems with their specialized data.
The determination of the genes responsible for diseases has
been improved by the availability of the genome sequence. Nat-
ural variation, called polymorphisms, among individuals in the
DNA sequences in between genes provides a large number of
closely spaced markers for locating candidate disease genes or
genes that contribute to the risk of a disease. Comparison of af-
fected and control groups of individuals through a complex
process called statistical genetics associates the disease with par-
ticular areas of chromosomes marked by specific polymor-
phisms. Nearby genes are candidates for the cause of disease or
increased risk for developing the disease. Candidate genes can
become targets for drug discovery for the development of thera-
peutics. A good polymorphic marker or multiple markers for the
risk of developing a disease are useful for counseling even if the
gene is unknown or the way it increases risk is not understood.
Someone with a marker associated with increased risk for hyper-
tension can be advised to make lifestyle changes, such as lower-
ing salt intake, even before symptoms appear to avoid severe
problems later in life.
Gene Mapping
Microfabrication techniques similar to those used to create elec-
tronic memory chips for computers have been used to attach the
Nuts and Bolts of Genetic Engineering
15

probes for specific DNA sequences in known positions at high
densities onto special surfaces. All of the genes of the human
genome—more than 30,000 of them—are represented on a single
or small number of chips. Similarly, tens of thousands of probes
for markers called polymorphisms at different positions on chro-
mosomes can be attached to chips, and the presence or absence
of all those markers in an individual can be tested at one time.
Geneticists can follow the segments of chromosomes as segments
assort through the generations in a family, which helps investi-
gators to associate particular traits or a disease with the inheri-
tance of portions of a chromosome. In this way, they can find dis-
ease genes as well as risk and protective factors when the gene
responsible is eventually identified.
Pharmacogenomics
From a seemingly impersonal high-throughput procedure arises
the possibility of truly personalized therapies. Already people
with certain genetic forms of enzymes that metabolize some
drugs and not others benefit from a diagnostic screening and
their medication selected to provide the maximum therapeutic
benefit with minimal side effects. This “profiling” has the poten-
tial to be extended to selecting therapeutics based on particular
groupings of polymorphisms that have been associated with the
best response to a particular treatment. This ultimate in person-
alized medicine remains mostly in the future while more data are
collected and issues of medical privacy are settled.
Although the genome indicates potential, it does not indi-
cate when, if ever, a feature will be expressed, or if it is expressed,
to what extent. It reflects “the odds”—a likelihood rather than a
certainty. Closer to true manifestation of a trait is the actual tran-
scription of the gene linked to that trait into the messenger RNA
that codes for the protein that when translated will produce the
protein itself, which can then have its effects. Messenger RNA ex-
pression can also be subjected to analysis to determine responses
to treatments. The levels of mRNA transcribed from each of the
genes of interest are measured with chips bearing complemen-
tary sequences to the mRNA. The expression levels are scruti-
nized for patterns that correlate with the prognosis for breast
cancer, for example (Friend and Stoughton 2002), or with the ef-
ficacy of a treatment. This provides a preview of the efficacy of a
treatment in time to adjust the regimen without having to wait
16
Overview of Genetic Engineering

for symptom relief. This is particularly valuable for conditions
that change slowly.
Bioinformatics
The sheer amount of sequence data in the human genome is be-
yond analysis by the unaided human mind. Add to this the se-
quences of the multiple alternative forms of the messenger RNAs
that code for proteins, and the information overload is incompre-
hensible. The sequences of other organisms are constantly being
added (for an update, see http://www3.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). Com-
puters and special software are now indispensable both for find-
ing sequences of interest and in defining what other sequences are
interesting. The analysis of patterns in DNA sequences, much like
patterns in speech or handwriting, gives a hint as to organizing
principles that seem lost in the details. In silico molecular biology,
where the scientist never touches the DNA or a test tube, deduces
the logic of the organization of genes and the chromosomes of
which they are part.
Genome organizational hypotheses required the develop-
ment of sophisticated computational analysis. Frequently, the pro-
grams are written by nonbiologists who are skilled at teasing
order out of apparent chaos by dealing with the properties of in-
formation that are not necessarily related to the specific topic. For
information specialists and their programs, reading the sequence
of the genome is similar to trying to break a secret code. Just like
the English alphabet, the four-“letter” DNA alphabet—adenosine,
thymidine, cytosine, and guanosine (ATCG)—is formed into
words, phrases, even paragraphs. If the reader doesn’t know the
language’s rules about how letters, words, and phrases are put to-
gether, the strings of characters are gibberish.
Computer analysis of the number of times a letter combina-
tion is used or what letters most frequently appear next to one an-
other gives hints about the way that a message is coded. For ex-
ample, in the human genome, an ATG word, or codon, specifies
the incorporation of the amino acid methionine into a protein. It
can signal the beginning of a protein, because proteins always start
with a methionine, or it could be a methionine somewhere else in
the protein. True starting methionine codons, however, have been
noted to be located near a CAAT sequence. Some of the amino
acids are specified by more than one codon triplet, and thus there
are multiple “spellings” for some amino acids. This redundancy
Nuts and Bolts of Genetic Engineering
17

comes about because there are 64 ways to arrange four letters, tak-
ing three at a time, but only 20 amino acids.
The “spelling” or codon usage is different inside genes than
outside of them, another pattern that can be used to recognize
genes. This is important for picking out human genes because in
the higher organisms such as mammals only about 2% of the
genome DNA sequence codes for genes. Additional computer
analyses tell much more about the genome, but they are beyond
the scope of this book.
The leap of faith into believing computer analyses and sta-
tistical arguments was difficult for molecular biologists, who as
experimentalists needed to be shown the relevance and useful-
ness of these apparently unrelated techniques. Much like the
quantum theory in physics, informatics is now accepted by prac-
titioners of molecular biology because it predicts and explains
many phenomena.
Genetically Modified Animals and Plants
Although the details of genetically modified organism genera-
tion are beyond the scope of this book, a number of unifying con-
cepts will help in thinking about them. It is also important to be
aware of the differences, both perceived and real, between trans-
genic organisms, that is, organisms derived by nuclear trans-
plantation (nuclear cloning), and organisms or tissues derived
from stem cells of various sorts.
Transgenic organisms incorporate a gene from another
species into reproductive cells, the germ line, and thus into all
cells of that organism and its progeny. For plants that replicate
vegetatively (without sexual reproduction—seeds, pollen, or
spores), all cells contain the new gene. The transgene may be an-
other species’ version of the gene in the recipient, or it may be a
gene for which there is no counterpart. By this definition, bacte-
ria into which nonbacterial genes have been inserted are also
transgenic; however, this term generally refers to multicellular
organisms into which foreign genes have been incorporated.
The most common transgenic animal species is the mouse. To
create a transgenic mouse, the gene of interest is isolated from
cells derived from the donor species using techniques described
earlier for the manipulation of DNA. The gene is incorporated
into a plasmid that also contains a promoter DNA sequence that
will determine how the expression of the transgene is regulated in
18
Overview of Genetic Engineering

the mouse. The specific details vary depending on the strategy for
generating the transgenic animal. In the most common method,
the construct containing the cloned gene with its selected pro-
moter is then injected into the early-stage nucleus of a fertilized
ovum where it incorporates into the DNA of one of the mouse
chromosomes. This modified ovum is implanted in the uterus of
a hormone-treated pseudo-pregnant surrogate mother where, if
all goes well, it will develop into a mouse. All of the cells of the
mouse embryo that develop from this transgenic ovum will con-
tain the new gene. The gene will be expressed under the direction
of its attached promoter, which may be different than the genes
around it, which are controlled by the cell type such as a lung cell
or liver cell.
Another method modifies mouse embryonic stem cells (ES
cells) in isolated cell culture with the foreign gene and then im-
plants early-stage embryos derived from individual stem cells in
pseudo-pregnant mothers as before. An advantage to the ES cell
technique is that the cells can be selected for their expression of
the new gene before they are implanted. Screening cells early on
reduces the number of offspring that have to be produced to ob-
tain pups positive for expression of the transgene.
Nuclear Transplantation
The most controversial form of genetic manipulation burst onto the
scene in 1997. Dolly, a Finn Dorset sheep, was produced by the
transplantation of the nucleus from an udder mammary tissue cell
of one sheep into an ovum from which the nucleus had been re-
moved. Nuclear transplantation for human cloning has proved to
be a “hot-button” controversial issue. Because the genes on the
chromosomes of every cell in the body are the same, the nucleus
from a donor cell theoretically can be derived from anywhere in the
body. The nucleus is removed from the donor cell with a micro-
pipet and injected into an unfertilized host ovum whose own nu-
cleus has been removed. In a key series of events including treat-
ment with biological factors, the donor nucleus de-differentiates
from the type of cell it came from and takes on the characteristics
of the ovum. As a germ cell, the ovum gives rise to cells that dif-
ferentiate into all of the different kinds of cells in the body. Geneti-
cally, the cell containing the transplanted nucleus differs from the
donor only in the small amount of genetic material carried by the
mitochondria in the cytoplasm of the ovum. They are genetically
Nuts and Bolts of Genetic Engineering
19

like a normal biological identical (monozygotic) twin, more closely
related to the nucleus donor than fraternal twins are to each other.
Biological monozygotic twins arise from a splitting of an embryo at
an early stage in utero for an unknown reason.
Although a number of species have been successfully
“cloned” by nuclear transplantation, the success rate (number of
viable offspring per ovum injected) for nuclear transplantation is
presently very low and depends on the species. The offspring fre-
quently develop problems as they grow up that have been attrib-
uted to incomplete de-differentiation of the donor nucleus which
disrupts some of the developmental instructions. Dolly was eu-
thanized in February 2003 after progressive lung disease was di-
agnosed. She had suffered from several ailments suggestive of
premature aging. Even if these technical issues are resolved, the
debate over creating new individuals is inseparable from the
strong sentiments and ethical implications that surround any-
thing that involves human reproduction.
Stem Cell Regenerative Therapy
In November 1998, two research groups including the Geron
Corporation (Menlo Park, California) announced that they had
isolated and maintained human embryonic stem cells in culture.
Unlike most work of this type, Geron had been discussing the
ethical dimensions of the work they were undertaking with the
Graduate Theological Union (Berkeley, California) beginning in
late 1996. The Clinton administration published federal guide-
lines for funding of stem cell research in August 2000, leaving the
details to the incoming George W. Bush administration. On Au-
gust 9, 2001, President George W. Bush announced the decision
allowing federal funding of the use of existing pluripotent stem
cell lines derived from human embryos prior to that date.
Human embryonic stem cell lines were a major development
because these cells have the ability to develop into most of the
specialized cells and tissues of the body. Although mouse em-
bryonic stem cells had been cultured since 1981, translating that
success into the human system had been elusive. To distinguish
nuclear transplantation that would result in a new individual (re-
productive cloning) from that involving embryonic stem cells (re-
generative technology), the stem cell process was dubbed thera-
peutic cloning. Because embryonic stem cells were obtained from
20
Overview of Genetic Engineering

human embryos that were destroyed in the process, the repro-
ductive rights and abortion issues ignited immediately. Stem cell
technology is focused on cell and tissue replacement rather than
creation of a new organism, and thus this controversy was spared
that set of ethical issues.
Small groups of nondescript stem cells dwell in the marrow
of the long bones and in the sinuses of the thymus. They await
hormonal signals to trigger them to divide and turn on the genes
that remodel them into the next generation of red blood cells,
white blood cells, and platelets. There is a continuum of stem cell
types, each more specialized than embryonic stem cells. Failure to
recognize the multiplicity of kinds of stem cells confuses discus-
sions in the lay media. Only stem cells originating from embryos
or possibly those derived from a fetus, depending on how they
were obtained, run afoul of the ethical issues associated with em-
bryonic stem cells. Hematopoietic (blood-forming) stem cells are
adult stem cells that will only give rise to a highly restricted lin-
eage. There are, in addition, a variety of precursors of specialized
cells poised in various areas of the body ready to be awakened to
their particular task and to integrate into specific pathways. Um-
bilical cord blood is a source of early precursors although these
stem cells are of later stages of commitment than the embryonic
stem cells. These precursors are usually only able to give rise to a
restricted range of cell types. They are considered pluripotent as
opposed to the totipotency of early embryonic cells or the ovum,
which have the capacity to form any cell in an organism.
Stem cells can be therapeutically useful. In cases of certain
white blood cell cancers, the endogenous blood cell precursors in
the marrow are killed by radiation and by chemotherapy. The
marrow is then repopulated by transplanting noncancerous mar-
row containing marrow stem cells from a donor with a matching
tissue type (analogous to blood type). The stem cells take up res-
idence and resume producing new blood cells for the host. Stem
cells from other tissues are treated with an appropriate growth
factor cocktail and transplanted into the area they are supposed
to colonize.
Although all cells in the body are ultimately descended from
the single fertilized ovum, embryonic development proceeds
along lineages in which certain kinds of cells are derived from one
particular group of cells and not from others. In simpler organ-
isms such as the nematode Caenorabiditis elegans, the lineage and
Nuts and Bolts of Genetic Engineering
21

fate of every single cell has been traced. As development contin-
ues building the organism, cells become more specialized and are
locked into fixed roles and their genetic machinery adjusted to
maintain that state. Earlier-stage stem cells, cells that are not yet
committed far down the pathway, are more abundant in embry-
onic tissues than in adult tissue. Depending on the conditions and
the sequence of signals, embryonic stem cells can be induced to
differentiate along selected lineages. In the right environment,
which includes the appropriate cell contacts and secreted materi-
als as yet unknown, a cell can integrate into a tissue or join with
other cells to form a new tissue and hopefully adopt its function.
The implications of this procedure for biomaterial production or
tissue regeneration are obvious and profound. However, the use
of human embryonic tissue, no matter how it is derived, as a
source of stem cells runs afoul of ethical and religious concerns.
This “hot-button” status and governmental reaction have strictly
regulated stem cell research in the United States. Other countries
are less restricted by these attitudes.
There are many difficulties in identifying and isolating the
small numbers of adult stem cells and then in expanding the cell
population to usable numbers without compromising their abil-
ity to develop into multiple cell types. These difficulties are re-
duced by isolation of stem cells from earlier developmental
stages. Fetal stem cells isolated from early-term fetuses, in the
case of humans from miscarried or aborted fetuses, are present in
larger numbers and have a broader tissue differentiation spec-
trum than adult stem cells. Finally, totipotent embryonic cells can
be isolated from the unorganized inner cell mass of the embryo
at the stage the outer layer of cells that will become part of the
placenta separates from the cell mass. Finally, embryonic germ
cells can be isolated from the germinal ridge of the developing
embryo at a slightly later stage. These cells were destined to be-
come the reproductive cells and thus are also totipotent.
Embryonic stem cells, in addition to being capable of differ-
entiating into any kind of cell given the proper clues, are also
truly immortal in that they will continue to divide, producing
identical daughter cells. Later stage stem cells can also be culti-
vated and expanded in culture, but like differentiated adult cells,
they can only divide a restricted number of times. Embryonic
stem cells are clearly the most useful type of stem cell, but they
come at the cost of the destruction of the embryo from which
22
Overview of Genetic Engineering

they derive. Like nuclear transplantation (reproductive cloning),
stem cell research is a divisive issue. It pits patients with deadly
or debilitating diseases or conditions with no other hope for re-
lief against those who feel that they are protecting the unborn
and the sanctity of human life from exploitation.
Stem cell technology is not designed to re-create an individ-
ual, but to generate differentiated cell types for transplantation to
replace damaged or defective nerves, heart, kidney or other cells.
It does not involve genetic manipulation. Conceivably, new stem
cell techniques could induce more differentiated stem cells from
the individual needing a transplant to de-differentiate and take on
the required characteristics. The details of the technology sur-
rounding the successful functional incorporation of differentiated
stem cells remain to be worked out, particularly for the human
system. Research in this area in the United States is currently lim-
ited by restriction of federal government funding of human stem
cell research. Although work is continuing with mice and other
animals, there are significant differences in development between
humans and other animals, and some of the steps cannot be mod-
eled in rodents. The technology has the potential to incorporate
genetic manipulation, although at present, that is not at issue.
Applications of Genetic Engineering
Recombinant DNA technology is a variety of enzymatic and chem-
ical procedures used to manipulate DNAin the test tube to form se-
lected combinations of sequences. By these techniques, genes can
be added to or removed from the genome of a cell, or existing genes
can be modified in some way. The process of changing the genetic
complement of a cell or a whole organism by this process has come
to be known as genetic engineering. The process of rearranging
DNA sequences in vitro is key in this definition, because accom-
plishing similar rearrangements by traditional breeding practices is
associated with different regulatory guidelines. The technology is
rapid and powerful, permitting much more far-reaching human
control over the biological world. It is also more precise, capable of
controlling single genes. Since the advent of the recombinant tech-
niques in the early 1970s, ever more applications of genetic control
have been demonstrated in the areas of health, agriculture, indus-
trial production, and environmental remediation. It has opened up
Applications of Genetic Engineering
23

new ways of doing things biologically that had been done previ-
ously chemically, if they could be done at all.
Many kinds of host cells from various organisms can be
used to make useful recombinant proteins from DNA sequence
encoded in vectors. Very often these hosts are simple bacteria or
fungi that can be grown easily in thousands of liters of culture
media. Not only single-celled organisms but plants or animals
made up of many cells such as soybeans and mice and cows can
also be caused to make a chosen protein. They are known as
transgenic because they carry a gene from another kind of or-
ganism, a transgene. Soybeans harboring a gene making them re-
sistant to weed killers or a protein toxic only to insects can make
farming them easier. Expressing an altered human gene for the
protein superoxide dismutase in a mouse produces a form of
Lou Gehrig’s disease (amyelotrophic lateral sclerosis) in the
mouse, which can be used to help researchers find a cure for that
neurological disease. Transgenic animals can produce useful
human biological products (Velander, Lubon, and Drohan 1997).
The milk from transgenic cows in which particular cow protein
genes are replaced with the human protein sequence is a valu-
able product, an infant formula for babies allergic to cow’s milk.
These are just a few examples of the usefulness of recombinant
DNA technology.
On the other hand, the same technology can pose dangers as
well through unanticipated effects of a transgene, such as the
herbicide-resistant soybean becoming a weed that would be hard
to kill or by passing on the resistance to a related plant, which
could then become a pest. Some people fear the misuse of the
technology to create extralethal biological weapons or produce a
super race of humans. Others are more concerned with the social
and ethical dilemmas stemming from the use of genetic informa-
tion available through recombinant DNA technology. An all too
real scenario less fraught with technical details than transgenic
weeds is the anticipated threat to personal privacy and possible
genetic discrimination resulting from increased genetic testing
for legitimate but unrelated reasons.
Genetic engineering employs the processes used in living
cells to reprogram the machinery of other living cells. It seeks to
redirect the chemistry in some or all of the many cells making up
an organism to change it in some particular way. The changes,
usually one or a small number, are made at the level of the infor-
mation stored by the cell that tells the cell what to do and when
24
Overview of Genetic Engineering

by altering the long strands of DNA code known as the genome.
The Human Genome Project was completed several years ahead
of schedule. The scale of this task can be envisioned by imagin-
ing the DNA in the genome stretched end to end extending
around the equator of the earth. One chromosome would then be
1,000 miles long and one gene would be one-twentieth of a mile,
roughly the length of a football field. Within that gene could lurk
a change of one nucleic acid base for another, a mutation, in the
span of one-twentieth of an inch! Knowing the sequence of the
genome is roughly equivalent to having a telephone book with
the names and addresses of all of the molecules of the body as
well as a map showing how they are connected. Such informa-
tion could potentially be misused or have unforeseen unpleasant
consequences. The practical and ethical implications of the avail-
ability and use of human genomic information is part of the
genome project. Guidelines for its use and for the protection of
individuals and discussion of the various issues are available
from the genome project (National Human Genome Research In-
stitute). The potential for misuse is already receiving the atten-
tion of numerous watchdog genetic resource support groups as
well as federal and state governments (Council for Responsible
Genetics).
Biomanufacturing
A host of medically important products once only laboriously ex-
tracted from animal tissues or human cadavers is now produced
by genetically engineered microorganisms or animal cells.
Prominent examples include insulin, erythropoeitin, interferons,
growth hormone, blood-clotting factors, antigens for vaccine pro-
duction, and white blood cell proliferation inducers. Anticancer,
antigraft rejection, and antiviral antibodies for treatments not re-
quiring a host immune response are used in large quantities. Be-
sides being free of potential human pathogens, many of these
proteins are extremely rare. By using the human form of the pro-
tein, immune reactions to the proteins are reduced. This is one
application of genetic engineering that has been an undisputed
success.
Transgenic plants can be made to produce some of the parts
of a vaccine, usually proteins made only by invading organisms.
These can be extracted and used without the disease organism
ever being present. Ideally, vaccination by mouth, as the Sabin
Applications of Genetic Engineering
25

oral polio vaccine is given now, although it doesn’t always work
for all vaccines, could be achieved by expressing the vaccine com-
ponents in foods that can be eaten raw. Vaccines produced in food
plants that didn’t have to be extracted to be effective would be
ideal in countries lacking access to medicines or refrigerated stor-
age. Potatoes, alfalfa sprouts, cowpeas, bananas, rice, and toma-
toes have been altered to produce the antigens for hepatitis B,
measles, yellow fever, diphtheria, polio, cholera, and traveler’s di-
arrhea by researchers at a number of universities and at Mycogen
Corporation (San Diego, California). Similarly, the antibody mol-
ecules recognizing a vaccine can themselves be made in plants
like other proteins to provide short-lived immediate protection.
Other examples include an antibody against a bacteria causing
tooth decay expressed in tobacco plants, extracted, and mixed
with toothpaste to fight cavities, while a different antibody made
in soybeans is being used to target drugs against cancers.
Agriculture
Humans have experimented with improving food production and
food quality since they first domesticated animals and planted
crops. Microorganisms were harnessed to brew alcoholic bever-
ages for home and religious use and to process milk into cheese for
unrefrigerated pantries. Selective breeding of plants and animals
increased food supplies for a burgeoning population. With the ad-
vent of modern fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides and im-
proved methods of land use and livestock management, the Green
Revolution of the 1960s hoped to feed the world.
Genetic engineering has entered into plant and animal
breeding projects because of the speed with which desired
changes in traits can be made, condensing generations of breed-
ing and crossbreeding over years and generations into a single
transfer of genetic information. There are limitations, however; in
plants at present, such transfers are restricted to the manipula-
tion of single or small numbers of linked genes (close together on
a plant chromosome) and thus fairly simple characteristics. Com-
plex multigenic traits involving large numbers of interacting
genes are still out of reach and require traditional crossbreeding.
Some changes can be made by transgenesis that will not occur
through traditional breeding. For example, the species barrier to
transfer of traits can be circumvented by moving the nitrogen fix-
26
Overview of Genetic Engineering

ation capability from legumes to corn or wheat to reduce fertil-
izer use. A host of desirable qualities including resistance to plant
diseases, herbicides, various pests, salt and toxic heavy metals,
freezing, drought, and flooding are being considered as targets
for genetic engineering of plants. Protease inhibitor or starch-uti-
lization inhibitor overexpressing plants show insect resistance. A
cold-regulation gene switch has been identified that controls
plant cell defense responses to low temperatures (Pennisi et al.
1998). Controlling cold response to increase plant tolerance could
extend growing seasons and expand the regions supporting agri-
culture for some crops. Production can also be increased by im-
proving the efficiency of photosynthesis, implanting nitrogen fix-
ation or colonizing factors to attract nitrogen fixing bacteria, or
controlling ripening of fruit. The nutritional content of major
food and forage crops can also be improved.
The current generation of crop transgenes provides either
herbicide tolerance (mainly glyphosate, bromoxynil) to reduce
cultivation and spraying to remove weeds or insect resistance
(mostly Bacillus thurengensis toxin, Bt) to reduce spraying of pes-
ticides. The widespread adoption of this technology is for the
major crops in the United States, which include corn, soybean,
canola, cotton, and potatoes. The number of acres of herbicide-
tolerant crops planted in the United States increased 20-fold be-
tween 1995 and 2000 to 100 million acres (Kalaitzandonakes
2003). The second generation of transgenic crops will likely ad-
dress resistance to stress (drought, salt) as well as enhanced pho-
tosynthetic and nitrogen-fixing activity. More emphasis will be
placed on industrial products, enhancing the nutritional qualities
of foods, and production of medical products.
The rapid growth of genetically engineered agribusiness has
ignited the smoldering resistance to the industrialization of the
food supply by providing a fresh set of concerns specific to ge-
netic engineering and the prospect of what some groups have
called “Frankenfood.” In addition, the business model being fol-
lowed by the multinational agribiotech industry has stirred up
resentment among nonfactory farmers and poor developing na-
tions whose fragile economies fear corporate control. These so-
cial concerns exist alongside significant ecological issues, some of
which are transgene-related and others of which recapitulate the
worry during the Green Revolution over the ecological stability
of large monocultures of genetically identical plants.
Applications of Genetic Engineering
27

Industry
Biotechnology has played a role in industrial production of fer-
mented products—cheese, yogurt, alcoholic beverages, and soy
sauce, to name just a few—for centuries. Most of the world’s sup-
ply of organic chemicals was produced by microorganisms be-
fore 1920 when Standard Oil of New Jersey began chemically
synthesizing isopropyl alcohol (rubbing alcohol) from propylene,
a petroleum product. Some fifty years later, the oil price rises of
the 1970s and now the 2000s, along with the advent of genetic en-
gineering, made biologically derived raw materials economically
competitive. The controlled breeding of crop plants and animals
in pursuit of high yields of particular industrial chemical build-
ing blocks such as plant oils with desired characteristics has con-
tinued unabated. Genetic engineering has allowed for quantum
leaps in production efficiency of single products in a very short
time compared with the years of crossbreeding required by tra-
ditional genetics.
Feedstocks
Transgenic plants have been the choice in many cases over mi-
crobes for new sources of feedstocks for two main reasons. Plants
directly access the prime energy source, the sun, and large-scale
cultivation and processing of plants is already practiced. Genetic
engineering has provided a new wrinkle in the ability to increase
yields of starting materials and to make available new classes of
industrial building blocks. Genes that code for the production of
materials previously obtained from petroleum or less efficient
plant or animal sources can be inserted into either microorganisms
or higher plants to enrich for industrially valuable products. The
requirements for industrially useful materials differ significantly
from the same materials in food products, especially economically,
because they face intense competition from petro-derived prod-
ucts. Useful bioproducts, other than food, may include various
oils and fatty acids containing from 8-22 carbon backbone chain
atoms that are in demand for use in soaps, detergents, cosmetics,
lubricant grease, coatings, plasticizers, drying oils, thermoplastics,
and varnishes. Erucic acid produced in rapeseed plants engi-
neered by Calgene is used as a lubricant and as a starting material
for making nylon 13-13. Formerly, synthetic polymers used in con-
tainers and as textile fibers such as the biodegradable Biopol
(polyhydroxybutyrate-polyhydroxyvalerate copolymer) are pro-
28
Overview of Genetic Engineering

duced in a number of bacterial fermentation systems, recovering
them from the harvested organisms. Greenpeace uses this copoly-
mer instead of synthetic polyvinyl chloride for the plastic credit
cards that they sponsor. Agracetus (Monsanto) has created “wash-
and-wear” copolymers with cellulose by transferring the bacterial
genes for the polyesters to cotton plants. Other components of the
cell wall materials of plants such as the aromatic polymers com-
prising lignins and the sugar polymers forming the various types
of cellulose and starch are also useful. They are building blocks for
traditional chemical processes, fuels, or fermentation substrates
for microorganisms to produce useful products. The obstacle to
routine use of bioprocessing and bioproduction of industrial ma-
terials is making them cost-competitive with petroleum-based
starting materials.
Bioconversion
Using specific genes or even multicomponent metabolic path-
ways from esoteric organisms cloned into “workhorse” strains of
bacteria (E. coli), algae, or fungi (yeast) or higher plants (tobacco),
normal cellular metabolic products can be converted into scarce
drugs or precursor chemicals for industrial use. Molecules useful
as medicines are naturally produced by specially adapted organ-
isms in minute amounts under particular conditions. Metabolic
pathways can be optimized and reconfigured to yield the desired
product even if it was only a minor metabolite in the original or-
ganism. This is a rapidly expanding facet of genetic engineering
that is predominant in the pharmaceutical production of medi-
cines. Traditional chemical industry is also beginning to apply
genetic engineering technology in place of more expensive chem-
ical synthesis, notably of stereoisomers of chemicals, which en-
zymes can make in pure form.
Renewable Fuels
The production of biogas (50%–80% methane) from fermenting
garbage, animal and human sanitary waste, and agricultural waste
materials has been practiced on a small scale worldwide. A broad
range of organic products can be converted by microbial activity
through a very low-tech process. The main difficulty comes in ex-
panding the process cheaply to industrial scale. The 5.6 billion m3
of methane, equivalent to 5 million tons of petroleum, produced
by Getty Synthetic Fuel is only a drop in the U.S. energy bucket. To
achieve economic sufficiency in fuel production microorganisms
Applications of Genetic Engineering
29

are being engineered to use low-cost energy sources and to func-
tion at elevated temperatures in the presence of high concentra-
tions of metabolites and at low oxygen concentrations.
Bioproduction of the ultimate clean fuel, hydrogen, which
yields only water on burning, can be carried out by the green
alga Chlamydomonas or the blue-green alga Anabaena cylindrica
with energy from light (Benemann 1996). A two-stage process
using photosynthetic bacteria is being tested at an Osaka power
plant. Fermentation of organic wastes by bacteria in the dark can
yield hydrogen mixed with methane as an adjunct to bioremedi-
ation to give a clean burning fuel. With all these technologies eco-
nomics will drive the utility of the process. Present yields of hy-
drogen are in the 10% to 20% of input with economic
sustainability hovering in the 60% to 80% range. Closer control of
fermentation conditions and genetic and metabolic engineering
of pathways will be needed to attain the breakeven point. Ger-
many and Japan have invested significantly in this technology,
whereas the United States lags significantly, spending about $1
million annually on research.
Biopulping
Chemical treatment of wood fibers is used to prepare wood pulp
to make paper and to whiten it, an expensive, and environmen-
tally damaging, process. A fungus that grows on wood, Tricho-
derma virida, accomplishes much of the same chemistry, partially
breaking down the cellulose into a starting material for paper,
producing as a by-product a sugar mixture that can be used to
feed microbes to do other jobs. Again the problem lies in the in-
dustrial scale-up, speeding up the process and reducing costs.
Genetic engineering of the metabolic pathways in woody
plants that produce the lignin fibrils and crosslink them together
to give wood its strength and resilience has been the subject of
much research (Baucher et al. 2003). Transgenic tree lignin path-
ways have been altered to fine-tune the properties of the wood
fibrils to make them more suitable for pulping and to reduce
drastically the use of treatments with chemicals or heating for
which disposal is environmentally damaging. The effect of the
changes in the physical characteristics of the wood for the ability
of the modified trees to withstand wind, water, and insect pests
is unknown. Environmentalist opposition to releasing modified
trees into the field and fear of vandalism have thus far largely
30
Overview of Genetic Engineering

prevented trials designed to determine the consequences of the
modifications.
Biomining
The recovery of copper and silver from mine leachings in the
early Roman Empire was reported during the first century A.D.
The natural action of indigenous bioleaching bacteria such as the
common Thiobacillus ferrooxidans and Leptospirillum ferrooxidans
solubilizes metals from their ores where they are generally pres-
ent as oxides or sulfides. These organisms, which live in the ore
deposits, grow best in highly acid solutions, pH 1.5–2.5 (neutral
water has a pH of 7), using energy from either oxidizing sulfur
compounds with oxygen or in its absence oxidizing ferrous (Fe+2)
iron to ferric (Fe+3) iron. Carbon and nitrogen to make cellular
substances come from atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) and ni-
trogen (N2), and phosphorus is obtained from soil mineral phos-
phate. Similar bacterial action can remove sulfur from coal de-
posits by conversion to sulfuric acid to make both a commercially
valuable acid and fuel coal while reducing sulfate air pollution.
Other bacteria such as Thiobacillus thiooxidans, T. acidophilus, and
Acidophilium cryptum, which recycle some of the T. ferrooxidans
products, often grow in association with T. ferrooxidans, making
ore decomposition more efficient. Bacteria of the Sulfobus genus
attack ores that are resistant to Thiobacillus action and thrive at
temperatures approaching 80°C; these can work on ore deposits
in situ, without excavating the ore. These organisms replace the
high temperatures and high pressures of industrial processing
plants.
Biomining can process lower-grade ores than is normally
commercially feasible, although the process is slower. Controlled
bioleaching can recover metals from low-grade ores or mine
wastes (<0.5 % metal content) as well as more enriched sources; at
the same time, it can minimize environmental pollution from nat-
urally occurring leaching. It is already a commercially viable oper-
ation; in the United States alone, copper worth $350 million and
uranium worth $20 million were recovered by microbial processes
in 1985. Worldwide, 25% of copper worth $1 billion is biomined.
Many metals, primarily copper and uranium, but also including
cobalt, zinc, nickel, gold, and lead, can be obtained in this way. An
annual worldwide value of $90 billion worth of biorecovered met-
als was projected by 2000 (Gorham International, Inc.).
Applications of Genetic Engineering
31

Bioceramics
A characteristic of biological systems is their ability to organize
physical structures. Besides their cellular materials, they can also
organize the deposition of inorganic constituents such as bone
(Ca(OH)PO4-hydroxyapatite) and the remarkably intricate yet
strong and resilient exoskeletons of shellfish (CaCO3) as well as
those of diatoms and sponges (SiO2) (Drum and Gordon 2003).
The structural details of these mineral shells have dimensions sig-
nificantly smaller than components on current generations of mi-
croelectronic chips. This size range is known as nanodimensional,
the realm of molecular-sized machines. Some grasses, such as
Brachiaria humidicola, contain highly structured “silica bodies,”
which could be used for constructing submicrometer-sized struc-
tures. Control of microscopic structure like this would be a boon
for industrial uses of silicon and ceramics as lightweight, inex-
pensive replacements for metallic parts in high-temperature or
corrosive applications. They can also serve as templates for nano-
electronic components and sensors and as gratings for separating
different wavelengths of light. Medical uses of bone substitutes
require specific forms of the mineral to be biocompatible in re-
constructive therapies. Biological control of ceramic microstruc-
ture is an emerging field (Mann and Ozin 1996).
Bioremediation 
Overview of Air, Water, and Soil Cleanup
Plants have a remarkable ability to influence their immediate en-
vironment both directly and by the commensal communities of
microorganisms that they attract and cultivate. Root systems of
different plants permeate soil anywhere from a few inches (blue-
grass), 1 to 4 feet (ryegrasses, fescue, clovers, and vetches), or 10
to 15 feet for prairie grasses and some wildflowers. Trees (poplar,
willow, and eucalyptus) can extend their root systems even
deeper. The vast surface area of the root system (rhizosphere) is
home to the many kinds of bacteria and fungi that exchange car-
bohydrates from the plant for nutrients that the microorganisms
liberate from soil components. At least 10 to 100 times as many
microorganisms live in the rhizosphere as in dry soil without
plants. Root systems introduce oxygen into the soil, which
greatly speeds the metabolism of foreign chemicals in the soil by
the microorganisms. Plants also secrete large quantities of car-
bon-based material into the soil that sometimes constitutes up to
32
Overview of Genetic Engineering

50% of the material produced by photosynthesis, which precipi-
tates many toxic materials such as heavy metals (mercury,
chromium, copper, iron, lead, and zinc). They bind to the soil
around the roots and concentrate there to protect the plant.
Contaminants spread through the leaching caused by diffu-
sion of groundwater through the soil. Uptake of water by deep-
rooted plants can prevent toxic plume spread by depressing the
water table to below the contaminants. A 5- to 10-year-old tree
can take up from 20 to 40 gallons of groundwater a day. Wetland
systems employing ponds and lagoons with cattail, bulrush, and
reed beds have been used for several decades to treat municipal
and industrial wastes as well as agricultural runoff. A variety of
federal environmental laws govern the use of phytotechnology
for remediation. These include the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act and the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act. Along with this broad-ranging
legislation the Brownfield initiatives, the Clean Water Act, and
the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination permit system seek
to regulate and validate the efficacy of bioremediation schemes.
A variety of state and local statutes can also apply.
Along with their evolutionary tendency to fill every con-
ceivable ecological niche, microorganisms have developed the
capacity to utilize many sources of energy and nutrients in order
to live and reproduce. This includes many materials that are toxic
to animals and most plants, such as a wide variety of petroleum
products and heavy metals such as mercury, lead, and uranium.
They can also adapt to degrade a wide variety of human manu-
factured chemicals such as dioxin that are rarely produced and
fluorocarbons that are not produced by nature. Using biological
organisms to remove toxins and wastes from contaminated ma-
terials is called bioremediation. These living creatures can
process trace contaminants present at the part-per-million level
or lower in water, soil, and air, or destroy millions of gallons of
spilled oil. Where do the organisms come from, and where do
they go? What does genetic engineering have to offer such a tal-
ented resource?
Organic Chemicals
Organisms capable of metabolizing almost any organic chemical
are already present in small numbers in the soil and water, a
product of the constant struggle for nutrients and space. Living
in intimate contact with their surroundings, they have evolved
Applications of Genetic Engineering
33

the means to deal with toxic materials in their neighborhood.
With large numbers of organisms and heavy selection pressure
by toxins, microbes that can’t deal with the insult don’t grow or
die out, leaving those that can detoxify it to multiply and take
their place. Microbes found near natural petroleum deposits are
enriched in species that can utilize the hydrocarbons and aro-
matic chemicals that were created over millions of years by the
decay and metamorphosis of prehistoric plant remains, some
caused by microorganisms. They treat an oil spill as a bonanza
and multiply rapidly, using it as a food source that the other bac-
teria in the soil cannot. Each type of organism can usually only
effectively metabolize two or three compounds, so a diverse na-
tive bacterial population is an advantage over inoculation of
spills with pure oil-eating cultures. In the Alaskan Exxon Valdez
oil spill of 1989, an effective cleanup measure was to spray oil-
soaked beaches with nitrogen- and phosphorus-rich fertilizer to
encourage the growth of the indigenous oil-eating bacteria,
which converted much of the oil to CO2 (Swannell, Lee, and Mc-
Donagh 1996). Although effective, bioremediation is consider-
ably slower than intensive physical cleaning, depending on the
environmental conditions. When the food oil runs out, the bacte-
ria die down to trace levels again. Open water spills have not re-
sponded as well to bioremediation treatment. Cleanup of some
20 square miles of oil-saturated sand from sabotaged oil wells in
Kuwait that threatened both water desalinization plants and the
coastal life after the 1991 Persian Gulf War enlisted microbial
help from the Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research near
Kuwait City.
Commercial use is being made of microbes selected from
natural environments. Two kinds of bacteria found in the soil of
a paint landfill and a junk pile combined with a fungus are used
at Kelly Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas, to strip paint from
airplanes without using solvents. Another bacterium degrades
the paint.
Chlorinated aromatic chemicals are a considerable environ-
mental liability in that they are carcinogenic, break down slowly
in the environment, and tend to concentrate in fatty tissue and
cause reproductive problems in birds and mammals. Organisms
are being genetically engineered with combinations of metabolic
pathways that break down such compounds more extensively
and efficiently than the parental organisms in the soil.
34
Overview of Genetic Engineering

Water-soluble Contaminants
Nitrogen- and sulfur-containing aromatic compounds generated
by mining, coal tar and oil shale processing, wood preserving,
and pesticide and chemical manufacturing processes endanger
water supplies. These water-soluble molecules are not retarded
by adsorption to soil components and pass rapidly into aquifers
that feed human water supplies. Compounds of this type are
substrates for a number of species of soil bacteria (Pseudomonas,
Corynebacterium, Brevibacterium, Bacillus, Nocardia) that convert
them to simple organic acids, ammonia, and sulfate ion, which
then harmlessly enter the normal food chain.
Heavy Metals
Removal of heavy metal contaminants from soil and water is a
different kind of problem. Because these materials are toxic in
their elemental forms, they cannot be broken down into innocu-
ous fragments but must instead be concentrated either for recla-
mation or for proper disposal. Microorganisms play a part in the
natural release of toxic metals from ores and mine waste. Plants,
in particular, the Brassicaceae (mustardweed) family, accumulate
metals such as nickel, cobalt, copper, zinc, selenium, and lead in
the above-ground part of the plant, in some cases up to 1% of its
dry weight. Further improvements could be obtained by using
genetic engineering to incorporate bacterial enzymes to reduce
the metal ions to the uncharged, less soluble, and less toxic ele-
mental metal. Highly efficient metal transporter molecules used
by marine phytoplankton to recover trace metals from ocean
water could be inserted genetically into land plants to increase
metal uptake. Peptides binding toxic metal ions with high affin-
ity could also be engineered into plants to increase their capacity.
Medicine and Health
Human Genome Project
As noted earlier, the nucleotide sequence of the human genome
was completed ahead of schedule thanks to technological im-
provements in sequencing methods and in computer programs to
overlap and align each of the thousands of small stretches of nu-
cleotide sequence as they were determined. The project was a race
mainly between the U.S. government–funded Genome Sequencing
effort and the private company Human Genome Sciences, headed
Applications of Genetic Engineering
35

by Craig Venter (Shreeve 2004). An international sequencing project
was also undertaken. The U.S. competitors announced the comple-
tion of the sequencing in a joint press conference at the White
House in June 2000. The two groups used different strategies for or-
ganizing the sequence that they determined, which provided a
check on the accuracy of the sequence and ironed out discrepancies.
The DNA sequenced in the genome projects was from a pool
of DNA samples from a number of anonymous individuals, male
and female. The European sequencing project used DNA from a
pool of 270 individuals of African, Japanese, Han Chinese, and
European descent. The U.S. efforts used a pool from individuals
of European, African, American (North, Central, South), and
Asian ancestry. Subsequent studies of multiple individuals sug-
gest that less than 0.1% of the total nucleotide sequence differs
among individuals, which would result in some 3 million se-
quence differences. Significant differences in sequence were not
expected within the coding region of genes, the part that specifies
the sequence of proteins and RNAs because that is controlled by
selection pressure from the environment. The parts of the
genome that vary most between individuals and ethnic groups
occur in the vast regions between genes or sometimes in the con-
trol regions of genes. These variations, or polymorphisms, are
largely responsible for subtle associations of ethnicity and other
traits with certain phenotypes.
Genetic Testing
Genetic testing involves the search for specific sequences of nu-
cleotides in DNA from individuals to see whether they harbor
changes in that sequence that studies have connected with a dis-
ease or an increased risk of developing a particular disease. A
number of technologies are available to do this. PCR amplifica-
tion (mentioned earlier) of short target regions of chromosomes
containing the areas of concern or binding of specific sequence
probes to those regions has replaced the earlier methods em-
ploying restriction endonuclease DNA fragmentation patterns of
those regions. Multiple genes or regions (or both) of the same
gene can be tested simultaneously.
Although the technology for detecting changes in the ge-
netic material has and will continue to advance, the question re-
mains as to whether such screening should be done, particularly
for diseases for which there are no treatments. Only in certain
cases with genetically dominant mutations such as Huntington’s
36
Overview of Genetic Engineering

disease, or where the individual has inherited two mutant copies
of a key gene is the effect of the genetic change certain to be ex-
pressed. This ethical question may not have a blanket answer. For
diseases affecting large enough numbers of people, studies may
be able to correlate particular sequence changes in a gene with
relative risk of developing the disease and possibly with age of
onset. This would be useful for planning healthcare but would
have implications for employability and insurance of the indi-
vidual. The confidentiality of such information under control of
the individual would then be critical to prevent discrimination.
Gene Therapy
Gene therapy is a medical treatment altering the genetic potential
of cells. There are currently two types of possible genetic alter-
ations. In one form, changes are introduced into nonreproductive
(somatic) cells, often only certain types of cells. These changes af-
fect only treated individuals and cannot be passed on to their off-
spring. The medical practice of gene therapy is in its infancy. Spe-
cific delivery of normal genes to the diseased part of the body,
replacement of damaged genes, and turning on and off specific
genes are still beyond reach of the “gene doctors.”
Many people support the alteration of genes that cause a de-
bilitating illness or deadly disease. On the other hand, the use of
gene therapy to “adjust” prenatally other embryo characteristics
has engendered much controversy. How many parents would
opt for enhancing “good” attributes such as intelligence and
physical features if such treatments were available? Gene ther-
apy is also expensive, which would mean that only wealthy or
well-insured people would effectively have access to the en-
hancements.
In the second form, germ line gene therapy, the permanent
alteration of cells, including the reproductive (germ) cells—
sperm and ova, causes the altered trait to be passed on to subse-
quent generations. Government guidelines and consensus in the
medical community currently forbid these germ line changes.
Besides formidable technical barriers to making permanent ge-
netic changes in reproductive cells, people disagree about
whether it is right to make permanent changes. Some people be-
lieve that while a patient may give consent to his or her own
treatment, they question whether that individual has the right to
choose for all succeeding generations who might have to bear the
Applications of Genetic Engineering
37

consequences of the alteration. This is countered by those who
point out that essentially the same type of choice is made for fu-
ture generations when a reproductive partner is selected. There
is also the question of societal reaction to someone who had un-
dergone germ line treatment somewhere in his or her pedigree.
They worry whether such individuals would be stigmatized like
someone who has undergone treatment for mental illness. Sena-
tor Thomas Eagleton, George McGovern’s vice presidential run-
ning mate in the 1972 U.S. presidential election, was forced to
withdraw from the contest when it was revealed that he had un-
dergone mental testing. Conversely, others believe that correct-
ing a deadly or debilitating disease condition to allow a person
and his/her offspring to live a normal life far outweighs the risks
and that not providing relief when it is available is wrong. Reli-
gious objections to changing “God’s handiwork” are also a con-
sideration for some people.
Pharmacogenomics 
The application of knowledge of the human genome sequence to
understanding variation in responses of individuals to pharma-
cological agents (pharmacogenomics) has been slow to gain
acceptance. Part of this is a lack of information on large popula-
tions about genes that would affect response or metabolism. A
major reason for this is that for economic reasons pharmaceutical
companies are loath to subdivide their markets. Their emphasis
is to encompass as large a patient population with a therapeutic
agent as possible rather than restrict those would receive treat-
ment. Only if a large enough fraction of the patients were pre-
dicted to be responsive to the therapy would this become attrac-
tive. Pharmacogenomic segmentation of patient populations,
however, is attractive for running clinical trials of new drugs. Re-
ducing the number of nonresponders in a study group decreases
the total number needed to demonstrate a given level of clinical
efficacy and thus the cost to run the trial. An example of this
would be to select only subjects who express particular forms of
drug-metabolizing enzymes that degrade, inactivate, or modify a
drug so that it is excreted. This would eliminate efficient metab-
olizers of a particular drug, thus increasing the chance that the
drug levels required to see a clinical effect would be attained. The
trade-off is that with this type of trial, approval from the Food
and Drug Administration might only be for demonstrated non-
38
Overview of Genetic Engineering

metabolizers. However, a small trial could give encouragement
to a company to run a larger, more inclusive trial and perhaps to
monitor drug levels to adjust dosages accordingly.
DNA and the Law
The use of DNA “fingerprinting” as evidence in court was thrust
firmly into the public limelight during the O. J. Simpson trial in
1995. The legal system now accepts that when properly calcu-
lated, the probability of matching crime scene DNA to that from
a blood sample can be estimated. Such conclusions bear in mind
the somewhat different prevalences of variants of genetic mark-
ers in different racial and ethnic populations. Forensic DNA
analysis was first introduced into evidence in 1986. Acceptance
was not immediate, coming only after statistical arguments
based on population genetics probabilities were established as
valid, by defining the probability that two DNA genetic marker
patterns appear identical simply by chance. The Frye Test, a 1923
U.S. Court of Appeals ruling for the District of Columbia Circuit,
was used to judge when evidence supplied through recombinant
DNA technology met the criteria for judicial technical evidence.
It also indicated the general acceptance of DNA evidence in the
relevant scientific community. Fingerprint and other forms of sci-
entific analysis now commonly accepted had been required to
meet similar standards. DNA evidence can be and has been ex-
cluded in some cases if the evidence was shown to have been col-
lected or analyzed improperly, just as evidence of any other type
would be treated.
DNA sequences differ between individuals at the level of ap-
proximately 0.1%, or around 3 million nucleotides out of the 3
billion nucleotides in the human genome. These differences are
not scattered randomly throughout the genome. There are 13
DNA regions in the genome that vary from person to person. The
probability of two persons having the same profile in all 13 re-
gions is 1 in 1 billion. By comparison, the probability of eyewit-
nesses being able to identify a person correctly out of a lineup as
having been at the scene of a crime is approximately 1 out of 2,
or half the time. Fingerprint analysis, the previous gold standard
for identification of individuals, uses a series of features called
Galton points after a 19th-century founder of biometrics, Francis
Galton. The number of matches required depends on the juris-
diction and the country. The Federal Bureau of Investigation
Applications of Genetic Engineering
39

(FBI) currently does not set a minimum number of matches con-
stituting a positive identification.
The current FBI standard is 13 short tandem repeat se-
quences that are determined and then stored in a database.
CODIS (Combined DNA Index System) is a software program
that operates local, state, and national databases of DNA profiles
from convicted offenders, unsolved crime scene evidence, and
missing persons authorized by the DNA Identification Act of
1994. All 50 states participate in CODIS at some level. For older
samples or tissue that lacks cell nuclei such as bone, hair, and
teeth, the DNA sequences from mitochondria, a subcellular or-
ganelle found in all cells, are analyzed. This DNA is inherited
from the mother and is compared with the mitochondrial DNA
sequences from a relative on the individual’s mother’s side of the
family.
Biological Warfare and Bioterrorism 
Biowarfare
In 1969, President Richard Nixon signed a decree unilaterally re-
nouncing biological weapons, purging them from the U.S. arse-
nal. The Second Asilomar Conference on Recombinant DNA in
1975 was very concerned with the possibility of genetic engi-
neering of biological weapons of mass destruction. They con-
cluded that “construction of genetically altered organisms for
any military purpose should be expressly prohibited by interna-
tional treaty.” In 1975, most countries in the world signed just
such a treaty banning production, possession, and stockpiling of
biological weapons and toxins. Oddly, the treaty did not apply to
chemical weapons (McDermott 1987). Although genetic engi-
neering would appear to be ideally suited for creation of devas-
tating disease weapons, many scientists doubt the possibility of
intentionally developing a genetically engineered Doomsday Mi-
crobe or an Andromeda Strain virus. Lack of understanding
about the causes and limits of disease makes it difficult to deploy
and to control the effects. Among developed nations at least, the
military finds such weapons to be too difficult to make effective
and to limit their action to an opponent to be useful. Since 1975,
most nations of the world have renounced the production, stor-
age, or use of biological weapons.
Inexpensive to produce and easy to hide, biological weapons
have been called the “poor man’s atomic bomb.” Nevertheless,
40
Overview of Genetic Engineering

use of such weapons by militarily weak nations and suicidal re-
leases by reckless individuals who disregard the consequences re-
main a possibility. There was concern during the Iraq conflict in
1991 following the invasion of Kuwait that in desperation Iraq
would use biological and chemical weapons. The U.S. Depart-
ment of Defense has reportedly maintained a research effort to
provide defense against biological weapons that might be used
against the United States. Periodically, there are questions about
whether the research is straying into the arena of offensive uses.
The issue is so politically charged that the military is careful about
even appearing to be involved in genetic engineering. This policy
has been marginally successful because of secrecy surrounding
the work, which breeds distrust. Public suspicion is fueled by pe-
riodic revelations. In 1992, the Yeltsin government admitted that
the Soviet Union had maintained a “standby” program in biolog-
ical weapons in the 1970s. An apparent leak of four strains of
deadly anthrax from Military Compound No. 19 in April 1979
into the city of Sverdlovsk, Siberia, was the first proven escape of
an infectious agent from a military biological laboratory resulting
in fatalities. Recombinant DNA technology ultimately provided
the proof through PCR analysis of frozen autopsy tissue from vic-
tims (Hoffman, 1998). Biological warfare has remained a highly
emotional issue particularly in Iraq, and concern over its possible
use was given as one reason for the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq in
March 2003 looking for “weapons of mass destruction” under the
peace treaty ending the 1991 Gulf War.
Bioterrorism
The United States received a taste of the potential impact of bioter-
rorism in the form of a white fluffy powder that spilled in October
2001 from mail addressed to members of Congress. These spores
of the bacterium Bacillus anthracis, a bacterium found in soil in low
numbers, germinated to infect 7 people with a skin form of anthrax
and 11 with the more dangerous inhalation respiratory disease. Al-
though this particular strain of the anthrax bacillus was sensitive
to the antibiotic Cipro, the disease, which is uncommon in devel-
oped countries, was recognized too late for some victims. Five of
the inhalation anthrax victims died, having come in contact with
mail that had been processed along with the envelopes laced with
the spores. Although the number of people actually affected by the
spores was small, the fear raised and the speed and ease of spread
was a sobering demonstration of the impact of a bioterrorist attack.
Applications of Genetic Engineering
41

The U.S. mail system was disrupted for months as post offices
were tested for contamination, and the Congressional Post Office
was closed for more than a year for decontamination.
Subsequent studies showed that the spores had been partially
weaponized. The suspension had been prepared in such a way as
to be stable, easily spread, and fine enough to penetrate normal
lung defenses. Although the bacterial strain was eventually found
to be similar to that used in several university and military micro-
biological laboratories to study the disease process, the perpetra-
tor(s) were never discovered. The sophistication of the material ini-
tially implicated foreign biowarfare programs, but domestic
sources are also suspect. A number of researchers’ careers were de-
stroyed as accusations flew, and the low level of control of poten-
tial biological agents that might already be in the hands of terror-
ists was uncovered. Steps were taken before and after the
establishment of the Office of Homeland Security in 2002 to control
access to potential biological agents. Scientists found their research
on a number of disease-causing organisms suddenly exposed to in-
tense scrutiny and were burdened with bureaucratic record keep-
ing and layers of security. Some of their work was sharply re-
stricted or banned altogether. None of this will ensure that
biowarfare agents will not fall into the hands of potential terrorists.
On the other side of the coin, a new biotechnology industry
sprang up to respond to new government initiatives funding the
development of new methods of detection and decontamination
of biological and chemical agents. Discovery of new antibiotics
potent against favorite bioweapon organisms and treatment pro-
tocols is being encouraged. Community plans and training to de-
tect and limit the spread of biological agents are being imple-
mented. The impossibility of total protection of air, water, and
food resources from terrorist acts leaves restricting the impact as
the best option.
The specter of genetic engineering in the service of terror is
a very real threat. The technology for legitimate applications is
widespread, although its application to potential bioweapon
agents is more complex. Small laboratories are sufficient for de-
velopment work, although production is more specialized. Sad-
dam Hussein was widely suspected of having a bioweapons pro-
gram, although clear evidence was hard to come by in the wake
of the U.S. invasion of Iraq in March 2003. Resistance to current
antibiotics and the combination of toxic agents in a single organ-
ism are only a few of the possible twists that could increase the
42
Overview of Genetic Engineering

impact of an agent. Because the purpose of terror is not necessar-
ily to decimate an opponent but to disrupt society by introducing
fear and uncertainty, biological weapons are a natural choice.
They are invisible, tasteless, odorless, self-propagating, easily de-
livered, and hard to detect, and only small amounts of the sub-
stances are required. Genetic engineering also has the potential to
combat bioterrorism. Engineered organisms can produce new
forms of antibiotics, signal the presence of toxic chemicals, or in-
terfere with the ability of bioagents to infect the host. It can be
used to construct new vaccines against biological agents that
would be effective against bacteria or even against viruses, which
are not affected by antibiotics. Humans, livestock, and agricul-
tural production could potentially be protected, although the ef-
fectiveness against an unknown agent would be uncertain.
Computers and microprocessors are a glittering testimony to
the accomplishments of human technological development. Cre-
ating something that never existed before by processes not seen in
nature was a monumental achievement. By contrast, genetic engi-
neering used processes employed by natural systems for billions
of years to promulgate life and adapt to changing surroundings,
harnessing their power to modify existing biological systems. In
doing so, genetic engineering reached a threshold that requires
decisions; just because a technology can do certain things does not
necessarily mean it should be used in those ways. The details of
the technology of genetic engineering are confusing to many, par-
ticularly to those who have little understanding of biology, which
automatically generates suspicion and fear. Combined with ques-
tions the new technology asks of deeply held principles of ethical
and moral conduct, this powerful mix occasions a great deal of
discussion among technologists, business interests, medical scien-
tists, theologians, ethicists, politicians, and common citizens. Gov-
ernments have the responsibility to manage this conflict to ad-
vance all interests and to protect the rights of the parties while
using the parts of the new technology that will solve human prob-
lems. As one might imagine, this is not an easy task.
Conclusion
New technologies generally give rise to opportunities as well as to
questions and concerns. Genetic engineering is no exception.
There are clearly contributions to improving the human situation
Conclusion
43

with enhanced medicines and possibly new treatments in store as
the Human Genome Project nears maturity and the data become
available to the research and pharmaceutical sectors. Less clear are
the gains from bioengineered agriculture, which promise indus-
trial feedstocks from renewable plant sources and high-quality
foodstuffs using fewer chemical fertilizers or herbicides and pesti-
cides and leaner, fast-growing animal products. To achieve this,
ecosystems will be exposed to genetically modified organisms on
a massive scale well beyond any testing. Will they be able to coex-
ist, and can an ecosystem recover from infusion of these types of
foreign species? Even for desperately needed bioremediation to
clean up our environment, the same ecological risks apply.
Beyond questions of safety and the environment rise myriad
social issues that cannot be settled by experiment and observa-
tion. Genetic engineering carries a considerable economic impact
as well. Countries able to support the necessary research and de-
velopment will have an advantage over those that do not, and
they can economically pressure the situation, creating depen-
dency and further separation of the haves and have-nots.
Maintaining the privacy of an individual’s genetic informa-
tion will be a paramount issue in the face of potential use of that
information by employers, insurers, and others. The growth of
DNA databases will make controlling accessibility more challeng-
ing. Tests for genetic diseases will continue to proliferate, and ge-
netic counseling will become increasingly important as more
treatment options become available, including gene therapies.
In a sense, Aldous Huxley’s Brave New World is already here.
The difference is that we have the opportunity and indeed the
obligation to see that it is done right. Huxley’s work of fiction
warns us of what we must be aware and what we should pre-
serve. Through careful evaluation of the effects of our newfound
technology on the environment and on what we believe the
essence of humanness to be, we need to make generally accept-
able choices. This will require both education and compromise
because a number of the issues poise at the border between ra-
tionality and faith. Such differences are hard to resolve directly.
They are, nonetheless, solvable at some level though probably
not entirely to everyone’s satisfaction, and this will ensure a con-
tinuing and, in the end, a healthy debate.
Now that the background of the development of genetic en-
gineering has been laid out and the technologies briefly explained,
it is important to consider the ramifications of their introduction.
44
Overview of Genetic Engineering

References
Baucher, M., C. Halpin, M. Petit-Conil, and W. Boerjan. 2003. “Lignin:
Genetic Engineering and Impact on Pulping.” Critical Reviews in Bio-
chemistry and Molecular Biology 38: 305–350.
Benemann, J. 1996. “Hydrogen Biotechnology: Progress and Prospects.”
Nature Biotechnology 14: 1101–1103.
Council for Responsible Genetics. http://www.gene-watch.org/.
Drum, R. W., and R. Gordon. 2003. “Star Trek Replicators and Diatom
Nanotechnology.” Trends in Biotechnology 21(8): 325–328.
Friend, S. H., and R. B. Stoughton. 2002. “The Magic of Microarrays.”
Scientific American (February): 44–53.
Hoffman, I. “Piece Found in Anthrax Mystery. Lab Sheds Light on Russ-
ian Leak.” Albuquerque Journal, February 1998.
Kalaitzandonakes, N. 2003. Economic and Environmental Impacts of Ag-
biotech: A Global Perspective. New York: Kluwer/Plenum.
Mann, S., and G. A. Ozin. 1996. “Synthesis of Inorganic Materials with
Complex Form.” Nature 382: 313–318.
McDermott, J. 1987. The Killing Winds: The Menace of Biological Warfare.
New York: Arbor House.
National Human Genome Research Institute. http://www.nhgri.nih.
gov/Goeff Spencer.
Pennisi, E. 1998 “Transferred Gene Helps Plants Weather Cold Snaps.”
Science 280: 36.
Shreeve, J. 2004. The Genome War: How Craig Venter Tried to Capture the
Code of Life and Save the World. New York: Knopf.
Swannell, R. P. J., K. Lee, and M. McDonagh. 1996. “Field Evaluations of
Marine Oil Spill Bioremediation.” Microbiological Reviews 60(2): 342–365.
Velander, W. H., H. Lubon, and W. N. Drohan. 1997. “Transgenic Live-
stock as Drug Factories.” Scientific American (January): 70–74.
References
45


2
Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions
S
ince the Second World War and the great destruction wrought
by that armed conflict, there has been a rising movement to
consider more carefully the consequences of new technology.
The atomic bomb’s vastly increased destructive capacity over
previous weapons and the critical role of scientists in producing
that weapon and subsequent generations of ever more powerful
devices jolted the public and many scientists to reconsider the so-
cial responsibilities of developing technology.
Problems and Controversy
Within this framework, significant technological advancements
and advantages have to be weighed against the moral, ethical, en-
vironmental, economic, and safety impact. In the United States,
some of these areas are traditionally considered the purview of
government regulators and policy makers, whereas others reflect
personal choice of values or religious faith. Still others require in-
teraction and dialog between nations and groups of nations. Ge-
netic engineering applications potentially span all of these areas,
tapping into some of the deepest convictions. Disagreements over
certain issues are rooted in systems of religious faith. This makes
it particularly difficult to have rational discussion and dialog.
Hot-button issues of this type in the United States are human re-
productive cloning and human embryonic tissue uses, which in-
clude embryonic stem cell research.
47

Proper government oversight and legislative networks can,
in theory, address many of the concerns in areas of health, pri-
vacy, environmental and economic impact, and forensics. Fol-
lowing through on these responsibilities, however, is not simple
and requires thorough investigation and much discussion to ar-
rive at agreement on the proper ratio of cost to benefit for society
and for individuals.
Safety of Genetic Engineering
Many of the early genetic engineering scientists worried about the
escape of modified organisms into the environment, their effects
on people, and the possibility of upsetting the global ecology.
Their apprehensions were shared by a significant number of non-
scientists and public officials who were concerned for public
health and envisioned creation of new uncontrollable forms of
life. A general lack of understanding of what could and couldn’t
be done with genetic engineering was the cause of much unrest.
Federal guidelines first issued in 1976 and updated at intervals
have regulated the types of genetic engineering experiments. Al-
though public debate has largely subsided over the years of ap-
parently safe application of the technology, watchdog groups
such as Jeremy Rifkin’s Foundation on Economic Trends continue
to monitor and challenge the release of genetically engineered or-
ganisms into the environment and marketing of food products
from genetically engineered organisms through the Pure Foods
Campaign (Rifkin 1998).
Genetic Engineering and Health
The unique contribution of genetic engineering technology to
medical science is the ability to alter specific portions of the ge-
netic code of an organism to repair genetic defects in an individ-
ual to cure genetic diseases. Until now people had to accept the
genetic background they inherited. In theory at least, this may no
longer be the case. Related DNA technology makes testing for
mutations rapid and accurate. Benefits of detection and correc-
tion of aberrant DNA will come to fruition only after much com-
plex experimental and clinical investigation. Recombinant DNA
technology also provides tools for understanding better how the
body functions in health and disease and for discovering new
treatments. This process is explained in a Scientific American arti-
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

cle (Haseltine 1997). Cellular and animal models that mimic
human and animal diseases can be engineered for the testing of
new medicines.
Genetic engineering, like other technologies such as micro-
electronics, has the potential to revolutionize the way things are
done for the betterment of society, but there are costs to be borne
as well. Along with an improved standard of living for many,
microelectronics ushered in automation that gradually margin-
alized unskilled labor with serious economic and societal conse-
quences. Significant changes of a different kind in society would
also be expected with recombinant DNA technology. Some peo-
ple assert that difficulties arising from the new genetic technol-
ogy can be anticipated and controlled. Others fear that dangers
of unrecognized proportions loom for genetic engineering. Po-
tential scenarios range from disruption of the earth’s ecosphere
with consequent crop failures and widespread starvation, to the
development of devastating “germ warfare” weapons. Less bio-
logically devastating but potentially more socially disruptive
would be the use of genetic information to assess health risks re-
sulting in discrimination against people in obtaining insurance
coverage or employment on the basis of their genetic heritage.
These are distinct possibilities unless controlled by legislation.
Ensuring protection of the privacy of an individual’s DNA and
the ethical implications of choosing the genes of future genera-
tions with some gene therapies are emerging as significant 
concerns.
Genetic Testing
Genetic engineering technology can be used to probe the hered-
ity of individuals. That genetic knowledge carries both health-re-
lated and societal consequences. Genetic testing is normally per-
formed on three groups of individuals, the first of which is
unborn children (prenatal testing) to determine whether they
have inherited a fatal or severely debilitating disease. Adults
who want to know whether they inherited a particular genetic
trait for a disease that occurs late in life or whether they could
pass a genetic disease on to their offspring are a second popula-
tion. Lastly, asymptomatic children are tested in a few cases for
certain later-developing diseases, but such testing is generally
discouraged until the age of majority when the young adult can
decide for herself or himself whether to be tested.
Problems and Controversy
49

Genetic analysis for the presence or absence of altered genes
only confirms that the altered gene is present in an individual.
Except for a relatively small number of disorders in which the
gene product is dominant, inevitably expressing the disease al-
though the time of onset is uncertain, only a risk is associated
with the presence of the altered gene. For nondominant, or re-
cessive, genes, to what extent and when, if ever, the disease will
occur are unpredictable. For multigenic traits such as heart dis-
ease in which more than one gene is involved the individual
genes are often considered risk factors rather than direct causes.
Many environmental modifications such as introducing a diet
low in cholesterol and saturated fat can intervene to prevent dis-
ease from developing by reducing the risk.
Prenatal testing for biochemical or genetic defects by ana-
lyzing amniotic fetal cells, placental tissue, or fetal blood is rou-
tinely used (300,000 cases/yr in the United States) where the fam-
ily history or advanced maternal age (35–40 years) indicates an
increased risk of fetal abnormality such as Down syndrome.
Every baby born in a U.S. hospital is presently screened for at
least two anomalies, phenylketonuria and congenital hypothy-
roidism. Most are tested for a larger number, depending on the
state. Title XXVI of the Children’s Health Act of 2000 undertakes
to improve and strengthen newborn metabolic screening in the
United States. At present, biochemical testing for the expressed
effect of an altered gene, rather than the gene itself, is preferred.
This is because determining risk due to the presence of an altered
gene is harder to interpret because not all gene defects are fully
expressed. Finding the biochemical hallmarks of the disease be-
fore it causes significant damage is a sure way of knowing early.
A negative biochemical test could change later depending on the
underlying genetics, but the effects are more readily noticed once
the person is older.
Eventually, prenatal genetic tests may be used for the same
disorders in place of the biochemical tests because they are easier
to perform and are more sensitive. Interpreting the results will
likely remain uncertain. Genetic counseling accompanying the
testing provides advice to the parents on the possible outcomes
of the pregnancy and to inform them of their alternatives. Many
of the genetic diseases screened for are presently untreatable,
leaving either termination of the pregnancy or raising a short-
lived or handicapped child with heavy burdens on the family
and the child. Some people question whether the genetic coun-
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

seling about risk is understood as a probability or a certainty by
the parents. Although the counselor is only trying to make infor-
mation available and not give advice, it is difficult to ensure com-
plete neutrality. Other people believe that counselors should pro-
vide guidance. They reason that if society becomes responsible
for the afflicted individual, then society should set some stan-
dards for quality of life.
After a person is born, what are the implications of a diagno-
sis of an incurable disease of unpredictable severity? How would
that alter a person’s life? Huntington’s disease (HD), a neurode-
generative disorder, typically becomes apparent in adulthood
after the disease has been passed to the next generation. In the ab-
sence of a treatment for the disease or accurate prognostication of
severity, HD family members often do not want to be tested, suf-
fering the insecurity, and hoping that they will experience only a
mild form of the disease. HD parents would have a hard time cop-
ing with the knowledge that they have passed on a serious genetic
disease to their child.
Health Privacy
Particularly in the United States, personal privacy is highly
prized and zealously guarded. There will be a greater need for
confidentiality protection as more potential disease genes are
identified. Although medical records are traditionally considered
confidential, is a person’s genetic code any more confidential
than fingerprints? Use of anonymous genetic markers for per-
sonal identification could be considered a similar but more con-
clusive method as long as the markers don’t eventually become
related to identifiable personal characteristics or to disease loci.
At that point, the information would constitute a medical record,
which then would dictate a different level of confidentiality. Os-
tensibly, information from a soldier’s DNA sample can only be
used for identifying remains. Police can obtain DNA samples
under warrant only to exclude suspects in a crime, but what
guarantees that these will be the only uses of those samples? Few
states have moved to bar unauthorized access to DNA databases.
The advances in genetic technologies triggered a debate
about how privacy of individuals should be protected. Is it a
question of protecting civil liberties, which require one standard
of safeguards, or is genetic information a form of health informa-
tion, which requires a different treatment under the law? Because
Problems and Controversy
51

genetic information will always be linked to health, it is regu-
lated under the umbrella policy issue of health information. The
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 does
many things besides what the name implies. It compelled the
health insurance industry to make certain changes to provide
more patient control of their medical information by April 2003,
or April 2004 for small health plans. These rules are in addition
to restrictions by individual states. Unlike the federal law, the
states tend to treat genetic information differently from other
medical information and use a variety of means to achieve more
patient control to safeguard the genetic information.
Insurance and Employment
The insurance industry stays in business by spreading out the risk
of paying settlements over many policyholders, some with a
higher risk for payment than others. Health and life insurance
companies contend that genetic testing simply adds more cer-
tainty to the standard medical testing and family history com-
monly used in actuarial analyses to determine that risk. They
argue that this knowledge would allow more focused assessment
and lower premiums for individuals. However, this policy would
result in other individuals, who from their genetic background
and no fault of their own, are at a higher risk for requiring expen-
sive healthcare or early death facing unaffordable premiums.
Many would likely be refused coverage altogether. By arguing
that genetics are beyond the control of the individual, lawsuits
have forced insurance companies to cover individuals with ge-
netic predisposition to a disease and the payment of medical ex-
penses incurred by a child born with a diagnosed genetic disor-
der. In response, insurance companies and employers may be
taking a closer look at premiums for people whose chosen lifestyle
exacerbates their risk.
Insurance cost- and productivity-conscious employers in-
creasingly attempt to use genetic screening to select their work-
force to cost them least to insure and miss the least amount of
work due to illness. Fair employment practices as set forth in
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 preventing a variety of
discriminations are the bedrock of genetics protections. The
American Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), which forbids discrim-
ination based on disabilities that do not affect performance, is im-
portant for people with expressed genetic diseases. Genetic pre-
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

disposition has been considered protected against discrimination
by the Equal Opportunity Commission since 1995, which in-
voked the ADA, but the U.S. Supreme Court has been less sym-
pathetic to this interpretation in a number of cases. In 1992, Wis-
consin became the first state to forbid discrimination in
employment or insurance coverage based on an individual’s ge-
netic readout. A 1996 federal law already bars insurers of group
plans from considering genetic predisposition a “preexisting con-
dition” in order to limit or charge more for coverage, unless the
condition is clinically evident. The statute does not address self-
insured individual health plans, which account for 10% of health
insurance. Laws in thirty states restrict the use of genetic infor-
mation in the workplace.
Forty-eight states restrict employment-related medical exams
and set the confidentiality standard but stop short of forbidding
access to medical information, including genetic information. An
employer can seek certain genetic information related to the abil-
ity of an individual to perform job-related functions or to work-
place safety.
Sixty percent of life insurance, forty percent of disability in-
surance, and nearly all long-term care insurance policies are indi-
vidually underwritten and thus not covered under the federal pro-
tections. In 1997, spurred by the cloning through nuclear transfer
of several mammalian species, the federal government was con-
sidering a wave of antigenetic discrimination and genetic privacy
legislation. By early 1998, nearly 250 bills in 44 state legislatures
proposed limits on access to genetic information. Forty-five states
restrict what health insurers can do with genetic information, but
only seventeen states address the use of genetic information for
decisions on life, disability, and long-term care insurance. As in the
federal case, the proposed regulations would only govern group,
not individual, policies. In formulating legislation, regulators need
to balance safeguards for individuals with excessive adverse ef-
fects on the insurance market.
State laws tend to restrict rather than ban the use of genetic
information for certain kinds of coverage other than basic health
insurance. These include life, long-term disability, and long-term
care, possibly because they are seen as less of a necessity. How-
ever, the underwriters usually must show actuarial data that peo-
ple who had the particular genetic condition required signifi-
cantly more payments than would be expected from the overall
population. Genetics and long-term care insurance will become
Problems and Controversy
53

an increasingly visible issue as the U.S. population ages and as
more genetic risk factors are discovered for protracted diseases of
the elderly, such as Alzheimer’s disease.
Human Cloning
Although the debate raged over the safety of recombinant DNA
technology at the Asilomar Conference in 1973, the issue of human
genetic engineering was purposely omitted from discussion. Be-
cause it was so far from the realm of possibility at the time, and re-
alizing that strong opinions were held on both sides of the issue,
the organizers, probably wisely, chose to keep this volatile topic
from derailing the conference. Better to concentrate on issues that
could be addressed and some conclusions reached, although the
implications of the new DNA technology for human engineering
remained in the back of everyone’s mind. The serious dialog that
society needed to have was simply postponed for 24 years. Con-
troversy reared its head in the form of a sheep created from an
ovum, an egg cell, by replacing its nucleus with a nucleus from a
cell with its genome committed to be an udder cell expressing only
udder cell genes. Although the procedure used is actually nuclear
transfer, the media immediately christened the accomplishment
“cloning.” Presumably, this was for its added shock value, because
that word is not mentioned in the original published scientific ar-
ticle describing the procedure (Wilmut et al. 1997).
The deprogramming of a differentiated genome had been ac-
complished with nonmammals in a number of laboratories, but
mammals just hadn’t worked. Previously believed to be irre-
trievably committed as an udder cell, the transplanted nucleus,
after it had been treated in a prescribed manner to initiate the
process, reversed the udder cell programming and became em-
bryonic. It was then capable of dividing to produce cells of all the
types needed to form a lamb when implanted in a surrogate
mother. Although the success rate was low, 1 out of 277 tries, the
seemingly impossible had been achieved, and soon other nuclear
transfers with mammals including two rhesus monkeys were re-
ported, many of which were under way at the same time as the
sheep. Thus, it is likely that this was a case of the technology ma-
turing to the point where it is now technically feasible to do a sim-
ilar procedure with human ova and nuclei. There are unsubstan-
tiated reports from individuals and organizations that human
clones have been produced.
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Although not requiring the recombinant DNA technology
that is the subject of this handbook, it is easy to foresee (or imag-
ine) further developments that would allow certain “repairs” or
“enhancements” to be performed on the donor nucleus before
transfer, making this truly human genetic engineering. The nu-
clear transfer technique was perfected to make available animal
clones of superior livestock (already practiced by artificially in-
seminated embryo implantation) and to facilitate production of
transgenic human proteins in these animals. However, nuclear
transfer cannot compete economically with the embryo transfer
method for livestock. Embryo transfer implants embryos pro-
duced by artificial insemination into surrogate mothers. Stem cell
technology, which like nuclear transfer “cloning” does not itself
involve alteration of genetic material, could also become a vehicle
to engineer changes in characteristics, although current uses in-
volving cell or tissue regeneration do not create a new individual.
The fervor of the public response, as well as the flurry of eth-
ical condemnation and legal activity, was reminiscent of that
greeting the advent of recombinant DNA. A moratorium on nu-
clear transfer experiments was immediately issued in the United
States and a raft of federal and state legislation proposed and po-
sition statements from scientific societies and religious groups
banning human cloning issued. The Food and Drug Administra-
tion (FDA) stepped up to fill a perceived regulatory vacuum. Any
human cloning requires FDA approval. Internationally, nineteen
members of the Council of Europe signed the European Conven-
tion on Human Rights and Biomedicine in January 1998, part of
which bans “any intervention seeking to create human beings ge-
netically identical to another human being, whether living or
dead.” Germany, which already forbids any human embryo re-
search, and Britain, which was involved in the sheep cloning and
aims to continue with its tradition of protecting the freedom of
scientific inquiry, did not sign the protocol.
Religious Implications of Genetic Engineering
Implicit in much of the discussion in this chapter is the concern
that the application of genetic technologies be fair in respecting the
privacy of the individual and that whatever burdens are imposed
fall reasonably equitably on various groups in the population.
There is a question in some people’s minds as to whether some or
even any of the technology ought to be applied at all. The general
Problems and Controversy
55

uneasiness felt by some people over technology’s ability to inter-
fere with the order of the natural world was stimulated by the so-
matic cloning of sheep and other animals. The generally held ab-
horrence of analogous “cloning” experiments with humans has
cut across a wide range of societies, religions, and philosophies.
Much the same sort of agreement surrounded the passing of the
United Nations Declaration on Human Rights in 1948 when, ac-
cording to David Tracy in an essay in Clones and Clones: Facts and
Fantasies about Human Cloning (Nussbaum and Sustein, 1998),
“Jews and Christians, Muslims, Buddhists, Hindus, Taoists, Con-
fucianists, and people of several indigenous religions found it pos-
sible to agree with the practical list of human rights—but each for
their own ethical, metaphysical, or religious reasons.” In the case
of cloning, it would be difficult for these divergent parties to agree
on the details of the concepts. For now, they agree on prohibiting
one type of manipulation. The concordance may not extend to
other procedures. A case in point is the use of animal tissues, ge-
netically modified to improve cross-species tolerance or not, in
transplants. Pig and baboon hearts have been transplanted into
humans whose own hearts have failed and for whom a human
donor was unavailable. The Old Testament (Leviticus 19:19) for-
bids the crossbreeding of distinct plant or animal kinds, prohibits
sexual relations between humans and animals, and proscribes eat-
ing an animal before the blood had been drained from it. Some
Christians, as well as Jews and Muslims, argue that this type of
statement strictly condemns biological intermingling of humans
and animals. On the other hand, because genetic material is not ex-
changed in xenografting—interspecies transplantation—and be-
cause many Christians interpret that human beings have been rec-
onciled to God through the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ,
thus superseding the ceremonial regulations of the Old Testament,
many feel that these medical procedures are allowable. Some
argue that even the observed barrier in nature to crossbreeding be-
tween species—indeed, the definition of species—is a human con-
struct and not a “natural” dividing line. Over the millions of years
of evolutionary time, these barriers constantly change and there-
fore appear to exist only for a given time, particularly in related
branches of the evolutionary tree, such as mammals that share
much of their DNA sequences.
Still, others would point out that the order of biological sys-
tems has developed, whether by self-organizing principles or
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

through the divine intervention of a purposeful Creator, into a
smoothly operating whole that should not be disturbed by “mere”
human beings because we cannot know the full extent of the con-
sequences of our interventions. Cross-species transmission and
adaptation of diseases is a very real possibility, especially worri-
some for infectious agents that we might not know about yet. This
comfortable, conservative principle of not rocking the boat has ap-
peared in several contexts in considerations of the applications of
genetic engineering.
The Judeo-Christian ethic uniquely values human life, and
killing of humans is forbidden except in punishment or in time of
war; it places strictures on appropriate animal use for human
benefit such as for food. Do recipients of xenografts, say, pigskin
replacement of burned tissue, become any less of a person? Be-
cause grafting does not carry on into the next generation, con-
cerns over succeeding generations and how they will be viewed
by their contemporaries should not arise. This differs from germ
line gene therapy, which will modify all generations and is cur-
rently forbidden in medical practice. Although many people ac-
cept the breeding and raising of animals for human food, some
people have difficulty accepting such practices for organs or tis-
sues, considering this yet another assault on the rights and feel-
ings of animals.
The cloning of humans also raises religious and moral objec-
tions about the dignity of a person—treating every human as an
individual. This is a consequence of the widely held belief that no
human being should be treated as an instrument to an end.
Cloning an incurably ill child as a “replacement” or creating a ge-
netic double to serve as a tissue donor, or even to gratify the ego of
someone who wants to create a clone of themselves, violates this
premise. Illogically, having a child “the old-fashioned way” for the
same purposes seems to be less of an issue. Such apparent incon-
sistencies riddle discussions on ethics and morality in general, but
despite them some sort of consensus needs to be reached. A prac-
tical view suggests that ethicists and the public need to concentrate
on what to do with cloning rather than trying simply to ban it.
Many people feel that if it is possible, it will probably be done
somewhere eventually, and making sure that agreed-on standards
are present to govern the application offers the best means of ex-
cising meaningful control. Past experience banning other societal
behaviors (e.g., prohibition) has taught us that much.
Problems and Controversy
57

Embryonic Stem Cells
The controversy over embryonic stem cell research is a result of
the rekindling of the abortion debate. Because derivation of em-
bryonic stem cells using today’s technology by definition in-
volves destruction of the embryo, it is subject to all of the bioeth-
ical objections of those opposed to abortion. This includes excess
embryos created for in vitro fertilization, of which some 400,000
are thought to exist in the freezers of in vitro fertilization clinics
worldwide (Lamb 2004). Only 20 of the original 78 embryonic
stem cell lines existing before the Bush administration deadline
of August 9, 2001, are useable to scientists who say they need
many more lines to learn how to direct their growth. Because the
technology is available and can be applied anywhere in the
world, the most productive recourse would be to provide the
proper ethical oversight rather than to try to ban its use.
Legislation aimed at restricting the application of embryonic
stem cell technology currently regulates research paid for by fed-
eral funds. Private individual or company practice is controlled
by the states, the jurisdictions of which differ. Numerous bills
and resolutions in both houses of Congress have been discussed,
further defining and supporting research under the guidelines
laid down in 2001 (S. 723/H.R.2059).
There are many highly visible lobbies promoting stem cell
technology, including actor Michael J. Fox who suffers from
parkinsonism and former first lady Nancy Reagan, whose hus-
band, former president Ronald Reagan, died from Alzheimer’s
disease. Both of these neurodegenerative diseases could poten-
tially benefit from successful embryonic stem cell therapies. In
November 2004 California voters supported a $3 billion bond ref-
erendum to support embryonic stem cell research. Venture capi-
talists are investing significantly in new firms that are targeting
embryonic stem cell therapies. It is too early to evaluate the util-
ity of embryonic stem cell technology.
Impact of Genetic Engineering 
on Health and Privacy
Biological science, particularly when applied to medicine and
pharmaceuticals, has been utterly transformed by the new ge-
netic technology. Genetic engineering has been tremendously en-
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

abling in experimental science and in the discovery of new med-
icines over and above the scarce hormones, growth factors, and
antibodies that can be produced on an industrial scale by direct
application of the technology.
On the other end of the spectrum is the decided lack of
progress on gene therapy. Gene therapy is something that recom-
binant DNA technology has the potential to do that other treat-
ments cannot: remove the root cause of a disease by replacing the
deficient gene that caused pathology. Initial concern over human
engineering was defused by a general agreement to ban germ line
gene therapy for the present. The debate was reawakened in Feb-
ruary 1997 with the generation of a sheep cloned by nuclear trans-
fer from an adult differentiated cell. Although not using recom-
binant DNA technology per se, the feat served to reopen the
discussion. Despite the approval and implementation of hundreds
of somatic gene therapy clinical protocols, convincing evidence of
a significant clinically useful effect remains to be shown. Seasoned
practitioners point out that this is exactly what would be expected,
especially because these treatments were therapy of last resort for
most patients. Clinical medicine has always been a slow, trial-and-
error process. Changing the pathophysiology was not going to be
as simple as popping a new gene into the diseased tissue. Propo-
nents of gene therapy would now agree that they are still learning
how to get genes into the right place at the right time for the proper
length of time and that the process is much more complicated than
was originally anticipated.
Although no worldwide ecological cycles stand in peril from
human genetic testing, the developed nations are experiencing
considerable upheaval and public debate over its social implica-
tions. Those countries without the infrastructure or scientific re-
sources for their own recombinant DNA programs may initially
be spared the trauma of adjustment to a wealth of personal ge-
netic information, but they will eventually have to face up to its
implications as filtered through their own societal norms and sen-
sibilities. They will have the opportunity to observe the debate
and types of solutions attempted by the nations that are facing the
dilemmas now and will be able to fashion their own versions. The
technology or personal or public safety in this case is not at issue,
but the use of the personal information obtained by individuals,
the government, and the business and industrial sector to deter-
mine personal opportunities and relationships is at stake. There is
no technological fix, no straightforward way to ensure that people
Impact of Genetic Engineering on Health and Privacy
59

are treated fairly while retaining the advantages of having genetic
information available. It is a social problem with greatest impact
at the moment on the developed nations that are trying to deal
with it. Linda Bullard articulated the dilemma:
Like nuclear power, genetic engineering is not a neutral
technology. It is by its very nature too powerful for our
present state of social and scientific development, no
matter whose hands are controlling it. Just as we would
say, especially after Chernobyl, that a nuclear power
plant is just as dangerous in a socialist nation as it is in
a capitalist one, so I would say the same thing for ge-
netic engineering. It is inherently Eugenic in that it al-
ways requires someone to decide what is a good and
what is a bad gene. (Bullard 1987)
Much controversy centers on the privacy of a person’s ge-
netic information and how that privacy will be maintained in an
environment where such information, which is out of the indi-
vidual’s control, could be used in hiring and firing decisions and
in determining insurability risks. Ensuring control over access to
information stored in databases has been an issue since the ad-
vent of the widespread use of computers to store and access that
information. Although overall security has been reasonable—so
far—there are more than a few public instances in which sensi-
tive information has been obtained despite the safeguards. With
the projected creation of extensive databases and DNA banks,
such as DNA databases of convicted criminals and military per-
sonnel for rapid identification, better control measures able to
handle larger amounts of data stored in more places become im-
perative. At the same time, just such repositories of genetic infor-
mation, with personal identifying characteristics removed, are
indispensable for research into understanding diseases and fun-
damental biological processes in the 21st century.
Foreseeable consequences of the ability to detect genetic dis-
orders are questions about how such information should be used
as well as to whom the testing should be available. Whether to
test in the first place, it is generally agreed, depends on whether
there is a high rate of conversion to the clinical disease (i.e., Hunt-
ington’s disease, Down syndrome, and cystic fibrosis), which
could be used as a base for reproductive decisions. Testing would
also be indicated if an effective treatment for the disorder is avail-
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

able. The consequence of the inappropriate use of genetic testing
results is the a priori limitation of personal opportunity on the
basis of projected genetic potential. This last issue particularly
concerns people who have been diagnosed with a genetic disor-
der but who do not yet show clinical signs of impairment. It also
affects their families and caregivers. The possibility of disastrous
confusion of genetic probability with certainty for most genetic
diseases makes a difficult and unsettling situation for the indi-
vidual with a positive diagnosis even worse. A genetic predispo-
sition to a disorder before symptoms appear is not the same thing
as a clinical disorder where the person or the physician notices
the changes due to the disease. The complex interdependence of
factors causes many genetic disorders to develop only partially if
at all into clinical disease. Nevertheless, the afflicted individual is
constantly under the pressure of trying to live a reasonably nor-
mal life, all the while looking for the first signs of the disease.
Should they tell a potential spouse of their condition and should
that person also be tested to avoid a union that might produce
children with an aggravated genetic risk? Parents may be
tempted to divert educational and other family resources to
“healthy” offspring with their presumed better chance to make
better use of the opportunity.
Mammalian cloning—that is, nuclear transfer as it is currently
practiced—does not make use of the recombinant DNAtechniques
that mark the genetic engineering discussed in this volume. How-
ever, the consequences are similar in some respects and as such de-
serve some comment here. The term genetic engineering originally
referred to human engineering, which would include reproducing
an organism from a single cell rather than its DNA complement.
The organizers of the Asilomar conferences in 1973 and 1975
agreed to exclude the topic of human engineering because of the
technical infeasibility of such experiments at the time. They also
recognized that the extremely emotionally charged nature of such
an issue would quickly dominate the public mind, and no consen-
sus would be possible on the more mundane but more pressing
issue of the safety of recombinant DNAtechnology matters. The is-
sues of human cloning using somatic cells are closely allied to
those of human germ cell gene therapy, which has by consensus of
the medical community been banned. Besides any theological sen-
sitivities that might be offended, in either of these cases a person
would be created who could, at a future time through no action of
Impact of Genetic Engineering on Health and Privacy
61

his/her own, be subject to discrimination or ostracism depending
on the course of societal values.
Possibilities for Action
When it comes to human health and the research that leads to
better and deeper understanding of human health and disease,
there is near consensus that genetic engineering has contributed
immensely to furthering knowledge and practical pharmacolog-
ical treatment. One needs to look no further than the enormous
private investment in biotechnology companies and in the cor-
porate acquisition of biotechnology capability. Most of this in-
vestment activity is in the pharmaceutical and diagnostic sector.
People believe that the technology will produce saleable prod-
ucts. On the down side, the miracle gene therapies promised by
the new technology have not as yet lived up to their potential in
any meaningful way, outside of some judiciously interpreted
proof of concept cases.
The arguably most profound impact of the genetic revolution
may well be on the ethics of some of the applications of genetic
engineering technology. In theory, it is possible to overcome the
technical objections to safety, ecological disruption, and economic
distortions from unequal access to the technology. The philosoph-
ical issues are yet another problem. Some of the ethical questions
being posed now have been disputed vehemently among intelli-
gent people for centuries, regardless of their religious persuasion,
without resolution. Genetic testing raises the question of what (as
well as who) is the individual and what rights does that person
have to knowledge about himself or herself, and what rights do
others have to that same information? What are the rights of fu-
ture generations, and what responsibility does one bear toward
descendants? The United States is moving toward legislative re-
striction of both access and use of genetic information for insur-
ance or employment selection. Other countries feel differently
about the relative importance of the individual and society and
are less restrictive. Outside of this arena, in the United States ge-
netic testing used to determine the potential of predisposition to
major genetic disease is presently regulated by a series of medical
guidelines depending on the age of the subject and on the prog-
nosis for intervention in the disease. This is still a very murky area
that will continue to expand as more markers for genetic disease
are identified.
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Nuclear transplantation, popularly dubbed “cloning,” of hu-
mans and human stem cell replacements have leapt to the fore in
the public notice as primary issues in genetic engineering, which
is increasingly being eyed as human engineering. Not strictly ge-
netic engineering in the sense of recombinant DNA technology, it
is not difficult to imagine future “enhancements” that could be
applied. Although not yet feasible for humans, the flurry of leg-
islative activity all over the world designed to control or ban nu-
clear cloning and stem cell research attests to how close such ac-
tivities approach what many people feel is the limit, the edge of
their humanity. The challenge will be in setting the boundaries
on exactly what is going too far without disrupting the beneficial
parts of genetic engineering as applied to these new technolo-
gies. Finally reduced to fundamental issues of philosophy that
are not amenable to proof and reason, this will be the burning
question for this millennium.
Impact of Genetically Modified Foods
An issue is whether food products genetically engineered by re-
combinant methods should be required to be labeled as such and
be processed and sold separately from the same products pro-
duced through traditional breeding programs. Public health con-
cerns (side effects or allergies), religious proscription, and per-
sonal preference considerations supporting special labeling on
one hand are arrayed against stigmatizing biotechnology for no
demonstrable reason and boosting protectionist economic tactics
by countries that lack a significant biotechnology infrastructure.
Little useful information about actual product safety is provided
to guide consumer decisions by such labeling of engineered crops.
Genetically modified foods, referred to as GMO (genetically
modified organisms), are even a bigger issue in Europe than in
the United States. In October 1999, the European Commission’s
Standing Committee for Food set a legal threshold of 1% geneti-
cally modified product contamination for imported agricultural
products destined for human consumption. Because the same
processing equipment is used to handle both GMO and regular
products, this limit can be unintentionally exceeded. In the ab-
sence of data showing harm caused by GMO foods, U.S. proces-
sors (and the farmers who supply them) feel unfairly discrimi-
nated against. Genetically modified soybeans (Monsanto) and
Impact of Genetically Modified Foods
63

maize (Ciba) have been targeted by the European Union, bring-
ing that organization into conflict with the World Trade Organi-
zation, which is responsible for overseeing the General Agree-
ment on Tariffs and Trade. This agreement states that imports can
be banned only on scientific grounds. Jeremy Rifkin’s Founda-
tion for Economic Trends, by way of the Pure Food Campaign,
maintains a generally critical stance on genetic engineering. This
group feels that labeling of all genetically modified produce
should be required and that any resulting conflict with trade law
should automatically be superseded by potential public health
concerns that could be associated with the genetic alteration. Tra-
ditionally cross-bred crops, even those resulting in the same char-
acteristics, would not be so regulated. This discrepancy is often
pointed out by proponents of genetically engineered or enhanced
foods who feel that such labeling needlessly stigmatizes their
products, because harmful effects have not been demonstrated.
Genetic Engineering of Food Animals
Genetic engineering of food animals has been less well devel-
oped, restricted primarily to providing supplements of native
growth hormone to cattle and pigs. Treatment of cattle with
growth hormone protein produced by biotechnology increases
milk production 10% per day, and animals reach market weight
sooner with leaner meat. Although the hormone given is chemi-
cally identical to the natural hormone, there is much controversy
over whether products from treated animals should be labeled
differently from regular animals in case problems develop. The
European Union still does not allow sale of products from ani-
mals treated with recombinant growth hormone.
In many areas of the world, the only source of high-quality
protein is fish taken from the ocean, lakes, or rivers. Some scien-
tists feel that increasing the amount of edible fish is not just con-
venient but necessary as commercial fish catches decline along
with the natural fish populations due to overfishing. In fishery
laboratories, sockeye salmon, catfish, trout, striped bass, floun-
der, tulipin, and other species are being given extra copies of fish
growth hormone implanted in their DNA (transgenic fish). These
superfish grow more than 10 times faster than regular fish, re-
quire less food per pound of body weight, and are adapted to be
raised in high-density “fish farms.” These farming advantages
have raised concerns about what might happen to the ecology of
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

natural systems if the faster-growing and reproducing transgenic
fish escaped into the wild fish population.
Environmental Safety
There is considerable disagreement over whether genetically
modified or transgenic plants grown on a massive agricultural
scale represent the same or greater risk to the environment than
those traditionally bred (Nottingham 2002). Few controlled stud-
ies on the actual risks have been carried out, and then only under
a limited set of environmental conditions. Potential problems are
seen for many of the proposed genetic modifications. Acquired
resistance to engineered pesticides such as Bacillus thurengensis
toxin (Bt) would negate the benefits of the transgene in crop
plants as well as reduce the effectiveness of the Bt spores used by
organic farmers for insect control. Cross-pollination and transfer
of herbicide resistance (glyphosate, bromoxynil) to related weed
plants could bring problems in weed control that wouldn’t be
outweighed by the use of small amounts of safer herbicides.
Viral-resistant plants containing viral coat proteins (squash; As-
grow Seed Co.) have the potential to harbor virulent recombinant
viruses with new properties, although the actual extent of
pathogen evolution in large-scale transgenic crops is unknown.
Other approaches or targets would not suffer this flaw. Antisense
ribozyme against rice dwarf virus would avoid this problem. Ge-
netically altered fruit ripening (enhanced ethylene production
(DNA Plant Technology) or cell wall hydrolase antisense DNA
(Calgene) would not be expected to have harmful effects on the
environment.
Although comprehensive studies of a transgenic plant enter-
ing a wild population to become a weed or to disrupt ecological
interactions among other plants have been lacking, prevented
sometimes by the very activists who demand the results of such
trials, lessons from history allow some estimates. Taking all
known instances of introduction of nonnative species, a species
becomes established in the new ecosystem 10% of the time. About
10% of these newly established species go on to become a “pest”
species, so 1% of the time a newly introduced species becomes a
pest. Although introduced species are more likely to be geneti-
cally different from the species around them, and thus less likely
to interbreed, the population dynamics of the first generation of
transgenic plant products (herbicide- and pest-resistant) do not
Impact of Genetically Modified Foods
65

differ markedly from their equivalent nontransgenic brethren. In
a nonselective environment (no herbicides present or infestations
of a monoculture), they would have no advantage and would re-
main at low levels. Crops such as transgenic soybeans, a nonna-
tive species, and those that have no or few wild relatives are even
less likely to be a problem. On the other hand, the spread of new
genes from cultivated trees is more likely to be a problem because
their pollen is transmitted over larger distances and genetic mech-
anisms in many tree species favor outbreeding.
Because of the ease of pollen dispersal, transgenic crop
plants have been found in nontransgenic fields. Possible prob-
lems with Bt-toxin–laden pollen being eaten by monarch butter-
fly caterpillars have also come to public attention. Collateral ef-
fects like this are a real concern. Agribiotech companies haven’t
improved the image of the new technology by prosecuting farm-
ers for license infringement when transgenic plants, likely cross-
fertilized from windblown pollen, were found among their fields
of nontransgenic plants in the vicinity of neighbors who had li-
censed the transgenic variety. Certified organic farmers and those
who wish to sell standard nontransgenic crops are at risk of hav-
ing their crops contaminated through no fault of their own. Some
of these issues could be addressed if the transgenes were de-
signed to be excluded from the readily dispersed pollen, al-
though this is a more challenging approach. Perhaps this adjust-
ment will be built into future generations of modifications.
Agribusiness Control of Agriculture
One of the differences between the Green Revolution and the
Gene Revolution is that private plant-breeding firms have taken
the lead in technology development in the latter. Government-
sponsored programs now play a much smaller role in developing
new plant varieties (Evenson 2002). Many are relegated to proj-
ects conserving the natural diversity of the germplasm resource
and are poorly funded. Most research and development plant
breeding, genetically engineered or traditional, is centered in the
developed world where the genetic engineering technology is
highly advanced and, importantly, where the intellectual prop-
erty laws are clearest and most rigorously enforced. To protect
costly investments, companies have for many years produced
hybrid varieties of some plants (maize, sorghum) that require
farmers to purchase new seeds each year for maximal yields.
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Still, many farmers in the United States save seed from the pre-
vious year’s crop to resow the following season. Up to 80% of
farmers in developing countries use retained seed. New systems
are in development that will further reduce the ability of farmers
to reuse seed. They are called genetic use-restriction technologies
(GURTs). So-called terminator strains are variety-based GURTs
that will not grow from replanted seed. Trait-based GURTs will
have properties of a standard variety but will require the pur-
chase of a complementary product to get the enhanced produc-
tion. These are high-tech solutions to what companies see as
unauthorized use of their products.
Farmers cite the uncodified Plant Breeder Rights originally
started in Europe and spread to the United States more than fifty
years ago under which farmers could replant seed and to use
freely any new varieties that might develop under their cultiva-
tion as long as they didn’t sell seed (Swanson 2002). Farmers had
traditionally been involved in the selection of varieties of crops
under their care to obtain plants that were adapted to local con-
ditions or displayed other superior characteristics. The Union
pour la Protection des Obtentions Végétales (UPOV) codified
limited Farmer’s Rights for private replanting of registered seed
in 1978. This protection was removed in 1991 as a result of objec-
tions by the biotechnology industry. The same agency in 1961
had provided exclusive marketing rights for registered plant va-
rieties, similar to the patent system, which does not cover plant
varieties. These restrictions are unevenly enforced despite the
World Trade Organization’s Trade-Related Intellectual Property
Rights Agreement (1994) because many countries lack the infra-
structure and funds to do so. Enforcement does not work because
the users (farmers) are not in the same country as the plant breed-
ers. Most agritechnology firms are multinational companies
based primarily in Europe and in the United States.
A major conflict with a familiar dividing line is shaping up.
The two sides are the rich, developed nations that hold the tech-
nology and the poor, developing nations in need of increased
agricultural productivity to provide income for their farmers and
food for their burgeoning populations. Some relief, although not
a solution, may come from a generics industry expected to spring
up in the next decade as patent protection lapses on the original
technologies.
The ecological consequences of the widespread use of genet-
ically modified organisms in agriculture and in industry remain
Impact of Genetically Modified Foods
67

largely unexplored. No application seems entirely risk-free. Even
bioremediation, which is directed to redress environmental dam-
age inflicted by industry and a consumer-driven society, is
fraught with possible ecologic nightmares. Potential scenarios
range from the rampant spread of pest and weed resistance, cold
tolerance, massive crop failures and starvation, contamination of
food crops with plants engineered to produce industrial chemi-
cals, and destruction of the world’s biodiversity and genetic re-
serves. Intermixing of genetically engineered foods and those de-
rived from traditional breeding methods could expose consumers
to unanticipated allergens or even potential toxins. These dire
possibilities are not all trumpeted by a zealous and vocal few in-
dividuals with a dread of any technology or any change, although
there are a number of such groups and individuals in the public
eye. Various incarnations of these issues and evidence for a mea-
surable effect can be found in governmental and research reports,
although, of course, the true extent of their impact is unknown.
Those considering the positive aspects of genetic engineer-
ing point to maintaining and increasing food production for the
burgeoning world population while decreasing the reliance on
chemical herbicides and pesticides as laudable goals, worthy of a
certain amount of risk. Opening previously unusable land with
engineered drought-, salt-, cold-, and heat-resistant plant vari-
eties could be augmented by plants with more efficient photo-
synthesis and enhanced nutritional content. Fast-growing, feed-
efficient, lower-fat food animals with enhanced processing
characteristics would increase the high-quality protein available.
Possibilities for Action
The agricultural impact of genetic engineering is likely to be only
slightly less revolutionary than in medically related fields. Just as
everyone gets sick, everyone needs to eat. Genetic technologies
have the potential to increase food crop production further, using
less fertilizer, fewer herbicides or pesticides, all in poorer soil
with less and poorer-quality water during an extended growing
season in harsher climates. Not established yet and greatly
feared, though, are the potential ecological consequences of mass
culturing of plants that could pass their favorable genetic prop-
erties to wild-type plants, which would then become weeds, dis-
rupting both human applications and world ecology. The Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency is responsible for regulating the
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

release of transgenic organisms in the United States. There are
also significant economic changes that would be incurred as well
as social changes in the farming profession.
Particularly strident voices have been raised over marketing
of transgenic crops, especially for human consumption. Vocal
groups of consumers typified by the Pure Foods Coalition oppose
the introduction of transgenic crops or products from plants or
animals produced with the assistance of genetic engineering tech-
nology, citing potential health hazards from unnatural combina-
tions of gene products. Resistance to transgenic foods and trans-
genic imports in Europe claims similar roots, but accusations of
economic protectionism have also been made. At this point the
perceived danger is a matter of personal preference, with little or
no convincing data presented. Legislation on labeling foodstuffs
known to be free of transgenic products would avoid stigmatizing
biotechnology products for unproven dangers and would resem-
ble similar labeling for organic products.
Ecological disaster caused by the escape of transgenic or-
ganisms is the most feared potential consequence of exposure of
engineered organisms to the environment—and the hardest to
provide evidence against. Adequate testing in the ecosystem in
which the organism will be used is rarely done because of the ex-
pense and time involved. Understanding of large ecosystems is
also poorly developed at present. Although no significant escape
into the wild population has been observed for transgenic plants,
this does not reassure some people. Meanwhile, enhanced risk-
versus-benefit analysis is being carried out and releases are re-
stricted until more is learned about their ecology.
Inextricably tangled with the “engineered” versus “natural”
controversy is the widespread planting of genetically homoge-
neous plant populations, which expanded greatly with the Green
Revolution. The potato blight in Ireland (1845), wheat “red rust”
in the United States (1954), and the corn leaf blight in the United
States (1970) are pointed examples of a population crash when a
small number of varieties are being grown. In the 1980s, 70% of
U.S. corn was in six cultivars while a single potato cultivar mo-
nopolized the Netherlands. This is a problem currently encoun-
tered with traditionally bred high-yield hybrids and is shared by
genetic engineered varieties. Monocultures displace indigenous
species and lower the diversity of the gene pool for those traits
that are multigenic or not yet assigned to a particular gene. Such
populations are particularly vulnerable should a pest or weed
Impact of Genetically Modified Foods
69

overcome the plant resistance and sweep through the crops. On
the other hand, in developed nations farmers maximize crop
yields and reduce cultivation requirements by planting the most
productive varieties. It is unrealistic in a market-driven economy
to expect otherwise. The danger of massive crop failures with
consequent food shortages from a pest circumventing resistance
or other methods of control is a constant threat. Some feel that the
possibility is adequately being dealt with, but others believe that
disaster is just over the horizon. In some sense, the dilemmas of
today with genetic engineering recapitulate those presented by
the Green Revolution in the 1960s. The desertification and
aquifer depletion that have accompanied some high-intensity
agriculture and continue today are seen by some as a prime ex-
ample of the lack of proper management.
Although many people consider the use of genetic engineer-
ing in certain health-related situations as a necessity, its application
in the production of food is much more controversial. At first
glance, such an attitude is incongruous with the centuries of wide-
spread plant and animal breeding to increase yield and resistance
to disease. On the other hand, it is an example of human reticence
to accept unfamiliar technology in everyday situations in which
traditional solutions are available. The conception for many peo-
ple is that there is nothing inherently better about the engineered
food products and that the consumer and environment are put at
unknown risk simply for the convenience and profitability of fac-
tory farm producers and manufacturers of processed foods. Par-
ticularly disturbing to some is that global economic conditions are
changing such that choice among the options may not be freely
available to all societies, particularly developing nations and the
third world. The worldwide implications for large-scale applica-
tion of plant and animal genetic engineering will be complex and
will pit the needs and aspirations of the third world against the
lessons learned by the industrialized nations as the developing na-
tions struggle for their place in the sun. Suman Sahai, the convener
of the Gene Campaign in New Delhi, India, summarized this per-
spective in Genetic Engineering News (May 15, 1997, issue): “There
is little reason for people in food surplus countries to become ex-
cited about the biotechnology route to increase the yield of wheat
or potato. But can we in India have the same perception? Is it more
unethical to ‘interfere in God’s work’ than to allow death from
hunger when it can be prevented?”
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Impact of Bioindustrial Engineering
The large-scale application of industrial bioengineering is likely
to have an impact on the environment similar to that of geneti-
cally modified foods. In comparison to most medical applica-
tions of genetic engineering, industrial uses typically involve
several orders of magnitude larger amounts of materials, some-
times running into the millions of tons. Working on such a scale
while maintaining close confinement and monitoring of the
stages of production with genetically engineered organisms is
manageable but requires significant investment. Escape or acci-
dental release into the environment from these larger popula-
tions could potentially disrupt the ecosystem. Using strains of or-
ganisms containing debilitating genes that put them at a
disadvantage compared with organisms that are naturally in the
environment provides a margin of safety if they escape culture
containment, although it is often pointed out that such features
are not foolproof. Similar concerns exist for both modified mi-
croorganisms grown in huge vats and for modified higher plants.
The latter situation involves cultivation of thousands of acres of
recombinant plants growing in fields next to plants that might
crossbreed and transfer undesirable characteristics. The plants
could also be infected with viruses or microorganisms that might
exchange genetic material, and the plants are exposed to insects
that might also disperse genetic material in unimagined ways.
On the other hand, the products being expressed for industrial
applications generally do not confer a selective advantage, unlike
pest or weed resistance, so there is less weed potential for these
systems
Situations such as biomining, in which microorganisms are
released or enriched for use directly in the environment, clearly
have considerable potential for causing ecological problems, al-
though many of these microorganisms are already present and
have adapted to living in the deposits, albeit in small numbers
before manipulation.
Possibilities for Action
Industrial applications of genetically modified organisms in-
clude the extension of the traditional culture of microorganisms
in closed systems such as sealed vats. Other systems are more
Impact of Bioindustrial Engineering
71

controversial. Utilizing genetically modified plants to produce
industrially useful building blocks such as certain oils or mixed
ester fibers grown on a large scale runs into some of the same en-
vironmental problems of other large-scale transgenic plant prop-
agation. Reducing the use of fossil fuels for industrial production
in favor of a renewable resource fits with the trend toward eco-
logically responsible technologies and could be a significant con-
tributor in the next century.
Biotechnology itself has become a substantial industry. The
spirit of entrepreneurship still runs high in the United States in
that most of these companies are small with almost 80% having
fewer than 50 employees. Many were started at academic institu-
tions and were often nurtured in university “incubators” by ad-
ministrations hungry for new sources of income as federal higher-
education funding dwindled. Although providing a pipeline to
convert academic knowledge to practical application, the rush to
obtain patent protection for ideas or products and the direct con-
nection of academic scientists to industry has drastically affected
the university-industry relationship and raised questions for
many people about the supposed “disinterested” involvement of
many academics and the role the government has played in fund-
ing the research. In Europe and the Far East, such connections be-
tween the universities and industry are more common than in the
United States. In any event, the profound change in the univer-
sity-industry relationship in the United States was an unpredicted
outcome of the genetic engineering revolution.
Impact of Bioremediation
Destruction and cleanup of toxic materials on-site without creat-
ing massive dangerous waste storage areas using nature’s own
mechanisms—it sounds too good to be true. And so it is; by its
very nature, bioremediation involves the large-scale release of a
few types of organisms into the environment, possibly genetically
modified microorganisms or plants. It can include controlling
groundwater flow into or out of a contaminated area with plants
that send roots to different depths in the soil. Control of releases
and their effects on the local ecology such as exchange of genetic
material with native populations or depletion of groundwater are
issues that have and will continue to limit the dissemination of
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

this technology. Regulatory agencies, local governments, and citi-
zens will have to wrestle with the conflicting needs for detoxifi-
cation of air, water, and soil, the need to protect fragile ecosys-
tems, and public unease with genetic engineering technology.
Many of the same questions that face other uses of biotechnology
in the open environment are also germane here. Naturally occur-
ring asphalt-eating bacteria are suspected to cause significant
damage to roads, particularly where weather and heavy loads
cause cracking, increasing microbial access. What is the possibil-
ity that super paint-eating or rubber-degrading strains could
change to grow in a normal environment, attacking houses, cars,
and machinery?
Possibilities for Action
Genetic engineering holds the potential for affecting a massive
cleanup of the environment of the various toxic and noxious
byproducts of industry and our high standard of living. Biore-
mediation of toxic waste in land, water, and air by either indige-
nous organisms or by engineered ones can be effective and rela-
tively inexpensive without processing factories or moving large
amounts of materials by treating them in situ. By their nature,
however, these techniques require release of large numbers of or-
ganisms into the environment without being able to control their
spread and disturbance of balanced populations of other organ-
isms. They could even get into underground storage tanks or ac-
celerate road destruction. Microbial ecology is even less well un-
derstood than terrestrial or aquatic ecology, so it would be even
more difficult to predict release outcomes than in the agricultural
case of a transgenic corn plant containing an herbicide resistance
gene. Further study of microbial ecology could provide needed
information to allow the design of biological containment sys-
tems that could provide for safe release.
Engineered higher plants with enhanced capabilities to deal
with pollutants or attract microbial communities would be easier
to contain than microbes and could provide much needed reme-
diation capabilities. In contrast to many other uses of genetic en-
gineering in which “ruthless corporate giants” and “greedy indi-
viduals” are perceived to be risking the public health and safety
of others for their exclusive benefit, bioremediation has the po-
tential to provide a positive impact for all parties.
Impact of Bioremediation
73

Impact of Genetic Engineering 
on DNA and the Law
In a period of less than a half dozen years, the use of DNA infor-
mation to identify individuals has moved from grudging accep-
tance to a highly sought link in the chain of evidence. It has been
particularly useful in clearing suspects of charges, even if they
had been previously convicted on the basis of other evidence.
One result of this newfound acceptance is a large backlog in the
processing of samples. Analysis is now more complete and the
results more reliable than before with the introduction of a larger
number of new markers. There are still issues over whether and
how long DNA samples may be retained by law enforcement
agencies and under what conditions they may obtain the DNA.
The nonforensic-related use of the DNA information de-
posited in a general database from a criminal investigation, how-
ever, has become a concern to a growing number of people. Some
consider “fishing” for a suspect by randomly matching crime
scene analyses of DNA markers to a general DNA database to be
a search without a warrant, a violation of individuals’ civil lib-
erty. The FBI, as of January 2003, had DNA profiles on more than
1 million convicted violent offenders and 48,000 from crime
scenes not connected with an offender. An early concern was that
the markers used for typing in that DNA database might be
linked at some later date to a genetic trait or behavior that then
would make it illegally disclosed confidential medical history.
With the human genome sequence completed, the markers cho-
sen are not in gene coding regions and thus unlikely to be infor-
mative with respect to a trait or behavior.
Where Is Genetic Engineering Today?
How do the scientists and physicians, industry, universities, eco-
logical activists, politicians, and finally the general public view
the place of genetic engineering in the world today? What have
been the gains and the losses over the nearly 30 years since the
recombinant DNA revolution began? What are the hopes and
fears for the future now that genetic technology is touching peo-
ple’s lives through its increasing use in providing food and med-
ical treatment? The interconnection and interdependence of these
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

sectors of society have increased greatly over the years. They are
no longer isolated endeavors. Changes in one area have reper-
cussions in all of the others.
Scientists and Physicians
Hopes were initially high for gene therapies to repair major ge-
netic disorders such as muscular dystrophy and cystic fibrosis as
well as to provide cures for cancer. Although numerous clinical
protocols for cancer and genetic disorders have been approved
and carried out, as of 2004, genetic therapies have not been
hugely successful and appear to add little to conventional medi-
cine. A variety of practical problems have stalled progress, al-
though in principle the therapies show the intended effects.
Much more development is needed before genetic treatments be-
come part of the physician’s armamentarium. The National Insti-
tutes of Health (NIH) Recombinant Advisory Committee, which
is entrusted with approving gene therapy protocols, issued a re-
port in December 1995 concluding that clinical efficacy had yet to
be conclusively demonstrated for any gene therapy protocol de-
spite anecdotal claims. Thus far, there has been consensus in the
medical community not to engage in germ line genetic therapy in
which the afflicted individual and all his or her progeny will
carry the genetic change.
Genetic engineering has been successful in producing bioac-
tive proteins with pharmacological activity, particularly with
white blood cell hormones to stimulate the recolonization of im-
mune cells after chemo- and radiotherapy in cancer patients and
with human insulin. Although not the “magic bullets” that some
had predicted, they are valuable and useful therapeutics.
Genetic engineering has completely revolutionized certain
areas of biological scientific research, particularly in its applica-
tion to medicine. Its impact goes far beyond the production of
medical biologicals (insulin, interleukins, growth hormone, gran-
ulocyte stimulating factor, and monoclonal antibodies), which in-
volve the relatively straightforward production of scarce biolog-
ical proteins. The tools for today’s biomedical research wholly
embrace recombinant DNA technology. The data flowing from
the Human Genome Project and other organism genome se-
quencing efforts are rapidly helping to define targets for new
medicines and may eventually change the way medicine will be
practiced. Pharmacogenetics will identify groups of patients that
Where Is Genetic Engineering Today?
75

are genetically programmed to process medicines differently,
which should reduce the incidence of side effects. Ironically,
knowing more in greater detail than ever before about the human
genome may lead to a more holistic manipulation of cellular and
organismal properties to attain health.
Industry
The modern biotechnology industry has been the main benefi-
ciary of genetic engineering. Biological technology has been prac-
ticed on an industrial scale since the middle 1800s, when it was
primarily limited by production engineering capabilities. The in-
troduction of molecular biology avoided this obstacle and placed
the limits only on biological feasibility. Before the 1960s the term
genetic engineering referred to human engineering, which at that
time was science fiction. Today, genetic engineering and biotechnol-
ogy are used nearly interchangeably, although biotechnology
generally retains the broader definition.
The use of genetic engineering of plants and microorganisms
to provide improved, cheaper feedstocks from nonpetroleum-
based materials as well as specialty chemicals has been a natural
outgrowth of the traditional biotechnology industry. Rises in
crude oil prices make this method of production more economi-
cally attractive. Cultivation of large numbers of genetically mod-
ified plants raises some ecological concerns, but because the
modified characteristics for industrial applications do not gener-
ally favor survival, there is less worry about escape into wild
populations. Microbial production of useful chemicals including
pharmaceuticals has continued over the years with little public
concern. Conventional fermentation of genetically engineered
microorganisms to produce some products is more readily con-
fined and escape can be monitored, so there is less issue with this
application.
Genetically engineered foods, on the other hand, have at-
tracted a great deal of attention and will continue to be a light-
ning rod for activist concern and activity. Expansion of the culti-
vation of genetically engineered crops into underdeveloped
countries raises questions about inadequate ecological testing
and exploitation of the economies of these nations lacking signif-
icant capabilities in biotechnology. In this scenario, developed
nations would provide the market but would keep underdevel-
oped nations dependent on the technology. Lack of intellectual
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

property protection in many of the underdeveloped nations is
cited as hindering the transfer of applied genetic engineering
technology to those countries. The United States held off signing
the United Nations–sponsored Treaty for the Protection of Biodi-
versity until 1993 until it won some concessions on intellectual
property protection. These issues were addressed to some extent
in the Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIP) agreement of the World Trade Organization, which came
into effect in 1995.
The genetic engineering industry likely will grow but at a
more normal pace without the blockbuster expectations of the
early years. In the near future, smaller biotechnology service-
based companies will be established to support various forms of
genetic testing and DNA forensics emanating from advances in
medical understanding and as a result of the mountain of infor-
mation provided by the Human Genome Project.
Universities
The development of genetic engineering has caused a realign-
ment of the relationship of the research universities and industry.
The many individuals and small enterprises involved in genetic
engineering have blurred the distinction between inquiry to un-
derstand more about how things work (basic science), which is
what normally is carried on by research universities, and apply-
ing that understanding to create a saleable product (applied sci-
ence), normally done in industry. Federal funding by NIH, the
largest source of research funds outside of defense, favors—in
fact, expects projects to show—medical or health applications.
Basic science discoveries are now patented and publicized, often
before their soundness and utility have been established. Such be-
havior impedes the free flow of ideas and defeats peer scientific
review of research results designed to maintain high scientific
standards. It also interjects the question of conflict of interest be-
tween individuals trying to commercialize their findings and the
research community. Meanwhile, many people feel that academic
researchers whose work is paid for by public funding from the
NIH, National Science Foundation, or other government agencies
are becoming tainted by commercialization as universities and in-
dividuals try to cash in on the process. The drying up of govern-
ment funding of research intensifies the impact of industrial
sources of funding focused on short-term (1–2 year) applied 
Where Is Genetic Engineering Today?
77

research. The question remains: Should taxpayers be paying to
allow a few people to profit from an idea developed at public ex-
pense, even if the product is of general benefit to society?
Ecological Activists
Although the initial worries about the rampant spread of geneti-
cally modified organisms from laboratories were unrealized,
some ecologically concerned scientists and citizens feel that the
potential for disturbing the balance of natural systems is actually
greater today than in the 1970s. During the moratorium period of
1975–1977, a series of experiments were carried out to evaluate
the risk of exchanging engineered genetic material between or-
ganisms of different types using “crippled” strains of host bacte-
ria. The restrictions on the types of genetic experiments that
could be performed were gradually relaxed. Small-scale con-
trolled releases of genetically modified bacteria to colonize host
plants and pests were carried out to estimate the risk of perturb-
ing the local ecosystem. Modified plants containing biopesticide
or other pest-resistance genes and herbicide-resistance were also
tested in small field plots under a variety of conditions. Although
such experiments provided little evidence that genetic escape oc-
curred or that pests developed resistance, many people felt that
more extensive testing would be required to evaluate risk prop-
erly. The early tests were often carried out under duress, after lit-
igation by groups such as the Foundation on Economic Trends.
Detailed study of the risk issues was not possible under those
conditions. Small test plot sites for modified plants now number
in the hundreds, but sabotage of experiments and destruction of
valuable research stocks by activists dissuade companies from
doing larger, more informative testing. There remain nagging
questions about the effects of large-scale exposure of the organ-
isms to the environment—millions of acres of monoculture in dif-
ferent environments with different species of plants and pests in
contact with the crop. There are similar worries about the culti-
vation of fish and other aquatic or marine organisms made trans-
genic for growth hormones or other traits to enhance growth and
how escapees might outcompete the wild populations.
The quietly growing consolidation of agriculture biotechnol-
ogy under the control of major chemical companies has been noted
with concern by Steve A. Edwards, Ph.D. (Genetic Engineering
News 17[19]: 1, 1997) who observed the recurring vertical business
78
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

integration of chemicals, seeds, genetic engineering, and pharma-
ceuticals. Twenty percent of the stock of the last major seed com-
pany (Pioneer Hi-Bred) has recently been acquired by Dupont. Ex-
amples of large chemical companies and their whole- or partly
owned subsidiaries include Monsanto, Calgene, Agracetus, Eco-
gen, DeKalb Genetics, Holden’s Foundation Seeds, Corn States In-
ternational, Asgrow Agronomics, Monsoy (Brazil); Novartis
(Horthrup King, S&G Seeds, Ciba Seeds); Rhone-Poulenc, and the
Dow Elanco cooperative venture between Dow Chemical Com-
pany and the pharmaceutical company Eli Lilly (Mycogen, DNA
Plant Technology, Empresa La Moderna [Mexico]). Besides ensur-
ing a market for their herbicide chemicals with resistant plants, the
acquired seed companies provide local outlets for products to gen-
erally conservative farmers and access to the seed company’s
germplasm of multiple crop varieties developed through tradi-
tional genetic means.
Widespread use of recombinant microorganisms in bioreme-
diation in which the modified bacteria or fungi are directly re-
leased into the environment is severely hampered by the lack of
knowledge about microbial ecology. Cleaning up oil spills or con-
taminated soil and water or biomining metal ores and oil and
natural gas recovery are socially and economically valuable uses
of genetic engineering. Unfortunately, they are also encumbered
by large risk factors because of the extensive exposure of the or-
ganisms to the environment.
Politicians
The intrusion of genetic engineering into the political scene has
intensified after a hiatus lasting from the middle 1970s. The up-
swing of political interest has been fueled by vocal public de-
mands for safeguards against decisions being made based on ge-
netic information that to many people felt like invasion of
privacy and, like gender and race, was beyond their control. Con-
cern about personal privacy and genetic information has resulted
in both federal and state legislation in the 1990s designed to re-
strict access to and use of genetic information in employment
and insurance decisions. At the same time, the use of genetic in-
formation and the establishment of databases for forensic pur-
poses have expanded. The issue of database access will have to
be addressed as more and more genes are discovered and cryptic
DNA markers lose their anonymity. Guidelines, the rudiments of
Where Is Genetic Engineering Today?
79

which are addressed in recently proposed “Genetic Confidential-
ity” legislation (H.R. 306, 341, and 1815 and S. 89 and 422; 105th
Congress), will be required for the appropriate use of genetic in-
formation and proper communication of test results, conse-
quences, and healthcare choices to clients.
The issue of mammalian somatic cell nuclear transfer (re-
productive cloning) has touched even deeper chords of philo-
sophical and religious faith because it addresses the deeply felt if
only poorly understood notion of an individual and the relation-
ship of genetics to that view. Likewise, for embryonic stem cells,
ethical issues surrounding destruction of embryos touch strongly
held views on abortion. Although it is too early to tell, the flurry
of proposed broad legislation will likely give way in both areas
to carefully circumscribed restrictions on certain kinds of human
cell manipulations while allowing other mutually agreed upon
medically beneficial work to proceed.
In the future, another round of legislative activity can be an-
ticipated when gene therapy finally comes to fruition as a safe
and effective means of treating certain disease states. A series of
issues including consent for the procedure, protection against
discrimination, and germ line genetic modification will need to
be considered.
References
Bullard, Linda. 1987. “Killing Us Softly: Toward a Feminist Analysis of
Genetic Engineering.” Made to Order. New York: Pergamon Press (from
Columbia World of Quotations, CD-ROM).
Evenson, R. E., V. Santaniello, and D. Zilberman, eds. 2002. Economic and
Social Issues in Agricultural Biotechnology. New York: CABI Publishing.
Haseltine, W. A. 1997. “Discovering Genes for New Medicines.” Scien-
tific American (March): 92–97.
Lamb, G. M. 2004. “Beyond the Mirage of Cell Science.” Christian Science
Monitor (September 16): 16.
Nottingham, S. 2002. Genescapes: The Ecology of Genetic Engineering. New
York: Zed Books/St. Martin’s Press.
Nussbaum, M., and Sustein, C., eds. 1998. Clones and Clones: Facts and
Fantasies about Human Cloning. New York: W. W. Norton.
Rifkin, J. 1998. The Biotech Century: Harnessing the Gene and Remaking the
World. New York: Jeremy P. Tarch/Putnam.
80
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Sahai, S. 1997. “Developing Countries Must Balance the Ethics of
Biotechnology against the Ethics of Poverty.” Genetic Engineering News
17(10): 4.
Swanson, T., ed. 2002. Biotechnology, Agriculture, and the Developing
World: The Distributional Implications of Technological Change. Northamp-
ton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Wilmut, I., A. F. Schieke, J. McWhir, A. J. Kind, and K. H. S. Campbell.
1997. “Viable Offspring Derived from Fetal and Adult Mammalian
Cells.” Nature 385: 810–813.
References
81


3
Worldwide Perspective
International Impact 
of Genetic Engineering
Although the United States and other developed nations took the
lead in creating genetic engineering technology and then pursu-
ing its applications, in the 21st century many nations have
launched their own versions of the industry model. It surprises
many Americans that the major international concern is not gene
therapy, reproductive cloning, or stem cells, but food and the en-
vironment. The greatest controversy stems from the expanding
role that multinational agribusiness is playing in agriculture and
food production and how the spread of genetic engineering tech-
nology is increasing the corporate grip on the global food supply.
This is particularly contentious when the technology is exported
to nations with a milder regulatory climate or lax enforcement of
environmental restrictions. A number of Asian nations outside of
Japan fall into this category. The economic potential for industry
in these nations, many of which provide significant governmen-
tal support, overrides public concern about safety or environ-
mental damage for those in power.
The antipathy toward genetic engineering as an exotic tech-
nology is strongest in Europe. For better or for worse, this has led
to a measured response to the introduction of the new technolo-
gies and concern about their impact, erring on the side of regula-
tory control. There is a movement to induce countries without
strict controls to be responsible and enact minimal standards to
avoid blatantly unsafe practices. Releases into the environment
83

do not respect national boundaries. The high-yield agriculture
that feeds the world’s population rests on dangerously few culti-
vars of a small number of crops. Disruption of this system would
have serious repercussions for all nations.
Status of Genetic Engineering 
around the World
Because of the technological complexity of genetic engineering,
there is a tendency to pay attention only to its impact on those na-
tions with the scientific and technological base to support their
own programs in that area. The economic interdependence of al-
most all of the world’s political subdivisions, however, links
them in a web of supply and demand for raw materials, goods,
and services. Where a given country’s economic base fits within
this structure depends on its ability to contribute to both sides.
This, in turn, depends on the natural resources of that country, in-
cluding the usual land, forests, water, minerals, and finally the
labor pool that extracts those resources and converts them to a
useable form. Based on the relative proportion of their economy
devoted to the production of goods and services compared with
that required to feed the population, nations are classified as “de-
veloped,” “developing,” and “underdeveloped” or “emerging.”
The impact of technological change can be quite different de-
pending on that nation’s economic stage of development. Ad-
mittedly Western in nature, with the collapse of the socialist ap-
proach with the former Soviet Union, this paradigm currently
dominates the world economic structure.
Considering the limited investment of the developing and
underdeveloped nations in the educational and technological re-
sources required for the development of substantial biotechnol-
ogy programs of their own, it is feared that these countries may
be destined to be net consumers of genetic engineering and
biotechnology, at least in the near term. A restricted industrial
base combined with a historical role in supplying raw or mini-
mally processed materials to the more developed nations further
constricts their options.
Although some people feel that these restrictions are artifi-
cially, and therefore unfairly, imposed by the developed nation’s
“club,” it is also true that nations such as Japan with limited nat-
84
Worldwide Perspective

ural resources in the form of raw materials have shifted their
economies to manufacturing and services by making the re-
quired investments in education and technology. The situation is
different for each nation, and the same options are not available
to all because of the natural situation or historical developments
from past commitments. In addition, the conflict is often drawn
between rich and poor nations, which adds an ethical dimension
to the otherwise sterile consideration of economic and technical
questions.
A number of international organizations already concerned
with problems of economic development have begun considering
the effects of biotechnology on the relationships between the de-
veloped and other nations. These include the World Health Orga-
nization; the International Council of Scientific Unions; the
United Nations (UN) Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Orga-
nization; the Food and Agriculture Organization; the United Na-
tions Industrial Development Organization; and the United Na-
tions Development Program. They have the difficult job of
attempting to reconcile the divergent interests of competing na-
tions to reduce the economic dislocation and social disruption fu-
eled by international trading forces (Swanson 2002). With the
proper set of guidelines adhered to by all parties and negotiations
in good faith, it should be possible to minimize further depen-
dency of the underdeveloped and developing nations on the de-
veloped nations while ensuring supplies of raw materials and rea-
sonable markets for finished products for the manufacturing
economies. Whether this will come about remains to be seen. Nei-
ther the form these guidelines should take nor the forum for pro-
ducing and enforcing any such agreements has been established.
The following sections detail the issues at the heart of the discus-
sion and the present framework for dealing with the problems.
Impact on Developing Countries
The Green Revolution sparked by traditional plant breeding and
application of high-production principles and methods provides
lessons for what might happen with genetic engineering applied
to biotechnology. In many places during the 1960s, veritable mir-
acles were achieved. The yields of cereal crops in parts of the
third world (today’s underdeveloped nations) doubled or tripled
between 1964 and 1988 with the introduction of the improved
plant varieties and cultivation methods. In the Indian Punjab,
Status of Genetic Engineering around the World
85

wheat and rice harvests were improved as were sorghum, finger
millet, and cassava in rain forest areas. By contrast, in areas rela-
tively untouched by the Green Revolution such as Africa,
poverty increased. In developing and particularly in underdevel-
oped countries, a growing majority of the world’s poor depends
primarily on wage employment, not on income from crops raised
on farmland. The Gene Revolution of biotechnology, agribusi-
nesses are quick to point out, similar to the Green Revolution, has
the potential to relieve the plight of poor people by providing
greater and more stable employment, better nutrition, and in-
creased small farm income (Thomson 2002). At the same time,
these technologies stand to further harm the poor by displacing
labor or otherwise improving the competitiveness of low-labor
large farms to the exclusion of small farms and their workers. A
similar scenario exists in developed countries such as the United
States where the family farm is in danger of extinction in some
areas. The displaced workers in the United States, however, have
considerably better economic fallback options than those in the
third world.
One of the criticisms of the use of present biotechnology ap-
plications in developing or underdeveloped nations is they are
directed solely at developed nation marketing demands. These
include obtaining staple crops with improved health benefits, by,
for instance, lowering the erucic acid content or, as in the Philip-
pines, improving yellow maize varieties to feed chickens. Unfor-
tunately, in the Philippine case, the amount of white maize, a sta-
ple food of the country’s poor, decreased over that same time.
The great majority of the world’s undernourished requires more
calories; only a minority requires more protein. Shifting land
from staple food to cattle raising or cattle feed production will re-
duce the calories available. For both technical reasons and be-
cause the genetic engineering capacity is concentrated in the
northern, developed countries with different interests, biotech-
nological or even traditional plant-breeding improvements have
been slow in coming to tropical staple plant crops such as cereals.
Propagation of valuable plants though tissue culture of plant
clones, bypassing genetic engineering per se, has been widely ap-
plied instead to coconut, palm, potatoes, coffee, and tea. This is
the type of biotechnology research most undertaken in develop-
ing countries.
A concern of developing and underdeveloped nations is that
the biotechnology products developed from genetic engineering
86
Worldwide Perspective

represent yet another form of economic enslavement to the de-
veloped world. The business plan is doing little to rebut this con-
ception. With the current generation of genetically engineered
products, the benefits of the technology remain with the pro-
ducer. The pesticide- or herbicide-resistant plants or F1 hybrid
seeds have to be purchased fresh each year from the supplier in
the developed country. Second- and third-generation genetic
technologies are being implemented to prevent farmers from
saving seed from a harvest to plant the next season circumvent-
ing a 50-year tradition in Europe of Plant Breeders Rights to re-
plant seed they have grown. Eighty percent of farmers in devel-
oping countries plant retained seed. Resource-poor farmers
practice 60% of global agriculture and produce 10% to 15% of the
food (Swanson 2002). Other technologies under development
will require application of special agents to a crop to take advan-
tage of the bioengineered enhancements. A growing merger
trend and chemical companies buying up agricultural biotech-
nology and seed companies are disturbing to many because it
gives these companies, which are frequently multinational, the
ability to guarantee a market for their own herbicides and other
products.
Major political and economic philosophies divide national
interests, which also take on ethical overtones. The Green Revo-
lution was researched and developed to a large extent by the
public sector in government facilities and through government-
sponsored research grants to universities and foundations, con-
sistent with the expanded role of government in society at that
time (Evenson, Santaniello, and Zilberman 2002). The present po-
litical environment, particularly in the United States where much
genetic engineering research is being done, favors the private
sector in which funding for research and development is pro-
vided by private investors. The legislative environment in the
United States at the same time supports the issuance of patents
protecting property rights to organisms and processes central to
genetic engineering and biotechnology. The combination has re-
sulted in the escalation of private, for-profit competitive industry
concerned with economic survival at the expense of the public
sector, which, in theory, can take a longer view of issues. A num-
ber of factors converge to produce a monopolistic situation with
all of the key supplies in the rich world. Only a few of the un-
derdeveloped and developing countries (Brazil, China, India,
Mexico, Pakistan, Cuba, and some others) possess the resources,
Status of Genetic Engineering around the World
87

scale, capacity, or stable political environment to mount a signif-
icant public-sector biotechnology effort on their own.
Another concern of some developing nations as well as 
environmentalists worldwide is that genetically engineered 
organisms—in most cases, plants—will be released on a large
scale into the environment without sufficient relevant testing to
ensure that they will not spread to devastate local ecosystems.
The anxiety is based on the same questions about safety that have
been discussed in chapter 2. There is a temptation for companies
to market or to test crops initially in countries without stringent
regulations to speed up product development or to avoid expen-
sive trials. Environmentalists fear that debt-burdened or corrupt
governments may succumb to the lure of promised quick-and-
easy profits for their country (or private pockets) to introduce a
technology before it is proven safe. In some cases, these are the
same governments that allow the use of polluting pesticides and
herbicides because they are inexpensive that the rest of the world
has banned. These governments could be mortgaging their coun-
try’s future for today’s profits and at the same time promoting
ecological disaster.
It is in the best interest of the developing nations to work out
some kind of plan to equalize the impact of genetic engineering
on their economic dependence on the developing nations. They
should do so sooner rather than later. In the developed countries,
given sufficient economic incentive, biotechnology can produce
substitute products for developing nation exports. This scenario
would have catastrophic consequences for the largely undiversi-
fied economies of developing nations. Escagenetics (California)
is working on a commercial-scale tissue culture method to pro-
duce vanilla plantlets bent on capturing the $200 million annual
U.S. market presently dominated by Madagascar. Nestle’s (the
Netherlands) and the Kao Corporation (Japan) are employing ge-
netic engineering to make cocoa butter substitutes. Cacao repre-
sents the second most important agricultural commodity in the
third world. Africa accounts for nearly 60% of world production
of this crop. A German biotech firm is working on a coffee sub-
stitute. The third world is responsible for virtually all coffee pro-
duction. The United States alone imports $10 to $50 billion of cof-
fee yearly from such countries as Columbia, Burundi, Uganda,
Rwanda, Ethiopia, and Indonesia.
What leverage do developing countries possess to avoid eco-
nomic indentureship to rich developed nations? While insisting on
88
Worldwide Perspective

the adoption of uniform patent protection for biotechnology prod-
ucts, the developed nations assert a claim to free access to the ge-
netic resources of the plants and animals of the developing and un-
developed nations as a world right. By some estimates, Asia,
Africa, and Latin America have provided the genetic base for
95.7% of the world’s food crops. In comparison, Europe, North
America, and Japan, comprising the developed nations, con-
tributed only 4.3% of the diversity. The developing nations argue
that the “wild” germplasm has been modified by centuries of cul-
tivation, breeding, and modification and that it should not be a
costless resource to be exploited by companies for products that
are subject to patent and trade secret and then sold back at pre-
mium prices to the countries providing the original resource. A
UN Food and Agriculture Organization proposal to establish
world Gene Banking Centers with free access to all countries was
rejected by the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany,
France, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland, the Netherlands, and
New Zealand. The U.S. Gene Bank at Fort Collins, Colorado, al-
though U.S. government property, has refused grants of germ-
plasm to countries with which the United States had political dis-
putes, such as the former Soviet Union, Cuba, Afghanistan,
Albania, Iran, Libya, and Nicaragua. The Treaty for the Protection
of Biodiversity signed at a UN Conference on Environment and
Development held June 1–12, 1992, in Rio de Janeiro by 153 coun-
tries was not signed by the United States until 1993 because the
treaty did not incorporate intellectual property protections. In-
stead, it contained language dealing with regulation of biotechnol-
ogy, equitable sharing of research and development benefits and
technology transfer, national registration of biological resources,
rights of indigenous peoples to profits from their own plants and
knowledge, and prior informed consent to any biotech testing in
their country. The World Trade Organization attempted to address
the commercial issues with the Trade Related Aspects of Intellec-
tual Property Rights agreement signed in 1995. These commercial
and ethical issues remain to be reconciled.
So what help might genetic engineering bring to the poor of
underdeveloped countries? Increasing the output of cash crops
or reducing imports with disease-resistant and drought-tolerant
nitrogen-fixing cotton, for example, without lowering employ-
ment would be an advantage. This engineering would need to be
applied judiciously to products that are labor-intensive such as
certain vegetable oils, but not to tea, coffee, or palm oil where a
Status of Genetic Engineering around the World
89

price glut would be devastating to the economy. Genetic engi-
neering can reduce the need for expensive or imported fertilizers,
a concern that was exacerbated by the Green Revolution. Im-
provement of the shelf life of products by, for example, changing
the oil composition in a foodstuff to slow spoilage would help
poor countries utilize a higher proportion of their harvest as they
are the most likely to have inadequate marketing capacity or in-
frastructure for processing.
Possible Impact of Genetic Engineering
Developed nations seldom consider publicly the economic im-
pact of widespread use of genetically engineered organisms on
nations that would be competitors for raw materials or that
would be net importers of the technology. Whether such reper-
cussions on a given economy are severe is not likely to halt the
application of genetic engineering, given the strength and mo-
mentum of world economic forces (Bernaer 2003). However, the
resultant economic and political dislocation can be moderated by
appropriately sensitive policy implementation. It would be in the
developed nations’ best economic interest to avoid creating a de-
pendency situation with frustrated and desperate governments
in countries where the major export is replaced or reduced in
value and food cannot be raised in sufficient quantities for the
people because the arable land is growing export crops. For both
technical and economic reasons, the food crops for the mostly
tropical underdeveloped or developing nations are not the types
of plants being genetically engineered today. Requiring produc-
ers to buy high-tech seeds every year from the developed coun-
tries who then control the price on the product in their market
has been a problem with hybrid strains in the past, and geneti-
cally engineered strains, especially the new “terminator” strains
that cannot be replanted, will only make it worse. Enlightened
self-interest would seem to dictate some thought about balancing
the economic consequences against the initial gains. Unfortu-
nately, such action is rarely seen in the real world unless an issue
is made of it. The developed nations and multinational agribusi-
nesses again seem inclined to pursue their own interests as evi-
denced by their strict insistence on protecting the full intellectual
property rights operant in Western economic systems while de-
valuing genetic diversity contributed by the developing and un-
developed nations’ plant and animal resources.
90
Worldwide Perspective

Recommendations for Action
An issue often not commented on is the economic impact of the
new genetic technologies on the developing and underdeveloped
nations of the world. Genetic engineering is a highly technical
field requiring a substantial investment in both training and tech-
nology to be able to do the research and to meet regulatory re-
quirements. It is no accident that the developed nations, includ-
ing a few of the developing nations, have cornered the market on
medical applications and food production. Developed nations
become the sole suppliers of patented engineered seeds and
plants, which must be purchased annually with proceeds from
the previous year’s harvest of products in demand by the devel-
oped nations. Consequences of this include effective national
economic servitude and decreases in indigenous food crop pro-
duction to plant enough imported seed for export of products. In
response, there are disputes, such as those aired at the 1992 Rio
de Janeiro Conference on Biodiversity, over intellectual property
rights and the value of the contribution of genetic diversity pro-
vided by the undeveloped or underdeveloped nations to the
forerunners of the engineered plants. A compromise needs to be
reached because the developed nations could, if sufficiently
pressed, eventually produce synthetic or engineered replace-
ments for the major exports of the underdeveloped nations, trig-
gering an economic disaster for suppliers.
Biowarfare and Bioterrorism
One internationally relevant area in which there is little informa-
tion available, largely as a result of its classified nature, is the mil-
itary use of genetic engineering to provide offensive weapons.
Despite a treaty renouncing such research, it is difficult to ascer-
tain exactly what the situation is because all parties deny in-
volvement in offensive weapons work. Concern over Iraq’s ca-
pacity to manufacture and deploy biological weapons of mass
destruction was a primary justification for the United States to in-
vade that country in March 2003.
In the aftermath of the September 11, 2001, attacks on the
World Trade Center and Pentagon, the prospect of bioterrorism
was given new credence by a series of anthrax-laced letters sent
through the postal system. Although the source of the weaponized
Biowarfare and Bioterrorism
91

material remains hazy and those responsible have not been appre-
hended, the use of such agents as weapons of fear has been estab-
lished. Biotechnology has been enlisted in counter-bioterrorism
programs designed to provide rapid detection and identification
of an attack. Other programs are aimed at protecting the water and
food supply. Such technology is a double-edged sword because it
can be used to engineer terror weapons.
International Mirror of Controversies 
in the United States
In general, the issues involving genetic engineering that are re-
ceiving the most attention are the same in the United States and
the rest of the developed world. The difference is in the relative im-
portance placed on the various issues. Genetically modified food
heads the list abroad, followed by environmental genetic contam-
ination. Lower down on the scale are issues such as human repro-
ductive cloning, stem cells, and genetic testing, which rank near
the top in the United States. This is not to say that there hasn’t been
debate or movements to regulate the use of genetic engineering
technology, but the relative importance to the citizens of different
countries is notable. What an American might think is the most
crucial point might be of relatively minor importance to a Euro-
pean. This leads to misunderstandings and international angst.
Genetically Modified Foods
There is considerable resistance in the United States to the wide-
spread use of biotechnology in the form of genetically modified
food plants and animals generally referred to as GMOs (geneti-
cally modified organisms). This is despite the fact that the United
States has the largest acreage of GMOs under cultivation in the
world. Four countries grew 99% of the developed world’s trans-
genic crops in 2000, with the United States accounting for 68% of
that total. Developing nations now account for one-third of
worldwide GMO crop acreage. The technology is so widespread
that the question in the United States is whether foods derived
from GMOs should be specifically labeled, a step that has been
vigorously opposed by agribusiness as potentially stigmatizing
products for which there is no proof of harm. A compromise has
92
Worldwide Perspective

been the establishment of certification for “non-GMO” labeling,
akin to the earlier “organic” labeling for products produced
without herbicides, pesticides, or synthetic fertilizers.
Particularly in Europe and Japan, GMO-derived products
may not be produced or imported. In October 1999, the European
Commission’s Standing Committee for food established a legal
threshold of 1% accidental GMO contamination for rejection.
Even transportation in containers that have been used to carry
GMO-derived products has been challenged, and testing for the
modified genes in products is routine. This antipathy is of con-
cern to U.S. farmers because the policies restrict their potential
markets. Even if a farmer plants only traditional cultivars, conta-
mination from a neighbor’s field or an unwashed storage bin or
railcar somewhere along the way to market could make their
crop worthless.
International Regulation 
of Genetic Engineering
Regulatory approval for products derived from genetic engineer-
ing depends greatly on the country and on the product being con-
sidered. Biopharmaceuticals have long been regulated, and the ad-
vent of materials produced through genetic engineering required
relatively minor changes in the testing and approval process for
most pharmaceutical products. Organizations dealing with GMOs
internationally include the National Institute for Biological Stan-
dards and Control (United Kingdom), UN Conference on Envi-
ronment and Development (multinational), Biotechnology Quality
Work Party (European Union), Center for Biologic Evaluation and
Research (United States), Advisory Committee on Novel Foods
and Processes (United Kingdom), and the International Confer-
ence on Harmonization (multinational).
Agribiotechnology has had a considerably less positive expe-
rience. Part of the reason for this is that modifications of current
GMOs benefit the producers (herbicide resistance, plant viral re-
sistance, insect resistance). Consumers feel that they and the envi-
ronment are put at possible risk with no benefit to them. The in-
troduction of several nutritionally enhanced crops such as vitamin
A–enriched rice or low trans-fatty acid canola oil has had little im-
pact on this opinion. The public is much quicker to appreciate the
International Regulation of Genetic Engineering
93

production of scarce medicines that are not available from other
sources.
References
Bernaer, T. 2003. Genes, Trade, and Regulation: The Seeds of Conflict in Food
Biotechnology. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Evenson, R. E., V. Santaniello, and D. Zilberman, eds. 2002. Economic and
Social Issues in Agricultural Biotechnology. New York: CABI.
Swanson, T., ed. 2002. Biotechnology, Agriculture, and the Developing
World: The Distributional Implications of Technological Change. Northamp-
ton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Thomson, J. A. 2002. “The Potential of Plant Biotechnology for Develop-
ing Countries.” In Biotechnology and Safety Assessment, edited by J. A.
Thomas and R. L. Fuchs. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
94
Worldwide Perspective

4
Chronology of 
Genetic Engineering
A
lthough the high-technology aspects of genetic engineering
have come to public attention mainly since the recombinant
DNA revolution in the 1970s, similar activities have actually
taken place over much of the thousands of years of human his-
tory. For much of that period, people were searching for the order
in nature to explain how phenomena related to one another. Only
in the latter part of the 19th and 20th centuries did knowledge of
genetic processes progress to the cellular and molecular levels to
the extent that scientists now feel that they understand much of
the detail. Using this insight, they have begun to manipulate the
systems in a variety of ways. The following chronology high-
lights key developments that led to today’s understanding of
how genetics works and events that were important in society’s
reaction to science’s new capabilities.
6000? 
Alcoholic beverages, cheese, and other products are pro-
duced by action of naturally occurring yeast present in
foodstuffs by the Sumerians and Babylonians in
Mesopotamia. Around 4000 B.C., the Egyptians discover
how to make leavened bread using yeast. Additional fer-
mentation processes are in use in China, including wine
making in the Shang Dynasty around 1300 B.C.
1790
The United States passes the first patent law to provide
commercial protection for inventors.
95
B.C.

1804
After much discussion and experimentation, chemists
conclude that substances consist of identical invisible
particles called molecules that are themselves formed
from a smaller number of more elementary particles that
John Dalton called atoms. An early theory of the atomic
nature of matter had been stated by the Greek philoso-
pher Democritus (460?–352? B.C.).
1810
The chemical equation for alcoholic fermentation
[C6H12O6 = 2 CO2 + 2 CH3CH2OH] (sugar converted to
alcohol and carbon dioxide) is deduced by the French
chemist Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac, explaining a process
that had been in use for millennia.
1836
The German physiologist Theodor Schwann attributes
processes of putrefaction and fermentation to microor-
ganisms. In the 1860s, the French chemist and microbiol-
ogist Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) will provide the experi-
mental evidence for this. Such explanations do not
conform to popular sentiment.
1852
Sparrows are imported from Germany into the United
States to deal with caterpillars ravaging food crops. This
example of the spread of a foreign species in a new envi-
ronment is thought by some to show what could happen
with a new genetically engineered plant or animal carry-
ing foreign genes that give it an advantage.
1862
The Organic Act establishes the U.S. Department of Agri-
culture, removing it from the Patent Office and directing
the department to collect and distribute seeds and plants
to farmers.
1865
In a presentation before the Natural Science Society in
Brunn, Austria, an Augustinian monk from Brno, Gre-
gory Mendel (1822–1884), proposes that invisible units
called factors are passed from one generation to the next
and that they account for transmission of observable
traits. Ignored in the wake of the furor over Charles Dar-
win’s evolutionary theory introduced in 1859, Mendel’s
publication is independently rediscovered by the
botanists Hugo DeVries (France), Erich Von Tschermak-
96
Chronology of Genetic Engineering

Seysenegg (Austria), and Carl Correns (Germany) in
1900.
Louis Pasteur develops the germ theory of disease from
his work on the silkworm disease plaguing the French
silk industry. The English surgeon Joseph Lister begins
using disinfectants such as carbolic acid (phenol) during
surgical operation in the handling of patients and in the
care of wounds, dramatically reducing patient deaths
from infection.
1869
The Swiss biologist Johann Friedrich Miescher isolates
DNA from white blood cells in the pus obtained from
discarded bandages. Because he is busy investigating the
nature of the many chemicals found in cells, he fails to
make the connection between DNA and Mendel’s hered-
itary “factors.”
1877
Louis Pasteur notes that some bacteria die when cul-
tured with certain other bacteria. He suggests that some
bacteria produce substances to kill other bacteria but
goes no further with the concept.
1882
The German bacteriologist Robert Koch first determines
the cause of a human microbial disease with the identifi-
cation of the tuberculosis organism. In the process, he es-
tablishes that specific diseases are caused by specific or-
ganisms by isolating pure cultures of bacteria from
infected individuals. Similar observations and culture
techniques are used by Pasteur to produce vaccines
against anthrax and rabies.
1885
Although the Chinese have practiced a desensitization
treatment for centuries and the English physician Edward
Jenner developed a smallpox vaccine in 1796, the presence
of disease-causing microorganisms had not been deter-
mined. Vaccination becomes an acknowledged weapon in
the medical arsenal when nine-year-old Alsatian Joseph
Meister is successfully treated for rabies by Louis Pasteur.
1888
Discovered in 1879 by the German biologist Walter 
Flemming, another German biologist, Heinrich Wilhelm
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
97

Gottfried Waldeyer, uses the word chromosome to de-
scribe the staining of structures in the cell nucleus by cer-
tain colored dyes. It would be 14 years before the con-
nection is made to the chromosomal role as a repository
for genetic information.
1889
The vedelia beetle, commonly known as the ladybug, is
imported from Australia into California to control the
cotton scale insect that is devastating the state’s citrus or-
chards. 
1890
The discovery of antibodies by the German bacteriolo-
gist Emil Adolph von Behring provides part of the ex-
planation of the protective factors that vaccines elicit.
The special cells that carry out the rest of the functions
necessary for immune system surveillance of foreign in-
vaders are described by the Russian zoologist and bacte-
riologist Elie Metchnikoff around 1891.
1892
Viruses are described by the Russian bacteriologist
Dmitri Iosifovich Ivanovski as disease-causing agents
smaller than bacteria.
1893
The German Nobel Prize–winning chemist Wilhelm Ost-
wald proves the catalytic nature of protein components
of cells called enzymes that are responsible for cellular
chemical reactions such as the fermentation of glucose.
One enzyme molecule causes the conversion of many
substrate molecules into product. These biological cata-
lysts greatly speed up the rate of cellular reactions that
occur much more slowly without them.
1895
A German company, Hochst am Main, sells commercially
cultured Rhizobium isolated from roots nodules to enhance
soil nitrogen fixation in Europe. These soil bacteria are in-
troduced into the United States in the following year.
1899
Chemical modification of the salicylic acid extracted
from willow bark and other plant extracts used to com-
bat fever yields acetylsalicylic acid, which causes less
stomach irritation. This first “wonder drug” is marketed
as Aspirin® by Bayer, a German chemical company.
98
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
1888
(cont.)

1901
The chemist Franz Hofmeister advances the theory that
the vital reactions of life are performed by enzymes,
those catalytic molecules that make chemical reactions
efficient enough to power life processes. Direct proof for
this comes when mutations (genetic changes) crippling
enzyme activities are shown to be injurious or lethal for
bacteria, fruit flies, and people.
1902
The German chemists Emil Fischer and Franz Hofmeis-
ter show that proteins are strings of individual amino
acid units chemically attached end to end through pep-
tide bonds to give polypeptides. This theme of using the
same chemical reaction to link varieties of a common
building block into long chains or polymers to obtain de-
sirable properties is repeated in biology with DNA,
RNA, and polysaccharides.
The U.S. cytologist and, later, physician Walter Stanbor-
ough Sutton suggests that Mendel’s “factors” reside on
chromosomes and are segregated as the chromosome
pairs separate during the formation of gametes through
meiosis. He names these factors genes, the term we use
today.
1903
The first use of the term biochemistry to describe the
chemistry of life is attributed to chemist Carl Neuberg.
1905
A system for analyzing the occurrence of observable traits
(phenotypes) describing the genetic principles of linkage
and gene interaction is used by William Bateson and Regi-
nald Crundall Punnett. These pioneering English geneti-
cists coin such genetic terms as F1 and F2 generations, al-
lelomorphism, homozygote, and heterozygote that are used to
describe genetic populations of individuals. The molecu-
lar events underlying the observations of the inheritance
of traits are eventually worked out over a half century
later.
1907
U.S. biologist Ross Granville Harrison establishes the
culture of isolated cells or tissue separate from the intact
organism (in vitro). Refinements in these techniques
have allowed in vitro culture of many types of cells, a
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
99

boon to the study of cellular biochemistry. The tech-
niques are eventually extended to tissue and cellular
transplants, monoclonal antibody production, plant
propagation, and genetic engineering modification of in-
tact organisms from the 1970s onward.
1908
The English physician Sir Archibald Edward Garrod rec-
ognizes that the final product of a gene is a protein and
pioneers studies of genetic diseases in humans with his
work on alkaptonuria. His postulate that diseases can be
caused by mutant genes is unnoticed until it is rediscov-
ered in 1940.
1909
Wilhelm Johannsen, a Danish botanist, first uses pheno-
type and genotype to describe an observable trait and the
genetic factors (genes) responsible for the trait, respec-
tively. Johannsen also describes the process of “selec-
tion” for a genetic trait by which an advantage conferred
by a gene leads to a higher occurrence of that gene in the
next generation because it enhances survival.
1910
American Thomas Hunt Morgan, a Nobel Prize–winning
geneticist, establishes the basis of modern genetics by
proving that genes reside on chromosomes, pinpointing
genes to particular chromosomes of the fruit fly,
Drosophila melanogaster. Over the next 10 years, Morgan’s
group describes gender-linked genes (white eye color in
Drosophila) and other trait linkages. Morgan and col-
leagues publish the classic The Mechanism of Mendelian
Heredity in 1915, formally setting forth the principles of
gene theory and linkage.
1912
Butanol and acetone are produced industrially via micro-
bial action using a process developed by the American
Chaim Weizman, who later becomes president of Israel.
This is the first large-scale use of microbial processes for
products other than food.
1917
A virus that infects and destroys bacteria, a bacteriophage,
is independently discovered by the English bacteriolo-
gist Frederick Twort and French bacteriologist Félix Hu-
bert d’Herelle. Bacteriophages, such as the T4 and the
100
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
1907
(cont.)

lambda phage, are important in early studies of gene
structure by the U.S. physicist-turned-geneticist Sey-
mour Benzer and others in the 1960s. The lambda phage
has been used as a gene-cloning vehicle since the 1970s.
1926
The first crystallization of an enzyme, urease, by James
Batcheller Sumner proves it to be a protein. He is awarded
the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1946 for this achievement.
Henry Agard Wallace founds the Hi-Bred Company, a
hybrid corn seed producer, known today as Pioneer Hi-
Bred International, Inc., a company involved in geneti-
cally engineering agriculturally useful plants.
1927
The first localization of a specific gene to a particular
chromosome in mammals is accomplished by the geneti-
cist Theophilius Shickel Painter, who correlates a visible
chromosomal deficiency (partial deletion) in a mouse
with a genetic analysis.
1928
Frederick Griffith demonstrates that a transforming prin-
ciple (shown to be DNA in 1944) in Pneumococci converts
nonvirulent to virulent strains—a “natural” (unassisted
by humans) form of gene transfer.
English bacteriologist and Nobel Prize winner Sir
Alexander Fleming discovers the first clinically useful
antibiotic, penicillin, which is produced by a mold grow-
ing on a contaminated bacterial culture plate. Other an-
tibiotics are known at this time but are toxic to mam-
malian hosts. Penicillin is isolated in 1938 by chemists
Howard Florey and Ernst Chain of Oxford University in
England. Although industrial production is initially de-
layed by lack of patent protection, the antibiotic is even-
tually made available for clinical use some 15 years later.
1932
A primitive microscope using electrons for sample illu-
mination is built by M. Kroll and Ernst August Friedrich
Ruska. High energy, and thus short wavelength, elec-
trons allow visualization of DNA and single protein mol-
ecules, objects some 1,000 times smaller than can be seen
with a regular light microscope. Being able to see what
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
101

previously could only be imagined allows scientists to
work out how molecules are assembled to form the parts
of a cell.
1935
A. G. Tansley introduces the concept of an ecosystem as
a balanced interdependent network of relationships link-
ing organisms and their environment. The minimizing of
competition by filling compatible “niches” is believed to
be critical for the balance and functioning of ecosystems.
Changes such as the introduction of a new species or an
old species that develops a novel competitive advantage
can upset the balance with potential catastrophic conse-
quences. Today, opponents of the release of genetically
modified organisms worry that precisely just such a sce-
nario will develop.
1938
X-ray scattering is first used to study the folded structure
of DNA by physicists William Thomas Astbury and F. O.
Bell. This technique, pioneered by English physicist Sir
William Lawrence Bragg in 1912 for small molecules, also
proves suitable to determine the structure on the scale of
the atom of even large DNA and protein molecules.
Bacillus papilliae, a bacterium, becomes the first microbial
product registered by the U.S. government as a control
for Japanese beetles. Large-scale spraying over several
states on the East Coast is the first substantial release of
such microbes.
1939
French bacteriologist René Jules Dubos isolates the an-
tibiotic gramicidin from a common soil bacterium.
Dubos later becomes a noted environmentalist.
1940
U.S. geneticist George Wells Beadle and U.S. biochemist
Edward Lawrie Tatum, cowinners of the Nobel Prize in
1958, propose that one gene specifies one enzyme from
studying the inheritance of traits in the common bread
mold, Neurospora crassa.
1941
The term antibiotic is coined by Ukrainian-born U.S. mi-
crobiologist and Nobel Prize winner Selman Abraham
Waksman to describe compounds produced by microor-
102
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
1932
(cont.)

ganisms that kill bacteria to gain an advantage in the
competition for nutrients and space. These toxins are de-
signed to be very specific against the bacteria because the
microorganisms producing them have to live in the same
environment. Pasteur had made the original observa-
tions of “antibiosis” in 1877.
Although publicly denouncing germ warfare, President
Franklin Delano Roosevelt approves a secret plan to de-
velop a U.S. biological warfare capability. By 1942, the
United States has a 4-pound anthrax bomb.
1944
DNA is recognized as hereditary material when microbi-
ologists Oswald Avery, Colin MacLeod, and Maclyn 
McCarty transmit the virulence of a strain of Pneumococ-
cus to a nonvirulent strain with isolated DNA alone.
1946
C. Auerbach and J. M. Robson observe gene mutation by
chemicals with subsequent alteration of traits. These ob-
servations provide the rationale for explaining genetic
diseases.
Transfer of DNA and genetic traits between Escherichia
coli strains by conjugation (bacterial mating) is demon-
strated by Nobel Prize winners U.S. geneticist Joshua
Lederberg and biochemist Edward Lawrie Tatum.
1950
The pairing of purines and pyrimidines across the
strands of the DNA helix—adenine (A) with thymine (T)
[A=T] and cytosine (C) with guanosine (G) [C=G]—is
demonstrated by Erwin Chargaff and coworkers, ex-
plaining the constant ratios of these nucleic acids in
DNA. This DNA sequence specificity removes one of the
last objections to nucleic acid encoding of hereditary in-
formation. These findings were instrumental in deter-
mining the physical structure of DNA 3 years later.
1951
American geneticist Joshua Lederberg demonstrates that
bacteria can exchange part of their genetic material,
which he calls a plasmid. He also finds that viruses that at-
tack bacteria can act as an intermediate to transfer genetic
matter between bacteria. Lederberg is later involved in
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
103

the recombinant DNA and biotechnology policy and de-
bate in the 1970s.
1952
X-ray diffraction patterns of the B form of DNA are de-
scribed by English physicist Rosalind Franklin.
1953
Using American biochemist Edwin Chargaff’s findings
on purine:pyrimidine pairs, Rosalind Franklin’s X-ray
scattering data, and hand-built models, the double alpha
helical structure of DNA is described by English bio-
chemist James Dewey Watson, physicist Francis Harry
Compton Crick, and physicist Maurice Wilkins. Rosalind
Franklin dies from cancer shortly after the historical arti-
cle describing this finding is published.
1955
Using a technique called fine structure mapping, Sey-
mour Benzer, a U.S. physicist turned biologist, shows
that there are many sites within a single gene that are
susceptible to mutation. This meant that there are many
ways a single gene could be altered and that the ob-
served effect might not be the same for all mutations. It
explains why genetic alleles exist and that they are the
same gene, although each maps slightly differently and
sometimes shows a slightly altered trait.
1956
U.S. Nobel laureate biochemist Arthur Kornberg’s dis-
covery of DNA polymerase, the enzyme responsible for
the replication of DNA, answers part of the question of
how genetic information is faithfully copied for trans-
mission to the next generation.
The Nobel Prize–winning work of American biochemist
Christian Boehmer Anfinsen reveals that the three-di-
mensional structure of proteins is determined by the
order of the amino acids in the protein sequence. He
shows that a string of chemically synthesized amino
acids with the same sequence as the biological enzyme
RNase A fold properly and express the catalytic activity
of the native enzyme. Twenty years later, molecular biol-
ogists will take advantage of the natural folding of
polypeptide chains when they begin to express large
104
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
1951
(cont.)

quantities of nonbacterial proteins in bacteria and then
isolate them to study their function.
1957
The remarkable fidelity of DNA replication becomes ev-
ident when biochemists Matthew Meselson and Franklin
Stahl show that replication proceeds by copying one of
the original strands, using the A=T and C=G rules sur-
mised by Erwin Chargaff. The replication proceeds in
one direction only from one end (the 5' end) of the DNA,
and a “proofreading” activity of the DNA polymerase
enzyme checks for mistakes.
1958
Francis Harry Compton Crick and Russian-born U.S.
physicist George Gamow propose the “central dogma”
of information flow in molecular genetics: DNA codes
for RNA, which codes for protein.
Microbiologists Samuel Bernard Weiss, J. Hurwitz, and
others report the discovery of DNA-directed RNA poly-
merase that provides essential support for the hypothe-
sis. Reverse transcriptase, an RNA-dependent DNA
polymerase, found in a family of retroviruses that in-
cludes some cancer viruses and the HIV virus linked to
AIDS, proves an exception to this rule. The independent
discovery in 1970 of this enzyme by cell biologists
Howard Temin and David Baltimore will prove of im-
mense value to molecular biologists because it allows the
cloning of proteins from their expressed mRNA.
1959
An extra chromosome is discovered in the nuclei of cells
from Down syndrome children by the French scientists
Jerome Jean Louis Marie LeJeune, M. Gautier, and Ray-
mond Alexandre Turpin. This unbalanced extra dose of
genes results in mental retardation and a host of other
malformations in this genetic disease. This relatively
common birth defect occurs spontaneously with increas-
ing frequency when maternal age is greater than 35 years.
French Nobel Prize–winning biochemists François Jacob
and Jacques Lucien Monod establish that the internal
controls for gene regulation reside in the DNA sequence
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
105

on the chromosome as mappable features distinct from
the portion of genes coding for proteins. The steps in
protein biosynthesis are also worked out at this time.
1961
The genetic code words for amino acids are identified
over a period of 5 years in the labs of U.S. Nobel
Prize–winning biochemists Robert William Holley, Mar-
shall Warren Nirenberg, Har Gobind Khorana, and
Severo Ochoa. As stated by the central dogma of molec-
ular biology, the code is transcribed from DNA into an
intermediate messenger RNA (mRNA), the function of
which was earlier defined by Francois Jacob and Jacques
Lucien Monod. mRNA is subsequently translated using
the genetic code words for the amino acids into protein.
1963
The first textbook based on the principles of modern
ecology is published by biologist E. P. Odin.
1964
The Green Revolution begins with the development of
new strains of rice at the International Rice Institute in
the Philippines. With sufficient fertilizer, production
yields of previous strains are doubled. Although hailed
as providing food for the hungry, issues such as increas-
ing the dependence of the third world on the developed
industrial nations for fertilizers and speeding nutrient
depletion of soils are downplayed. Acknowledgment of
the impact of these issues will come later with experience
and will engender significant debate over the introduc-
tion of genetically engineered crops in the 1990s.
1965
Genes coding for bacterial antibiotic resistance are found
on plasmids, small circular pieces of DNA that remain
separate from the main DNA of the bacterium. The most
common antibiotic resistance genes code for enzymes
that destroy the drug molecules before they can harm the
bacteria. β-lactamase hydrolyzes β-lactam antibiotics
such as penicillin.
1967
Polynucleotide ligase from E. coli is isolated and studied
by U.S. biochemists Samuel Bernard Weiss and Charles
Clifton Richardson. This enzyme is important in DNA
106
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
1959
(cont.)

damage repair, closing breaks in DNA by forming a new
bond between pieces of the same strand of DNA. A bac-
teriophage T4 variant of the ligase is a routine tool in en-
gineering recombinant DNA to splice together pieces of
genes.
1970
The first restriction endonuclease enzyme, E. coli restric-
tion endonuclease I (Eco RI), is isolated. These enzymes,
discovered in 1968, protect bacteria in their natural envi-
ronment from foreign DNA. By cutting at specific nu-
cleotide sequences they make manipulation of DNA pre-
dictable and much easier.
1971
General Electric and Indian-born U.S. microbiologist
A. M. Chakrabarty apply, initially without success, to the
U.S. Patent Office for a patent on oil-eating Pseudomonas
bacteria, created to deal with ocean oil spills. The patent
is eventually issued after review by the Court of Customs
and Patent Appeals. This landmark decision removes the
distinction between patenting animate and inanimate in-
ventions and opens the infant biotechnology industry to
development. In 1980 the U.S. Supreme Court upholds
the patent.
1972
The first recombinant DNA molecules constructed using
restriction enzymes and DNA ligase are fabricated at
Stanford University. In 1973, restriction enzymes are used
for cloning toad DNA into bacteria by the laboratories of
U.S. biochemists Stanley Norman Cohen at Stanford and
Herbert Wayne Boyer at the University of California, San
Francisco. A patent issued to Stanford University and the
University of California on this process collects royalties
today for every cloning experiment performed with these
enzymes.
1973
Public concern is expressed over the possible production
of dangerous hybrid organisms by the new recombinant
DNA technology. Scientists draft a public letter arising
from discussions at the Gordon Conference on Nucleic
Acids published in Science on the possible biohazards of
DNA splicing.
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
107

Congress creates the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) to act as the national watchdog for the environment.
1974
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) forms the Re-
combinant DNA Molecule Program Advisory Commit-
tee (RAC) on October 7, which is charged with framing
guidelines for recombinant DNA research and reviewing
gene therapy protocols. Its first meeting is in February
1975. Critics of recombinant DNA technology call for a
worldwide moratorium, which is respected on certain
kinds of experiments while the potential dangers are
studied further.
1975
The first mammalian gene (rabbit globin, the protein part
of the oxygen carrier hemoglobin) is cloned in bacteria
by molecular biologists A. Efstratiadis, F. Kafatos, A.
Maxam, and Tom Maniatis.
The Asilomar Conference on Recombinant DNA Mole-
cule Research is held to discuss concerns and progress in
providing biological containment of experimental organ-
isms and in assessing the safety of recombinant DNA re-
search. Tensions run high because scientists feel that they
are being railroaded by activists who don’t understand
or care about scientific issues or the freedom of inquiry.
Nonscientists, on the other hand, feel that the issues at
stake, such as the safety of the environment, are too im-
portant to be left for scientists to decide because they
have their own agendas and their livelihoods at stake.
The Senate Subcommittee on Health, Committee on
Labor and Public Welfare, begins the first public debate
on recombinant DNA with a series of hearings on genetic
engineering beginning on April 22 and chaired by Sena-
tor Edward Kennedy. Other nations seem to be following
the lead of the United States in the controversy at this
time. The Report of the Working Party on the Experi-
mental Manipulation of the Genetic Composition of Mi-
croorganisms in the United Kingdom calls for special
laboratory precautions for recombinant DNA research.
1976
On June 23, the long-awaited publication of the NIH’s
first Federal Safety Guidelines on Recombinant DNA Re-
108
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
1973
(cont.)

search establishes a voluntary system of regulation for 
institutions receiving federal funding for research. The
Department of Heath, Education, and Welfare–NIH
guidelines are published (Federal Register 41[131]:
27902–27943). Enforcement relies to a great extent on ex-
isting statutes and regulatory powers. Although restrict-
ing many categories of experiments, the guidelines do not
go far enough for some people and are unnecessarily con-
fining and bureaucratic to others. Industry is expected to
comply voluntarily with the regulations, which disturbs
many people who are concerned that the profit motive
will override notions of safety in bringing products to
market. The stringency of the guidelines applied to re-
combinant DNA research is later amended as experimen-
tal evidence accrues to support the safety of some types
of experiments. Commercial release of recombinant or-
ganisms into the environment is regulated by the net-
work of government agencies empowered by the numer-
ous statutes covering biological and chemical products.
Robert Swanson (an investment broker) and Herbert
Boyer (a molecular biologist involved in the first genetic
engineering experiments) found Genentech, the first
company based on genetic engineering technology, to
produce medically important molecules. Thousands of
other biotechnology companies will rise and fall through
the years, but Genentech, the first and still the largest,
will market some of the first genetically engineered bio-
logical products, mostly hormones or growth factors,
produced by the new technology.
1977
A U.S. National Academy of Science meeting on recom-
binant DNA is held in Washington, D.C., March 7–9. Al-
though intended as a forum on industrial applications of
the new genetic engineering technology, major figures
such as the Nobel Prize winner George Wald and his
wife Ruth Hubbard, both committed foes of recombinant
DNA technology, speak to the audience, turning the
panel discussions into a debate and encouraging dis-
senters in the audience, including the activist Jeremy
Rifkin, to take advantage of the media presence to sup-
port their cause. Rifkin argues that the nature of life itself
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
109

is at stake and that it is necessary for the people to keep
inhuman science in its place. Sixteen bills are introduced
in Congress to regulate recombinant DNA research; none
are ever passed into law.
The first recombinant DNA molecule incorporating
mammalian DNA is produced with genes for hemoglo-
bin. The molecular basis for diseases with special impact
on ethnic populations, sickle cell anemia (African de-
scent) and beta-thalessemia (Mediterranean descent), is
shown by DNA sequencing procedures developed the
same year to be single amino acid changes in these vital
oxygen-carrying proteins.
1978
The Nobel Prize in Medicine is awarded to Werner
Arber, Daniel Nathans, and Hamilton Smith for the dis-
covery and use of restriction enzymes for genetic engi-
neering. A number of human gene products, including
somatostatin and insulin, are produced by recombinant
DNA techniques. The RAC is expanded to include mem-
bers of the general public.
The first baby conceived by mixing human sperm and a
human egg outside of the body (in vitro fertilization, or
IVF) is born in the United Kingdom. Nineteen years later,
a sheep is “cloned” by transfer of an intact adult cell nu-
cleus into an egg cell (ovum) with its nucleus removed.
1979
The NIH guidelines for recombinant methods of han-
dling viral DNAs are relaxed with the accumulation of
safety data and the development of impaired host organ-
isms and engineered vectors. Cancer-causing genes are
studied by transformation of cultured cells with DNA
from malignant (cancerous) cells. Ironically, these are the
types of experiments that in the summer of 1971 had set
Robert Pollack and Paul Berg to contemplating the possi-
ble ramifications of recombinant technology applied to
cancer genes, leading to the Asilomar Conferences.
1980
The Nobel Prize in Chemistry is awarded to Paul Berg,
Walter Gilbert, and Frederick Sanger for creation of the
first recombinant DNA molecules and for DNA sequenc-
110
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
1977
(cont.)

ing methods. U.S. molecular biologist Kary Mullis and
others at the Cetus Corporation in Berkeley, California,
invent the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique of
replicating selected DNA sequences from a mixture of
DNAs. This methodology revolutionizes molecular biol-
ogy in the 1980s. The patent for the PCR process was
later sold to Hoffman-LaRoche, Inc., in 1991 for $300 mil-
lion. Biogen, another of the early genetic engineering
firms, is founded by U.S. molecular biologists Walter
Gilbert and Charles Weissman and begins producing in-
terferon, a potent antiviral protein. Revised NIH Guide-
lines are published including voluntary compliance by
non-NIH-funded institutions (Federal Register 45:[20]:
6724–6749, and revised Federal Register 45[227]:7
7384–77409).
1981
The first transgenic mammals are produced at Ohio Uni-
versity when foreign genes are transferred into mice.
Golden carp produced by Chinese scientists are the first
example of cloned fish. Sickle cell anemia becomes the
first genetic illness diagnosed before birth at the gene
level by restriction enzyme analysis of DNA. Congress-
man Al Gore begins a series of hearings on the relation-
ship between academia and the growing commercializa-
tion of biomedical research. Such concerns are the
harbinger of the university-industry web linking the
many hundreds of new biotechnology companies with
their academic founders and established industries. The
fear that these interconnections will drastically influence
the university research environment proves prophetic.
The NIH publishes a final plan to assess formally the
risks of recombinant DNA research (Federal Register
46[111]: 30772–30778).
1982
The pharmaceutical company Eli Lilly markets human
insulin produced by recombinant DNA methods (Hu-
mulin). In addition to relieving a forecasted shortage of
insulin for the increasing number of people with dia-
betes, allergic reactions to animal insulin are reduced by
providing the human protein sequence. This hormone is
the first of many biopharmaceuticals, small- to medium-
sized proteins with potent biological effects on particular
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
111

cell types, previously available only in minute quantities,
introduced into medical therapy.
A foreign gene cloned into tobacco plants is successfully
transmitted to progeny in common Mendelian fashion
just like indigenous genes. Besides showing the similar-
ity of genetically engineered changes to “normal” genet-
ics, the transfer demonstrates the practicality of engi-
neering plant genes that would soon become of major
economic and ecological interest. The following year,
U.S. patents are granted to companies for genetically en-
gineered plants.
A human bladder cancer gene cloned into E. coli contain-
ing a single base pair change that resulted in a single
amino acid change in the protein is shown to be respon-
sible for the cancer-causing activity of the protein when
expressed in mammalian cells. This observation suggests
that some cancers could be genetic diseases. AIDS is rec-
ognized as a syndrome, although the causative agent
will not be identified until the following year.
University of California scientist Stephen Lindow is the
first to ask permission to deliberately release genetically
modified organisms into the environment to prevent
frost damage on potatoes and strawberries, stimulating a
storm of controversy. The NIH approves his protocol the
following year.
1983
A chemical method for preparing synthetic genes is in-
vented by chemist Marvin Caruthers at the University of
Colorado. Leroy Hood’s automation of the procedure at
California Institute of Technology makes gene synthesis
a routine genetic engineering tool.
1984
Several moves are made to establish guidelines for con-
trolling the impact of new medical technologies on hu-
mans. Activist Jeremy Rifkin authors a resolution signed
by 56 religious leaders and 8 scientists supporting so-
matic cell modification while opposing germ line (trans-
missible to subsequent generations) treatments as
human gene therapy. The National Organ Transplanta-
112
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
1982
(cont.)

tion Act passes under the auspices of Senator Al Gore,
prohibiting interstate commerce in organs or organ sub-
parts for profit but allows transfers for medically rele-
vant research purposes. The Warnock Report issued by
the Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry in England rec-
ommends limiting research on human embryos.
1985
Congress authorizes the Biomedical Ethics Review Board
to examine the ethical implications of genetic engineering
of humans and to recommend policies and legislation to
control potential abuses of the technology. The Biotech-
nology Science Coordinating Committee (BSCC) is estab-
lished under Senator Al Gore as part of the U.S. Govern-
ment Office of Science and Technology Policy.
Federal courts rule that private companies do not need
NIH approval for field testing of genetically engineered
organisms. EPA approval has been required since 1984.
MVP, a genetically engineered biopesticide, a protein
toxic to certain insects, developed by Mycogen, becomes
the first such product approved by the EPA.
1986
Amid the controversy over relationships between uni-
versities and industry, CRADAs (Cooperative Research
and Development Agreements) are instituted through
the Technology Transfer Act of 1986 to facilitate technol-
ogy transfer from government (NIH) to industry. Al-
though this enables high-ranking government scientists
to tap more private funds for research, the potential con-
flict of interest erodes public confidence in personal and
government impartiality. The first field trials of geneti-
cally engineered plants resistant to insects, viruses, and
bacteria are undertaken. In a statement he has regretted
since, Walter Gilbert calls the complete human genome
sequence the “holy grail” of biology.
1988
James D. Watson, then director of Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratories where much of the new recombinant DNA
technology had its start, is appointed head of the National
Center for Human Genome Research. It was felt that a sci-
entist with the stature of a discoverer of the double helical
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
113

structure of DNA was needed to galvanize the massive ef-
fort required to determine the complete DNA sequence of
the human genetic complement, the genome. The first
patent on a living transgenic animal, the Harvard Onco-
Mouse (US 4,736,866), is issued to Phil Leder and Harvard
University. This mouse is an animal model for antitumor
therapies that had been engineered to be highly suscepti-
ble to certain types of cancer. The OncoMouse patent was
refused in Europe.
1990
Although most critics worry about private industry com-
mercializing genetic engineering, the first gene patents
are actually obtained by the U.S. government’s (NIH)
Craig Venter, who patents thousands of genes based on
short pieces of DNA sequence with functions that can be
predicted. Venter soon leaves NIH to start a biotechnol-
ogy company outside of Washington, D.C., in Gaithers-
burg, Maryland, based on these “expressed sequence”
tags (ESTs). This is the year the Human Genome Project
begins, a 15-year project to sequence the entire human
genome. The Office of Technology Assessment reveals
that 13% of Fortune 500 companies are using or had used
some form of genetic screening in hiring decisions.
A young girl, Ashanthi DeSilva, receives the first cellular
gene therapy using her own white blood cells genetically
modified to regain their immune function resulting from
an adenosine deaminase (ADA) enzyme deficiency.
Modest improvement is seen, but, more important, no ill
effects are noted. Numerous other gene therapy proto-
cols soon follow, directed against intractable diseases
such as cancer, Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy, and
cystic fibrosis as clinicians struggle to learn if the new
technology will live up to its potential.
In the United Kingdom, the Human Fertilization and
Embryology Act of 1990 bans human cloning.
1991
The Task Force on Genetics and Insurance is established
at the National Center for Genome Research (NIH/De-
partment of Energy) to address issues raised by genetic
testing. This is part of the comprehensive plan to control
114
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
1988
(cont.)

consequences of the explosion of knowledge from the
Genome Project.
1992
The Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee is dis-
banded and its functions taken over by various govern-
ment agencies. The RAC served through the turbulent
years of assessment of the safety of the new recombinant
DNA technology while the regulatory aspects were
being developed.
Wisconsin is the first state to forbid discrimination in em-
ployment or insurance based on an individual’s genetic
background. Other states steadily follow suit. Loopholes
remaining for company-financed insurance plans even-
tually lead to introduction of protective federal legisla-
tion in 1997.
1993
Despite heavy controversy, technology transfer contin-
ues unabated with 200 CRADAs issued. The genetically
engineered delayed-ripening Flavr Savr/MacGregor
tomatoes are marketed by Calgene.
1994
Fifty-nine gene therapy protocols involving 150 patients
are approved.
1995
The first complete nucleotide sequence of a bacterium
(Hemophilus influenzae) is published. One hundred and
six clinical protocols involving gene therapy had been
approved and 597 patients had undergone experimental
gene transfer since the first gene therapy experiment in
September 1990. NIH spends $200 million per year on
gene therapy research. Biotechnology companies are
thought to be spending as much again or more. The NIH
RAC concludes after a study of gene therapy that, de-
spite great promise and expectations, clinical efficacy
had not been demonstrated definitively in any gene ther-
apy protocol.
1997
The cloning of a sheep from a somatic cell nucleus in
Scotland raises a storm of concern over human cloning,
previously ignored because it was so far from realization.
Cloned rhesus monkeys are reported. Suddenly human
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
115

cloning appears imminent, although formidable techni-
cal obstacles remain. Federal legislators rush to intro-
duce a number of bills prohibiting human cloning. Pro-
tection against genetic discrimination is improved by the
introduction of several Genetic Confidentiality and
Nondiscrimination bills.
Although the public is willing to accept genetically engi-
neered medical products, it is another matter entirely
when it comes to what it eats. Reaction against geneti-
cally engineered foods in the United States results in the
Bovine Growth Hormone Milk Act regulating labeling of
milk products produced with the aid of the synthetic
hormone. The European Union bans milk or meat prod-
ucts produced with synthetic growth hormone and
maintains a similar stance on food products from genet-
ically engineered plants.
Flavr Savr tomatoes are removed from the market for
“improvements.” They never return.
1998
Human cloning remains a topical issue. The mouse, an
important laboratory animal, is cloned by nuclear trans-
plantation, a process that is expected to speed up certain
kinds of research. Reaction to the pending blanket human
anticloning legislation by the clinical and basic science
community as well as supporters of medical research
calls for further study of the proposals. The intention is to
avoid outlawing vital scientific and medical procedures
needed to develop new therapies while maintaining a
stance against cloning of human beings.
Human embryonic stem cell lines are established by two
groups, one at the Geron Corporation (Menlo Park, Cal-
ifornia) and in the laboratory of James Thomson at the
University of Wisconsin. The controversy begins.
The first complete animal genome, that of the worm
Caenorhabditis elegans, is sequenced, and a rough map of
the human genome is published showing the location of
nearly 30,000 genes.
116
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
1997
(cont.)

2000
The first complete genome map of a plant, Arabidopsis
thaliana, is published, a task made difficult by the large
size of plant genomes. Genetically engineered crops are
grown on 108.9 million acres in 13 countries.
On June 25, 2000, the International Human Genome Proj-
ect and the private Celera Genome Corporation jointly
announce completing the initial sequencing of the
human genome.
In August, the Clinton administration publishes federal
guidelines for funding of stem cell research.
2001
First complete map of a food plant, rice, is completed,
and the genomes of several agriculturally important bac-
teria, a nitrogen-assimilator and a plant pathogen, are
published. On August 9, 2001, President George W. Bush
announces his decision to allow federal funding of the
use of existing pluripotent (not totipotent) stem cell lines
derived from human embryos prior to that date.
2002
Many other genome sequences are reported including
that of the malaria parasite and the mosquito that carries
it, a pathogen of rice, and a draft version of the full
human genome. The mouse genome project publishes a
draft sequence.
A regulatory role is discovered for previously small RNA
sequences in controlling cellular functions that had been
puzzling for many years.
Genetically engineered crops are grown on 145 million
acres in 16 countries.
2003
Disease mapping studies using the human genome se-
quence identify a gene for vulnerability to depression,
and linkages are sought for schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder, two other psychiatric disorders. Genetically en-
gineered crops are grown on 167.2 million acres in 18
countries. The EPA approves the first transgenic root-
worm-resistant corn expected to save farmers more than
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
117

$1 billion a year in pesticides and crop losses. A geneti-
cally engineered coffee plant that produces caffeine-free
beans is developed in Japan.
Dolly, a sheep, the first cloned mammal (1997) is eutha-
nized after developing a progressive lung disease and
other signs of premature aging.
2004
The first human stem cell line produced with the aid of
somatic nuclear transfer in Korea.
The chicken genome sequence is published.
Agriculture biotechnology receives a boost from the re-
sults of studies carried out by influential groups. The
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization en-
dorses biotech crops as a complement to traditional farm-
ing. The National Academy of Science Institute of Medi-
cine finds that biotech crops do not pose any more danger
to consumers than traditional crops. Genetically engi-
neered crops are grown on 200.5 million acres worldwide.
118
Chronology of Genetic Engineering
2003
(cont.)

5
Biographical Sketches
William French Anderson (1936–)
W. French Anderson grew up in Tulsa, Oklahoma, where he was
born on December 31, 1936. He decided that he wanted to work on
curing genetic diseases after finishing an undergraduate course at
Harvard on DNA and genetics taught by James D. Watson, the
Nobel Laureate. After graduating with an A.B. in 1958, he studied
with Francis Crick at Cambridge, receiving an M.A. in 1960. Then
it was back to Harvard for an M.D. in 1963 followed by a pediatric
residency at Boston Children’s Hospital. His research career began
in 1965 at NIH, where he studied hemoglobin synthesis and the in-
herited blood disorders thalassemia and sickle cell disease, which
result from mutant hemoglobin molecules. Anderson pioneered
the use of iron-binding drugs in iron overload conditions. In 1977
he became director of the Molecular Heredity Section at the NIH.
Searching for practical ways to introduce genes into cells after re-
moving the harmful genes, Anderson began to test retroviruses, a
family of RNA viruses that included members that normally cause
tumors and AIDS as potential therapeutic vectors. The hemoglo-
bin disorders proved too complex for beginning gene therapy in
humans, so Anderson selected the newly discovered adenosine
deaminase gene for replacement in patients immunocompromised
by an ADA gene deficiency, a rare genetic disorder. Following suc-
cessful gene marking tests with the engineered viral vector system
in terminal cancer patients in 1988, the first true gene therapy
treatment was initiated by Drs. Anderson, R. Michael Blaese, and
119

Kenneth W. Culver on September 14, 1990. The ADA gene in a
retroviral vector was inserted into some of a nine-year-old girl’s
own white blood cells, which were then returned to her blood-
stream. Blood ADA levels rose and the her immune system par-
tially recovered—a success!
In 1991, Anderson founded the private company Genetic
Therapy to commercialize work that was being done in federal
government laboratories and to provide vectors for gene therapy
to hospitals and universities. He moved to the University of
Southern California in 1992.
Paul Berg (1926–)
Paul Berg, currently at Stanford University where he has been on
the faculty at the medical center since 1959, was born in New
York City on June 30, 1926. He received his B.S. at Penn State in
1948 and his Ph.D. at (Case) Western Reserve University in 1952.
Following postdoctoral studies at Washington University in St.
Louis, he joined the faculty there in 1955 where he remained until
he moved to Stanford as an associate professor in 1959. At that re-
search mecca, Berg found himself in the midst of scientific devel-
opments that would lead to recombinant DNA technology. He
was recognized early on for his seminal contributions to the de-
termination of the mechanism by which proteins are coded by
DNA. Before age 40, Berg was elected to the prestigious U.S. Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, just one of a long series of awards
that have acknowledged his contributions to science and society.
It was Berg’s concern about the safety of certain kinds of
DNA manipulation that he was contemplating, particularly
tumor virus DNA, that lead to the historic “Berg letter” to Science
and the call for a moratorium on certain recombinant DNA re-
search until safety issues were addressed. He was a key orga-
nizer of the Asilomar Conference in 1975, which lead to the Na-
tional Institutes of Health guidelines on recombinant DNA
research issued in 1976, a historic instance of responsible self-reg-
ulation in scientific research. Paul Berg was awarded the Nobel
Prize in Chemistry in 1980 for his work on DNA. This recognition
for his scientific accomplishments, among others, was followed
by acknowledgment of his social contributions with the Scientific
Freedom and Responsibility Award, the National Medal of Sci-
ence, and the National Library of Medicine Medal. His studies
120
Biographical Sketches

continued to involve recombinant DNA technology through the
1980s. In 1985, Berg was appointed to direct the Beckman Center
for Molecular and Genetic Medicine at Stanford. Continuing his
socially responsible ethic, in 1991 he was named as the head of
the Human Genome Project Scientific Advisory Committee of the
National Institutes of Health. In this role, he has been consider-
ing the ethical and practical issues raised by the new technology
and the impact of genetic technologies on society.
Herbert Wayne Boyer (1936–)
Herbert Boyer was born in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, on July 10,
1936, and attended tiny St. Vincent College in nearby Latrobe,
Pennsylvania, where he received his A.B. in biology and chem-
istry in 1958. The former high school football lineman went on to
the University of Pittsburgh where he earned his M.S. in 1960
and finally his Ph.D. in bacteriology in 1963. After 3 years of post-
doctoral experience at Yale University, he moved to the Depart-
ment of Microbiology at the University of California at San Fran-
cisco in 1966 where he became embroiled in the early events of
the recombinant DNA revolution. His laboratory was investigat-
ing the restriction enzymes of Escherichia coli, discovering that
Eco RI (E. coli restriction endonuclease number I) cut DNA into
reproducible-sized pieces, producing “sticky ends” that tended
to adhere to other pieces of DNA treated with Eco RI. Boyer
began collaborating with Dr. Stanley Cohen at nearby Stanford,
who had been studying plasmids, circular pieces of DNA carry-
ing genes for such properties as antibiotic resistance in bacteria.
The laboratories of Boyer and Cohen were soon able to recom-
bine segments of DNA in a desired order to include genes for
proteins and to put the engineered plasmids back into bacteria.
These altered bacteria, when properly grown, would then make
that protein under the direction of the plasmid DNA regardless
of the origin of the protein because the genetic code for the vari-
ous amino acids was universal. This process was to provide the
basis for the biotechnology industry.
In 1976, Boyer cofounded Genentech along with venture
capitalist Robert Swanson on the strength of the new technology
and served as vice president of the company until 1990 when he
shifted to the board of directors, where he remains at present.
Genentech produced the first biopharmaceutical drug in 1978,
Herbert Wayne Boyer (1936–)
121

the peptide hormone human insulin, which was subsequently li-
censed to the pharmaceutical company Eli Lilly. Genentech was
the first biotechnology company to produce its own product
when it launched human growth hormone in 1985. Boyer re-
tained his appointment at the University of California at San
Francisco, becoming a full professor in the Genetics Division of
the Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics in 1976; he is
now a professor emeritus there. He has been the recipient of nu-
merous academic and industrial honors and prizes for his pio-
neering applications of genetic engineering and is still on the
board of directors at Genentech. Boyer is a member of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, a fellow of the American Academy
of Arts and Sciences, and a recipient of the Albert Lasker Basic
Medical Research Award, considered by many to be the highest
scientific award short of the Nobel Prize.
Ananda Mohan Chakrabarty (1938–)
Ananda Chakrabarty was born in Sainthia, India, on April 4,
1938. He earned his B.Sc. from St. Xavier’s College in Calcutta,
India, in 1958, and both his M.Sc. (1960) and his Ph.D. in bio-
chemistry from Calcutta University in India (1965). After a year
as a scientific officer at Calcutta University, Chakrabarty moved
to the United States as a research associate at the University of
Illinois at Urbana, where he worked from 1965 to 1971. He then
made the transition to industry, joining the General Electric Com-
pany in Schenectady, New York, as a staff microbiologist dealing
with environmental pollutants. He recognized the potential for
bioremediation of contaminants through the metabolic activity of
microbes and created strains of Pseudomonas bearing plasmids
coding for enzyme activities capable of converting toxic oil spills
to harmless by-products. A landmark patent case claiming spe-
cific genetically engineered organisms to clean up oil spills was
filed in 1971 by General Electric and Chakrabarty. The original
application was rejected but was finally upheld by the Court of
Customs and Patent Appeals in 1980, the year after Chakrabarty
left General Electric to join the faculty in the Department of Mi-
crobiology at the University of Illinois Medical Center in
Chicago, where he teaches and does research today. For his work
with the oil-eating bacteria, Chakrabarty was recognized as In-
dustrial Scientist of the Year in 1975 and later was honored with
122
Biographical Sketches

the Public Affairs Award from the American Chemical Society
(1984) and the Pasteur Award (1991).
The U.S. Supreme Court turned back yet another challenge
to the patent in 1990. This key patent decision removed the dis-
tinction between the patenting of animate and inanimate inven-
tions. The possibility of protecting the commercial potential of
genetically engineered organisms is a cornerstone of the biotech-
nology industry.
John William Coleman (1929–)
John Coleman was born in New York, New York, on December 30,
1929. As a black man in the 1940s, his educational choices were
initially limited. He received his bachelor’s degree from Howard
University in 1950. He served as a physicist for the U.S. National
Bureau of Standards from 1951 to 1953 and then as an instructor
in physics at Howard University from 1957 to 1958. Coleman con-
tinued to advance his studies during this time, obtaining his mas-
ter’s degree from the University of Illinois in 1957. In 1958, he was
hired as an engineer by the RCA Company, where he focused his
research on the physics of electrons. During his tenure at RCA, he
earned his Ph.D. in biophysics at the University of Pennsylvania,
receiving his degree in 1963. Although the electron microscope
was invented in 1934 by Max Knoll and Ernst Roska, it remained
a physics curiosity until 1940 when RCA demonstrated a crude
commercial version. Coleman was involved in the development
of the electron microscope at RCA as it was transformed from the
behemoth 2.5-ton instrument (1949) suitable for materials science
study (metallurgy, ceramic surfaces) into a high-resolution device
useable for properly treated biological samples.
Francis Sellers Collins (1950–)
Francis Collins was born in Staunton, Virginia, on April 14, 1950.
He was educated at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville,
receiving his B.S. in 1970, his M.S. in 1972, and his Ph.D. in 1974
from Yale University. Collins earned his M.D. from the Univer-
sity of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in 1977 and then served his
internship and residency at the hospital there through 1981. He
continued his medical education as a fellow in medical genetics
Francis Sellers Collins (1950–)
123

and pediatrics from 1981 to 1984 at the Yale University School of
Medicine. He moved to the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor
in 1984 as a faculty member in the Departments of Internal Med-
icine and Medical Genetics, serving as chief of those departments
from 1987 to 1991 as well as a Howard Hughes Investigator at the
University of Michigan from 1987 to 1993. In 1993, he replaced
the flamboyant and controversial James D. Watson as the direc-
tor of the National Center for Human Genome Research at the
National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland.
Numerous honors and awards have been bestowed on Dr.
Collins, and he is on the editorial boards of several prestigious
scientific journals dealing with human genetics, molecular biol-
ogy, and genetic engineering. He is a member of the Institute of
Medicine of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences.
While at the University of Michigan, Dr. Collins became
known for cloning the most prevalent form of the defective gene
responsible for 80% of the cystic fibrosis (CF) cases, seen at that
time as a scientific coup and an example of the power of genetic
techniques for elucidating the cause of diseases. It also raised the
possibility of genetic therapy for this commonly inherited (1:2,000
Caucasian births) disease. Despite much effort, however, success-
ful clinical treatment by gene therapy for this condition remains
to be demonstrated. Besides his work on CF, Dr. Collins is a key
figure in the massive Human Genome Project, maintaining a con-
stant presence in the public eye and balancing the swirling issues
of ethics, morality, and privacy while coordinating one of the
most ambitious human endeavors ever: sequencing the human
genome by the year 2006. Why would anyone take on this tremen-
dous responsibility? Collins accepted a pay cut to direct the
Genome Project, saying, “I feel I’ve been preparing for this job my
whole life.”
Francis Harry Compton Crick (1916–2004)
Francis Crick was born in Northhampton, England, on June 8,
1916. As a boy, he was fascinated with science but was over-
whelmed by the fear that by the time he grew up, everything
would have been discovered. He trained in physics, receiving his
B.Sc. from the University College of London in 1937. During and
after World War II (1940 to 1947), he served the British Admiralty
as a scientist. He was a medical research council student at the
124
Biographical Sketches

Strangeways Laboratory at Cambridge from 1947 to 1949 and
then on staff at the Molecular Biology Laboratory at Cambridge
from 1949 to 1977. He began his famous collaboration with James
D. Watson on the architecture of DNA, contributing his expertise
in X-ray crystallography, which resulted in publication of the
double helical model for DNA structure in 1953. Crick received
his Ph.D. from Cambridge in 1954 and continued his work on the
chemical basis for DNA structure. In 1955, he postulated that pro-
teins were produced by adaptor molecules from the DNA code.
By 1958, there was enough information to support the hypothe-
sis that biological information flowed from DNA through RNA to
protein structure, a hypothesis that became known as the central
dogma of molecular biology. The eventual discovery of viruses in
which the genetic repository was RNA (hence the name retro-
viruses for some) required qualification of the hypothesis, but the
concept still generally holds. The 1962 Nobel Prize in Physiology
and Medicine was awarded jointly to Crick, Watson, and Wilkins
for their work in determining the structure of DNA and the cat-
alytic impact on molecular biology and biochemistry. Many sci-
entific honors followed over the years, including election to the
American, German, French, and Indian Academies of Science
and selection as a fellow of the Royal Academy of Science.
In 1977, Crick moved to the Salk Institute for Biological
Studies in La Jolla, California, and began to engage his interests
in the neurosciences and complex behavior such as conscious-
ness as set forth in his The Astonishing Hypothesis (Scribner, 1994).
Crick’s quiet style of doing science never earned him the antipa-
thy that his more outspoken collaborator, James Watson, seemed
to relish. He lost a several-year battle with colon cancer on July
28, 2004.
Rosalind Franklin (1920–1958)
Rosalind Franklin was born on July 25, 1920, in England. She
graduated from the Cambridge University undergraduate pro-
gram and began graduate work in physical chemistry. While still
a graduate student, Franklin made her contribution to the World
War II effort as an assistant research officer of the British Coal
Utilization Research Association. From 1942 to 1946, she did pio-
neering work on coal microstructure. In 1945, she received her
Ph.D. In February 1947, Franklin went to the Laboratoire Central
Rosalind Franklin (1920–1958)
125

des Services Chimiques de l’Etat in Paris, France, to learn X-ray
diffraction techniques to further her microstructure work. After
several productive years, she was eager to tackle biological struc-
tures and took up John Randall’s offer to set up an X-ray diffrac-
tion facility in Maurice Wilkins’s laboratory at King’s College,
England, in 1951. She succeeded in obtaining high-quality dif-
fraction patterns of oriented B-form DNA fibers, clearly recog-
nizing the helical organization of the fiber and postulating a mul-
tichain helix with the phosphate backbone on the outside and the
nucleic acid bases on the inside. This information was communi-
cated at a colloquium in November 1951 at which James Watson
was present. From this information, from Maurice Wilkins’s com-
munications, and from official King’s College laboratory reports,
combined with their own data and intuition, Watson and Crick
built the models that culminated in the publication of the helical
paradigm of DNA structure.
Despite not receiving full credit for providing the experi-
mental evidence of the structure of DNA, Franklin continued her
work and published a structure for the A-form of DNA. In 1953,
she left King’s College for Birkbeck College in London to work
with J. D. Bernel’s group where she produced one of the first X-
ray structures of the tobacco mosaic virus, ironically comprising
protein subunits arranged in a hollow helix around a DNA core.
Just a few years later, on April 16, 1958, Rosalind Franklin died of
cancer.
The Nobel Prize for the structure of DNA was shared by
Watson, Crick, and Wilkins in 1962. Although the Nobel Prize is
only awarded to living persons, many people attribute the ap-
parent snub to the fact that Rosalind Franklin was a woman.
Albert Gore, Jr. (1948–)
Albert Gore, vice president of the United States from 1992 to
2000, is a politician who has had significant impact on the re-
combinant DNA debate through his involvement in ecological is-
sues while he was in Congress. Born in Washington, D.C., on
March 31, 1948, he obtained his A.B. from Harvard University in
1969 and then served a stint in Vietnam with the U.S. Army
(1969–1971). Returning from the service, he did postgraduate
work at the Graduate School of Religion at Vanderbilt University
(1971–1972) and then at the law school there from 1974 to 1976.
126
Biographical Sketches

During this period, he was an investigative reporter and editori-
alist for The Tennessean (1971–1976) where he honed his writing
skills. Gore entered public service in the U.S. House of Represen-
tatives (1977–1985) and then as a senator (1985–1993). As a con-
gressman, he conducted a series of hearings on the connection
between academia and industry in the commercialization of bio-
medical research, and as a senator he was involved with the Na-
tional Organ Transplantation Act to regulate the commercializa-
tion of human organs for transplants. In Congress he established
himself as an expert on the environment and on nuclear arms
control as well as bioethics. Gore is the author of Earth in the Bal-
ance: Ecology and the Human Spirit (1992).
Leroy E. Hood (1938– )
Lee Hood was born in Missoula, Montana, on October 10, 1938.
He received a B.S. from the California Institute of Technology in
Pasadena, California, in 1960 and proceeded to the Johns Hop-
kins University School of Medicine in Baltimore, Maryland,
where he earned his M.D. in 1964. He then returned to Caltech
where he obtained his Ph.D. in biochemistry in 1968 and culti-
vated his interest in molecular immunology. From 1967 to 1970,
he was a fellow at the National Cancer Institute studying im-
munology. Still drawn to California, Lee returned once more to
Caltech, this time as a faculty member where he rose to the rank
of full professor by 1977. In 1989, he was appointed director of
the National Science Foundation Center for Molecular Biotech-
nology. In 1992, he accepted the chairmanship of the new Molec-
ular Biotechnology Department at Caltech.
Hood’s interest in the sequence basis for the polymorphic
immune system made him impatient with the available technol-
ogy for protein and nucleic acid sequence analysis. He began de-
signing and building instrumentation that could automatically
and rapidly determine the nucleic acid sequences of DNA and
the amino acid sequences of proteins from very small amounts of
sample. He also built machines that could chemically make syn-
thetic nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) and polypeptides (proteins)
from their component monomer units. He also commercialized
these instruments so that they were available to the scientific
community where they made possible the rapid progress in se-
quencing the new genes being discovered daily. The automated
Leroy E. Hood (1938–)
127

nucleic acid sequencing technology has been at the core of the
Human Genome Project to sequence the human gene comple-
ment, without which the project would not be possible.
Dr. Hood is a member of the U.S. National Academy of Sci-
ences. He was awarded the Louis Pasteur Award for Medical In-
novation and the Albert Lasker Basic Medical Research in 1987
for his studies of immunological diversity. The technological ad-
vances spawned by the instrumentation and techniques devel-
oped in Hood’s laboratory have earned him numerous other
awards and honors. He is becoming increasingly involved in the
analysis of the genetic information that is accumulating from the
genome sequencing projects from multiple organisms, realizing
that effectively utilizing this information to solve important med-
ical problems is as big a challenge as acquiring the information in
the first place.
Edward Moore Kennedy (1932-–)
Edward (Ted) Kennedy was born in Boston, Massachusetts, on
February 22, 1932, the son of Joseph and Rose Kennedy. He was
born into a prominent family steeped in politics and with a tradi-
tion of public service. The older brother of Robert (U.S. attorney
general) and John F. Kennedy (U.S. president), both victims of as-
sassin’s bullets, obtained his A.B. from Harvard University in
1956. He pursued training in the law with postgraduate study at
the International Law School at The Hague, the Netherlands, in
1958, obtaining his L.L.B. in 1959 from the University of Virginia.
Passing the Massachusetts bar exam in 1959, he was the assistant
district attorney for Suffolk County from 1961 to 1962. He was
elected U.S. senator from Massachusetts in 1962 and has remained
an outspoken liberal voice in that body on social issues since that
time. During his tenure in the Senate, he has served on the Judi-
ciary Committee (1979–1981), the Armed Services Committee,
and the Democratic Steering and Organization Committee. He
has been particularly involved with health issues and was a
prominent figure in Congress as chairman (1971–1980) of the Sub-
committee on Health of the Labor and Human Resources Com-
mittee during the early attempts to legislate regulation of the use
of recombinant DNA technology. He is also a member of the Bio-
medical Ethics Board. His publications include Decisions for a
128
Biographical Sketches

Decade (1968), In Critical Condition: The Crisis in America’s Health-
care (1972), Our Day and Generation (1979, with Mark O. Hatfield),
and Freeze: How You Can Help Prevent Nuclear War (1979).
Michael Martin (1956–)
Michael Martin was born in 1956 in the rural Alabama town of
Orrville, growing up on a small cotton and livestock farm. Mar-
tin’s encounter with the southern corn leaf blight of 1970, which
destroyed his hopes of winning a Future Farmers of America
award, left him searching for an explanation of why some corn va-
rieties survived and others were wiped out. A county extension
agent explained the basis of genetic resistance to the black
teenager, setting him onto a career in crop improvement. Martin
earned a B.S. in agronomy from Alabama A&M University and
went on to Iowa State for an M.S. and eventually his Ph.D. (1982)
in plant breeding and cytogenetics. One of his former professors
hired the newly graduated Martin as a research center manager
for the Garst Seed Company, a leader in hybrid corn development.
Garst merged with Zeneca Seed of Britain in 1990 and continued
to grow. Martin led Garst into the first commercial introduction of
an herbicide-resistant as well as multigenic disease-, insect-, and
climate-resistant corn. By 1996, he was supervising a staff of 247
and an annual budget of $18.5 million. The formation of Advanta
Seeds by Zeneca and the Dutch Royal VanderHave Group further
expanded his horizons and responsibilities. As the world’s largest
provider of canola and sunflower seeds, and ranking in the top
five worldwide in corn seeds, Advanta Seeds has projected annual
sales in 1997 of more than $500 million. Martin is responsible for
developing and implementing a research, sales, and distribution
plan in his specialty of dent and tropical corn varieties.
Barbara McClintock (1902–1992)
Barbara McClintock was born June 16, 1902, in Hartford, Con-
necticut. After graduating from high school at age 16, she worked
at an employment agency until she entered Cornell University’s
Agriculture College. She decided to study genetics, receiving her
B.S. in 1923. She was fascinated by the chromosomes of corn
Barbara McClintock (1902–1992)
129

plants; maize was the genetic system studied at Cornell at the
time rather than the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, which was
in vogue at other universities. Careful microscopic study of
maize development allowed McClintock to see clearly the chro-
mosomes divide and rearrange. The characterization of this sys-
tem became her Ph.D. dissertation project, which she earned
through the Department of Botany in 1927. She remained as an
instructor until 1931 when she and Harriet Creighton published
work that connected the physical interchange of maize chromo-
some material with the exchange of genetic information, just
weeks ahead of the publication of similar observations with
Drosophila. Very much a loner and uncomfortable with the norms
of scientific behavior, McClintock held various positions and did
research at Cornell, the University of Missouri, and CalTech be-
tween 1931 and 1940. Her reputation as a cytogeneticist was im-
peccable. In 1941, she was invited to join the staff of the Carnegie
Institute of Washington (D.C.) Department of Genetics at the
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratories on Long Island, New York,
where she remained for the rest of her life.
McClintock was elected to the U.S. National Academy of Sci-
ences in 1944, the third woman so honored. The subsequent year,
she was elected president of the prestigious Genetics Society of
America, the same year that genes were demonstrated to be
made of DNA. In 1951, McClintock tried to explain her observa-
tions on the transmission of certain maize characteristics by pos-
tulating that DNA could be rearranged on the scale of genes, but
she failed to gain the general acceptance of the scientific commu-
nity. A number of years later, after molecular techniques demon-
strated similar events with bacteria and viruses, McClintock’s
data on evolutionarily more advanced organisms obtained with
19th-century equipment, a regular microscope, crossbreeding ex-
periments, and careful observation finally gained the recognition
it deserved. DNA can rearrange—“jumping genes” are a biolog-
ical reality. Similar DNA rearrangements within a gene of the
white blood cells of the immune system are crucial for the con-
struction of antibodies that protect against foreign invaders. Mc-
Clintock was honored for her contributions, receiving several
awards including the National Medal of Science in 1970 and fi-
nally winning the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine in
1983. With all of the attention so richly deserved, Barbara Mc-
Clintock remained quietly aloof, working in her laboratory and
cornfields until she died on September 2, 1992.
130
Biographical Sketches

Louis Pasteur (1822–1895)
Louis Pasteur was born on December 27, 1822, at Dole in the Jura
region of France. An unremarkable student until near the end of
his secondary school career, Pasteur obtained his bachelor’s de-
gree in 1840, after a series of fits and starts, from the Collège
Royal de Besançon. He eventually entered the École Normale
Supérieure in Paris, receiving his doctorate in physics and chem-
istry in 1847. He continued to work at the École Normale while
awaiting a faculty position, becoming involved in studies on the
optical activity of molecules. This work became the starting point
for his career-long involvement in seemingly diverse and unre-
lated research topics. In 1849, he became professor of chemistry
at Strasbourg and then professor and dean of the Faculty of Sci-
ence at Lille in the industrial region of France in 1854.
Associated with an institution closely allied with manufac-
turing interests, Pasteur found an outlet for his highly practical
inclinations in Lille. His investigations into the biological and
chemical origins of optical activity and development of tech-
niques for separating the components led Pasteur into the exam-
ination of fermentation reactions of various types. He conducted
a series of experiments that led to elimination of spontaneous
generation in 1860 as an explanation of spoilage processes plagu-
ing the wine and vinegar industries. The heat treatment method
that bears his name, pasteurization, proved effective for several
industrial applications, and he eventually patented the proce-
dure in 1865. In 1857, he moved back to the École Normale as di-
rector of scientific studies. He was asked by the French silkworm
industry to find a solution to a mysterious disease that was ruin-
ing silk production. Through long and tedious experimentation,
Pasteur was able to demonstrate two simultaneously occurring
microbial diseases and to work out procedures to eliminate fur-
ther outbreaks. During this time, the germ theory of disease was
receiving experimental support from Robert Koch, the father of
bacteriology, and others who, along with Pasteur, developed
methods of growing pure cultures of disease-causing organisms.
Joseph Lister introduced antiseptic surgery in which instru-
ments, hands, and surroundings were chemically sterilized with
carbolic acid in the 1860s. These precautions were immediately
effective in reducing hospital patient mortality.
Pasteur began studies on anthrax, a deadly bacterial disease,
after hiring assistants who could perform the necessary biological
Louis Pasteur (1822–1895)
131

experiments, which he, partially paralyzed by a stroke in 1868 and
as an antivivisectionist, could not. He became one of the pioneers
of immunity and prophylaxis, following up on the successful late-
18th-century smallpox vaccinations by Edward Jenner. A success-
ful, highly publicized field trial of an attenuated anthrax treatment
on susceptible farm animals in 1881 led Pasteur to extend his work
to fowl cholera, hog cholera, and rabies. The July 6, 1885, treatment
of nine-year-old Joseph Meister who had been bitten by a rabid
dog with attenuated virus-infected spinal cord extracts prevented
the inevitably fatal progression of the disease and solidified Pas-
teur’s fame.
In 1888, Pasteur became director of a new institute bearing
his name, dedicated to the treatment of rabies and the develop-
ment of more effective vaccines. Increasingly incapacitated by ill-
ness, Pasteur continued directing research at the institute. He died
near Paris on September 28, 1895, and was honored with a state
funeral at the Cathédrale de Notre Dame. Pasteur was the recipi-
ent of numerous awards and much honorary recognition, includ-
ing election to the Royal Society, to the Académie de Medécine,
and to the Académie Française. His contributions to both the ex-
perimental demonstration of the germ theory of disease and to
the practical development of treatments for microbial diseases
laid the basis for modern immunoprophylaxis and therapy.
Jeremy Rifkin (1945–)
Growing up in the late 1940s to early 1950s on the south side of
Chicago, Rifkin gave little hint of the political and social activist
he would become. The son of a plastic bag manufacturer and a
charity worker, he developed his antiwar and civil rights senti-
ments at the University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton Business
School of Finance. He feels that growing up in the Vietnam War
protest era steered him to his activist profession. Rifkin served as
an organizer of the 1968 March on the Pentagon and in 1969
founded the Citizen’s Commission to focus on alleged U.S. war
crimes in Vietnam. In 1971, he founded the People’s Bicentennial
Commission as a countercultural alternative to official govern-
ment plans for the U.S. bicentennial celebration.
By the time the recombinant DNA controversy came on the
scene, Rifkin was well entrenched as a foe of the establishment.
He founded the nonprofit Foundation on Economic Trends,
132
Biographical Sketches

based in Washington, D.C., to influence government policy on a
spectrum of economic, environmental, scientific, and technologi-
cal issues. Although lacking formal training in the sciences, be-
ginning in the late 1970s, he became a strident voice in opposing
genetically engineered crops, patenting of genes, genetic engi-
neering of animals and animal breeding practices, biological
weapons, and the sale of recombinantly modified foods. Almost
exactly 20 years predating the 1997 announcement of the cloning
of the sheep Dolly by nuclear transfer, Rifkin and a group of pro-
testers disrupted a National Academy of Sciences meeting on ap-
plications of recombinant DNA technology chanting, “We will
not be cloned!” He apparently feels that biotechnology would
allow scientists to “play God” and could lead to eugenic pro-
grams. Through his foundation he has filed lawsuits against var-
ious government agencies, including the Department of Agricul-
ture on a number of fronts challenging the genetic engineering
and animal breeding practice on the basis of animal rights, and
various proposed releases of genetically modified organisms
such as engineered frost-preventing bacteria (Frostban) and
crude-oil-eating bacteria for oil spills on the basis of inadequate
environmental impact assessment.
Although Rifkin moved on to other concerns including global
economics, workers’ rights issues, the impact of information tech-
nologies on the workplace, and global warming, his foundation in
the 1990s began rallying grassroots opposition to the use of genet-
ically engineered bovine growth hormone to enhance milk and
meat production in cattle. In May 1995, he orchestrated the is-
suance of a statement from 180 religious leaders from some 80 re-
ligious groups including United Methodist, Southern Baptist, Jew-
ish, and Muslim organizations, calling for a moratorium on
patenting of genetically engineered animals and human genes,
cells, tissues, organs, and embryos. In April 1997, the foundation,
in concert with others, organized a global protest to oppose genet-
ically engineered foods, cloning, and patenting of genes and life
forms. Despite his fervent opposition to many aspects of genetic
engineering, Rifkin maintains that he has never opposed biotech-
nology for genetic screening, applying genetic knowledge to pre-
ventative medicine, or for the production of pharmaceuticals.
By enlisting strong emotional opposition to genetic engi-
neering and other issues, Rifkin has incurred the enmity of gov-
ernment officials, scientists, and industry executives to whom he
is known as the “abominable no man.” He responds by saying
Jeremy Rifkin (1945–)
133

that critical perspective is needed in commercialization of genetic
technologies, pointing to the lack of such a public debate on the
nuclear and chemical technologies that led to the Three Mile Is-
land, Chernobyl, and Bhopal disasters.
Rifkin is president of the Foundation on Economic Trends,
president of the Greenhouse Crisis Foundation, and head of the
Beyond Beef Coalition. He is the author of 13 books, including
Algeny (Viking Press, 1983), which expressed a naturalistic or vi-
talistic view of nature and caused a stir by questioning the objec-
tivity and validity of Darwinian evolution using creationism ar-
guments. Rifkin returned at the close of the 1990s to stir the pot on
genetic engineering as the author of The Biotech Century: Harness-
ing the Gene and Remaking the World (Putnam, 1998), on the effects
of globalization on cultural identity in The Age of Access (Tarcher,
2001), on fossil fuels in The Hydrogen Economy (Tarcher, 2002), and
on the lapsing of the American Dream and its replacement by the
European Union in The European Dream (Tarcher, 2004)
Marian Lucy Rivas (1943–)
Marian Rivas was born on May 6, 1943, in New York City. After
receiving her B.S. from Marian College in 1964, she continued her
studies at Indiana University where she earned first an M.S.
(1967) and then a Ph.D. (1969) in the then-new field of medical
genetics. She extended her training with a fellowship at Johns
Hopkins University from 1969 to 1971. Her first faculty position
came at the Douglas College of Rutgers University in New Jersey
where she was an assistant professor from 1971 to 1975, just as
the recombinant DNA revolution was beginning to sweep biol-
ogy. The medical applications of the new technology and their
consequences were to become apparent just a few years later. In
1975, Rivas moved to the Hemophilia Center of the Oregon
Health Sciences University where she has been a full professor
since 1982. In 1978, she also became an associate scientist at the
Neurologic Science Institute of the Good Samaritan Hospital. As
a medical geneticist, Rivas has served on several committees on
genetics at the National Institutes of Health. Her career has
spanned human gene mapping and investigation of the genetic
aspects of epilepsy, and she has been involved in genetic coun-
seling of patients and with the application of computers in clini-
cal genetics.
134
Biographical Sketches

Maxine Frank Singer (1931–)
Maxine Singer was born in New York City on February 15, 1931.
She received her A.B. from Swarthmore College in 1952 and
Ph.D. from Yale University in 1957. Singer began her career at the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) as a Public Health Service
Fellow and rose through the ranks working on nucleic acid
chemistry and metabolism through 1987. Her work on the bio-
chemistry of animal viruses in the 1970s brought her into contact
with the issues that she would address as cochair at the Gordon
Conference on Nucleic Acids in 1973. She was instrumental in
drafting a letter to the National Academy of Sciences and Na-
tional Institutes of Medicine expressing concern about the safety
of the new recombinant DNA technology. This public anxiety of
a group of scientists combined with similar sentiments of Paul
Berg eventually led to the moratorium on certain research with
recombinant DNA proposed at the Asilomar Conference of 1975.
She continued her involvement in both recombinant DNA re-
search and in monitoring scientific social responsibility on the
safety of recombinant DNA systems. In the 1980s, when the hys-
teria over the new technology had died down without ecological
disaster, Singer began emphasizing the benefits to be derived
from recombinant DNA applications. In the 1990s, she pointed
out that the Flavr Savr tomato genetically engineered to delay
softening upon ripening was little different from tomatoes de-
rived by years of crossbreeding and was just as safe to eat.
Singer’s accomplishments were recognized by numerous
awards including her election to the U.S. National Academy of
Sciences and National Institutes of Medicine. She has been an
emeritus scientist of the NIH National Cancer Institute and the
president of the Carnegie Institute in Washington, D.C., from
1988 until retiring in 2002. She supervised the First Light Pro-
gram designed to interest grade school girls and boys in science.
Robert Swanson (1947–1999)
Robert Swanson made his impact on genetic engineering by pro-
viding the primary ingredient that was to allow this technology
to become a major force today: investment capital. With an un-
dergraduate degree in chemistry from Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and an M.S. from MIT’s Sloan School of Business and
Robert Swanson (1947–1999)
135

fortified with four years of experience as an investment banker
with Citibank, he was aptly suited for bridging the promise of
the science and the principles of business competition and return
on investment on which many a biotechnology startup company
founders. In 1975, Swanson found Herbert Boyer at the Univer-
sity of California, San Francisco, where his and Stanley Cohen’s
labs combined the use of the new restriction enzymes to cut
DNA, leaving sticky ends with bacterial plasmids to recombine
genes, inserting them into bacterial cells for the production of
specific proteins. Assured by Boyer that commercial application
of genetic engineering was feasible, in 1976 the two convinced
Thomas Perkins of Kleiner-Perkins, a Silicon Valley venture cap-
ital firm, to advance seed money to establish Genentech. By 1978,
Genentech had produced genetically engineered human insulin
in bacteria and licensed the technology to Eli Lilly, a major phar-
maceutical company and producer of animal (porcine) insulin for
treatment of diabetes. In 1985, Genentech became the first startup
biotechnology company to introduce its own biopharmaceutical
product, human growth hormone. It remains the largest and
most successful biotechnology company both on the business
side and in scientific enterprise. Swanson was director and chief
executive officer from 1976 until 1990 when he was named chair-
man of the board. He died in 1999.
James Alexander Thomson (1959–)
James Alexander Thomson was born in Oak Park, Illinois, and
obtained his B.S. in biophysics from the University of Illinois in
1981. He earned a doctor of veterinary medicine degree in 1985
and a doctorate in molecular biology in 1988 from the University
of Pennsylvania where he studied genetic imprinting in early
mammalian development. This research area proved seminal in
focusing his interests. After two years as a postdoctoral re-
searcher at the Primate In Vitro Fertilization and Experimental
Embryology Laboratory at the Oregon Regional Primate Re-
search Center, he joined the Wisconsin Regional Primate Re-
search Center of the University of Wisconsin where he developed
techniques for isolation and culture of nonhuman primates, pub-
lishing the first isolation of nonhuman primate embryonic stem
cells in 1995. In 1998, a group headed by Dr. Thomson reported
the first isolation of human embryonic stem cells in 1998, a feat
136
Biographical Sketches

accomplished nearly simultaneously by the group of John Gear-
heart at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine.
Dr. Thomson is a champion of the ethical use of embryonic
stem cells for basic research into developmental biology and for
therapeutic uses. He advocates for the removal of federal gov-
ernment restrictions on government funding of stem cell research
and supports increased funding for embryonic cell research. He
is the founder of Cellular Dynamics International, a biotech
startup focused on differentiating embryonic stem cells into heart
cells for testing heart drugs. They hope to change medicine
rapidly rather than wait for the development of transplantation
techniques and the resolution of myriad ethical issues. He is also
scientific director for WiCell Research Institute, a research center
in Wisconsin dedicated to embryonic stem cell biology studies.
J. Craig Venter (1946–)
Craig Venter was born on October 14, 1946, in Salt Lake City, Utah.
A year spent in Vietnam as a medical corpsman during the war
there in 1967 helped galvanize his career plans along medical lines.
In 1972, he obtained his B.A. from the University of California, San
Diego, where three years later, in 1975, he earned his Ph.D. in
physiology and pharmacology. After a research fellowship from
1975 to 1976 in cardiovascular pharmacology at the University of
California, San Diego, he moved to the State University of New
York at Buffalo, where he was a faculty member in pharmacology
and biochemistry until 1984 when he joined the National Institute
of Neurological Disorders and Stroke at the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) in Bethesda, Maryland. From his initial studies on
pharmacologically important hormone receptors, Venter entered
into the then-infant field of genomics, promoting a sequencing
strategy called the expressed sequence tag/complementary DNA
(EST-cDNA) technique to identify human genes, skipping the in-
active (nontranscribed) parts of the genomic DNA sequence. The
NIH raised a storm of scientific controversy when it sought to
patent the EST gene fragment sequences without knowing the
function of the proteins coded by the sequences. Many critics be-
lieved that patenting gene sequences would discourage research
on the gene products. This criticism added to the controversy over
whether genes should be patentable at all. The EST/cDNA tech-
nique coupled with the growing ability to predict the function of
J. Craig Venter (1946–)
137

new sequences based on characteristic protein sequence structural
and functional motifs has been useful in chromosomal mapping
projects because they are large enough (300–400 base pairs) to rep-
resent unique sequences, which can be rank-ordered along the
length of the chromosomes.
In 1992, failing to obtain expanded research funding for his
EST sequencing project, Venter once again precipitated contro-
versy by jumping from NIH to become the president and direc-
tor of a private, nonprofit research center, the Institute for Ge-
nomic Research (TIGR) in Gaithersburg, Maryland. TIGR was
allied with a biotechnology affiliate Human Genome Sciences
(HGS), which was to commercialize selected sequences discov-
ered by TIGR. Access to a cDNA database jointly maintained by
TIGR and HGS and preferentially available to pharmaceutical
companies supporting their research has been a bone of con-
tention. Much of the disputed data, some 45,000 genes, has re-
cently been made publicly available over the World Wide Web.
The human genome sequence was jointly reported by Celera and
the government Human Genome Research Institute in June 2001.
Such debate over public and private interests has been a common
feature of biotechnology. It has been at once an ethical challenge
for modern society and the driving force for the application of
the new knowledge for the benefit of humankind. Venter left Cel-
era in 2002 and has been involved with several nonprofit insti-
tutes, finally merged in 2004 as the Craig C. Venter Institute. His
current interest is microorganisms found in seawater. In June
2005, he founded Synthetic Genomics dedicated to the use of
modified microorganisms to create ethanol and hydrogen as al-
ternative fuels.
James Dewey Watson (1928–)
James Watson was born on April 6, 1928, in Chicago, Illinois. He
entered the University of Chicago at age 15, receiving his B.S. in
1947. Harvard and the California Institute of Technology rejected
his applications for graduate study (ironically, he would later
serve on the faculty of both institutions), so he went to Indiana
University where he earned his Ph.D. in genetics in 1950. After
postdoctoral study in Copenhagen (1950–1951), Watson joined the
Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge, England, where he met
Francis Crick and became involved in the search for the structure
138
Biographical Sketches

of DNA. As described in the autobiographical The Double Helix
(Atheneum, 1968), he and Crick fashioned a model of two DNA
strands wound around each other in a helical configuration held
together by the pairing of DNA bases. Data for the model came
from X-ray crystallography and electron microscopic studies of
Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins as well as from their own
work. The DNA double helix was published in 1953 and served as
a cornerstone for nucleic acid biology in the infant fields of mole-
cular genetics and biochemistry. For the far-reaching conse-
quences of this paradigm, Watson, Crick, and Wilkins were jointly
awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine in 1962.
Many scientific awards followed his seminal work including
election to the U.S. National Academy of Sciences. Watson was a
faculty member at CalTech (1953–1955) and finally at Harvard
(1956–1976). He continued to make contributions to the under-
standing of the triplet code of DNA by which the sequences of
proteins are specified. In 1968, he served as director of the Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory where he continued through the pres-
ent, becoming president in 1994 and the chancellor in 2004, ad-
ministering and advocating for basic research in science. When
the Human Genome Project needed a prominent, forceful cham-
pion for their huge DNA sequencing project, they turned to Wat-
son, who provided the required spark and leadership from 1988
to 1990 to get the project rolling, pointing out its potential med-
ical applications. He once commented, “We used to think that
our future was in the stars. Now we know that it is in our genes.”
Always outspoken and, many felt, often abrasive, James Watson
has proved to be an able administrator and a positive force for
the application of gene science. A staunch advocate of unfettered
intellectual pursuit and the scientific method, he has been criti-
cized for not paying enough attention to the impact of the
Genome Project on political, social, or ethical issues.
James Dewey Watson (1928–)
139


6
Facts, Data, and Opinion
Statistical Data
Understanding and Acceptance 
of Genetic Engineering
The recombinant DNA revolution has experienced the same re-
sistance to the introduction of new technology commonly seen in
Western society throughout history. Analysts cite a variety of the-
ories for this behavior, with a common motivation being fear of
the unknown. A survey covering the period from 1983 to 2001 of
the attitude of the American public toward organized science in-
dicated that as people have become more accustomed to techno-
logical advances, they become less concerned with the rate of
change and tend to feel that those changes contribute positively
to their lives (Figure 6.1).
Influential factors in the recombinant DNA debate include
the potential impact on world ecosystems, health, and personal
control of information. Many other major controversies with im-
plications for public health such as locating the Seabrook nuclear
power plant, drilling for oil offshore or in the Arctic Wildlife Re-
serve, landing of the Supersonic Transport aircraft, regulating the
sale of the artificial sweetener saccharin, establishing standards
for genetic carcinogens, and reducing ozone destruction by fluo-
rohydrocarbons such as Freon® were decided in the public fo-
rums of the courts, by legislation, and in public hearings of gov-
ernment agencies. Scientific input was only part of the process.
The genetic engineering controversy, particularly during the
initial stages of the debate, has been distinct on several levels. 
141

Recombinant DNA technology is largely a scientific research tool,
and scientists, a decided minority of the population, initially
would have the most to gain from its application. As the tech-
nology matured, applications attracted business and economic
interests that acted on a larger scale, consequently arousing pub-
lic suspicion of the technology. The potential hazards, although
widely discussed, had not been confirmed to occur, nor was the
magnitude of the expected effects known. Finally, in addition to
the environmental and health issues, the public debate included
ethics. Even if personal rights of privacy of genetic information
and fair treatment are guaranteed, is it proper to manipulate the
genetic substance in the first place? Achieving consensus on such
issues of faith is a daunting prospect. A survey in the United
142
Facts, Data, and Opinion
Year
1984
1986
1988
1990
Science makes our lives more comfortable, easier
Benefits of science are greater than harmful effects
Science makes our way of life change too fast
We depend too much on science and not enough on faith
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
Percentage agreeing with statement
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
FIGURE 6.1 
Attitude toward Organized Science
Source: Revised from National Science Board, Science and Engineering Indicators—2002 (Washington, DC: U.S. Gov-
ernment Printing Office, 2002), Appendix, Table 7-13.

Kingdom (Lee, Cody, and Plastow 1985) found that 70% of the re-
spondents found genetic engineering to be “morally wrong,”
62% found it “unnatural,” and 27% found it “frightening.” Simi-
lar responses were obtained in the United States (Hoban and
Kendall 1992). The beliefs about the ethical scruples also depend
on the proposed use of the genetic engineering. People are far
more likely to consider the application of genetic technology per-
missible for medical conditions than for food enhancements or
increased industrial production.
Outside of the “gut” feelings of moral rightness and trepi-
dation toward change, a major contributor to the general public
unease with genetic engineering is the highly technical nature of
the arguments used to justify the safety of the technology and to
assess the magnitude of the harm that could be caused. This re-
flects the general scientific illiteracy of the American public, par-
ticularly in the lack of understanding of the process of scientific
inquiry—how scientists arrive at conclusions and what those
conclusions mean. A 2005 survey by the Office of Technology As-
sessment (National Science Board 2002, pp. 7-10 to 7-12) con-
cluded that 70% of adults, up from 64% in 1995, do not under-
stand the process by which measurements are made and
comparisons drawn in experimental studies to determine which
of two alternative treatments is better than the other and whether
the difference is significant. As for many issues, though, lack of
understanding is no impediment to having strongly held opin-
ions. Formal education, in particular, science and math educa-
tion, improves understanding of the process, but still nearly one-
third of respondents do not understand basic scientific proof
(Table 6.1).
People’s feelings about whether the benefits to be derived
from genetic engineering were greater than the risks showed lit-
tle correlation with educational level from non-high school grad-
uate to baccalaureate. If anything, non-high school graduates
were slightly more optimistic about the benefits than those with
higher education (Figure 6.2).
Early fears about genetic engineering focused on the proba-
bility of the escape of modified organisms from laboratories caus-
ing human disease and disruption of the environment. Initially,
little experimental evidence was available to drive bona fide risk
analysis; even the scientists had to make quite unsophisticated es-
timates. As data became available and biocontainment—the de-
velopment of standard workhorse organisms with drastically 
Statistical Data
143

reduced ability to survive outside of the laboratory—improved,
the fantastic scenarios of massive plagues faded from discussion.
There remain serious questions about the safety of the large-scale
deliberate release of organisms into the environment for agricul-
tural or bioremediation applications, which are presently ad-
dressed on a case-by-case basis through the Environmental Pro-
tection Agency (EPA) and allied agencies. Surveys by the Office
of Technology Assessment published in 1987 indicate that public
opinion is less than mollified. Respondents made little distinction
144
Facts, Data, and Opinion
TABLE 6.1 
Public Understanding of the Nature of Scientific Inquiry
A
B
C
D
Level of Understanding
(% of sample)
Sample Size
All adults
2
21
13
64
2,006
Formal education
Less than high school
0
4
7
89
418
High school graduate
1
18
15
66
1,196
Baccalaureate
6
44
13
37
260
Graduate/professional
10
49
12
29
132
Science/mathematics education
Low
0
9
12
79
1,125
Middle
3
30
16
51
530
High
7
45
12
36
352
Sex
Female
2
20
13
65
1,053
Male
2
22
12
64
953
Attentiveness to science or technology
High
5
34
14
47
195
Medium
3
22
13
62
946
Low
1
16
13
70
865
Respondents were presented with the following situation: “Two scientists want to know whether a certain drug is ef-
fective against high blood pressure. The first scientist wants to give the drug to 1,000 people with high blood pres-
sure and see how many experience lower blood pressure levels. The second scientist wants to give the drug to 500
people with high blood pressure and not give the drug to another 500 people with high blood pressure and see how
many in both groups experience lower blood pressure. Which is the better way to test this drug? Why is it better to
test the drug this way?”
A = understands science as the development and testing of theory.
B = not A level understanding, but understands concept of experimental study, including meaning and use of a con-
trol group.
C = not B level understanding, but understands science to be based on careful and rigorous comparison.
D = does not understand science on any of the above levels.
Source: Revised from National Science Board, Science and Engineering Indicators–1996 (Washington, DC: U.S. Gov-
ernment Printing Office), Appendix, Table 7-9, p. 304.

between specific dangers that might be expected from the use of
genetically altered organisms in the environment (Office of Tech-
nology Assessment 1987). When presented with approving agri-
cultural use of an organism with no risk to humans but with in-
creasingly remote possibilities of losing some local species of
plant or fish ranging from unknown up to one in a million, a sub-
stantial percentage of respondents (18%) would not approve even
at the lowest risk (1:106). Significantly, having available some
quantitative measure of risk, such as 1:1000 or 1:10,000 provided
Statistical Data
145
Percentage of Respondants
0
20
40
60
80
100
benefits >> risks
benefits > risks
benefits = risks
benefits < risks
benefits << risks
1979
1985
1990
1995
2001
1979
1985
1990
1995
2001
1979
1985
1990
1995
2001
1979
1985
1990
1995
2001
All Adults
Non -
HS
graduate
HS
Graduate
Baccalaureate
Genetic Engineering
Educational Status
FIGURE 6.2 
Public Assessments of Genetic Engineering by Educational Status
Source: Revised from National Science Board, Science and Engineering Indicators—2002 (Washington, DC: U.S. Gov-
ernment Printing Office, 2002), Appendix, Table 7-23, pp. 1072–1073.

a basis for a decision. Forty-six percent would not approve the
use of the organism if the risk were unknown even if it were
“very remote.” The specific use of the organisms affected the like-
lihood of public approval because release of disease- and frost-re-
sistant crops or “oil-eater” bacteria was more likely to be ap-
proved than more effective biopesticides or larger game fish.
While people wanted to be consulted on whether or not ge-
netically engineered organisms should be released into the envi-
ronment, they were more comfortable delegating the actual deci-
sions on whether commercial firms should be allowed to release
genetically modified organisms on a large scale to a government
agency or secondly to an external scientific body. The distribu-
tion of opinion was similar across different political affiliations.
Interestingly, only 5% or less of respondents believed that the
public at large or communities should decide.
Surveys conducted over 10 years later asking most of the
same questions have been conducted in other countries includ-
ing New Zealand and Japan (Macer 1998), the European Union
(BEPCAG 1997), and Canada (Eisiedal 1997). Despite the differ-
ing extent of involvement in biotechnology, different cultural tra-
ditions, and the intervening 10+ years since the U.S. survey, the
opinions of the sampled populations are remarkably consistent
in their basic mistrust of biotechnology, fuzzy public under-
standing of questions of relative risk-to-benefit, apprehension
about effects on the environment, and wanting to be consulted in
deciding what kind of work should be allowed. There remains a
general lack of confidence in the effectiveness of government reg-
ulation and in the motivations and accountability of industry.
People are far more willing to see genetic engineering used in
health-related ways than for food production, and all viewed the
potential for human cloning research negatively.
Genetic Engineering as a Business
Genetic engineering has been a vastly enabling technology at both
the level of being able to do things that were previously impossi-
ble or completely novel and in expediting and improving the ca-
pabilities of current practices. Many believe that this success and
rapid development, especially in the United States, was primarily
because obstacles to its commercialization were removed at an
early stage. The General Electric Company/Chakrabarty patent
146
Facts, Data, and Opinion

decision from the Court of Customs and Patent Appeals was a
landmark determination. It allowed the patenting of bacteria engi-
neered to metabolize oil spills during the early 1970s as a new form
of life. Previously, certain types of plants were the only form of life
that could be patented. Eventually upheld by the Supreme Court
in 1980, the Chakrabarty patent plus an additional patent to Stan-
ford University (Drs. Stanley Cohen and Herbert Boyer) on gene
splicing methodology issued the same year laid the legal ground-
work for the biotechnology industry. In 1987, the first patent was
granted to Harvard University on a genetically engineered mam-
mal, a mouse designed to be highly susceptible to tumor formation
to aid in the development of anticancer therapies. A patent grants
an exclusive right for a specified period of time to challenge the
use of that technology or product without permission of the holder
of the patent. Each country has its own set of rules governing the
protection of intellectual property by patents or copyrights, al-
though international agreements have established some common
standards.
Patents are currently allowed in the United States for genet-
ically modified microbes, cells, animals, and plants, whether pro-
duced by recombinant DNA technology or by traditional breed-
ing practices, although some restrictions are under discussion.
This view is challenged by a number of activists and some coun-
tries such as India. New techniques for manipulating genes and
inserting them into organisms can also be protected. A gene itself
may be patented (the use of the gene and its sequence), but only
if the function of the gene is known, which prevents patenting of
unknown DNA sequences in hopes of figuring out what they are
later. The rules governing patents in biotechnology evoked much
controversy when they were first proposed, and they remain a
complex subfield of patent law. Although not a guarantee of ex-
clusivity, patent protection attracted financial investment to the
new biotechnology companies, which gave them the money and
therefore the time to apply the new genetic technology to prod-
uct development.
Even in the age of colossal multinational corporations, a tech-
nique, an idea, a few test tubes, some agar plates, and a patent
pending can put a person into the genetic engineering business.
Usually such operations begin in the university research labora-
tory of a faculty member, but more than a few started in a garage
or vacant warehouse. The uses of world biotechnology grew ex-
ponentially from 1969 to 1984; since 1983, the growth has simply
Genetic Engineering as a Business
147

been explosive. The United States has tended to dominate the dis-
tribution of biotech companies in the world, partly because of the
availability of investment capital and technical expertise and
partly because of favorable intellectual property laws. In 1988, 469
of the worldwide 1,036 biotechnology companies were in the
United States. The common technology has spurred a worldwide
network of strategic alliances (Table 6.2).
By 2003, there were 1,473 biotechnology companies in the
United States alone. They are distributed primarily among states
that have made a conscious effort to attract the new technology
(Table 6.3).
Most are small, with 58% of the companies employing fewer
than 50 people and less than 12% with more than 500 workers.
They are distributed thus: 1–10 employees, 25.7%; 11–50 employ-
ees, 32.9%; 51–500 employees, 30.9%; 501–2,500 employees, 5.7%;
2,501–15,000 employees, 3%; and >15,000 employees, 1.9% (ASur-
vey . . . 2003). They also tend to be concentrated in metropolitan
areas. The top 10 states in total biotechnology research and devel-
opment funding in the Science and Engineering Indicators—2002
survey were California, Michigan, New York, Texas, Massachu-
setts, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Illinois, Wisconsin, and Mary-
land (National Science Board 2002, Text Table 4-11, p. 196).
The number of biotechnology firms in the United States has
remained fairly constant since 1994 (1,473 in 2003). Sales in-
creased almost fourfold as their development streams matured
into saleable products, recording an aggregate of more than $28.4
billion in sales in 2003. The number of employees over this same
148
Facts, Data, and Opinion
TABLE 6.2 
Worldwide Strategic Alliances of Biotechnology Companies (1990–2000)
United States–Europe
525
United States–Japan
82
United States–other
71
Europe–Japan
37
Europe–other
49
Japan–other
6
Intra-United States
629
Intra-Europe
147
Intra-Japan
7
TOTAL
1,553
Source: National Science Board, Science and Engineering Indicators—2002 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Print-
ing Office), Appendix, Table 4-12, p. 208.

period nearly doubled, again reflecting the maturing of the in-
dustry, with a total of 198,300 employees by the end of 2003.
These employment figures do not include those working in gov-
ernment laboratories, academic scientists, or state biotechnology
centers. Therapeutics and healthcare account for the focus of
more than 75% of the companies (A Survey . . . 2003).
This late-20th-century “cottage industry” spawned a new
generation of biotechnology investment capitalists to provide the
hundreds of millions of dollars of financial support needed to
turn the golden idea or technology into a product. In 1992, com-
pared with total sales of $5.9 billion, biotechnology firms spent
$4.9 billion on research, roughly equivalent to IBM’s research and
development budget that year. More than 90% of these new ven-
tures failed, like many new businesses, most within the first 5
years, because they didn’t convert their ideas into moneymaking
products fast enough. Only 18% of 225 public biotechnology firms
were profitable in 1995. Good scientists frequently are not good
business managers. The 1990s brought a slowdown in biotechnol-
ogy investing because the fantastic forecasts failed to materialize
and the stock market general technology bubble burst. Neverthe-
less, by persevering or by shrewd alliances with established in-
dustries, many successful biotechnology-based companies have
emerged. Most are connected with healthcare, although agricul-
tural applications continue to expand. Major corporations have
also invested or acquired interests in biotechnology as they rec-
ognized the need for such processes or investments (Table 6.4).
Genetic Engineering as a Business
149
TABLE 6.3 
Location of U.S. Biotechnology Companies, 2004
California
420
Massachusetts
193
North Carolina
88
Maryland
84
New Jersey
77
New York
66
Texas
64
Georgia
63
Pennsylvania
63
Washington
42
Florida
33
Connecticut
29
Source: Modified from Ernst and Young, LLP, America’s Biotechnology Report: Resurgence 2004. Available: BIO Web
site: http://www.bio.org/speeches/pubs/er/statistics.asp (04-21-06).

Their individual research and development expenditures ex-
tended into the hundred of millions of dollars in 1995 (Table 6.5).
Note that some companies have grown in worth (Market Capital-
ization) with relatively low research and development expendi-
tures. This type of success depends both on the type of products
and the company’s financial situation.
150
Facts, Data, and Opinion
TABLE 6.4 
Some Major Corporations Investing in Biotechnology
Abbott Laboratories
General Foods Corp.
Allied Chemical Corp.
Genzyme Corp.
Allied Signal, Inc.
GlaxoSmithKline
American Cyanamide Co.
Hercules Research & Development
American Home Products
Hoffman-LaRoche, Inc.
American Hospital Supply Corp.
Johnson & Johnson
Amgen
Kimberly-Clarke
Amoco Corp.
Life Technologies, Inc.
Ares-Serono Laboratories
Litton Bionetics, Inc.
Aventis-Behring
Lubrizol Enterprises
BASF
Merck and Company, Inc.
Baxter Healthcare Corp.
Miles Laboratories, Inc.
Becton Dickinson and Co.
Miller Brewing Company
Berlex Corp.
3M
Biogen-Idec
Monsanto Agriculture Company
Bio-Rad Laboratories
National Distillers & Chemical Corp.
Boehringer-Ingleheim Corp.
New England Nuclear Corp.
Boehringer-Mannheim Corp.
Novartis Pharmaceutical Corp.
Bristol-Meyers Squibb Corp.
Olin Corp.
Celanese Research Co.
Organon
Chiron Corp.
Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp.
Corning Glassworks
Pennwalt Corp.
Del Monte USA
Pfizer, Inc.
Diamond Shamrock Biotechnology Research
Phillips Petroleum Co.
Dow Chemical Co.
Proctor and Gamble Co.
Dupont Pioneer-Hi-Bred
RJR Nabisco, Inc.
E. I. du Pont de Nemours Co.
Rohm & Haas Co.
Eastman Kodak Co.
Rorer Group Inc.
Ecogen Inc.
Schering-Plough Corp.
Elan Corp.
Standard Oil Co.
Eli Lilly & Co.
Texaco Research Center
Exxon
Universal Foods Corp.
FMC Corp.
Weyerhauser Co.
Genentech
W. R. Grace & Co.
General Electric Co.
Wyeth Laboratories
Source: S. S. Brown, Opportunities in Biotechnology Careers (Lincolnwood, IL: NTC Publishing Group, 1994), pp.
138–141.

Genetic Engineering as a Business
151
TABLE 6.5 
Top 48 Biotechnology/Pharmaceutical Companiesa
Worldwide by 2003 Research and Development Expenditures
R&D
Market Capitalization
Company
(millions US$)
(billions US$)b
Pfizer, USA
$3,983.6
$194.1
GlaxoSmithKline, UK
$2,791.0
$143.4
Johnson & Johnson, USA
$2,616.6
$192.6
Novartis, Switzerland
$2,098.2
$115.5
AstraZeneca, UK
$1,927.8
$79.2
Merck, USA
$1,775.4
$64.4
Eli Lilly, USA
$1,312.9
$64.3
Bristol-Myers Squibb, USA
$1,273.1
$49.1
Wyeth, USA
$1,169.5
$61.5
Sanofi-Synthelabo, France
$927.3
$231.6
Amgen, USA
$924.8
$138.9
Schering-Plough, USA
$820.6
$32.9
Allergan, USA
$425.7
$18.1
Novo Nordisk, Denmark
$396.8
$31.1
Eisai, Japan
$311.2
$17.2
Altana, Germany
$290.2
$14.5
Millennium Pharmaceuticals, USA
$272.9
$4.7
Serono, Switzerland
$272.3
$16.5
Chiron, USA
$218.6
$12.7
Genzyme, USA
$187.3
$28.5
Elan, Ireland
$142.1
$5.7
Forest Laboratories, USA
$137.7
$24.3
Biogen Idec, USA
$130.4
$24.3
Shire Pharmaceuticals, UK
$128.4
$9.5
Sepracor, USA
$123.0
$11.6
Teva Pharma Industries, Israel
$119.3
$36.7
Human Genome Sciences, USA
$102.4
$2.7
Cephalon, USA
$95.1
$4.5
Gilead Sciences, USA
$92.1
$33.3
MedImmune, USA
$87.3
$11.6
Vertex Pharmaceuticals, USA
$77.9
$2.0
Exelixis, USA
$71.3
$1.0
Intermune, USA
$67.0
$0.7
Incyte, USA
$64.9
$1.1
Ivax, USA
$60.5
$9.1
Celgene, USA
$60.1
$12.2
Mylan Laboratories, USA
$56.3
$8.1
Watson Pharmaceuticals, USA
$55.5
$5.9
Medarex, USA
$53.3
$1.5
OSI Pharmaceuticals, USA
$52.0
$3.6
Barr Pharmaceuticals, USA
$51.0
$9.3
continues

Total spending of pharmaceutical and biotechnology com-
panies (not all necessarily related to genetic engineering) on re-
search and development climbed up to 1995 and then leveled off
(Figure 6.3), reflecting the investment downturn of the late 1990s.
Over the period from 1981 to 1992, a national survey showed
that research and development expenditures in several categories
(motor vehicles; office and computing; and food, beverages, and
tobacco) leveled off, whereas medicines and drugs (including
biotechnology) nearly tripled (Figure 6.4). According to the Phar-
maceutical Research Manufacturers Association (PhRMA) Foun-
dation (Washington, D.C.), U.S. companies invested $33.2 billion
in research and development (17.7% of domestic sales), more than
the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the international
pharmaceutical industry combined. In 2004, these figures rose to
$38.8 billion (18.8% of domestic sales).
It is becoming increasingly difficult to separate biotechnol-
ogy and the pharmaceutical sector because recombinant DNA
technology is becoming so pervasive in that industry. U.S.-
company-financed research and development in pharmaceuti-
cals continues to exceed that of other countries by a wide margin
(Table 6.6). There are 155 Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–
approved biotechnology derived drugs and vaccines on the mar-
152
Facts, Data, and Opinion
TABLE 6.5 continued
R&D
Market Capitalization
Company
(millions US$)
(billions US$)b
ImClone Systems, USA
$49.6
$5.0
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, USA
$49.5
$0.6
ICOS, USA
$47.9
$2.5
Abgenix, USA
$46.2
$1.2
Neurocrine Biosciences, USA
$45.0
$2.5
Affymetrix, USA
$36.8
$6.1
Amylin Pharmaceuticals, USA
$35.6
$3.0
a Companies with publicly traded stock
b September 2005 intraday market capitalization
Sources: DTI 2004 R&D Scoreboard 700 Top UK and 700 International Companies by R&D Investment, part 2. Com-
pany Data  http://www.innovation.gov.uk
Market Capitalization – Yahoo Finance

ket and more than 370 currently in clinical trials targeting more
than 200 diseases.
These figures may actually underestimate the investment of
the industrial sector because it is difficult to separate private in-
dustry:government coalitions in such countries as Japan and Cuba
in which the economic model differs from the United States. The
U.S. federal government investment in biotechnology research is
considerable, $4.299 billion in Fiscal Year (FY) 1994, of which the
lion’s share, 41%, was devoted to improving medicine and health-
related programs. Much of the funding goes to universities to pro-
vide both the basic groundwork to advance the science and to
stimulate application of new techniques through research founda-
tions (39%) and to support technology infrastructure in general
(8%). Agriculture, manufacturing, environment, and energy re-
sources receive much less governmental support (12% total). Some
people believe that these fields have potentially as great if not
greater social impact as healthcare in a world in which food and
Genetic Engineering as a Business
153
Year
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
Millions of constant 1996 US$
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
9,000
10,000
11,000
FIGURE 6.3 
Company Funding of Pharmaceutical Research and Development
Source: Revised from National Science Board, Science and Engineering Indicators—2002 (Washington, DC: U.S. Gov-
ernment Printing Office, 2002), Appendix, Table 4-29, p. 810.

154
Facts, Data, and Opinion
Year
1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997
Purchasing power parity ($ X 106)
0
2,500
5,000
7,500
10,000
12,500
15,000
17,500
20,000
Food, beverages, and tobacco
Motor vehicles
Office and computing
Chemicals
Medicines and drugs
FIGURE 6.4 
Manufacturing Industry Research and Development Performance, 1981–1997
Source: Revised from National Science Board, Science and Engineering Indicators—2002 (Washington, DC: U.S. Gov-
ernment Printing Office, 2002), Appendix, Table 6-9, p. 1033.
TABLE 6.6 
Company-Financed Pharmaceutical Research and 
Development Ranked by Country for 1995
United States
36%
Japan
19%
Germany
10%
France
9%
United Kingdom
7%
Switzerland
5%
Sweden
3%
Italy
3%
Other countries
8%
Source: Revised from Centre for Medicines Research International, 1997 figures. In Parexel’s Pharmaceutical R&D
Statistical Sourcebook (Waltham, MA: Parexel International Corp., 1997), p. 167.

energy supplies dwindle as population and demand increases. Re-
search in several of these areas, particularly agriculture and man-
ufacturing, is dominated by private industry in the United States
(Figure 6.5).
The Cycle of Ideas
It is useful to consider today’s trends in the context of historical
developments. According to Nola Masterson, Ph.D., of Science
Futures in San Francisco (Wong 2005), revolutionary ideas or
processes that profoundly impact society such as computer 
Genetic Engineering as a Business
155
General foundations
39%
Infrastructure
8%
Agriculture
5%
Energy 1%
Environment 2%
Manufacturing/bioprocessing 4% 
Medical / health
41%
FIGURE 6.5 
Federal Investment in Biotechnology Research—Fiscal Year 1994
Source: From National Science and Technology Council, Biotechnology Research Subcommittee, Biotechnology for the
21st Century: A Report from the Biotechnology Research Subcommittee, Committee on Fundamental Science (Wash-
ington, DC: Biotechnology Research Subcommittee, 1995), p. 2.

technology, automobiles, and biotechnology tend to follow a gen-
erational cycle that operates over 50 years:
• The first decade lays down the foundation for the tech-
nologies.
• The second decade yields a small number of products
based on this methodology.
• The third decade produces a flood of innovative prod-
ucts based on refining and broadening its core method-
ologies.
• The fourth decade finds products incorporated into
daily life, and the processes that generated them are
fully integrated into industry.
• The fifth decade ushers the formerly new technologies
into mainstream industry, and the revolution that gave
birth to them becomes part of history.
By this timeline, the chemical industry is in its fourth decade,
as plastics and polymers are commonplace. Biotechnology is be-
ginning its third decade in which a flood of products is making
its way into clinical trials and onto the market. It is also shifting
its research focus into cellular and systems biology to harness the
massive amount of knowledge gained in genomics and pro-
teomics for cell-based therapies and stem cell research.
Medical Applications
The top 25 publicly traded biotechnology companies worldwide
(Table 6.5) are heavily invested in medical and health product de-
velopment. This position is driven by the ready application of ge-
netic engineering to the production of scarce biomolecules, the
relatively high rate of return on investment for pharmaceuticals,
and a low profile on environmental impact because the recombi-
nant organisms are controlled entirely within the production fa-
cilities. Those companies diversifying into other areas such as
agriculture and bioremediation have encountered the ecological
issues surrounding release of engineered organisms into the en-
vironment and a significant public backlash against the technol-
ogy. The FDA approved the first recombinant biopharmaceutical
agent, human insulin (Humulin) from Eli Lilly, in 1982. These re-
combinant products are mostly protein hormones or growth fac-
156
Facts, Data, and Opinion

tors (of human sequence to avoid immunological reaction), re-
placement enzymes (blood clotting factor VIII), or antibodies de-
signed to neutralize or target cell types for cancer therapy. The
top-selling biotech drug worldwide is Amgen’s erythropoetin, an
activator of blood cell production, ranking 15th in the worldwide
drug sales overall for 1996. Four recombinantly engineered drugs
were among the top 50 drugs sold in 1997. To put it in perspec-
tive, though, biopharmaceuticals account for only about 10% of
1996 U.S. drug sales (Dibner 1998).
Gene therapies for cancer, cystic fibrosis, and enzyme re-
placement are also being developed. In contrast to the initial trials
in 1990 of adenosine deaminase (ADA) replacement in ADA-defi-
cient immunocompromised individuals which were designed as
a proof of concept for gene therapy by W. F. Anderson, the dis-
eases being targeted now afflict significant numbers of people.
For both technical and ethical reasons, no permanent genetic re-
pairs in which the defective gene is replaced or otherwise inacti-
vated in the reproductive cells, transmitting the modification to
future generations, are being advanced. Only the individual being
treated (presumably) will be affected by the therapy. Targeting
and the robustness and duration of the therapeutic effect will be
carefully monitored. The difficulties of this approach are leg-
endary and the ability of such treatments to compete with more
conventional pharmacologic avenues, when they can be devel-
oped, will decide the success of these companies.
A concern of both proponents and opponents of gene therapy
is the risk of abuse of the technology. Although there is general
agreement that gene therapy should be subject to societal controls,
defining what constitutes abuse will be difficult. The NIH Recom-
binant Advisory Committee (RAC), charged with approving gene
therapy protocols, is holding a series of conferences and open fo-
rums designed to bring the public into the debate on what sorts of
treatments are medically justified. The NIH RAC member and
bioethicist Eric Juengst from Case Western Reserve University in
Cleveland, Ohio, observed, “Just about any enhancement could be
packaged as therapy in some context.” His thoughts are echoed by
Sheila Rothman of Columbia University in New York City, who
says, “Powerful forces are available to promote enhancement, and
medical treatments can quickly become enhancements.” A hypo-
thetical case in some discussions—would a gene therapy solution
to male pattern baldness be a “therapy” or an “enhancement”?
Genetic Engineering as a Business
157

Agriculture and Manufacturing
Agricultural products register the largest commercial impact out-
side of medically related uses of genetic engineering. In 1992, out
of a total of $5.9 billion in receipts, agribiotech accounted for
sales of $184.5 million. In 2002, genetically engineered crop sales
in the United States were $20 billion (Runge and Ryan 2003).
Large chemical and pharmaceutical companies such as Mon-
santo, Dupont, and Searle have diversified by investing in agri-
cultural applications of genetic engineering through interests in
other companies like Collagen, Biogen, Genentech, Genex, and
Biotechnica International (see Table 6.4). These companies deal in
proprietary technologies rather than the commodities them-
selves: they provide the engineered seed and supporting treat-
ments such as herbicides. Condensation of the industry through
mergers has narrowed the field since 2000. Syngenta, Bayer,
Monsanto, DuPont/Pioneer-HiBred, Dow, and BASF had world-
wide sales in 2002 of seed and supporting treatments of $28 bil-
lion (Runge and Ryan 2003).
Although scientific traditional breeding of plants through
controlled pollen transfer has flourished for hundreds of years,
the in vitro propagation of plants from clones derived from sin-
gle cells to develop desired qualities was a 20th-century phe-
nomenon. Single plant cell cloning in its original sense does not
invoke gene manipulation. Genetic engineering, in the form
practiced at the molecular level for bacteria, fungi, and animal
cells, was slowed by the initial lack of suitable vector systems for
transfecting plant cells and difficulty in penetrating the tough
plant cell wall. Some types of crops such as rice, bananas, and ce-
reals that would impact food production for the worker popula-
tion in developing nations have been recalcitrant to molecular
manipulation, but they are now yielding to improved technol-
ogy. The full-scale use of engineered plants, unlike most recom-
binant bacterial or fungal production applications, necessarily in-
volves release of large numbers of recombinant organisms over
millions of acres of cropland. Although they cannot walk, swim,
or fly away, plants can disperse their genetic material (pollen and
seeds) over considerable distances, potentially interbreeding
with related weed plants. Transgenic trees could spread engi-
neered sawmill-friendly characteristics such as low lignin con-
tent from cultivated tree farms to offspring of wild populations,
which could affect their ability to compete and survive in unpro-
158
Facts, Data, and Opinion

tected areas in mixed culture with other species. Pest resistance
to specific recombinant strategies can also develop, potentially
causing disastrous crop failures when pest populations surge.
Environmentally tolerant plants could move into new ecosys-
tems disrupting the growth of indigenous species. As a result, the
ecologic consequences of agriculturally based genetic engineer-
ing have attracted much attention. This has been a prime target
for protest groups and governmental regulation. Public misgiv-
ings about pest management with genetic engineering have dras-
tically slowed deployment of the technology. Dr. R. Jones Cook of
the U.S. Agriculture Research Service at Washington State Uni-
versity, Pullman, Washington, reflects the climate in his state-
ment, “[the] question of social acceptance of pest management
with transgenes . . . remains a deterrent to plant biotechnology”
(American Association for the Advancement of Science Annual
Meeting, Philadelphia, PA, February, 1998).
The approach for regulating genetic engineering in the
United States was to expand the auspices of existing regulatory
agencies and to provide supplemental legislation. The result is a
complex network of interconnected responsibilities. Table 6.7
outlines the regulatory responsibilities for reviewing planned in-
troductions of genetically modified organisms, of which plants
are a part.
These regulations cover basic academic research and com-
mercial releases. Commercial biotechnology products also have to
be approved by the appropriate government agency(s) depending
on the intended use of the product (Table 6.8).
From 1987 through 2005, 13,357 field trials (releases) have
been approved by the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
(APHIS) of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)
(Table 6.9). The relative proportions of trials for types of modifi-
cations have remained relatively constant over the years.
The USDA has 120 days from the time of submission of a for-
mal proposal for field release of genetically modified organisms
to review and approve the proposal. After a number of years of
testing with no evidence of ecological impact, companies work-
ing with genetically engineered plants can request that APHIS
determine that there is “no potential for plant pest risk” and cer-
tify the release of the tested varieties. Table 6.10 reveals that in
1996–1997, a number of engineered plants that had initially been
ecologically suspect in principle showed no evidence under the
particular conditions they were tested that they would become
Genetic Engineering as a Business
159

160
Facts, Data, and Opinion
TABLE 6.7 
Responsibilities for Reviewing Planned 
Introductions of Genetically Modified Organisms
No release in environment (contained)
Federally funded
Funding agencya
Non-federally funded
NIH or S&E voluntary review, APHISb
Foods/food additives, human drugs, medical
devices, biologics, animal drugs
Federally funded
FDAd, NIH guidelines and review
Non-federally funded
FDAd, NIH voluntary review
Plants, animals, animal biologics
Federally funded
Funding agencya, APHISb
Non-federally funded
APHISb, S&E voluntary review
Pesticide Organisms
Genetically Engineered
Intergeneric
EPAc, APHISb, S&E voluntary review
Pathogenic intrageneric
EPAc, APHISb, S&E voluntary review
Intrageneric nonpathogen
EPAc, S&E voluntary review
Nonengineered nonindigenous pathogens
EPAc, APHISb
Indigenous pathogens
EPAc, APHISb
Nonindigenous nonpathogens
EPAc
Other uses (microorganisms) released in the environment
Genetically engineered intergeneric organisms
Federally funded
Funding agencya, APHISb, EPAc
Commercially funded
EPA, APHIS, S&E voluntary review
Pathogenic source organisms
Federally funded
Funding agencya, APHISb, EPAc
Commercially funded
APHISb, EPAc (if nonagricultural use)
Intrageneric combination of nonpathogenic source 
EPA Report
Organisms
Nonengineered organisms
EPA Report*, APHISb
* = Lead agency.
a = Review and approval of research protocols conducted by NIH, S&E, or National Science Foundation.
bAPHIS = Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (involved when microorganism is a plant or animal pathogen
or regulated by permit).
cEPA = Environmental Protection Agency—jurisdiction for plots of more than 10 acres.
dFDA = Food and Drug Administration—reviews federally funded environmental research only when it is for com-
mercial purposes.
NIH = National Institutes of Health.
S&E = U.S. Department of Agriculture, Science, and Education.
Source: From 51 Federal Register, Table II. Office of Science and Technology Policy Federal Registration Notice on a
Coordinated Framework for Regulation of Biotechnology (1986), p. 23305.

“weedy” or transfer their modified genetic material to native
plants. Many more such certifications have been allowed in a
continuing process of determinations (updates at http://www.
aphis.usda.gov). Although this does not prove that the plants are
safe in all environments, the initial apprehension turned out to be
ill-founded. Critics insist that testing should be carried out in
each different area because the ecologies differ.
Rather than writing new regulations specifically for geneti-
cally engineered products, the U.S. government has extended
coverage with the same legal statutes that protect agriculture and
Genetic Engineering as a Business
161
TABLE 6.8 
U.S. Federal Government Agency Responsibilities for 
Approval of Commercial Biotechnology Products
Food/food additives
FDAa, FSISb
Human drugs, medical devices, and biological products
FDA
Animal drugs
FDA
Animal biological products
APHIS
Other contained uses
EPA
Plants and animals
APHISa, FSISb, FDAc
Pesticide organisms released into environment (all)
EPAa, APHISd
Other uses (microorganisms)
1. Intergenera(ic) combination
EPAa, APHISd
2. Intragenera(ic) combination:
(a) pathogenic source organism:
agricultural use
APHIS
nonagricultural use
EPAa,e, APHISd
(b) no pathogenic source organisms
EPA Report
nonengineered pathogens
(i) agricultural use
APHIS
(ii) nonagricultural use
EPAe, APHISd
nonengineered nonpathogens
EPA Report
a = Lead agency.
bFSIS = Food Safety and Inspection Service (under the assistant secretary of agriculture for Marketing and Inspection
Service).
c = FDA is involved in relation to food use.
dAPHIS = Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (involved when microorganism is a plant or animal pathogen
or regulated by permit).
e = Only for significant new use (proposed new rule, 1989).
FDA =F ood and Drug Administration.
EPA = Environmental Protection Agency.
Source: From 51 Federal Register Chart I. Office of Science and Technology Policy Federal Registration Notice on a Co-
ordinated Framework for Regulation of Biotechnology (1986), p. 23304.

162
TABLE 6.9 
Categories of Field Releases (APHIS) 1987–2005
Total Releases
%
%
Enhancement
(1987–2005)
total
(2005)
Herbicide tolerance
3,624
27.2
32
Insect resistance
3,148
23.5
20
Product quality
2,334
17.5
19
Virus resistance
1,241
9.3
1
Agronomic properties
1,069
8.0
14
Fungal resistance
657
4.9
3
Marker gene
557
4.2
5
Bacterial resistance
107
0.8
—
Nematode resistance
17
0.1
—
Other
603
4.5
5
Total
13,357
100
Source: Revised from Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) Web site; http://www.aphis.usda.gov/
(cited 05/02/05).
TABLE 6.10 
No Potential for Plant Pest Risk Determinations (APHIS) 1996–1997
Product
Company
Date
Insect-resistant corn
Northrup King Company
January 1996
Herbicide-resistant cotton
Dupont Agricultural Products
January 1996
Male-sterile corn
Plant Genetic Systems (America), Inc.
February 1996
Altered ripening tomato
Agritope, Inc.
March 1996
Colorado potato-beetle-resistant potato
Monsanto Agricultural Company
May 1996
Virus-resistant squash
Asgrow Seeds
June 1996
Herbicide-tolerant soybean
AgroEvo
July 1996
Virus-resistant papaya
Cornell University and University of Hawaii
September 1996
Insect-resistant corn
DeKalb Genetics Corporation
March 1997
Insect-resistant cotton
Calgene, Inc.
April 1997
High oleic acid soybean
Dupont Agricultural Products
May 1997
Insect-resistant corn
Monsanto Agricultural Company
May 1997
aAPHIS = Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service. Potential for plant pest risk is a measure of the chance that the
genetically altered organism will crossbreed with closely related wild relatives to produce a weed plant with the new
characteristic and significant growth or propagation advantage.
Source: Revised from Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), BSS Biotechnology Update (November 1997).
Available: http://www.aphis.usda.gov/bbep/bp/newsletter.html (cited 05/02/05).

the nation’s food supply from pests and contamination from con-
ventional sources. Those who would have genetically engineered
organisms and produce singled out for special regulation have
criticized this policy decision. The statutes and the U.S. Legal
Code comprise a very large document that has been revised and
amended over the years. It is most readily accessed and searched
via the Internet (e.g., http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/
index.html and other sites). The indicated sections of the follow-
ing statutes (Title|U.S. Code|Section; Title 7 = Agriculture; Title
21 = Food and Drugs) are considered applicable to USDA-regu-
lated biotechnology (51 Federal Register, Office of Science and
Technology Policy Federal Registration Notice on a Coordinated
Framework for Regulation of Biotechnology [1986], p. 23339), al-
though there is no special mention of biotechnology in the docu-
ments: Virus-Serum Act of 1913 (21 U.S.C. 151–158); Federal
Plant Pest Act of May 23, 1957 (7 U.S.C. 150aa–150jj); Plant Quar-
antine Act of August 20, 1912 (7 U.S.C. 151–164, 166, 167); Or-
ganic Act of September 21, 1944 (7 U.S.C. 147a); Federal Noxious
Weed Act of 1974 (7 U.S.C. 2801 et seq.); Federal Seed Act (7
U.S.C. 155 et seq.); Plant Variety Protection Act of 1930 and 1970
(7 U.S.C. 2321 et seq.); Federal Meat Inspection Act of 1907 (21
U.S.C. 601 et seq.); and the Poultry Products Inspection Act of
1957 (21 U.S.C. 451 et seq.). This is not an exhaustive list of ap-
plicable statutes. Modifications are made as technology and new
issues develop. Keeping up with constantly changing biotech-
nology regulation is complex and time-consuming. The BioTech-
nology Permits Home Page (http://www.aphis.usda.gov/
BBEP/BP/) is a useful source for information on regulations per-
taining to agricultural biotechnology and links to other govern-
mental agencies and their regulations.
Genetic engineering of foodstuffs is an even more complex
and emotionally involved issue than the environment. According
to University of Wisconsin sociologist Frederick Buttel, food
biotechnology is responsible for 90% of the controversy, although
medical biotechnology accounts for 90% of the products of ge-
netic engineering. The human cloning and stem cell controver-
sies have temporarily shifted the balance of discussion since that
statement was made. Debate over the use of recombinant DNA
technologies in the production of food includes not only envi-
ronmental and consumer safety issues but the right to choose
whether one uses a product produced in a certain way (“syn-
thetic” vs. “natural”). In response to this debate, two bills were
Genetic Engineering as a Business
163

introduced into the U.S. House of Representatives (H.R. 2084 and
H.R. 2085) that would require the distinct labeling of milk and
milk products derived from cows treated with synthetic bovine
growth hormone to stimulate milk and meat production in-
tended for human consumption and the development of tech-
nologies to verify the source of the bovine hormone in foods.
H.R. 2084, the Bovine Growth Hormone Milk Act, intro-
duced by Representative Bernard Sanders (I-VT) and 27 other
representatives on July 20, 1997, imposes labeling requirements
for milk and milk products produced from cows treated with
synthetic bovine growth hormone. It directs the development of
a test specific for the synthetic hormone and also requires that the
USDA pay a lower subsidy price for milk and milk products pro-
duced with the aid of synthetic growth hormone. H.R. 2085, the
Bovine Growth Hormone Milk Act (also introduced by Sanders
and the 27 other representatives on July 20, 1997), imposes the
same requirements as H.R. 2084 without requiring the USDA to
pay a lower price for milk and milk products produced with the
aid of synthetic growth hormone. 
In response to the perceived impact of the growing influence
of agribusiness and the unknowns of genetic engineering tech-
nologies, legislation has been introduced to address the issues
confronting farmers and developing nations:
H.R. 4812: The Genetically Engineered Crop and Animal
Farmer Protection Act of 2002 sets forth a Farmer’s Bill of Rights,
including the right of farmers to save seeds, to be informed of the
risks of using genetically engineered crops, and not be held liable
for effects of genetically engineered crops to others; it also pro-
hibits genetic engineering designed to produce sterile seeds (“ter-
minator” technology) and loan discrimination based on choice of
seeds.
H.R. 4813: The Genetically Engineered Food Safety Act of
2002 requires that all genetically engineered foods follow the
FDA’s current food additive guidelines, phasing out antibiotic se-
lection markers. It prohibits introduction of known allergens, au-
thorizes the FDA to independently test food safety of genetically
engineered products, and opens a public comment period after a
safety application is completed.
H.R. 4814: The Genetically Engineered Food Right to Know
Act of 2002 requires the labeling of all foods that contain or are
produced with genetically engineered material enforced by peri-
164
Facts, Data, and Opinion

odic FDA testing and authorizes voluntary “no genetic engineer-
ing” labels.
H.R. 4815: Real Solutions to World Hunger Act of 2002
would offer incentives and protections to help developing na-
tions by establishing an international sustainable agriculture re-
search fund, allow U.S. firms to market to developing countries
only the genetic engineering technology that has been certified
safe for use in the United States, and make it mandatory for
biotech companies to allow developing nations to license genetic
engineering technology that is appropriate for the nations’ peo-
ples to produce food. A trust fund would be set up to fund these
activities, financed by a tax on the biotechnology companies sell-
ing genetically engineered seeds.
H.R. 4816: Genetically Engineered Organism Liability Act of
2002 would protect farmers by assigning all liability arising from
the consequences of the use of genetically engineered crops, such
as ecological damage or contamination of neighboring non–ge-
netically engineered fields, to the creator of the technology.
Such legislation faces an uphill battle from agribusiness,
which will contest demonization of a technology that they feel
has been proven to be safe and effective. Agribusiness is con-
cerned about the punitive nature of this legislation and asks why
these businesses are being held to a higher standard than other
modes of food production. The issues are a complex mixture of
antitechnology philosophy and a growing distrust of the indus-
trialization of farming and food production by huge multina-
tional corporations that have no boundaries and no loyalties ex-
cept to their financial bottom line. Of the examples cited only the
Growth Hormone Act has been passed into law, although com-
ponents of the other legislation may still be integrated into other
legislation. 
Despite the confusing web of regulation, the perceived fu-
ture returns on investment of genetically engineered crops have
kept entrepreneurial interest high. As shown in Table 6.11, in ad-
dition to the expected agricultural and food-based players, large
chemical and pharmaceutical companies lead as the most active
applicants to the USDA for field testing of transgenic crops.
Lists of approved applications and releases are available at
the APHIS Web site (http://www.aphis.usda.gov). The EPA has
indicated its intention to classify and thus regulate as “pesti-
cides” all transgenic plants that are disease- or insect-resistant.
Genetic Engineering as a Business
165

166
Facts, Data, and Opinion
TABLE 6.11 
Most Active Applicants to U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) 
for Field Testing of Transgenic Crops
Applicants
% of Applicationsa
Chemical companies
46%
Monsanto (52%)
Upjohn (Asgrow Seed)
Dupont
Sandoz (Northrup, King, and Rogers NK Seed)
Ciba-Geigy
Hoechst-Roussel
Imperial Chemical Industries
American Cyanamid
Universities/USDA
17%
USDA Agriculture Research Service
Cornell University
North Carolina State University
University of Kentucky
University of California
Michigan State University
Seed Companies
15%
Pioneer Hi-Bred (51%)
DeKalb Plant Genetics
Holden’s Foundation Seed
Petoseed
Harris Moran
Biotechnology Companies (biotech only)
13%
Calgene (82%)
DNA Plant Technology
Agrigenetics
Food Companies
5%
Frito-Lay
Campbell
Heinz
Land O’Lakes
Miscellaneous
4%
Cargill
Amoco Technology
aCompilation of 549 applications to the USDA from 1987 to 1993.
Source: From J. Rissler, Perils amidst the Promise: Ecological Risks of Transgenic Crops in a Global Market (Cambridge,
MA: Union of Concerned Scientists, 1993), Figure 1.3, p. 8.

Biotechnology companies have protested the expense and delay
engendered by the legal and bureaucratic process of pesticide reg-
ulation employed for chemical pesticides. They point out that the
same resistance gene introduced by traditional breeding would
not be considered a pesticide and would not be regulated. Small
companies with a niche product lacking the high-powered regu-
latory machinery of the large integrated chemical and agricultural
companies feel that they are being unfairly excluded from the
marketplace. The list of genetically engineered agricultural prod-
ucts currently on the market is short but likely to grow substan-
tially (Table 6.12).
Most of these products promise improved production
through pest and herbicide resistance, although agricultural
products with genetically altered oil composition are available,
and an even more diverse set of products is in the development
pipeline. Published Premanufacture EPA Notifications include a
number of applications that involve contained fermentation and
release into the environment that are directed at production of
manufacturing intermediates or products.
Microorganisms are responsible for a large number of com-
mercial products generated through conventional biotechnology.
Natural products, or secondary metabolites, are molecules, often
chemically complex, that are synthesized by an organism to gain
a selective advantage for survival and growth in a particular en-
vironment. Some, such as bread mold, have been enshrined in
folk medicine by indigenous human societies for treatment of var-
ious ailments as ancestors of pharmacological treatment. The
most recognizable of these are the antibiotics that have apparently
evolved to reduce competition by other organisms for space and
nutrients. Their isolation and clinical use as medicines, beginning
with penicillin discovered in 1928 by English bacteriologist Sir
Alexander Fleming, have been credited, along with great strides
in improving public sanitation, for the reduction in deaths due to
disease in developed and developing nations since 1900. Microor-
ganisms produce many pharmaceutically useful agents and novel
chemical structures. Other materials including food supplements
and emulsifying agents for stabilizing fat-containing mixtures are
obtained through microbial fermentation. Besides providing sci-
entists with the tools to design new generations of antibiotics to
overcome evolving drug resistance, recombinant DNA techniques
are used to move the genes responsible for natural product syn-
thesis into organisms more amenable and safer to culture.
Genetic Engineering as a Business
167

Seeking to decrease reliance on petroleum-derived precursor
chemicals, a number of industrially useful building blocks such as
glycerol and acetone have been produced by microorganisms cul-
tured on low-grade carbohydrate residue from processed agricul-
tural plant waste at competitive cost. Polymeric substances pro-
duced by microorganisms such as the food additives xanthan
gum and various alginates and the biosynthetic “plastic” polyhy-
droxybutyric acid (from Alcaigenes eutrophus) are available from
168
Facts, Data, and Opinion
TABLE 6.12 
Genetically Engineered Agricultural Products on the Market
Product
Company
Enhancement
Herbicide resistant
Liberty Link® Corn
Bayer Crop Science
Liberty® herbicide resistant
Liberty Link® Canola
Bayer Crop Science
Liberty® herbicide resistant
InVigor® Hybrid Canola
Bayer Crop Science
Liberty® herbicide resistant
Nexera® Canola
Dow AgroSciences
Liberty® herbicide resistant
Roundup Ready® Canola
Monsanto
Roundup® herbicide resistant
Liberty Link® Cotton
Bayer Crop Science
Liberty® herbicide resistant
Roundup Ready® Cotton
Monsanto
Roundup® herbicide resistant
Roundup Ready® Soybeans
Monsanto
Roundup® herbicide resistant
IMI-CORN®
Pioneer Hi-Bred Intl.
Imidazolinone herbicide resistant
IMI™-Canola Seed
Pioneer Hi-Bred Intl.
Imidazolinone herbicide resistant
BXN® Cotton
Calgene, Inc.
Herbicide resistant
DEKALB GR Hybrid Corn
DeKalb Genetics Corp.
Glufosinate herbicide resistant
Pest resistant
DEKALBt™Insect-Protected Corn
DeKalb Genetics Corp.
Corn borer resistance
Rogers® Attribute™ Bt Sweet Corn
Syngenta Seeds
Corn borer, rootworm resistant
Maximizer™Hybrid Corn
Novartis Seeds
Corn borer resistant
YieldGard® Corn Borer
Monsanto
Corn borer and rootworm 
resistant
Bollgard® Cotton
Monsanto
bollworm, army worm, and loop 
worm resistant
Freedom II™Squash
Seminis Vegetable Seeds
Plant virus resistant
Rainbow and Sunuppapayas
Cornell University/Papaya Admin.
Papaya virus resistant
Gray Leaf Spot Resistant
Garst Seed Co.
Disease-resistant corn
Stress resistant
High pH Tolerant Corn
Garst Seed Co.
Alkaline soil-tolerant
Augmented production
Optimum® Soybeans
Dupont Agricultural Products
High oleate oil content
Laurical® Rapeseed
Calgene
Special manufacturing food oil
Flavr Runner Peanut
Mycogen
High oleic acid
Naturally Stable Sunflower
Mycogen
No trans-fatty acids
Source: Revised from Biotechnology Industry Organization Web site: http://www.bio.org/speeches/pubs/er/agri_
products.asp (cited 05/02/05).

microorganisms. In 1997, Japanese scientists at research institutes
in Tsukuba and Kyoto reportedly engineered a cyanobacterium
(Synechococcus sp.) to produce up to 10% of its dry weight as poly-
hydroxybutyric acid using only light energy and carbon dioxide.
Through genetic engineering, the agricultural company Agrace-
tus is constructing cotton plants that will produce fibers of cotton
(cellulose) filled with a synthetic polyester fiber—a natural wash-
and-wear fiber. Dupont (Wilmington, Delaware) and Genecor In-
ternational, Inc. (Palo Alto, California) have incorporated genes
for bacterial and yeast enzymes in a single organism to make 3G
(trimethylene glycol), the monomer base of a new recyclable poly-
ester (3GT). The bottom line remains the economic feasibility of
production from renewable biological sources rather than limited
petrochemical stores.
The use of transgenic sheep and goats to produce therapeutic
products in their milk is now well established. “Pharming” of
human proteins can be done on a large, formerly industrial scale,
with few effects on the animals. A mature rabbit yields up to 8
liters of milk per year, a sheep 300 liters, a goat 1,000 liters, and a
cow 8,000 liters. Thus, small herds of these animals producing at
expression levels of 8 to 15 grams of product per liter could be
competitive with industrial-scale cell culture of complex proteins.
Human anti-thrombin III (ATIII) produced in goats for acquired
ATIII deficiency, a blood coagulation proteolytic disorder (Gen-
zyme Transgenics Corp., Framingham, Massachusetts), α1-anti-
trypsin, a protease inhibitor produced in sheep for treatment 
of cystic fibrosis (PPL Therapeutics, Edinburgh, Scotland), and 
α-glucosidase, a carbohydrate hydrolyzing enzyme, produced in
rabbits for the treatment of Glycogen Storage Disease Type II,
which results from a deficiency of this enzyme (Pharming Health-
care Products, Leiden, the Netherlands), are all products in vari-
ous stages of clinical trials. Other proteins are under development,
including human serum albumin used as a blood-volume exten-
der for surgery and trauma. Currently, 440 metric tons of the pro-
tein extracted from 16 million liters of human blood plasma are re-
quired for therapy each year. Transgenic animal production of
human proteins would avoid issues of hepatitis, HIV, Creutzfeld-
Jacob prion, and other pathogen contamination passed on from
human blood supplies, although the potential for transmission of
animal diseases across species needs to be addressed. However,
governmental action in Europe places the future of this industry
in doubt. In March 1998, the Dutch Ministry of Agriculture, partly
Genetic Engineering as a Business
169

in reaction to the nuclear transplant cloning controversy, reversed
an earlier decision and revoked a Pharming Healthcare Products
permit for its nuclear transplant–based transgenic mammal
cloning work designed to speed the generation of transgenic ani-
mals producing human therapeutic proteins. This judgment effec-
tively bans nuclear transplant cloning in the Netherlands for the
foreseeable future.
Bioremediation
As the word’s component parts suggest, bioremediation means to
repair or make right using biological processes. The word is most
commonly employed to refer to the removal of manmade conta-
minants from the environment. In fact, the process is neither new
nor restricted to human contamination. Recycling of nutrients,
minerals, and chemical building blocks has proceeded for mil-
lions of years to make way for new life—and fortunately so, oth-
erwise the earth would be deeply buried under dead bacteria, in-
sect exoskeletons, and leaf litter. With the increasing pressure of
burgeoning human populations and the impact of industrializa-
tion, humankind has had to find ways to speed up recycling and
to clean up concentrations of toxic substances from commercial,
governmental, and residential waste and to cope with accidental
spills. The difficulty of extracting toxic materials present at the
part per million (roughly 1 drop in 13 gallons) level distributed
throughout large volumes of earth, water, or air has lead to some
innovative treatment strategies. Studies employing naturally oc-
curring microorganisms and plants that use these toxins as en-
ergy sources or that concentrate and store heavy metal ions have
shown that the desired results can be achieved under some cir-
cumstances. Genetic engineering can potentially combine several
steps of a metabolic pathway in a single microorganism. A phe-
notype could be structured to include traits that would not allow
the organism to survive outside of the treatment zone, such as re-
quiring the contaminant as a sole carbon source. Fewer types of
organisms would then need to be present to degrade many types
of contaminants more completely, and the possibility of escape of
the altered microbes into the natural bacterial population would
be reduced. The widely distributed root systems of some plants
can take up toxic metals and, with the help of recombinant DNA
technology, can achieve higher specificity and greater concentra-
170
Facts, Data, and Opinion

tion of the metals from both land and water. So why aren’t these
environmental cleanup tools in widespread use? The National
Priority List of toxic waste sites contains more than 1,200 con-
firmed sites with perhaps more than 32,000 sites potentially
needing remediation and more being added to the list yearly. In
addition, a significant number of the 7 million underground stor-
age tanks in the United States are leaking. This points to an im-
pending crisis of contamination when the tanks reach and pass
their designed life spans.
With their capacity to multiply, microorganisms have ex-
tended their domain into environments well beyond that which is
normally considered conducive to life. From oil reservoirs and ore
deposits buried thousands of feet below the earth’s surface, to
boiling hot springs, to super-heated acid underwater volcanic jets,
these single-celled organisms live and reproduce. They thrive on
chemicals that we consider toxic waste—sulfuric and phosphoric
acid or carcinogen-laced oils and tars—breaking them down into
carbon dioxide, water, and mineral elements. The energy and
chemical building blocks they extract in this process called miner-
alization are used to make new organisms and to erect barriers
against their caustic environment. Soil, water, and air can all be
treated by bioremediation. On a familiar level, microorganisms
process biological waste in sewage and septic systems all over the
world. Microorganisms adapt to utilize the sources of energy and
raw materials that are available to them, and those that can’t are
outcompeted for what food sources remain and are eliminated or
reduced to low levels in the microbial population. Escherichia coli,
the common human intestinal bacterium, contains more than
4,300 protein-encoding genes. In a normal cell growing on glucose
as a carbon and energy source, more than 800 enzymes are ex-
pressed to catalyze the intertwined cellular reactions we call life.
Although E. coli are not particularly adept at using environmental
contaminants as metabolic fuel, other species such as Pseudomonas
and Desulfobacterium readily adapt, taking advantage of various
combinations of metabolic enzymes carried on extrachromosomal
DNA plasmids (much like antibiotic resistance factors). Many
chemical reactions are carried out—hydrolysis, hydroxylation,
methylation and dealkylation, nitro reduction, deamination, ether
cleavage, numerous conjugation reactions, and dehalogenation
(dechlorination), all of which are needed to break down the toxic
chemicals. This last process is particularly useful because the dif-
ficult part of many bioremediation efforts is the removal of the
Bioremediation
171

highly stable chlorine atoms from industrial environmental pollu-
tants such as DDT as well as those listed in Table 6.13. Often one
species of organism carries out one or only a few parts of the
degradation pathway, so cooperation between species in the form
of a mixed bacterial culture is generally required to degrade resis-
tant compounds completely.
Eastern Europe is a major site for toxic waste cleanup efforts
due to lax environmental controls on industry in that region since
the Second World War, with an estimated 50,000 contaminated
sites in Bulgaria alone. The toxic heavy metal ions copper, zinc,
cadmium, arsenic, and even uranium polluting soils can be im-
mobilized by microbial conversion to insoluble forms that leach
slowly. Carcinogenic hydrocarbons and long-lived halogenated
hydrocarbons are also being targeted for degradation by endoge-
nous bacterial species in several studies. Much of the frontline re-
search is being done by Eastern European scientists in Budapest
and Prague, targeting sites such as the Kola Peninsula in Russia
(heavy metals, sulfur dioxide), Northern Bohemia (strip mining),
and Upper Silesia (industry and poor waste management)
(Aldridge 1997).
Biochemical reactions catalyzing the degradation of envi-
ronmental contaminants can also be exploited to produce salable
products on their own. Organisms such as the naturally occur-
ring Thiobacillus ferrooxidans and other more thermophilic organ-
isms release economically important metals such as gold and
cobalt from their insoluble complexes in ores that are refractory
to the normal industrial cyanide leaching process and make re-
covery of metals from low-grade ores economically feasible. Bio-
catalytic removal of sulfur from petroleum and coal (desulfuriza-
172
Facts, Data, and Opinion
TABLE 6.13 
Examples of Environmental Contaminants
Chlorobenzoic acids
Degradative products of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), herbicides, and 
plant growth regulators
Chlorinated biphenyls
Electrical transformer and hydraulic fluids, plasticizers, fire retardants
Chlorobenzenes
Industrial and paint solvents, by-products of textile dyeing, fungicides
Chlorophenols
Antifungal agents, wood preservatives, herbicides (2,4-D; 2,4,5-T) derivatives
Phenylamide herbicides
Herbicides
Chlorinated dioxins and furans
Burning of PCBs, manufacturing by-products, hydraulic and heat exchanger 
fluids
Source: K. H. Baker, and D. S. Herson, eds., Bioremediation (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994), p. 49.

tion) using endogenous bacteria and oxygen to produce cleaner
burning fuels is being pursued by companies such as Energies
Biosystems Corporation (The Woodlands, Texas) to meet refin-
ers’ growing need to decrease sulfur emissions from fossil fuels.
Other biorefining technologies being considered include nitro-
gen and metal ion removal, viscosity reduction, and cracking
(hydrocarbon chain length reduction) to make products such as
gasoline, processes normally carried out in refineries at high tem-
perature and pressure. The LATA Group (Ochelata, Oklahoma)
provides selected water-soluble nutrients to stimulate indige-
nous beneficial microorganisms in petroleum fields and fuel stor-
age facilities. Damaging bacteria producing the highly corrosive
hydrogen sulfide responsible for low petroleum yields and
spoilage of petroleum are ecologically outcompeted, reducing
the amount of sulfur contaminants in the fuel.
Genetic engineering offers the capability of combining sev-
eral components of a chemical degradation pathway in a single
organism that may also be fitted with biological safeguards be-
yond natural competition when the foreign substrate is ex-
hausted. A number of types of bioremediation by which different
contaminated environmental systems can be treated by altering
the method of application of the appropriate microorganisms are
described in Table 6.14.
Numerous small companies have sprung up around biore-
mediation technologies, but the tendency is for them to merge or
be taken over by larger organizations that may require their ser-
vices. International Bioremediation Services (Walsall, United
Kingdom), Microbe Masters of InterBio (Baton Rouge, Louisiana),
PolyBac (Bethlehem, Pennsylvania), and Oppenheimer Biotech-
nology (Austin, Texas) are just a few of the survivors with their
Bioremediation
173
TABLE 6.14 
Types of Bioremediation
Bioaugmentation
Addition of bacterial cultures to medium
Biofiltration
Microbes immobilized on columns to treat air emissions
Bioreaction
Biodegradation in a container or reactor
Biostimulation
Optimization of microbes already present in a medium
Bioventing
Oxygenating contaminated soils to stimulate microbial growth and activity
Composting
Aerobic thermophilic treatment, addition of bulking agent
Land forming
Solid phase treatment for contaminated soil in place or after removal
Source: Revised from K. H. Baker, and D. S. Herson, eds., Bioremediation (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994), p. 3.

varied technologies. Because each bioremediation situation may
require a unique solution, a number of analysts support the for-
mation of bioremediation consortia to broaden their credibility
and strengthen their position on legal liability issues. The U.S. De-
partment of Energy (Germantown, Maryland) is charged with en-
vironmental cleanup of 2.5 trillion liters of contaminated liquids
and some 200 million cubic meters of contaminated solids. The
agency, which pursues more traditional methods of environmen-
tal restoration, also funds scientific research on alternative
methodologies including bioremediation. In 1996, it established
BASIC (Bioremediation and Its Social Implications and Con-
cerns), a program designed along the same lines as the Human
Genome Project’s ELSI (Ethical, Legal, and Social Implications)
commission, which is similarly supported by the DOE along with
the National Institutes of Health. Like ELSI, this bioremediation
organization will have to bridge the often conflicting interests of
the scientific researchers, public advocates for community in-
volvement such as the Waste Policy Institute (Washington, D.C.),
and government regulators. Preliminary findings from opinion
surveys conducted by the governmental agencies Environmental
Canada and Industry Canada indicate that the “public expects to
be consulted in establishing guidelines or codes of ethics for
biotechnology,” yet the public lacks specific knowledge about
biotechnology and genetic engineering, especially in the area of
the environment. Clear explanations will be required to avoid
hasty and uninformed public reaction.
Plant-based bioremediation (phytoremediation) is applicable
to some aspects of environmental cleanup, although at present it
commands a significantly smaller market. The total 1997 U.S. mar-
ket for phytoremediation was estimated to be $3 to $7 million com-
pared with $200 to $250 million for microbial remediation (D.
Glass Associates 1997). The figures were predicted to be more com-
parable by 2005—$100 to $200 million for plant bioremediation
versus $400 to $700 million for microbes. Marshes and estuaries
have long been known to cleanse heavy metal ions and excess nu-
trients in fertilizer runoff from agricultural land. A small number
of companies focusing entirely on phytoremediation are experi-
menting with amaranth, Indian mustard, and sunflowers to ab-
sorb toxic or radioactive metal ions from contaminated soil and
water with the assistance of the EPA and Phytotech, Inc. (Mon-
mouth, New Jersey). Field trials in Chernobyl, Ukraine, are being
run to demonstrate cleaning of the remaining dangerous radioac-
174
Facts, Data, and Opinion

tive cesium and strontium from the atomic reactor accident there.
Crossbreeding and genetic engineering are being used to further
refine and increase the concentration of these materials by these
plants, which can then be safely disposed of or recycled from the
harvested plants. PhytoWorks, Inc. (Gladwyne, Pennsylvania) and
EarthCare, Inc. (Hanover, New Hampshire) are also concentrating
on toxic metal ions such as mercury and on organic chemical con-
taminants. Phytodegradation of organic chemical contaminants in
groundwater is being pursued by Applied Natural Sciences
(Hamilton, Ohio), Ecolotree (Iowa City, Iowa), and PhytoKinetics,
Inc. (Logan, Utah). PhytoKinetics is also looking at root-based
detoxification of organic compounds in soil by grasses and other
plants.
Genetic engineering can also enhance phytoremediation.
Transgenic tobacco plants making engineered antibodies to atra-
zine, a widespread herbicide contaminant in soil and water, bind
and concentrate the toxin while allowing the plant to survive. In
a different approach, Aberdeen University (Scotland, United
Kingdom) and Axis Genetics (Cambridge, United Kingdom) plan
to transfer the antibody genes to deep-rooted plants such as rape
and other Brassicas, which would be used as a final cleanup step
after most of the atrazine is removed by microbial remediation.
Phytoremediation research is also being carried out at a num-
ber of U.S. universities including Cornell University, Iowa State
University, Kansas State University, Montana State University,
Ohio University, Oklahoma State University, Rutgers University,
and the Universities of Georgia, Iowa, Maryland, Missouri, Okla-
homa, and Washington. Heffield University and Glasgow Uni-
versity are involved overseas. Various U.S. government agencies
sponsor extramural (award grants) or conduct their own labora-
tory research on phytoremediation, including the Department of
Agriculture, the EPA, the Army Corps of Engineers, and the De-
partment of Energy. Some nonprofit organizations such as Ar-
gonne National Laboratories, Los Alamos National Laboratories,
the Institute of Gas Technology/Gas Research Institute, and the
Rothamstead Experimental Station in the United Kingdom also
have programs.
Safety
A major impediment to the widespread use of bioremediation to
remove environmental contaminants is the question of whether
Bioremediation
175

the genetically modified organisms released into the environ-
ment will escape control measures and adversely affect the
ecosystem. Safety is, of course, a relative term that is defined by
tolerability and acceptability limits, which are themselves set ac-
cording to currently available expertise and, to the chagrin of
proponents of environmental uses of genetically modified organ-
isms, increasingly by public reaction. The other part of the eval-
uation process is risk assessment. This involves a more quantita-
tive measure of the probability of harm occurring, encompassing
both the probability of it happening and the amount of damage
incurred should it happen. In the case of modified plants or mi-
crobes, decisions have primarily been based on safety because it
is generally not possible at this time to conduct a straightforward
risk assessment on organisms, whether or not they are geneti-
cally modified. Chemical toxicology, which has accumulated ev-
idence through long experience, supplies information about
classes of chemicals and their effects, the dosages required, and
probabilities of adverse effects predicted by validated models as
part of the risk assessment–risk management process. With
plants, animals, and microbes, although similar organisms and
modifications are used to compare with previously analyzed sys-
tems, dose-response effects cannot be rigorously determined,
whether genetically modified or not. Robust models for living or-
ganisms remain to be developed. The particular hazards to be ex-
pected may not necessarily be predictable with organisms either.
The current compromise for evaluating organisms requires less
quantification than chemical risk assessment, but it attempts to
identify the hazards of greatest concern. An example of regula-
tory information required by the European Union is provided in
Table 6.15. The difficulty in obtaining this in-depth data in each
ecosystem in which the organism is to be used can be readily
imagined.
An extensive network of laws regulates environmental re-
mediation in the United States. Phytoremediation is an impor-
tant component of many treatment and containment efforts.
Federal statutes that encompass plant-based technologies in-
clude the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA);
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Recovery Act (CERCLA); a series of Brownfields initiatives; and
portions of the Clean Water Act (Flechas and Latady 2003; U.S.
EPA 1999).
176
Facts, Data, and Opinion

Ethics
Genetic engineering stirs the primal emotions of right and wrong
and fear of the unknown, as discussed in the first part of this chap-
ter and elsewhere in this volume. Yet even if the moral objections
to “playing the role of God” are satisfied, further questions remain
about the social and personal impact of the knowledge made avail-
able by the technology. The following discussion is predicated on
general notions of the mores, culture, politics, and economic envi-
ronment prevalent in the United States. Priorities, accessibility, and
the impact of genetic engineering technology are likely to vary in
different societies as will the responses of the people in these soci-
eties. People’s individual feelings of right and wrong may be in
distinction to their more homogeneous responses on issues of
wider scope such as concern over potential ecological distur-
bances. Is society ready for the disclosure of hidden susceptibilities
Ethics
177
TABLE 6.15 
Regulatory Information for Environmental Release of 
Genetically Modified Organisms (European Union)
The Organism
Organism modification methods
Construction and implementation of the genetic change (insert or deletion)
Purity of inserted information and other sequences and functions present
Similarity in sequence, function, or location of the modified nucleic acid sequences to any known harmful
sequences
Environmental Impact
Potential for excessive population increase of organism in environment
Competitive advantages of modified over unmodified organism in environment
Anticipated mechanisms and consequences of interactions between modified and unmodified organisms
Identification and description of nonsimilar organisms that might be affected by genetically modified organism
Probability of shifts in biological interactions such as host shift after release
Known or predicted effects on other organisms in the environment such as population changes
Known or predicted involvement in biogeochemical processes
Other potentially significant interactions with the environment
EEC Directives:
90/219/EEC  Containment
90/220/EEC  Release and Marketing
90/679/EEC  Health and Safety of Workers Using Genetically Modified Organisms
Adapted from European Union directive 90/220/EEC. Council of European Communities, Official Journal L117/115:
15-27 (1990). In O. Kappeli and L. Auberson, Trends in Biotechnology 15 (1997): 342–349.
Source: Revised from European Union Directive 90/220/EEC, 1990.

and the insecurity of knowing but not truly understanding? The
present information glut in areas of much less importance is al-
ready hard to handle for many people. Can individuals’ right to
privacy of their medical information be protected, and how
much should be shielded? Can society resist the temptation to in-
terpret probabilities as certainties, denigrating people whose ge-
netic heritage condemns them to an uncertain but threatened fu-
ture? People’s response to currently available biochemical and
genetic tests suggests that just because the information is obtain-
able, it doesn’t follow that it will or should be used. Simply ban-
ning genetic testing is similarly not a workable option. An unfor-
tunate adjunct of our increasingly litigious society and the
availability of genetic testing brings the potential for “wrongful
birth” lawsuits by parents and “wrongful life” lawsuits brought
by, or on the behalf of, an afflicted child against healthcare
providers, if testing was not offered or parties felt that appropri-
ate counseling had not been provided. Leonard Fleck, professor
of philosophy and medical ethics at Michigan State’s Center for
Ethics and Humanities in the Life Sciences, aptly sums up the
dilemma: “We used to live in the age of genetic innocence, with
no control over our genetic fate or that of our children. Now we
live in the age of genetic responsibility.”
The National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI),
a part of the U.S. NIH, established the NHGRI Policy and Leg-
islative database on July 19, 2004, on its Web site (http://www.
genome.gov/LegislativeDatabase), which currently focuses on
genetic testing and counseling, insurance and employment dis-
crimination, newborn screening, privacy of genetic information
and confidentiality, informed consent, and commercialization
and patenting.
Bioterrorism
Although not as effective as military weapons, many biological
agents have a potential impact sufficient to cause fear and panic
in a civilian population. The genomes of many pathological or-
ganisms that terrorists might employ have been determined by
the Genome Institute for rapid identification of those organisms
in suspicious outbreaks of illness. H.R. 3448, the Bioterrorism
Preparedness Act of 2002, went into effect on June 12, 2002,
charging the FDA with implementation of its measures (http://
www.fda.gov/oc/bioterrorism/bioact.html).
178
Facts, Data, and Opinion

Genetic Testing
Approximately 3% of all children are born with a severe disorder
generally considered to be genetic in origin. Most genetic dis-
eases manifest early in life, particularly during prenatal develop-
ment, although there are also a significant number of adult-onset
genetic diseases, such as the neurological disease Huntington’s
chorea. Some examples of currently diagnosable genetic diseases
are given in Table 6.16.
Guidelines established by the Institute of Medicine of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences for the use of genetic testing depend
on the age of the individual being tested, with increased strin-
gency mandated for those considered unable to make informed
decisions. The criteria for allowing genetic screening for newborns
are that there must be a clear benefit to the newborn, confirmatory
Ethics
179
TABLE 6.16 
Examples of Prenatally Diagnosable Genetic Diseases
Disease
Incidence
Symptoms
Phenylketonuria
1:10,000
Mental retardation
Hemoglobinopathies
Anemia 
Sickle cell
common in Africa and 
Anemia,
Mediterranean 
ischemic crises
α-thalassemia
common in Mediterranean and 
Anemia, ischemic crises
Asia 
α1-antitrypsin deficiency
1:8,000
Emphysema (lung), liver disease
Hemophilia A
1:10,000 males
Bleeding disorders
Tay-Sach’s disease
1:300,000 general population
Mental retardation
1:3,000 Ashkenazi Jews
Gaucher’s disease
Rare in general population
Anemia, enlarged spleen
1:600 Ashkenazi Jews
Glucose-6-phosphate
Variable, many mutations
Anemia, dehydrogenase deficiency
Type II hyperlipidemia
1:2,500
Atherosclerosis, coronary heart disease 
Familial hypercholesterolemia
1:500
Atherosclerosis, coronary heart disease
Duchenne muscular dystrophy
1:3,000
Muscle wasting
Cystic fibrosis
1:2,000–3,000
Lung failure, digestive malabsorption
Neurofibromatosis
1: 3,500
Nervous system tumors
Adult polycystic disease
1:5,000
Kidney failure 
Huntington’s disease
1:10,000–12,000
Uncontrolled movement—nervous system 
degeneration
Spinocerebellar ataxias
1:25,000–50,000
Movement disorders—nervous system 
degeneration
Source: Revised from C. T. Caskey, in Code of Codes, D. J. Kevles, and L. Hood, eds. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1992), Tables 3-6, pp. 119, 122, 127, 133.

tests must be available, and both treatment and follow-up are
available for the affected individuals. This specifically forbids de-
termining whether a newborn carries a genetic trait for a disease as
opposed to determining whether the child has a predisposition to
the disease. If a high risk of carrying a disease gene is suspected in
a family, then testing of the parents is recommended.
In general, testing of children is indicated only if there is a cu-
rative or preventative treatment that must applied early in life to
be effective. Carrier status testing or testing for incurable or late-
onset diseases (unless preventable by early treatment) is to be de-
ferred to adulthood when the individual is presumably capable of
informed decisions. The reasoning includes the concept that un-
restrained childhood testing infringes on that individual’s confi-
dentiality rights (normally provided to adults). Knowledge of a
child’s genetic status risks stigmatizing his or her upbringing and
relationship to family members and raises life and health insur-
ance issues. Finally, testing a child also intrudes on his or her fu-
ture right to make the decision for testing as an adult. Another
reason for this is that the majority of eligible adults (depending on
the disease), in fact, choose not to be tested. One-third of individ-
uals at risk for Huntington’s disease did not plan to make use of
genetic testing (Adam et al. 1993). Although 75% of partners of at-
risk individuals were in favor of genetic testing, only 29% of the
at-risk individuals were supportive. Thirty percent of pregnant at-
risk individuals requested the testing, and only 18% actually had
it performed (Elvers-Krebooms 1990). Nancy Wexler, a Ph.D. clin-
ical psychologist at the California-based Hereditary Disease
Foundation, herself at risk for Huntington’s disease, remarked in
1984, “It’s not a good test if you can’t offer a treatment.” Eighteen
percent of parents with a child afflicted with phenylketonuria
were willing to undergo prenatal diagnosis in subsequent preg-
nancies (Barwell and Pollitt 1987). Eighty-one percent of women
at increased risk for fragile X syndrome (Moorish and Abuelo
1988) and 82% of carriers of hemophilia (Lajos and Czeizel 1987)
would choose prenatal testing under the same circumstances.
Arguments in support of genetic testing of children can be
made on the basis of a parent’s right to know and resolution of
parental uncertainty as well as on providing lead time for psy-
chological adjustment. There are also families in which siblings
have already have been tested. Proponents of childhood testing
also point out that based on genetic statistics, between 33% and
50% of those tested will be reassured by the results that they
180
Facts, Data, and Opinion

don’t have the potential for the disease. Others reported “sur-
vivors’ guilt” as well as the realization that as a consequence of
not carrying the genetic trait, they will be responsible for the care
of afflicted siblings.
Prenatal testing for catastrophic fetal disorders by looking
for biochemical expression of the disease has been mandated by
many states for decades (Table 6.17).
In contrast to genetic analysis, there has been little criticism
of this type of testing. These tests more closely measure the clin-
ical impact of the disease rather than a risk or probability. Ad-
vances in genetic technologies made possible by recombinant
DNA techniques are now capable of detecting many more ge-
netic abnormalities with higher sensitivity than the biochemical
tests. In addition, biochemical defects may show up later. A list of
some of the techniques now in use along with their pros and cons
is provided in Table 6.18.
So why isn’t all testing done by genetic means? The reason is
that the complexity of factors involved in producing most disease
states makes it difficult to predict exactly who will develop the
disease and when. The tests determine only the average probabil-
ity of developing the disease at some time during a lifetime. Bio-
chemical tests based on the abnormality only identify those who
have clinical expression of the condition at the time of testing.
Ethics
181
TABLE 6.17 
U.S. Screening of Newborns for Genetic Disorders: 2004
Disorder
No. States Promoting Screeninga
Phenylketonuria
52
Congenital hypothyroidism
52
Galactosemia
52
Hemoglobinopathy
50
Adrenal hyperplasia
40
Maple syrup urine disorder
37
Biotinidase deficiency
34
Homocysteinuria
33
Tyrosinemia
20
Cystic fibrosis
7
Toxoplasmosis
3
aIncluding District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and U.S. Virgin Islands.
Source: National Newborn Screening and Genetics Resource Center, U.S. National Screening States Report, November
15, 2004.

They cannot predict those who will develop the disease later in
life. One in twelve African Americans is a carrier of the sickle cell
trait, a hemoglobin variant that affects the red cell response to
oxygen. If both parents carry that recessive trait, their child has a
1 in 4 chance of having sickle cell anemia. Yet with prophylactic
penicillin treatment to prevent infections, the observed incidence
of sickle cell anemia is actually 1 in 600. Thus, having the gene
variant does not guarantee having the disease. Other tests for
later-onset genetic diseases are performed on adults suspected to
be at risk because of a family history of a disorder after they have
decided that they want to know whether they have the disorder
or are a carrier (Table 6.19).
Even though there are few individuals with identified ge-
netic diseases (see Table 6.17 for incidence), many people are in-
volved in decisions about genetic testing. Thirty-seven percent of
respondents to a survey by the National Opinion Research Cen-
ter in 1990 (“Genes, Social Science Survey” 1990) report having
an immediate family member who has had or who is at risk for,
or who is a carrier of a genetic disease. This surprising percent-
age is likely to be an overestimate because in identifying the dis-
182
Facts, Data, and Opinion
TABLE 6.18 
Genetic Testing Techniques: Scanning for Mutations
Nucleotide sequencing—Boosted by technology developed for the Human Genome Project, highly parallel capillary
sequencing is rapid and inexpensive. Candidate gene regions are sequenced.
Chip technology—Microfabrication techniques allow thousands of DNA sequences to be tested on a single chip.
Candidate gene regions are probed. 
Protein truncation—This is the only test that measures whether a mutation in a candidate gene is expressed
because it tests for changes in the protein product of that gene. The mutation must cause the protein sequence to
be shorter than normal to be detected. Rarely, a protein will be longer than it should be if the mutation causes the
protein synthesis machinery to go past the normal stop signal.
PCR mRNA amplification—Polymerase chain reaction can be used to amplify and sequence cDNA made from the
mRNA of a test tissue to look for mutations that are expressed. This method is almost as direct as the protein
truncation method but can detect single nucleotide changes.
Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization (FISH)—Deletions or translocation of parts of chromosomes to another
chromosome are common changes in certain kinds of cancer that are followed by fluorescent tags directed to
specific DNA sequences. Genes can be fragmented, controlled by inappropriate promoters, or shut off by
chromosomal regulators. Duplications of parts or whole chromosomes such as chromosome 21 in Down syndrome
are also detected by this method.
Source: Revised from C. Eng, and J. Vijg, Nature Biotechnology 15 (1997): 424–426.

order most people in the survey focused on physical deformities
or on mental retardation, which in many cases actually may be
environmental or traumatic and not genetic in origin. Much the
same as surveys reporting a high level of scientific illiteracy, 85%
of the respondents to this survey claimed to have read or heard
little or nothing about genetic screening. Nevertheless, they ex-
press strong opinions about screening and are wary of the poten-
tial for misuse. A March of Dimes survey also found that 68% of
respondents knew little or nothing about genetic testing, and
87% were similarly ill-informed about gene therapy (March of
Dimes 1992).
Employment and Insurance
Employers in increasing numbers are using genetic testing in
support of hiring decisions as an adjunct to a battery of psycho-
logical and standardized tests. The objective is to reduce the risk
that a new employee will be transient, absentee, or disruptive or
will increase costs of Workmen’s Compensation coverage or
medical insurance. Identifying and excluding people with a
propensity to allergies or a genetic susceptibility to cancer from
working in environments with possible exposure to levels of
Ethics
183
TABLE 6.19 
Examples of Late-Onset Genetic Disorders
Disease
Incidence
Pathology 
Monogenic
Huntington’s chorea
1: 100,000
Uncontrolled movement     
Hemochromatosis
1:500 (Caucasian)
Iron storage 
Familial hyper-cholesterolemia
1:500
Atherosclerosis
Polycystic kidney disease
1:500–1:5,000
Renal failure
Inherited susceptability to cancers
1:200
p53, breast cancers
Multigenic
Congestive heart disease
Several major susceptibility genes 
Hypertension
Several genes regulating sensitivity 
Cancers of complex origin
Not inherited—somatic changes in tissue
Diabetes
Numerous genes
Rheumatoid arthritis
HLA antigens and others
Psychiatric disorders
Schizophrenia, manic depressive disorder, 
panic disorders, Tourette’s syndrome, 
some alcoholism
Schizophrenia
Genes on several chromosomes
Bipolar disorder
Genes on several chromosomes

agents that have little effect on the general population would be
another use for such information. Opponents of this type of test-
ing demand that instead the employer should be responsible for
reducing the environmental risk to permit even highly sensitive
individuals to work there. Such uses of genetic testing argue that
a genetic predisposition can be equated with a preexisting condi-
tion. The logic of this reasoning is flawed because for most ge-
netic disorders the genetic marker reflects only a probability that
a person will develop a disease, not that he or she has the disease.
Opposition to the use of genetic testing for setting selection crite-
ria that are beyond an individual’s control, such as race or ge-
netic background, comes from the perception of many that such
practices are unfair and discriminatory.
Fewer than half of the states have addressed the employment
issue, and the federal government only began to consider legisla-
tion on the privacy of genetic information in 1996. Fourteen states
(Arizona, Florida, Illinois, Iowa, Louisiana, New Hampshire,
New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Oregon,
Rhode Island, Texas, and Wisconsin) restrict employer access to
and use of genetic information. Some are more comprehensive
than others in their protection. Florida and Louisiana only cover
sickle cell disease, and Oklahoma has only set up a task force to
make nonbinding recommendations to the state legislature. The
other eleven states with legislation forbid discharging or refusing
to hire an individual on the basis of genetic information. Seven
states (Arizona, Iowa, New York, Oregon, Rhode Island, Texas,
and Wisconsin) forbid employer access to results of genetic test-
ing without an individual’s consent, and some allow no access at
all. Iowa, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Oregon,
Rhode Island, and Wisconsin forbid employers from requiring ge-
netic testing as a condition of hiring or continued employment.
New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, and Wisconsin permit
occupation-related disorders susceptibility testing if requested by
an individual seeking employment who might be worried about
his or her sensitivity to environmental conditions.
People are overwhelmingly opposed to using genetic testing
in employment decisions: 85% (U.S. General Social Survey 1990)
and 80% (ABC News Poll, May 1990). Seventy-five percent sup-
ported the principle that the tested individual should retain sole
control over access to his or her genetic testing information (U.S.
General Social Survey 1990). The sentiment is mirrored in Ger-
many with 75% opposed to the use of genetic testing in employ-
184
Facts, Data, and Opinion

ment screening, and 23% favoring prohibiting genetic testing al-
together (Hennen, Petermann, and Schmitt 1990). However, 26%
of the respondents in the German survey thought that people
have a duty to have their genetic makeup tested.
A similar campaign is being waged to prevent or restrict the
use of genetic information by the health and life insurance indus-
tries to determine the cost of covering individuals. In actuarial
analysis, risk of a particular outcome is calculated for various cat-
egories of people who have been grouped by similarities in infor-
mation available to the company, age, high blood pressure, choles-
terol, family history, smoking history, and so on. The companies
would like to use genetic testing to further stratify their clients to
improve their ability to predict risk (and some people believe sim-
ply to exclude people with the potential to develop expensive dis-
eases). Although this would protect the company against losing
money on payments for exceptionally high-risk individuals,
charging premiums adjusted for the individual risk would make it
even more difficult for people with chronic diseases to find and re-
tain insurance coverage at an affordable cost. Denial of insurance
coverage is not an exceptional event. In 1987, health maintenance
organizations denied membership to 24% of individual applicants
(not group applicants, who are usually covered through their place
of employment or other organization).
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996 (HIPAA) prohibits the use by employer-based or commercial
health insurers of either genetic test results or family history to
deny coverage or charge high rates to individuals based on a pre-
existing condition unless the disease is already clinically active.
This protects some 150 million Americans insured through group
plans primarily by their places of employment. Thirteen million
Americans with individual healthcare insurance policies enjoy no
such refuge. The National Human Genome Research Institute re-
ported that most states have enacted legislation to conform with
HIPAA. Thirty-seven states also enacted legislation on genetic dis-
crimination in health insurance, and 24 states enacted legislation
on genetic discrimination in employment.
Fear of having their genetic information used against them
looms large for many people. An NIH study found that 32% of
women approached to take part in a genetic breast cancer detec-
tion trial did not participate, mostly due to fear of discrimination
and lost privacy. One woman, whose family includes nine breast
cancer cases in three generations, is waiting until legislation
Ethics
185

guaranteeing nondiscrimination is on the books: “My doctor said
to me, ‘If you get this test done, your daughter is not going to get
insurance.’”
How can the needs of people to have affordable healthcare
regardless of their genetic and economic status be provided for in
the absence of an effective state or national healthcare program?
Assuming that this is approached through insurance plans and
that the companies are entitled to use all available information to
match each insuree’s premium payment to their individual risk,
there are several possibilities. One compromise would be for all
of the insured to pay more to subsidize those more likely to re-
quire benefits. This would yield essentially the present situation
when specific genetic information is not known. Another would
be to provide an adequate basic level of coverage for everyone
without the use of genetic information with the opportunity for
additional coverage using all available information including ge-
netic testing to set the rates. Alexander Tabarrok, assistant pro-
fessor of economics at Ball State University, suggested yet an-
other option: People, before opting for genetic testing, could
purchase insurance against finding that they carry a disease-
causing gene. This insurance, if a person tested positive for a ge-
netic disease marker, would cover the higher premiums charged
by an insurance company, the higher healthcare costs, or both.
The rapidly expanding capabilities and use of genetic testing
in personal health and employment decisions have prompted the
drafting of the legal basis to control abuses of the new informa-
tion. In February 2000, President Bill Clinton signed an executive
order prohibiting federal government agencies from obtaining
genetic information from employees or job applicants and from
using genetic information in hiring and promotion decisions.
Three bills were introduced in the 107th Congress to extend this
sort of protection to the private sector: HR 602 and S. 318 Genetic
Nondiscrimination in Health Insurance and Employment Act
and S. 383 Genetic Information Nondiscrimination in Health In-
surance Act of 2001.
Some people feel that blocking access to genetic information
will be futile and that regulation would be more effective if tar-
geted against the use of the information. Hastily proposed in
early 1997, none of this legislation was enacted for a number of
years because of concern over the potential limitation on access
that could include genetic information such as that collected
186
Facts, Data, and Opinion

under informed consent in clinical trials. Industry organizations
such as the Pharmaceutical Manufacturer’s Association feel that
such blanket denial of access will severely restrict the use of
anonymous genetic information to devise new medical therapies.
The direct marketing of genetic testing to the public is now a
reality. Some commercial laboratories such as Myriad Genetic Lab-
oratories, Inc. (Salt Lake City, Utah) and Oncormed, Inc. (Gaithers-
burg, Maryland) who offer breast cancer gene screening do so only
to a group of select clients. They also provide instruction to physi-
cians about how to screen prospective patients and provide edu-
cational materials for medical professionals and consumers. In ad-
dition, these companies assist physicians in locating genetic
counseling for their high-risk patients. There are fears of unregu-
lated marketing to the general public without providing adequate
interpretation and counseling to make use of the results, a situa-
tion characterized by Glenn McGee (Center for Bioethics, Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania) as “drive-through genetic testing.” As part of
the Human Genome Project, the ELSI Task Force on Genetic Test-
ing issued a series of recommendations in May 1997 that included
the following: 1) institutional review board approval of predictive
genetic tests; 2) outside review of clinical utility and validation
data provided by test developers; 3) enhanced genetic training of
healthcare professionals including nurses, social workers, and
public health workers whose patients have diseases with substan-
tial inherited components; 4) development of stringent criteria of
predictive genetic tests; 5) evidence of competency to interpret ge-
netic tests and provide counseling for hospitals or managed care
organizations before ordering genetic tests; and 6) improved trans-
mission of new information on rare genetic diseases to physicians.
These recommendations remain to be completely codified.
Genetic testing may soon be found alongside the blood glu-
cose and pregnancy home testing kits. Gamera Bioscience Corp.
(Medford, Massachusetts) is developing the LabCD System, a
compact disk player–sized unit that will perform several genetic
tests simultaneously. While initially targeting test manufacturers,
the company has an eye on physician’s offices and even the home,
Gamera Chief Executive Officer Alec Mian has indicated. How
will enforcement of the laudable safeguards of the ELSI Task
Force on Genetic Testing against misuse and abuse of genetic 
information be assured with the availability of “on-demand” 
testing?
Ethics
187

DNA Forensics
Several commercial companies have specialized in performing
forensic DNA analysis, which is beyond the scope of most foren-
sic laboratories, although the FBI maintains its own forensic
DNA capability. Cellmark Diagnostics, a subsidiary of Imperial
Chemical Industries, with labs opening in Germantown, Mary-
land, in 1987, pioneered the DNA “fingerprinting”SM technology
based on restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)
analysis. Lifecodes Corporation (Valhalla, New York) also used
an RFLP technology while Forensic Science Associates (Rich-
mond, California) has pursued polymerase chain reaction ampli-
fication and marker alleles of known genes such as human leuko-
cyte antigen (HLA) DQα–1 locus. Gennan Corporation (Akron,
Ohio) and Genescreen (Dallas, Texas) have also been identified as
commercial forensic DNA analysis laboratories by the U.S. Office
of Technology Assessment. The completion of the human
genome sequence has revolutionized the area of DNA identifica-
tion by establishing norms for the extent of differences between
individuals. Through January 1990, 185 court cases were re-
ported using DNA typing evidence in the prosecution or defense
(Table 6.20). Often these cases are crimes of violence where there
188
Facts, Data, and Opinion
TABLE 6.20 
Reported Uses of DNA Typing and DNA Database Legislation (2003)
Offense
No. Statesa
Sex crimes
50
Murder
50
All violent felons
47
Burglary
46
Drug crimes
38
All felons
34
Juveniles
31
Some misdemeanors
26
Arrestees
3
Jailed offenders
48
Community corrections
48
Retroactive jail and prison
36
Retroactive probation and parole
22
aDoes not include the District of Columbia or Puerto Rico.
Source: Revised from DNARESOURCE.COM. Available: http://www.dnaresource.com/bill_tracking_list.htm (cited
07/01/05).

is no living witness, thus rendering the DNA evidence crucial in
obtaining a conviction.
The tendency toward collection of large databases of infor-
mation operates in law enforcement perhaps with more energy
than in any area other than the military. By January 2003, the
United States held more than 1 million DNA profiles from con-
victed offenders and more than 50,000 profiles from crime scenes;
40,000 matches of suspects have been made to a crime scene
(http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/
elsi/forensics.shtml). Law enforcement officials cite the high rate
of recidivism among convicted violent offenders as justification
for the maintenance of databases to aid in identification and swift
prosecution. In 1989, the Bureau of Justice Statistics reported that
62.5% (59.6% of the violent criminals) of prisoners released in
1983 had been rearrested within 3 years, with 41.4% being re-
turned to prison. Among the violent offenders, rapists were 10.5
times more likely than other released offenders to be rearrested
for rape; murderers about 5 times more likely than other offend-
ers to be rearrested for homicide. Although these statistics would
argue powerfully for databases to protect society, it is noteworthy
that in the same study only 6.6% of the released rapists were re-
arrested for rape and 7.7% of the killers were rearrested for mur-
der (Bureau of Justice Statistics 1989). The civil rights of convicted
criminals, particularly felons, are legally curtailed compared with
those of the average citizen. The Privacy Act of 1974 (5 U.S.C.
552a) governing data collection and access to information about
most people in federal databases specifically exempts criminal
justice agency record systems from many provisions (5 U.S.C.
552a(b)(7), (c)(3), and (j)(2)). States control the privacy of nonfed-
eral criminal history databases, ranging from complete public ac-
cessibility (Florida) to sealed records (Massachusetts). Pressed by
rising crime statistics, state legislatures passed legislation to re-
quire or propose the collection of DNA samples and test results
from certain convicted offenders, particularly those who crimes of
a sexual nature (see Table 6.20) and (http://www.dnaresource.
com/bill_tracking_list.htm). The creation of a national DNA data-
base could aid the criminal justice system and the military, but it
would be essential in many people’s minds to restrict the use of
that information. The U.S. military maintains the Armed Forces
Repository, a DNA database to aid in identifying remains
(http://www.afip.org/Departments/oafme/dna/afrssir/). As of
March 1, 2006, over 4.6 million specimens had been collected from
Ethics
189

personnel in all branches of the military and the Coast Guard.
While there is a stated policy governing sample use, critics still
question how long the DNA will be held and under what condi-
tions information from that DNA could be used.
Human Cloning
The announcement on February 22, 1997, of the successful differ-
entiated cell nuclear transfer, dubbed “cloning,” of Dolly, a Finn
Dorset lamb (Wilmut 1997), and shortly thereafter that of non-
genetically identical rhesus monkeys using embryonic nuclear
transfer to enucleated mature oocytes at the Oregon Regional Pri-
mate Research Center was followed by several similar experi-
ments with other animals. These achievements elicited an imme-
diate call for legislation to control, if not outright ban, the
application of similar technology to humans. On February 27,
1997, S. 368, restricting the use of federal funding for research re-
lated to cloning, was introduced into the Senate. This was swiftly
followed on March 5, 1997, by the introduction of H.R. 922 into
the House of Representatives with a similar intent. Significantly,
this was supplemented with H.R. 923, which would make it a
civil crime for a person to conduct cloning of a human. As intro-
duced, these bills contained little more than the initial statement
of purpose. The intention was that details were to be added as
the bills made their way through the legislative process. People
trying to keep in sight the broader vision for society injected a
note of caution about blanket bans on cloning research. The
chairman of the genetics subcommittee of the National Bioethics
Advisory Commission, Thomas H. Murray, Ph.D. (director of the
Center for Biomedical Ethics, Case Western Reserve University
School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH), remarked at the March 5
House Science Subcommittee meeting, “It is essential that we
keep in view the possible scientific, and ultimately the human,
benefits of research on animal cloning, benefits best described by
other witnesses before you today. It is important that our public
policy response to research on the cloning of animals not be
swept along by our concern to prevent what we will judge to be
the ethical dangers of human cloning.”
H.R. 922—The Human Cloning Research Prohibition Act
would prohibit the “expenditure of federal funds to conduct or
190
Facts, Data, and Opinion

support research on the cloning of humans.” Introduced by Ver-
non J. Ehlers (R-MI) on March 5, 1997, it was referred to the Com-
mittee on Commerce and the Committee on Science.
H.R. 923—The Human Cloning Prohibition Act would make
it “unlawful for any person to use a human somatic cell for the
process of producing a human clone.” It imposes a civil penalty
of up to $5,000. Introduced by Ehlers on March 5, 1997, it was re-
ferred to the Committee on Commerce.
S. 368 aims “to prohibit the use of federal funds for human
cloning research.” This bill defines cloning as “the replication of
a human individual by the taking of a cell with genetic material
and the cultivation of the cell through the egg, embryo, fetal, and
newborn stages into a new human individual.” Introduced on
February 27, 1997, by Kit Bond (R-MO) and John Ashcroft, it was
referred to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources.
Before the passage of legislation, a voluntary moratorium on
human cloning was generally agreed on by scientists, medical
professionals, legislators, and industry. Lacking the force of law,
there is historical precedence for the effectiveness of such volun-
tary restrictions with the initial use of recombinant DNA technol-
ogy in the early 1970s. At that time, potentially risky experiments
were delayed for several years until detailed guidelines could be
developed and safety issues had been resolved. Analogous guide-
lines are expected to evolve. News opinion polls conducted soon
after the cloning announcements showed a significant amount of
concern: 56% (America Online) and 93% (Times—CNN) of Amer-
icans opposed human cloning.
At the request of President Clinton, the National Bioethics
Advisory Commission called for immediate action on the fol-
lowing:
“1) A continuation of the current moratorium on the use of
federal funding in support of any attempt to create a child by so-
matic cell nuclear transfer.
2) An immediate request to all firms, clinicians, investigators,
and professional societies in the private and non-federally funded
sectors to comply voluntarily with the intent of the federal mora-
torium. Professional and scientific societies should make clear
that any attempt to create a child by somatic cell nuclear transfer
and implantation into a woman’s body would be at this time an
irresponsible, unethical, and unprofessional act.” Full report Na-
tional Bioethics Advisory Committee, “Ethical Issues in Human
Human Cloning
191

Stem Cell Research,” 1999. Available http://www.georgetown.
edu/research/nrcbl/nbac/pubs.html.
To address the general public concern about human cloning,
scientific societies such as the Federation of American Societies
for Experimental Biology (FASEB) adopted specific resolutions
supporting the moratorium and called upon scientists to provide
input to ensure that imprecise or misused technical language in
anti–human cloning legislation did not compromise vital bio-
medical research. For instance, cloning is a general term that in-
cludes general recombinant DNA handling as well as somatic cell
nuclear transfer. Research involving “cloning” the human insulin
receptor and expressing it in a cultured cell line to learn more
about how insulin works and what might be going wrong in di-
abetes could be prohibited by sloppily written legislation. The
FASEB Public Affairs Executive Committee adopted the follow-
ing resolution on September 10, 1997:
Resolved: The Federation of American Societies for Ex-
perimental Biology (FASEB) adopts a voluntary five-year
moratorium on cloning human beings, where “cloning
human beings” is defined as the duplication of an exist-
ing or previously existing human being by transferring
the nucleus of a differentiated, somatic cell into an enu-
cleated human oocyte, and implanting the resulting
product for intrauterine gestation and subsequent birth.
Although seeming needlessly complex, the detail in the leg-
islation is essential; it avoids affecting cloning of human genes
for medical research as well as the scenario of a woman being
prosecuted for “cloning” by bearing monozygotic (maternal or
identical) twins. In fact, mammalian cloning has been wide-
spread for a number of years with the cloning and implantation
of prize-winning cattle embryos. It is not entirely clear to some
people why cloning people presents such a problem because, in
effect, with identical twins there are many “clones” already
around. Society deals with them as individual persons with little
remark. They are identical genetically which, as has been pointed
out in a previous section, only addresses potentiality, not actual-
ity. A number of scientists and the general public, particularly in
the United States, now wonder whether our leaders were stam-
peded into poorly thought out legislative action. The broadly
written Human Cloning Prohibition Act, S. 1061, which would
192
Facts, Data, and Opinion

have made human somatic cell nuclear transfer a criminal of-
fense, punishable by fines and a 10-year prison sentence, had
been hurriedly introduced. During the February 11, 1998, debate
on S. 1061, Senator Connie Mack, himself with cancer, whose par-
ents and brother died of cancer, and whose wife and daughter
were similarly diagnosed, offered this impassioned plea:
I appeal to you, don’t get drawn into this debate that we
should pass this legislation because we want to stand up
and make a statement that we are against cloning. We
are all against human cloning. What I am asking you to
do is to vote no on cloture so we will have an opportu-
nity to hear from those patient groups that want to rep-
resent people like myself, represent families that have
been affected like my family has been affected.
The cloture vote was to cut off debate, forcing an immediate
vote on the bill without the discussion of a full hearing to present
the information needed to make an informed decision on this
highly technical yet highly emotional issue. Senator Robert C.
Byrd (D-WV) offered the following caution:
Who can say with any comfort what the impact may be
on important research aimed at dread diseases? Doesn’t
important and potentially far-reaching legislation such
as this at least warrant hearings before we proceed?
This legislation could have unintended and detrimental
consequences.
By a count of 42–54, short of the 60 votes needed to end de-
bate, the Senate in effect decided to continue the discussion. A
substitute Human Cloning Prohibition Bill, S. 1062, jointly spon-
sored by Senators Diane Feinstein (D-CA) and Edward Kennedy
(D-MA), which bans the implantation of the product of nuclear
transplantation in a woman’s womb, but not the nuclear trans-
plantation technology itself, was put into consideration. Al-
though being explicit about restricting human somatic cell nu-
clear transplantation for the purpose of creating a child, specific
protections for nuclear transfer in nonhuman animals, general
DNA cloning, and vital medical research are provided.
BIO, the Biotechnology Industry Organization, representing
more than 745 biotechnology companies, academic institutions,
and state biotechnology centers in 46 states and more than 25
Human Cloning
193

countries, agrees that cloning of a human being is “plainly inap-
propriate.” Carl B. Feldbaum, president of BIO, issued the fol-
lowing statement (in part) (PR Newswire 1998): 
BIO continues to support President Clinton’s and the
National Bioethics Advisory Commission’s (NBAC)
moratorium on the cloning of a human being. Cloning a
human being poses major ethical and moral questions,
as well as deeply troubling medical safety issues. . . . the
public has come to learn of the benefits of cloning cells,
genes and tissues, techniques which have been ongoing
for 20 years. While these techniques do not lead to the
cloning of a human being, they do have promise, for ex-
ample, to enable us to regenerate spinal cord tissue for
accident victims and skin for burn victims. It is essential
that any restrictive legislation which may be adopted by
Congress or state legislatures on the cloning of a human
being, recognize the biomedical benefits of these existing
cloning procedures and protect and encourage them.
The search continues for a legislative solution that balances a
spectrum of ethical and political viewpoints with both the freedom
to avoid blocking medical advances and the recognition of the
global spread of the technology. Many bills are proposed, but most
are not enacted, so it is confusing to determine where the law of
the land stands. In addition, the development of stem cell technol-
ogy further complicated issues and required modification of legis-
lation. Some examples of recent legislation are the following:
H.R. 534—The Human Cloning Prohibition Act of 2003 (D.
Weldon, R-FL) prohibits both reproductive and therapeutic
cloning and provides a criminal penalty of up to 10 years for vi-
olation. Passed 241–155. A substitute measure, H.R. 801 (J. Green-
wood, R-PA), that would have prohibited only reproductive
cloning failed 174–231.
H.R. 916—The Human Cloning Research Prohibition Act (C.
Stearns, R-FL) would prohibit the use of federal funds to conduct
or support research on human cloning. It would also express the
Sense of Congress that other countries should legislate similarly.
H.R. 938—The Human Cloning Prevention Act of 2003 (R.
Paul, R-TX) would prohibit any federal agency from supporting
any entity that “within the past year has engaged in human
cloning,” with human cloning defined as including somatic cell
transfer to derive stem cells.
194
Facts, Data, and Opinion

H.R. 1357—The Human Cloning Prohibition Act of 2005 (D.
Weldon, R-FL) would make it a criminal act with a penalty of up
to 10 years and/or a fine of $1 million, or twice any monetary
gain over $1 million, for any individual or entity public or private
to knowingly participate in human cloning.
S. 245—The Human Cloning Prohibition Act of 2003 (S.
Brownback, R-KS) is similar to H.R. 234 and would prohibit both
reproductive and therapeutic cloning.
S. 303—The Human Cloning Ban and Stem Cell Research
Protection Act of 2003 (A. Specter, R-PA) would prohibit repro-
ductive cloning but specifically permits therapeutic cloning if
carried out within certain ethical guidelines.
The international reaction to Dolly was similar to that in the
United States, swift and severe. Great Britain initially banned
human cloning outright, while a number of European countries
including Germany and Italy initially called for either worldwide
bans or instituted temporary moratoria on human cloning exper-
iments. In 2001, Great Britain became the first country to legalize
research cloning. One license in August 2004 was granted to a re-
search team to create insulin-producing cells for transplant into
diabetics. A second was granted in February 2005 to derive stem
cells from patients with motor neuron disease (Lou Gehrig’s dis-
ease) to induce them to form neurons and to study how they dif-
fer from normal motor neurons (Wagner 2005). According to the
Center for Genetics in Society (http://www.genetics-and-soci-
ety.org/), of 192 countries, 23% ban reproductive cloning, and
77% have not taken action. Six percent allow cloning for research
purposes, and 16% ban cloning for research.
Stem Cells
The furor over reproductive cloning, popularly known as human
cloning, was still in full swing when the derivation of human
pluripotent stem cells from human blastocysts (Thomson et al.
1998) and germ cells from cultured primordial human germ cells
(Shamblott et al. 1998) was announced. In some people’s eyes, this
immediately inserted abortion and the issue of viability of em-
bryos used to derive embryonic stem cells into concerns over the
technology. Although not the realm of genetic engineering, this
form of biotechnology is linked in the public mind with nuclear
cloning (reproductive cloning) and with the potential to introduce
Stem Cells
195

genetic modifications. The Clinton administration issued tempo-
rary guidelines governing the use of embryonic stem cells on Au-
gust 23, 2000, and postponed review of grant applications until the
Bush administration could assess the situation. President George
W. Bush issued his decision on funding of stem cell research on
August 9, 2001, that restricted funding to research on stem cell
lines established before August 9, 2001.
Numerous bills to regulate stem cell research were offered.
Because of the potential medical benefits and intensive lobbying
by researchers, biotechnologists, and patients, the legislation has
been less restrictive. In addition, the regulations only apply to
work supported by federal funds, not to the private sector. The
following legislation is under consideration in both Houses of
Congress:
H.R. 2059 (J. McDermott, D-WA) and S. 723—The Stem Cell
Research Act of 2001 (A. Specter, R-PA) would provide for
human embryonic stem cell generation and research.
H.R. 2096 (C. H. Smith, R-NJ) and S. 1349—The Responsible
Stem Cell Research Act of 2001 (J. Ensign, R-NV) would establish
a stem cell donor bank derived from adult tissue, placentas, and
umbilical cord blood. No embryos are involved. These stem cells
are not embryonic and not fully pluripotent. They are capable of
differentiating into fewer types of cells than embryonic stem
cells.
H. Con. Res. 17 (C. Maloney, D-NY) is a congressional reso-
lution expressing the Sense of Congress on pluripotent stem cell
research.
H.R. 2747 (D. L. DeGette, D-CO) would convert the Clinton
guidelines of 2001 on research with pluripotent stem cells into
law.
H.R. 2838 (J. Millender-McDonald, D-CA) would require
NIH to conduct human embryonic stem cell research and would
repeal the Human Embryo Research Ban contained within the
Labor, HHS, and Education Appropriations Act.
The failure of the prohibition of alcohol manufacture and
sales in the early 20th century is a recent demonstration that reg-
ulation is much more effective at controlling citizen behavior than
outright banning of activities. A sign of this realization is intro-
duction of legislation to police rather than ban stem cell research.
H.R. 2863 (J. McDermott, D-WA) would establish an FDA
Advisory Committee to recommend policy on human embryonic
stem cell research and therapeutic cloning.
196
Facts, Data, and Opinion

H.R. 4011 (C. Maloney, D-NY) would establish a Stem Cell
Research Board within the legislative branch to evaluate the ef-
fects of President Bush’s August 9, 2001, policy decision on stem
cells.
Summary
Genetic engineering is poised to make its greatest impact over
the next few decades. It is hard to judge the balance between the
relative good and bad potential of the technology. To this point,
we have only been able to catch a glimmer of the potential ad-
vances to be made with this newfound power to see into and to
influence nature on a scale never before imagined. This power is
frightening to many people. It has forced us to think both about
our place in the world ecological web and about our relation-
ships to one another. Powerful tools to improve our understand-
ing of the chemistry of life and to probe what goes wrong in dis-
ease are the major accomplishments of the first 30 years of
genetic engineering. New medicines have come from this, cer-
tainly, although full eradication of a genetic disease is still in the
future. Both are positive contributions. Less understood and
therefore feared by many are potential repercussions in the envi-
ronment from the wide-scale release of genetically modified
plants, animals, and microbes in industrial, agricultural, or envi-
ronmental remediation applications of genetic engineering. Ac-
ceptable control measures remain to be developed, as the tech-
nology is available. Banning it will only force applications
underground and generate suspicion. Negative repercussions of
genetic engineering, at least until society figures out how it wants
to regulate it, are most notable in the genetic testing and forensic
realms. Controlling the application of the information obtained
from the testing and from databases has the potential to deter-
mine whether the impact of genetic engineering will be good or
bad. These issues have also surfaced in discussions about repro-
ductive versus therapeutic cloning and stem cell research and po-
tential therapies.
Genetic engineering technology applied to human health
challenges some of our deepest feelings about our private selves
and makes us reevaluate our moral tenets and religious beliefs. It
gives us access to more information about ourselves then we re-
ally want to know or, especially, to share with others. Humans
Summary
197

demonstrate a need for some mystery in their lives and will in-
vent the requisite amount when necessary. Knowing your genetic
potential, although it reflects only a possibility, is unsettling, par-
ticularly if people start to act on the basis of that information.
There seems for most people to be a comfort zone in which some
things must be left to chance to give a person the opportunity to,
or at least the feeling that they can, control their own destiny. The
biggest and most far-reaching impact of genetic engineering will
be social: How can we guarantee the privacy of the individual?
Living in the age of genetic responsibility will not be easy. As is
increasingly common in modern society, there is too much infor-
mation, too many choices, and too many decisions to be made.
References
Adam, S., et al. “Five Year Study of Prenatal Testing for Huntington’s
Disease: Demand, Attitudes, and Psychological Assessment.” Journal of
Medical Genetics 30 (1993): 549–556.
Aldridge, S. “Researchers Tackling Bioremediation Challenge in Eastern
Europe.” Genetic Engineering News (October 1, 1997): 1.
Barwell, B. E., and R. J. Pollitt. “Attitudes des parents vis- à-vis du diag-
nostic prenatal de la phenylcetonurie.” Archives of French Pediatrics 44
(1987): 665–666.
Biotechnology and the European Public Concerted Action Group
(BEPCAG). “Europe Ambivalent on Biotechnology.” Nature 387 (1997):
845–847.
Bureau of Justice Statistics. A Survey of Recidivism among Prisoners Re-
leased in 1983. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, March 1989.
D. Glass Associates, Inc. Genetic Engineering News 17 (1997): 43.
Dibner, M. D. Genetic Engineering News (1998, January 1): 34.
Eisiedal, E. F. Biotechnology and the Canadian Public: Report on a 1997 Sur-
vey and Some International Comparisons. Calgary, Canada: University of
Calgary, 1997.
Elvers-Krebooms, G. “Predictive Testing for Huntington’s Disease in
Belgium.” Journal of Psychosomatic Obstetrics and Gynecology 11 (1990):
61–72.
Flechas, F. W., and M. Latady. “Regulatory Evaluation and Acceptance
Issues for Phytotechnology Projects.” Advances in Biochemical Engineering
and Biotechnology 78 (2003): 171–185.
198
Facts, Data, and Opinion

“Genes, Social Science Survey.” Public Opinion Online Database. Storrs,
CT: Roper Center for Public Research, September 1990.
Hennen, L., T. Petermann, and J. Schmitt. “TA-Projekt ‘Genomanalyse’—
Chancer und Risiken Genetische Diagnostik” (TAB-Arbeitsbericht, No.
18, Bonn, 1990).
Hoban, T. J., and P. A. Kendall. Consumer Attitudes about the Use of
Biotechnology in Agriculture and Food Production. Raleigh: North Carolina
State University: 1992.
Lajos, I., and A. Czeizel. “Letter to the Editor: Reproductive Choices in
Hemophiliac Men and Carriers.” American Journal of Medical Genetics 28
(1987): 519–520.
Lee, T. R., C. Cody, and E. Plastow. Consumer Attitudes towards Techno-
logical Innovations in Food Policy. Guildford, England: University of Sur-
rey, 1985.
Macer, D. Attitudes to Biotechnology in New Zealand and Japan in 1997 (Euro-
barometer Survey). Christchurch, New Zealand: Eubios Ethics Institute,
1998.
March of Dimes. Genetic Testing and Gene Therapy, National Survey Find-
ings. White Plains, NY: Louis Harris and Associates, 1992.
Moorish, D. L., and D. Abuelo. “Counseling Needs and Attitudes to-
ward Prenatal Diagnosis and Abortion in Fragile-X Families.” Clinical
Genetics 33 (1988): 349–355.
National Science Board. Science and Engineering Indicators—2002.
Office of Technology Assessment. New Developments in Biotechnology: Pub-
lic Perceptions of Biotechnology (OTA-BP-BA-45). Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1987.
PR Newswire. http://www.prenewswire.com, January 7, 1998.
Runge, C. F., and B. Ryan. “The Economic Status and Performance of Plant
Biotechnology in 2003: Adoption, Research, and Development in the
United States.” Washington, DC: Council of Biotechnology Information,
2004.
Shamblott, M. J., J. Axelman, S. Wang, E. M. Bugg, J. W. Littlefield, P. J.
Donovan, P. D. Blumenthal, G. R. Huggins, and J. D. Gearhart. “Deriva-
tion of Pluripotent Stem Cells from Cultured Human Primordial Germ
Cells.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 95 (1998): 13726–13731.
ASurvey of the Use of Biotechnology in U.S. Industry. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Commerce, October, 2003.
Thomson, J. A., J. Itskovitz-Eldor, S. S. Shapiro, M. A. Waknitz, J. J.
References
199

Swiergiel, V. S. Marshall, and J. M. Jones. “Embryonic Stem Cell Lines
Derived from Human Blastocysts.” Science 282 (1998): 1145–1147.
U.S. EPA. “Introduction to Phytoremediation.” EPA document 600/R-
99/107. EPA National Risk Management Research Laboratory, 1999.
U.S. General Social Survey. Chicago: National Opinion Research Center,
1990.
Wagner, T. “License Granted for Human Cloning.” Associated Press.
Lexington Herald-Leader, February 9, 2005.
Wilmut I., et al. “Viable Offspring Derived from Fetal and Adult Mam-
malian Cells.” Nature 385 (1997): 810–830.
Wong, J. F. “Is Biotech in the Midst of a Fifty-Year Cycle?” G&E News 25,
5 (2005): 60.
200
Facts, Data, and Opinion

7
Directory of Organizations, 
Associations, and Agencies 
T
his chapter describes selected U.S. and international organiza-
tions connected with medical genetics, genetic engineering, or
the impact of the technology on society. Many more are avail-
able online. Brief background information on the organization; the
purpose of the group; its address, Web site, and contact informa-
tion; the services provided; and publications of the organization
are included. For the most part, these are organizations that are
open to the general public. Organizations for professionals en-
gaged in various aspects of genetic engineering have been omitted.
If you are looking for information on a genetic disease, the Na-
tional Organization for Rare Diseases maintains a comprehensive
listing and links at their Web site (http://www.rarediseases.org).
Alliance of Genetic Support Groups
4301 Connecticut Avenue NW, Suite 404
Washington, DC 20008
(202) 966-5557; (800) 336-GENE (4363)
FAX: (202) 966-8553
E-mail: info@geneticalliance.org
Web site: http://www.geneticalliance.org
Contact: Executive director
The alliance, founded in 1985, comprises volunteer genetic organi-
zations, professionals, and interested individuals who support
people with genetic disorders and their families by assisting inter-
actions with government agencies, healthcare professionals, and
service providers. It provides technical assistance and information
201

for referrals to the support groups and the public. The group main-
tains a database for its membership and offers an annual recogni-
tion award.
PUBLICATIONS: Alliance Alert (monthly newsletter), Al-
liance Health Insurance Resource Guide, Directory of Voluntary Ge-
netic Organizations and Related Resources, Informed Consent: Partic-
ipation in Genetic Research Studies, Media Reporting in a Genetic Age,
Alliance Resource Guide on Peer Support Training Programs
American Genetic Association
P.O. Box 257
Buckeystown, MD 21717-0257
(301) 695-9292
FAX: (301) 695-9292
E-mail: agajoh@mail.ncifcrf.gov
Web site: http://www.theaga.org
A largely professional organization founded in 1903 includes bi-
ologists, zoologists, geneticists, botanists, and others exploring
basic and applied research in genetics. Formerly called American
Breeders Association.
PUBLICATION: Journal of Heredity
American Parkinson Disease Association
135 Parkinson Avenue
Staten Island, NY 10305
(718) 981-8001; (800) 223-2732
FAX: (718) 981-4399
E-mail: apdas@apdaparkinson.org
Web site: http://www.adpaparkinson.org
Contact: Vice president
Since 1961, the association has worked to alleviate the suffering
of affected individuals and their families by subsidizing infor-
mation and referral centers and funding research into cures for
the disease. Counseling services are offered to patients and fam-
ilies through 51 information and referral centers. It maintains a li-
brary, not open to the public, and offers various awards for con-
tributions to patient well-being and contributions to research on
Parkinson’s disease.
PUBLICATIONS: American Parkinson Disease Association
Newsletter (quarterly), booklets on dealing with Parkinson’s 
disease
202
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

American Society of Human Genetics
9650 Rockville Pike
Bethesda, MD 20814-3998
(301) 634-7300; 866-HUM-GENE
E-mail: society@ashg.org
Web site: http://genetics/faseb.org/genetics/ashg
Contact: Executive director
The American Society of Human Genetics, founded in 1948, is
one of the oldest professional genetics organizations. Its mem-
bers are involved in various aspects of medical genetics from
basic research to clinical applications
PUBLICATIONS: American Journal of Human Genetics, Guide to
Human Genetics Training Programs in North America, Enhancement of
K–12 Human Genetics Education
American Society of Plant Physiologists
15501 Monona Drive
Rockville, MD 20855-2768
(301) 251-0560
FAX: (301) 279-2996
E-mail: info@aspb.org
Web site: http://www.aspb.org
Contact: Executive director
The American Society of Plant Physiologists is a professional or-
ganization of scientists interested in plant physiology. It is a
source of plant expertise including traditional biology and genetic
engineering.
PUBLICATION: Plant Physiology, Agricultural Ethics in a
Changing World, Plants, Genes, and Crop Biotechnology (2nd edition)
Applied Research Ethics National Association (ARENA)
126 Brookline Avenue, Suite 202
Boston, MA 2115
(617) 423-4112
FAX: (617) 423-1185
E-mail: info@arena.org
Web site: http://www.primr.org
Contact: President
ARENA was founded in 1986 and is now part of Public Respon-
sibility in Medicine and Research (PRIM&R). It consists of 
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
203

researchers, administrators, and professionals interested in
bioethics, including members of institutional review boards, hos-
pital ethics committees, patient advocacy groups, and institu-
tional animal care and use groups. The group monitors federal
legislation and public policy issues and provides expert consul-
tation to members. They maintain a reference library and com-
puterized mailing lists.
PUBLICATIONS: ARENA Newsletter (quarterly) and various
brochures, educational programs to deal with HIPAA (Health In-
surance Portability and Accountability Act) regulations.
A-T Medical Research Foundation
5241 Round Meadow Road
Hidden Hills, CA 91302
(818) 704)-8146
FAX: (818) 704-8310
E-mail: Becca4435@aol.com
Web site: http://www.gspartners.com/at
Contact: President
This multinational organization established in 1983 funds research
on ataxia-telangiectasia, a genetic neurodegenerative disease. The
group maintains a reference library of clippings and articles. It also
awards a grant to support research.
PUBLICATION: A-TMRF Newsletter
Bioindustry Association
14/15 Belgrave Square
London SW1X 8PS England
+44(0) 20 7565 7190
FAX: +44(0) 20 7565 7191
E-mail: admin@bioindustry.org
Web site: http://www.bioindustry.org
Contact: Executive director
A national organization of individuals interested in biotechnol-
ogy development in the United Kingdom, established in 1989. It
seeks out contacts with trade associations and biotechnology or-
ganizations worldwide and represents member interests in regu-
latory affairs, government policy, and financing. In support of
their mission, the association conducts educational workshops,
seminars, and conferences and maintains a reference library, a
computer database, and e-mail facilities.
204
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

PUBLICATIONS: Bioscience UK (annual), BIA Annual Review,
electronic newsletter and reports (weekly)
Biotechnology Industry Organization
1225 Eye Street NW, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 962-9200
E-mail: info@bio.org
Web site: http://www.bio.org
Contact: President
BIO, founded in 1993, is an organization of industrial firms in the
United States engaged in human healthcare, animal science, and
chemical and industrial fermentation production. It also includes
equipment manufacturers and servicers involved with recombi-
nant DNA or hybridoma/immunologic technologies. Its mission
is to provide information on biotechnology issues regarding var-
ious problems facing the industry such as U.S. and international
regulations, patents, and financing opportunities. Much of this
information is accessible through its Web site. The group inter-
acts with Congress, a variety of government and nongovernment
agencies, regulatory bodies, and the public. BIO maintains a re-
source library and provides a recognition award.
PUBLICATIONS: BIO Bulletin, BIO News online.
Birth Defect Research for Children
930 Woodcock Road, Suite 225
Orlando, FL 32803
(407) 895-0802
Web site: http://www.birthdefects.org
Contact: Executive director
A multinational organization (formerly Association of Birth De-
fect Children) created in 1982 brings together parents, healthcare
professionals, other individuals, and organizations and services
concerned with birth defects, particularly those associated with
environmental exposure. BDRC conducts an educational cam-
paign warning of the effects of prenatal exposure to environ-
mental agents; sponsors, studies, and compiles statistics; and
monitors and engages in legislative activities. The association
maintains a computer database, a National Birth Defect Registry,
and a parent matching service. 
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
205

PUBLICATIONS: Birth Defect News (monthly e-newsletter),
Why My Child?, fact sheets, and videotapes
Chromosome 18 Registry and Research Society
7155 Oakridge Drive
San Antonio, TX 78229
(210) 657-4968
FAX: (210) 657-4968
Web site: http://www.chromosome18.org
Contact: President
This multinational organization, founded in 1990, strives to lo-
cate individuals with chromosome 18 disorders and to educate
the families and the public about prognosis and treatment. The
group seeks to encourage research in the area and to link affected
families and their physicians to the research community. It funds
clinical research and maintains a parent network.
PUBLICATION: Chromosome 18 Communique (quarterly
newsletter)
Council for Responsible Genetics
5 Upland Road, Suite 3
Cambridge, MA 02140
(617) 868-0870
FAX: (617) 491-5344
E-mail: crg@gene-watch.org
Web site: http://www.gene-watch.org
Contact: Executive director
This multinational watchdog group founded in 1983 monitors
the biotechnology industry with concern for the social implica-
tions of genetic technology development. Primary issues of con-
cern are genetically engineered foods, military uses of biotech-
nology, cloning and human genetic manipulation, and issues of
genetic discrimination. The council maintains a reference library
and a speakers bureau.
PUBLICATION: GeneWatch (bimonthly newsletter)
Crop Science Society of America
677 S. Segoe Road
Madison, WI 53711
(608) 273-8080
FAX: (608) 273-2021
206
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

E-mail: info@a-s-f.org
Web site: http://www.crops.org
Contact: Executive vice president
This is a professional society of individuals interested in issues
surrounding plants and their cultivation as crops.
PUBLICATIONS: professional journals, e-newsletter
European Federation of Biotechnology
Pg. Lluis Companys 23
08010 Barcelona Spain
+34 93 268 7703
FAX: +34 93 268 4800
E-mail: info@efb-central.org
Web site: http://www.efb-central.org
Contact: General Secretary
The EFB is a multinational organization representing technical
and scientific organizations in 26 European and non-European
countries. Its purpose is to further biotechnology. Founded in
1978, it is concerned with animal and plant cell culture, produc-
tion and processing of biomaterials, and environmental and
safety issues.
PUBLICATIONS: Annual Report of the EFB, EFB Newsletter
(English), Proceedings of European Congress of Biotechnology (peri-
odic), fact sheets, briefing papers, review papers
Fanconi’s Anemia Research Fund, Inc.
1801 Williamette
Eugene, OR 97401
(541) 687-4658; (800) 828-4891
FAX: (541) 687-0548
Web site: http://www.fanconi.org
Contact: Family support contact
Since 1989, the research fund has provided support and net-
working advice to families, and updates them on new research
findings. It operates a support group and conducts fundraisers
for research. The organization maintains a library open to the
public.
PUBLICATIONS: FA Family Directory, FA Family Newsletter
(semiannual), Fanconi Anemia: A Handbook for Families and Their
Physicians
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
207

Foundation on Economic Trends
4520 East West Highway, Suite 600
Bethesda, MD 20814
(301) 656-6272
FAX: (301) 654-0208
E-mail: dhjohnston@foet.org
Web site: http://www.foet.org
Contact: Director
The foundation serves as a watchdog on technology and society
issues in general and has entered on occasion into litigation to
challenge government and industry policies. Founded in 1977 by
Jeremy Rifkin, a noted activist, it has supported a wide variety of
his causes.
Henry A. Wallace Institute for Alternative Agriculture
Winrock International
1621 N. Kent Street, Suite 1200
Arlington, VA 22209
(703) 525-9430
Web site: http://www.winrock.org
Contact: Executive director
Founded in 1983, this organization bands together farmers, agri-
culture scientists, educators, nutritionists, and consumers seek-
ing to promote production methods that are economically viable,
environmentally sound, and sustainable through development of
educational programs and scientific research. It monitors and re-
ports on related government activities.
PUBLICATIONS: Alternative Agriculture News (e-newsletter),
American Journal of Alternative Agriculture (quarterly), reports,
policy studies
International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology
AREA Science Park Padriciano 99
I-34012 Trieste Italy
+(39) 040 37571
FAX: +(39) 040 226555
E-mail: icgeb@icgeb.org
Web site: http://www.icgeb.trieste.it
Contact: Director
208
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

This multinational organization, founded in 1984, promotes the
use of biotechnology to solve problems of developing nations. It
sponsors training programs as well as research and development
in healthcare, agriculture, and industrial applications of biotech-
nology. The centre advises on biotechnology issues and main-
tains a reference library, a database, and electronic mail.
PUBLICATIONS: Activity Report (annual), Helix (quarterly
newsletter in English)
March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation
1275 Mamaroneck Avenue
White Plains, NY 10605
(914) 428-7100
Fax: (914) 428-8203
Web site: http://www.marchofdimes.com
Contact: President
Founded in 1938 by President Franklin D. Roosevelt, the March
of Dimes promotes prevention of birth defects through proper
prenatal care by addressing mother-child health issues such as
low birth weight and maternal substance abuse. 
PUBLICATION: Genetics in Practice (monthly e-newsletter);
a separate Web site (http://www.modimes.org) provides educa-
tional material on genetic diseases, including spina bifida, sickle
cell disease, the neurofibromatoses, cleft lip and palate, clubfoot,
and Down syndrome
Michael Fund (International Foundation for Genetic Research)
4371 Northern Pike
Pittsburgh, PA 15146
(412) 374-0111
E-mail: chuckdet@michaelfund.org
Web site: http://www.michaelfund.org
Contact: Executive director
The fund, with its pro-life stance, has supported research on
Down syndrome and related genetic disorders since 1978. The
group opposes prebirth detection of disorders as well as abortion
or euthanasia of afflicted children or adults. As an alternative, it
seeks to improve care, treatment, and rehabilitation of afflicted
children and adults through the support of professionals and
public advocates.
PUBLICATION: TMF Newsletter
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
209

National Foundation for Jewish Genetic Diseases
250 Park Avenue, Suite 1000
New York, NY 10177
Center for Jewish Genetic Diseases, Mt. Sinai School of 
Medicine
Web site: http://www.nfjgd.org
(212) 371-1030
Contact: President
The foundation, established in 1974, seeks to have an impact on
the seven known genetic diseases affecting children of mainly
Ashkenazi Jewish heritage (Gaucher’s disease, dysautonomia,
Tay-Sachs disease, Bloom’s syndrome, Niemann-Pick disease,
and mucolipidosis IV). It supports basic medical research and
acts as a referral agency for individuals. The organization pro-
motes the establishment of disease carrier identification, pro-
vides genetic counseling including prenatal detection, and con-
ducts a national education campaign.
PUBLICATIONS: a variety of books and brochures on Fanconi
anemia, Tay-Sachs disease, β-lipoproteinemia, Bloom’s syndrome,
Canavan disease, familial dysautonomia, Gaucher’s disease, mu-
colipidosis IV, Niemann-Pick disease, and Torsion dystonia
National Foundation for Rare Diseases
55 Kenosia Avenue
Danbury, CT 06813-1918
(203) 744-0100; (800) 999-6673 (voicemail)
TDD: (203) 797-9590
FAX: (203) 798-2291
E-mail: orphan@rarediseases.org
Web site: http://www.rarediseases.org
The foundation was established in 1983 by a group of patients and
families who worked together to get the Orphan Drug Act
through Congress. The act provides incentives for development of
therapeutics for diseases afflicting fewer than 200,000 individuals.
There are more than 6,000 human genetic diseases in this category,
and in some instances only a few cases of the diseases occur each
year worldwide. The mission of this nonprofit nongovernmental
organization is to help people, assist organizations, and influence
public policy through education, advocacy, and research. The
foundation maintains a database of more than 1,150 diseases and
210
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

an index of more than 2,000 organizations concerned with indi-
vidual diseases with many links at their Web site.
National Fragile X Foundation
P.O. Box 190488
San Francisco, CA 94119
(925) 938-9300; (800) 688-8765
FAX: (925) 938-9315
E-mail: NATLFX@FragileX.org
Web site: http://www.fragilex.org
Contact: Executive director
Founded in 1974, the foundation is a multinational organization
uniting professionals and families to support research and im-
prove the treatment of this X chromosome–linked genetic disease
causing mental retardation in affected males. It supports, ad-
vises, and assists parents of children with fragile X syndrome.
The organization maintains a reference library.
PUBLICATIONS: National Fragile X Foundation Newsletter
(quarterly), audio- and videotapes, brochures, and information
packets for families and professionals
National Health Federation
P.O. Box 688
Monrovia, CA 91017
(626) 357-2181
FAX: (626) 303-0642
E-mail: contact-us@thenhf.com
Web site: http://www.thenhf.com
Contact: President
This large, established, multinational organization, founded in
1955, seeks alternatives to “organized medicine, the pharmaceu-
tical industry, and other special interests” in support of individ-
ual freedom of choice in matters of health. The group serves as
watchdog and attempts “corrective” measures through educa-
tion, legislation, and coordination of like-minded organizational
efforts. The federation supports research in such areas as laetrile
testing and conducts legislative lobbying. It maintains a com-
puter database and a public library of some 25,000 entries on al-
ternative health and related laws.
PUBLICATION: Health Freedom News (quarterly)
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
211

National Institute for Science, Law, and Public Policy
1400 16th St. NW, Suite 101
Washington, DC 20036
(202) 462-8800
FAX: (202) 265-6564
Web site: http://swankin-turner.com/nislapp.html
Contact: President
The institute was founded in 1978 to influence public policies on
sustainable agriculture, food safety, and nutrition. It promotes
technologies avoiding chemical fertilizers and pesticides. The or-
ganization operates an information clearinghouse on aspartame,
federal regulatory practices on milk pricing, use of prescription
drugs, and interpretation of food and drug law. Training is pro-
vided through internships in areas of concern. The group pro-
vides information on request and maintains a speaker’s bureau.
PUBLICATIONS: The Earth and You Eating for Two, Eat Wise,
Healthy Harvest IV: A Directory of Sustainable Agriculture Organiza-
tions (annual)
National Neimann-Pick Disease Foundation
P.O. Box 49
401 Madison Avenue, Suite B
Ft. Atkinson, WI 53538
(920) 563-0930; (877) 287-3672
FAX: (920) 563-0931
E-mail: nnpdf@idcnet.com
Web site: http://www.nnpdf.org
Contact: Chairman
This multinational organization of parents, friends, and health
and education professionals to promote research on Niemann-
Pick disease was founded in 1992. This genetic disease affects
sphingomyelin lipid and cholesterol metabolism. The foundation
provides medical and educational information, offers support to
families of children with the disease, supports legislation, and
sponsors research on Niemann-Pick disease. It also maintains a
reference library and a phone referral service.
PUBLICATION: Niemann-Pick Newsletter (quarterly)
National Society of Genetic Counselors
233 Canterbury Drive
Wallingford, PA 19086-6617
212
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

(610) 872-7608 (voice mail)
FAX: (610) 872-1192
E-mail: FY@nsgc.org
Web site: http://www.nsgc.org
Contact: Executive director
Founded in 1979, this multinational professional organization
comprises genetic counselors and people with an interest in ge-
netic counseling. A major focus is on education of the genetic
counselor and promotion of the field in view of the increased
need for such services with the advent of new genetic tests. The
group provides a speaker’s bureau and compiles statistics related
to genetic counseling. It maintains a computer job-matching ser-
vice and a general database.
PUBLICATIONS: Journal of Genetic Counseling (quarterly),
Perspectives in Genetic Counseling (quarterly), a variety of high
school and college level career packets, and genetic discrimina-
tion resources.
Neurofibromatosis, Inc.
P.O. Box 18246
Minneapolis, MN 55418
(800) 942-6825
Web site: http://www.nfinc.org
Contact: President
A multinational support group founded in 1988 to serve individ-
uals with neurofibromatosis, their parents, caregivers, and
healthcare providers. Neurofibromatosis is a genetic disorder
linked to a number of neurological disabilities in which tumors
form on nerves. The organization informs local, state, and na-
tional legislators about the needs of neurofibromatosis families
and supports and funds medical and sociological research, in-
cluding an annual scholarship, on possible cures and treatment.
Neurofibromatosis Inc. identifies peer-counseling and local sup-
port resources and offers referrals to medical resources. It main-
tains an archival library that is not open to the public. 
PUBLICATIONS: NF Ink (newsletter, semiannual), Under-
standing Neurofibromatosis: An Introduction for Patients and Parents
(booklet), NF Handbook
Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine
5100 Wisconsin Avenue, NW, Suite 400
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
213

Washington, DC 20016-4131
(202) 686-2210
FAX: (202) 686-2216
E-mail: pcrm@pcrm.org
Web site: http://www.pcrm.org
Contact: President
The committee is a large lay organization of physicians, scien-
tists, and healthcare professionals and interested others seeking
to increase awareness of the importance of preventative medicine
and nutrition. Founded in 1985, the group raises scientific and
ethical questions about the use of animals and humans in med-
ical research. Recent activity includes organizing a coalition of
environmental and public health groups to push for adoption of
a requirement for short-term nonanimal tests in lieu of those reg-
ulations mandating animal tests. The Physicians Committee
maintains a speaker’s bureau and both general and breast cancer
hotlines.
PUBLICATIONS: Alternatives in Medical Education, Food for
Life, Good Medicine (quarterly), The Power of Your Plate, brochures
and fact sheets, video on Web site
Prader-Willi Syndrome Association U.S.A.
5700 Midnight Pass Road
Sarasota, FL 34242
(941) 312-0400; (800) 926-4797
FAX: (941) 312-0142
E-mail: national@pwsausa.org
Web site: http://www.pwsausa.org
Contact: Executive director
The association is a multinational organization of families and
professionals, founded in 1975, that works to promote communi-
cation about this genetic syndrome, mainly how to cope with it.
It supports research and establishment of treatment facilities,
conducts educational programs, and compiles statistics. The
group maintains a reference library and a computer database.
PUBLICATIONS: Gathered View (bimonthly newsletter); Man-
agement of Prader-Willi Syndrome (book); Food, Behavior and Beyond
(DVD); Prader-Willi Syndrome: Coping with the Disease (book); Prader-
Willi Syndrome Is What I Have, Not Who I Am (book); and various in-
formation packets
214
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Public Responsibility in Medicine and Research
120 Brookline Avenue, Suite 202
Boston, MA 2115-3920
(617) 423-4112
FAX: (617) 423-1185
E-mail: info@primr.org
Web site: http://www.primr.org
Contact: Executive director
This is a multinational group of researchers, clinicians, adminis-
trators, attorneys, and laypersons supporting responsible animal
and human research. The organization was founded in 1974 and
is allied with the Applied Research Ethics National Association.
It primarily educates the healthcare community about develop-
ment of research regulation and constructively attempts to
counter the public’s increasingly hostile attitude toward scientific
research. The group sponsors public forums for discussion of is-
sues and acts as a resource for members in preparing presenta-
tions for legislative or other types of public hearings. 
PUBLICATIONS: Conference Report (semiannual proceed-
ings), Guidebook on Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees,
Human Subjects Guidebook, and a variety of educational materials
Rural Advancement Fund-USA (RAFI-USA)
P.O. Box 640
Pittsboro, NC 27312
(919) 542-1396
FAX: (919) 542-0069
Web site: http://www.rafiusa.org
Contact: Executive director
This multinational organization, founded in 1990, promotes con-
servation and the sustainable use of agriculture, family farms,
and socially responsible use of new technologies.
PUBLICATIONS: The Community Seed Bank Kit (preserving
traditional crop varieties), The Laws of Life: Another Development
and the New Biotechnologies (social and economic impact of new
biotechnologies on third world), RAFI Communique (issues on
biodiversity, biotechnology, and intellectual property), Shattering:
Food, Politics, and the Loss of Genetic Diversity (governments and
corporations struggle for control of access to world’s plant ge-
netic resources), Farmer’s Guide to GMO’s, monthly e-bulletins
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
215

Turner Syndrome Society of the United States
14450 T.C. Jester, Suite 260
Houston, TX 77014
(832) 249-9988; (800) 365-9944
FAX: (832) 249-9987
E-mail:  tssus@turnersyndrome-us.org 
Web site: http:/www.turnersyndrome.org
Contact: Executive officer
Founded in 1987, the society seeks to link individuals suffering
from the disease, their families, and healthcare professionals.
Turner syndrome is a genetic disease affecting females, resulting
in short stature and kidney, cardiac, and motor perception diffi-
culties. The group promotes public awareness of the medical and
sociopsychological impact of the syndrome on those with the dis-
ease and provides healthcare professional referral. It maintains a
speaker’s bureau, a reference library, and a computer database.
PUBLICATIONS: Newsletter (quarterly), Turner’s Syndrome:
A Guide for Families, Turner’s Syndrome: A Guide for Physicians
World Aquaculture Society (USA)
Louisiana State University
143 J. M. Parker Coliseum
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
(225) 388-3137
FAX: (225) 388-3493
E-mail: wasmas@aol.com
Web site: http://ag.arizona.edu/azaqua/WAS/uschap.htm
http://www.was.org (international)
Contact: Manager
The society, founded in 1970, is a multinational organization ded-
icated to the evaluation, promotion and distribution of scientific
and technological advancement in marine sciences worldwide. It
promotes education and technical training and disseminates in-
formation on issues in aquaculture and mariculture.
PUBLICATIONS: Advances in World Aquaculture (periodic),
Journal of the WAS (quarterly), World Aquaculture (quarterly—
science, technology, political and economic updates)
216
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

8
Selected Print 
and Nonprint Resources
T
his chapter provides a selected annotated bibliography of
printed resources (books, reports, periodicals, and directories)
on various aspects of genetic engineering. The books are
grouped according to their main subject content—General (in-
cludes history), Ethics, International, Legal, Business, Agriculture,
Environment, and Science—and then arranged alphabetically.
Sources that disagree with the mainstream opinion are indicated
with an asterisk. A group of books on genetic engineering for
young adults and younger readers is also provided. Following
this are a selection of U.S. government, congressional, agency, and
nongovernment reports on applications of genetic engineering
and its societal impact. A list of periodicals, newsletters, and di-
rectories provides an introduction to more current and often more
focused information on scientific and social issues.
Books
Note: * indicates sources with an alternative opinion to the main-
stream.
General
Aldridge, S. The Thread of Life: The Story of Genes and Genetic
Engineering. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 258p.
ISBN 0-521-46542-7.
217

The focus of this book is primarily on the explanation of the cel-
lular systems that molecular biologists have learned to control.
By comparing human capabilities of recombinant DNA manipu-
lation to nature’s evolutionary and contemporary processes, the
author provides useful perspective on their relative magnitudes.
A section on how cellular DNA is organized in the genome and
how that genetic information is regulated (as it is currently un-
derstood) gives an inkling of the complex program that the
Human Genome Project hopes to elucidate. The relationship of
genes and cancer provides a description of genetic predisposition
from which lessons can be extrapolated to other diseases. An il-
luminating discussion of what a person’s genetic identity means
reveals that it differs from the public conception. Important for
the educated lay reader, this particular section exposes the myth,
often inferred in the media, that because certain simple things
have been done, complete human or other organism engineering
will be a trivial operation. Not only society but nature conspires
against genetic engineers. Examples of uses to which biotechnol-
ogy has been put in biopharmaceuticals, medicines, agriculture,
industrial production as well as in environmental remediation
and energy production are also discussed in some detail. The au-
thor leaves to the many other books a detailed treatment of ethi-
cal issues and the social impact of genetic engineering.
Alexander, B. Rapture: How Biotech Became the New Religion.
Cambridge, MA: Perseus/Basic Books, 2003. 289p. ISBN 0-738-
20761-6.
A consideration of biotechnology as a futurist culture and what
the opposition of so-called bio-Luddites to the applications of
stem cells, human cloning, and genetic engineering means about
society.
Bains, W. Biotechnology from A to Z. New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1993. 358p. ISBN 0-199-63334-7.
A detailed introduction to biotechnology and its applications is
provided at a level requiring more technical experience for a full
understanding than The Thread of Life by Susan Aldridge (cited
earlier). The potential consequences of application of the tech-
nology are also discussed in some detail. Genetic engineering,
particularly as reflected in human cloning and gene therapy, and
the numerous moral, ethical, and social issues that accompany
218
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

these technologies receive less coverage, partly because these
considerations became prominent after 1993 when the book was
published.
Cherfas, J. Man-Made Life: An Overview of the Science, Technol-
ogy, and Commerce of Genetic Engineering. New York: Pantheon
Books, 1982. 270p. ISBN 0-394-52926-X.
This book recounts the history of the science of genetic engineer-
ing. It is conversationally written and identifies many of the sci-
entists involved. The author provides lucid explanations of what
the scientists were doing and why they were doing it during the
development of the technology rather than dryly presenting the
facts.
Department of Government Relations and Science Policy.
Biotechnology (information pamphlet). Washington, DC: Ameri-
can Chemical Society. 1995. 16p.
A basic primer on biotechnology and its applications compressed
into a small space.
DeSalle, R., and D. Lindley The Science of Jurassic Park and the
Lost World or, How to Build a Dinosaur. New York: Basic Books,
1997. 194p. ISBN 0-465-07379-4.
Jurassic Park and The Lost World, those fantastic, thrilling Steven
Spielberg–directed movies with dinosaurs re-created from pre-
served DNA by recombinant DNA technology, were a marvel of
special effects and cinematic art. The story line of Michael Crich-
ton’s books on which these movies are based is similarly a mar-
vel of science and science fiction, highly entertaining and seem-
ingly believable. In the tradition of the great science fiction
author Jules Verne, there is just enough fact to give the illusion of
reality. Before getting too carried away about the possibilities of
cloning ancient life, it’s worth considering what the chances are
that such events could really happen. The Science of Jurassic Park
is a highly readable assessment of what series of highly unlikely
events would have to occur, what would be required to bring
them about, and under what set of conditions. Along the way the
reader finds out quite a lot about recombinant DNA technology,
its strengths and its weaknesses, the reality of cloning technol-
ogy, the likelihood of dinosaur societies, and survival of disease.
Books
219

Finally, the author considers the ethical questions of resurrecting
an extinct creature. Even if it could be done, should it?
Fox, M. W. Superpigs and Wondercorn: The Brave New World of
Biotechnology and Where It All May Lead. New York: Lyons and
Burford, 1992. 209p. ISBN 1-558-21182-9.
A critical assessment of uncontrolled use of biotechnology and
genetic engineering. Although not opposed in principle to the
use of the technology, the author warns of the overselling of the
possibilities. The text is liberally sprinkled with facts and
figures supporting the theme of the book.
Fumento, M. Bioevolution: How Biotechnology Is Changing Our
World. San Francisco: Encounter Books, 2003. 510p. ISBN 1-893-
55475-9.
This book is an essay on the impact of the biotechnology revolu-
tion at multiple levels in the world economy and culture. It goes
beyond the headlines, the moralist rhetoric, and the biotech hype
to analyze how the advances have permeated the world culture.
Once started, it was not a reversible process. The author is a jour-
nalist and a keen observer of biotechnology who has written
weekly medical columns and for investment magazines. The
book includes an extensive (more than 100 pages) series of notes
and references.
Hellman, H. Great Feuds in Technology: Ten of the Liveliest Dis-
putes Ever. New York: Wiley and Sons, 2004. 248p. ISBN 0-471-
20867-1.
A member of the “Great Feuds in . . .” series of books. Although
most of the book is devoted to other technologies, two chapters
take up biotechnology confrontations: Chapter 9, “Venter vs.
Collins—Decoding the Genome,” and Chapter 10, “Rifkin vs. the
Monsanto Company. Battling the Biotech World.” The author
provides a lively and highly readable discussion of the events
surrounding the race to sequence the genome (Ch. 9) and social
activism vs. business interests (Ch. 10).
Hodgson, J. G. Bio-Technology: Changing the Way Nature
Works. London: Cassell, 1989. 124p. ISBN 0-304-31783-7.
220
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Although somewhat outdated and lacking coverage of the
newest trends, this book provides a first-rate introduction to
biotechnology and its applications. Lavishly illustrated and filled
with color photographs and computer models of the technology
and the people at work in the field make this book a good place
to get a visual feel and an understanding for the science.
*Hubbard, R., and E. Wald. Exploding the Gene Myth: How Ge-
netic Information Is Produced and Manipulated by Scientists,
Physicians, Employers, Insurance Companies, Educators, and
Law Enforcers. Boston: Beacon Press, 1993. 206p. ISBN 0-807-
00418-9.
As the book title suggests, Dr. Ruth Hubbard has a lot to say
about the influence the genetic engineering revolution has or
could have on society. The populist sentiment is evident, decry-
ing the abuse of genetic information and the seemingly conspir-
atorial machinations of medicine, science, government, and in-
dustry combining to oppress certain individuals and minority
groups. The number of alleged improprieties and potential ulte-
rior motives detailed suggest an incredible scandal. Although
there is probably a certain amount of nefarious activity, as there
is in any human endeavor, only part of the story is told here, and
the reader is left to judge the extent of the truth. Reality likely lies
somewhere in between.
The technical background of the controversy and genetic
concepts are explained in a facile manner. Despite having to im-
part a great deal of information, Hubbard presents her point of
view in an engaging style aimed at the lay public. The book’s
notes and information resources give access to points of view
often at odds with the scientific and government mainstream.
Judson, H. F. The Eighth Day of Creation: Makers of the Revolu-
tion in Biology. Plainview, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press, 1996. 714p. ISBN 0-879-69477-7.
This is a history of molecular biology that concentrates less on
the science and more on the political and social repercussions of
the science. The earlier edition of this book has not been available
in the United States for a number of years. The new version pro-
vides additional material on some of the principal figures in the
history and updates events since 1978.
Books
221

*Kimbrell, A. The Human Body Shop: The Engineering and Mar-
keting of Life. San Francisco: Harper, 1993. 348p. ISBN 0-062-
50524-6.
This book takes an antitechnology view of the developments in
organ transplant technology and genetic engineering. The author
deals with a number of controversial issues concerning the patent-
ing of life, use of body parts, and changing notions of self. Many
of the arguments are made on the basis of what is “natural.”
Kolata, G. B. Clone: The Road to Dolly and the Path Ahead. New
York: William Morrow, 1998. 276p. ISBN 0-688-15692-4.
The author is the New York Times reporter who broke the story of
the sheep Dolly, the first mammal cloned from differentiated tis-
sue cells, to the American public. In this book, she presents her
case in the style of scientific journalism rather than as a philoso-
pher or as a self-proclaimed moralist. The history of the science
follows the step-by-step process of the development of the tech-
nology through the widely accepted technology of cloned cattle
embryos of prized stock to the virtually ignored creation of the
twin lambs Megan and Morag from cloned embryonic cells, up to
the highly publicized cloning of Dolly from a differentiated adult
udder cell.
Kolata quotes a variety of opinions and in the end raises
more questions than she answers. In the meantime, she explains
how and why society has come to this point in the cloning issue
clearly and understandably to a wide nontechnical audience and
exposes some of the future implications of the technology and
our reaction to it for further contemplation.
Krimsky, S. Genetic Alchemy: The Social History of the Recom-
binant DNA Controversy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982.
445p. ISBN 0-262-11083-0.
A history of the early years of the development of recombinant
DNA technology.
*Lear, J. Recombinant DNA: The Untold Story. New York:
Crown, 1978. 280p. ISBN 0-517-53165-8.
John Lear, a veteran commentator on the communication be-
tween science and society, presents an expose-style view of the
history of the recombinant DNA controversy. He weaves an en-
222
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

grossing tale of personalities and motives in which he detects a
conspiracy of scientists to deceive and control the public. This
highly readable book, written on a Ford Foundation grant, pre-
sents an alternative critical picture of how science and social is-
sues interact. It is particularly instructive to consider these
thoughts after the more than 20 years of genetic engineering
practice that have passed since the publication of this book. Just
what have society and scientists learned about each other in that
time?
Levine, J. S., and D. Suzuki The Secret of Life: Redesigning the
Living World. Boston: WGBH Television, 1993. 280p. ISBN 0-963-
68810-3.
The book form of the popular Nova educational television series
on genetic engineering.
Lim, H. A. Genetically Yours: Bioinforming, Biopharmacy, and
Bioforming. River Edge, NJ: World Scientific, 2002. 417p. ISBN 9-
810-24938-1.
The author discusses the implications of the biotechnology and
genetic revolutions for individuals in having and using knowl-
edge of their genetic background and what impact that will have
on their life choices and medical treatment options.
Lyon, J., and P. Gorner. Altered Fates. New York: W. W. Norton,
1995. 636p. ISBN 0-393-31528-2.
Written by two Chicago Tribune journalists who won the Pulitzer
Prize for reporting in 1987, this book provides an enlightening
and entertaining treatment of the history of gene therapy and the
development of the Human Genome Project. It includes discus-
sions of gene repair and work with embryos. After making the
case for the impact of genetic diseases, the authors make it clear
they believe that society is not ready to handle the implications
of gene therapy.
McGee, G. Beyond Genetics. New York: William Morrow/
HarperCollins, 2003. 231p. ISBN 0-060-00800-8.
The author describes the genome sequencing efforts and what it
means to have that knowledge. He suggests how individuals will
be using this new information to make decisions about food,
Books
223

medical treatment, family planning, and other issues in their
daily lives.
Paula, L., ed. Biotechnology for Non-specialists—A Handbook
of Information Sources. EFB Task Group on Public Perceptions of
Biotechnology, 1997. 286p. ISBN 9-076-11001-8.
This handbook is designed to assist people with a broad range of
interests and backgrounds in finding information in the public
debate on biotechnology in Europe. Written information sources
are cataloged, and lists and descriptions of organizations are pro-
vided along with a collection of Internet sites and acronyms. The
book is intended as an information source and organizer rather
than to provide detailed explanations of the science, which the
author feels are found elsewhere.
Pence, G. E. Cloning after Dolly: Who’s Still Afraid? Lanham,
MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2004. 211p. ISBN 0-742-53408-1.
The author tries to assess how human and other animal cloning
will affect us in the long run. Whereas most books of this type
dwell on the negative potential, he considers that because the
technology is available, one would do well to consider neutral
and even positive aspects. He is particularly interested in how it
will change our way of thinking about ourselves once we get be-
yond knee-jerk reflexes against change. He corrects a number of
common misconceptions, arguing, for example, that cloning will
not affect genetic diversity in any substantial way.
Piller, C., and Yamamoto, K. R. Gene Wars: Military Control over
the New Genetic Technologies. New York: Beech Tree Books,
1988. 302p. ISBN 0-688-07050-7.
A somewhat dated account of the involvement of the military
with genetic engineering and recombinant DNA technologies.
*Rifkin, J. The Biotech Century: Harnessing the Gene and Re-
making the World. New York: Jeremy P. Tarch/Putnam, 1998.
271p. ISBN 0-874-77909-X.
As he suggests by the title, Jeremy Rifkin has a few comments to
make about the genetic engineering revolution that he opposed
more than 20 years ago. The specter of human cloning (by nu-
clear transfer) has reawakened the original concerns of the early
224
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

antigenetic engineering activists. Along the way, Rifkin reaffirms
his Luddite leanings about the uses and abuses of technology in
his examples of the acquisition of fire, the early printing press,
the English law on common land, and finally passing on to what
he perceives as our failing modern industrial workplace. His
message to consider the ethical quandaries of technology in gen-
eral, and those of biotechnology and genetic engineering in par-
ticular, comes through as it did in Algeny, although with less
force and alarm than in the past.
*Rifkin, J., and N. Perlas. Algeny. New York: Viking Press, 1983.
298p. ISBN 0-670-10885-5.
In this book, Rifkin presents a critique of the then-emergent
biotechnology epoch. The term algeny, newly coined by the au-
thors, is drawn in parallel to alchemy, which in the ancient world
was the culmination of the natural conversion of lesser materials
into gold or perfection through the agency of fire. Biotechnology
is cast as an analogous philosophy in which technology provides
the molding force for change to the detriment of natural systems,
spiced throughout by Rifkin with a hint of conspiracy.
This worldview in which technology is destined to destroy
the natural order of the relationship of humankind to the earth is
the driving force of Rifkin’s actions in opposition to biotechnol-
ogy in line with his many publications on ecological, social, and
political issues.
Russo, E., and D. Cove Genetic Engineering: Dreams and Night-
mares. New York: W. H. Freeman/Spektrum, 1995. 243p. ISBN 0-
716-74546-1.
A detailed lay presentation of the promises and disasters of ge-
netic engineering.
*Shiva, V., and I. Moser Biopolitics: A Feminist and Ecological
Reader on Biotechnology. Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Zed Books.
1995. 294p. ISBN 1-856-49335-0.
A nontraditional view of biotechnology.
Shreeve, J. The Genome War: How Craig Venter Tried to Capture
the Code of Life and Save the World. New York: Knopf, 2004.
403p. ISBN 0-375-40629-8.
Books
225

A highly readable history of the race to sequence the genome and
the high-stakes personalities involved.
Thompson, L. Correcting the Code: Inventing the Genetic Cure
for the Human Body. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1994. 378p.
ISBN 0-671-77082-9.
Larry Thompson, a master’s level molecular biologist and a for-
mer science writer for the Washington Post, tells the history of ge-
netic therapy, from the initial grandiose plans to the realization
that developing the process would be long and hard and finally
to the first true genetic treatment of four-year-old Ashanti De-
Silva in September 1990. He vividly portrays the very personal
stake the genetic pioneers had in their science, the disappoint-
ments, and the temptations, set in the background of the early
days of the genetic revolution.
Watson, J. D. The Double Helix. New York: W. W. Norton, 1980.
298p. ISBN 0-393-01245-X.
The controversial story of the discovery of the helical structure of
DNA as seen through the eyes of James Watson, Nobel laureate.
Watson shatters the image of the white-coated calculating scien-
tist toiling alone in a laboratory with his account of the coinci-
dences, emotions, and conflict of strong personalities with differ-
ent motives. Accounts by others involved in the search for the
Holy Grail of genetics show the personal nature of science from
diverse perspectives. A classic.
Watson, J. D., and A. Berry. DNA: The Secret of Life. New York:
Knopf, 2003. 446p. ISBN 0-375-41546-7.
This coffee table–style book with many high-quality pictures is a
historical narrative of the history of DNA by one of the pioneers.
Watson, J. D., and J. Tooze. The DNA Story: A Documentary His-
tory of Gene Cloning. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1981. 605p.
ISBN 0-716-71292-X.
This engaging history of the early days of the recombinant DNA
story provides insight into the scientific, political, and legislative
developments during that period. Reproduction of many letters
exchanged between key scientists, administrators, and legislators
226
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

brings this era to life by giving a view of the process rather than
merely the final result. Reproductions of key portions of govern-
ment documents and articles from newspapers, magazines, and
science journals provide the societal background throughout.
Yount, L. Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering. New York:
Facts on File, 2000. 280p. ISBN 0-816-04000-1.
A handbook of facts and issues of biotechnology.
Ethics
Andrews, L. B. Future Perfect: Confronting Decisions about Ge-
netics. New York: Columbia University Press, 2001. 264p. ISBN 0-
231-12162-8.
A discussion of the issues confronting how decisions about the
availability and use of genetic information are being made.
Andrews, L. B., J. E. Fullarton, N. A. Holtman, and A. G. Motul-
sky, eds. Assessing Genetic Risks: Implications for Health and
Social Policy. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1994.
338p. ISBN 0-309-04798-6.
This is a report by the Institute of Medicine gleaned from a series
of workshops and meetings, public and private, on genetic testing
and its impact on patients, providers, and the laboratories provid-
ing the services. Each section finishes with a series of conclusions
and recommendations of the Committee on Assessing Genetic
Risks. A unique contribution of this book is its consideration of
what is required on a practical level to achieve the accuracy and ac-
countability of the laboratory science (Ch. 3), public education to
allow informed decision making (Ch. 5), and training of genetic
professionals (Ch. 6) who will be presenting the options. They also
consider the usual social, ethical, and legal implications of genet-
ics policies. This is an informative but densely written book.
Bodner, W., and R. McKie. The Book of Man: The Human Genome
Project and the Quest to Discover Our Genetic Heritage. New
York: Simon and Schuster, 1995. 272p. ISBN 0-195-11487-6.
A description of the Human Genome Project and its implications
for society.
Books
227

Cole-Turner, Ronald. The New Genesis: Theology and the Genetic
Revolution. Louisville, KY: Westminster/John Knox Press, 1993.
128p. ISBN 0-664-25406-3.
The author discusses genetic engineering and its uses in the con-
text of humankind and Christian theology. He notes that in gen-
eral, except for certain groups who oppose any technological in-
tervention, little resistance is shown to medical applications.
More concern is shown for any attempt to “improve” humans, al-
though he acknowledges that medical necessity and “improve-
ment” can converge on occasion.
Drlica, K. A. Double-Edged Sword. The Promises and Risks of the
Genetic Revolution. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Longman,
1994. 256p. ISBN 0-201-40838-4.
The author concentrates primarily on the social and ethical con-
sequences of the use of the influx of genetic information. He
gives a list of genetic services providers and volunteer services
for different genetic diseases.
Frankel, M. S., and A. Teich, eds. The Genetic Frontier: Ethics,
Law, and Policy. Washington, DC: American Association for the
Advancement of Science, AAAS Publication #93-27S1994, 240p.
ISBN 0-871-68526-4.
This collection of articles on the implications of the Genome Proj-
ect and genetic testing is distilled from an invitational confer-
ence of the AAAS on social aspects of genetic engineering. Con-
tributors comment on defining the family, privacy, linking
genetics and behavior, assigning responsibility, use in criminal
justice, and intellectual property and patent rights versus human
dignity.
Holdrege, C. Genetics and the Manipulation of Life: The Forgot-
ten Factor of Context. Hudson, NY: Lindisfarne Press, 1996.
190p. ISBN 0-940-26277-0.
A philosophical discussion of genes and organisms.
Holland, S., L. Labacqz, and L. Zoloth, eds. The Human Embry-
onic Stem Cell Debate: Science. Ethics, and Public Policy. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001. 257p. ISBN 0-262-08299-3.
228
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

A collection of articles on the issues firing the debate over stem
cells.
*Howard, T., and J. Rifkin. Who Should Play God? The Artificial
Creation of Life and What It Means for the Future of the Human
Race. New York: Delacorte Press, 1977. 272p. ISBN 0-440-09552-2.
This book considers the issues surrounding the increased control
of genetics made feasible by recombinant DNA technology. The
history of eugenics is recounted along with a description of mod-
ern reproductive technology and the impact the new technolo-
gies will have on social mores. The authors discuss recombinant
DNA technology in terms of its use to detect genetic defects and
to have the potential for genetic fixes such as gene therapies. The
authors pose the question of whether these technologies are re-
ally needed or wanted by society. Examples of science and cor-
porate abuses of power and mismanagement in other situations
are cited to suggest that these should not be the groups that soci-
ety allows to make decisions on the use of the new genetic tech-
nologies. The authors at the time they wrote the book were codi-
rectors of the Peoples Bicentennial Commission. J. Rifkin is a
well-known figure often found opposing the application of ge-
netic technologies and involved with environmental issues.
Kevles, D. J., and L. Hood, eds. The Code of Codes: Scientific and
Social Issues in the Human Genome Project. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1992. 384p. ISBN 0-674-13645-4.
This collection of expert commentaries covers the spectrum of
technologies that were required for the Human Genome Project
to succeed and recounts the project’s history through 1992. It also
addresses many of the social issues that need to be confronted in
the use of that information. When genetic testing should be ap-
plied and what it means for the individuals involved are the
main themes of the book.
Kitcher, P. The Lives to Come: The Genetic Revolution and
Human Possibilities. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1996. 381p.
ISBN 0-684-80055-1.
The book is primarily directed at ethical issues, although some
scientific issues are considered.
Books
229

Kristol, W., and E. Cohen, eds. The Future Is Now: America Con-
fronts the New Genetics. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield,
2002. 357p. ISBN 0-742-52195-8.
This book is a collection of essays, articles, and speeches ad-
dressing cloning and stem cell research focusing on their social
impact. The arguments are pro or con, impassioned and rea-
soned, philosophical and pragmatic. It is meant to be a sampling
of the discussions about the place of new genetic technologies
and how they should be regulated to keep them from spinning
out of control.
Lee, T. F. Gene Future: The Promise and Perils of the New Biol-
ogy. New York: Plenum Press, 1993. 339p. ISBN 0-306-44509-3.
This book describes the many sides of the issues of the science and
ethics of genetic engineering and the Human Genome Project.
Nelkin, D., and L. Tancredi. Dangerous Diagnostics: The Social
Power of Biological Information. New York: Basic Books, 1989.
207p. ISBN 0-465-01573-5.
This book considers the consequences of biological testing and
the effects of labeling individuals in various social contexts such
as the workplace, in courts of law, and in healthcare.
O’Neill, T., ed. Biomedical Ethics: Opposing Viewpoints. San
Diego, CA: Greenhaven Press, 1994. 312p. ISBN 1-565-10062-X.
Ethical issues surrounding the medical applications of high tech-
nology include some brought about by the genetic revolution.
Reiss, M. J., and R. Straughan. Improving Nature: The Science
and Ethics of Genetic Engineering. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1996. 288p. ISBN 0-521-45441-7.
A biologist and a moral ethicist consider the potential of the ge-
netic engineering revolution and explain its pitfalls. This book
supplies much-needed discussion on moral and ethical questions
about the various aspects and applications of biotechnology. Pro
and con viewpoints to each question are presented (without a
conclusion) and are accompanied by critical facts and figures
without vilifying either viewpoint. This evenhanded presenta-
230
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

tion emphasizes that there really are two (at least) sides to every
issue. In doing so, such a format also points out how far apart the
two sides remain.
In emphasizing the importance of public education in in-
forming people to have meaningful discussions about biotech-
nology issues, the authors distinguish between education and in-
formation. Because the authors—a biologist (MJR) and a moral
philosopher (RS)—are English, much of the information is from
the European community, providing a unique viewpoint com-
pared with most U.S. sources.
Resnik, D. B. Owning the Genome: A Moral Analysis of DNA
Patenting. Albany: State University of New York Press, 2004.
235p. ISBN 0-791-45931-4.
A discussion of the controversy and intricacies of what it means
to patent natural and modified DNA sequences. Should it be al-
lowed, and if so, under what conditions? Who should be allowed
to benefit?
Rothstein, M. A., ed. Genetic Secrets: Protecting Privacy and
Confidentiality in the Genetic Era. New Haven, CT: Yale Uni-
versity Press, 1997. 511p. ISBN 0-300-07251-1.
The chapters in this compendium provide a comprehensive as-
sessment of the impact of the new genetic technology and its
medical and nonmedical uses on personal privacy. The “gen-eti-
quette” controversy and how it is being played out in the societal
arenas of health and law and order are discussed in separate
chapters by a group of clinical, scientific, legal, and ethicist ex-
perts. Particularly valuable is the inclusion of the international
impact of the new technology and the issues being debated in
countries other than the United States, with the focus on Europe.
A working policy framework for protecting genetic information
and personal privacy is proposed.
Ruse, M., and C. A. Pynes, eds. The Stem Cell Controversy: De-
bating the Issues. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2003. 308p.
ISBN 1591020301.
A collection of articles on the issues of the stem cell debate.
Books
231

Smith II, George P. Bioethics and the Law: Medical, Socio-Legal
and Philosophical Directions for a Brave New World. Lanham,
MD: University Press of America, 1993. 332p. ISBN 0-819-19177-9.
Bioethics is the point at which genetic engineering and biotech-
nology contact society’s norms and expectations. The law at-
tempts to put some consistent form to these sometimes-vague
guidelines through legislation that proscribes which actions may
be taken and which are not allowed. This book provides a dis-
cussion of this process.
Suzuki, D., and P. Knudtson. Genethics: The Clash between the
New Genetics and Human Values. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1990. 372p. ISBN 0-674-34566-5.
This is a book written by the television science communicator
David Suzuki for the nonscientist. Dr. Suzuki provides a very
readable discussion that begins by describing genes and DNA
and then turns to the technology. The bulk of the book is con-
cerned with the ethical implications of genetic technology. Topics
covered include the blaming of aggressive behavior on chromo-
somes (XYY males), genetic screening, somatic and germ cell
therapy, biological weapons, environmental damage to DNA, the
value of genetic diversity, and the implications of crossing ge-
netic boundaries with transgenic organisms. The authors raise
numerous questions about the use of genetic technologies.
International
Brock, M. V. Biotechnology in Japan. The Nissen Institute/Rout-
ledge Japanese Studies series. New York: Routledge Press, 1989,
156p. ISBN 0-415-03495-7.
The policy-making process used in Japan is different from that in
the United States. In Japan, a coalition comprising government bu-
reaucracy, industry, and politics is essential. Such close ties would
engender a congressional investigation in the United States. Japan
is particularly attracted to biotechnology because it allows the ef-
ficient use of normally scarce resources in that island nation to re-
duce dependence on outside parties and economic forces. The
shift to knowledge-intensive industries is significantly more ad-
vanced than in the United States. Most of the book is concerned
with strategies for developing a biotechnology industry in Japan.
232
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Doyle, J. C., and G. J. Persley, eds. Enabling the Safe Use of
Biotechnology: Principles and Practice. Washington, DC: World
Bank, 1996. 84p. ISBN 0-821-33671-1.
This book describes a global environmental agenda. The stated
goal of the volume is to provide “a practical guide for policy-
makers and research managers who are responsible for making
decisions on ensuring the safe use of modern biotechnology.”
This report does not consider the global differences of opinion
over introducing genetically engineered organisms into agricul-
ture. The tenth in a series of monographs, Environmentally Sus-
tainable Development Studies.
Juma, C., J. Mugabe, and P. Kameri-Mbote, eds. Coming to Life:
Biotechnology in African Economic Recovery. London: Zed
Books, 1995. 192p. ISBN 9-9966-41087-2.
The countries of Africa are experiencing economic, political, and
ecological decline, all of which contribute to a decreasing ability
to compete on the open world market. Their political, educa-
tional, and industrial institutional structures are unable to cope
with changes such as a decreasing market for raw materials that
have constituted the bulk of the exports of these nations. The sit-
uation is assessed in Cameroon, Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania, and
Uganda, and a series of recommendations for African policy
makers are made to facilitate the integration of new technology
and institutional change to improve the economic outlook for the
region.
Peritore, N. P., and A. K. Galve-Peritore. Biotechnology in Latin
America: Politics, Impacts and Risks. Wilmington, DE: SR
Books, 1995. 229p. ISBN 0-842-02556-1.
This collection of articles considers the general problems associ-
ated with developing nation economies and scientific and tech-
nical infrastructures. It looks specifically at the situation in Mex-
ico, Cuba, and Columbia. Particularly relevant to these countries
are the ideas of property rights (patent protection) balanced
against gene pool rights (genetic property rights to natural di-
versity). Economic limitations for most Latin American nations
have stunted the development of the appropriate infrastructure
for technological advancement. This has led to the idea of con-
verting national debt owed to developed nations into credits for
Books
233

technological advancement in developing nations, which then
could afford products from developed nations.
Russell, A. M. The Biotechnology Revolution: An International
Perspective. New York: St. Martins Press, 1988. 266p. ISBN 0-745-
00013-4.
The emphasis of this book comes from the author’s training in in-
ternational relations. It provides a perspective on the process of
development of regulations in the United Kingdom and Europe
in particular, with some comments on Japan, West Germany, and
Canada and little on the United States. The history of national de-
velopments and controls is reviewed. There is a fear that Western
companies will test their genetically engineered products in un-
derdeveloped countries, much as they sold less safe nuclear re-
actor designs there, because the undeveloped nations had less so-
phisticated regulatory standards.
Sasson, A. Biotechnologies in Developing Countries: Present and
Future. Vol. 1: Regional and National Survey. Paris: UNESCO,
1993. 764p. ISBN 9-331-02875-8.
Sasson has been the director of the Bureau of Studies, Program-
ming and Evaluation of UNESCO since 1974. This book provides
a wealth of economic data and reports on biotechnological re-
search and development activities. Overviews of achievements,
expected developments, constraints on progress and application,
research and industrial application strategies, consumer interest
and biosafety, intellectual property, and regulation issues are pre-
sented, concluding with comments on the economic impact (with
a set of forecast tables) and on how biotechnology is being pur-
sued in developing countries.
Smith, J. E. Biotechnology. 3rd edition. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1996. 236p. ISBN 0-521-44467-5.
This book considers the various aspects of genetic engineering
particularly with respect to industrial applications. It covers the
biotech industry, agriculture, biomining, concerns with patents
and ethics, and environmental release of genetically modified or-
ganisms. The information is primarily from England, providing a
distinctive European view of the subject.
234
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Legal
Bernaer, T. Genes, Trade, and Regulation: The Seeds of Conflict in
Food Biotechnology. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
2003. 229p. ISBN 0-691-11348-3.
The impact of genetic engineering on agricultural biotechnology
in particular is a complex issue with the potential to distort local
and global economics. The current regulatory structure is strug-
gling to balance business interests with safety and market forces.
Billings, P. R., ed. DNA on Trial: Genetic Identification and Crim-
inal Justice. Plainview, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press, 1992. 154p. ISBN 0-879-69379-7.
This book covers the history and impact of DNA forensic evi-
dence on civil liberties and public policy. It contains an analysis
of decisions made in various courts by juries considering DNA
evidence.
Cook, T., C. Doyle, and D. Jabbari. Pharmaceuticals, Biotechnol-
ogy, and the Law. New York: Stockton Press, 1991. 834p. ISBN 1-
561-59040-1.
The laws respecting pharmaceuticals and biotechnology differ,
sometimes significantly, among nations. This book reviews the
law and legislation governing pharmaceuticals and biotechnol-
ogy, concentrating on Great Britain and the European Economic
Community (EEC) countries. The appendices contain the texts of
the EEC Council Directives and other related documents of the
late 1980s through the early 1990s.
Environmental Law Centre. Law in the New Age of Biotechnol-
ogy. Edmonton, Canada: Environmental Law Centre, 1992. 220p.
ISBN 0-921-50341-5.
This book describes the legal basis and present legislation gov-
erning biotechnology and environmental law in Canada.
Inman, K., and Rudin, N. An Introduction to Forensic DNAAnaly-
sis. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1997. 256p. ISBN 0-849-38117-7.
A discussion of modern methods of analyzing DNA and use of
that information in courts of law. A technical source.
Books
235

Laurie, G. T. Genetic Privacy: A Challenge to Medicolegal
Norms. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002. 335p. ISBN
0-521-66027-0.
The author is a senior lecturer in law at the University of Edin-
burgh. His analysis of the philosophical and legal meanings of
privacy range from attempts to construct a legal framework to
the practical workings in different societies. He feels that the new
genetic technologies make it even more imperative that privacy
rights be better defined than they have in the past and that the
laws be brought into compliance with the outcome of this dis-
cussion. So far, he feels that most legislation has dealt with regu-
lating misuse of genetic information in insurance coverage or
compensation and in employment but leaves the deeper philo-
sophical issues unaddressed. Legislation is also not uniform
across countries, even at a baseline level.
Muth, A. S., ed. Forensic Medicine Sourcebook. Detroit, MI: Om-
nigraphics, 1999. 574p. ISBN 0-780-80232-2.
This book is a collection of articles and essays reprinted from var-
ious sources on the topic of forensic investigation—what is in-
volved, the kind of evidence collected, how it is collected, and
what the impact is or has been. Of importance to genetic engi-
neering concepts are Chapter 27, “Automated DNA Typing”;
Chapter 37, “The Potential of DNA Testing”; and Chapter 49,
“Exonerated by DNA,” all on the specific impact of DNA analy-
sis admitted into evidence in criminal trials.
Shiva, V. Biopiracy: The Plunder of Nature and Knowledge.
Boston: South End Press, 1997. 148p. ISBN 0-896-08556-2.
A confrontation is shaping up over the legal status and the grow-
ing economic importance of genetic diversity and products from
underdeveloped countries. Pharmaceutical companies in partic-
ular as well as companies with interests in agriculture regard the
untapped natural resources and folk medical practices of the de-
veloping nations as useful starting points for novel product de-
velopment. Indigenous peoples are beginning to recognize the
real value of what they had been giving away for so many years
and are starting to take ownership. The legal status of their pro-
prietary position and the demand for free access to world natural
236
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

resources for research purposes are the source of much discus-
sion and legal wrangling.
Sibley, Kenneth D., ed. The Law and Strategy of Biotechnology
Patents. Biotechnology Series No. 25. Boston: Butterworth-
Heinemann, 1994. 262p. ISBN 0-750-69444-0.
This book focuses on the law governing biotechnology patents
and the strategies followed in protecting intellectual property in
the United States.
Weir, B. S., ed. Human Identification: The Use of DNA Markers.
Contemporary Issues in Genetics and Evolution Series. Boston:
Kluwer Academic, 1995. 213p. ISBN 0-792-33520-1.
This monograph explains the methodology and the interpretive
issues involved in using DNA patterns to relate individuals.
Wiegele, T. C. Biotechnology and International Relations: The
Political Dimensions. Gainesville: University of Florida Press,
1991. 212p. ISBN 0-813-01055-1.
The global interdependence in science has created an international
political context in biotechnology. This book, written to provide
background for those persons pursuing a career in international re-
lations, tries to show where this particular expertise can assist gov-
ernments in dealing with the new technology to maximize benefits
and minimize harm. It reviews national regulatory postures, major
international legal instruments, determination of harm and sanc-
tions, and verification and enforcement of laws governing biotech-
nology applications. Other concerns are the impact of international
commerce on both developed and developing economies and the
prospect for biological warfare as a terrorist weapon.
World Intellectual Property Organization. Guide on the Licensing
of Biotechnology. Geneva: World Intellectual Property Organiza-
tion, Publication No. 708(E), 1992. 197p. ISBN 9-280-50410-X.
The patenting of biotechnology products is a highly specialized
branch of intellectual property rights. It is at the center of the
commercialization controversy in agriculture, which is far from
settled. This book provides a summary of the established con-
cepts that are accepted, at least by developed nations.
Books
237

Wright, Susan. Molecular Politics: Developing American and
British Regulatory Policy for Genetic Engineering, 1972–1982.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994. 591p. ISBN 0-226-
91065-2.
This book describes the history of the development of regulation
of biotechnology and genetic engineering in considerable detail.
The author follows the cycle of regulation followed by deregula-
tion with an analysis of the societal, political, economic, and sci-
entific forces that drove events. She interprets the deregulation as
a sellout of the public due to overriding industrial (and research)
interests rather than to a reasoned change.
Business
Kenney, M. Biotechnology: The University-Industrial Complex.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1986. 306p. ISBN 0-300-
03392-3.
This book describes the early development of biotechnology
and the university-industrial connection from a sociological
point of view. The extremely close relationship with industry
has not been without its effects on the university. The structure
of the biotech industry—venture capital funding, pharmaceuti-
cal and chemical company investments, and the rewards and in-
centives for academics—is placed in perspective. Biotech com-
panies have undergone tremendous growth, which has brought
changes in the roles, motivations, and perceptions of their em-
ployees. Growing relationships with multinationals are forcing
further changes in industry, particularly in those applied to
agriculture.
Krimsky, S. Biotechnics and Society: The Rise of Industrial Ge-
netics. New York: Praeger. 1991. 280p. ISBN 0-275-93853-X.
A history of the evolution of the industrial involvement in ge-
netic engineering from enhancing technology to commercializa-
tion of entirely new ideas and products.
Swanson, T., ed. Biotechnology, Agriculture, and the Developing
World: The Distributional Implications of Technological
Change. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar, 2002. 281p. ISBN 1-
840-64679-9.
238
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

This book considers the business effects biotechnology has had
and likely will have on modern agriculture and the economies of
the developing world. The issues of plant breeders’ rights and
how genetic engineering and agribusiness are in conflict with
agricultural practices in developing countries where much of the
farming is by small operations are discussed.
van Balken, J. A. M., ed. Biotechnological Innovations in Chem-
ical Synthesis. London: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1997. 376p.
ISBN 0-750-60561-8.
This book describes the current and potential uses of biotechnol-
ogy in chemical synthesis. Industrial fermentation processes are
connected with their respective chemical syntheses to compare
their strengths and weaknesses and where they might be applied
together to advantage.
Agriculture
Beaumont, A. R., and K. Hoare. Biotechnology and Genetics in
Fisheries and Aquaculture. Oxford: Blackwell Science, 2003.
158p. ISBN 0-632-05515-4.
Most agriculture biotechnology is concerned with plant agricul-
ture. This book presents the impact of genetic engineering on fish
and seafood. Increasing numbers of varieties of aquatic and ma-
rine organisms are being farm raised for food rather than caught
wild. If you eat salmon or catfish at a restaurant, chances are that
it is farmed fish. This takes fishing pressure off of those popula-
tions but in return presents issues of pollution and questions
about practices such as transgenic growth hormone or antibiotic
supplementation to support high population densities as well as
the consequences of escapes of farmed, genetically altered fish.
*Busch, L., W. B. Lacy, J. Burkehardt, and L. R. Lacy. Plants,
Power, and Profit: Social, Economic, and Ethical Consequences
of the New Biotechnologies. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell. 1991.
275p. ISBN 1-557-86088-2.
This book discusses emerging issues and trends in the biotech-
nology worldwide. It presents perspectives on science and soci-
ety including a discussion of the philosophy behind the science.
A history of plant breeding and its connection to the new genetic
Books
239

engineering technologies provides a background of the debate
about the relative contributions of the two strategies. Examples
of political biology with a chapter on wheat and one on tomatoes
demonstrate the principles introduced in earlier sections. A chap-
ter on the international scope of biotechnology’s social impact
demands accountability for releases of transgenic plants and po-
tential economic effects on indigenous industry. There is also the
question of who will do the engineering on minority food and
other crops important to many developing nations. With the
highly technical transgenic crops, the future appears to bode
fuller integration of crop production into industry and out of the
hands of individual farmers in all countries.
*Dawkins, K. Gene Wars: The Politics of Biotechnology. Open
Media Pamphlet series. New York: Seven Stories Press, 1997. 60p.
ISBN 1-888-36348-7.
This short book makes the case of the perceived perils of plant
and animal agricultural biotechnology from the escape of engi-
neered organisms, to the impact on regular agriculture, economic
displacement, and the evils of control exercised by the multina-
tional agricultural industry. The points are made succinctly, and
the book includes information sources for activists to make a dif-
ference.
*Gussow, J. D. Chicken Little, Tomato Sauce and Agriculture:
Who Will Produce Tomorrow’s Food? New York: Bootstrap Press,
1991. 150p. ISBN 0-942-85032-7.
A critical discussion of the impact of genetic engineering on food
production and who will be producing it.
Institute of Food Technologies. Appropriate Oversight for Plants
with Inherited Traits for Resistance to Pests. Chicago: Institute
of Food Technologies, 1996.
This report recommends principles for regulating genetically en-
gineered plants. The level of risk should be determined by the
characteristics of the plant, not by lack of familiarity with the
gene change, the source of genes, or the method of gene transfer.
The genes or gene products should not be pesticides that are sub-
ject to the federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act;
concepts such as “generally regarded as safe” (GRAS) applied to
240
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

other areas such as food additives should also be applied to the
new varieties of plants. GRAS substances are not subject to the
federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. This report does not in-
clude consideration of global differences of opinion over intro-
ducing genetically engineered organisms into agriculture.
Krimsky, S., and R. P. Wrubel. Agricultural Biotechnology and
the Environment: Science, Policy, and Social Issues. Urbana:
University of Illinois Press, 1996. 294p. ISBN 0-252-02164-9.
This book describes the various applications of genetic engineer-
ing to agricultural systems. It covers herbicide-resistant plants,
insect-resistant plants, disease-resistant crops, various transgenic
plant products, microbial pesticides, nitrogen fixation, and frost-
inhibiting bacteria. Animal agricultural products are included
such as animal growth hormones and their use and various
transgenic animals. In keeping with his other publications, Krim-
sky is careful to include discussion of the cultural and symbolic
sides of agricultural biotechnology.
*Mather, R. Garden of Unearthly Delights: Bioengineering and
the Future of Food. New York: Penguin Books, 1995. 205p. ISBN
0-525-93864-8.
The author, food editor of the Detroit News, considers the future
of food supply in the United States from the new genetically en-
gineered plants and recombinant bovine growth hormone for
meat and milk products to sustainable agriculture through a se-
ries of visits with individuals involved in the process. The tone of
the commentary and the information selected for presentation
are not in favor of the application of biotechnology to agriculture.
The author suggests a blueprint for individual action in con-
sumer buying power to support “whole food” production.
Miller, H. I., and G. Conko. The Frankenfood Myth: How Protest
and Politics Threaten the Biotech Revolution. Westport, CT:
Praeger/Greenwood Press, 2004. 296p. ISBN 0-275-97879-6.
The authors present the case that a combination of anti-technol-
ogy activism, bureaucratic overreach, and business lobbying has
resulted in a regulatory framework that is out of sync with the
potential benefits and risks of gene splicing. Regulation is ac-
cused of stifling new research at both universities and small
Books
241

biotech companies that could resolve some of the issues in con-
tention. They suggest a series of business and public policy re-
forms that they believe will provide appropriate safeguards
while allowing the benefits of advances in agriculture through
biotechnology to be available to consumers and farmers. The
book is written at the level of upper-level undergraduates but is
meant to be read by policy makers as well.
*Nestle, M. Safe Food: Bacteria, Biotechnology, and Bioterror-
ism. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004. 350p. ISBN 0-
520-24223-8.
The author contends that the agribusiness lobby has stifled gov-
ernment regulatory power over foods. Her concern is that this in-
terference occurs for both general foods and genetically modified
foods but in different ways. Part 1 covers general food safety and
Part 2 covers biotechnology.
Nottingham, S. Genescapes: The Ecology of Genetic Engineering.
New York: Zed Books/St. Martin’s Press, 2002. 211p. ISBN 1-842-
77036-5.
This small volume is a reasoned treatment of the ecological im-
pact of the first generation of commercial transgenic plants and
animals. The author references multiple studies and is critical of
what he characterizes as woefully inadequate field trial studies of
the impact of transgenic crops on the ecology, on farming as a
livelihood, and on the economic impact in developing countries.
He documents the continuation of the process of industrializa-
tion of agriculture begun during the Green Revolution and the
tightening control of multinational corporations over the food
supply. Many of the same issues of plant monoculture effects in
the surrounding ecology are presented with potentially farther
reaching consequences.
Although not a diatribe against genetic engineering, the au-
thor clearly feels that the multinational corporations that domi-
nate the area have a different set of priorities than societies do.
He believes that governments should act to balance the economic
forces with the social and ecological consequences of the appli-
cation of new technology.
*Perlas, N. Overcoming Illusions about Biotechnology. Atlantic
Highlands, NJ: Zed Books, 1994. 119p. ISBN 1-856-49303-2.
242
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

The author considers the impact of genetic engineering and
biotechnology on the environment, natural resources, society,
and the family farm to be largely negative. He describes sustain-
able agricultural methods as a solution and the control of
biotechnology by legislative and populist means.
Pringle, P. Food, Inc. Mendel to Monsanto—The Promise and
Perils of the Biotech Harvest. New York: Simon and Schuster,
2003. 239p. ISBN 0-743-22611-9.
A revealing analysis of the propaganda battles and fear monger-
ing by technologists and agribusiness and by anticorporate eco-
warriors over genetically modified foods. The author is a jour-
nalist who provides an evenhanded and entertaining account of
this ongoing dispute.
Reborn, P. The Last Harvest: The Genetic Gamble That Threatens
to Destroy American Agriculture. Lincoln: University of Ne-
braska Press, 1995. 269p. ISBN 0-803-28962-6.
The loss of genetic diversity brought about by current plant
breeding programs and the cultivation of vast monocultures is
being exacerbated by the closing of seed germ plasm repositories.
The author points out the vulnerability of homogeneous crop
plants to disease and environment without periodic access to the
heterogeneity of traits offered by other varieties freely exchang-
ing genetic material in the wild.
Rissler, J., and M. Mellon The Ecological Risks of Engineered
Crops. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996. 168p. ISBN 0-26218-
171-1.
This monograph sponsored by the Union of Concerned Scientists
points out potential risks associated with the widespread com-
mercial cultivation of transgenic crop plants. Most current traits
being modified are specific pest and herbicide resistance and
traits that benefit processors but don’t enhance nutritional value.
The original idea of making plants drought- or salt-resistant, ni-
trogen fixing, or higher yielding has faded with the realization
that these are multigenic traits that are less amenable to trans-
genic manipulation. The authors propose a specific testing pro-
gram to determine the risks of a given transgenic plant becoming
a weed or passing the transgene to wild populations.
Books
243

Environment
Chaudhry, G. R., ed. Biological Degradation and Bioremediation
of Toxic Chemicals. Portland, OR: Dioscorides Press, 1994. 515p.
ISBN 0-931-14627-5.
This book describes the vast microbial metabolic diversity and the
quest to construct recombinant strains to combine pathways in the
same organism to improve their effectiveness in bioremediation.
Kalaitzandonakes, N. Economic and Environmental Impacts of
Agbiotech: A Global Perspective. New York: Kluwer/Plenum,
2003. 336p. ISBN 0-306-47501-4.
An international analysis of the growing influence of agribusi-
ness and, in particular, genetic modifications of organisms on
world food supply and the environment.
Prieels, A.-M. Development of an Environmental Bio-Industry:
European Perceptions and Prospects. Lanham, MD: Dublin Insti-
tute, by the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living
and Working Conditions. Distributed by UNIPUB, 1993. 131p.
ISBN 9-282-64691-2.
This report is compiled from responses (in 1990) of persons and
organizations to two general questions: can biotech contribute to
an improvement in the state of the environment, and why is bio-
industry not more developed in Europe? Specific topics include
the pollution treatment bio-industry, the scientific and techno-
logical bases of the environmental bio-industry, acceptance of the
development of applications in the environmental sector,
biotechnology and sustainable development, and the political
and regulatory framework of the environmental bioindustry.
Many of the problems are the same as those encountered in the
United States.
Thomas, J. A., and R. L. Fuchs, eds. Biotechnology and Safety As-
sessment. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 2002. 487p. ISBN 0-
126-88721-7.
How exactly does one go about demonstrating the safety of
biotechnology and how does it compare with chemical safety?
What is safe enough and who sets the standards?
244
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Witt, S. C. Biotechnology, Microbes, and the Environment. Brief-
book series. San Francisco: Center for Science Information, 1990.
219p. ISBN 0-912-00503-3.
This book is designed to provide decision makers with a basic
level of scientific understanding to make informed public policy; it
is also intended to educate the general public. Written in a dis-
tinctly irreverent but engaging style, the majority of the book is
concerned with the impact of the technology, risk assessment, U.S.
and international regulation, historical events, and major issues at
stake. A unique contribution is a list of U.S. and international ex-
pert sources drawn from academic scientists, government agency
workers, industrial representatives, and foes of genetic engineer-
ing with comments on their areas of expertise and an assessment
of the “articulate interview” and the “solid source.”
Science
Bronzino, J. E., ed. The Biomedical Engineering Handbook. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1995. 2,862p. ISBN 0-849-38346-3.
A compendium on the design, development, and use of medical
technology to diagnose and treat patients. It includes 11 chapters
on biotechnology and 17 chapters on tissue engineering. Regula-
tions and ethics currently in force that influence biomedical engi-
neering are discussed.
Claverie, J.-M., and C. Notredame. Bioinformatics for Dummies.
Foster City, CA: IDG Books Worldwide, 2003. 432p. ISBN 0-764-
51696-5.
Written in the breezy style of the For Dummies series, this book
provides a quick introduction to bioinformatics and how to use
it. Although a lot of information is packed into a small space, the
format allows the reader to appreciate and use the extensive re-
sources of the World Wide Web to do research or just to learn
about history, techniques, and new developments—all from a
desktop computer.
Danchin, A. The Delphic Boat: What Genomes Tell Us. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002. 368p. ISBN 0-674-
00930-4.
Books
245

In explaining what a genome is and what it codes for, the au-
thor’s emphasis is as much on the arrangement and spacing of
the coding components in the nucleotide sequence as on what the
protein and known regulatory sequences are. Genome science is
at the point where it has determined the linear sequence of the
genetic message, but having that information does not allow the
creation of a new cell, much less a whole organism. Something
else is needed, an organizational plan. The author suggests that
this plan may be encoded in some way within existing organisms
building off of a preexisting template. His interpretation is that
by the time in evolutionary history that genomes had assembled,
the genetic code may not be able to stand on its own. According
to this scenario, a dinosaur could not be produced from its DNA.
Friedmann, T. Gene Therapy: Fact and Fiction in Biology’s New
Approaches to Disease. Plainview, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Lab-
oratory Press, 1994. 124p. ISBN 0-879-69446-7.
This short book provides historical background and an assessment
of current challenges. It reviews the field’s technical achievements
and ethical dilemmas.
Gralla, J. D., and P. Gralla. Complete Idiot’s Guide to Under-
standing Cloning. New York: Alpha Books, 2004. 323p. ISBN 1-
592-57148-4.
One of the highly readable Complete Idiot series of overview
books that provide an introduction to a wide range of topics.
There’s a lot of information on both the science and the social im-
pact of nuclear cloning technology. After several introductory
chapters that give history and explanation of genetic engineering
principles, a large fraction of the book is devoted to nuclear
cloning and stem cells, which have engendered the most public
controversy although they are the least frequent applications of
genetic engineering technology. There is also coverage of gene
therapy with its high hopes and thus far meager clinical success.
Hall, S. S. Invisible Frontiers: The Race to Synthesize a Human
Gene. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1987. 334p. ISBN 0-871-
13147-1.
Story of the race to clone and express human insulin for the treat-
ment of diabetes.
246
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Jackson, J. F. Genetics and You. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, 1996.
92p. ISBN 0-896-03329-5.
Written for the educated lay consumer of genetic testing, this
short book explains the principles of genetics and how to make
use of the test results in conjunction with genetic counseling. It
clarifies the new genetics and provides guidance on how to get
questions answered and deal with the decisions to be made.
Kreuzer, H., and A. Massey. Recombinant DNA and Biotechnol-
ogy: A Guide for Teachers; and Recombinant DNA and Biotech-
nology: A Guide for Students. American Society for Microbiology
Press, 1996. 564p. ISBN 1-555-81101-9C (teacher); 364p. ISBN 1-
555-81110-8C (student).
An introductory textbook for high school and college students
containing sections of textbook topics, wet lab experiments, dry
lab experiments and demos, and material on weighing the risk-
benefit impact on society. The book includes a decision-making
model for bioethical issues, case studies in bioethics, and infor-
mation on careers in biotechnology.
Miklos, D. A., and G. A. Freyer. DNA Science: A First Course in
Recombinant DNA Technology. Plainview, NY: Cold Spring Har-
bor Laboratory Press, 1990. 477p. ISBN 0-892-78411-3.
This is a combination textbook and lab manual designed for ad-
vanced high school or beginning college students showing where
recombinant DNA technology came from and pointing to where
it might lead. It traces a historical perspective with experiments
designed to illustrate the text. The course is designed to be sup-
ported by Carolina Biological Supply reagents and supplies if re-
quired. Well illustrated and engagingly written, the textbook it-
self is suitable for introducing recombinant DNA in courses on
science and society.
Moody, G. Digital Code of Life: How Bioinformatics Is Revolu-
tionizing Science, Medicine, and Business. New York: John Wiley
and Sons, 2004. 400p. ISBN 0-471-32788-3.
Describes how the field of bioinformatics came about and pro-
files the major players in the field, their personalities, and their
contributions. The first important contribution of the new disci-
pline of bioinformatics was as an indispensable element in the
Books
247

piecing together of thousands of nucleotide strings in the proper
order to give the complete human genome. New information
technology also was key to analyzing the billions of nucleotides
in the sequence to extract information encoded there. The book
explores the commercial applications and investment opportuni-
ties as well as when and where future growth may occur.
Murray, T. H., M. A. Rothstein, and R. F. Murray, Jr. The Human
Genome Project and the Future of Health Care. Bloomington:
University of Indiana Press, 1996. 248p. ISBN 0-253-33213-3.
This book focuses on the implications of the Human Genome
Project for society and health practice. Attention is drawn to the
effect the information from the Genome Project will have on the
quality and delivery of healthcare in the United States. The issues
of genetic discrimination in employment and insurance and
equal access to testing and treatment of minority and indigent
clients as well as the impact on reproductive decision making are
treated in a series of articles by experts in those areas.
Neel, J. V. Physician to the Gene Pool: Genetic Lessons and
Other Stories. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1994. 457p. ISBN
0-471-30844-7.
The author, a physician, discusses genetics and populations, ge-
netics and individuals, and the impact of medical genetics on
past and present medical care. He then compares these effects to
those expected from the application of genetic engineering.
Prentice, D. A. Stem Cells and Cloning. San Francisco: Benjamin
Cummings, 2003. 39 pp. ISBN 0-805-34864-6.
A short, concise introduction to embryonic stem cells and nuclear
cloning technologies.
Rabinow, P. Making PCR: A Story of Biotechnology. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1996. 190p. ISBN 0-226-70146-8.
An entertaining story of the development of the polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) method, a key technology in genetic engi-
neering. The author provides a historical description of the
events during the conception of this powerful tool for manipu-
lating nucleic acids. It engagingly includes numerous personal
248
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

accounts of the struggle for power and precedence among the
key players.
Svendsen, P., and J. Hau, eds. Handbook of Laboratory Animal
Science. Volume 1: Animal Models. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press,
1994. 224p. ISBN 0-849-34378-X. Handbook of Laboratory Ani-
mal Science. Volume 2: Selection and Handling of Animals in
Biomedical Research. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1994. 448p.
ISBN 0-849-34390-9.
A comprehensive description of lab animal genetics, diseases,
health monitoring, nutrition, and environmental impact on ani-
mal testing. It considers the ethics of animal experimentation in
Europe and North America. Also discussed are alternatives to an-
imal experiments, including isolated organs, cell cultures, and
computer simulations.
Books on Genetic Engineering 
(Young Adult Sources)
Balkwill, F. Amazing Schemes within Your Genes. London:
HarperCollins, 1993. 32p. ISBN 0-001-96465-8.
The uniqueness of every human being is explained through their
genes, even though our DNA is 99.5% identical. The process by
which visible characteristics such as hair, eye, and skin color or
ear shape are transmitted and how genetic diseases such as cys-
tic fibrosis are inherited are explained and illustrated for readers
aged 9 to 15 years.
Balkwill, F. DNA Is Here to Stay. London: HarperCollins, 1992.
32p. ISBN 0-001-91165-1.
The process by which the code of life directs the growth from an
embryonic cell to a complete human being is described and
clearly illustrated for readers aged 9 to 15 years.
Bornstein, S. What Makes You What You Are: A First Look at Ge-
netics. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: J. Messner, 1989. 128p. ISBN 0-
67168-650-X.
An introduction to genes, DNA, and genetics for grades 7 and up.
Books
249

Bryan, J. Genetic Engineering. New York: Thomson Learning,
1995. 64p. ISBN 1-568-47268-4.
The main topic of this book is the issues involved in the applica-
tion of genetic engineering. The treatment is up-to-date as of
1995, and the illustrations and pictures are very good.
Darling, D. J. Genetic Engineering: Redrawing the Blueprint of
Life. Parsippany, NJ: Silver Barnett, Dillon Press, 1995. 64p. ISBN
0-875-18614-9.
This book outlines the progress made in understanding the ge-
netic code by following research on cystic fibrosis. The author
uses this disease with major effects on children to explain mech-
anisms of genetic diseases and to enhance student involvement
with the issues of genetic screening, amniocentesis, abortion, and
gene therapy. For grades 5 and up.
Gerbi, S. A. “From Genes to Proteins.” In Carolina Biology Read-
ers Series, Volume 158. Burlington, NC: Carolina Biological Sup-
ply. 16p. ISBN 0-892-78358-3.
A description of the biochemical events involved in information
flow from a gene sequence to the functioning protein. For grades
10–12.
Grace, E. S. Biotechnology Unzipped: Promises and Realities.
Washington, DC: Joseph Henry Press (National Academy Press),
1997. 264p. ISBN 0-309-05777-9.
An up-to-date discussion of the possibilities and achievements of
the new science of biotechnology.
Lampton, C. DNA and the Creation of New Life. New York:
ARCO Publishing, 1983. 135p. ISBN 0-668-05396-8.
This somewhat dated book details the story of the quest for the
gene and what scientists are doing to mold genes to do their bid-
ding. The author, a well-known contributor to juvenile science
writing, also considers some of the issues scientists face as the
“engineers of life,” including genes as property. Discussion of
both the projected uses and issues of DNA technology is similar
to those current now.
250
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Lampton, C. DNA Fingerprinting. Danbury, CT: Franklin Watts,
1991. 112p. ISBN 0-531-13003-7.
An explanation of how DNA patterns in cells and body fluids are
much like a fingerprint and can be used to identify individuals.
DNA analysis evidence can be used in a court of law to place an
individual at the scene of a crime. For grades 7 to 12.
Marshall, E. L. The Human Genome Project: Cracking the Code
Within Us. Danbury, CT: Franklin Watts, 1996. 128p. ISBN 0-531-
11299-3.
The fifteen-year, multibillion-dollar project of mapping and se-
quencing the human genetic code, the genome, is described and
explained in this work for grades 8 to 12. The author explains the
lay concepts involved in genetic research by concentrating on in-
dividual real scientists and the work they do as part of the proj-
ect. The controversies involved in doing and applying genetic re-
search are recognized, along with the potential benefits of the
knowledge for research and human health, brought to life again
through the device of real-life stories about the people involved.
Personalizing in this way helps to drive home the magnitude of
the Human Genome Project. It also serves as a reminder that in
the end it all comes down to ordinary individuals—the public—
who will have to decide how to use the information.
Marteau, T., and M. Richards, eds. The Troubled Helix: Social and
Psychological Implications of the New Human Genetics. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 359p. ISBN 0-521-
46288-6.
This book addresses the interpretation and use of genetic informa-
tion at both the personal level and by society as a whole. As the au-
thors, both pro and con, of the various chapters on carrier testing of
adults, prenatal testing, testing children, and the impact of genetic
counseling point out, disagreement rests on the lack of predictabil-
ity of the outcome of having a genetic defect. Although the tech-
nology for determining that there is a mutation in a specific gene
has improved immensely, being able to predict when, where, and
how much of an effect that lesion will have on an individual has not
progressed appreciably. The interpretation problem will only get
worse as geneticists tie together more complex multigenic traits.
Books
251

The Troubled Helix also analyzes social aspects of genetic test-
ing. How do people react to and use genetic information to make
decisions? Many people who are at risk for a devastating disease
simply do not wish to know. Other points of debate include test-
ing of children and how and when to inform other kindred of test
results. There is public agreement throughout that genetic infor-
mation is private for the individual. Numerous studies and sta-
tistics of various types are cited. The book is written from the En-
glish point of view, although a great deal of effort is made to
make things more international. The reader will note that certain
basic assumptions about public attitudes and legal precedence
differ from those in the United States.
Sherrow, V. James Watson and Francis Crick: Decoding the Secret
of DNA. Woodbridge, CT: Blackbirch Press, 1995. 110p. ISBN 1-
56711-133-5.
This historical-biographical account of the discovery of the struc-
ture of DNA is written for the middle school and early high
school student and contains numerous illustrations and pho-
tographs of the important principles and human participants in
the events leading up to the determination of the three-dimen-
sional structure of the DNA molecule. The story of Watson and
Crick and DNA is carried up through the 1990s, including Wat-
son’s brief tenure as head of the Human Genome Project.
Swisher, C. Genetic Engineering. San Diego, CA: Lucent Books,
1996. 128p. ISBN 1-560-06179-0.
This book provides a comprehensive overview of genetic engi-
neering technology placed in the perspective of the controversy
brought by its applications. Opposing points of view are pre-
sented with equal weight to the proponents. A glossary, extensive
index, list of organizations to contact for additional information,
and suggestions for further reading make this book a good re-
source for young readers and some adults. For grades 7 and up.
Tagliaferro, L. Genetic Engineering: Progress or Peril? Minneapo-
lis, MN: Lerner, 1996. 128p. ISBN 0-822-52610-7.
The author balances the potential benefits of human, plant, and
animal genetic experimentation with cautionary statements. Sep-
arate chapters on each of these topics follow a short introduction
252
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

on cell and DNA structure and function and descriptions of ge-
netics and Mendelian heredity theory. Discussion of human gene
identification, the development of new life forms, and the regu-
lation of genetic engineering lead into considerations of patent
usage and the effects of exclusive use of genetic modifications of
current organisms turning into monopoly. A substantial bibliog-
raphy including articles from periodicals, corporate scientific re-
ports, and monographs that are a rich source for debating current
issues in genetic engineering is provided. For grades 7 to 9.
Thro, E. Genetic Engineering. New York: Facts on File, 1993. 128p.
ISBN 0-816-02629-7.
Through the use of charts and line drawings, the author covers
the usual topics of cell and DNA structure, chromosomes, and
genes. She outlines some uses that have already been found (as
of 1993) for genetic engineering and warns of upcoming ethical
problems in eugenics and patenting of new life forms. For grades
7 to 12.
Van Loon, B. DNA, The Marvelous Molecule. Norfolk, England:
Tarquin, 1990. 32p. ISBN 0-906-21275-8.
The helical structure of DNA and the topology of the many struc-
tures that inhabit the microscopic world of molecular biology are
often inadequately portrayed on the flat page. The three-dimen-
sional heavy paper models provided by Van Loon to be cut out
and assembled solve this problem. The models include a DNA
helix, a bacteriophage with a packaged DNA helix, nucleotide
hydrogen bonding pairs, and a protein-folding model that
graphically illustrates the effect of a mutation on a protein’s
shape. A 27-page minibook included within the package suc-
cinctly and clearly explains the models and the place of DNA in
life, genetics, and evolution. This book is written for middle and
senior high school students.
Wekesser, C., ed. Genetic Engineering: Opposing Viewpoints. San
Diego, CA: Greenhaven Press, 1997. 240p. ISBN 1-565-10358-0.
A discussion of the benefits and risks of the application of genetic
engineering technology to medicine, agriculture, industry, and
the environment. Ethical issues such as human cloning and ge-
netic testing are also covered. For grades 5 to 12.
Books
253

Wells, D. K. Biotechnology. Tarrytown, NY: Benchmark Books
(Marshall Cavendish), 1997. 64p. ISBN 0-761-40046-X.
A description of the tools and wonders of biotechnology. For
grades 3 to 5.
U.S. Government Publications
Office of Technology Assessment Documents
Titles are available from:
U. S. Government Printing Office National Technical
Information Service
Superintendent of Documents
5285 Port Royal Road
Department 33, Springfield, VA 22161-0001
Washington, DC 20402-9325 (703) 487-4650
(202) 783-3238
Impacts of Applied Genetics: Micro-Organisms, Plants, and
Animals
OTA-HR-132, April 1981.
An Assessment of Alternatives  for a National Computerized
Criminal History System
OTA-CIT-161, October 1982.
Splicing Life: A Report on the Social and Ethicaal Issues of 
Genetic Engineering with Human Beings
Pr 40.8:Et 3/L 62. November, 1982.
Commercial Biotechnology: An International Analyysis
OTA-BA-218, January 1984.
Human Gene Therapy: A Background Paper
OTA-BP-BA-32, December 1984.
254
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Technologies for Detecting Heritable Mutations in Human 
Beings
OTA-H-298, September 1986.
Ownership of Human Tissues and Cellls—Special Report
OTA-BA-337, March 1987.
New Developments in Biotechnology: Public Perceptions of
Biotechnology
OTA-BP-BA-45, May 1987.
Issues Reelevant to NCIC (National Crime Information Center)
2000 Proposals
Staff paper, November 1987.
Mapping Our Genes: Genome Projectts—How Big? How Fast?
OTA-BA-373, April 1988.
Field Testing Engineered Organisms: Genetic and Ecological
Issues—Special Reeport
OTA-BA-350, May 1988.
U.S. Investment in Biotechnology: An International Analysis
OTA-BA-360, July 1988.
Medical Testing and Health Insuraance
OTA-H-384, August 1988.
Patenting Life—Special Report
OTA-BA-370, April 1989.
Genetic Witness: Forensic Uses of DNA Tests
OTA-BA-483, July 1990.
Genetic Monitoring  and Screening in the Workplace: Contrac-
tor Documents
U.S. Government Publications
255

OTA-BA-455, October 1990.
Genetic Screening in the Workplace
OTA-BA-456, October 1990.
Biotechnology in a Global Economy
OTA-BA-494, October 1991.
Cystic Fibrosis and DNA Testss: Implications of Carrier Screen-
ing
OTA-BA-532, August 1992.
Genetic Counseling and Cystic Fibrosis Carrier Screening: Re--
sults of a Survey
OTA-BP-BA-97, September 1992.
Genetic Counseling and Cystic Fibrosis Carrier Screening: Re-
sults of a Survey (background paper)
OTA-BP-BA-98, September 1992.
Biomedical Ethics and U.S. Public Policy. Hearing of the Com-
mittee on Labor and Human Resources
OTA-BP-BBS-105, June 1993.
Congressional Reports
Biotechnology and the Ethics of Cloning: How Far Should We
Go? Hearing before the Committee on Science, Subcommittee on
Technology, U.S. Congress. 1997. 59p. ISBN 0-160-55267-2.
Biotechnology Science Competitivenness Act of 1988. U.S.
House Committee on Agriculture. CIS 88 #703-15 (pt. 1); CIS 88
#163-18 (pt. 2).
A Coordinated Framework for the Regulation of Biotechnol-
ogy. Fed. Reg. 51: 23303-23309 (1986).
256
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Designing Genetic Information Policy: The Need for an Inde-
pendent Policy Review of the Ethical, Leegal, and Social Impli-
cations of the Human Genome Project (16th report). (No. #102-
478 USGPO), House Committee on Government Operation, U.S.
Congress. 1992.
Genetic Non-discriminatiion: Implications for Employers and
Employees. Hearing before the Subcommittee on Employer-Em-
ployee Relations of the Committee on Education and the Work-
force. 2002. 154 pp. U.S. Government document number Y4.ED8/
1:107-25.
The Genome Project: The Ethical Issues of Gene Pateenting.
Hearing before the Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on
Patents, Copyrights, and Trademarks. 1993. 240p. ISBN 0-160-
41610-8.
Guidelines for Research Involving Recombinant DNA
Molecules. Fed. Reg. 59: 34496-34547 (1994).
Issues in the Federal Regulation of Biotechnology: From Re-
search to Release. By the U.S. Congress House Committee on
Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Investigations and
Oversight. CIS 86 #702-18, December 1986. 118 pp.
Other Government Agency Reports
Biotechnology Law for the 1990’s: Analysis and Perspective. By
the Special Projects Unit of the Bureau of National Affairs, the
BNA Special Report Series on Biotechnology; Special Report #4,
Bureau of National Affairs, Washington, DC. 1989. ISBN 1-558-
71153-8.
Blair, R. R. Forensic DNA Analysis: Issues. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice
Statistics. 1991. 32p. GPO item # 0968-H-12 Doc. J 29.9/8:F 76.
Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions. Geneetic
Information in the Workplace. Washington, DC, 2000. 121p.
Government document number Y4.L 11/4 : S.HRG.106-647.
U.S. Government Publications
257

Recombinant DNA Research, Volume 20: Documents relating
to “NIH Guidelines for Research Involving Recoombinant DNA
Molecules,” August 1994 to December 1994, NIH Publication
number 95-3993, U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices, Public Health Service, NIH Report of Recombinant Advi-
sory Committee, December 1995.
Report on National Biotechnology Policy, the President’s Coun-
cil on Competitiveness. Government document number Pr
41.8:B52 1991.
U.S. Biotechnology: A Legislativve and Regulatory Roadmap. By
the Special Projects Unit of the Bureau of National Affairs, the
BNA Special Report Series on Biotechnology; Special Report #2,
Bureau of National Affairs, Washington, DC. 1989. ISBN 1-558-
71139-2.
Nongovernment Reports
President’s Council on Bioethics. Beyond Therapy: Biotechnol-
ogy and the Pursuit of Happiness. A Report by the President’s
Council onn Bioethics. New York: Regan Books, HarperCollins,
2003. 328p. ISBN 0-060-73490-6.
This report divides a discussion of the ethical implications for
aspects of biotechnology in four areas: Better Children, Superior
Performance, Ageless Bodies, and Happy Souls. Issues that they
address are humility, unnaturalism, individuality, access, un-
fairness, liberty, health, commerce, medicine, and American
ideals.
The Evaluation of Forensic DNA Evidence: An Update. Na-
tional Research Council, Committee on DNA Forensic Science.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1996. 254p. ISBN 0-
309-05395-1.
Genetic Information and Insuriing: Confidentiality Concerns
and Recommendations, American Council of Life Insurance,
Subcommittee on Privacy Legislation. 1990.
258
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Genetic Tests and Health Insurance: Results of a Survey. Up-
land, PA: Dione, 1993. ISBN 1-56806-637-6.
Miller, T. H. The Human Genome Project and Genetic Tessting:
Ethical Implications. Series: The Genome, Ethics, and the Law:
Issues in Genetic Testing, Washington, DC: American Association
for the Advancement of Science, 1991.
van Overwalle, G. Opinion on Ethical Aspects of Patenting In-
ventions Involving Human  Stem Cells. Opinion No. 16. Lux-
embourg: European Group on Ethics in Science and New Tech-
nologies to the European Commission, 2002. 135p.
Report of the ACLI-HIAA Task Force on Genetic Testing.
Washington, DC: Health Insurance Association of America, 1991.
van Overwalle, G. Study on the PPatenting of Inventions Related
to Human Stem Cell Research. Luxembourg: European Group
on Ethics in Science and New Technologies to the European
Commission, 2002. 218p. KA-41-01-470-EN-C.
Periodicals and Newsletters
The Ag Bioethics Forum
115 Morrill Hall, Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50011
Interdisciplinary coverage of agricultural bioethics.
Applied Genetic News
Business Communications Company, Inc.
25 Van Zant St.
Norwalk, CT 06855-1781
Online vendor: DIALOG (Knight-Ridder Information, Inc.)
http://www.buscom.com
Monthly. $395/yr
This newsletter covers the application of genetic research to in-
dustry and technology and evaluates ongoing research in aging
as well as cancer and other diseases. Research funding, venture
Periodicals and Newsletters
259

capital, and stock prices are also discussed. First published in
1980, the targeted audience is both biotechnology professionals
and laypersons.
BIO News (Biotechnology Industry Organization)
Biotechnology Industry Organization
1625 K Street, NW, Suite 1100
Washington, DC 20006
Six/yr. Free to members
This newsletter concentrates on federal regulations and legisla-
tive developments affecting the biotechnology industry. Since
1985, it has served as the Association of Biotechnology Compa-
nies newsletter.
BioTech Market News & Strategies
Conmar Enterprises, Inc.
P.O. Box 11155
Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33339
Monthly. $322/yr
First published in 1983, this newsletter contains marketing and
product development strategies to biotechnology and pharma-
ceutical executives. In addition it covers “new marketable appli-
cations” and summarizes lawsuits related to biotechnology,
patents, and environmental regulations.
Biotechnology and Development Monitor. University of Amster-
dam, the Netherlands: (joint) Directorate General, International
Cooperation of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Hague,
Switzerland, and the University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
International monitoring of biotechnology.
Biotechnology Law Report
Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
20 W. 3rd Street, 2nd Floor
Media, PA 19063-2824
Bimonthly. $605/yr
This hefty newsletter, up to 200 pages per issue, covers the legal
developments in the fields of biotechnology and genetic engi-
neering. First published in 1982, it includes aspects of product li-
ability, patent, biomedical, contract and licensing, and interna-
260
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

tional law along with pertinent legislation, regulatory actions, lit-
igation resolution, and international developments. It publishes
complete texts of significant court decisions, briefs, regulations,
and legislation. Aimed primarily at lawyers with biotechnology
clients, regulatory affairs professionals, and university and com-
pany biotechnology research departments.
Editor: Gerry J. Elman (chief)
Biotechnology News
CTB International Publishing, Inc.
P. O. Box 218
Maplewood, NJ 07040-0218
Thirty/yr; indexed semiannually. $538/yr
This newsletter concentrates on developments that affect genetic
engineering, microbial and enzyme technology, and fermentation
contributions to the production of pharmaceuticals, foods, crops,
fuels, and chemicals. Established in 1980, this publication is
mostly targeted at biotechnology industry management.
Biotechnology Newswatch
The McGraw-Hill Companies
1221 Avenue of the Americas, 36th Floor
New York, NY 10020
Semimonthly. $975/yr
This newsletter is intended to provide an overview of the inter-
national biotechnology industry through a series of capsule sum-
maries of news stories and a compilation of research and busi-
ness stories. It is aimed at biotechnology industry professionals.
Biotechnology: The International Monthly for Industrial
Biotechnology
65 Bleeker Street
New York, NY 10012-2467
Nature Publishing Company
Biotech Reporter
Freiberg Publishing
P. O. Box 7
Cedar Falls, IA 50613
Monthly. $135/yr
Periodicals and Newsletters
261

Formerly AgBiotechnology News and published since 1984, the Re-
porter covers business and technological aspects of international
agricultural biotechnology. Besides the industrial perspective, it
also covers educational opportunities related to the field.
BLAST, Bulletin of Law, Science & Technology
Section of Science and Technology—American Bar Association
(ABA)
750 N. Lake Shore Drive
Chicago, IL 60611
Quarterly. Included in ABA membership
This professional newsletter of the American Bar Association, es-
tablished in 1976 as the Bulletin of Law, Science & Technology, is
concerned with current issues relating law and science and tech-
nology. Subjects included are the use of computers and the law,
controls on scientific information, legal problems of genetic tech-
nologies, and policy issues in the communications industry.
Carolina Tips
Carolina Biological Supply Company
2700 York Road
Burlington, NC 27215
Quarterly; indexed annually. Free to science teachers on written
request on school letterhead and to health professionals
This newsletter contains articles of interest to science teachers
from the elementary to college levels. Published by Carolina Bio-
logical Supply, a major source for science teaching supplies since
1938, it contains many useful tips for teaching, well-illustrated
articles, and student experiments.
Genetic Engineering News
New York: Mary Ann Liebert
Monthly.
Current news on science and industry developments in genetic
engineering technology. Includes business information, new com-
panies, new products. Commentary and articles on issues of in-
terest to the genetic engineering and biotechnology community.
The Gene Exchange: A Public Voice on Genetic Engineering
National Biotechnology Policy Center
262
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

National Wildlife Federation
1400 16th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
Genetic Engineering Letter
8750 Georgia Avenue, Suite 124
Silver Spring, MD 20910
GeneWatch
19 Garden Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
Newsletter of the Council for Responsible Genetics, a resource
for public involvement.
Human Genome News
Human Genome Management Information System for the U.S.
Department of Energy
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
1060 Commerce Park
Oak Ridge, TN 37830
Quarterly. Free
Formerly the Human Genome Quarterly and first published in
1989, this governmental newsletter specializes in news about the
Human Genome Project and is intended to facilitate communica-
tions among genome researchers. Besides the researchers, con-
sumers of human genome information such as teachers, genetic
counselors and physicians, ethicists, students, congressional
staff, and the general public may find the information useful.
Intellectual Property & Biodiversity News
Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy 
2105 1st Avenue, South
Minneapolis, MN 55404
Unknown. Free
Aimed at biotechnologists, this newsletter discusses the current
news headlines that affect biotechnology.
Life Sciences & Biotechnology Update
Infoteam, Inc.
P. O. Box 15640
Periodicals and Newsletters
263

Plantation, FL 33318-5640
Monthly. $269/yr
Aimed at professionals involved with the applications of biotech-
nology in the life sciences, this newsletter covers activities in
agriculture, food, medicine, health, biological and biomedical en-
gineering, microorganisms, nutrition, and disease.
McGraw-Hill’s Biotechnology Newswatch
McGraw-Hill, Inc.
1221 Avenue of the Americas, 36th Floor
New York, NY 10020
Online vendor: LEXIS-NEXIS; DIALOG (Knight-Ridder
Information, Inc.); Dow Jones
Semimonthly. $875/yr
A comprehensive update since 1981 of news of scientific, com-
mercial, and governmental significance in the biotechnology field.
Areas included are genetic engineering, hybridoma technology,
applied plant genetics, enzymology, and biomass conversion. It is
aimed at a wide audience interested in the progress and future of
biotechnology, from scientists to investment analysts, patent at-
torneys, and government officials.
Mealey’s Litigation Report: Biotechnology
Mealey Publications, Inc.
512 W. Lancaster Avenue
P.O. Box 446
Wayne, PA 19087-0446
Semimonthly; indexed annually. $650/yr
One of several newsletters specializing in various topics of legal
litigation, the Report, beginning in 1996, has covered in depth the
legal disputes over processes and products developed through the
use of biotechnology “from DNA to drugs to disease detection.”
Legislative action and international disputes as well as expert
commentary are included. It is directed primarily to legal counsel
for biotechnology, chemical, and pharmaceutical companies.
New England Regional Genetics Group—Regional Newsletter
New England Regional Genetics Group
P.O. Box 670
264
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Mt. Desert, ME 04660
Semiannually. Free
First published in 1985, this newsletter covers news of interest to
genetic service professionals and consumers of genetic services
in the New England region.
Olsen’s Biotechnology Report
G. V. Olsen Associates
123 Picketts Ridge Road
West Redding, CT 06896
Monthly. $150/yr
Focused primarily on food and agricultural biotechnology, this
newsletter provides coverage on genetic engineering research,
scale-up, production, and marketing of plant, animal, and agri-
cultural chemicals. It also includes a financial analysis of the
biotechnology market and investment opportunities in that area.
First published in 1983, this newsletter lists large farmers and
growers as well as universities as a part of its audience.
U.S. Regulatory Reporter
Parexel International Corporation
195 West Street
Waltham, MA 02154-1116
Monthly. $395/yr
This newsletter, first published in 1984, covers the regulatory news
from the Food and Drug Administration primarily for pharma-
ceutical and biotechnology industry professionals. It provides
analysis of FDA product approval standards and the review
process.
West Coast Biowatch
2700 H Street
Sacramento, CA 95816
Your World: Biotechnology and You
State College, PA: Pennsylvania Biotechnology Association.
A journal for junior and senior high students describes the appli-
cation of biotechnology to problems facing our world. Science
and engineering.
Periodicals and Newsletters
265

Directories
Woolum, J., ed. AgriBioScan. Phoenix, AZ: Oryx Press, 320p.
Three times/yr. $395/yr.
A compilation of statistics on agricultural biotechnology compa-
nies. Information includes company name, address, phone, fax,
research and development, key personnel, financial data, part-
nerships, and products awaiting Food and Drug Administration
or U.S. Department of Agriculture approval.
Walters, L., T. J. Kuhn, and D. M. Goldstein, editors. Bibliography
of Bioethics. Washington, DC: Kennedy Institute of Ethics, 2005.
701 p. ISBN 1-883-91312-8.
The bibliography covers the whole of bioethics. The topics rele-
vant to genetic engineering are cloning (pp. 97–102); gene ther-
apy (pp. 167–171); genetic counseling (pp. 177–188); and recom-
binant DNA research (pp. 334-335).
Brogna, C., ed. Bioindustry Directory. Maplewood, NJ: CTB In-
ternational. 165p. Annual. $157/yr.
A listing of more than 3,000 U.S. and foreign companies, govern-
ment agencies, cultural collections, professional organizations,
and trade groups working in genetic engineering, plant biotech-
nology, applied molecular biology, and bioculture technologies.
Information included: Name of firm or agency, address, phone,
fax. 
Coombs, J., and Y. R. Alston, ed. Biotechnology Directory. New
York: Stockton Press, 500p. Annual, December. $275 + shipping and
handling
Lists more than 10,000 companies, universities, research centers,
government agencies, and suppliers of products and services.
Information includes: organization name, address, phone, fax,
contact, description of products, services, or research.
Dibner, M. D. Biotechnology Guide USA: Companies, Data, and
Analysis. New York: Macmillan Publishers in association with
the Institute for Biotechnology Information, 1999. 710 pp. ISBN 
0-333-79409-5. Irregular publication frequency.
266
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

This book is also available as an electronic database: U.S. compa-
nies database—1,100 companies; actions database—more than
10,000 strategic actions and alliances in commercial biotechnol-
ogy from 1981; other databases on general topics of interest to
commercial biotechnology. Information includes address, phone,
fax, financing, names and titles of key management personnel,
products on the market and in R&D, number of employees, tech-
nologies used, partnerships, and failed companies.
Han Consultants. Chinese Biotechnology Directory. Wuhan,
Hubei, People’s Republic of China: Han Consultants, 1993. 256p.
ISBN 7-501-10570-9.
Biotechnology in the People’s Republic of China; claims to be the
only collected source in English on biotechnology in mainland
China. Information includes lists of companies, location, prod-
ucts, areas of interest, and contacts. It also provides an overview
of biotechnology in mainland China; a description of govern-
ment policy on technology transfer, intellectual property, and
patent coverage; and a list of information resources in China—
abstracting services, journals, and newsletters.
Mogge, D. Directory of Electronic Journals, Newsletters, and
Academic Discussion Lists. Washington, DC: Association of Re-
search Libraries, 1997. 950p. ISSN 1057-1337.
A standard reference for serials available via the Internet.
U.S. Department of Commerce Technology Administration. Di-
rectory of Federal Laboratory and Technology Resources: A Guide
to Services, Facilities, and Expertise. Washington, DC: U.S. De-
partment of Commerce Technology Administration, 1993. ISBN 0-
934-21340-2.
A listing of federally funded programs provided by National
Technical Information Service and National Technology Transfer
Center and arranged by subject area. Information includes orga-
nization name, institution, address, phone, name and title of con-
tact, facilities or activities, and fields of emphasis.
Alford, J. E., II, ed. Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology Firms
Worldwide Directory. Princeton Junction, NJ: Mega-Type 
Directories
267

Publishing, 703p. $299; alternate format: diskette with custom
search and report software—$599.99. Annual, October.
International coverage of 6,000 firms with biotech divisions as
well as small independent companies. This book is also available
on diskette. Information included: company name, address, divi-
sion name (if applicable), name and title of executives, research
lab locations, number of employees engaged in biotech or genetic
engineering, equity interests held by others, areas of research ac-
tivity, and currently available products.
Barry, Inc. National Biotech Register. Wilmington, MA: Barry,
1995. 242p. $58.
Coverage of 2,200 companies active in biotech research, develop-
ment, and manufacturing. This book is also available on micro-
fiche. Information included: company name, address, phone, fax,
names and titles of key personnel, description of business activi-
ties, number of employees, and year founded.
Self, J. North American Biotechnology Directory. Houston, TX:
I.E.I. Publishing Division, 620p. Annual. $89.
This directory lists companies, research institutions, universities,
government agencies, suppliers, and manufacturers involved
with biotechnology throughout the United States, Canada, and
Mexico. This book is also available on diskette and as mailing la-
bels. Information included: company/institution name, address,
contacts, phone, and FAX.
Ratafia, M., ed. TMG’s Worldwide Biotechnology and Pharma-
ceutical Desk Reference. New Haven, CT: Technology Manage-
ment Group, 1,311p. Annual. $372 (book); alternate format: diskette
$338 or $398 with print edition included.
The listing covers more than 375 biotech and pharmaceutical
companies, 321 universities, 128 U.S. government agencies and
labs, and 402 company funding sources.
This book is also available on diskette. Information included:
company/institution name, address, phone, fax, and name and
title of contact.
Crafts-Lighty, A., E. Burak Reed, and J. Sime. UK Biotechnology
Handbook. Slough, England: BioCommerce Data, 620p. Every 18
268
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

months. $180 + $30 airmail shipping. Online vendors: DIALOG
(Knight-Ridder Information, Inc.), as BioCommerce Abstracts
and Directory DataStar (Knight-Ridder Information, Inc.)
Covers more than 700 biotech companies, research institutes, uni-
versities, and related professional and academic associations.
This book is also available on diskette and as mailing labels. In-
formation included: organization name, phone, telex, fax, names
and titles of key personnel, number of employees, description of
activities, and areas of research interest.
McGrath, K. A., ed. Who’s Who in Technology. Detroit, MI: Gale
Research, 1,701p. Irregular. $195.
This book contains information about more than 25,000 North
American men and women working in more than 1,000 scientific
and technology fields. Also available as an online database
through LEXIS-NEXIS, GALBIO; Vendor: ORBIT Search Service,
WHOTECH. Information included: name, occupation, personal
data, educational background, career information, technical
achievements, organizational affiliations, honors, awards, special
achievements, area(s) of expertise, technical publications, patent
data, and addresses.
Selected Nonprint Resources
This section provides genetics, biotechnology, and genetic engi-
neering resources available outside of the printed page. Educa-
tional video and audiocassettes are reviewed, many of which are
designed as instructional aids, others of which are public lectures
by leaders in the field or had a first life on educational television.
Many can be obtained through Amazon.com or other book dealers.
Electronic handling of information has expanded with the in-
creasing availability of powerful personal computers and the In-
ternet. With computers come more varied presentations of mater-
ial and the ability to search for specific information. Examples of
computer educational software and CD-ROM and DVD contribu-
tions enhanced with pictures, text, and audio are provided. Also
included are electronic databases and directories of information
and sources on aspects of biotechnology and genetic engineering,
which are becoming increasingly popular because they are read-
ily expanded and updated and easy to use with powerful search
Selected Nonprint Resources
269

functions. The World Wide Web computer network, accessible
from home computers and from computers in many schools and
public libraries, is a fertile source for all types of information rel-
evant to genetic engineering ranging from the latest technical nu-
ances to government documents, to personal opinions on issues.
Meaningful use of this information requires that the con-
sumer consider the source carefully because standards for verifi-
cation of posted facts differ among Web sites. Only a sampling of
Web sites on general biotechnology is provided in this chapter
because individual Web addresses come and go. Searching for
keywords such as biotechnology, genetic engineering, or recombinant
DNA will quickly generate a plethora of interesting sites.
Videocassettes
Biotechnology on Earth
Type: NTSC VHS (U.S. and Canada only)
Age: High school/college
Cost: $58.95
Date: 2001
Source: Hawkhill Associates
ASIN: B00080KVKG
This video attempts to project the impact of the biotechnology
and nanotechnology revolutions, the 21st century analogs of the
Industrial Revolution that transformed the late 19th and the 20th
centuries. The scientific, economic, and ethical issues are outlined
from a global perspective, encouraging thinking and discussion
rather than dogmatic polemic.
Clone
Type: NTSC VHS (U.S. and Canada only)
Age: 6th grade–college
Length: 60 min.
Cost: $19.95
Date: 2002
Source: National Geographic
Carolina Biological Supply
2700 York Road
Burlington, NC 27215
Phone: (800) 334-5551; FAX: (800) 222-7112
270
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Web site: http://www.carosci.com/
Item: 49-2198
Examines the issues surrounding nuclear transplantation (cloning)
and its potential impact on society. Features an interview with
Christopher Reeve.
Cloning: How and Why
Type: NTSC VHS (U.S. and Canada only)
Age: High school/college
Cost: $58.95
Date: 2002
Source: Hawkhill Associates
ASIN: B0006UCCW8
This video visits the laboratories in Scotland where the nuclear
transfer procedure was used to create the first artificially cloned
sheep, Dolly. The procedure is explained by Dr. Neal First in his
laboratory at the University of Wisconsin–Madison. The implica-
tions of cloning for the 21st century are discussed.
Discovery Channel Bioethics Video Set
Type: VHS video (U.S. and Canada only), set of three, closed-
captioned
Age: Grades 6–12
Length: 128 min. total (3 cassettes)
Cost: $129.95
Date: 2002
Carolina Biological Supply
Item: 49-2239
Vol. 1, Genes and Environment, Vol. 2, Genes and Personality, Vol. 3,
Genes and Body Type. Describes the relationship between our
genes and the environment and how our genetic makeup influ-
ences or does not influence individuals, the ongoing nature-ver-
sus-nurture continuum.
DNA: The Secret of Life
Type: VHS video/DVD (U.S. and Canada only)
Age: High school and college
Length: 32 min.
Cost: $19.95
Date: 2003
Selected Nonprint Resources
271

Carolina Biological Supply
Item: 49-0986 VHS; 49-0987 DVD
Chronicles the discovery of the double helical structure of DNA
and illustrates the mechanics of genetic engineering. It explores
the implications of genetics and the impact of the Human Genome
Project.
Double Helix
Type: VHS video (U.S. and Canada only)
Age: Grade 9–college
Length: 108 min.
Cost: $149.95
Date: 1998
Source: BBC Productions
Carolina Biological Supply
Item: 49-2211
A dramatization of the race to solve the structure of DNA. High-
lights the problem-solving process that resulted in the unraveling
of DNA’s double helical organization.
Genetics and Heredity: The Blueprint of Life
Type: VHS (U.S. and Canada only)
Age: Grade 9–college
Length: 22 min.
Cost: $95
Carolina Biological Supply
Item: 49-1063
Describes the field of genetics, which revealed much about prob-
abilities and inheritance before the molecular basis of genes and
DNA was discovered. Makes the connection between the modern
techniques of molecular biology and genetic engineering and the
descriptive power of genetics in explaining the basis of disease.
Genetic Engineering: Exploring the Issues
Type: VHS (U.S. and Canada only)
Age: Grades 7–12
Length: 26 min.
Cost: $ 49.95
Date: 2000
272
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Carolina Biological Supply
Item: 49-2214
Explores the issues that surfaced with the advent of genetic engi-
neering with Dr. Gael Jennings. Should genetic engineering be
applied to humans? Who should make that decision, and what
impact would it have on society?
Genetic Engineering of Animals
Type: DVD (U.S. and Canada only)
Age: High school and college
Length: 50 min.
Cost: $21.95
Date: 2002
Source: Global Science Productions, Dr. Elliot Haimoff, director
ASIN: B0007VNPEA
HuGEM (Human Genome Education Model)
Tape 1. An Overview of the Human Genome Project and Its Ethical,
Legal, and Social Issues
Tape 2. Opportunities and Challenges of the Human Genome Project
(Francis Collins, narrator)
Tape 3. Issues of Genetic Privacy and Discrimination
Tape 4. Genetic Testing across the Lifespan
Tape 5. Working Together to Improve Genetic Services
Type: VHS
Age: Unspecified, for general public
Length: set of 5 videotapes ranging from 19 to 45 min.
Cost: $50 for the set or $15 each, includes a manual
Date: 1997
Source: Georgetown University Child Development Center
Washington, DC 20057
e-mail: Laphamy@medlib.georgetown.edu
or 
Alliance of Genetic Support Groups
35 Wisconsin Circle, Suite 440
Chevy Chase, MD 20815
Phone: (301) 652-2553; (800) 336-4363
FAX: (301) 654-0171
e-mail: alliance@cpacess.org
Selected Nonprint Resources
273

The set of videos is designed to educate the general public. It con-
sists of a series of interviews with researchers, physicians, and
consumers.
On Becoming a Scientist
McDougle, V. T. M.
Type: videotape, VHS and teacher’s guide
Age: Geared for young audience (unspecified age)
Length: 19 min.
Cost: $70
Date: 1996
Source: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
10 Skyline Drive
Plainview, NY 11803-2500
Phone: (800) 843-4388; FAX: (516) 349-1946
e-mail: cshpress@cshl.org; Web site: http://www.cshl.org/
ISBN 0-879-69486-6
This video portrays a day in the life of three graduate students
and a laboratory manager through a series of interviews. The
purpose is to dispel stereotypes and to provide role models.
Stem Cells
Type: VHS (U.S. and Canada only) (closed-captioned)
Age: Grades 9–12
Length: 24 min.
Cost: $86.95
Date: 2002
Carolina Biological Supply
Item: 49-2233
Takes students inside Dr. James Thomson’s laboratory where em-
bryonic stem cells were first cultured and explains what stem
cells are, how they are handled, and their importance for scien-
tific understanding of disease as well as potential for new thera-
pies. The ethical issues of the production and use of stem cells are
also emphasized through interviews with ethicists and scientists.
274
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Computer Programs and 
Other Electronic Resources
(See also online versions of Directories and Newsletters under
Print Resources)
If not otherwise noted, these items, and similar materials, are
available on Amazon.com and other online vendors.
Biotechnology for Plants, Animals, and the Environment
Type: DVD (U.S. and Canada only)
Age: High school/college
Length: 50 min.
Cost: 21-2217 Teacher’s Guide $46.90
21-2208 Student Guide $10.00
Topics covered include agricultural biotechnology, biotechnol-
ogy of plants, biotechnology of animals, and biotechnology of the
environment which involves bioremediation.
PROGRAM: DNA from the Beginning
Type: CD-ROM, set of three
Computer: Macintosh/Windows
Age: High school to college
Cost: $54.50
Source: Dolan DNA Learning Center of the Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory
Carolina Biological Supply
2700 York Road
Burlington, NC 27215
Phone: (800) 334-5551; FAX: (800) 222-7112
Web site: http://www.carosci.com/
Item: 21-2200
Explores how genetic engineering was developed and how it
works through animations, video interviews with over 80 key
scientists, and interactive problems. 72 hours of content.
PROGRAM: Genetic Engineering Laboratory
Computer: Macintosh/Windows
Age: Grade 10 to college
Cost: $152.95
Carolina Biological Supply
2700 York Road
Selected Nonprint Resources
275

Burlington, NC 27215
Phone: (800) 334-5551; FAX: (800) 222-7112
Web site: http://www.carosci.com/
Item: 39-9104
An interactive program that takes students through the molecu-
lar biological manipulations of nucleic acids. Experiments can be
simulated step by step, from extraction and purification of DNA,
through restriction enzyme digests, gel electrophoresis, cloning,
amplification, and gene sequencing. This feature is particularly
useful for schools that do not have the equipment to do live ex-
periments. A CD-ROM is included (Genetic Engineering Principles)
to provide students with background in the fundamentals of ge-
netic engineering.
Occupational Outlook Handbook
Type: CD-ROM
Computer: Macintosh/Windows
Age: High school
Cost: $399.00
Carolina Biological Supply
2700 York Road
Burlington, NC 27215
Phone: (800) 334-5551; FAX: (800) 222-7112
Web site: http://www.carosci.com/
Item: W1-39-4996
After an interactive session in which the software surveys the
student’s educational interests and personality traits, the pro-
gram provides information from more than 300 career titles on
necessary skills, high school courses, length of training, common
outlook, related work activities, related occupations, and where
to go for additional information. The CD-ROM format includes
short video clips for groups of careers, giving the students a vi-
sual feel for the work environment. Regular upgrades of new ca-
reer fields are planned.
Women in Science
Type: CD-ROM
Computer: Macintosh/Windows CD-ROM
Age: Grades 5 through 12
Cost: $79.95
Carolina Biological Supply
276
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

2700 York Road
Burlington, NC 27215
Phone: (800) 334-5551; FAX: (800) 222-7112
Web site: http://www.carosci.com/
Item: W1-39-83316
The advantages of the interactive CD-ROM format are evident in
the compelling stories of current women scientists and their
work. Twelve interview questions are available to hear about
these women’s lives and their love for science as the student “vis-
its” them where they work. Interactive experiments allow the
student to join scientific teams collecting data and analyzing re-
sults. A database of information on 130 past and present women
scientists is also included.
Databases
Crafts-Lighty, A., ed. BioCommerce Abstracts and Directory.
Slough, England: BioCommerce Data Ltd. The online vendor is
DIALOG (Knight-Ridder Information, Inc. Vendor: DataStar)
Knight-Ridder information, Ltd.; Alternate format on diskette.
This database contains 135,000 abstract records on 2,000 U.S. and
European biotech companies, research institutes, universities, and
related professional and academic associations. Information in-
cludes: name, occupation, personal data, educational background,
career information, technical achievements, organizational affilia-
tions, honors, awards, special achievements, area(s) of expertise,
technical publications, patent data, addresses, production/
services, and research areas. Semimonthly.
Specialized Information Services Division, U.S. National Library
of Medicine. Directory of Biotechnology Information Re-
sources. Bethesda, MD: U.S. National Library of Medicine.
This online database contains more than 3,300 records with infor-
mation on computer bulletin boards and networks, culture collec-
tions, specimen banks, biotechnology centers and related organi-
zations, periodicals, directories and monographs, nomenclature
reconciliation, and assorted sources of biotechnology information.
Information includes title, organization name, address, phone,
name and title of contact, facilities or activities, fields of emphasis,
Selected Nonprint Resources
277

language, and limitations of use and availability of resource.
Quarterly.
National Human Genome Research Institute. NHGRI Policy and
Legislation Database. NHGRI’s Office of Policy, Communica-
tions, and Education, Director Alan E. Guttmacher, M.D. http://
www.genome.gov/LegislativeDatabase.
A free searchable database that is part of the Human Genome Pro-
ject containing links to full-text copies of federal and state laws
and statutes, federal legislative materials, and federal administra-
tive and executive material, including regulations, institutional
policies, and executive orders. It currently focuses on genetic test-
ing and counseling, insurance and employment discrimination,
newborn screening, privacy of genetic information and confiden-
tiality, informed consent, and commercialization and patenting.
The database can be searched by keyword, content type, topic, or
source and can sort output by date or citation. There are plans to
add more categories of content, primarily foreign laws and
statutes, foreign policy, treaty and international agreements, and
policy material from international organizations.
Woolum, J., ed. WooBioScan: The Worldwide Biotech Industry
Reporting DDatabase. Phoenix, AZ: Oryx Press. Online vendor is
Knowledge Express data systems, updated monthly. Alternate
formats: mailing labels, magnetic media, complete database,
mailing list.
The database contains more than 1,000 companies doing product
research and development in food processing, agriculture, medi-
cine, and other fields in biotechnology. Information includes com-
pany name, address, phone, names and titles of key personnel,
number of employees (and number of Ph.D.s), date founded,
names and descriptions of subsidiaries, names of investors and
percentage of investment, name and description of agreements,
and contracts. Annual, with bimonthly supplements. $975/yr including
supplements.
Internet Sources on Genetic Engineering
These addresses are meant to provide an entry to the wealth of
information accessible on the Internet. Interconnections with re-
278
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

lated sites are easily explored by clicking on the built-in links.
Government sites are extensively cross-referenced. The search
function on a Web browser will quickly locate many more sites.
Access Excellence. San Francisco: Genentech, Inc. http://www
.gene.com/ae
A national educational program sponsored by the biotechnology
company Genentech billed in the site header as “A Place in Cy-
berspace for Biology, Teaching, and Learning.” The site provides
science updates and clips on newsmakers—the researchers, foren-
sic scientists, and people contributing to the ongoing discussion
of bioethics, history of recombinant DNA, and the issues. A vari-
ety of activities for teachers and their students is suggested.
Agbiotech Online. Blacksburg, VA: Information Systems for
Biotechnology, Virginia Tech. http://gophisb.biochem.vt.edu/
Information on agricultural and environmental biotechnology re-
search, product development, regulatory issues, and biosafety.
Bioethics Journals, Networks, and Associations in tthe U.S. and
Canada. http://www.med.upenn.edu/~bioethic/outreach/bio
forbegin/organizations.html
Lists of organizations and publications concerned with bioethics
and links to other sites.
Bio Online. Vitadata Corporation. http://www.bio.com/
A comprehensive site for information and services related to
biotechnology. It includes resources on industry, government,
nonprofit special interest groups, research, career information,
and education.
Biotechnology—Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition..
Food and Drug Administration. http://vm.cfsan.fda.gov/~1rd/
biotechm.html
Web site for food safety that includes a component on regulation
of genetically modified food products.
BioTechnology Permits Home Page. http://www.aphis.usda
.gov/BBEP/BP/links.html.
Internet Sources on Genetic Engineering
279

Lists of links to other biotechnology Web sites, both U.S. govern-
ment and international. A good source for information on regu-
lations pertaining to agricultural biotechnology. Provides access
to a database (1987–present) on applications for release or testing
of bioengineered crops.
Blazing a Genetic Trail. Howard Hughes Medical Institute.
http://www.hhmi.org/GeneticTrail/
This nontechnical educational site sponsored by the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute is organized in terms of a series of well-
written illustrated stories such as “How Genetic Disorders Are
Inherited” and “Stalking a Lethal Gene.” It is designed to educate
the general public.
Council for Responsible Genetics. The Council for Responsible
Genetics. http://www.gene-watch.org/
Monitors biotechnology’s social, ethical, and environmental con-
sequences. Programs include cloning and human genetic manip-
ulation; genetic testing, privacy, and discrimination; biotechnol-
ogy and agriculture; biowarfare; genetic bill of rights; and other
genetic issues. Publishes magazine GeneWatch since 1983. Recent
topics include conflicts of interest between academic research
and commercial enterprise. The organization aims to foster pub-
lic debate about social, ethical, and environmental implications
of genetic technologies.
DNA Forensics. The Human Genome Project. http://www.ornl
.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/elsi/forensics.shtml
Information on the use of DNA in forensics, techniques, legisla-
tion, ethics, and other topics.
Gene Letter. The Shriver Center. http://www.geneletter.org/
mainmenu.htm
An all-inclusive site for information on the Web about scientific
and social issues in genetics with links to federal and state ge-
netics agencies and legal statutes. It includes an uncensored chat
area and a search engine for locating information elsewhere in
the site and on the Web.
280
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Genetics Education Center. The University of Kansas Medical
Center. http://www.kumc.edu/gec/
Genetics education for students.
National Biological Information Infrastructure. http://www
.nbii.gov/
A main Web site for biological information of all sorts on the
Web. There are links to many scientific disciplines and issues,
regulations, and so on.
National Human GGenome Research Institute. http://www
.nhgri.nih.gov/
The main Web site for Human Genome Research. It is the access
point for information on the project and for databases derived
from it. Includes research on bioethics and other areas impacted
by the project.
The Pure Food Campaign. http://interactivism.com/purefood/
Web site for an activist group focusing on issues of food produc-
tion, organic versus genetically engineered or processed. The
Pure Food Campaign is allied with Jeremy Rifkin’s Foundation
on Economic Trends. Links are available to other similar types of
groups.
United States Department of Agriculture. http://www.ice.net/
jumps/ag/ag.html
Includes many links to agricultural biotechnology sites.
United States Regulatory Agencies Unified Biotechnology.
http://usbiotechreg.nbii.gov/lawsregsguidance.asp
U.S. laws and regulations; agency responsibilities.
Gaulin, P. 2001 Web Site Source Book: A Guide to M
Major U.S.
Businesses, Organizations, Agencies, Institutions, and Other
Information Resources on the  World Wide Web. Detroit, MI:
Omnigraphics, 2001. 2,536p. ISBN 0-780-80428-7.
Internet Sources on Genetic Engineering
281


Appendix: 
Acronyms
AAV
Adeno-associated virus
ADA
Adenosine deaminase—an enzyme involved in nucleotide
metabolism
AIDS
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
ALS
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis—a neurodegenerative
disease
APHIS
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
BIO
Biotechnology Industry Organization
BSCC
Biological Science Coordinating Committee
Bt
Bacillus thurengensis toxin
CEO
Chief executive officer
CF
Cystic fibrosis
CODIS
Combined DNA Index System
CRADA
Cooperative Research and Development Agreement
DOE
Department of Energy (U.S.)
ELSI
Ethical, Legal, and Societal Implications—Task Force of the
Human Genome Project
EPA
Environmental Protection Agency
EST
Expressed Sequence Tag
FASEB
Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology
FBI
Federal Bureau of Investigation
FDA
Food and Drug Administration
FSIS
Food Safety and Inspection Service
GATT
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
G-CSF
Granulocyte stimulating factor
GMO
Genetically modified organism
GURT
Genetic Use Restriction Technology
HD
Huntington’s disease—a neurodegenerative disease
affecting muscular coordination
HGS
Human Genome Sciences
283

HIPAA
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
HIV
Human immunodeficiency virus
IND
Investigational new drug application
NHGRI
National Human Genome Research Institute
NIH
National Institutes of Health
NSF
National Science Foundation
OTA
Office of Technology Assessment
PCB
Polychlorinated biphenyl (complex environmentally stable
organic molecule)
PCR
Polymerase chain reaction 
PMN
Premanufacture notification
RAC
Recombinant DNA Molecule Program Advisory
Committee
RFLP
Restriction fragment length polymorphism
S&E
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Science, and Education
TIGR
The Institute for Genomic Research
U.S.C.
United States Code (legal code)
USDA
United States Department of Agriculture
284
Appendix: Acronyms

Glossary
aerobe
An organism that can grow in the presence of oxygen.
Amino acid
A chemical building block used by cells to make proteins
and that can be converted into other chemicals the cell needs. There are
20 natural amino acids used to make proteins.
anaerobe
An organism that cannot grow in the presence of oxygen.
antibiotic
A chemical produced by one organism that kills or inhibits
growth of another organism in competition for food or space. Often pro-
duced by microorganisms (yeast or bacteria), humans have adopted
their use to control organisms that cause disease.
antibodies
Defense proteins produced by the body in response to ei-
ther vaccines or the organism or a component that binds and neutralizes
the toxic agent, allowing the body to clear the danger.
aquifer
A natural underground collection of water accumulated in a
layer of permeable rock or sand from percolating surface water usually
cleansed by its passage through soil layers. Polluted soils are leading to
contamination of the underground water, which normally has a very
slow turnover. This pool is often the source of fresh water for human
consumption or for agriculture.
aromatic
Organic chemical compound with a very low hydrogen-to-
carbon ratio. Because of their resistance to biological modification, aro-
matic compounds can be quite stable in the environment and are often
considered pollutants. Examples are benzene, phenol, naphthylene,
dioxin, 2,4-D, and biphenyls.
bacteria
(bacterium, singular) Single cell microorganisms capable of
multiplying independently, the genetic information of which is not en-
closed in a membrane-bounded nucleus. Bacteria are thought to be one
of the oldest forms of life.
285

Bacteriophage (also phage)
A virus that infects bacteria. Used by mol-
ecular biologists as a vehicle to transfer DNA sequences into host bacte-
ria for study.
base pair
Technical term that refers to the nucleotides paired across the
double-stranded DNA helix by hydrogen bonds (A=T; C=G). One nu-
cleotide in a single DNA (or RNA) sequence corresponds to one base
pair in a double-stranded DNA (or RNA) sequence.
biodegradable
Capable of being broken down into its component
parts by biological organisms.
bioethics
Application of the ideas of ethical conduct to biotechnology
and medicine. Trying to reconcile the ability to accomplish certain med-
ical or genetic or environmental actions with the societal norms of ac-
ceptable actions. Being able to perform a genetic test does not mean that
it should be done, especially if there is no cure for the disease. Some peo-
ple consider doing a genetic test for an incurable disease once a person
is born to be unethical.
biomass
Total dry weight of biological organisms.
bioremediation
The use of biological organisms to remove toxins and
wastes from contaminated materials.
candiidate gene
In gene mapping, a gene selected for study as being
potentially responsible for a trait based on an activity or property of the
molecule encoded by the nucleotide sequence.
catalyst
An agent that speeds up the rate of a chemical reaction. In
cells, catalysts are special proteins called enzymes that allow reactions to
occur at body temperature.
central dogma
A hypothesis stating that the direction of genetic infor-
mation flow is from DNA through RNA (messenger RNA) into protein.
This turns out to hold for most situations except notably for certain
viruses that contain RNA as their genetic material. These are called
retroviruses, referring to their ability to replicate their RNA through a
DNA intermediate that they generate by the action of a reverse tran-
scriptase enzyme.
chromosome
Structures in the nuclei of cells that contain the linear se-
quence of genes on DNA wrapped for compactness on a protein scaf-
fold. A gene resides in a particular position on a particular chromosome
in all cells of an individual in a species. Human cells contain 23 pairs of
chromosomes. Reproductive cells contain only one copy of each chro-
mosome so that when the sperm and ovum combine, the resulting zy-
gotic cell (soon to become an embryo) contains one set of chromosomes
(and genes) from each parent.
clone
A genetic replica, either an organism or a piece of DNA.
286
Glossary

codon
A group of three consecutive nucleotides in the DNA polymer
(64 possibilities) that codes either for one of the 20 amino acids or pep-
tide chain termination.
cytoplasm
The semisolid fluid that fills plant, animal, and microbial
cells and in which are immersed the nuclear material and other cellular
structures that carry out the chemistry of life.
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
A chain or polymer that contains the
genetic information for an organism. It comprises four kinds of units
called nucleotides: adenosine (A), thymidine (T), cytosine (C), and
guanosine (G).
DNA ligase
An enzyme that chemically joins separated (usually re-
striction enzyme-cleaved) double-stranded DNA segments together end
to end to produce a continuous DNA molecule. Another important tool
of recombinant DNA technology.
dominant gene
A genetic characteristic that is expressed when present
in either of the set of chromosomes from the parents carrying that DNA
sequence. In genes controlling eye color, brown eyes are a dominant
characteristic.
ecology
The study of the interaction of groups of organisms with each
other and with their environment.
ecosystem
A unit consisting of a natural community of organisms to-
gether with their environment.
eenzyme
Proteins that speed up (catalyze) a chemical reaction and con-
trol the generation of products.
ethics
A philosophy or system for judging right and wrong actions in
human conduct. Commonly termed morality, the basic assumptions
about what constitutes right and wrong are often difficult to agree on
within any particular society. Complicating the issue is that these basic
assumptions can vary dramatically between societies with different his-
tories. Because they are usually deeply held convictions rather than ver-
ifiable facts, rational discussion and compromise are difficult.
eukaryote
A cell in which DNA is contained within a membrane-
bounded nucleus. These include such single-celled organisms as yeast
and fungi. Cells other than bacteria or blue-green algae are generally eu-
karyotic. Viruses are not cells and are not eukaryotic.
F1 hybrid
The first offspring from a genetic cross between two organ-
isms with different genetic backgrounds that have an equal contribution
of genetic material from each parent. F0 is the parental generation.
Crossing two F1 generation organisms will produce a ratio of two
parental and two hybrids in the second (F2) generation. Hybrid qualities
are rapidly diluted out in the general population if the seeds produced
Glossary
287

by an F1 crop are replanted by the farmer. Providing only F1 seeds keeps
the farmer dependent on the supplier for new seed.
fermentation
Originally restricted to refer to the growth of microor-
ganisms utilizing organic compounds as a source of energy in the ab-
sence of atmospheric oxygen, the term is now used to refer to the con-
trolled culture of microorganisms to produce useful products.
forensic
Suitable for courts of law or for public debate.
gene
A segment of DNA with sequence codes for a specific function or
protein molecule. The gene is the basic unit of genetic information and
can extend for millions of nucleotides in length.
gene chip
A microfabricated system containing an array of gene nu-
cleotide sequences used for determining expression levels of messenger
RNAs in cells or tissues. Tens of thousands of genes can be displayed on
a single chip.
gene linkage
The tendency of genes to be inherited together on the
same piece of DNA.
gene mapping
A process of matching inheritance of a trait with a lo-
cation on a chromosome to identify the gene involved.
gene therapy
A therapeutic approach in molecular medicine in which
the genetic code is altered in the patient or additional genetic coding is
added where there is a deficient gene. The modification can be limited
to certain cells and not be transmitted to the next generation (somatic
therapy). Alternatively, the genetic information of the reproductive cells
can be modified, with that change carried through the offspring of the
patient into subsequent generations (germ line therapy).
genome
All nuclear genetic material in an organism, including genes
and intervening nucleic acid sequences in all of the chromosomes of an
organism.
ggerm cells
The cells responsible for transmitting the heredity informa-
tion during reproduction. In mammals these are sperm (male) and ova
(female).
germplasm
A general term for the living material that controls hered-
ity in a species. It refers to the genetic potential of the species.
Green Revolution
Intensive agriculture aimed at increasing crop
yields to allow developing nations to become self-sufficient in food pro-
duction through the use of special high-yield hybrid disease-resistant
plant strains and increased use of fertilizers, herbicides, and irrigation.
Although these goals were attained, analysis suggests that considerable
damage to local ecosystems occurred through overuse of chemical sup-
plements. In addition, residual economic dependency for the fertilizer
and herbicides casts a shadow over plans being made to introduce re-
combinantly modified crops.
288
Glossary

GURT
Genetic use restriction technology—a controversial use of ge-
netic engineering designed to control expression of designer character-
istics to ensure the supplier a market. Currently applied to crops genet-
ically modified to be insect- or herbicide-resistant to limit reuse of seeds
or require additional technology to be purchased by the grower to ex-
press the desirable trait.
informatics
The technology of information management and process-
ing. Bioinformatics involves the manipulation of data on nucleotide se-
quences and all of the associated information.
insert
A familiar word used to refer to the piece of DNA placed or “in-
serted” into a plasmid used as a genetic engineering tool.
in silico
Operations carried out by computer analysis without physi-
cal experiments, literally in silicon, referring to the computer semicon-
ductor chips.
membrane
Cellular membranes comprise two layers of phospho-
lipids, molecules with a phosphate head group that faces the water and
with a greasy hydrocarbon tail. The tails contact each other, forming an
oil-like layer to provide a waterproof barrier between the outside and in-
side of the cell to isolate the cellular chemistry inside from outside in-
fluences. Proteins with special functions to control transport of vital
molecules from the environment are embedded in the membrane.
metabolism
The cellular chemical processes that provide energy and
material for cellular function. A metabolite is any chemical entity in-
volved in these chemical processes.
microbe
Microscopically small, single-celled organisms, usually used
to refer to bacteria, algae, and yeast.
microscope
An instrument used to make images of small objects. A
light microsscope uses glass lenses to bend visible light passing through
a thin sample to provide magnification of up to 2000X. An electron mi-
croscope uses magnetic lenses to focus an electron beam, magnifying up
to 1 million fold.
mitochondrion
A part of the cell, an organelle, roughly the size of a
bacterium, that contains the biochemical machinery to provide the
chemical energy needed to run a cell.
monocotyledon
One of a large family of flowering plants that include
the grasses that have only one leaf in the newly emerged seedling and
usually parallel veins in the leaves. Many cereal grains are monocots,
which have presented some difficulties in genetic engineering, and
hence these crops have lagged in development.
multigenic trait
A genetic characteristic governed by several genes
that contribute to varying extents. Many chronic diseases such as heart
disease or certain types of behaviors or inherited personality types are
Glossary
289

multigenic. Drought resistance and cold hardiness are multigenic traits
in plants.
niche
An ecological term that refers to the specific position in an
ecosystem to which its occupant is adapted.
nuclear transfer
Replacing the nucleus and its associated genetic ma-
terial of one cell with the nucleus of another cell. Erroneously dubbed
“cloning” by the media, nuclear transfer performed with sheep and with
other species has produced an identical genetic copy of the nucleus
donor, except for cytoplasmic genetic material in the mitochondria. Al-
though the transplantation was not true cloning, the feat resurrected the
controversy over possible human genetic engineering and led to a raft of
pending legislation to curb such experimentation.
nucleotide
The building block of DNA and RNA. Each nucleotide
comprises one of four chemical “bases” (adenine, cytosine, guanine, or
thymine [uracil in RNA]), one ribose sugar, and a phosphate group.
nucleus
Compartment of a cell containing the genetic material. In ani-
mal and plant cells, this region is enclosed by a membrane and contains
the chromosomes.
organelle
A small part of a cell organized to perform a specialized
function. The nucleus stores the genetic material and controls informa-
tion flow from the DNA to the rest of the cell. The ribosome assembles
proteins from information provided by the nucleus through messenger
RNA. The mitochondrion provides cellular energy and synthesizes
needed metabolites.
organic
The scientific definition is a chemical compound containing
carbon and hydrogen. A popular definition refers to food or products
produced without the aid of purified chemicals for nutrients or process-
ing, often relying on complex biological sources for those materials.
pathogen
Any organism capable of causing disease.
PCR
Polymerase chain reaction—A molecular biological technique
using DNA replicating enzymes (polymerases) isolated from bacteria
living in hot springs or deep ocean hydrothermal vents. This revolu-
tionary method employs cycles at high temperature to replicate or am-
plify specific nucleic acid sequences rapidly from a complex mixture of
sequences. Various modifications allow the technology to perform other
reactions using the polymerases to alter target gene sequences.
pharmacogenomics
Use of genomics to personalize pharmaceutical
applications according to genetic propensity to respond to a particular
therapeutic regimen. This attempts to take into account individual ge-
netic variability in metabolizing drugs or in responding to a drug based
on genetic markers linked to these variations.
290
Glossary

phytoremediation
Application of the normal growth and uptake
properties of plants for the removal of toxic agents from the environ-
ment by concentration or by metabolism.
plasmid
Pieces of DNA-containing genes, usually circular, that can be
transferred between microorganisms and into cells and that cause them-
selves to be copied by the recipient cell. Because they can be handled so
easily, they are a favorite tool of molecular biologists for storing inserted
pieces of DNA and causing the added gene to be activated under exper-
imental control.
pluripotent
A term used in referring to stem cells that are capable of
differentiating down a particular path, giving rise to a number of, but
not all, types of cells. Compare totipotent.
polymer
A chain formed from similar types of building blocks. Typical
biological building blocks and their common polymers are amino acids
(proteins), carbohydrates (cellulose), and nucleic acids (DNA and RNA).
Nonbiologic polymers include tars, waxes, polyesters, and polyamides
(nylon, plastics), although genetic engineering is allowing plants to
carry out some of these syntheses.
polymorphism A single nucleotide change in the sequence of a gene in
a species that is present in a significant percentage of a population (as
opposed to a mutation that alters one organism). The change may or
may not result in a change of function of the nucleotide sequence or in a
protein, but its inheritance can be followed through generations as a
marker.
prokaryote
A cell such as a bacterium in which DNA is not contained
within a membrane-bounded nucleus. The DNA usually is found in a
single long, circular strand. Compare eukaryyote.
protein
An unbranched chain or polymer of 20 types of units called
amino acids. Proteins provide structure and catalytic activity for cells to
synthesize and organize the rest of their components.
recessive gene
A genetic characteristic that is only evident when both
pairs of chromosomes carry that particular DNA sequence. In genes con-
trolling human eye color, blue eyes (in adults) are a recessive character-
istic. Compare dominant gene.
recombinant DNA
The manipulation of DNA and genes in new com-
binations. Although this process also takes place in nature, this term is
normally used to refer to human-mediated rearrangements.
replication
The copying of the DNA sequence of the genome.
restriction ennzyme
An enzyme (endonuclease) capable of recognizing
a specific DNA sequence of four or more base pairs and cleaving the
double-stranded helix. Evolved by bacteria to prevent incorporation of
Glossary
291

foreign DNA into their genomes in sort of a genetic immune system,
molecular biologists use the isolated enzymes to cut and paste DNA seg-
ments into the desired order. The ability to manipulate DNA combina-
tions at will was the key to the recombinant DNA revolution and genetic
engineering.
reverse transcriptase
An enzyme produced by viruses in which the ge-
netic material is RNA rather than the usual DNA. It possesses the un-
usual property of copying RNA sequences into DNA (an RNA-depen-
dent DNA polymerase). This property has been exploited by molecular
biologists who use the enzyme to copy messenger RNA into a comple-
mentary DNA sequence that can then be replicated and engineered in
the standard way in bacteria and other organisms.
ribosome
A part of the cell, an organelle, that organizes the connect-
ing of amino acids together to produce a protein.
ribozyme
A special RNA species with catalytic activity (usually RNA-
cleaving activity). These molecules can participate in splicing of RNA
messages and in the destruction of specific RNA sequences. Synthetic ri-
bozymes can be constructed to control the levels of specific messages in
cells.
species
A group of like organisms classified together. Individuals
within a species can interbreed. Different species cannot interbreed to
produce fertile offspring.
statistical genetics
A branch of genetic analysis that uses statistical
techniques to associate observed traits with specific stretches of DNA. It
is used to map the location of genes on chromosomes.
stem ccell
A primordial cell that has not yet undergone the develop-
mental process to take on the specialized characteristics of a tissue type
or organ. Differentiation is a multistep, multipath process and stem cells
can arrest at various points along the path awaiting a signal to form a
particular kind of cell.
strain
A variant within a species. Intraspecific strains can interbreed.
totipotent
A term used in referring to stem cells that are capable of dif-
ferentiating into any type of cell. The final product cell type is deter-
mined by specific biological factors and cellular environment as well as
the order in which the cells are exposed to the influences. Embryonic
stem cells and germinal stem cells are totipotent.
transcription factor
A protein that regulates the activity of genes. It
binds to a specific DNA sequence in the regulatory part of a gene and or-
ganizes several proteins and the enzyme needed to synthesize messen-
ger RNA.
transgene
A gene from another species of organism. A mouse engi-
neered to contain the human hemoglobin gene is a transgenic animal.
292
Glossary

These are artificial combinations of genes that would not have occurred
with any appreciable frequency in the natural environment.
transgenic organism
An organism containing genetic material from
another species.
tumorigenic
Capable of causing a cell to divide out of control and to
become cancerous.
vaccine
A preparation of killed or weakened pathological organisms
or parts of those organisms administered to induce immunity against
that pathogen.
vector
A piece of DNA initially borrowed from a naturally occurring
bacterial plasmid or from a virus and engineered to contain convenient
features for molecular biologists. Vectors allow the easy handling of
pieces of DNA, allowing the replication of the DNA, synthesis of RNA,
or production of protein from a cloned gene in whatever type of host cell
the vector is designed to function.
virus
A small protein and lipid particle containing DNA or RNA se-
quences that can penetrate into cells and direct their own replication.
Parasitic, lacking metabolic functions, and unable to replicate them-
selves without assistance, viruses are generally not considered to be
alive.
xenograft
Transplantation of cells or tissue from one species into an-
other such as replacement of a human heart with a baboon heart.
Glossary
293


Aborted fetuses, 22, 58
Acetylsalicylic acid, 98
Acidophilium cryptum, 30
Acronyms, 283–284
Adenine, 7, 17, 103
Adenosine deaminase (ADA),
119–120, 157, 283
Advanta Seeds, 129
Aerobe, 285
Africa, 233
Agracetus, 29
Agriculture and food production
biotechnology, 26–27, 63, 64, 129,
158–159
acreage of genetically engineered
crops, 27, 117–118
agribusiness domination issues,
66–68, 78–79
biomanufacturing applications,
25–26
developing/underdeveloped
nations and, 84–93
European policies, 63–64, 83, 93,
177
feedstocks, 28, 76
field testing, 78, 112, 159–161, 166
first EPA-approved biopesticide,
113
Flavr Savr tomatoes, 115, 116, 135
genetic use-restriction technologies,
67
global concerns, 83
Green Revolution, 27, 85, 87, 106,
288
impact of, 63–64
influential endorsements, 118
intellectual property or patent
protection, 66–67, 76–77
intermixing impacts, 68
labeling, 63, 64, 69, 92–93, 116,
164–165
low-diversity cropping risks, 69–70,
84, 243
milk products, 64, 116, 133
nitrogen fixing capability, 26–27, 98
nutritionally enhanced crops, 93
organizations or associations, 206,
208
pest resistance development, 159
policies and regulation, 159–167
print resources, 239–243
products on the market , 168 (table)
questioning need for, 70
safety concerns, 65–66, 68–69
seed use and production, 66–67, 79,
87, 90, 101, 164
social concerns, 27
substitution for indigenously
important crops, 88
terminator strains, 90, 164
transgenic plants as “pesticides,”
165, 167
transgenic trees, 30–31, 66, 158–159
use of exotic species, 96, 98
AIDS, 112, 283
Albumin, 169
Aldridge, S., 217–218
Alexander, B., 218
295
Index

Alford, J. E., II, 267
Allergies, genetic susceptibility, 183
Alliance of Genetic Support Groups,
201–202
Alston, Y. R., 266
Altman, Sidney, 6
Alzheimer’s disease, 58
American Genetic Association, 202
American Parkinson’s Disease
Association, 202
American Society of Human Genetics,
203
American Society of Plant
Physiologists, 203
Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA), 52
Amino acids, 99
definition, 285
DNA code, 10–11, 17–18
protein structure, 104
Amyelotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS),
24, 283
Anabaena cylindrica, 30
Anaerobe, 285
Anderson, William French, 119–120,
157
Andrews, L. B., 227
Anfinsen, Christian Boehmer, 6, 104
Anthrax, 41–42, 91–92, 103, 131–132
Anti-thrombin III, 169
Antibiotics, 101, 102, 167
bacterial resistance, 106
defined, 285
Antibodies, 98, 285
Applied Research Ethics National
Association (ARENA), 203–204
Aquifer, defined, 285
Arabidopsis thaliana, 117
Arber, Werner, 6, 110
Armed Forces Repository, 189
Aromatic, defined, 285
Asilomar Conferences, 2, 3, 40, 54, 61,
108, 120, 135
Asphalt-eating bacteria, 73
Aspirin, 98
Astbury, William Thomas, 102
A-T Medical Research Foundation,
204
Ataxia-telangiectasia, 204
Atrazine, 175
Auerbach, C., 103
Avery, Oswald, 103
Bacillus papilliae, 102
Bacillus thurengensis toxin (Bt), 65
Bacteria, defined, 285
Bacteriophages, 100–101, 286
Bains, W., 218–219
Balkwill, F., 249
Baltimore, David, 6, 105
Base pair, defined, 286. See also
Nucleotides
BASIC, 174
Bateson, William, 99
Beadle, George Wells, 5, 102
Beaumont, A. R., 239
Bell, F. O., 102
Benzer, Seymour, 101, 104
Berg, Paul, 2, 6, 110, 120–121
Bernaer, T., 235
Berry, A., 226
Billings, P. R., 235
Bioceramics, 32
Biochemistry, 99
Biocontainment, 143
Bioconversion, 29
Biodegradable, defined, 286
Biodiversity protections, 77, 89
Bioethics, defined, 286. See also Ethical
and moral concerns
Biogas, 29
Biogen, 111
Biographical sketches, 119–139
Bioindustrial engineering. See
Industrial bioengineering
Bioindustry Association, 204
Bioinformatics, 14–15, 17–18, 245, 247,
289
Biological weapons, 40–41, 49, 91–92,
103
Biomanufacturing applications. See
Industrial bioengineering
Biomass, defined, 286
Biomedical Ethics Review Board, 113
Biomining, 71
Biopol, 28–29
Biopulping, 30–31
Biorefining technologies, 172–173
Bioremediation, 32–35, 72–73, 79,
170–175
296
Index

BASIC, 174
Chakrabarty’s work, 122–123
definition, 286
herbicide contamination, 175
oil-eating bacteria, 34, 107, 122, 147
potential risks or impacts, 68,
72–73, 175–176
print resources, 244
radioactive sites, 174–175
regulation, 176
service providers, 173
Biotechnology industry, 72, 158–159
agribusiness domination issues,
66–68, 78–79, 83
associated publications, 259–265
associations or organizations,
204–205
Biogen, 111
bioremediation providers, 173
characteristics of, 148–149
cycle of ideas, 155–156
database resources, 277–278
directories, 266–269
embryonic stem cell technology,
137
Genentech, 109, 121–122, 136, 279
government-to-industry
technology transfer, 113
growth of, 147–149
human cloning and, 193–194
investment in, 62
patents and private sector
investment, 146–147
print resources, 238–239
private sector R&D investment,
149–152
public sector R&D investment, 153
university-industry relationship,
72, 111, 113, 238
See also Agriculture and food
production biotechnology;
Pharmaceutical biotechnology
Biotechnology Industry Organization
(BIO), 205
Biotechnology industry patents. See
Patents
Biotechnology related periodicals and
newsletters, 259–265
Biotechnology Science Coordinating
Committee (BSCC), 113
Biotechnology video resources,
270–274
Bioterrorism, 41–43, 178
counter-bioterrorism technology, 92
Bioterrorism Preparedness Act of
2002, 178
Bipolar disorder, 117
Birth Defect Research for Children
(BDRC), 205
Bodner, W., 227
Bornstein, S., 249
Bovine Growth Hormone Milk Act,
164
Boyer, Herbert, 1, 107, 109, 121–122,
136
Bragg, William Henry, 5
Bragg, William Lawrence, 5, 102
Brock, M. V., 232
Brogna, C., 266
Bronzino, J. E., 245
Bryan, J., 250
Burak Reed, E., 268
Burkehardt, J., 239
Busch, L., 239
Bush, George W., 20, 117, 196
Byrd, Robert C., 193
Caenorhabditis elegans, 21, 116
Calgene, 28, 115
Canada, 174
Cancer-associated genes, 110, 112
screening, 183, 185–187
Candidate gene, defined, 286
Carp, 111
Catalyst, defined, 286
CD-ROMs, 275–277
Cech, Thomas R., 6
Cellmark Diagnostics, 188
Cellular Dynamics International, 137
Central dogma, 105, 106, 125
definition, 286
Ceramics, 32
Chakrabarty, Ananda Mohan,
122–123, 146–147
Chargaff, Erwin, 103, 104
Chaudhry, G. R., 244
Chemicals production, 28–29, 168–169.
See also Industrial
bioengineering; Pharmaceutical
biotechnology
Index
297

Chemistry, 96
Cherfas, J., 219
Chernobyl, 174–175
Chicken genome sequence, 118
Chinese biotechnology, 267
Chip technologies, 13–14, 16
Chlamydomonas, 30
Chlorinated aromatic chemicals, 34
Chromosome 18 Registry and
Research Society, 206
Chromosomes, 7, 98, 99, 100
definition, 286
extra chromosome and Down’s
syndrome, 105
gene localization, 101
gene mapping, 15–16
See also DNA structure
Chronology of genetic engineering,
95–118
Cipro, 41
Claverie, J.-M., 245
Clean Water Act, 176
Clinical applications. See Health and
medicine biotechnology
Clinton administration, 20, 186, 194,
196
Clone, defined, 286
Cloning, 19–20
defining, 191, 286
dinosaurs, 219–220
embryo transfer implants, 55
mammalian genes, 108
1997 sheep nuclear transplantation,
3, 19, 20, 54, 59, 110, 115, 190, 222
nuclear transplantation system,
19–20, 54–55, 80
print resources, 246
therapeutic, 20–21
video resources, 270–271
Cloning, human. See Human cloning
Cocoa butter substitutes, 88
CODIS, 40
Codons, 9, 17–18
definition, 287
Coffee plant, 118
Coffee substitute, 88
Cohen, E, 230
Cohen, Stanley, 1, 107
Cold resistance, 27, 133
Coleman, John William, 123
Cole-Turner, Ronald, 228
Collins, Francis Sellers, 123–124
Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and
Recovery Act (CERCLA), 176
Confidentiality. See Privacy and
confidentiality
Congressional reports, 256–257
Conko, G., 241
Cook, T., 235
Coombs, J., 266
Cotton plants, 169
Council for Responsible Genetics, 206,
280
Cove, D., 225
Cows, bioengineered milk production,
24, 64, 116, 133
Crafts-Lighty, A., 268, 277
Crichton, Michael, 219
Crick, Francis Harry Compton, 5, 104,
105, 119, 124–125, 139, 252
Crop Science Society of America,
206–207
Cystic fibrosis, 124, 256
Cytoplasm, defined, 287
Cytosine, 7, 17, 103
Dalton, John, 96
Danchin, A., 245–246
Darling, D. J., 250
Darwin, Charles, 96
Data management systems, 14–15
Database resources, 277–278. See also
DNA databases
Dawkins, K., 240
Delbruck, Max, 6
Democritus, 96
Deoxyribonucleic acid. See DNA
Depression, 117
Desulfobacterium, 171
Developing nations and genetic
engineering, 84–91, 165. See also
Global biotechnology issues
DeVries, Hugo, 96
D’herrelle, Felix Hubert, 100
Dibner, M. D., 266
Dinosaur cloning, 219–220
Directories, 266–269
Disease, germ theory of, 97
Diseases, genetic. See Genetic diseases
298
Index

DNA, 7
automated sequencing technology,
127–128
central dogma of molecular
genetics, 105, 106, 125, 286
chip technologies, 14
damage repair, 106–107
definition, 287
discovery, 97
gene regulation control, 105–106
jumping genes, 7, 130
print resources, 249
recognized as hereditary material,
103
transcription code, 9–11, 105, 106
video resources, 271–272
DNA amplification. See Polymerase
chain reaction
DNA databases, 40
Armed Forces Repository, 189
fishing for suspects, 74
law enforcement databases, 40, 51,
74, 189
privacy concerns, 51–52, 79–80
DNA fingerprinting, 39, 188, 251
DNA forensics, 74, 188–190
databases, 40, 51
fishing for suspects, 74
PCR technique, 13
print resources, 235, 236, 251, 256,
258, 259
Website, 280
DNA ligase, defined, 287
DNA polymerase, 9, 13, 104, 105
DNA structure, 7–9
early research, 102, 103
nucleic acid bases, 7, 17
Watson and Crick model, 104, 125,
126, 139, 226, 252
X-ray diffraction techniques, 102,
104, 125, 126, 139
Dolly, 19, 20, 118, 222
Dominant gene, defined, 287
Down syndrome, 105, 209
Doyle, C., 235
Doyle, J. C., 233
Delia, K. A., 228
Drosophila melanogaster models, 15, 100
Drug development. See
Pharmaceutical biotechnology
Dubos, Rene Jules, 102
Dulbecco, Renato, 6
Eagleton, Thomas, 38
Eastern European toxic waste
cleanup, 172
Ecology, 106
definition, 287
Economic development and
biotechnology, 84–91. See also
Global biotechnology issues
Ecosystem, 102
definition, 287
Edwards, Steve A., 78
Efstratiadis, A., 108
Electron microscope, 101, 123
ELSI, 174, 187
Employment and genetic information,
49, 52–53, 114, 115, 183–186
government documents, 256, 
258
Environmental decontamination. See
Bioremediation
Environmental Law Centre, 235
Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), 68, 108, 113, 144
Environmental safety issues, 143–144
biocontainment, 143
bioremediation risks, 68, 175–176
developing/underdeveloped
nations and, 88
European Union regulatory
information, 177
genetically-modified organisms,
65–66, 68–69
print resources, 244–245
quantitative risk, 145–146
risk assessment, 176
Environmentalist movement, 78
Enzymes, 10–11, 98, 99
crystallization, 101
definition, 287
one-gene one-enzyme theory, 
102
Epilepsy, 134
Erucic acid, 28
Erythropoetin, 157
Escagenetics, 88
Escherichia coli, 1, 103, 106, 107, 121,
171
Index
299

Ethical and moral concerns, 142–143,
177–178
ARENA, 203–204
DNA forensics, 188–190
embryonic stem cell technology, 21
employment, 183–185
genetic testing, 62, 178, 179–183
human cloning, 56
insurance, 185–187
interspecies transplantation, 56–57
print resources, 227–232, 256, 259
religious implications, 55–57, 228
Ethylene production, 65
Eugenics, 229
Eukaryote, defined, 287
European Convention on Human
Rights and Biomedicine, 55
European Federation of
Biotechnology, 207
European policies on genetically-
modified products, 63–64, 83, 93,
177
Exotic species, 96, 102
Expressed sequence
tag/complementary DNA (EST-
cDNA) technique, 137
Exxon Valdez oil spill, 34
Fanconi’s Anemia Research Fund,
Inc., 207
Farmer’s Bill of Rights, 164
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI),
39–40, 74, 188
Feedstocks, 28, 76
Feinstein, Diane, 193
Feldbaum, Carl B., 194
Fermentation, defined, 288
Fermentation products, 28, 30, 76, 95,
96, 131
Fertilizers, 90, 106
Fingerprint analysis, 39
Fischer, Emil, 99
Fish, genetically modified, 64–65, 111,
239
Flavr Savr tomatoes, 115, 116, 135
Fleming, Alexander, 101, 167
Flemming, Walter, 97
F1 hybrid, defined, 287
Food production. See Agriculture and
food production biotechnology
Forensic biotechnology. See DNA
forensics
Forensic, defined, 288
Forensic Science Associates, 188
Forestry applications, 30–31
Foundation on Economic Trends, 48,
78, 132–134, 208
Fox, M. W., 220
Fox, Michael J., 58
Frankel, M. S., 228
Frankenfood, 27. See also Agriculture
and food production
biotechnology
Franklin, Rosalind, 104, 125–126, 139
Friedmann, T., 246
Frog DNA, 1
Fruit fly model, 15, 100
Fruit ripening, 65
Frye Test, 39
Fuchs, R. L., 244
Fuel production, 29–30
Fullarton, J. E., 227
Fumento, M., 220
Galton points, 39
Galve-Peritore, A. K., 233
Gamow, George, 105
Garrod, Archibald Edward, 100
Gautier, M., 105
Gene chips, 13–14, 16, 288
Gene linkage, defined, 288
Gene mapping, 15–16
definition, 288
Gene synthesis, 112
Gene therapy, 37–38, 59, 75, 114,
119–120, 157
approved protocols, 115
ban on germ line alterations, 37, 59,
112
clinical efficacy, 59, 62, 75, 115
cystic fibrosis, 124
definition, 288
ethical or legal issues, 37–38
print resources, 246, 256
risk of abuse, 157
Genentech, 109, 121–122, 136, 279
Genes, 99
chromosome localization, 101
defined, 288
DNA code, 10 
300
Index

one-gene one-enzyme theory, 102
Genetic counseling, 50–51, 134,
212–213, 256
Genetic diseases:
associations or foundations,
204–214, 216
ataxia-telangiectasia, 204
extra chromosome, 105
Fanconi’s anemia, 207
Jewish genetic diseases, 210
late-onset (table), 183
mutant theory, 100
Neimann-Pick disease, 212
neurofibromatosis, 213
polymorphic markers, 15
Prader-Willi syndrome, 214
prenatal diagnosis, 111
recombinant DNA research, 110
sickle cell, 110, 111, 119
Turner syndrome, 216
Genetic engineering, applications,
23–25. See also Agriculture and
food production biotechnology;
Biological weapons;
Bioremediation; Biotechnology
industry; DNA forensics; Health
and medicine biotechnology;
Industrial bioengineering; other
specific applications
Genetic engineering, ethical concerns.
See Ethical and moral concerns
Genetic engineering, historical
development of, 2–5
chronology, 95–118
Genetic engineering, international
issues. See Global biotechnology
issues
Genetic engineering, nonprint
resources. See Nonprint
resources
Genetic engineering, print resources.
See Print resources
Genetic engineering, science texts,
245–249
Genetic engineering terms, 99, 100
acronyms, 283–284
glossary, 285–293
Genetic information:
bioinformatics, 14–15
federal policies, 186
insurance and employment issues,
49, 52–54, 114–115, 183–187
preexisting conditions, 184
privacy concerns, 44, 51–52, 60,
79–80
risk assessment, 185
state laws, 53, 115, 184, 185
See also DNA databases; DNA
forensics; Genetic testing;
Privacy and confidentiality
Genetic support groups, 201–202
Genetic testing, 36–37, 48, 49–51
cancer susceptibility screening, 183,
185–187
childhood testing, 180–181
diagnostic limitations, 50, 61,
181–182
direct marketing, 187
ethical issues, 36–37, 62, 178,
179–183
guidelines, 187
litigation potential, 178
prenatal or infant screening, 49–50,
179–180
print resources, 256, 258
public attitudes, 182–185
safeguards, 187
social concerns, 59–60
Genetic testing, use of information
from. See Genetic information
Genetic use-restriction technologies
(GURTs), 67, 289. See also
Terminator technology
Genetically Engineered Crop and
Animal Farmer Protection Act,
164
Genetically Engineered Food Safety
Act, 164
Genetically Engineered Organism
Liability Act, 165
Genetically modified organisms
(GMOs), 18–19, 24, 169
early public concerns, 107–108
European policies and regulations,
63–64, 83, 93, 177
field testing, 78, 112, 113
first transgenic mammals, 111
food animals, 64–65
global concerns, 90
global protest, 133
Index
301

Genetically modified organisms
(GMOs), cont.
intellectual property or patent
protection, 146–147
labeling, 63, 64, 69, 92, 116, 164–165
liability, 165
monitoring by watchdog groups,
48
nuclear transplantation, 19–20
patents, 114
regulation, 68–69, 159–163
risk assessment, 176
safety concerns, 65–66, 143–144
safety concerns, developing nations
and, 88
Genetically modified organisms
(GMOs), applications. See
Agriculture and food production
biotechnology; Bioremediation;
Health and medicine
biotechnology; Industrial
bioengineering; Pharmaceutical
biotechnology; other specific
applications
Genetics:
central dogma, 105, 106, 125, 286
chromosome theory, 100, 101
Mendelian theory of, 96
Genome, 25, 288. See also Human
Genome Project
Genomics, 137. See also Human
Genome Project
Genotype, 100
Gerbi, S. A., 250
Germ cells, defined, 288
Germ theory of disease, 97
Germany, 184, 195
Germplasm:
access to indigenous genetic
resources, 89
definition, 288
Geron Corporation, 20
Gilbert, Walter, 6, 110, 111
Global biotechnology issues, 83–84, 
91
access to genetic resources, 89, 236
biowarfare and bioterrorism, 91–92
consistency of public attitudes, 
146
dependency, 87, 88, 91
economic development
classifications and problems,
84–85
economic impacts of genetically
engineered organisms, 90
environmental safety concerns, 88
human cloning policies, 195
intellectual property protections
and, 76–77, 87–91
international organizations, 85, 93
multinational agribusiness
domination, 83
negative economic/employment
trends, 86
potentially positive impacts, 89–90
print resources, 232–234, 237
protein production priorities, 86
regulation, 93
substitution for indigenously
important crops, 88
sustainable agriculture research
fund, 165
U.S. biotechnology issues and, 92
U.S. law and, 165
worldwide biotechnology
directory, 267–268
Goldstein, D. M., 266
Gordon Research Conference on
Nucleic Acids, 2, 135
Gore, Albert, Jr., 111, 113, 126–127
Gorner, P., 223
Government-to-industry technology
transfer, 113
Grace, E. S., 250
Gralla, J. D., 246
Gralla, P., 246
Gramicidin, 102
Great Britain, human cloning policy,
195
Green Revolution, 27, 85, 87, 106
definition, 288
Griffith, Frederick, 101
Growth hormone, 116, 122, 133, 136,
164
Guanine, 7
Guanosine, 17, 103
Gussow, J. D., 240
Hall, S. S., 246
Harrison, Ross Granville, 99
302
Index

Health and medicine biotechnology,
48–49, 58–59, 62, 75–76, 134,
156–157
biomedical research tools, 75
Human Genome Project and, 35–36
personalized medicine, 16
pharmaceutical production, 29
pharmacogenomics, 16, 38–39
stem cell regenerative therapy, 20
See also Gene therapy; Genetic
testing
Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996, 52,
185
Hellman, H., 220
Henry A. Wallace Institute for
Alternate Agriculture, 208
Herbicide contamination
bioremediation, 175
Herbicide-tolerant plants, 27, 87, 129,
167, 168. See also Agriculture and
food production biotechnology
Heredity, Mendelian theory of, 96
Hershey, Alfred Day, 6
HIV, 105
Hoare, K., 239
Hodgson, J. G., 220–221
Hofmeister, Franz, 99
Holdrege, C., 228
Holland, S. L., 228
Holley, Robert William, 6, 106
Holtman, N. A., 227
Hood, Leroy E., 127–128, 229
Howard, T., 229
Hubbard, R., 109, 221
Human cloning, 54–55, 63
biotechnology industry and,
193–194
defining, 191
ethical and religious concerns, 56
global policies, 195
maintaining vital scientific and
medical procedures, 116
policies and regulation, 55, 61, 114,
116, 190–195
twins, 20, 192
Human embryonic stem cells. See
Stem cell technology
Human Fertilization and Embryology
Act, 114
Human Genome Project, 3–4, 114, 
139
books about, 227, 247, 251
chip technologies, 13
clinical applications, 75
complete sequence, 117
data management systems, 14
DNA source pools, 36
ELSI, 174, 187
free searchable database, 278
health and medical applications,
35–36
National Center for Human
Genome Research, 113–114, 124
National Human Genome Research
Institute (NHGRI), 138, 178, 185,
278, 281
print resources, 258
sequencing technology, 127–128
video resource, 273
Websites, 281
Human Genome Sciences (HGS),
35–36, 138
Human insulin, 110, 111–112, 122, 136,
156, 246
Human rights, 56
Human serum albumin, 169
Huntington’s chorea, 36–37, 51, 179,
180
Hurwitz, J., 105
Huxley, Aldous, 44
Hydrogen, 30
Hydrogen sulfide, 173
Identical twins, 20, 192
In silico, 17, 289
In vitro fertilization (IVF), 110
India, 70, 85–86
Industrial bioengineering, 28–32,
71–72, 76–77, 167–169
bioceramics, 32
bioconversion, 29
biomanufacturing, 25–26
biomining, 31, 71
biopulping, 30–31
early chemical production, 100
European perspectives, 244
feedstocks, 28–29, 76
print resources, 238–239
renewable fuels, 29–30
Index
303

Industrial bioengineering, cont.
university-industry relationship,
77–78
See also Biotechnology industry;
Pharmaceutical biotechnology
Informatics, defined, 289, See also
Bioinformatics
Inman, K., 235
Insect resistant plants, 27, 168. See also
Agriculture and food production
biotechnology
Insecticides, 113
Insert, defined, 289
Institute for Genomic Research, 138
Institute of Food Technologies, 240
Insulin, 110, 111–112, 122, 136, 156, 246
Insurance and genetic information, 49,
52–54, 114, 115, 185–187, 258
Intellectual property protections, 74,
116, 146–147
agriculture-associated
biotechnology, 66–67
concerns for
developing/underdeveloped
nations, 76–77, 87–91
favoring of private versus public
sector investment, 87
international technology transfer
issues, 76–77
usurping local genetic biodiversity
resources, 89
See also Patents
Interferon, 111
International Centre for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology,
208–209
International Foundation for Genetic
Research, 209
International organizations, 85, 93,
207, 208–209
Internet resources, 15, 279–282
Iraq, 42, 91
Italy, 195
Ivanovski, Dmitri, 98
Jabbari, D., 235
Jackson, J. F., 247
Jacob, Francois, 6, 105
Japan, 84, 93, 232
Japanese beetles, 102
Jenner, Edward, 97
Jerne, Niels K., 6
Jewish genetic diseases, 210
Judson, H. F., 221
Juma, C., 233
Jumping genes, 7, 130
Junk DNA. See Human Genome
Project
Jurassic Park, 219
Kafatos, F., 108
Kalaitzandonakes, N., 244
Kameri-Mbote, P., 233
Kao Corporation, 88
Kennedy, Edward, 3, 128–129, 193
Kenney, M., 238
Kevles, D. J., 229
Khorana, Har Gobind, 6, 106
Kimbrell, A., 222
Kitcher, P., 229
Klug, Aaron, 6
Knudtson, P., 232
Koch, Robert, 5, 97, 131
Kohler, Georges J. F., 6
Kolata, G B., 222
Kornberg, Arthur, 5
Kossel, Albrecht, 5
Kreuzer, H., 247
Krimsky, S., 222, 238, 241
Kristol, W., 230
Kroll, M., 101
Kuhn, T. J., 266
Labeling of genetically-modified
products, 63, 64, 69, 92–93, 116,
164–165
Lacy, L. R., 239
Lacy, W. B., 239
Ladybug, 98
Lambda phage, 101
Lampton, C., 250
LATA Group, 173
Latin America, 233
Law enforcement databases, 40
Lear, J., 222–223
Lederberg, Joshua, 5, 103
Lee, T. F., 230
Legislation. See Regulation and
legislation
Lejeune, Jerome, 105
304
Index

Leptospirillum ferrooxidans, 31
Levine, J. S., 223
Liability issues, 165, 178
Lifecodes Corporation, 188
Lim, H. A., 223
Lister, Joseph, 97
Livestock feed, 28, 76
Lou Gehrig’s disease, 24
Lungfish DNA, 7–9
Luria, Salvador Edward, 6
Lwoff, Andre Michael, 6
Lyon, J., 223
Mack, Connie, 193
MacLeod, Colin, 103
Madagascar, 88
Maize, 64, 130
Maniatis, Tom, 108
March of Dimes Birth Defects
Foundation, 209
Marrow transplants, 21
Marshall, E. L., 251
Marteau, T., 251
Martin, Michael, 129
Massey, A., 247
Mather, R., 241
Maxam, A., 108
McCarty, Maclyn, 103
McClintock, Barbara, 6, 129–130
McGee, G., 223–224
McGrath, K. A., 269
McKie, R., 227
Medical applications. See Health and
medicine biotechnology
Mellon, M., 243
Membrane, defined, 289
Mendel, Gregor, 96
Mental health disorders, 117
Merrifield, Robert Bruce, 6
Meselson, Matthew, 105
Messenger RNA (mRNA), 10, 106
chip technologies, 14
pharmacogenomics, 16
Metabolism, defined, 289
Metallurgical applications, 31, 172
Metchnikoff, Elie, 98
Methane, 29, 30
Methionine, 17
Michael Fund (International
Foundation for Genetic
Research), 209
Microbe, defined, 289
Microelectronics, 13, 49
Microscope:
definition, 289
electron microscope, 101, 123, 
289
Miescher, Johann Friedrich, 97
Military applications, 40–41, 91–92,
178
Military DNA database, 189
Milk products, 24, 64, 116, 133, 164,
169
Miller, H. I, 241
Milstein, Cesar, 6
Mineral extraction and processing, 31,
71, 172
Mineralization, 171
Mitochondrion, defined, 289
Mogge, D., 267
Molecular biologist, 7
Monocotyledon, defined, 289
Monoculture cropping risks, 69–70
Monod, Jacques Lucien, 6, 105, 106
Moore, Stanford, 6
Morgan, Thomas Hunt, 5, 100
Moser, I., 225
Motulsky, A. G., 227
Mouse genome project, 116
Mouse, transgenic model, 18, 111, 114,
116, 147
Mugabe, J., 233
Mullis, Kerry B., 6
Multigenic trait, defined, 289
Murray, R. F., Jr., 248
Murray, T. H., 248
Mutations, 103, 104
diseases and, 100
enzyme activity and, 99
Muth, A. S., 236
Nanodimensional structures, 32
Nathans, Daniel, 6, 110
National Center for Human Genome
Research, 113–114, 124
National Foundation for Jewish
Genetic Diseases, 210
National Foundation for Rare
Diseases, 210–211
National Fragile X Foundation, 211
National Health Foundation, 211
Index
305

National Human Genome Research
Institute (NHGRI), 138, 178, 185,
278, 281
National Institute for Science, Law,
and Public Policy, 212
National Institutes of Health (NIH):
government-to-industry
technology transfer, 113
health sector funding bias, 77
National Center for Human
Genome Research, 113–114, 124
recombinant DNA guidelines,
108–109, 110, 111
Recombinant DNA Molecule
Program Advisory Committee,
3, 75, 108, 115, 157
National Neimann-Pick Disease
Foundation, 212
National Organ Transplantation Act,
112–113, 127
National Pollution Discharge
Elimination permit system, 33
National Society of Genetic
Counselors, 212–213
Neel, J. V., 248
Neimann-Pick disease, 212
Nelkin, D., 230
Nematode model, 21–22, 116
Nestle, M., 242
Nestle’s, 88
Netherlands, 169–170
Neuberg, Carl, 99
Neurodegenerative diseases, 58, 202
associations or foundations, 203,
204
Neurofibromatosis, 213
Niches, 102
definition, 290
Nirenberg, Marshall Warren, 6, 106
Nitrogen fixation capability, 26–27, 
98
Nobel prize winners, 5–6, 12–13
Nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), 85
Nonprint resources, 269–270
CD-ROMs, 275–277
databases, 277–278
videos, 270–274
Websites, 279–282
Nottingham, S., 242
Nuclear transplantation, 19–20, 54–55,
61, 80, 190–195
breakthrough sheep “cloning”
(1997), 3, 19–20, 54, 59, 110, 115,
190, 222
definition, 290
moratorium, 55
regulation of, 63
virulence transfer, 101, 103
Nucleotides (nucleic acids), 7–9, 103
base pair definition, 286
definition, 290
sequencing technology, 127–128
Nucleus, defined, 290
Ochoa, Severo, 5, 106
Odin, E. P., 106
Office of Technology Assessment
(OTA) publications, 254–256
Oil-eating bacteria, 34, 107, 122, 133,
147
O’Neill, T., 230
Organ transplants, 112–113, 127
xenografts, 56–57, 293
Organelle, defined, 290
Organic, defined, 290
Organic Act of 1862, 96
Organic contaminants, 33–34
Organic farmers, 66
Organizations, associations, and
agencies, 201–215
international organizations, 85, 93,
207, 208–209
watchdog groups, 25, 48, 206
See also specific organizations or
agencies
Ostwald, Wilhelm, 98
Painter, Theophilius Shickel, 101
Parkinsonism, 58, 202
Pasteur, Louis, 96, 97, 103, 131–132
Patents, 146–147
animate versus inanimate
inventions, 107, 123, 146–147
favoring of private versus public
sector investment, 87
first living transgenic animal
patent, 114, 147
first U.S., 95
gene sequences, 114, 137, 147, 231
306
Index

print resources, 231, 237, 257, 259
recombinant DNA technology, 107
See also Intellectual property
protections
Pathogen, defined, 290
Paula, L., 224
PCR. See Polymerase chain reaction
Pence, G. E., 224
Penicillin, 101, 167
Periodicals and newsletters, 259–265
Peritore, N. P., 233
Perlas, N., 224–225, 242–243
Persley, G. J., 233
Personalized medicine, 16
Pest resistance to biotechnology, 159
Pest resistant plants, 27, 168. See also
Agriculture and food production
biotechnology
Pesticide regulation, 165, 167
Pesticide resistant plants, 65, 87, 167
Petroleum refining, 172–173
Pharmaceutical biotechnology, 29, 75,
111–112, 152–153, 167, 169–170
growth hormone products, 116,
122, 133, 136, 164
human insulin, 110, 111–112, 122,
136, 156, 246
legal issues, 235
pharmacogenomics, 16, 38–39,
75–76, 290
products expressed in milk, 24, 64,
116, 133, 164, 169
return on investment, 156
See also Biotechnology industry;
Health and medicine
biotechnology
Pharmacogenomics, 16, 38–39, 75–76,
290
Phenotype, 100
Phenylketonuria screening, 50, 180
Philippines, 86
Physicians Committee for Responsible
Medicine, 213–214
Phytoremediation, defined, 291. See
also Bioremediation
Piller, C., 224
Pioneer Hi-Bred International, Inc.,
101
Plant Breeders Rights, 67, 87
Plant genome map, 116
Plants, transgenic. See Agriculture and
food production biotechnology
Plasmid, 18, 103, 106, 121
definition, 291
Pluripotent, defined, 291. See also
Stem cell technology
Politics, 79–80
Pollack, Robert, 2
Pollen dispersal, 66
Polyhydroxybutyric acid, 168–169
Polymer, defined, 291
Polymer production, 28–29, 168–169
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
12–13, 111, 188, 284
book about, 248
chip technologies, 14
definition, 290
forensic applications, 13
genetic testing, 36
Polymorphisms, 15
definition, 291
pharmacogenomics, 16
Polynucleotide ligase, 106
Prader-Willi Syndrome Association
U.S.A., 214
Prenatal screening, 49–50, 179–180
Prentice, D. A., 248
President’s Council on Bioethics, 
259
Prieels, A.-M., 244
Pringle, P., 243
Print resources, 217
agriculture, 239–243
business, 238–239
directories, 266–269
ethics, 227–232
general, 217–227
international, 232–234
legal, 235–238, 256–258
periodicals and newsletters,
259–265
texts, 245–249
U.S. government publications,
254–258
young adult sources, 249–254
Privacy and confidentiality, 44, 51–52,
60, 79–80, 231
environment, 244–245
insurance and employment issues,
49, 52–54, 114–115, 183–187
Index
307

Privacy and confidentiality, cont.
legislative initiatives, 53, 80, 115,
116
print resources, 231, 236
See also DNA databases; Genetic
information
Prokaryote, defined, 291
Protease inhibitor, 169
Proteins, 99, 100
definition, 291
DNA code, 10–11
three-dimensional structure, 104
Pseudomonas, 107, 122, 171
Public Responsibility in Medicine and
Research, 215
Punnett, Reginald Crundall, 99
Pure Food Campaign, 48, 64, 281
Rabies vaccine, 132
Rabinow, P., 248
Radioactive material bioremediation,
174–175
Ratafia, M., 268
Reagan, Ronald, 58
Real Solutions to World Hunger Act,
165
Reborn, P., 243
Recessive gene, defined, 291
Recombinant DNA Molecule Program
Advisory Committee, 3, 75, 108,
115, 157
Recombinant DNA technology, 7, 23
applications, 23–25
definition, 291
early regulation, 109, 110
ethical guidelines and regulation,
3–4
moratorium, 108, 120, 191–192
NIH’s guidelines, 108–109, 110, 111
patents, 107
public debate forum, 109–110
textbooks, 247
See also Cloning; Human cloning;
specific applications
Regulation and legislation, 3, 48,
108–109
applicable policies and statutes,
161–163
approved field trials, 159–161
bioremediation effects, 176
discriminatory use of genetic
information, 115, 185–186
food biotechnology, 163–165
genetic confidentiality, 80
genetically-modified organisms,
68–69, 159–163
human cloning ban, 55, 61, 114, 116,
190–192, 194–195
international issues, 93
Internet resources, 281
labeling, 63, 64, 69, 92–93, 116,
164–165
maintaining vital scientific and
medical procedures, 116
print resources, 235–238, 256–258,
260–261
stem cell use, 58, 63, 196–197
transgenic plants as “pesticides,”
165, 167
See also State laws
Reiss, M. J., 230–231
Religious implications, 55–57, 228
Renewable fuel production, 29–30
Replication, defined, 291
Resnik, D. B., 231
Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act (RCRA), 176
Restriction enzymes, 9, 107, 110, 121,
136
definition, 291
Retroviruses, 105, 119, 125
Reverse transcriptase, 105, 292
Rhesus monkey, 115, 190
Rhizosphere, 32
Ribonucleic acid (RNA), 10
Ribosomes, 10, 292
Ribozyme, defined, 292
Richards, M., 251
Richardson, Charles Clifton, 106
Rifkin, Jeremy, 48, 64, 109–110, 112,
132–134, 208, 224–225, 229
Risk assessment, 176, 185
European Union regulatory
information, 177
Rissler, J., 243
Rivas, Marian Lucy, 134
RNA, 10
RNA polymerase, 9, 105
RNA viruses (retroviruses), 105, 119,
125
308
Index

Robson, J. M., 103
Roosevelt, Franklin, 103
Rothstein, M A., 231, 248
Rudin, N., 235
Rural Advancement Fund-USA
(RAFI-USA), 215
Ruska, Ernst, 101
Russell, A. M., 234
Russo, E., 225
Safety concerns. See Environmental
safety issues; Ethical and moral
concerns; specific genetic
engineering applications or methods
Sahai, Suman, 70
Sanger, Frederick, 5, 6, 110
Sasson, A., 234
Schizophrenia, 117
Seed use and production, 66–67, 79,
87, 90, 101, 164
Selective breeding, 26
Self, J., 268
Sheep “cloning” (1997), 3, 19–20, 54,
59, 110, 115, 190, 222
Sherrow, V., 252
Shiva, V., 225, 236
Shreeve, J., 225–226
Sibley, Kenneth D., 237
Sickle cell disease, 110, 111, 119
Silkworm disease, 131
Sime, J., 268
Simpson, O. J., 39
Singer, Maxine, 2, 135
Smith, George P., II, 232
Smith, Hamilton Othanel, 6, 110
Smith, J. E., 234
Smith, Michael, 6
Somatostatin, 110
Soybeans, 24, 63, 66
Species, defined, 292
Stahl, Franklin, 105
State laws:
mandated prenatal testing, 181
use of personal genetic
information, 53, 115, 184, 185
Statistical genetics, defined, 292
Stein, William Howard, 6
Stem cell, defined, 292. See also Stem
cell technology
Stem cell lineages, 21–22
Stem cell technology, 58, 80, 116,
195–197
books about, 228, 231
cell lineages, 21–22
clinical applications, 20–23
ethical issues, 21
federal policies on research, 20, 116,
117, 196
legislation, 196–197
nuclear transplantation “cloning”
system, 19
regulation, 58, 63
testing heart drugs, 137
Thomson’s research, 136–137
video resources, 274
Strain, defined, 292
Straughan, R., 230–231
Sumner, James Batcheller, 101
Superoxide dismutase gene, 24
Sutton, Walter Stanborough, 99
Suzuki, D., 223, 232
Swanson, Robert, 109, 121, 135–136
Swanson, T., 238
Swisher, C., 252
Synthetic Genomics, 138
Synthetic polymers, 28–29, 168–169
Tagliaferrro, L., 252
Tancredi, L., 230
Tansley, A. G., 102
Task Force on Genetics and Insurance,
114
Tatum, Edward Lawrie, 5, 102, 103
Teich, A., 228
Temin, Howard Martin, 6, 105
Terminator technology, 67, 90, 164
Terrorism, 41–43
Textile products, 29, 169
Thalessemia, 110, 119
Therapeutic cloning, 20–21
Thiobacillus ferrooxidans, 31, 172
Thomas, J. A., 244
Thompson, L., 226
Thomson, James Alexander, 136–137
Thro, E., 253
Thymine (or thymosine), 7, 17, 103
Tissue culture, 99–100
Tobacco, transgenic, 175
Tooze, J., 226
Totipotent stem cells, 22, 292
Index
309

Toxic waste cleanup. See
Bioremediation
Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights, 77, 89–90
Transcription factor, defined, 292
Transgene, defined, 292
Transgenic fish, 64–65, 111, 239
Transgenic organisms, 18–19, 24
applications and products, 24–26
definition, 293
See also Genetically modified
organisms (GMOs)
Transgenic organisms, bioremediation
applications. See Bioremediation
Transgenic organisms, drug
production applications. See
Pharmaceutical biotechnology
Transgenic organisms, food
production applications. See
Agriculture and food production
biotechnology
Transgenic organisms, industrial
applications. See Industrial
bioengineering
Transgenic plants. See Agriculture and
food production biotechnology
Transgenic trees, 30–31, 66, 158–159
Treaty for the Protection of
Biodiversity, 77, 89
Tschermak-Seysenegg, Erich Von,
96–97
Tumorigenic, defined, 293
Turner Syndrome Society of the
United States, 216
Turpin, Raymond, 105
Twins, 20, 192
Twort, Frederick, 100
Umbilical cord blood, 21
Union pour la Protection des
Obtentions Végétales (UPOV),
67
United Nations (UN) Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO),
89, 118
University-industry relationship, 72,
77–78, 111, 113, 238
U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA), 96, 159, 281
U.S. Department of Energy, 174
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), 55, 152–153, 156
U.S. government publications,
254–258
Vaccines, 25–26, 97, 132, 152
definition, 293
Van Balken, J. A. M., 238
Van Loon, B., 253
Van Overwalle, G., 259
Vanilla, 88
Vector, defined, 293. See also Plasmid
Venter, J. Craig, 35–36, 114, 137–138,
225–226
Videos, 270–274
Viral-resistant plants, 65
Viruses, 98
bacteriophages, 100–101, 286
definition, 293
retroviruses, 105, 119, 125
Von Behring, Emil Adolf, 98
Waksman, Selman Abraham, 102
Wald, E., 221
Wald, George, 109
Waldeyer, Heinrich, 97–98
Wallace, Henry Agard, 101
Walters, L., 266
Waste Policy Institute, 174
Watchdog organizations, 25, 48, 206
Watson, James Dewey, 5, 104, 113, 119,
124, 125, 138–139, 226, 252
Websites, 15, 279–282
Weir, B. S., 237
Weiss, Samuel Bernard, 105, 106
Weissman, Charles, 111
Weizman, Chaim, 100
Wekesser, C., 253
Wells, D. K., 254
WiCell Research Institute, 137
Wiegele, T. C., 237
Wild germplasm diversity, 89
Wilkins, Maurice Hugh Frederick, 5,
104, 125, 126, 139
Witt, S. C., 245
Wood pulping applications, 30–31
Woolum, J., 266, 278
World Aquaculture Society, 216
310
Index

World Intellectual Property
Organization, 237
World Trade Organization (WTO), 64,
67, 89
Wright, Susan, 238
Wrubel, R. P., 241
Xenografts, 56–57
definition, 293
X-ray crystallography, 102, 104, 125,
126, 139
Yalow, Rosalyn, 6
Yamamoto, K. R., 224
Yount, L., 227
Zebrafish model, 15
Zoloth, L., 228
Index
311


About the Author
Harry LeVine, III, Ph.D., received his B.S. in biochemistry from Cornell
University in 1971 and his Ph.D. in physiological chemistry from the
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine in 1975. A postdoctoral stint at the
Burroughs-Wellcome Company evolved into a 28-year career in the phar-
maceutical industry encompassing tenures at Wellcome, Glaxo, Parke-
Davis, and Pfizer. His first experience of the recombinant DNA revolu-
tion was wondering about the relevance of a qualifying exam question
asked by two professors on a then-esoteric bacterial DNA restriction en-
zyme system. Ham Smith and Dan Nathans subsequently won the Nobel
Prize for their work in that area. Later, Dr. LeVine’s projects in multiple
therapeutic areas depended heavily on DNA technology and then ex-
panded into new fields in the era of the genome. In 2003, he moved to the
University of Kentucky where he is associate professor of biochemistry in
the Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry and the Sanders-
Brown Center on Aging, where he is studying Alzheimer’s disease. Dr.
LeVine is author of more than 100 research articles, reviews, and book
chapters as well as four patents. In addition to Genetic Engineering: A Ref-
erence Handbook (ABC-CLIO), he is coauthor of Drug Discovery and Devel-
opment—Technology in Transition (Churchill/Livingston, 2006). He also
has published articles about science and scientists for young readers in
Cricket and Cicada magazines.
313

