
GENOCIDE

Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Series
American Families in Crisis, Jeffrey S. Turner
Animal Rights, Clifford J. Sherry
Autism Spectrum Disorders, Raphael Bernier and Jennifer Gerdts
Climate Change, David L. Downie, Kate Brash, and Catherine 
Vaughan
DNA Technology, David E. Newton
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Education in Crisis, Judith A. Gouwens
Environmental Justice, David E. Newton
Gangs, Karen L. Kinnear
Gay and Lesbian Rights, David E. Newton
Global Refugee Crisis, Mark Gibney
Globalization, Justin Ervin and Zachary A. Smith
Identity Theft, Sandra K. Hoffman and Tracy G. McGinley
Lobbying in America, Ronald J. Hrebenar and Bryson B. Morgan
Modern Piracy, David F. Marley
Modern Sports Ethics, Angela Lumpkin
Obesity, Judith Stern and Alexandra Kazaks
Same-Sex Marriage, David E. Newton
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
Sexual Crime, Caryn E. Neumann
Sexual Health, David E. Newton
Substance Abuse, David E. Newton
U.S. Border Security, Judith A. Warner
U.S. National Security, Cynthia A. Watson
U.S. Trade Issues, Alfred E. Eckes Jr. 
Waste Management, Jacqueline Vaughn
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
www.abc-clio.com.

 Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital 
issues in today ’ s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution, 
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and 
nonacademic experts, these books are  authoritative, clearly 
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars, 
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople, 
activists, and others. 
 Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an 
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology,  biographical 
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies, 
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index. 
 Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will 
ﬁ nd the information they need to have a better  understanding 
of the social, political, environmental, and economic issues 
facing the world today.  


 GENOCIDE 
 A Reference Handbook 
 Howard Ball 
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES

 Copyright 2011  by ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior 
permission in writing from the publisher. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 Ball, Howard, 1937– 
 Genocide : a reference handbook / Howard Ball. 
  p. cm.—(Contemporary world issues) 
 Includes bibliographical references and index. 
 ISBN 978-1-59884-488-7 (hbk. : alk. paper)—ISBN 978-1-
59884-489-4 (ebook) 1. Genocide. 2. Genocide—History.
3. Crimes against humanity. 4. International offenses. I. Title. 
 HV6322.7.B35  2011 
 364.15’1—dc22   2010035195 
 ISBN: 978-1-59884-488-7 
 EISBN: 978-1-59884-489-4 
 15 14 13 12 11  1 2 3 4 5 
 This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. 
 Visit www.abc-clio.com for details. 
 ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911 
 Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911 
 This book is printed on acid-free paper 
 
 Manufactured in the United States of America 

 To my grandchildren Lila and Nathan Bernhardt 
and Sophie Ball-Dolan 


 Contents 
 Preface ,  xv 
 1 Background and History ,  1 
 A Brief History of the Events of the 
20th Century That Led to the Concept 
of Genocide,  5 
 The Sovereign Nation-State and Genocide,  5 
 Treaties and Conventions to Restrain Military 
Actions during Wars,  6 
 The Deﬁ nition of Genocide, 1933–1948,  8 
 Early 20th-Century “Genocides,”  16 
 International Military Tribunals in Germany 
and Japan, 1945–1948,  19 
 Key Issues Associated with Genocide,  20 
 Why Do People Kill Other People?,  21 
 Perpetrators, Victims, and Bystanders,  24 
 The Stages Leading to Genocide,  26 
 References, 29 
 2 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions ,  31 
 Fifty Years of Nonuse of the 1948 Genocide 
Convention, 1948–1998,  32 
 Critics of the Genocide Convention,  33 
 No Enforcement Mechanism to Intervene 
to Stop Genocide or Apprehend Genocidists,  36 
 Lack of Political and Diplomatic Will by 
the UN and Major Western Powers,  38 
 Possible Solutions to the Weaknesses Associated with 
Enforcement of the 1948 Genocide Convention,  40 
 Amnesty,  42 
 Truth and Reconciliation Commissions,  44 
ix

x Contents
 Replace the UN with a Collective Humanitarian 
Intervention Organization,  46 
 National Legal Tribunals to Try Indicted Genocidists,  48 
 Ad Hoc ICTs,  48 
 Hybrid ICCs to Deal with Genocidists,  49
 Mediation between Warring Parties,  51 
 The Permanent ICC, 1998, 2002,  52 
 The  Gacaca Trials in Rwanda,  57 
 The Critical Role of International Nongovernmental 
Organizations in Encouraging and Drafting 
International Human Rights Conventions 
and Taking Actions to Prevent Genocide,  58 
 Operational and Campaigning NGOs,  61 
 Other Categories of NGOs,  62 
 The Perennial Clash between Justice 
and Sovereignty,  62 
 References, 63 
 3  Special U.S. Issues: The United States 
and the Creation of an International 
Criminal Court ,  67 
 American Antipathy toward the Idea of an 
ICC, 1918–2010,  68 
 The “Two Roads Taken” by the United States before 
and during the Drafting of the Rome Treaty 
of the ICC, 1998: the Bill Clinton Years,  71 
 America ’ s Position after the Signing of the Rome 
Treaty, 2001–2009: the George W. Bush Years,  74 
 President Bush ’ s “Unsigning” of the Rome 
Statute, May 2002, and Other Actions in 
Response to the “Entry into Force” 
of the ICC, July 2002–2009,  74 
 The March toward Passage of the American 
Servicemen’s Protection Act (ASPA), 2001–2002,  77 
 The Bilateral Immunity Agreement (BIA) as 
Another Strategy of the Bush 
Administration to Weaken the ICC,  81 
 The Status of U.S. Policy Regarding the ICC after 
the 2008 Election of Democratic President 
Barack Obama, 2009–2012,  84 
 The Future of International Law in the Nation-State 
Universe,  88 
 References, 91 

Contents xi
 4 Chronology ,  93 
 1904–1907—German South West Africa, Herreros,  93 
 1915–1923—Ottoman Turkey, Armenians, 
1.5–2 Million Dead,  94 
 1932–1933—USSR, Ukraine ’ s Forced Famine: 
7 Million Dead,  95 
 1937—Japan, The Rape of Nanking, 
China: 300,000 Dead Chinese,  96 
 1941–1945—The Nazi Holocaust: Approximately 
6 Million Dead Jews, as well as Other 
Ethnic Groups and Nationalities: 
Roma-Sinti, Russians, and Poles,  96 
 1945–1948—International Military Tribunals 
Created in Germany and Japan at 
the Conclusion of the War,  97 
 1947–1948—UN: International 
Convention on Genocide Established,  98 
 1949—Communist China ’ s Great Leap Forward: 
27 Million Die of Starvation,  98 
 1951—Genocide Convention in Force,  98 
 1967–1970—Biafran War, Nigeria,  98 
 1971—East Pakistan, East Bengal,  99 
 1971–1979, Uganda ’ s Killing Fields,  100 
 1972—Burundi, 150,000 Hutus 
Executed in Two Months,  100 
 1975–1979—Cambodian Khmer Rouge: 
2 Million Dead Cambodians,  101 
 1977–1978—Ethiopian Red Terror,  101 
 1981–1983—Guatemala, Murder 
of the Indigenous Maya,  103 
 1987–1991—Iraq, Anfal Campaign against 
the Kurds,  103 
 1992–1995—Serbia, 200,000 Bosnian Muslims Killed,  104 
 1993—UN Resolution 827 Creates International 
Criminal Tribunal, Yugoslavia,  105 
 1994—Rwanda, 800,000 Tutsis Killed 
by Hutu Militias in Three Months,  105 
 1994—UN: Resolution 955, International 
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda Created,  106 
 1998–2007—Democratic Republic of the Congo,  106 
 2003–Present—Sudan, Darfur: 
400,000 Black Arabs Killed,  107 

xii Contents
 5 Biographical Sketches ,  109 
 Hafez al-Assad,  109 
 Omar Hassan al-Bashir,  110 
 Idi Amin,  111 
 Ion Antonescu,  111 
 Col. Theoneste Bagosora,  112 
 Ismail Enver,  113 
 Gen. Romeo Lucas Garcia,  114 
 Adolf Hitler,  114 
 Saddam Hussein,  116 
 Shiro Ishii,  117 
 Radovan Karadzic,  118 
 Haile Mariam Mengistu,  119 
 Slobodan Milosevic,  120 
 Gen. Ratko Mladic,  121 
 Jose Efrain Rios Montt,  122 
 Anton Pavelic,  123 
 Gen. Augusto Pinochet,  125 
 Pol Pot,  125 
 Joseph Stalin,  126 
 Haji Suharto,  128 
 Pasha Mehmat Talat,  128 
 Father Joseph Tiso,  129 
 Mao Tse-Tung,  130 
 Gen. Jorge Raphael Videla,  131 
 Lothar Von Trotha,  132 
 6 Documents ,  133 
 Documents ,  133 
 General Orders No. 100: Instructions for the Government 
of Armies of the United States in the Field by Francis 
Lieber: April 24, 1863,  133 
 The Hague Peace Conference, 1899,  135 
 The Kellogg-Briand Pact, 1928, Excerpts,  136 
 Raphael Lemkin, Axis Rule in Occupied Europe: Laws of 
Occupation, Analysis of Government, and Proposals for 
Redress, 1944,  137 
 Constitution of the International Military Tribunal (The 
Nuremberg Charter), 1945, Excerpts,  139 
 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, December 10, 
1948,  143 

Contents xiii
 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the 
Crime of Genocide, December 9, 1948,  150 
 Summary of Geneva Conventions, 1949,  151 
 Statute of the International Tribunal for 
the Former Yugoslavia, May 1993, 
Amended May 1998, 2000, Excerpts,  154 
 Statute of the International Criminal Tribunal 
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible 
for Genocide and Other Serious Violations 
of International Humanitarian Law 
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda 
and Rwandan Citizens Responsible 
for Genocide and Other Such Violations 
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring 
States, between Janaury 1, 1994 
and December 31, 1994,  160 
 Preamble and Selected Articles, Rome Statute of the 
International Criminal Court, July 17, 1998,  162 
 Proposed Text of Article 98 Agreements 
with the United States, July 2002,  192 
 Article 98 Waivers Signed by the United States 
and a Second Nation-State, 2002–2008,  193 
 Nongovernmental Organization Coalition Letter to 
Congress Regarding Bilateral Immunity 
Agreements, May 30, 2008,  196 
 Chapter 7, UN Charter, 1945: Action with Respect 
to Threats to the Peace, Breaches of the 
Peace, and Acts of Aggression,  198 
 7 Directory of Organizations ,  201 
 NGOs Working on Genocide and Human Rights 
Issues,  201  
 The NGO Directory,  203 
 Intergovernmental Organizations (IGOs) Working 
on Genocide Issues,  213 
 The UN System,  215 
 NGOs Afﬁ liated with the UN and Its Agencies 
or Afﬁ liated with Other IGOs,  218 
 Intergovernmental Organizations (IGOs), Other Than 
the UN and Its Agencies, with a Focus on Human 
Rights and Peacekeeping Operations,  221 

xiv Contents
 8 Resources ,  225 
 Print Resources,  225 
 General,  226 
 Speciﬁ c Genocides and Mass Murders,  237 
 Press Coverage,  251 
 Journals/Reports,  252 
 Nonprint Resources,  254 
 Films,  254 
 Documentaries,  256 
 Television/Videotapes,  258 
 Databases/Web Sites,  258 
 Glossary,  261 
 Index,  267 
 About the Author,  277 

xv
 Preface 
 “The President will not authorize the use of force. Eng-
land and Russia are rattling their sabers, but the politi-
cal will in Parliament and the Duma just isn ’ t there. The 
leadership in the House and Senate have also indicated 
they aren ’ t willing to defend the . . . Treaty with Ameri-
can lives.” “So that ’ s it?” Juan said with disgust. “We call 
ourselves a moral nation, but when it comes to ﬁ ghting 
for an ideal the politicians ram their heads into the sand.” 
( Cussler 2010, 266 )  
 Although these words are uttered by ﬁ ctional characters in the Cus-
sler novel  The Silent Sea , they reﬂ ect the truth about the essential 
dilemma that confronts the civilized world community in the 21st 
century.  Realpolitik,  not humanitarian intervention to save lives, 
is still the operative term to describe international politics. It is a 
clear consequence of the continued and powerful presence of the 
sovereign nation-state system in international affairs.  Genocide: A 
 Reference Handbook  tries to explain the reasons why the most vicious 
crime in all of human history, genocide, as well as the creators and 
perpetrators of this crime of crimes, (1) is allowed to run its course 
without outside interference and (2) why the leaders who ordered 
the genocide have never been stopped and most have never been 
punished by an outside world community for crafting and then 
carrying out their nefarious policy. We live in an age of impunity, 
an era where national leaders can order genocide without fear of 
punishment. And it is a world of nation-state publics that see the 
genocide occurring but, evidently,  lack the will  to intervene to stop 
the murderous path taken by a genocidal policy maker. 
 Genocide, the planned, intentional extermination policy of 
a state that is implemented against a group of persons based on 

xvi Preface
their religion, their nationality, their ethnicity, or their race has an 
ancient history. Although the term itself, genocide, was formed in 
the 1940s, functionally the policy has been implemented through-
out human history from the ancient Greeks to the expansionist 
imperialist societies of the past few centuries. History is replete 
with examples of “superior” societies acquiring new territory in 
Africa, the Americas, the Middle East, and Asia, through a policy of 
intentionally exterminating indigenous peoples who lived in these 
coveted regions. North American Indians, the Mayans in Central 
America, the Herreros in Africa, and Aborigines in Australia and 
New Zealand are but a few of the native societies destroyed, in 
whole or in part, in human history. Justiﬁ cations abounded for 
such actions: Manifest Destiny, Survival of the Fittest,  Lebensraum , 
and the creation of a Greater Serbia or a New Cambodia are a few 
names used to justify mass destruction of human beings because of 
their inferior and worthless race, religion, ethnicity, or nationality. 
 Genocide: A Reference Handbook  looks at a number of critical 
issues and questions that ﬂ ow from the reality of mass murder, 
crimes against humanity, and genocide throughout human his-
tory. Why does one group of people kill another group of people 
without any remorse or misgivings? Who are the perpetrators 
who commit these brutal acts against innocent men, women, and 
children? Why hasn ’ t genocide been prevented or stopped by the 
bystanders—in the nation and by outraged world publics? ( Can 
such planned state-ordered exterminations  ever be stopped?) 
 Genocide: A Reference Handbook looks at the half century of 
nonuse of the 1948 Genocide Convention; the treaty stressed the 
obligatory actions of the nation-states that ratiﬁ ed the document 
to proactively respond to a perceived policy of exterminating a 
targeted group. However, these obligations were ignored until 
the 1990s. However, the actions that were taken in the 1990s were 
efforts that attempted to punish those responsible for genocidal 
actions  only after  the genocide had occurred. Why was there this 
hysterical blindness on the part of the nation-state bystanders? 
Surely the leaders of these powerful nations and international 
institutions  knew about the murders of Rwandans, Burundians, 
Congolese, Somalians, Bosnians, Cambodians, Chinese, Russian, 
Bengalese, Sudanese, East Timorese, and others who were slaugh-
tered by antidemocratic regimes or who disappeared. As this book 
shows, news coverage, television coverage, ﬁ lms and documenta-
ries, and other media coverage showed, in full color and instantly, 
the results of most 20th and 21st-century genocidal actions. 

Preface xvii
 The reasons for such genocidal actions are pieced together and 
chronicled in a genocide timeline in Chapter 4 (see also brief biog-
raphies in Chapter 5). Critics of the institutions responsible for (not) 
responding to genocide (primarily the UN Security Council and 
powerful nation-states such as the United States, Russia, China, 
the United Kingdom, and France) have tried to suggest steps the 
international community can take to  substantially  change the ways 
the “bystander” nations react to genocide.  Genocide: A Reference 
 Handbook  looks at the various criticisms and suggestions and pres-
ents the ideas, the organizations, the solutions that they suggest. 
 Most of the suggestions and developments in response to 
actual genocides deal with possible actions  after  the genocide 
has ended.  Genocide: A Reference Handbook  describes these post-
genocide proposals and practices, which are essentially legal 
ones. These include the creation of ad hoc international criminal 
tribunals, national criminal courts, truth and reconciliation com-
missions, the granting of amnesty to perpetrators, a permanent 
independent international criminal court, and additional treaties 
and conventions that attempt to clarify and strengthen existing 
prohibitions against genocide.  Genocide: A Reference Handbook also 
contains a set of documents—treaties and conventions—that lay 
out the (as yet unfulﬁ lled) hopes of the international community. 
 Two leading genocide scholars have written the following: 
 It is painfully clear that we—humanity and members 
of the international community—do not yet have the 
“answer” as to how genocide can be prevented. What 
humanity is in most need of in this respect is how to cast 
off the addiction to  realpolitik , the lack of political will to 
act, and, ultimately, the lack of real care about “others” 
who face annihilation at the hands of mass murderers. . . . 
We have not found the humanity that is needed to prevent 
genocide from reappearing, time and again, like a horriﬁ c 
nightmare ( Totten and Parsons 2009, 2 ).  
 This assessment has come at a time when a radical suggestion 
has been posited by some critics of the status quo and realpolitik. 
There must be the  replacement  of the United Nations, which they 
believe has done little to prevent or stop genocides, with a new 
international institution with the clear  responsibility  to intervene 
in the sovereign affairs of a genocidal nation-state with enough 
force to stop the genocide.  Genocide: A Reference Handbook also 

xviii Preface
shows that many hundreds of nongovernmental organizations 
have advocated such a radical change in international law and 
politics. To realize the values of human integrity and justice, these 
advocates maintain, there must be the overcoming of realpolitik 
through the creation and employment of such a humanitarian 
intervention organization. 
 Will such a radical change occur in the new century? A central 
underlying theme of  Genocide: A Reference Handbook is that there 
cannot be any true world peace unless there is effective humani-
tarian intervention to stop the genocide, followed by judicial pro-
cesses to punish the perpetrators. “Never Again” has been a term 
used since the World War II holocausts. Instead, since 1945, the 
world has seen “Again and Again.” The task for those committed 
to ending genocide is a daunting one. It must, however, be one 
acted upon by newly committed societies unwilling to deny the 
reality of genocide. 
 Howard Ball 
 June 2010 
 References 
 Cussler, C., with Jack Du Brul. 2010.  The Silent Sea . New York: G. P. 
Putnam ’ s Sons. 
 Totten, Samuel, and Parsons, W. S. 2009.  Century of Genocide: Critical 
Essays and Eyewitness Accounts. 3rd ed. New York: Routledge. 

1
 1 
 Background and History 
 It was always easier to think of evil as the work of indi-
viduals rather than the successful and well-planned 
efforts of societies and organizations operating with a 
mandate. [Mad killers] were not created simply by their 
environments. Auschwitz and the Nanking massacre 
did not happen in a vacuum. ( Burke 2009, 389 ) 
 J
ames Patterson is a very popular writer of mystery ﬁ ction. His 
major actor in many of his novels is a Washington, D.C., detec-
tive Alex Cross. In the 2008 novel  Cross Country , Patterson has 
Cross traveling to Sudan in Africa in search of a killer called Tiger. 
His description of the genocide taking place in that nation, where 
the Janjaweed (Arabic, means “man with a gun on horseback”), 
Sudanese Muslim Arab militias, working on behalf of the govern-
ment, were slaughtering black Sudanese who were living in the 
Darfur region, I believe, is a somber introduction to a book on 
genocide. 
 Since 2003, hundreds of villages have been destroyed by the 
Janjaweed, and more than 100 refugee camps were created to 
house the survivors of these massacres. There was no housing, 
little food, and a tiny number of medical facilities to treat the sick 
and the dying black Sudanese. And all the camps were vulnerable 
to continued attacks by the Janjaweed. 
In the book, an associate of Cross described what was 
occurring: 
 “The Janjaweed burn everything they can—food, stores, 
livestock. They put human and animal carcasses down 

2 Background and History
the wells, too. Anything to ensure that no one comes 
back.” These were the Arab militias, widely believed 
to be supported by the current government in a vicious 
campaign to make life as unsafe as possible for black 
Africans in the region. An unthinkable two million 
people had already ﬂ ed their homes and more than two 
hundred thousand had died. Two hundred thousand 
that we know of. 
 . . . There was no disguising the horror—especially 
against women and children, thousands of whom were 
raped, then branded to increase their humiliation. “Rape 
has become such a cruel weapon in this civil war. Ameri-
cans have no idea, Alex. They couldn ’ t possibly. 
 “Sometimes the Janjaweed will break a woman ’ s legs 
ﬁ rst so she can ’ t possibly escape and will be an invalid 
for the rest of her life. They like to ﬂ og victims; to break 
ﬁ ngers one by one; to pull out ﬁ ngernails,” Adanne said 
in a voice that barely got above a whisper. 
 It was Rwanda all over again. In fact, it was worse. 
This time the whole world was watching and doing 
almost nothing to help. 
 In these sentences, one gets a sense of the brutality of genocide 
in the 20th and 21st centuries. The Janjaweed are attempting to 
eradicate an entire ethnic and religious culture in Sudan. It is a 
methodical, programmed, and coordinated slaughter aimed at the 
entire black Sudanese population through torture, murder, rape, 
destruction of habitat, and starvation. The Janjaweed are agents 
of the government, implementing a policy created by the political 
leaders of the nation. Unlike warfare between nations or a civil 
war between the government forces and insurgent armed forces, 
civilians are the sole target of the Janjaweed. (Note: Rwanda is a 
small African nation, formerly a colony of Belgium, where there 
exists, side by side, two different tribes, the majority Hutus, the 
minority Tutsis. In just three months, in 1994, the Hutus killed 
more than 800,000 Tutsis with axes, machetes, and other  primitive 
tools.) 
 Finally, although the whole civilized world sees the slaughter, 
the murderers act with impunity because the world ’ s bystanders 
have not interfered with the murders taking place in a  sovereign 
nation and a member of the United Nations (UN). Unfortu-
nately, the Darfur region of Sudan brutality is the reality in the 

Background and History  3
21st  century to this point in time. (Although there has been some 
movement toward resolving the merciless slaughter of persons 
in the Sudan, the problem still continues. A nongovernmental 
organization, the U.S. Institute for Peace, issued the following in 
January 2010: 
 With Southern Sudan ’ s referendum on whether to 
remain part of Sudan or secede approaching, it is vital 
that the international community encourage and sup-
port negotiations on postreferendum arrangements, 
which include issues ranging from wealth sharing to 
citizenship rights to security arrangements. Good coor-
dination among the international community will be 
essential:  
 A single mediator with a clear and strong mandate 
• 
should lead negotiations on postreferendum arrange-
ments, supported by a contact group or group of 
friends that can insert targeted pressures and incen-
tives into the process. The mediator needs to be 
strong enough to prevent “forum shopping” and 
contain or co-opt spoilers. 
 States and nonstate actors that wish to play a central 
• 
role in negotiations on postreferendum arrange-
ments should demonstrate a long-term commitment 
to Sudan and to overseeing implementation of any 
agreement. 
 Negotiations on postreferendum arrangements and 
• 
the ongoing negotiations on Darfur should be kept 
separate.) ( US Institute for Peace, 2010 .) 
 In February 2010, an e-mail sent by Martha Bixby for the 
Save Darfur Coalition to activists contained a statement about the 
events in Sudan (reprinted with permission of Martha Bixby and 
the Save Darfur Coalition): 
 Brutal dictator Sudanese president Omar al-Bashir 
may still be held accountable for committing geno-
cide in Darfur. Today, the International Criminal Court 
reversed an earlier decision not to charge Bashir with 
genocide. With Bashir already wanted for crimes against 
humanity and war crimes in Darfur, the court will now 

4 Background and History
reconsider whether to charge Bashir with the crime of 
genocide. 
 This strikes a blow to Bashir at the same time his 
regime  refuses to guarantee basic political freedoms for self-
determination : the freedoms of association, movement, 
assembly and speech; freedom from arbitrary searches, 
detentions, beatings and arrests; and freedom of the 
press. 
 And without scrutiny by the Obama administra-
tion and the international community, the elections will 
deliver the sort of legitimization that Bashir desires. Jus-
tice and accountability must be essential components of 
the comprehensive solution required to ﬁ nally end the 
crisis in Darfur. 
 Both nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) implicitly voice 
concern about the unwillingness of the international commu-
nity to do more than diplomatic overtures and sanctions to try 
to end mass murder and genocide. Their hope is that concerned 
people will 
 Send a letter to President Obama today and demand that 
without these freedoms, the United States and the world 
must not recognize the results of an illegitimate elec-
toral process. Tell President Obama not to recognize the 
results of an illegitimate election. Send an email directly 
to the White House now and let them know you think 
the United States should lead the world in making sure 
brutal dictator Bashir is not allowed to claim legitimacy 
from a rigged election. 
 It is a sad commentary about the international community ’ s 
inaction in the face of genocide when concerned NGOs can do no 
more than encourage people to write protest letters to their politi-
cal leaders (also reprinted with permission of Martha Bixby and 
the Save Darfur Coalition). 
 This chapter will present (1) the deﬁ nition of the crime of 
genocide formulated by the United Nations after World War II, 
(2) some emergent issues that the world faced after 1948; and (3) 
brief examples of inhumane practices before (in cases of genocide) 
and during war (genocide and crimes against humanity) that have 
occurred during the 20th and 21st centuries. 

Events of the 20th Century That Led to the Concept of Genocide 5
 A Brief History of the Events of the 
20th Century That Led to the Concept 
of Genocide 
 Mass murder has occurred throughout history. The growth of the 
nation-state has led to new behaviors and immunity from action 
by other nations to prevent or stop genocide. Modern nations (from 
the 19th century onward) and their political and religious leaders, in 
the ideological effort to purify their society, or expand their territory, 
took efforts to rid the nation of unhealthy, diseased members of the 
sovereign nation. It certainly continued, with devastating horror and 
cruelty, in the 20th century and continues into the 21st century. The 
world community has not been able to prevent these actions taken 
by the leaders of sovereign nation-states against groups within the 
nation ’ s borders nor has mass murder been stopped when national 
leaders invade other states and take steps to round up, isolate, and 
then exterminate targeted groups. The following segments examine 
why, in the 20th century, mass murder committed with the intent to 
destroy a group or groups is different from earlier epochs, in great 
part because of the modernity of the nation-state.  
 The Sovereign Nation-State and Genocide 
 In the modern world, from the 1850s to the 21st century, the hallmark 
of this era is the sovereign nation-state. As will be shown, nation-
building has become the impetus for 20th-century genocides. 
 Some states are based on religious nationalism and  racist 
beliefs that groups in their society are inferior and therefore dan-
gerous to the health of the nation. For the nation ’ s continued, 
improved health, such less-than-human groups must be restrained 
and then disappear in order for the nation to achieve its destiny. 
 In the 20th century, for the ﬁ rst time in world history, mass 
killing and genocide became a massive state effort that required a 
state-sponsored policy and the use of the technology of the mod-
ern nation-state. “Mass killing is a huge endeavor that required 
the mobilization of enormous human, material, and administra-
tive forces. It needs incitement, organization, guile and denial, 
often simultaneously” ( Kiernan 2007, 34 ). 
 Given the technological strengths of the modern state, the mass 
production of arms, poison gas, dynamite, and other  innovations 

6 Background and History
brought about large-scale destruction, and radio, telegraph, and 
mass transportation by rail, road, and air all brought unspeak-
able violence into the civilian life of the nation-state (  Gellately and 
Kiernan 2003, 21, ff ). Also, if there was genocidal racism foisted 
by the political and religious leaders, two things occurred: (1) the 
state ’ s technological strengths overwhelmed the targeted victims 
and steps taken, as forecast in the national policy, that did ulti-
mately lead to extermination of that group, and (2) because of the 
strength of the universal concept of the inviolability of state sover-
eignty in the modern world, global justice actions are not taken by 
other, often horriﬁ ed nations. 
 According to international law, if a nation begins to act on 
the ﬁ nal solution, the genocide of the targeted group, the civilized 
world is responsible, under the terms of the 1948 Genocide Con-
vention, to take action against the perpetrators that will prevent 
or stop the genocide from taking place and to try those perpetra-
tors for committing universal crimes against innocent individuals. 
Sadly, however, for most of the 20th century, genocide trumped 
justice. 
 Genocidal policy of the nation ’ s political leaders needs racial 
hatred in the language of the society, the ability to have and use 
superior brute force to carry out the genocide policy, and “a cult 
of antiquity glorifying a lost history, a vision of ideal land use, and 
its deployment as justiﬁ cation for territorial aggression” (  Kiernan 
2007, 27  ). In world history, given the primacy of the nation-state 
system, colonial expansionism by the major nation-states was the 
natural order of events and  nothing  was done to prevent indig-
enous peoples from being nearly wiped out in Africa and Asia by 
these powers. Instead, there existed the doctrine of noninterven-
tion in the internal affairs of a nation-state: a doctrine that still has 
a prominent place in international  realpolitic . 
 Indeed, the ﬁ rst international treaties were written and signed 
by the major nation-states in the last half of the 19th century and 
these focused on the humane treatment of soldiers in wartime. 
 Treaties and Conventions to Restrain Military Action 
during Wars 
 From the middle of the 19th to early 20th century, the civilized 
world realized the horrible destruction that  total war produced—to 
military personnel and civilians in the path of the destruction. The 

Events of the 20th Century That Led to the Concept of Genocide 7
concept of total industrialized war was introduced in  international 
affairs in the middle of the 19th century. Unlike wars fought by 
nation-states prior to the American Civil War, this new type of 
war drew upon the entire society ’ s resources to defeat the enemy. 
In total war there is the mass mobilization of the entire population 
and its resources to ﬁ ght such wars across the globe. 
 Also, the distinction between civilian populations and the 
armed military forces of the nation-state dissolved. Unarmed 
civilians became targets of the armed enemy and, by the time of 
the Second World War, more civilians were killed than military 
forces. Winston Churchill spoke about this new type of warfare 
in a radio speech he gave to the nation, from the House of Com-
mons, on August 20, 1940: “There is another more obvious differ-
ence from 1914, the whole of the warring nations are engaged, not 
only soldiers but the entire population, men, women, and chil-
dren. The fronts are everywhere to be seen. The trenches are dug 
in the towns and streets. Every village is fortiﬁ ed. Every road is 
barred. The front lines run through the factories. The workmen 
are soldiers with different weapons but the same courage.” 
 The First World War, for the ﬁ rst time in world history, 
brought civilians into warfare “in all-encompassing new ways.” 
Women began to work in factories and in a limited number of 
military positions, mostly behind the lines of war. This age of 
patriotic nationalism brought entire populations into political life 
as both agents and victims. In that war, the German “Hun” was 
seen as a baby-slaughterer and vile rapist of women in occupied 
territories. 
 In humane efforts to restrain warring sides from  unnecessary 
cruelty in war, the world community wrote treaties that tried 
to limit inhumane behavior in war. Included in the 1907 Hague 
Treaty were the following: 
 limits on the treatment of the wounded on the ﬁ eld 
• 
of battle; 
 guidelines for the treatment of prisoners of war; 
• 
 restrictions on new and innovative techniques for 
• 
killing the enemy, or causing “superﬂ uous injuries”; 
 limits on the use of poison gas; 
• 
 banning of showing “no quarter” to captured or 
• 
wounded soldiers in and after battle; 
 “wantonly” destroying enemy cities or “caused 
• 
devastation not justiﬁ ed by military necessity”; 

8 Background and History
 “improperly using the ﬂ ag of truce;” 
• 
 “willfully damaging institutions dedicated to reli-
• 
gion, charity, and education, the arts and sciences, 
and works of art and science;” 
 attacking soldiers who had laid down their arms; 
• 
 using aerial bombs; 
• 
 violating a nation ’ s neutrality; 
• 
 using dum-dum bullets against the enemy; 
• 
 and committing to prevent the killing of civilians and 
• 
the destruction of nonmilitary targets (  Ball 1999  , 15–16).  
 Both the 1899 and 1907 Hague treaties also focused on the 
“duty owed by a belligerent occupant to citizens of the overrun 
nation.” This meant that the occupier “shall take all the measures 
in his power to restore and ensure, as far as possible, public order 
and safety, while respecting, unless absolutely prevented, the law 
in force in the country” ( Ball 1999, 16 ). 
 The primary theme at the heart of all these treaties was that 
“the right of belligerents to ﬁ ght war is not unlimited.” However, 
although there emerged—over one-half century—an  enumeration 
of “war crimes,” no enforcement mechanisms were ever built into 
the various international rules of military behavior and into the 
international treaties to punish those who violated these rules of 
war. (See, for example, Francis Lieber ’ s Rules of Engagement and 
Treatment of Prisoners of War for the Union Armies, 1864 [(emu-
lated by the Confederate Army and then by various European 
nations]; Hague Convention, 1899; Hague Convention, 1907; Ver-
sailles Treaty, 1919; the Geneva Conventions, 1925, 1949, 1977; and 
Kellogg-Briand Pact, 1928.) 
 The Deﬁ nition of Genocide, 1933–1948 
 There was no word to deﬁ ne the mass murders that took place 
throughout history until the Nazi government was created in 1933 
with Adolf Hitler as  der Führer , the leader, of Germany. “Geno-
cide,” writes Adam Jones, “is one of history ’ s deﬁ ning features, 
overlapping a range of central historical processes: war, imperial-
ism, state-building, and class struggle” ( Jones 2006, xxi ). 
 Scholars note that the ﬁ rst genocide in world history was 
Rome ’ s siege and eventual destruction of Carthage at the close of 
the Third Punic War (149–146 BCE). At least 150,000 Carthaginians 

Events of the 20th Century That Led to the Concept of Genocide 9
out of a population of more than nearly 2.5 million were killed by 
the Romans ( Jones 2006, 5–6, passim). 
 However, it was not until one Polish-Jewish legal scholar 
Raphael Lemkin, living in America in the early 1940s, began chron-
icling the cruel, horrible era of Nazi occupation of the  conquered 
nations of Europe that the word was created. 
 For Lemkin, who was obsessed with mass killings in history 
and the question of why such evil takes place (  Jones 2006, 9  ), there 
was a fundamental difference between war crimes and genocide. 
Genocide, he wrote, was “not only a crime against the rules of 
war, but a crime against humanity itself.” “The immorality of a 
crime such as genocide is not a war crime,” Lemkin argued, “and 
should not be confused with the amorality of war” (quoted in 
 Destexhe 1995 ). 
 Lemkin ’ s Original Deﬁ nition of Genocide, 1933 
 Although mass murder of groups took place in world history, 
the word “genocide” did not exist before 1944. Its creator, 
Raphael Lemkin, had the germ of the thought to prohibit such 
actions when, in 1933, he presented a paper to an international 
conference in Madrid, Spain (The International Conference for 
Uniﬁ cation of Criminal Law). His goal, in 1933 and later, was to 
have  international law recognize a general crime: the destruc-
tion of national groups. The laws of war were inadequate to 
recognize such a general plan of eradication. For Lemkin, such 
a crime “was not normal warfare, nor was it an excess of war, 
but a capital enterprise that went beyond war” (  Shaw 2007 
24–25 ). 
 In that document, he wrote about the need for the interna-
tional community to prohibit “Acts of Barbarity,” that is, actions 
that attempt to exterminate human groups, and “Acts of Vandal-
ism” that attempt to destroy a national group ’ s cultural heritage, 
whether in peacetime or in war because of their religious, ethnic, 
political, social status, and cultural views. The text of the Lemkin 
proposal read as follows: 
 Article 1. Whoever, out of hatred towards a racial, reli-
gious or social collectivity or with the goal of its exter-
mination, undertakes a punishable action against the 
life, the bodily integrity, liberty, dignity or the economic 
existence of a person belonging to such a collectivity, is 
liable, for the offense of barbarity. . . . 

10 Background and History
 Article 2. Whoever, either out of hatred towards a 
racial, religious, or social collectivity or with the goal of 
its extermination, destroys works of cultural or artistic 
heritage, is liable, for the offense of vandalism (  Lemkin 
1933 ). 
 Given that the world had not yet witnessed the brutality of 
the Nazi regime ’ s efforts to destroy Jews and other groups, Lem-
kin ’ s proposal to make these two concepts a part of the interna-
tional criminal law was not accepted at that time. 
 Forced to leave Poland when the Second World War began in 
September 1939, he escaped death at the hands of the Nazis by ﬂ ee-
ing across Russia to his ﬁ nal destination, the United States. There, 
he taught law at Duke University and served as a  consultant for 
the U.S. War Department. Through his European contacts and his 
research, Lemkin saw the wanton killings of large groups of civil-
ians—Jews, Gypsies, and Poles—and made a continuing effort to 
inform the U.S. State Department about these mass murders. 
 Lemkin Creates the Term “Genocide” in 1944 
 By 1944, with mountains of research on the actions of the Nazis 
when they occupied a nation, Lemkin wrote an important book, 
 Axis Rule in Occupied Europe: Laws of Occupation, Analysis of Gov-
ernment, Proposals for Redress , about the Nazi occupation of Europe 
and its methodical killing of millions of Jews living in Europe. In 
response to Winston Churchill ’ s view that was happening across 
Europe by the Nazi hordes “was a crime without a name,” in his 
1944 book, Lemkin provided these horrendous crimes alluded to 
by Churchill with a name:  genocide  (see Chapter 6, Documents). 
He formed the word by combining  geno - from the Greek word for 
race or tribe, with - cide , the Latin word for murder. Lemkin wrote 
in the 1944 book that genocide “. . . is a conspiracy aimed at the 
total destruction of a group and thus requires a concerted plan of 
action. It is a coordinated plan of different actions aiming at the 
destruction of essential foundations of the life of national groups, 
with the aim of annihilating the groups themselves.” However, 
although the word began to be used descriptively by the Allies, it 
had no force of law until 1948. 
 The UN Narrowly Deﬁ nes Genocide, 1948 
 On December 9, 1948, three years after the trials of the leading 
Nazi and Japanese leaders began and after years of negotiating 

Events of the 20th Century That Led to the Concept of Genocide 11
behind the scenes by delegates, the UN approved the  Convention 
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. 
Lemkin was the leading advocate of such a treaty, and his life 
from 1944 to 1948 was spent successfully convincing representa-
tives of the nations that made up the UN that such a treaty had 
to be drawn up and be made a crucial part of international law. 
The treaty itself established genocide as an international crime, 
and the nations who signed it pledged to “undertake to prevent 
and punish.” However, it is important to note that for centuries, 
the nation-state and its leaders were immune to international 
pressure. 
 The sovereign nation-state, wrote Jones, “trumped every-
thing. The state [had] an immunity to do what it wanted with 
its own citizens.” There was, and continues into the 21st cen-
tury, the concept of state sovereignty (  Jones 2006, 9  ). As another 
scholar wrote: “the movement for global justice has been a strug-
gle against SOVEREIGNTY, the doctrine of non-intervention in 
the internal affairs of nation-states asserted by all governments 
which have refused to subject the treatment they mete out to 
their citizens to any independent external scrutiny” (  Robertson 
2002, xxx ). 
 The international legal deﬁ nition of genocide is found in Arti-
cles II and III of the Convention. Article II contains the two funda-
mentals of the crime: (1) the mental element, which is the “intent” 
to commit the crime, must be shown, and (2) a  description of the 
tangible acts that constitute the crime. The concept “. . . brings 
together a whole class of violent and humiliating actions against 
members of [a targeted] collective; it was a general charge that 
highlighted the common elements of many acts that, taken sep-
arately, constituted speciﬁ c crimes. The common feature: their 
threat to the existence of a collectivity and thus to the social order 
as well” ( Shaw 2007, 18 ). 
 Genocide, for Lemkin, was a destructive process, not just 
the physical destruction of a group. Although different in some 
ways from war, genocide is like war “because it involves the 
development of strategies, moments of preparation, organiza-
tion, supply, and deployment. Genocide, like war, involves 
political, economic and ideological and military power” (  Shaw 
2007, 36 ). 
 Genocide does not mean the immediate destruction of a 
group; it is a coordinated, comprehensive process of different 
actions aiming at the total destruction of a group over time. The 

12 Background and History
aim is to ultimately “annihilate” the targeted group (  Shaw 2007, 
19–20 ): 
 Article II. In the present Convention, Genocide means any of 
the following acts committed with  intent  to destroy,  in whole 
or in part, a national, ethnical, racial, or religious group, as 
such: killing members of the group; causing serious bodily 
or mental harm to members of the group; deliberately 
inﬂ icting on the group conditions of life calculated to bring 
about its physical destruction in whole or in part; imposing 
measures intended to prevent births within the group; forc-
ibly transferring children of the group to another group. 
 Article III. The following acts shall be punishable: 
Genocide; Conspiracy to commit genocide; Direct and 
Public incitement to commit genocide; Attempt to com-
mit genocide; Complicity in genocide. 
 Because of the central role Lemkin played in bringing the 
world ’ s leaders to accept the idea of crafting such an interna-
tional law, in 1946, the secretary general of the UN asked Lemkin 
to write the ﬁ rst draft of the Convention. In his original draft, 
Lemkin included  all  types of national human groups, including 
political and social groups, in Article II. In a resolution writ-
ten by him and passed by the UN in December 1946, genocide 
was deﬁ ned as “a denial of the right of existence of  entire human 
groups ”: 
 Such denial of the right to existence shocks the con-
science of mankind, results in great losses to humanity 
in the form of cultural and other contributions repre-
sented by these groups, and is contrary to moral law 
and the spirit and aims of the United Nations. Many 
instances of such crimes of genocide have occurred 
when  racial, religious, political or other groups  have been 
destroyed, entirely or in part. The punishment of the 
crime of  genocide is a matter of international concern. 
The [UN] General Assembly therefore, afﬁ rms that 
genocide is a crime under international law, which the 
civilized world condemns, and for the commission of 
which principals and accomplices—whether private 
individuals, public ofﬁ cials or statesmen, and whether 
the crime is committed on religious, racial, political, 

Events of the 20th Century That Led to the Concept of Genocide 13
or on any other grounds—are punishable. (Quoted in 
 Staub 2007, 7–8, my emphasis)  
 However, after two years of debate in the UN, which consists of 
sovereign nation-states, and with the start of the Cold War between 
Stalin ’ s Soviet Union and the West a reality, at Stalin ’ s insistence 
“political” and “social” groups were removed from  discussion regard-
ing possibly placement in Article II. (As later chapters will show, by 
1948, Stalin ’ s policy of purging his political and social enemies could 
be considered genocidal actions.) Although many nations believed 
that additional groups should be identiﬁ ed in Article II (cultural, eco-
nomic, and political groups), this, however, did not happen. 
 Three events that took place between 1948 and 1949 (The 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, December 10, 1948; 
the Genocide Convention, December 11, 1948; and the four 1949 
Geneva Conventions) “were the high water marks of the UN 
movement for human rights. . . . [However,] it proved powerless 
to move politicians or diplomats to prevent genocide across the 
world until the 1990 ’ s” ( Robertson 2002, 37 ). It was an “appalling 
failure” of will ( Robertson 2002, 37 ). 
 By 2009, more than 135 nations had formally ratiﬁ ed the Con-
vention and more than 70 nations have made provisions or passed 
legislation making the punishment of genocide part of their domes-
tic law. By the end of the 20th century,  genocidal murders were more 
than double the number of soldiers killed: 61 million military deaths in 
wartime versus at least 127 million victims of genocide ( Goldhagen 
2009, 33  ), although one scholar believes that only 61 million geno-
cidal deaths occurred in the 20th century ( Waller 2007, 15–16 ) .
 From the extermination of the Herreros by the Germans in 
1904 to the slaughter of Bosnian Muslims and Rwanda Tutsis 
(1992–1995 and 1994, respectively), the killing of civilians because 
of their race, ethnicity, or religion has gone on without interfer-
ence by outside nations until the 1990s. Since 1904, there has been 
no time when the world was free from ongoing mass annihilation 
and genocide. “Our time,” writes Goldhagen, “has been the age of 
mass murder” ( Goldhagen 2009, 55 ). 
 Jones has deconstructed the essence of genocide in the  following 
manner.  
 Genocide ’ s agents: state and ofﬁ cial authorities; 
 Its victims: social minorities who are essentially 
defenseless; 

14 Background and History
 Its goals: destruction/eradication of victim group 
and its culture; 
 Its scale: From targeting victim group in its total-
ity downward to its psychic and ﬁ nally, its physical 
extermination; 
 Its strategy: develop and implement a coordi-
nated plan of different actions to exterminate targeted 
group; 
 Its intent: it is committed with the intent to destroy 
the minority group in a deliberate, organized, and sys-
tematic manner ( Jones 2006, 19, ff ) .
 Another scholar has written that the ideology of genocide 
means “a set of symbols, rituals, stereotypes, and partially con-
cealed assumptions that dehumanize a people as a whole, justify 
the use of military power to destroy them, and are in turn rein-
forced by the economic, political, and military beneﬁ ciaries of that 
destruction” ( Sells 1998, 28 ). 
 Because U.S. policy makers were concerned that the Con-
vention might be used against Americans, the nation refused to 
ratify the Genocide treaty for more than four decades. However, 
during the administration of Ronald Reagan, the U.S. Senate rati-
ﬁ ed the treaty in November 1988. Before doing so, however, con-
servative senators added so many caveats to the legislation that 
it was nearly unenforceable. (See Chapter 3 for American policy 
 makers ’  concerns about such international law voiced from 1918 
to the present time.)  
 The Legal Manifestations of Genocide 
 As deﬁ ned by Lemkin and incorporated into the 1948 Genocide 
Convention, genocide 
 is the ultimate crime against humanity because it is 
legally deﬁ ned as the targeting of people for destruction 
on the basis of inherited, or genetic, or religious shared 
group characteristics that the victims cannot divest. 
Whereas political party afﬁ liation or social classes are not 
the same for one can move from bourgeoisie to another 
social class or political party—they have none of the 
impossibility of transforming one ’ s racial background. 
Nor were they covered in the 1948 Genocide Convention 
( Gellately and Kiernan 2003, 17 ) .

Events of the 20th Century That Led to the Concept of Genocide 15
 Although genocide became, with ratiﬁ cation, a major  universal 
crime, until the 1990s it  never  became the basis for legal actions 
against perpetrators who ordered and those who committed geno-
cide. Since 1948 the meaning of genocide has been “mired in dis-
agreements, misuse, and controversies. The common thread? Each 
of these controversies stands in the way of meaningful action to 
end genocide, once and for all” ( Human Rights 2008 ). 
 One critical element for such historical inaction,  intent to 
act to destroy a group, in whole or in part,  must be shown before 
any action could be taken by a national or a regional legal entity. 
Intent must be evident before an action can be labeled genocide. 
The intent of the Nazis to destroy, in whole or in part, Jews, Gyp-
sies, and Poles was clearly seen when the regime ’ s documents are 
read by jurists. There was clearly stated policy indicating intent to 
destroy the groups—whether in Hitler ’ s book,  Mein Kampf , or in 
published laws and regulations and military orders that clearly 
laid out the ﬁ nal solution for dealing with the targeted popula-
tions. For Hitler, the presence of the Jew in Germany despoiled the 
purity of the Aryan nation, and therefore these “deadly bacilli” 
had to be destroyed. 
 However, the critics maintain that the German habit of chron-
icling such deeds is unusual. In most cases of genocide in the 20th 
and 21st century, there has not been such clear intent shown, and 
this gives other nation-states and the UN an excuse for not calling 
the actions genocidal. However, although intent must be present, 
even if inferred by actions against a group taken by the govern-
ment, the  motive  for such genocidal actions is not part of the legal 
deﬁ nition of genocide ( Kiernan 2007, 18–19 ). 
 Another reason was the fact that the Genocide Conven-
tion was insufﬁ ciently broad: it excluded two national groups— 
political and social/economic—and, according to some scholars, it 
did not speciﬁ cally give a range of number of persons killed before 
any action could be labeled genocide—assuming intent was also 
present. 
 Finally, critics point out that the focus in Article II of the Geno-
cide Convention is physical destruction of the group, but not a 
group ’ s cultural destruction. For example, in the Bosnian War, 1992–
1995, genocide was motivated and justiﬁ ed by religious nationalism. 
Destruction of Bosnian centers of culture—major libraries, manu-
script collections, museums, and more than 1,400 Mosques—were 
destroyed by the Serbian religious nationalists (Orthodox Chris-
tians) as well as the Croats (Catholics). This  cultural destruction 

16 Background and History
was accompanied by the murders or  expulsions of Bosnian Mus-
lims, which totaled more than 500,000 civilians after four years of 
war ( Sells 1998, xiii, 10, passim). 
 Ironically,   Lemkin, in 1933  , called such actions by a nation 
to destroy a group ’ s cultural heritage, “acts of vandalism.” How-
ever, the 1948 Convention did not deﬁ ne such actions as one of the 
characteristics of genocide. Therefore, for example, post–World 
War II Chinese Communist government efforts to destroy Tibetan 
culture, as well as Brazil ’ s and Paraguay ’ s destruction of the cul-
ture of their indigenous tribes, are not genocidal actions. (With 
respect to physical destruction of a group, rape of the group ’ s 
women was initially not enumerated as a characteristic of geno-
cide. Only in the past two decades have such actions been consid-
ered genocidal.) 
 Although many journalists and political leaders use the term 
to describe  any  occurrence of human suffering, the irony is that 
the UN and individual nations “have been notoriously slow in 
recognizing and responding to genocide. . . . [Until the 1990s there 
was no] political will to intervene in actual cases” (  Human Rights, 
2008 ). 
 Serbia ’ s nearly successful effort to create a “Greater Serbia” 
by occupying and committing genocide against the Bosnian Mus-
lims and Croats was, for nearly one-half decade ignored by the 
world ’ s onlookers. Boyle points out, “[T]he West ’ s reluctance to 
recognize the commission of genocide in Bosnia, and the unwill-
ingness to act against it, is the root cause of the prolonged agony 
of the people of Bosnia-Herzegovina.” Because of their inaction 
for such a long period of time, 1991–1995, more than 200,000 Bos-
nians were exterminated by Serbian troops and Bosnian Serbian 
paramilitary units (  Boyle 1996  , viii). Why was there no effort to 
stop the exterminations and rapes and forced marches? For Boyle, 
a strategic reason for nonintervention in the ﬁ rst European geno-
cide since the Nazi actions was because the Bosnians were Mus-
lim and there is a prejudice against that group by Western nations 
(  Boyle 1996  , ix–x). As America ’ s Secretary of State Baker stated in 
1991: “[W]e do not have a dog in the hunt.” 
 Early 20th-Century “Genocides” 
 Imperialism (colonialism), wars, racism, agrarianism, and social 
revolutions are inextricably linked to the crime of genocide. These 
events can “facilitate” genocide of hated or unwanted groups 

Events of the 20th Century That Led to the Concept of Genocide 17
in a society. Any one of them can “predispose” a government, 
its leaders, and their followers to more easily see genocide as a 
 governmental policy (  Goldhagen 2009, 40–41  ). The crime of geno-
cide “transcends political labels.” It has been associated with the 
following types of societies: expanding colonialism; shrinking 
empires; religious communalism; atheistic dictatorships; unfet-
tered capitalism; national socialism; communist revolution; post-
communist nationalism; national security militarism; and Islamic 
terror ( Kiernan 2007, 37, ff ). 
 The ﬁ rst genocide in the 20th century—because of  expanding 
empire and racism—was carried out by the German military in 
1904–1907 in present-day Namibia in Southwest Africa, which 
was at the turn of the 20th century a German colony. The Her-
rero natives were herdsmen who moved their livestock and set up 
their homes in the 17th and 18th centuries in the territory that was 
colonialized by the Germans in the late 1800s. In 1885, the Herrero 
territory was annexed into German Southwest Africa. After the 
Herreros began attacking the settlers and the military, a German 
policy was established and implemented that exterminated four-
ﬁ fths of the Herrero population, including women and children. 
Those who survived the killings were removed from their homes 
and forced into the desert. 
 To control the region, the Germans literally wiped out the 
native Herreros. Colonialism is the establishment and mainte-
nance (through the use of military force), for an extended period 
of time, of a major power ’ s rule over a native group that is sepa-
rate and subordinate to that power, socially and geographically 
( Jones 2006, 39–40, ff ). 
 Prior to—and even after—the World War II era, there existed a 
“culture of impunity” for a nation ’ s leader who undertook destruc-
tive actions against national groups and indigenous groups whose 
territory was occupied by the nation. The men who ordered war 
crimes and crimes against humanity or what we now call geno-
cide were never punished for their behavior; neither were those 
followers who obeyed these illegal orders and war policies and 
wantonly killed targeted civilian populations. 
 However, worse than genocide committed on behalf of colo-
nial imperialism as a cause of genocide, is war. “Genocide and war 
are the Siamese Twins of history,” wrote   Jones (2006, 48, ff  ). “[War] 
accustoms a society to mass violence; greatly increases the quo-
tient of fear and hatred in a society; eases genocidal logistics by 
making it easier to mobilize the resources for  genocide;  provides 

18 Background and History
a smokescreen for genocide; fuels intracommunal  solidarity 
and intercommunal enmity; stokes grievances and a desire for 
revenge” ( Jones 2006, 48, ff ). 
 World War I was the apex of total industrial war. Genocide, 
noted Kiernan, requires superior technological and material power 
over a sizable population. “The nation ’ s technology overwhelms 
the victims” (  Kiernan 2007, 21, ff  ). In that war, the second “geno-
cide” took place. The extermination of nearly two million Chris-
tian Armenians living in the remnants of the Ottoman Empire, 
were targeted by the Young Turk Islamic government. The lead-
ership took advantage of the war to commit genocide against the 
Armenian minority living in the nation. 
 The slaughters began soon after World War I began, which 
saw Turkey allied with Germany. In April 1915, Armenian soldiers 
serving in the Turkish army were removed and then murdered. 
Armenian civilians living in the nation were forced into depor-
tation marches—after Armenian men and boys were murdered 
by Turkish police and military. Like the German colonial military 
in Southwest Africa, the Turkish strategy was to force march the 
women and children over mountains and into the desert. 
 During these marches, the Armenian women were system-
atically raped, tortured, and mutilated by Turkish perpetrators. 
The marchers were constantly attacked while on the road; they 
were not provided with food or water. Hundreds of thousands of 
them died during the long march. In the ﬁ nal analysis, more than 
half of the Armenian population in the Ottoman Empire (more 
than 1.5 million) was exterminated by the Young Turk govern-
ment. Although the peace treaty called for trials of the leaders of 
the  government for their policy of mass murder, opposition to the 
treaty in Turkey led to no action taken against the leaders of the 
nation who ordered the extermination of the Armenians (see   Ball 
1999  ). To this day, modern Turkey refuses to acknowledge that the 
government ’ s actions against the Armenians were genocide. 
 World War II exhibited the “barbarization of warfare,” as 
seen in Japanese actions against the Chinese and Nazi extermina-
tion of six million Jews, as well as the slaughter of Gypsies, Poles, 
Russians, and others, including Germans who were not worthy of 
life ( Jones 2006, 52–54 ). 
 Since 1945, there have been more than 250 wars and civil wars. 
Since the end of World War II, the civilian-to-military  casualty 
rate has been reversed, from 10 to 1 military casualties to 10 to 1 
civilian deaths ( Goldhagen 2009, 517 ). 

Events of the 20th Century That Led to the Concept of Genocide 19
 Finally, genocide has occurred during social and political 
revolutions where the winner in the civil war committed  genocide 
against their enemies. This occurred after the Russian Revolution 
of 1917, especially Soviet efforts to kill the Kulaks, which took 
place in the Chinese Communist revolution that began in the 
1930s. Revolutions, notes Jones, create conditions for genocidal 
movements to gain power (Nazis in Germany, Fascists in Italy, 
Communists in Russia and China, Communists in Cambodia). 
Revolution makes possible the imposition of radical ideologies 
and new orders that legitimized genocide: social mobilization of 
low-class or despised groups that helped make them targets of 
genocide and the development of genocidal state policy against a 
group ( Jones 2006, 55–56 ). 
 International Military Tribunals in Germany 
and Japan, 1945–1948 
 With the ad hoc International Military Tribunals convened in 
Nuremberg and Tokyo by the victors in the years between 1945 
and 1948, a new reality seemed to emerge in international law: the 
ending of a “culture of impunity”; leaders and major followers 
were put on trial for their actions and, after mass of evidence was 
presented by the prosecutors, they were found guilty, and most 
were sentenced to death. 
 At the Nuremberg trial of the major Nazi political and  military 
leaders, 22 men were charged with waging aggressive war, war 
crimes, and crimes against humanity. A few defendants commit-
ted suicide, and three men were acquitted. Most of the others 
were sentenced to death (see   Ball 1999  ). In the countries occupied 
by the Nazis during the war, national tribunals tried and found 
guilty many hundreds of Nazi perpetrators. 
 Tokyo war crimes tribunal, begun in 1946, saw 25 military 
and political leaders tried before a panel of 11 judges (each jurist 
represented each nation occupied by Japan or who were wartime 
enemies of the Japanese Empire). All were found guilty of wag-
ing aggressive war, some were found guilty for the inhumane 
 treatment of prisoners of war, and key military generals for delib-
erately and recklessly disregarding their duty to take adequate 
steps to prevent their troops from committing atrocities during the 
war. Seven of the 25 were executed, and as happened in Europe, 
many of the occupied nations indicted, tried, and punished lower 
level Japanese military leaders in their own courts. 

20 Background and History
 One critical outcome was the creation of the Constitution 
of the International Military Tribune (the Nuremberg Charter) 
used by prosecutors in both major trials of the defeated enemies, 
 Germany and Japan. This was followed, after the major German 
and Japanese trial ended, by the UN ’ s adoption of the seven 
Nuremberg Principles, which were segments of the Constitution 
of the International Military Tribunals. 
 Compared with current problems regarding genocide, these 
post–World War II trials were relatively free of problems and con-
troversies. Robertson wrote that Nuremberg ’ s legacy was that 
there are no human rights without remedies for human wrongs: 
crimes against humanity and that Nuremberg 
 . . . stands as a colossus in the development of inter-
national human rights law, precisely because its char-
ter  deﬁ ned  crimes against humanity and its  procedures 
proved by acceptable and credible evidence that such 
crimes had been instigated by some of the defendants 
( Robertson 2002, 231 ) .
 The Nuremberg Charter (see Chapter 6) and the trial of the 
top Nazi leaders established in international law the concept of 
 universal jurisdiction . Because of the severity of the crime against 
humanity committed by perpetrators, any court anywhere “is 
empowered by international law to try it and to punish it, irrespec-
tive of its place of commission or the nationality of the offender or 
the victims” ( Robertson 2002, 254, ff ). 
 Key Issues Associated with Genocide 
 “Under what conditions do governments and their agents decide 
on the utterly utopian goal of destroying a problem popula-
tion?” (  Gellately and Kiernan 2003, 9  ). How can people kill other 
people, often neighbors and friends? Is the extraordinary evil 
in genocide committed by pathologically cruel sadists and mad-
men? As this segment will point out,  ordinary people —doctors, 
lawyers, religious persons, academics, opera buffs, law enforce-
ment ofﬁ cers—do the killing. How that happens is examined 
below. The principal keys to this reality occurring are (1) the 
collective called the nation-state and (2) the political leaders of 
nation-states.  

Key Issues Associated with Genocide 21
 Why Do People Kill Other People? 
 In Greg Iles ’  book,  The Devil ’ s Punchbowl , one of his characters, a 
retired Texas Ranger, is attending a dogﬁ ght in rural  Louisiana. 
He hears the screams and yells of the rednecks watching the 
bloody, cruel spectacle: 
 Walt ’ s stomach heaves, unable to tolerate the mixture 
of anger and disgust flooding through him. This is 
like standing in a room where prisoners are forced 
to fight or copulate for the pleasure of their guards. 
The Nazis did that, and the Japanese, and probably 
the jailers of all nations in all epochs of history. . . . The 
spectre of Abu Ghraib rises in his mind. The terrible 
truth is that  brutality is part of human nature , and all 
the laws in the world can ’ t neuter it” (  Iles 2009, 477  , 
my emphasis) .
 Genocide occurs many times when the nation is at war. Dur-
ing a total war, when national fervor and xenophobia are at their 
peak, it is easy for the leader to accomplish the “depersonaliza-
tion” of all the members of the targeted group or groups. During 
war, the nation ’ s population is eager to ignore the “personhood” 
of the individual members of that hated group and brutally kill 
them, “systematically and intentionally,” without any mercy 
(  Waller 2007, ix  ). Brutality, when certain conditions exist in a soci-
ety, a part of human nature, is let loose. What are the inﬂ uences 
that enable ordinary citizens to “unleash [their] extraordinary 
evil destructive capacities” and become genocidal perpetrators? 
( Waller 2007, xii–xvii ). 
 There are three  proximate  cultural causes that explain  how 
such behavior occurs in a nation ’ s population: (1) the society ’ s 
cultural construction of a worldview (reﬂ ecting the views of 
its political leaders), (2) the psychological construction of the 
“other,” the group targeted for extermination, and (3) and the 
social construction of cruelty in that nation. Under certain condi-
tions, “these converge interactively to impact individual behavior 
in situations of collective violence” (  Waller 2007, xvii  ), and (the 
 why  for genocidal actions in a nation), there is an  ultimate cause 
present, triggered by the nation ’ s leaders, which is the rationale 
for proximate behavior to evolve into genocide (see   Waller 2007, 
139–258, passim). 

22 Background and History
 Central in all these causes is the role of “language and  imagery” 
in a nation-state. Goldhagen believes they are the 
 . . . speciﬁ c beliefs that people, through language, relate 
to one another; the fundamental reality of how people, 
leaders and followers, become cognitively, psychologi-
cally, and emotionally prepared to give themselves to 
the elimination of others, and how people become mobi-
lized to attack, dragoon, expel, or kill others (  Goldhagen 
2009, 313 ) .
 Language “dehumanizes and demonizes” the potential vic-
tims in the society. For example, in Nazi Germany, Hitler, and other 
Nazi leaders, sharing the general hatred of the Jew with the popu-
lation, had no difﬁ culty describing the Jew as criminal, as a demon, 
and as subhuman and not worthy of life. Killing such subhumans 
is both natural and necessary for the German state to regain its 
lost purity ( Goldhagen 2009, 319 ). All other genocides  must and 
do  dehumanize the targeted group before proceeding to the next 
stages in the march toward genocide and mass killing. Examples 
of dehumanizing language actually used by genocidists include 
the following phrases: The victim is to be murdered because 
 “To allow you to live is no beneﬁ t, to destroy you is no 
loss.” (Cambodia) 
 You are an “undesirable parasite.” (Bosnia) 
 You are a “rodent, vermin, or a disease carrier.” (all) 
 You are “less valuable than a pig, because a pig is edi-
ble.” (Japan) 
 You are “a sleazy cockroach.” (Rwanda) 
 You are “dog food.” (Turkey) 
 You are “unworthy of Life.” (Germany) 
 You are “wearing glasses.” (Cambodia) 
 Your murder “would create no greater moral weight 
than squashing a bug or butchering a hog.” (Japan) 
( Ball 1999 , 220) 
 Proximate Cause 1. The cultural construction of a nation ’ s 
worldview is the background, the lens, through which its citizens 
interpret their social environment and base their actions on. Waller 
identiﬁ es at least three such models: a  collectivistic  model, where 
group values are the basis of an individual ’ s behavior; an  authority 

Key Issues Associated with Genocide 23
model, whose values order the social world and its  people accord-
ing to their power and position in the society ’ s hierarchy; and the 
 social dominance  model, based on the development and mainte-
nance of hierarchical values. 
 Proximate Cause 2. The psychological construction of the 
“other” in a society shows how a group or groups in a nation 
become the objects of the nation ’ s actions through the process of 
 we – they  thinking. This proximate cause becomes the “social death 
of the victims—they are excommunicated from a common moral 
community and slowly become the objects of perpetrators ’  cruel 
actions” (  Waller 2007, 197–198  ), and social death occurs daily in 
the victims ’  lives. It makes their lives meaningless because of the 
daily legal, social, and economic indignities and hardships they 
experience. It is the prerequisite step before deportation, expul-
sion, and the ﬁ nal solution for the nation: genocide. 
 This proximate cause enables the society to disengage itself 
from the group targeted for social death and ultimately physi-
cal death. Death of the victim group is necessary for the nation ’ s 
 survival. To do this over a period of time, there is the dehuman-
ization process, which creates a psychological distance between 
the victims and the rest of society. They are not human; they are 
disease carriers, parasites, insects, and vermin. Such psychologi-
cal distancing makes it easier to exterminate the victim group. 
Therefore, the society must do this in order to remain healthy and 
free of germs and the sickness brought on by these victims. 
 Proximate Cause 3. The social construction of cruelty is the 
ﬁ nal proximate cause. This proximate cause contains the factors 
that provide the perpetrators with a coping mechanism for their 
wanton cruelty toward the victims. This social construction is 
“an inverted moral universe in which right becomes wrong, heal-
ing has become killing, and life has become death.” It explains 
how ordinary people, not sadists, become extraordinary evil 
killers. The killers in such a society lose their individuality, and 
the prime societal value is extraordinary evil. It is inherent in 
the law, in justice, and in all other communal values. There is, in 
short, the evolving repression of individual conscience in such 
a nation-state through conformity to peer pressure and rational 
self-interest. 
 The ultimate inﬂ uence is the political leader ’ s ability to acti-
vate the proximate causes—through control of the media, repeated 
propaganda—over and over again through time, and thus unleash 
the innate characteristics inherent in human beings: aggressiveness 

24 Background and History
and other bad human instincts. It is the ideology of the nation ’ s 
leaders ’  that enables them to identify domestic  enemies and pro-
vides the nation with the solution to the problem: genocide. 
 Human beings are evolving animals; they do evil because they 
can and this impulse to do evil “qualiﬁ es as a human capacity. . . . 
We all have dark sides and given the conﬂ uence of  contributing 
factors, we are all capable of terrible deeds” (  Waller 2007, 160–
161  ). These allow for, as Hannah Arendt suggested in her book 
about the Eichmann trial in Israel, the “banality of evil” to take 
place ( Arendt 2006 ). 
 Underscoring the emergence of genocidal acts in a nation is 
the presence of politics. Politics is central in the genesis of mass 
murder and genocide. Genocide is a political act; it is a policy of 
the state (  Goldhagen 2009, 68–69  ). Although the possibility of 
extermination of a hated religious or ethnic group is a nascent 
ideal held by members of the community, politics actualizes 
these thoughts of hatred and fear, and intentional acts of geno-
cide occur. As Goldhagen observes, “The most virulent hatred 
of a group does not result in systematic slaughter unless politi-
cal leaders mobilize and organize those who hate into a program 
of killing” (  Goldhagen 2009, 69  ). When the nation is at war, the 
political leaders ﬁ nd it easier to mobilize the public to act against 
the target group. 
 Perpetrators, Victims, and Bystanders 
 In his 1944 book, Lemkin wrote the following: 
 The instigators and initiators of a genocide are cool-
minded theorists ﬁ rst and barbarians only second. The 
speciﬁ city of genocide does not arise from the extent of 
the killings, nor their savagery or resulting infamy, but 
solely from the  intention : the destruction of a group. 
 If German voters had not given the Nazis an electoral vic-
tory in 1933, if Hitler had not become der Führer, the leader, of 
the nation, the genocidal policy immediately begun by the Nazis 
in 1933—ordered by Hitler—would not have emerged. “If other 
people held power, if leaders had decided on other [nongeno-
cidal policies], there would have been no mass murder of the 
Jews, Gypsies, and other groups” (  Goldhagen 2009, 73–74  ). The 

Key Issues Associated with Genocide 25
Germans would still have held onto their malicious views of the 
Jew but would not have taken any organized actions against that 
group if the political leaders had not developed a state policy of 
genocide against that religious/racial group. 
 The political leader of the state—a Hitler, or a Pol Pot, or a 
Stalin—is the critical factor in triggering actions and state policies 
that ultimately lead to genocide. The leader is “the prime mover 
of mass murder” (  Goldhagen 2009, 78  ). Most genocidal leaders 
want to  purify  their society by getting rid of the groups that infect 
the social community. Identifying the leader ’ s aspirations, views 
of the world, moral values, hatreds, and prejudices is the critical 
knowledge one needs to understand why some leaders move to 
genocide and others do not. 
 Once the “great man,” the political leader, assumes power, 
the policy is developed through discriminatory laws, severe pro-
scriptions against members of the targeted group. Although Hit-
ler centralized control over the “Jewish” policy, local groups—the 
police, the military, the race haters—took the  pleasurable initiative 
of interpreting and implementing the policies. Social death of the 
targeted group occurs daily: members of the group are barred 
from practicing and teaching law, from practicing their profes-
sional jobs, from selling goods to non-Jews, from serving in the 
civil service and the military, from marrying Germans, and from 
doing business with Germans. 
 All those who participate in the development of state policies 
that will ultimately lead to the social and then physical deaths of 
the hated group are perpetrators. All those citizens who imple-
ment these discriminatory policies against members of the group 
are perpetrators as well. 
 A perpetrator “is  anyone who knowingly contributes in some 
tangible fashion to the deaths of others, or to injuring others as 
part of an annihilationist program” (  Goldhagen 2009, 91  ). These 
perpetrators see the targeted group as vermin, lice, or disease car-
riers; because the victims are not human, it is the perpetrators sol-
emn duty to exterminate them. 
 Once Hitler moved to implement the Final Solution to the 
Jewish problem (which occured after the social death of the Jews 
reached its apex), the military became the prime state  organization 
tasked to carry out the policy. The perpetrators are the willing 
and obedient military leaders who develop the procedures, the 
institutions, and the logistics for the killings as well as the special 
military units tasked to implement the killing process. 

26 Background and History
 The victims, the targets of the genocidal policies crafted by 
the political leaders, are murdered in a variety of ways: They are 
gassed, shot, starved, beaten, and tortured. Machine guns, clubs, 
machetes, knives, clubs, and rakes are some of the tools used by 
the perpetrators to exterminate the victims. 
 If a person in Germany approved of the extermination policy 
of the Nazi government, he killed the victims. If another person 
approved the genocidal policy but did not kill, he was not pun-
ished. Such persons were not “coerced” because, in Nazi Germany, 
there were many willing perpetrators. They were, as were most 
of the citizens living in Nazi Germany, a “supportive bystander” 
(  Goldhagen 2009, 146, ff  ). (Given peer pressure in Nazi Germany, 
few men in the military or in police battalions used for extermina-
tion tasks refused to participate in the slaughter.) 
 The Stages Leading to Genocide 
 There have been ﬁ ve principal types of actions that lead,  ultimately, 
to a nation ’ s intentional effort to exterminate one or more domestic 
groups in the society: (1) transformation, the destruction of the 
group ’ s deﬁ ning identity; (2) repression, reducing by violent 
methods the hated group ’ s ability to harm others in the nation; 
(3) expulsion, the deportation of the hated group from the nation 
or territory; (4) prevention of reproduction by systematic rapes 
of women in the group or through sterilization; and (5) the ﬁ nal 
solution, extermination of the members of the targeted group by 
intentional actions of the state ’ s agents, primarily the military 
( Goldhagen 2009 , 14–18). 
 Summing up, there are no less than eight stages of an unin-
terrupted, implemented genocidal policy in a nation-state (  Stan-
ton 1998 ). Genocide is a policy developed by the political leader 
or leaders of the nation-state. The progression toward the ﬁ nal 
solution can be halted by change in leaders, revolution, or civil 
war, but not by the targeted groups themselves nor, presently, by 
actions of the international community. 
 As will be seen in Chapter 4, which describes 20th-century 
genocides, each one is different in terms of time, culture, and 
technological development. However, they all, some very quickly 
(the Rwandan genocide, 1994) and others more slowly (the 
Jewish genocide, 1933–1945), reach the ﬁ nal solution stage: the 
intentional murder of some or all of the members of that hated 
group. 

Key Issues Associated with Genocide 27
 The initial stage is the reality that all national cultures have 
language and values to distinguish and  classify  the various societal 
groups. Because of these psychological and sociological distinc-
tions, one or more groups, because of their religion or ethnicity or 
their race, are historically labeled as different and  dangerous  to the 
larger body politic. 
 In the second stage, these classiﬁ cations become visible 
symbols (Jews, Gypsies, Muslims, Blacks, Hindus, and Ban-
tus) in the society, and if the culture has historically disdained 
the group, there has also emerged over time a hatred of these 
members. If the hatred is accompanied by political change in 
the society, where the new political leadership is committed to 
destroy these “nonhumans,” social customs and laws are gen-
erated to discriminate against these unwanted groups. This 
is the beginning of the group ’ s social death. Physical  symbols 
are forced upon the targeted group to distinguish them from 
the “pure” citizens, and so Jews were forced to wear yellow 
Jewish stars on their clothing, and the targeted urban persons 
and religious minorities in Cambodia were forced to wear blue 
scarves. 
 The third stage in the march to genocide is the further con-
tinuation of the social death of the group through their  dehuman-
ization . Wartime hastens this movement because of the primacy 
of nationalism, ethnocentrism, and xenophobia. In all spheres of 
social life in that nation, the members are denied their humanity. 
They are called cockroaches, vermin, and disease carriers. They 
are forbidden entry into most professions in the society. Further, 
radio, ﬁ lm, theatre, and the press broadcast and print and speak 
hateful words about the group and its danger to the nation. Hate 
crimes begin to proliferate, and individual members of the hated 
group are beaten up and murdered randomly; their stores are 
desecrated, their houses of worship burned down, and all other 
elements of their lives are disrupted over and over again by mem-
bers of the larger society. 
 Stage four is the state ’ s  organization  of the nation ’ s person-
nel, especially its police units and special military units, into 
perpetrators who strike against the targeted group. Other gov-
ernment bureaucrats plan for the eventual destruction of the 
group through deportation to ghettos and then transport them 
to concentration camps and killing centers. They determine how 
to organize the transportation system to move the group ’ s mem-
bers (which can reach millions of persons), and they also draw 

28 Background and History
up various plans for the killing of these groups—efﬁ ciently and 
effectively. 
 In the ﬁ fth, stage, the  polarization  of the society ’ s groups has 
taken place. Propaganda, however, continues to describe the tar-
geted group in hateful ways. Members of the group continue to 
live in a heavily discriminated society, slowly losing their human-
ity and their lives because of the continued beatings, rapes, and 
murders that occur with impunity. 
 By the sixth stage in the march to the ﬁ nal solution, the  prep-
arations  for the genocide have or are about to be completed by 
the political leaders and their local surrogates. Ghettos are iden-
tiﬁ ed, killing centers are built, transportation plans have been 
approved, roundups of the group ’ s members are planned or 
already  underway. There are no due process guarantees that can 
be used by the targeted group. They are the powerless victims of 
these societal actions against them. They live at the mercy of the 
state ’ s perpetrators. 
 Then comes stage seven, the beginning of the  extermination 
process. The plans are implemented by the perpetrators. The 
group is rounded up, segregated into ghettos, shipped to concen-
tration camps and ﬁ nally, to the killing centers. This intentional 
mass killing of the members of the group, solely because of their 
race, religion, or nationality, or ethnicity, is what Lemkin called 
genocide. The world community has viewed the movement 
toward this stage but, because of the concept of nonintervention 
into the domestic affairs of the nation-state, nothing is done. There 
is no intervention even though hundreds of thousands, millions, 
of innocent civilians are seen in ghettos and concentration camps 
and killing centers, and stories emerge from these regions about 
the fate of these people. 
 The eighth stage is the genocide denial phase. In this stage, 
“the perpetrators of genocide dig up the mass graves, burn the 
bodies, try to cover up the evidence and intimidate the witnesses. 
They deny that they committed any crimes, and often blame what 
happened on the victims. They block investigations of the crimes, 
and continue to govern until driven from power by force, when 
they ﬂ ee into exile” ( Stanton 1998 ). They also argue that, as good 
soldiers, they were merely following the orders of their political 
and military leaders. 
 At any of the stages leading to genocide, the international 
community—either through the UN or through actions by the 
major powers—could intervene and stop genocide from  occurring. 

References 29
The history of the 20th century, however, indicates that this did 
not happen. The next chapter examines this tragic reality. 
 References 
 Arendt, H. 2006.  Eichmann in Jerusalem: The Banality of Evil . New York: 
Penguin Classics. 
 Ball, H. 1999.  Prosecuting War Crimes and Genocide . Lawrence, KS: 
 University Press of Kansas. 
 Boyle, F. A. 1996.  The Bosnian People Charge Genocide: Proceedings at the 
International Court of Justice concerning BOSNIA V. SERBIA on the 
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide . Amherst, MA: 
Alethia Press. 
 Burke, J. L. 2009.  Rain Gods . New York: Simon and Schuster. 
 Destexhe, A. 1995.  Rwanda and Genocide in the Twentieth Century . New 
York: New York University Press. 
 Gellately, R., and B. Kiernan 2003.  The Spectre of Genocide: Mass Murder in 
Historical Perspective . New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Goldhagen, D. J. 2009.  Worse than War: Genocide, Eliminationism, and the 
Ongoing Assault on Humanity . New York: Public Affairs Press. 
 Human Rights. 2008. Five Controversies on Genocide (. . . but 
not the only ﬁ ve).  http://humanrights.change.org/blog/
view/5_controversies_on_genocide_but_not_the_only_ﬁ ve . 
 Iles, G. 2009.  The Devil ’ s Punchbowl . New York: Scribner ’ s. 
 Jones, A. 2006.  Genocide: A Comprehensive Introduction . New York: 
Routledge. 
 Kiernan, B. 2007.  Blood and Soil: A World History of Genocide and Extermi-
nation from Sparta to Darfur . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
 Lemkin, R. 1933.  Acts Constituting a General (Transnational) Danger 
 Considered as Offences against the Law of Nations , report presented at the 
5th Conference for the Uniﬁ cation of Penal Law, Madrid, Spain, October 
14–20, 1933.  http://www.preventgenocideinternational.org . 
 Patterson, J. 2008.  Cross Country . New York: Vision. 
 Robertson, G. 2002.  Crimes against Humanity: The Struggle for Global 
Justice . London: Penguin. 
 Sells, M. 1998.  The Bridge Betrayed: Religion and Genocide in Bosnia . 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
 Shaw, M. 2007.  What Is Genocide? Malden, MA: Polity Press. 

30 Background and History
 Stanton, G. H. 1998.  The 8 Stages of Genocide . (Originally presented as a 
brieﬁ ng paper at the U.S. State Department in 1996.)  http://www
.genocidewatch.org/aboutgenocide/8stagesofgenocide.html . 
 Staub, E. 2007.  The Roots of Evil: The Origins of Genocide and Other Group 
Violence . Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press. 
 Temin, J. 2010. United States Institute of Peace. Negotiating Sudan ’ s 
post-referendum arrangements.  http://www.usip.org/resources/
negotiating-sudans-post-referendum-arrangements . 
 Waller, J. 2007.  Becoming Evil: How Ordinary People Commit Genocide and 
Mass Killing . 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press. 

31
 2 
 Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions 
 T
he goal of the 1948 Genocide Convention was to modify interna-
tional law so that the United Nations (UN) or the  nation-state, 
facing the prospect of genocide and mass murder in another 
nation, will devise strategies to stop, or intervene quickly, and 
provide justice for the victims and the perpetrators who planned 
and ordered the genocide. It was a reﬂ ection of the reality of Nazi 
and Japanese crimes against humanity during the long Second 
World War and would be an action that would enable the UN 
and nation-states to  aggressively act  to make sure genocide never 
emerges from any nation-state or territory. 
 Throughout world history, social conﬂ ict, including mass 
murder of innocent civilians, has been “ubiquitous.” Wars erupted 
constantly in history. The 20th century was no exception.  Genocides 
emerge during wartime and after “extreme social and political cri-
sis, where normal rules of behavior are suspended and violence is 
honored” ( Gellately and Kiernan 2003, 56 ). 
 Even after Nuremberg and Tokyo War Crimes Tribunals and 
the appearance of the Nuremberg Principles, the Genocide Con-
vention of 1948, and the four Geneva Conventions of 1949, the 
next four decades unfortunately did not deviate from prior world 
history. There were more than 200 wars (including civil wars), 
involving more than 60 nation-state members of the UN. There 
were only 26 days of world peace during those years ( Waller 2007, 
xiv  ). “Until [the war in] Bosnia, the world pretended that Nurem-
berg never happened, the precedent it established was ignored” 
( Robertson, 2002, 220 ). 

32 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 The international community was at fault for its inaction 
over these decades. It did not prevent mass murder and geno-
cides; justice was sacriﬁ ced in the name of national sovereignty. 
As  Goldhagen states: “The international community must become 
more than a ﬁ ction: it is now a loose collection of individual states 
that come together to agree or disagree” ( Goldhagen 2009, 570 ). 
 This chapter presents some of the reasons for this state of 
affairs. It also discusses a variety of efforts taken by the interna-
tional community to try to ﬁ gure out  how  to prevent or intervene 
and then to punish the perpetrators of these universal crimes, 
including two UN-created ad hoc tribunals (Yugoslavia and 
Rwanda), national tribunals, and, in 2002, the formal beginning 
of the world ’ s ﬁ rst permanent International Criminal Court (ICC) 
created by the UN. 
 Fifty Years of Nonuse of the 1948 
Genocide Convention, 1948–1998 
 Unfortunately, after the trials of the major Nazi and Japanese lead-
ers ended, the principle of sovereign impunity reemerged. Until 
the Bosnian War, 1992–1995, “the world pretended that Nurem-
berg never happened; the precedent it established was ignored” 
(  Robertson 2002, 219–220  ). The “. . . intervening half century [after 
1948],” commented Samantha Power, “had not been kind to the 
term [genocide]” ( Power 2002, 478 ). 
 Although there have been many mass exterminations and 
genocides committed since 1949, until genocides were committed in 
the former Yugoslavia (Bosnia), 1992–1995; Rwanda, 1994; and 
Sierra Leone, 1997, no action was taken to either stop the genocidal 
actions or try and then punish, if found guilty, the perpetrators. 
 Some examples of genocides committed with impunity during 
this time include Pol Pot ’ s slaughter of urban Cambodians and small 
religious groups; Stalin ’ s mass murder of the Russian Kulaks; the 
Chinese Communist (Mao Tse-Tung) policy of exterminating Chi-
nese and Tibetans; Pakistan ’ s General Tikka Khan ’ s genocide of the 
Bangladeshi Bengali Muslims; General Suharto ’ s (Indonesia) mass 
murder of domestic communists; Guatemalan presidents Garcia and 
Montt ’ s mass murder of the indigenous Naya; Ethiopia ’ s murder of 
Ethiopians; the Argentina junta ’ s “dirty war” against their domes-
tic enemies (socialists,  communists); Chile ’ s Augusto Pinochet ’ s 

Fifty Years of Nonuse of the 1948 Genocide Convention, 1948–1998 33
murdering domestic enemies; Syrian president Hafez  Al-Assad ’ s 
 extermination of the Hamas; Iraq ’ s Saddam Hussein ’ s use of poison 
gas to murder Iraqis, Iranians ’ , and Kurds ’ ; and Sudan ’ s president 
Omar  al-Bashir ’ s effort to exterminate South Sudanese and black 
Arabs in the Darfur region of the nation. Those political and military 
leaders responsible for these actions have acted with near-absolute 
impunity until the last decade of the 20th century. 
 Ruth-Gaby Vermot Mangold, the president of the Society for 
Threatened Peoples, said recently: “I ’ ve looked at the list of all the 
genocides of the past (20th) century. One just follows the other [cit-
ing genocidal events on Cambodia, Rwanda, Bosnia- Herzegovina, 
and Darfur]. The international community has failed to prevent 
genocides, which is the main aim of the convention” (   Human 
Rights Tribune 2008 ). 
 The reasons for such dramatic disuse of the Genocide Conven-
tion were alluded to in Chapter 1. This chapter further explores 
the problems that have led the world to this ongoing tragedy. 
 However, with the conviction of Bosnian Serb General Kristic 
in the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia 
(ICTY) in a courtroom in The Hague, for war crimes and genocide 
of Bosnian Muslims in Srebrenica, in August 2001, some inter-
nationalists saw the beginning of the path to enforcement of the 
Genocide Convention. The defendant, Kristic, was sentenced to 
46 years in prison (  Power 2002, 479, ff  ). That event, the ﬁ rst person 
convicted of genocide in the ICTY, came after unpunished geno-
cides in Iraq and Cambodia—the genocide of Kurds by Saddam 
Hussein in 1988 and the 1975–1979 tragedy in Cambodia—led 
some nations and dozens of human rights nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs) to demand that a criminal court be created 
to indict and try these genocidist leaders. The wars in the former 
Yugoslavia was the event that led to some legal action by the UN. 
(The world ’ s very ﬁ rst conviction for the crime of genocide came 
in the International Criminal Tribunal, Rwanda [ICTR] in Septem-
ber 1998 when Jean-Paul Akayesu, the mayor of Taba, Rwanda, 
was found guilty of genocide and crimes against humanity.) 
 Critics of the ICC and the UN were not convinced that the 
age of impunity was ending that suddenly. 
 Critics of the Genocide Convention 
 Since 1948, many scholars and critics, because of the politicized birth 
of the Genocide Convention, have insisted that the  Convention is 

34 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
too narrow to be used as a deterrent to state actions that it labeled 
“genocide.” The 1948 Genocide Convention contains no effective 
enforcement mechanisms. As Juan Mendez, an Argentinian law-
yer and president of the International Center for Transitional Jus-
tice said in 2008: “The [1948] convention calls for the prevention of 
genocide, but it doesn ’ t say how” (   Human Rights Tribune 2008 ). 
 The most severe criticism focuses on the deﬁ nitional prob-
lems with the concept of genocide. It excludes political, social, 
and economic groups. The Convention “does not deﬁ ne genocide, 
or include objective criteria (such as threshold number of people 
killed); as a consequence when mass murder takes place, nations 
avoid labeling the action as genocide” ( Goldhagen 2009, 236, ff ). 
 Still other critical observers believe that the term itself has lost 
Lemkin ’ s original meaning and has become “dangerously com-
monplace” (quoted in   Destexhe 1995  ). To shock the conscience 
of the civilized world, genocide “has been misused as synony-
mous with massacre, oppression and repression, overlooking that 
what lies behind the image it evokes is the attempted annihilation 
of the entire Jewish race.” The “inevitable consequences of such 
misuse” (describing a human disaster such as a tsunami that kills 
hundreds of thousands of innocent persons as a holocaust) are 
a loss of “intrinsic meaning” and the trivialization of the word 
itself. 
 The other side of the genocide concept has also been quite 
common since the 1940s:  underuse  or  nonuse  of the word itself, and 
with underuse comes inertia—nonintervention—by the world 
community when genocides do occur. This silence in the face of 
mass murder continues to foster impunity for those leaders and 
perpetrators of genocide into the 21st century. 
 As one scholar wrote: “In full view [of the mass murders and 
concentration camps] in Bosnia, the world allowed genocide to be 
carried out with impunity” (  Sells 1998, 25  ). Another scholar, with 
respect to the events in Bosnia in the 1990s, asked and answered 
the question of  why  the Western powers ignored their legal obli-
gations under the Geneva Convention and did nothing to stop 
Serbia from genocide in Bosnia. The West stood silent, he claimed, 
for the following reasons: 
 Geopolitical considerations; 
 Lack of political will to act; 
 Political expediency; 
 State sovereignty and the national security concept; 

Fifty Years of Nonuse of the 1948 Genocide Convention, 1948–1998 35
 Fear of the domestic impact in Western nations of their 
soldiers dying for Muslims; and 
 Prejudice against Muslims by the West. ( Boyle 
1996, xix )  
 Two important omissions in the ﬁ nal version of the 1948 
Genocide Convention were the rejection of political and social 
groups from the deﬁ nition of targeted groups. Critics believe that 
such an intentional omission has allowed political leaders to mur-
der their opposition after taking power. 
 In  all  dictatorial nations, the political leaders, whether a 
Hitler, a Josef Stalin (Russia), or a Mao Tse-Tung (China), have 
 always  targeted their political opponents for extermination. Hitler 
targeted the Social Democrats and the Communist Party political 
opponents as soon as he became chancellor in 1933. Massacres of 
the  political  and  social  opposition in Russia, from the 1920s to the 
1940s, and in China, from the 1930s to the 1980s, exterminated 
more civilians than did the revolutions themselves in those two 
nations. According to the deﬁ nition of genocide ﬁ nally approved 
after 1948, the intentional targeting and murder of political, eco-
nomic, and social groups does not constitute genocidal action, 
and therefore there was no effort to initiate actions to stop these 
millions of executions from taking place over decades. 
 The weakness of the international political system itself has 
been a target of some of the critics. The politics that takes place in 
the UN is mostly self-serving activities that do little to deal with 
serious problems such as mass murder and genocide. Some critics 
argue that the organization should be done away with because “it 
is illegitimate and ineffectual and corrupt, and does far too little 
to coordinate the world ’ s countries to alleviate misery, including 
genocide” ( Goldhagen 2009, 592 ). 
 Given the continued power of the sovereign nation-state, 
there is continual nonintervention  unless  it is in the nation ’ s self-
interest to intervene. Political leaders in these nation-states are 
reluctant to place their military in a combat scenario unless it 
serves the foreign policy of the nation. Soldiers will be killed in 
such an intervention, and the political leaders must explain to an 
angry public why their sons and daughters, mothers and fathers, 
were killed. The national security explanation holds the criticism 
in abeyance for a while. 
 For example, the deaths of less than two dozen American mili-
tary in Somalia in 1993, who were there to carry out  peacekeeping 

36 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
functions of the UN, led to a hasty American exit from that 
 war-torn nation. President Clinton and the military refused to 
sacriﬁ ce American armed forces on behalf of the UN ’ s effort to try 
to control the violence in Somalia. It was not in America ’ s national 
interest. 
 After the American military disengaged from Somalia, the 
new Clinton administration policy was to  deliberately  avoid using 
the word “genocide” in reference to Rwanda and the former Yugo-
slavia, even though, in Rwanda, 800,000 civilians were murdered 
in three months (  CBC News 2006  ). It was not until 2004, when 
then secretary of state Colin Powell appeared before the U.S. Sen-
ate Foreign Relations Committee, that the word “genocide” was 
uttered by an American political ﬁ gure. 
 Talking about the brutal murders of black Sudanese in the 
Darfur region of the Sudan, he told the senators that the U.S. ofﬁ -
cials found a “pattern of atrocities committed by the  Janjaweed 
and government forces. . . . The evidence leads to the conclusion 
that genocide has occurred and may still be occurring in Darfur.” 
However, he did not suggest that the United States intervene to 
stop the genocide although, he said, “the U.S. is doing every-
thing we can to get the Sudanese government to act responsibly” 
(quoted in  CBC News 2006 ). 
 No Enforcement Mechanism to Intervene to Stop 
Genocide or Apprehend Genocidists 
 At the present time, there is no enforcement mechanism to inter-
vene in a nation-state where genocide is occurring nor is there a 
standing military presence to go after the genocidists. Critics bela-
bor this failing: “There is a need for a standing, permanent military 
force to stop genocide—and [to provide] real punishment of the 
perpetrators of genocide” ( Waller 2007, 284 ). A person indicted 
by an ad hoc tribunal or by the new ICC must be apprehended, 
even if the person is a national leader still in ofﬁ ce. 
 In March 2009, the ICC indicted the sitting president of the 
Sudan, Omar al-Bashir, but he is still in power and there still 
has been no interference by the outside world to end the geno-
cide. Although he is careful about his movements, he knows that 
enforcement of ICC indictments is serendipitous. Therefore, he 
did not travel to Turkey to attend a conference of Muslim nations 
in Istanbul. Even though the host nation does not recognize the 

Fifty Years of Nonuse of the 1948 Genocide Convention, 1948–1998 37
authority of the ICC and is not a signatory, al-Bashir, cautiously, 
decided not to attend. 
 Apprehension of indicted genocidists is extremely difﬁ cult, 
if not impossible, because of the immunity the nation-state pro-
vides its citizens and the willingness of the UN and nation-states 
to accept the inviolability of national sovereignty. Some alleged 
genocidists escape justice by taking refuge in “friendly” states, 
protected there by their own security forces and those of the host 
nation. 
 In World War I, the German Kaiser sought refuge in Belgium. 
Even though the Allies wanted him to face trial for waging war in 
deﬁ ance of the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907, the Belgian 
government simply refused to hand the German leader over. 
 The UN recognized this problem in the early 1990s, about the 
time the ad hoc tribunals for Yugoslavia and Rwanda were being 
discussed. In 1993, there was a proposal put forward in the UN for 
the creation of a Rapid Reaction Force (RRF), “essentially a stand-
ing UN multinational military force that would be used to enforce 
the UN Security Council ’ s peacekeeping responsibilities.” 
 However, although the newly elected U.S. president Bill 
Clinton enthusiastically supported the idea of an RRF, the mili-
tary leaders, led by the then chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 
Army general Colin Powell, just as strongly rejected the notion. 
The president bowed to their belief that such a standing force, 
with foreign generals issuing orders to American forces, would 
place the American military in jeopardy. Furthermore, in a speech 
Powell gave in September 1993, he clearly enunciated the Penta-
gon ’ s unwillingness to participate in a UN multinational military 
force: 
 We have a value system and a cultural system within the 
armed forces of the U.S. We have this mission:  to ﬁ ght and 
win the nation ’ s wars . . . . Because we are able to ﬁ ght and 
win the nation ’ s wars, because we are warriors, we are 
also uniquely able to do some of these new missions that 
are coming along [Iraq and Afghanistan]. But we never 
want to do it in such a way that we lose sight of the focus 
of why you have armed forces—to ﬁ ght and win the 
nation ’ s wars ( Powell 1993, 31–59, passim). 
 At the same moment in 1993, Anthony Lake, President Clin-
ton ’ s foreign affairs advisor, put this policy in even more blunt 

38 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
terms: “Let us be clear: peacekeeping is not at the center of our 
nation ’ s foreign and defense policy. Our armed forces ’  primary 
mission is not to conduct peace operations but to win wars” ( Lake 
1994 ). 
 After Powell and the U.S. generals quashed the idea, the 
U.S. delegation to the UN informed the secretary general that, 
although the RRF was needed, the American leaders rejected the 
creation “at this time”: “The U.S. does not plan to earmark forces 
or assign troops to the UN Security Council permanently under 
Article 43 of the UN Charter. Given the immediate challenges 
facing UN peacekeeping, these options are impractical at this 
time” (  Wisner 1993, 69  ). (Article 43 calls for “all members of the 
UN to undertake and to make available to the Security Council, 
on its call and in accordance with a special agreement or agree-
ments, armed forces, assistance, and facilities, including rights of 
passage, necessary for the purpose of maintaining international 
peace and security.”) 
 There is, in the 21st century, still no standing military force 
that can carry out the legal orders of the UN ’ s ad hoc tribunals or 
of the ICC. Without armed forces ’  intervening—crossing into the 
territory of a nation-state, either to stop the ongoing genocide or 
to arrest those persons indicted by the prosecutor—the impunity 
concept is the reality. Unless a government voluntarily turns over 
to the tribunal the indicted defendant (as the Serbian government 
did when it transported former president Slobodan Milosevic to 
the ICTY located in The Hague for trial), there is nothing that can 
be done to the perpetrators of genocide. Although an optimist 
might argue that the “veil of sovereign statehood has been lifted 
far enough,” to date that seems to be the voicing of hope, not real-
ity ( Robertson 2002, 221 ). The age of impunity has not yet ended. 
 Lack of Political and Diplomatic Will by the 
UN and Major Western Powers 
 Since the trials of the Nazi and Japanese leaders in the 1940s, the 
UN, individual nations, and regional organizations have  never 
acted to prevent—or stop—a genocide from taking place. (See 
Chapter 4, which presents a chronology of genocides and mass 
murders that occurred during these decades.) 
 For example, the UN peacekeepers in Rwanda were not 
allowed to suppress the nascent conﬂ ict before the genocide took 

Fifty Years of Nonuse of the 1948 Genocide Convention, 1948–1998 39
place (  Durch 1996, 3–7,   passim). In May 1998, four years  after 
the genocide ended, UN secretary general Koﬁ  Annan landed 
in Kigali, the capital of Rwanda. He was not greeted warmly 
because of his and his organization ’ s role in not intervening when 
the genocide began. “Instead of ﬁ nding forgiveness, he received 
an outright hostile reception from the Rwandan leaders.” 
 The nation ’ s foreign minister, Anastase Gasana, accused the 
organization of not heeding the clear warnings about the upcoming 
genocide “and then lacking the political will to intervene once the 
massacres started. We are interested in knowing who was behind 
this  lack of will ” (  Ball 1999, 187  , my emphasis). He was looking at 
the primary UN ofﬁ cial responsible for the inaction. Koﬁ  Annan, 
in 1994, was the UN ’ s head of peacekeeping and issued the orders 
to UN commanders in Rwanda not to intervene! 
 The president of the United States, Bill Clinton (D-1993–2001), 
also visited Rwanda in 1998. Unlike Annan, he came to apologize 
for the world ’ s failure to stop the genocide: 
 The international community . . . must bear its share of 
responsibility for this tragedy. We did not act quickly 
enough after the killing began. We did not immediately 
call these crimes by their rightful name: genocide. . . . 
All over the world there were people like me sitting in 
ofﬁ ces, day after day after day, who did not fully appre-
ciate the depth and the speed with which you were being 
engulfed by this unimaginable terror (Clinton 1998). 
 Although the UN Charter gives the Security Council “the 
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace 
and security” (see “Chapter 7, UN Charter,” in Chapter 6, Docu-
ments), that organization ’ s leaders rarely implemented this peace 
enforcement responsibility. The UN “proved powerless to move 
politicians or diplomats to prevent genocide across the world” 
until it created the two ad hoc tribunals to examine the events that 
took place in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda  after the genocides 
ended . Only then, in the mid- and late-1990s (  Robertson 2002, 37;   
see also   Waller 2007, 282  ) was anything done—however minimal-
ly—to indict, arrest, and try alleged genocidists. 
 The crisis in Darfur in the Sudan illuminates this dilemma. 
Nigerian ambassador Baba Gana Kinaibe spoke with a Canadian 
Broadcasting Company reporter David McGufﬁ n in Septem-
ber 2006 about the ongoing genocide in that region. At the time, 

40 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
he served as head of the African Union ’ s (AU) Mission in Sudan 
(AMIS) peacekeeping mission in that nation. After describing 
the continued bleakness of the situation facing the 7,000- member 
peacekeeping AU force, he spoke about the weakness of the 
UN and of the Western powers in helping the AU resolve the 
problem: 
 The AU is committed to staying the course in Darfur. Why 
we have to leave is simply because we cannot stay. The 
operation costs us $25 million a month just in terms of 
allowances and feeding and so on, not to talk of logistics 
and infrastructure and so on. So, the deal with the inter-
national community was that Africa would provide the 
manpower and the international community will provide 
the necessary logistics and funding to sustain the opera-
tion.  The international community have reneged on that . . . . 
So we are caught between the rock and the hard place, as 
the UN and the government of the Sudan carry on their 
disputation, the AU force is stranded. . . .  The international 
community has left Darfur to its fate; they have left the people 
of Darfur to their fate  (CBC News 2006, my emphasis).  
 Possible Solutions to the Weaknesses 
Associated with Enforcement of the 
1948 Genocide Convention 
 One scholar has argued that, in the last two years of the 20th 
 century, there has been “a revival of the Nuremberg legacy” (  Rob-
ertson 2002, xxv  ). He points to a number of events that occurred 
in that time frame, including the ICC statute agreed to by nearly 
120 nations in Rome, Italy, in 1998; the arrest of General Augusto 
Pinochet, former leader of Chile when thousands of his political 
enemies “disappeared,” in London, England, in October 1998; 
NATO forces and air power used in Yugoslavia to end the mass 
killing of Kosovars in 1998; East Timor genocide by Indonesian 
military stopped in 1999 by interference of the UN; the Hague 
tribunal ’ s hearing cases involving the genocide and war crimes 
in the former Yugoslavia begins to receive indicted individuals 

Possible Solutions to the Weaknesses 41
captured by NATO forces in 1999; Slobodan Milosevic, the former 
president of Serbia during the 1991–1995 wars, is turned over to 
the Hague tribunal to face charges of war crimes and genocide; 
the Lockerbie Agreement between Libya and England signed, 
and the two defendants allegedly responsible for the air disaster 
over Scotland are surrendered to stand trial for their alleged ter-
rorist activities in Scotland; and, also in 1999, the crisis in Sierra 
Leone seemed to be under control as the UN established a war-
crimes tribunal (see  Robertson 2002, xxvi–xxvii ). 
 For Robertson, all these events suggest the weakening of the 
concept of state sovereignty and the gradual acceptance by the 
world community of the concept of the  universal jurisdiction of 
the crime of genocide and crimes against humanity. If the crime 
committed is genocide or a crime against humanity, universal 
jurisdiction posits that any court anywhere is empowered by 
international law to try the alleged perpetrator and to punish the 
person if found guilty, “irrespective of its place of commission or 
the nationality of the offender or the victims.” 
 The arrest of the Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet in Eng-
land after he was indicted in Spain, and the unwillingness of geno-
cidal leaders such as indicted (by the ICC) President al-Bashir to 
leave the safety of his country, Sudan, for fear of arrest, gives hope 
for some observers of the international political arena. They hope 
that the era of impunity from the consequences of such shocking 
crimes seems to be eroding with these actions by the UN and by 
individual nation-states. 
 A review of the types of actions taken by the world commu-
nity to deal with the consequences of genocide tends to exhibit 
the opposite reality. Reviewing these actions over the past four 
decades, suggests other scholars, reveals the continuing strength 
of the sovereign nation-state. It leads many observers to be less 
optimistic than Robertson and to maintain that all the domestic 
and international mechanisms created to respond to the reality 
of genocide “remain woefully inadequate and extraordinarily 
controversial” (  Human Rights 2008  ). Although there have been 
a number of efforts to address the consequences of mass killings 
and genocide, none of the efforts have been able to resolve the 
dilemma discussed earlier: the lack of a rapid response military 
effort to stop the genocide and to capture the persons indicted 
for their actions. Until this dilemma is resolved in a substantive 
 fashion, the world will continue to witness genocides and mass 
murder and will be powerless to intervene. For the creators of these 

42 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
possible structures that address the horrors of genocide, there is 
an effort to balance the need to achieve justice and redress for the 
victims of genocide with the equally valid need for truth telling 
by the perpetrators and the victims for the historical record. 
 Amnesty 
 Amnesty is one response to genocide and crimes against  humanity 
that occurred in a nation. After a genocide ends, the new political 
leaders forgive the perpetrators rather than press for justice. For 
the new Cambodian leaders, after Pol Pot ’ s genocide, where more 
than two million Cambodians were executed between 1975 and 
1979, a series of trials of the leaders would not allow Cambodia 
to get beyond that horrible past. “If we bring them to trial it will 
not beneﬁ t the nation, it will only mean a return to civil war. . . . If 
we put them in prison will this beneﬁ t the society or lead to civil 
war?” said the new Cambodian political leader, Hun Sen (quoted 
in  Mydans 1998 ). 
 Said one former Khmer Rouge leader who turned himself in 
to the new government because of the offer of amnesty: “We must 
forget the past in order to reach national reconciliation, peace, and 
stability so we can rebuild our country” (quoted in   Mydans 1999  ). 
After Pol Pot ’ s death in 1998, other Khmer Rouge leaders came 
forward to accept amnesty. Prime Minister Hun Sen welcomed 
them, in his own words, “With bouquets of ﬂ owers, not with pris-
ons and handcuffs” ( Mydans 1998 ). To date, although there have 
been calls for an international tribunal to deal with those who led 
the genocide in Cambodia, there has been no such action. 
 The Cambodian response to the genocidal actions of the 
Khmer Rouge turns justice into a fungible concept, not a univer-
sally needed ideal. There are not too many defenders of the amnesty 
approach to the genocide, although the concept of truth and rec-
onciliation commissions, actually used in South Africa and nearly 
two dozen other nations, is a close enough concept.  However, 
both, argue the critics, do not provide justice for the victims and 
for the national community. They maintain that “some degree of 
justice is increasingly a precondition of peace and reconciliation.” 
If genocidists are immunized from prosecution for their inten-
tional acts, as happened in Cambodia, the inaction “corrodes the 
fabric of society” (  Stanley Foundation 1998, 11  ). If impunity from 
any punishment is a primary goal of international law, “expe-
diency has been placed above both principle and pragmatism. 

Possible Solutions to the Weaknesses 43
There will be no lasting peace without justice” (  McDonald 
1998, 33 ). 
 However, between 1998 and 2005, due to worldwide pres-
sure on Cambodian leaders to do more than provide amnesty for 
the Khmer Rouge genocidist leaders, intense deliberations were 
held between the leaders and the UN. As a consequence, in 2005, a 
special court was created—with a majority of Cambodian judges 
sitting in judgment—to hear cases involving the actions of the 
Khmer Rouge leaders. 
 Under a 2003 agreement between the two sides, it was 
agreed that the trial would be held for a period of three years—
after the UN raised the needed funds for the special court. From 
the  beginning the court structure has been criticized by NGOs 
and nations because a majority of the judges and prosecutors 
are Cambodian. In April 2003, one major NGO, Human Rights 
Watch, said, “So long as the Cambodian government continues to 
exercise direct control over the Cambodian judiciary, any tribunal 
with a majority of Cambodian judges and a Cambodian prosecu-
tor will fail the most basic test of credibility with Cambodians and 
the international community” ( Dworkin 2005 ). 
 Although the world community wanted another ad hoc tri-
bunal similar to the ones listening to cases in the Yugoslavia and 
Rwanda tribunals (see below)—where international jurists were 
hearing the cases—Cambodian leaders refused to move in that 
direction. They did agree, however, that “at least one international 
judge would be required for conviction.” The trials were sched-
uled to begin in 2006; however, the ﬁ rst trial began in 2009 in the 
court called the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cam-
bodia (ECCC) when the leader of the infamous Tuol Seng torture 
and death prison, Kaing Gech Eav (Duch) faced trial for crimes 
against humanity and genocide. (He was charged with ordering 
the torture and deaths of 12,000 Cambodian prisoners.) In late July 
2010, the hybrid Khmer Rouge tribunal sentenced the convicted 
Duch to 35 years in prison for his crimes. However, the tribunal 
took into account time served and, with leniency, sentenced him 
to a commuted term of 19 years in prison (Chun Sakada, “Hun 
Sen Praises Tribunal Verdict in Duch Case,” Khmer NZ, August 4, 
2010, at  www.khmernz.blogspot.com .). 
 Very few—ﬁ ve—Khmer Rouge leaders faced trial, how-
ever. The Cambodian coprosecutor opposed the effort by the 
 international prosecutor to add six additional suspects for trial. 
He “cited Cambodia ’ s ‘past instability’ and the ‘need for national 

44 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
reconciliation’ as the reasons for rejecting bringing charges against 
additional suspects” ( Human Rights Watch 2009 ). 
 Whether or not there will be “political manipulation” by 
the Cambodian government is an unanswered question. How-
ever, most NGOs and the UN itself are not sanguine about 
the results of these trials. Without an independent judiciary, 
they believe that justice will not be reached for the victims of 
genocide.  
 Truth and Reconciliation Commissions 
 Truth and Reconciliation Commissions (TRC) are a dramatic 
alternative to national and international tribunals. These com-
missions hear testimony from both victims and perpetrators in 
order to provide the nation with an accounting of the events that 
occurred during the genocide. They are not courts of law, and the 
commissioners do not have the power to imprison anyone. The 
ﬁ nal report presents recommendations to the new government 
that, hopefully, will repair the social fabric of the community and 
promote national reconciliation—without retribution against the 
perpetrators. 
 No other concern has dominated discussions of truth com-
missions, especially from legal scholars, as has the issue of jus-
tice. For many, the proper response to the perpetrators of human 
rights abuses, violence, ethnic cleansing, or genocide must be 
criminal proceedings by some sort of tribunal, a court of law 
duly authorized to render judicial dispositions: to establish jus-
ticiable facts of the matter, to render verdicts, and if called for, to 
punish. However, truth commissions (including the more ambi-
tious TRCs) cannot by their nature deliver this sort of justice, 
and so a signiﬁ cant part of the literature is devoted to the delin-
eation (and defense) of quasi-justice forms and entities, among 
them “transitional justice,” “restorative justice,” or “retroactive 
justice,” most of which aim, in the end, to move away from 
criminal verdicts—retributive justice—and forward to “truth-
seeking” and reconciliation. These alternative forms of justice 
mean that the work of truth commissions falls somewhere in 
the morally, politically, and emotionally fraught continuum 
between “vengeance and forgiveness.” A great deal of the con-
troversy, not to mention passion, that surrounds the workings 
and assessment of these commissions by different parties, has to 

Possible Solutions to the Weaknesses 45
do with the tension existing between the two poles of this con-
tinuum: the human impulses to wreak  vengeance or to offer for-
giveness, for terrible wrongs done. The tension has to do as well 
with arguments about whether notions of “justice” and “truth” 
are related. 
 More than 40 nations have chosen the TRC path after the 
blood of many thousands has been shed by the perpetrators in 
power at an earlier time. This large group of nations have opted 
for hopes for reconciliation rather than courts of law to deal with 
the perpetrators of injustice. The complete list of nations who 
have used, through 2009, some version of the TRC follows (where 
there was a speciﬁ c focus of the TRC, it is noted below.): 
 Uganda, 1974, 
disappearances 
Brazil, 1979
Bolivia, 1982
Zimbabwe, 1983
Argentina, 1983, 
disappearances
Peru, 1986, massacre of prisoners
Uganda, 1986, human rights 
violations
Nepal, 1990, disappearances
Chile, 1990, disappearances
Chad, 1990
Germany, 1992, communist 
dictatorship
El Salvador, 1992
Ethiopia, 1993
Rwanda, 1993
Sri Lanka, 1995, 
disappearances
Haiti, 1995
Germany, 1995
Burundi, 1995
South Africa, 1995
Ecuador, 1996
Guatemala, 1997, disappearances
Rwanda, 1999
Nigeria, 1999, human rights 
violations
Uruguay, 2000, violating 
the peace
South Korea, 2000, 
suspicious deaths
Ivory Coast, 2000
Panama, 2001
Peru, 2001
Serbia and Montenegro, 
2002
East Timor, 2002
Ghana, 2003
Democratic Republic of the 
Congo, 2003
Chile, 2003, torture, 
political 
imprisonment
Algeria, 2003, 
disappearances
Paraguay, 2004
Morocco, 2004
Liberia, 2006
Ecuador, 2007, address 
the impunity issue
Solomon Islands, 2009
Kenya, 2009

46 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 Clearly, the whole area of reconciliation and forgiveness 
remains a contested one, raising many more questions in the 
literature than answers. One such question is this: Is contrition 
and forgiveness, and even reconciliation, adequate for a nation ’ s 
“coming to terms with its past”? One premise of most truth com-
missions is to answer this question in the afﬁ rmative. Another is 
to argue that reconciliation, so crucial to peace and stability, is part 
of how these commissions successfully affect the transition from 
regimes based upon violent oppression to those operating under 
the democratic rule of law. 
 Replace the UN with a Collective Humanitarian 
Intervention Organization 
 The UN international organization “is illegitimate and  ineffectual 
and corrupt; and does far too little to coordinate the world ’ s 
countries to alleviate misery, including genocide” (  Goldhagen 
2009, 592  ). One writer summed up this critical view of the UN 
in the following words regarding the bloodshed in Argentina: 
“The UN has rattled its vocal swords, threatening sanctions but 
ultimately sending out a watered-down resolution condemning 
human rights abuses that the ruling junta duly ignored” (  Cussler 
2010, 20 ). 
 As already brieﬂ y noted, some critics argue that the UN 
should be replaced because of its continuing inability to deal with 
mass murder and genocide until after the murders have been 
committed. The new organization must be able to provide order, 
through military humanitarian intervention, in the international 
community and to end the impunity of perpetrators because 
of the continuing dynamic of the nation-state. Clearly, this is a 
daunting task—perhaps an impossible one—and those who call 
for the liquidation of the UN are expressing their frustration at the 
continuing futility of the UN and its member nations in stopping 
or ending genocide and mass murder. 
 They point out that, on a number of occasions in the post-
Nuremberg world, genocide  was stopped by military intervention 
(see, for example,   Jones 2006, 395–396  ). In 1971, India intervened 
in East Pakistan to end the mass murders that were taking place, 
and the Pol Pot genocide in Cambodia ended when Vietnam 
invaded Cambodia in 1979. Another case in 1979 was the halt of 
mass murder in Idi Amin ’ s Uganda when the Tanzanian military 

Possible Solutions to the Weaknesses 47
crossed the border and ended his dictatorship. A ﬁ nal example, 
this time of a regional military intervention, was the NATO inter-
cession that stopped Serb forces from continuing to murder Kos-
ovo civilians in 1999. 
 Some maintain, given the genocides that occurred in Europe 
and the Far East during the Second World War and the 1948 
Genocide Convention that made the crime of genocide one of 
universal jurisdiction, that “humanitarian” military interven-
tions are required. A collective institution must be created to 
“ effectively intervene not only after genocides are underway but 
also in  advance —to anticipate and prevent genocide” (  Nardin and 
 Williams 2006, 4, my emphasis): 
 [There is a shift in emphasis] from the permissibility of 
intervening to the  responsibility  to intervene. [There] is 
an emerging conviction that the response to humani-
tarian crises needs to be collective, coordinated, and 
preemptive—in a word,  institutionalized . . . . [There is] 
a consensus that genocide, ethnic cleansing, and other 
atrocities are the world ’ s business—as their inclusive 
name, “crimes against humanity,” implies (  Nardin and 
Williams 2006, 3, my emphasis). 
 This issue of preemptive military intervention by a state or 
a collective organization, to prevent or to halt the mass murder 
of innocent people who are citizens of another state, is one that 
will continue to be discussed so long as genocides fester and then 
brutally occur in the world, ending only when they run their 
brutal course or when war breaks out and the genocidists are 
defeated. 
 These UN critics, however, do not seriously address the great 
good that  agencies  of the UN have accomplished in the face of 
genocide and the massive uprooting of ethnic communities. 
 UN specialized agencies, such as UNICEF, The World Food 
Program, the Ofﬁ ce of High Commissioner for Human Rights, 
and others, have been “extraordinarily effective” in responding 
to the effects of mass murder and genocide (  Jones 2006, 394  ). Fur-
thermore, the UN, although its leaders acknowledge that little has 
been done by the institution to stop genocide from taking place, 
has done a great deal to repair the damages after the bloodletting 
ends through its  peace-building  efforts. This new concept emerged 

48 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
in force in the 1980s. As stated by then UN secretary general Koﬁ  
Annan, peace-building is 
 . . . [t]he creation or strengthening of national  institutions, 
monitoring elections, promoting human rights, provid-
ing for reintegration and rehabilitation programs, as well 
as creating conditions for resumed development. . . . It 
aims to build on, add to, or reorient such activities in 
ways that are designed to reduce the risk of a resump-
tion of conﬂ ict and contribute to creating conditions 
most conducive to reconciliation, reconstruction, and 
recovery (  International Commission on Intervention and 
State Sovereignty 2001, 40 ) .  
 National Legal Tribunals to Try Indicted Genocidists 
 National legal tribunals to try indicted genocidists seemingly have 
“certain advantages” over the ad hoc ICTs created in the 1990s 
(  Jones 2006, 368  ). He points out a major disadvantage of such 
trials: “the infrastructure for administering justice [in Rwanda, 
the Sudan, Bosnia, Ethiopia, et al.] may be sorely inadequate.” A 
nation ’ s criminal justice system is in place; there are precedents to 
follow; there are prosecutors and defense attorneys and judges to 
handle the cases. They have been used by a few nations in order 
to  quickly  try, convict, and punish those involved in the nation ’ s 
genocide. Because of the extreme slowness of the two ad hoc inter-
national tribunals to bring indicted persons to The Hague for trial, 
Rwanda, for example, used its judicial criminal law system to deal 
with the Hutu perpetrators. Justice could be meted out quickly 
and, unlike the UN-created tribunals, the death penalty was avail-
able as punishment for some of the leaders. Critics argue, how-
ever, that in many instances involving these courts—Rwanda and 
Ethiopia are two examples offered—there has been a lack of due 
process evidenced in court because of the evident eagerness to 
punish the perpetrators ( Ratner and Abrams 2001, 29 ). 
 Ironically, Rwanda was the only nation to vote against the 
UN ’ s creation of an ICT to deal with those Hutu leaders who were 
responsible for the 1994 genocide. 
 Ad Hoc ICTs 
 Ad hoc ICTs to try indicted genocidists were created in 1993 
and 1994 to deal with the horror of mass murders in the former 

Possible Solutions to the Weaknesses 49
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and Rwanda (ICTR). These were the ﬁ rst ad 
hoc ICTs created since Nuremberg and Tokyo. However, as one 
scholar pointed out, “[I]t is one of history ’ s ironies that the ICT for 
Yugoslavia was created to deﬂ ect accusations of Western compla-
cency in the face of genocide” ( Jones 2006, 366 ). 
 To date, they are the only such ICCs established to deal with 
the consequences of genocide in Bosnia and Rwanda. When the 
ﬁ rst defendant, Dusko Tadic, faced justice before the ICTY in 
1996, some “viewed [it] as a deeply symbolic moment; the ﬁ rst 
sign of a seismic shift from diplomacy to legality, in the conduct 
of world affairs” (  Robertson 2002, 222  ). However, these two ICTs 
have faced the same problems as have other legal efforts to deal 
with the consequences of genocide: many indicted defendants 
are still living in their nations or have ﬂ ed to nations that protect 
them, with no real effort to turn them over to the courts. 
 Also, although it took time for the tribunals to establish prin-
ciples and protocols, they have added precedents applicable to 
international law, especially with regard to the deﬁ nition of geno-
cide. The ICTR, in the  Akayesu  decision of 1998, deﬁ ned rape as a 
form of genocide. This new addition to the concept of genocide 
“reﬂ ects decades of successful feminist mobilization around the 
issue of rape, including ground-breaking analyses of rape in war 
and genocide” ( Jones 2006, 367–368 ). 
 Hybrid ICCs to Deal with Genocidists 
 By the turn of the 21st century, another legal international inno-
vation was introduced to try to provide justice for the victims of 
mass murder and genocide. It was a legal tribunal composed of 
national and international jurists. Their task was to apply inter-
national legal rules to deal with those who committed genocide. 
A majority of international judges sit, with domestic jurists in 
the minority (except for Cambodia), to hear cases. The ﬁ rst such 
hybrid international court was created to deal with the mass mur-
ders that had taken place in Sierra Leone during the decade of the 
1990s. 
 A civil war led to the deaths of nearly 100,000 civilians and 
the departure of nearly 600,000 refugees to neighboring African 
states. In January 2002, the new government agreed to the creation 
of the special hybrid court. Its task was to apply the law to deal 
with mass murderers. Additionally, the new government created 
a TRC. It provided amnesty for the perpetrators for their actions 
between 1991 and 1996. (The special court dealt with actions by 

50 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
the rebels after the 1996 peace treaty was broken by them.) Article 
26 of the Lome Treaty laid out the purpose of the TRC: “to pro-
vide a forum for both the victims and the perpetrators of crimes 
against humanity to tell their story, get a clear picture of the past 
in order to facilitate genuine healing and reconciliation.” The 
TRC ’ s major goal was to heal the wounds of the small nation after 
a decade of civil war. 
 In another part of the world, a second hybrid court to deal with 
genocide and mass murder was created. The UN–East Timorese 
Crimes Tribunal consisted of East Timorese and  international 
jurists selected by the UN to try to mete out justice for the East 
Timorese who suffered and died at the hands of the Indonesian 
military and rogue paramilitary forces. 
 East Timor is a very small territory administered by Portugal 
until 1975. It lies between Australia and Indonesia in the Timor 
Sea. In 1974, civil war broke out between those who wanted inde-
pendence and those who wanted to join the Indonesian nation. 
Because of the war, Portugal left in 1975, and Indonesian troops 
invaded East Timor, calling the territory the 27th province of 
Indonesia. For a quarter century, Indonesian troops occupied 
East Timor, and terror rained down on the local population at the 
hands of the military. Between 1975 and 1999, more than 25 per-
cent of the population—nearly 400,000 persons—was murdered. 
Another 300,000 civilians ﬂ ed their homes and found themselves 
in West Timor. 
 In 1999, Indonesia, pressured by the UN, agreed to have the 
remaining population choose between independence and local 
autonomy within the Indonesian nation. Although terror was 
used by the military to coerce the population to remain in Indo-
nesia, 79 percent of the voters voted for independence. After the 
vote, there was more violence until a UN peace force was sent to 
the territory and restored peace. After these events, an Interna-
tional Commission of Inquiry, reporting to the UN, called for the 
establishment of a hybrid special court to deal with the murders, 
massacres, assassinations, rapes, other human rights violations, 
and deportations that took place after the vote in 1999. Ironi-
cally, although the tribunal issued indictments against a number 
of Indonesian defendants, Indonesia refused to extradite these 
indicted individuals to East Timor to stand trial. 
 In still another territory, Kosovo, a province of Serbia, the UN, 
after hostilities ended between the ethnic Albanians ( Muslims) 
and the Serb forces (Orthodox) in 1999, created a peace plan that 

Possible Solutions to the Weaknesses 51
gave Kosovo “substantial autonomy within the Federal  Republic 
of  Yugoslavia” (essentially Serbia). Because of continuing violence 
between the ethnic and religious groups since 1999, the UN has 
remained to provide administrative, police, and humanitarian aid 
to the province. Furthermore, the court system has been interna-
tionalized in Kosovo, with international prosecutors and judges, 
including Americans, working to ensure that there is no ethnic 
bias in the administration of justice. 
 In two other areas of the world, Cambodia and Afghanistan, 
the UN and other nongovernmental agencies have tried to  create 
hybrid courts to hear cases with impartiality. However, as noted, 
Cambodia has rejected such an arrangement for dealing with the 
Khmer Rouge leaders who received amnesty and Afghanistan ’ s 
tribal leaders had already granted amnesty to Taliban leaders and 
followers. 
 In all these cases, there was no external intervention while 
the mass murders and genocide and other crimes against 
humanity were taking place. Only after the killings stopped 
were there efforts to provide some justice for the victims and 
the survivors. The dilemma remains in the international system: 
There is no enforcement of the international treaties; there is no 
stopping of the murders, rapes, and deportations while they are 
happening.  
 Mediation between Warring Parties 
 This is the basic protocol the UN has been using since the late 
1940s. Because the organization still cannot quickly introduce a 
rapid response military action to stop the genocide and has been 
extremely slow in creating ad hoc ICCs, the UN relies on diplo-
macy and negotiation to end the war and the genocide. 
 In Switzerland, in 2008, a conference, organized by the 
Society for Threatened Peoples, took place to assess the reasons 
for continuing genocides after 1948. Its president, Ruth-Gaby 
Vermot-Mangold, stated, [The Genocide Convention is thus far 
limited] “to mediation and peace initiatives with rebels, govern-
ment, and getting the various parties sitting around a table—the 
Geneva Convention, despite everything, is still an instrument for 
that” Ruth-Gaby Vermot-Mangold, “Value of UN Genocide Con-
vention Questioned,” (   Human Rights Tribune , December 17, 2008  ), 
in Institutional Center for Transitional Justice,   www.ictj.org/en/
news/coverage/article/2187.html . 

52 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 Vermont-Mangold and other leaders of NGOs believe that 
“various ideas and creativity” can work to end genocide. She 
believes that negotiations with the perpetrators of genocide are nec-
essary for an end to their actions. For example, in Darfur she has 
engaged women ’ s groups to talk with “offenders ’ mothers to  try to 
get them to talk some sense to their sons ” ( Human Rights Tribune 2008, 
my emphasis). 
 These creative ideas, however, reﬂ ect the ongoing  weakness 
of the institution and its leading nation-states. There is no pos-
sibility of intervening to stop a genocide or mass murder; the 
institution can only provide peacekeepers when there is success-
ful mediation between the warring sides or when diplomacy and 
sanctions work. 
 The Permanent ICC, 1998, 2002 
 World history was made in 1998 when, in Rome, Italy, more than 
160 nation-states and more than 200 NGOs, led by UN secretary 
general Koﬁ  Annan, met to discuss the possibility of creating a 
 permanent ICC. When the conference ended, there was a treaty 
that, when ratiﬁ ed by 60 UN member states, would have the ICC 
come into existence. This formal ratiﬁ cation occurred in 2002. 
 The modern movement toward the creation of such an ICC 
began after World War I ended. The 1919 Versailles Peace Treaty 
contained an article that called for the creation of such a tribunal 
in order to bring before the international bar of justice Germans 
accused of committing war crimes in violation of the 1899 and 
1907 Hague treaties. However, the Americans opposed such a 
court and the victorious allies, “in the interest of regional stabil-
ity and political agendas,” went along with the American policy 
makers. Noting this change, one scholar bitterly wrote that the 
Allies 
 exempliﬁ ed the sacriﬁ ce of justice on the altars of inter-
national and domestic politics of the allies. [They] missed 
the opportunity to establish an international system of 
justice that would have functioned independently of 
political considerations to ensure uncompromised jus-
tice ( Bassiouni 1997, 20–21 ) .
 In 1926, the newly established League of Nations—which the 
U.S. Senate rejected—initiated another effort to create a permanent 

Possible Solutions to the Weaknesses 53
international criminal court. However, it did not get acted on by 
the member states. After the Nuremberg and Tokyo trials ended 
in the late 1940s, there was once again renewed interest by UN 
member states in a permanent ICC that would hear only griev-
ous cases involving waging an aggressive war, genocide, crimes 
against humanity, and war crimes. Article VI of the Genocide Con-
vention provided that individuals accused of genocide “shall be 
tried in a competent tribunal of the State in the territory of which 
the act was committed  or by such international tribunal as may have 
jurisdiction ” (my emphasis). 
 Inherent in this language was an important international 
legal concept that became part of the 1998 Rome Treaty:  comple-
mentarity . If the nation that experienced genocide was unwilling 
or unable to bring to justice the perpetrators, then an ICT could 
act in its stead. 
 The UN, at the same time the 1948 Genocide Convention 
was being drafted and debated, mandated that the International 
Law Commission (ILC) codify the Nuremberg Principles and 
draft a statute for the establishment of a permanent ICC. Drafts 
were introduced in 1951 and 1953 in the General Assembly, but 
no action was taken because of the recent onset of the Cold War 
between the Soviet Union and its allies and the United States along 
with its allies. It was not until the collapse of the Soviet Union in 
1989 that the idea of an ICC once again emerged in UN debates. 
In 1992, the ILC was once again asked to prepare a working draft 
of a permanent ICC. 
 One month after a draft of the statute was presented in 
November 1994 to the UN, the General Assembly created an ad 
hoc committee to review the critical issues presented in the ILC 
draft. In 1995, the committee recommended the establishment of 
a UN preparatory committee (PrepCom) that would hold a series 
of meetings to reﬁ ne and redraft the ILC draft. 
 Between 1996 and 1998, the PrepCom held six meetings with 
member states and a drafting committee began to meet in the 
Netherlands to redraft the treaty in light of PrepCom discussions. 
Their primary focus was the deﬁ nition of core crimes that would 
be within the ICC ’ s jurisdiction. These core crimes were those that 
had universal jurisdiction: war crimes, crimes against humanity, 
genocide, and wars of aggression. After addressing other contro-
versial issues such as the relationship between national sovereignty 
and international court jurisdiction, as well as the relationship of 
this independent criminal tribunal with the UN Security Council, 

54 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
a ﬁ nal draft statute was presented to Koﬁ  Annan, the new secre-
tary general of the UN. The draft was almost 200 pages in length 
and included 13 parts and 116 articles. 
 The secretary general then announced that between June 15 
and July 17, 1998, a Rome Conference on the establishment of a 
permanent ICC would meet to possibly ﬁ nalize and then approve 
the statute. Of the then 185 member states of the UN, 161 nations 
sent representatives to Rome for this historic meeting. In  addition 
to the 161 nations represented, there were 235 NGOs in atten-
dance and who, after they all coalesced under the Coalition for an 
Independent Criminal Court (CICC), provided critical assistance 
in the month-long effort to agree on the language of the statute. 
However, in this endeavor, the concept of national sovereignty 
loomed over the sessions. As the London  Economist editorialized: 
 After four years of intense negotiations among some 120 
countries, the effort to set up the world criminal court has 
run smack into the ambivalence that has always been felt 
by the world ’ s biggest powers about international law: 
they are keen to have it apply to others in the name of 
world order, but loathe to submit to restrictions on their 
own sovereignty ( New World Court 1998, 16 ) .
 The “heart of the debate” then—and now—was “the scope 
of the UN ’ s Security Council involvement in deciding whether or 
not the ICC takes up a particular case.” Could one of the ﬁ ve per-
manent members of the Security Council (United States, England, 
France, China, and Russia) have  veto power  over the ICC ’ s abil-
ity to investigate and to prosecute war criminals and genocidists 
(  Goldman 1998, 16  )? In this regard, the role of the United States 
was very clear: There must be veto power over the ICC held by 
the ﬁ ve permanent members of the Security Council! 
 However, the U.S. position on the critical issues debated 
and incorporated into the Rome Treaty was always the negative 
one—and always in the minority when the votes were cast by the 
nations attending the Rome meeting. These controversial issues 
were found in Part 2 of the statute, containing 15 articles (5–20), 
all of them focused on “Jurisdiction, Admissibility, and Appli-
cable Law.” 
 Articles 5 and 12, the jurisdiction articles, stated that the ICC 
“shall be limited to the most serious crimes of concern to the inter-
national community as a whole (genocide, war crimes, and crimes 

Possible Solutions to the Weaknesses 55
against humanity). Seventy-ﬁ ve percent of the nations voted for 
 automatic jurisdiction  for all three core crimes. The United States, in 
the minority, voted for automatic jurisdiction only for genocide. 
 Article 15 addressed the power of the prosecutor.  Eighty-three 
percent of the states voted for the prosecutor to have independent 
power to initiate an investigation and then, if necessary, to initi-
ate actions against the perpetrators. Article 13 enabled the Secu-
rity Council or a state that is party to the treaty (termed a “State 
Party”) to refer cases to the prosecutor for possible action. The 
prosecutor was checked internally by having to gain approval for 
his actions by the Chambers (judges whose task was to review the 
case built by the prosecutor) at an early stage in the proceedings 
of the ICC. Article 18 allowed an “interested party” to challenge 
the admissibility of a case before the ICC at an early stage of the 
proceedings. 
 The Security Council, in Article 16, was able to defer ICC 
cases for one year when necessary for “peacekeeping purposes.” 
Fifty-three nations voted for the one-year deferral; the United 
States and four other nations voted for the “unspeciﬁ ed number 
of years” Security Council option. 
 In order for the ICC to succeed in its effort to punish genoci-
dists, the world ’ s powerful nations, especially the United States, 
must support the general concept of such a permanent interna-
tional judicial organization, accept the ICC ’ s legal jurisdiction, 
and assist in the apprehension of persons indicted for crimes 
against humanity and genocide. This new court faces many chal-
lenges, most signiﬁ cantly the concept of national sovereignty. The 
ICC ’ s opponents, especially the United States, argue that the court 
infringes upon the prerogatives of national sovereignty by plac-
ing their political and military leaders and their military forces “in 
jeopardy of being indicted for war crimes” (  Ball 1999, 9  ). (Chapter 3 
focuses on the problems American political and military lead-
ers have with a permanently sitting ICC.) Robertson hopes that 
the ICC will succeed. However, it will “succeed once it teaches 
nation-states to live with the idea that justice, in respect to crimes 
against humanity [and genocide], is non-negotiable” (  Robertson 
2002, 307 ). 
 Critics of the ICC scoff at the views of the optimists. They 
are of the belief that the new creation is not strong enough to end 
nation-state impunity when its leaders order genocide against 
a minority group. Only armed force can prevent or stop geno-
cide from occurring and the ICC does not have that mechanism 

56 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
built into the Rome Treaty. To disregard the vital role of the 
 Security Council is a fatal ﬂ aw in the Rome Treaty and the ICC. 
If the ICC has any chance of success, it must reﬂ ect a balancing of 
international idealism with the  realpolitik  of the still very potent 
 nation-state system. 
 The major opposition to the ICC and other suggested innova-
tions that would strengthen international criminal law was the 
United States, after the fall of the Soviet Union, the world ’ s only 
superpower. Chapter 3 examines this issue, looking at some of 
the strategies used by the United States to nullify the impact of 
the ICC. 
 While the U.S. policy makers in the White House, Congress, 
and the Pentagon sought to weaken or destroy the ICC, by 2009 
there were 110 member countries. More than six years after open-
ing its doors, the ICC began its ﬁ rst trial in The Hague. Thomas 
Lubanga, a Congolese warlord, was in the dock, charged with 
war crimes, “including commandeering children under the age of 
15 and sending them into war to maim and kill.” 
 The reasons for the long delay in getting down to business 
were “the turf wars within the court, bitter legal squabbles and 
irritation among trial judges [that] had almost torpedoed the case” 
(  Simons 2009,   A1). In addition to the charges against Mr. Lubanga, 
ICC prosecutors have also ﬁ led charges, in 2009, against war crimes 
suspects in Sudan, Uganda, and the Central African Republic, and 
an arrest warrant was issued in March 2009 for Sudanese presi-
dent Omar Hassan al-Bashir. Furthermore, the ICC ’ s investigators 
are conducting preliminary examinations regarding alleged war 
crimes incidents in Kenya, Sri Lanka, Colombia, the Ivory Coast, 
and Gaza. 
 In the summer of 2010, the ICC will have had its ﬁ rst review 
conference. In addition to the grave problems the United States 
has created for the ICC, the chief prosecutor of the ICC, Luis 
Moreno-Ocampo, an Argentinean jurist (who taught law at Har-
vard Law School), has been responding to criticisms that the 
Court only goes after rights violators in weak countries. Critics 
of the ICC have raised concerns that the institution has done little 
to “build a stronger international justice system” and that the ICC 
should expand its purpose (“ending impunity for war crimes”) to 
helping weak nations develop their own national court systems 
( Franchi 2009, 1 ). 
 Furthermore, a recent ICC action that is sure to anger NATO 
forces, especially the American commanders and their troops, 

Possible Solutions to the Weaknesses 57
concerns Afghanistan, one of the 110 nations to ratify the Rome 
Statute. Moreno-Ocampo has noted that because Afghanistan is 
a  member state, the ICC has “normal jurisdiction” and that the 
court ’ s investigators are conducting preliminary investigations 
regarding “collateral damage” incidents and allegations of torture 
committed by NATO forces. 
 The  Gacaca Trials in Rwanda 
 The  gacaca trials in Rwanda have been taking place since 2005 
to bring the perpetrators of genocide some kind of justice—as 
well as moving the nation beyond its recent, bloody history. 
After the 1994 genocide, the new government detained more 
than 100,000 persons suspected of involvement in the genocide. 
However, the Rwandan courts were not capable of hearing these 
cases because of the huge mass of suspects held in jails across 
Rwanda. The solution to the crisis was an age-old Rwandan 
judicial  custom that was reworked to end the human bottleneck 
the government faced. The solution was a modern version of the 
 gacaca trial.  
 For centuries, Rwandans would select well-respected 
elders in their community who would sit on  umucaca —
covered ground—to resolve disputes among certain 
members of the community.  Gacaca is a derivative of 
that word. It means “on the hilltop,” referring to these 
venerated open air community courts. In 2001, the 
govern ment began using this mechanism to deal with its 
overcrowded prison population of suspected genocidists 
(  Jones 2006, 370  ). In its modern form, more than 260,000 
lay judges were elected from within the community to 
sit on nine-member panels in  gacaca  sessions “with the 
mission not of settling petty disputes, but of hearing and 
recording testimonies from community members who 
saw and witnessed what happened during the genocide; 
who killed who, who stole what, and so on” (  Rwanda 
Development Gateway 2010 ). 
 After gathering and reviewing this information, the judges—
both Hutu and Tutsi, who come from different levels in society—sit in 
their respective villages and preside over trials of genocide suspects, 
depending on the category of their crime. In 1996, two years after 

58 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
the slaughter of Tutsis, the Rwanda parliament enacted and voted a 
genocide law dividing genocide suspects into four categories: 
 1.  Suspects whose deeds during the genocide put them 
among the planners, organizers, instigators, leaders, 
and supervisors of the genocide 
 2.  Suspects who participated in physical attacks that 
resulted in the death of the victim 
 3.  Suspects accused of terrible assaults that did not 
result in the death of someone, and 
 4.  Suspects accused of looting, theft, or other crimes 
related to property. 
 “Gacaca courts have jurisdiction over genocide suspects that 
fall between categories 2 and 4. Each gacaca jurisdiction is made 
up of a general assembly, a coordinating committee, a seat and a 
president. A gacaca court general assembly is comprised of every 
adult (18 years and above) who resides within a cell in which that 
particular court sits” ( Rwanda Development Gateway 2010  ). 
 The trial is a version of a TRC. Victims and perpetrators 
confront each other and speak about the event that occurred in 
1994. However, there is no death penalty if persons are found 
guilty of participating in the genocide. Instead, the sentences 
received by persons found guilty “emphasize redress through 
service to the community: helping to build homes, . . . repairing 
schools and hospitals, and performing agricultural work” (  Jones 
2006, 371  ). The government ’ s goal was to provide some kind of 
justice to victims and move the nation beyond its brutal history. 
In 2005, thousands of these courts began to hear cases in the 
effort to end the problem and reconcile the nation ’ s population. 
 The Critical Role of International 
Nongovernmental Organizations in 
Encouraging and Drafting International 
Human Rights Conventions and Taking 
Actions to Prevent Genocide 
 Claude E. Welch Jr. wrote about a signiﬁ cant change in 
 international politics: “ State sovereignty has been persistently 
and progressively undermined by NGOs . . . . States have not been 

The Critical Role of International Nongovernmental Organizations 59
 displaced  by  non-state actors; but, without question, they have 
been  supplemented , often extensively, by them” (  Welch 2001, 262–
263, my emphasis). 
 Although it can be difﬁ cult to categorize NGOs by speciﬁ c activ-
ities, they can be broadly classiﬁ ed as operational or  campaigning. 
Campaigning NGOs inﬂ uence the international political system to 
achieve large-scale change. Operational NGOs use direct projects 
to achieve small-scale change. 
 There has been an explosive growth of NGOs since the end of 
World War II. Prior to that time, there were few NGOs, and only 
one had reached worldwide attention: the International  Committee 
of the Red Cross (ICRC). In 1956 there were 973 NGOs function-
ing in a different number of ways. By 1968, there were 1,899 such 
groups. In 1981, there were 4,265 nongovernmental actors at work 
in the world; in 1996, the number had increased to nearly 5,500 
NGOs. In 2010, there are over 10,000 major NGOs functioning 
across the world. Including NGOs in nearly every nation-state, 
local as well as national and international, there are almost 50,000 
agencies. For example, Amnesty International, housed in London, 
has 4,300 local groups and national sections in 55 nations, “some 
of them with 100,000 or more members” ( Amnesty International 
1999, 377 ). 
 NGOs serve a number of different functions that impact 
sovereign states, including authoritarian regimes. Disaster relief, 
developmental aid, and humanitarian assistance NGOs such as 
CARE and Oxfam, “generally cooperate even with rights-abusing 
governments in order to gain access and distribute relief” (  Welch 
2001, 270  ). Human rights international nongovernmental orga-
nizations (INGOs) such as Amnesty International, International 
Human Rights Law Group, International Commission of Jurists, 
and Human Rights Watch, who are concerned about and target 
civil and political abuses, reject any formal association and depen-
dence on governments because, generally, the governments are 
the  targets of these organizations. 
 Some scholars have identiﬁ ed at least six separate functions 
of NGOs: 
 Standard setting for human rights both locally and 
globally; 
 Providing information through research, information 
gathering and documenting abuses; 
 Evaluation and disseminating of their ﬁ ndings through 
reports; 

60 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 Lobbying against governmental actions that infringe 
human rights and trying to transform public opinion 
on these human rights issues; 
 Provide assistance to victims, legal and emergency 
humanitarian relief; and 
 Moral condemnation or, less often, praise for state actions 
( Scoble 1984 ) .
 One example of lobbying by an NGO is the following  Internet 
message from Amnesty International USA. It concerns a particular 
human rights issue regarding open and fair trials, even for those 
who are allegedly terrorists. It advocates action that would impact 
governmental actions. It also raises funds for its  continuing efforts 
in addressing human rights injustices. Part of one message to the 
public, sent in an e-mail, states 
 The White House is playing political football with the 
9/11 terror trials. Don ’ t let our government cave in to 
fear. Give Amnesty the ﬁ repower it needs to raise the 
public outcry in defense of justice. 
 For human rights groups, the ﬁ rst  major task  is standard set-
ting, that is, trying to do what sovereign states have done in the 
past—“establishing international norms for state behavior, set 
forth in legally binding treaties that have been negotiated and rat-
iﬁ ed by governments” (  Welch 2001, 3  ). For example, two norms 
that have been targeted for decades by NGOs is to have an inter-
national treaty that deﬁ nes and prohibits torture (The Convention 
Against Torture and other forms of Cruel Inhuman or Degrading 
Treatment or Punishment, 1984) and to create a treaty that bans 
the use of land mines globally (The Convention on the Prohibi-
tion of the Use, Stockpiling, Production, and Transfer of Anti-
Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction, 1997). This effort led 
to the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to the person and NGO 
responsible for successfully drafting and lobbying successfully 
for such a ban (although the United States has still not signed the 
treaty). In all, more than 1,200 NGOs took part in the passage of 
the Anti- Landmines Convention. 
 The  second major task is monitoring, researching, dissemi-
nating, and promoting information they have collected regarding 
a human rights abuse. The third task is  advocating for change : the 
establishment of norms, then the research and documentation and 

The Critical Role of International Nongovernmental Organizations 61
reports, and ﬁ nally, advocacy and lobbying by NGOs until the 
civil or political abuse is addressed by a nation-state or an inter-
national organization such as the UN. As already seen, more than 
300 human rights NGOs attended and vigorously participated in 
the 1998 Rome Conference that led to the passage of the statute 
creating the ICC. 
 To accomplish their goals, the NGOs must have ﬁ nancial and 
human resources. There a number of ways these  nongovernmental 
agencies raise the money needed to continue their work:  donations 
from individuals, governments (although human rights NGOs 
eschew this source of funding), foundations such as the Ford 
Foundation and the Rockefeller Foundation, and money gener-
ated through the payment of membership dues. 
 There are, however, limitations to the success of NGOs. For 
example, Welsh has written, “the severity of abuses [to indigenous 
Maya] in Guatemala and the seemingly minimal impact of human 
rights NGOs during more than a decade of major repression seem 
to underscore their limitations: NGOs have generally proven far 
more effective in raising awareness about abuses than in directly 
resolving them” ( Welch 2001, 14 ). 
 However, there has been a shifting of power in international 
relations since the full-blown emergence of the INGO after World 
War II. Through the research and dissemination and lobbying 
of these non-governmental organizations, international law has 
undergone some signiﬁ cant shifts in the effort to protect citizens 
from abuses by governments. Chapter 7 provides a great deal of 
information about the number and scope of NGO activity. 
 Operational and Campaigning NGOs 
 Operational NGOs sustain their programs and projects by mobi-
lizing resources: ﬁ nancial donations, materials, and volunteer 
labor. To organize these resources, these NGOs usually maintain a 
ﬁ eld staff and headquarters. For campaigning NGOs, fundraising 
is still necessary, but on a smaller scale. It symbolically strength-
ens the donors ’  identiﬁ cation with the cause. More important is 
persuading people to donate their time; successful campaigning 
NGOs have the ability to mobilize large numbers of people for 
certain issues and events ( Willets 2002 ). 
 Fundraising, mobilization of supporters, organizing special 
events, courting the media, and managing a headquarters are activi-
ties common to both organizing and campaigning NGOs. Only the 

62 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
major actions, implementing projects or holding  demonstrations, 
are different. In reality, however, these lines are often crossed. 
When projects are not making the expected impact, operational 
NGOs often move into campaigning. For example, an environmen-
tal operational NGO may support campaign networks. Similarly, 
campaigning NGOs often feel they cannot ignore the immediate 
practical problems in their policy domain. A human rights NGO 
may have programs assisting the victims of discrimination and 
injustice.  
 Other Categories of NGOs 
 Other types of NGOs use variants of these two primary  functions. 
Research institutes, for example, increase knowledge and under-
standing (a form of operational programming). They could pro mote 
an academic, nonpolitical issue and/or disseminate information 
for campaigning purposes. Professional associations, trade unions, 
recreational groups, and other organizations provide program 
activities for their members. Sometimes, these organizations also 
campaign to enhance their economic interests and status.  
 The Perennial Clash between 
Justice and Sovereignty 
 At the core of all these international and national efforts to deal 
with the consequences of genocide and war crimes is the peren-
nial clash between justice and national sovereignty. To date, the 
national sovereignty concept has been a successful tool to blunt 
efforts by internationalists to provide a working justice system to 
deal with some of the dilemmas brought on by war crimes, geno-
cide, and crimes against humanity. However, especially since the 
1970s, the proliferation of human rights INGOs has had an impact 
on the once-sacrosanct concept of state sovereignty. Advocating 
changes regarding human rights has become the norm across the 
globe. And there have been many success stories showing how 
NGOs can inﬂ uence public opinion around the globe to call for 
adoption of the norms addressed by the nongovernmental organi-
zations. However, as the next chapter will show, there are still 
powerful nations whose leadership continues to reject the stan-
dards called for by INGOs and other sovereign states. 

References 63
 The events of the 21st century, especially those triggered by 
the many hundreds of INGOs, as well as the impact of multi-
national businesses and the shrinking of the world through the 
Internet, will determine the outcome of this clash of important yet 
 conﬂ icting values. 
 References 
 Amnesty International. 1999.  Amnesty International Report 1998 . London: 
Amnesty International. 
 Ball, H. 1999.  Prosecuting War Crimes and Genocide . Lawrence, KS: 
 University Press of Kansas. 
 Bassiouni, M. C. 1997. From Versailles to Rwanda in Seventy-ﬁ ve Years: 
The Need to Establish a Permanent International Criminal Court.  Har-
vard Human Rights Journal 10: 11–62. 
 Boyle, F. A. 1996.  The Bosnian People Charge Genocide: Proceedings at the 
International Court of Justice Concerning BOSNIA V. SERBIA on the Preven-
tion and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide . Amherst, MA: Alethia Press. 
 CBS News. 1998. Text of Clinton ’ s Rwanda speech. Speech given 
March 24, 1998, in Kigali, Rwanda.  http://www.cbsnews.com/
stories/1998/03/25/world/main5798.shtml . 
 CBC News. 2006. The Genocide Convention. September 18, 2006.  http://
www.cbc.ca/news/background/sudan/genocide-convention.html .  
 Cussler, C. 2010.  The Silent Sea . New York: G. P. Putnam ’ s. 
 Destexhe, A. 1995.  Rwanda and Genocide in the Twentieth Century . 
New York: New York University Press. 
 Durch, W. J. 1996. Keeping the peace. In  UN Peacemaking, American 
Policy, and the Uncivil Wars of the 1990s , edited by W. J. Durch. New York: 
St. Martin ’ s Press. 
 Dworkin, A. 2005. Cambodian War Crimes Tribunal Given Go-ahead. 
May 5.  http://www.crimesofwar.org/onnews/news-cambodia2.html . 
 Franchi, H. A. 2009. International Court Eyes Role Beyond War-crimes 
Trials.  Christian Science Monitor September 12, 1. 
 Gellately, R., and B. Kiernan, 2003.  The Spectre of Genocide: Mass Murder 
in Historical Perspective . New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Goldhagen, D. J. 2009.  Worse Than War: Genocide, Eliminationism, and the 
Ongoing Assault on Humanity . New York: Public Affairs Press. 
 Goldman, T. R. 1998. A World Apart: U.S. Stance on a New ICC Con-
cerns Rights Groups.  Legal Times June 8, 16. 

64 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 Human Rights. 2008. Five Controversies on Genocide (. . . But 
Not the Only Five).  http://humanrights.change.org/blog/
view/5_controversies_on_genocide_but_not_the_only_ﬁ ve . 
 Human Rights Tribune . 2008. Value of UN Genocide Convention 
Questioned. December 17.  http://www.ictj.org/en/news/coverage/
article/2187.html . 
 Human Rights Watch. 2009. Cambodia: First Trial to Test Tribunal ’ s 
Credibility. February 14.  http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2009/02/
14/cambodia-ﬁ rst-trial-test-tribunal-s-credibility . 
 International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty. 2001. 
 The Responsibility to Protect . Ottawa, Canada: International Development 
Research Centre.  http://www.iciss.ca/pdf/Commission-Report.pdf . 
 Jones, A. 2006.  Genocide: A Comprehensive Introduction . New York: 
Routledge. 
 Lake, A. 1994. The Limits of Peacekeeping.  New York Times 
February 6, D17. 
 McDonald, G. K. 1998. The Changing Nature of the Laws of War.  Mili-
tary Law Review 156: 30–51. 
 Mydans, S. 1999. Two Khmer Rouge Leaders Spend Beach Holiday in 
Shadow of Past.  New York Times January 1, 1. 
 Mydans, S. 1998. Cambodia ’ s Leader Says Top Khmer Rouge Defectors 
Will Be Spared.  New York Times December 29, 1. 
 Nardin, T., and M. S. Williams. 2006.  Humanitarian Intervention: Nomos 
XLVII . New York: New York University Press. 
 A New World Court: American Objections to a Strong International 
Criminal Court are Misplaced. 1998.  The Economist June 13–19, 16. 
 Powell, C. 1993. Testimony before U.S. Congress. U.S. Participation in 
UN Peacekeeping Activities. House Committee on Foreign Affairs. 
 Power, S. 2002.  “A Problem from Hell”: America and the Age of Genocide . 
New York: Basic Books. 
 Ratner, S. R., and J. S. Abrams 2001.  Accountability for Human Rights 
Atrocities in International Law: Beyond the Nuremberg Legacy . Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press. 
 Robertson, G. 2002.  Crimes against Humanity: The Struggle for Global 
Justice . London: Penguin. 
 Rwanda Development Gateway. 2010. About Gacaca.  http://www
.rwandagateway.org/gateway_new/?rubrique30 . 
 Scoble, H. M. 1984. Human Rights Non-governmental Organizations 
in Black Africa: Their Problems and Prospects in the Wake of the Banjul 

References 65
Charter. In  Human Rights and Development in Africa , edited by C. E. 
Welch Jr. and R. I. Meltze, 177–194. Albany, NY: State University of New 
York. 
 Sells, M. 1998.  The Bridge Betrayed: Religion and Genocide in Bosnia . 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
 Simons, M. 2009. “International Court Begins First Trial,”  New York 
Times January 29, A1. 
 Stanley Foundation. 1998. The UN Security Council and the ICC: How 
Should They Relate. Conference at Arden House, New York, Febru-
ary 20–22.  http://www.stanleyfoundation.org/publications/archive/
Issues98.pdf . 
 Waller, J. 2007.  Becoming Evil: How Ordinary People Commit Genocide and 
Mass Killing . 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Welch, C. E., Jr. 2001.  NGOs and Human Rights: Promise and Performance . 
Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
 Willetts, P. 2002.  What Is a Non-governmental Organization?  http://www
.staff.city.ac.uk/p.willetts/CS-NTWKS/NGO-ART.HTM# . 
 Wisner, F. 1993. Statement before U.S. Congress: International 
Peacekeeping and Peace Enforcement. U.S. Senate Committee on 
Armed Forces. 


67
 3 
 Special U.S. Issues: 
The United States and the 
Creation of an International 
Criminal Court 
 U
ntil 1998, the United States was in the forefront of efforts to 
ameliorate crimes against humanity and war crimes and, 
after 1945, to punish those who fomented genocide before 
and during war. It was a major supporter of the ad hoc tribu-
nals to try and then to punish those found guilty of such crimes 
in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. The Clinton adminis-
tration called for a special criminal court to try the leaders of 
the Cambodian Khmer Rouge for ordering and committing 
genocide. 
 However, the United States opposed the creation of a per-
manent international criminal court and fought hard not to 
have the International Criminal Court (ICC) come into exis-
tence. This opposition was voiced by Democratic president Bill 
Clinton (1993–2001) and Republican president George W. Bush 
(2001–2009). This chapter will examine the opposition to the ICC 
by these administrations and examine the view of the ICC held 
by the administration of Democratic president Barack Obama 
(2009–2013). It is clear that for the ICC to be successful, the United 
States  must  be a forceful supporter of this international criminal 
tribunal.  

68 Special U.S. Issues
 American Antipathy toward the Idea 
of an ICC, 1918–2010 
 Charges of war crimes and “crimes against civilized humanity” 
by the Allies—against Germany and Turkey—were made by them 
during and after the First World War ended in 1918. As early as 
1915, the United Kingdom and Russia warned Turkish leaders 
that their actions against the Armenian minority were “crimes 
against civilized humanity” and those responsible would be pun-
ished at war ’ s end. 
 In 1919, the report by the Allies ’  Committee of Enquiry into 
the Breaches of the Laws of War found that almost 1,000 German 
military and political persons, including the Sovereign, Kaiser 
Wilhelm II, committed serious war crimes and crimes against 
humanity. The Committee recommended the establishment of an 
international criminal court, composed of ﬁ ve judges (from the 
United States, France, the United Kingdom, Italy, and Japan) to 
try those identiﬁ ed by the Committee. Sections 227–230 of the Ver-
sailles Treaty established such a tribunal and set parameters for 
the criminal trials. 
 However, these  smachparagraphen  were never implemented 
because of the unwillingness of the United States. The Ameri-
can secretary of state, Robert Lansing, successfully argued that 
punishment for war crimes must be left to each nation ’ s military 
tribunals—even the defeated nations. He argued that the creation 
of an international war crimes tribunal, an unprecedented idea, 
was not needed and that the idea was “an unchartered area of 
international law and a  frontal attack on the concept of state sover-
eignty .” Lansing said that the idea of such an international crim-
inal  tribunal “reﬂ ected a lack of precedent, precept, practice or 
procedure” (my emphasis) (quoted in MacMillan 2001). 
 Lansing also stated that a head of state, whether kaiser or 
president, is immune from any criminal charges because of the 
existence of the centuries-old international law concept of “sover-
eign immunity.” He also rejected the new concept, in the Versailles 
Treaty, of “negative criminality,” i.e., that the Central Powers lead-
ers  failed  to prevent war crimes and crimes against humanity com-
mitted by their subordinates in the ﬁ eld. 
 The alternative, for Lansing and President Woodrow Wilson, 
was to democratize the defeated nations and to let them have their 
own legal and military law authorities provide criminal justice for 

American Antipathy toward the Idea of an ICC, 1918–2010 69
those accused of war crimes. In 1922, the German Supreme Court, 
sitting in Leipzig, received the 1,000 charges against German mili-
tary personnel from the Allies. The result: all but 12 cases were 
dismissed by the “democratic” court; only four cases, involving 
about a dozen military personnel, ended in guilty verdicts. All 
were sentenced to minor prison terms of two years or less. 
 During the interwar era, 1919–1939, there was some talk about 
creating an international criminal court but no action ensued. In 
1926, for example, the League of Nations proposed the creation 
of an international criminal court, with jurisdiction over individ-
uals accused of violating the laws of war. Nothing came of the 
proposal. 
 Even during the Second World War, 1939–1945, the United 
States was opposed to the creation of an international criminal law 
war tribunal to try the leading Nazi and Japanese leaders. Presi-
dent Franklin D. Roosevelt ’ s view, shared by Winston Churchill, the 
United Kingdom ’ s prime minister, was for  summary execution of the 
top 5,000 military and political leaders without any trial whatso-
ever. As late as April 1945, one month before the unconditional sur-
render of Nazi Germany, Churchill wrote the following to FDR: 
 His majesty ’ s government is deeply impressed with the 
dangers and difﬁ culties of judicial proceedings, and 
they think that execution without trial is the preferable 
course. A trial would be exceedingly long and elaborate, 
many of the Nazis ’  deeds are not war crimes in the ordi-
nary sense, nor is it at all clear that they can properly be 
described as crimes under international law. 
 However, the winter 1944–1945 war crimes of the Nazis at 
Malmady and the late April 1945 discovery of the Nazi concen-
tration and death camps led the Allies to create an ad hoc, not 
a permanent, international military tribunal to try the leaders 
of Nazi Germany and, later, the Japanese leaders, excluding the 
emperor. These actions led to the formulation of the Nurem-
berg Principles of 1946, which made waging aggressive war, 
war crimes, and crimes against humanity serious violations 
of the laws of war. In 1948, the United Nations (UN) deﬁ ned 
“genocide” and, in the Genocide Convention of 1948, ratiﬁ ed in 
1950, made genocide—whether committed in peacetime or dur-
ing war—a major violation of the laws of war and international 
humanitarian law. 

70 Special U.S. Issues
 Article VI of the Genocide Convention called for the creation of 
an international criminal court to hear cases brought against individ-
uals, including heads of state, charged with genocide, war crimes, 
crimes against humanity and/or waging aggressive war. In Article 
VI were two critically important innovations in international law: 
“ universal jurisdiction ” and “ complementarity .” The former suggested 
that there were certain crimes that fell under the concept of universal 
jurisdiction because every civilized society condemned them. 
 Complementarity  is the concept suggesting that a civilized 
society should bring to national justice any person accused of a 
serious breach of international law but that, should the nation be 
 unable or unwilling to so act , an international criminal tribunal could 
act in order to ensure justice and deny  impunity to the accused. 
 In 1948, the UN created the International Law Commission 
(ILC) to look into the matter and to draft rules and guidelines for a 
permanent international criminal court. The ILC submitted drafts 
of the proposed ICC in 1951 and 1953; however, the Cold War 
between the Soviet Bloc and the West negated any discussion of 
such an international entity. It would not be until 1990 that the 
ILC once again began drafting a statute that would lay the foun-
dation for a permanent international criminal court. 
 Between 1950 and 1990, there were 40 years of hot and cold 
war, of regional warfare, and of wars of revolution and indepen-
dence. More than 200 “wars” occurred during this time frame, 
from Korea and Vietnam to Cambodia and Cyprus. However, by 
1989–1990, the world community saw the collapse of the Soviet 
“empire,” and the UN once again began to examine the ideal of a 
permanent international criminal court. Continuous work by the 
ILC and the Preparatory Committee (PrepCom) of the ILC—and 
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) across the globe—led to 
the convening of 161 state delegations and 235 NGOs in Rome, 
Italy, in June–July 1998 to examine and possibly ratify the work of 
the draft statute committees. 
 By 1998, the world had seen the creation of two ad hoc Interna-
tional Criminal Tribunals (former Yugoslavia, 1993, and Rwanda, 
1994). These were nonpermanent international courts created by 
the UN to try to bring to the bar of justice those who had com-
mitted war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide: (1) 
during the 1991–1995 wars in the former Yugoslavia (involving 
Croatia, Bosnia, and Serbia) and (2) during the less-than-three-
month Rwandan civil war between Hutu and Tutsi where almost 
one million Tutsi were murdered by Hutu soldiers. 

The “Two Roads Taken” by the United States 71
 Although U.S. leaders supported the creation of the ad hoc 
tribunals, they were wary of the effort to create a permanent—
and independent—international criminal court. Clearly, this was 
seen in the actions of the Democratic administration of President 
Bill Clinton (1993–2001) and those of the Republican administra-
tion of President George W. Bush (2001–2009). 
 The “Two Roads Taken” by the United 
States before and during the Drafting 
of the Rome Treaty of the ICC, 1998: 
the Bill Clinton Years 
 The U.S. opposition to an ICC had been voiced for almost a 
 century, from Wilson and Lansing in 1919 to contemporary 
U.S. opposition to the Rome Treaty and the ICC. Criticism has 
been voiced by Democratic and Republican administrations, by 
 moderate presidents as well as conservative chief executives alike 
and by the nation ’ s military leaders. Fundamentally, there is the 
perception that ceding legal and prosecutorial powers to an inde-
pendent ICC is equivalent to turning over a segment of the United 
States ’  “national sovereignty” to the ICC and that American mili-
tary personnel and their political leaders would become the tar-
gets for partisan prosecutors. 
 The U.S. Constitution is a set of sanctiﬁ ed, governing princi-
ples that prohibit a “surrender” of national sovereignty to an inter-
national prosecutor. This view of national sovereignty by American 
leaders was clearly enunciated before and during the Rome confer-
ence. For the chief American spokesperson at the conference, David 
Scheffer, there had to be substantive checks on the independence 
of the prosecutor ’ s ofﬁ ce, primarily through the intercession of the 
UN Security Council, where the United States has veto power. 
 For the Americans, a major fear was that an overzealous, 
anti-American, politically motivated prosecutor would use the 
discretionary powers of an independent prosecutor ’ s ofﬁ ce to 
try to bring U.S. military personnel and their leaders, as well as 
the political leadership of the United States, before an interna-
tional criminal court for “frivolous” reasons. For Scheffer, absent 
Security Council veto power, the United States could not vote in 
favor of the creation of an ICC. “The Security Council,” he said in 

72 Special U.S. Issues
Rome, “needs to be a very signiﬁ cant player in the operation of 
this court” ( Goldman 1998, 16–17 ). 
 The Security Council ’ s role had to be that of a check on the 
actions of an independent prosecutor. Without the check and 
balance of the Security Council, there might be the horror of a 
prosecutor running wild—acting out of personal or political moti-
vations. Scheffer concluded, “[The U.S. government] remains 
strongly opposed to giving an international prosecutor the right 
to initiate cases” ( Crosette 1998, A1). 
 At the conclusion of the Rome meeting, the United States 
was on the losing side on the critical issues of prosecutorial inde-
pendence and of the role of the UN Security Council in regard to 
the actions of the ICC. The Rome Statute was approved by 121 
nations; only seven voted against the statute: China, Iran, Iraq, 
Israel, Libya, North Korea—and the United States. (The remain-
ing state delegations chose to abstain from voting.) 
 Article 15 (1) of the Rome Treaty, which gave the prosecutor 
independent power to investigate allegations of serious breaches 
of international law and the discretionary power to initiate pros-
ecutorial actions in the ICC, passed by a vote of 63–13. (Article 13 
(b) and (c) also enabled the UN Security Council or a State Party 
to refer a case to the prosecutor for possible adjudication.) 
 Prior to and during the Rome meeting in June–July 1998, the 
U.S. leaders strode down two very different roads at the same time. 
Although President Clinton, his secretary of state, and the U.S. ambas-
sador to the UN championed the idea of an ICC that was constrained 
by the Security Council, others in the administration, primarily the 
Defense Department, including the top echelon of the military estab-
lishment, took a different road: threats and intimidation. 
 Newspapers on the Continent reported that U.S. spokes-
persons were threatening poor nations with a cutoff of aid, and 
NATO allies were told that U.S. military aid would be jeopar-
dized if they voted for the Rome statute (  Jackson 1998, 19  ). For 
example, a paper prepared for the U.S. secretary of defense Wil-
liam Cohen, stated that “if Germany [voted for the statute], the 
U.S. might retaliate by removing its troops, including those in 
Europe” ( Jackson 1998, 19 ). 
 As a practical matter, the United States was concerned about 
the direction the Rome meeting was taking. Said Scheffer, 
 [No] other nation matches the extent of United States 
overseas military commitments through alliances and 

The “Two Roads Taken” by the United States 73
special missions such as current peacekeeping commit-
ments in the former Yugoslavia. We constantly have 
troops serving abroad on humanitarian missions, res-
cue operations, or missions to destroy weapons of mass 
destruction. . . . Someone out there isn ’ t going to like 
it, but we ’ re the ones who do it. . . . It is our  collective 
interest that the personnel of our military and civil-
ian commands be able to fulﬁ ll their many legitimate 
responsibilities without unjustiﬁ ed exposure to criminal 
legal proceedings ( Stanley 1998, A1) .
In the end, the United States voted against the Treaty in July 1998; 
its representative did not sign the document at the  conclusion of 
the Rome meeting. 
 Not signing the Rome Statute, “a largely nonbinding ges-
ture,” meant that the United States could not participate in any of 
the follow-up meetings of PrepCom to work on continuing issues 
surrounding the formulation of standards for the ICC. However, 
in the waning days of his administration, and on the very last 
possible day that a nation could sign the Statute—December 31, 
2000—President Bill Clinton signed the Rome Treaty on the ICC. 
He signed, he said, “to reafﬁ rm our strong support for interna-
tional accountability and for bringing to justice perpetrators of 
genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity. We do so 
as well because we wish to  remain engaged in making the ICC an 
instrument of impartial and effective justice in the years to come” 
(my emphasis). 
 However, in the attached statement, Clinton voiced again the 
concerns of the United States about the ICC: 
 We are concerned that when the Court comes into exis-
tence, it will not only exercise authority over  personnel 
of states that have ratiﬁ ed the Treaty, but also claim juris-
diction over personnel of states that have not. With sig-
nature, we will be in a position to inﬂ uence the evolution 
of the Court. Without signature, we will not. . . . Court 
jurisdiction over U.S. personnel should come only with 
U.S. ratiﬁ cation of the Treaty.  The United States should have 
a chance to observe and assess the functioning of the Court, 
over time, before choosing to become subject to its jurisdiction . 
Given these concerns, I will not, and do not recommend 
that my successor submit the Treaty to the Senate for 

74 Special U.S. Issues
advice and consent until our fundamental concerns are 
satisﬁ ed. (my emphasis)  
 America ’ s Position after the Signing 
of the Rome Treaty, 2001–2009: 
the George W. Bush Years 
 After the delegations left Rome, the U.S. position was ﬁ xed: 
It would oppose the ICC as long as the Security Council ’ s ﬁ ve 
 permanent members did not have a veto power to restrain a par-
tisan independent prosecutor. As will be seen, there was some 
movement toward working cooperatively with the ICC after 
2006; however, no president, including Democratic president 
Barack Obama, has moved to bring the treaty to the U.S. Senate 
for ratiﬁ cation. 
 Although President Clinton was willing to wait and see how 
the ICC evolved and to have the United States participate in future 
discussions about the ICC, his successor, George W. Bush, took a 
totally different approach to the ICC—and to other multilateral 
treaties deliberated by members of the international community. 
 President Bush ’ s “Unsigning” of the Rome Statute, 
May 2002, and Other Actions in Response to the 
“Entry into Force” of the ICC, July 2002–2009 
 As soon as George W. Bush took the oath of ofﬁ ce on January 
20, 2001, the atmosphere in the political White House regarding 
the ICC changed radically. For the conservative Republican presi-
dent, the ICC substantially impinged on the national sovereignty 
of the United States in a number of major ways: 
 1.  The ICC claims jurisdiction over certain crimes com-
mitted in the territory of a State Party, including by 
nationals of a non-Party. Such a claim would entail 
ICC jurisdiction of U.S. citizens ( U.S. Department of 
State 2002 ); 
 2.  Although a “State Party” to the ICC treaty could 
“opt out” of crimes added by amendment to the 
ICC ’ s jurisdiction, a non-State Party cannot so act; 

America’s Position after the Signing of the Rome Treaty, 2001–2009 75
 3.  The ofﬁ ce of independent prosecutor would be 
subject to pressure that would lead to “politicized 
prosecutions”; 
 4.  The prosecutor is totally unaccountable to an elected 
body or to the UN Security Council. There are no 
“checks and balances” in place; 
 5.  The ICC has usurped the role of the UN Security 
Council; 
 6.  There is no trial by jury; therefore, there is a denial of 
due process of law. 
 Furthermore, the new president was categorically and ideo-
logically unwilling to wait and see how the ICC would function 
over time once the requisite number of states (60) formally ratiﬁ ed 
the Rome Treaty, nor were Bush and his foreign affairs leaders 
interested in U.S. participation in future discussions about pos-
sible improvements and modiﬁ cations in the ICC. 
 From the beginning of his administration, Bush saw the ICC 
as an “unchecked power” able to prosecute military soldiers and 
their leaders. Bush ’ s under secretary of state, Marc Grossman, 
said: “We believe the ICC is built on a ﬂ awed foundation. These 
ﬂ aws leave it open for exploitation and politically motivated pros-
ecutions.” The Bush administration ’ s ambassador for war crimes, 
Pierce-Richard Prosper, stated bluntly: “We [the United States] 
have washed our hands. It ’ s over.” 
 On May 6, 2002, after there were more than 60 nations that 
formally ratiﬁ ed the ICC Statute, for the very ﬁ rst time in U.S. 
diplomatic history, a president formally renounced previous U.S. 
support of an international treaty. In a letter to UN secretary gen-
eral Koﬁ  Annan, John R. Bolton, then the under secretary for arms 
control and international security, wrote: “This is to inform you in 
connection with the Rome Statute of the ICC, adopted on July 17, 
1998, that the United States does not intend to become a party to 
the treaty. Accordingly, the United States has no legal obligations 
arising from its signature on December 31, 2000. The United States 
requests that its intention not to become a party, as expressed in 
this letter, be reﬂ ected in the depository ’ s status list relating to this 
treaty.” 
 For Bolton this was a most satisfactory action. Prior to the 
controversial 2000 electoral victory of Bush over his Democratic 
opponent, Al Gore, John Bolton, was vice president of the neocon-
servative American Enterprise Institute and advisor to Sen. Jesse 

76 Special U.S. Issues
Helms. He was a most outspoken war hawk and vocal critic of the 
ICC. As Helms ’  advisor, he was instrumental in the early drafting 
of the American Service-Members ’ Protection Act (ASPA) of 2002. 
 The decision to “unsign” Clinton ’ s ratiﬁ cation of the ICC 
Statute was, evidently, a controversial one in the Bush administra-
tion. The “unilateralists”—Vice President Dick Cheney, Secretary 
of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, and others—successfully battled 
Secretary of State Colin Powell and other senior State Department 
ofﬁ cials who believed that the May 2002 “unsigning” letter was 
unnecessary and symbolic but that it would “needlessly alienate 
European allies” ( Lobe 2002 ). 
 However, once the decision was made, beginning on May 6, 
2002, there was an orchestrated defense of the action as well as the 
positive position of the United States with respect to bringing to 
justice individuals who perpetrate genocide, war crimes, or crimes 
against humanity. Various high level ofﬁ cials in the U.S. Depart-
ment of State participated in this public relations effort, including 
Secretary of State Colin Powell. In an interview broadcast on South 
Africa ’ s radio stations, Powell said there was no reason to apolo-
gize for not ratifying the ICC treaty “because we hold our soldiers 
and our public ofﬁ cials to the very highest levels of accountabil-
ity and responsibility. And we also have a constitutional system 
that says when one of our individuals who is serving overseas has 
done something wrong, we expect that individual to be dealt with 
under the Constitution of the United States.” 
 Others who spoke out negatively about the ICC included 
Ambassador for War Crimes Issues Pierre-Richard Prosper (at a 
Foreign Press Center brieﬁ ng in Washington, D.C.) and Under sec-
retary for Political Affairs Marc Grossman (in remarks to the Cen-
ter for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, D.C.). 
 In his prepared remarks, Grossman presented the essential 
principles of the Bush administration: 
 justice and the promotion of the rule of law; 
• 
 those who commit the most serious crimes of concern 
• 
to the international community should be punished; 
 states, not international institutions are primarily 
• 
responsible for ensuring justice in the international 
system; [and] 
 the best way to combat these serious offenses is to 
• 
build domestic judicial systems, strengthen political 
will and promote human freedom. 

America’s Position after the Signing of the Rome Treaty, 2001–2009 77
 However, the ICC “does not advance these principles.”  Grossman 
then reiterated the litany of ﬂ aws in the ICC, “. . . ﬂ aws that 
leave [the ICC] open for exploitation and politically motivated 
prosecutions. . . . [For these reasons,] President Bush has come 
to the conclusion that the United States can no longer be a party 
to this process.” He also stated that the United States does 
share a 
 common goal—the promotion of the rule of law. Our 
differences are in approach and philosophy. In order 
for the rule of law to have true meaning, societies must 
accept their responsibilities and be able to direct their 
future and come to terms with their past. An unchecked 
international body should not be able to interfere in this 
delicate process. . . . We believe that there is common 
ground, and ask those nations who have decided to 
join the Rome Treaty to meet us there. . . . [We] believe 
that justice would be best served in creating an environ-
ment that will have a lasting and beneﬁ cial impact on 
all nations across the globe. . . . In the end, the best way 
to prevent genocide, crimes against humanity, and war 
crimes is through the spread of democracy,  transparency, 
and rule of law. Nations with accountable, democratic 
governments do not abuse their own people or wage 
wars of conquest and terror. A world of self-governing 
democracies is our best hope for a world without inhu-
manity ( Grossman 2002, 4–6 passim). 
 The March toward Passage of the American 
Servicemen’s Protection Act (ASPA), 2001–2002 
 In addition to these political, legal, and diplomatic actions taken 
by the Bush administration in the international arena, the presi-
dent and his political advisors took domestic political actions—
supported by two key Republican legislative leaders in the U.S. 
House of Representatives and the Senate—to buttress the admini-
stration ’ s rejection of the ICC. In early August, 2002, President 
Bush signed the ASPA of 2002, a critically important amendment 
to the U.S. Defense Department supplemental authorization 
legislation. 
 The ASPA legislation began its 15-month trek to passage 
on May 8, 2001, when the archconservative, Rep. Tom DeLay 

78 Special U.S. Issues
(R-Tex.), the House majority whip, introduced the ASPA as an 
amendment to H.R. 1646, the Foreign Relations Authorization 
Act. Passed in two days, it was sent to the Senate where, on May 
10, 2001, Sen. Jesse Helms (R-N.C.), who was joined by Sen. Zell 
Miller (D-Ga.), introduced it as free-standing Senate bill S. 857, the 
ASPA of 2001. DeLay, in turn, introduced the same legislation in 
the House as H.R. 1794. 
 Although critics of the ASPA, led by Sen. Christopher Dodd 
(D-Conn.) and Representative Amo Houghton (R-N.Y.), unsuccess-
fully introduced legislation in support of continued U.S. engage-
ment with the ICC, the ASPA moved inexorably toward passage. 
After the 9/11 attacks, on September 26, 2001, Senator Helms 
again introduced a revised ASPA (with administration support) 
as an amendment to the Defense Department (DoD) Authoriza-
tion Act. After the revised ASPA was ruled nongermane, Helms 
in October 2001 again introduced another ASPA. On December 7, 
2001, Helms reintroduced still another version of ASPA as an 
amendment to the ﬁ scal year 2002 DoD Appropriations Act. That 
amendment passed the same day on a vote of 78–21. 
 The amendment was removed in conference committee on 
December 20, 2001. However, DeLay and Helms were unremit-
ting in their effort to see the ASPA become law. On May 9, 2002, 
DeLay ’ s ASPA, attached to a supplemental Defense Appropria-
tions Act (H.R. 4775), passed, and in June 2002, Sen. Paul Warner 
(R-Va.) proposed the ASPA as an amendment to the supplemental 
DoD appropriations bill in the Senate. The text was identical to 
DeLay ’ s House version of ASPA. 
 During the ﬂ oor debate in the Senate, Senator Dodd intro-
duced a second amendment that was incorporated into the ﬁ nal 
version of the supplemental appropriations bill. In the ﬁ nal ver-
sion of the ASPA, the Dodd Amendment (Section 2015) states: 
“Nothing in this title shall prohibit the United States from render-
ing assistance to all international efforts to bring to justice Saddam 
Hussein, Slobodan Milosevic, Osama bin Laden, other members 
of Al Qaeda, leaders of Islamic Jihad, and other foreign nationals 
accused of genocide, war crimes, or crimes against humanity.” In 
the conference committee deliberations, Sen. Patrick Leahy (D-Vt.) 
and Sen. James Byrd (D-W.Va.) urged the legislators to leave the 
Dodd Amendment in the ﬁ nal bill. Leahy said: “Congress wanted 
to be clear that the United States can cooperate with international 
efforts, including those by the ICC, to bring foreign nationals to 
justice. ”

America’s Position after the Signing of the Rome Treaty, 2001–2009 79
 The conference committee met in July 2002 and approved the 
ASPA with the Dodd Amendment added as Section 2015 of the 
legislation. On July 23–24, 2002, Conference Report 107-593 passed 
the House, and the following day, the Senate as H.R. 4775. On July 
26, 2002, it was given to President Bush. On August 2, 2002, Bush 
signed the ASPA legislation, making it Public Law 107-206. 
 Among the provisions of the ASPA were ones that prohib-
ited any cooperation between ICC investigators and other ICC 
employees and any federal or state or local law enforcement 
agency. Indeed, ICC investigators were prohibited from doing 
their work on American soil. The statute also prohibited any U.S. 
participation in UN peacekeeping actions unless there was a blan-
ket waiver of any possible ICC action against American military 
personnel. Further, the act prohibited any military assistance to a 
nation that was a “State Party” to the ICC—except for NATO and 
major non-NATO allies. The major sections of the ASPA follow. 
 Section 2003 grants the president authority to waive restric-
tive sections of ASPA (Sections 2004, 2005, 2006, and 2007) for a 
period of one year. Section 2004 prohibits cooperation or support 
 by any U.S. court, U.S. agencies, or state and local 
• 
government with the ICC, 
 for any investigative activity on U.S. soil by the ICC, 
• 
 of extradition of any person from the United States to 
• 
the ICC, and 
 from transferring any U.S. citizen or permanent 
• 
resident alien to the ICC. 
 Section 2005 states that it is the policy of the United States 
to seek permanent exemption from the ICC for U.S. troops in 
every UN peacekeeping operation authorization. It also bars 
U.S. military participation in UN peacekeeping unless the presi-
dent submits to Congress a “certiﬁ cation waiver” that one of 
three  conditions has been met: (1) that the UN Security Council 
exempted U.S. forces in the resolution, (2) that the ICC does not 
have jurisdiction over the nations in which U.S. troops will oper-
ate, or that these countries have entered into Article 98 bilateral 
agreements with the United States, or, (3) that the “U.S. national 
interest,” in the estimate of the president, justiﬁ es participation in 
the peacekeeping activity. 
 Section 2006 requires the president to develop procedures 
to ensure that there would be no direct or indirect transfer of 

80 Special U.S. Issues
 classiﬁ ed national security and law enforcement information to 
the ICC. Section 2007 prohibits any U.S. military aid or assistance 
to any “State Party” to the ICC treaty. However, it does allow the 
president to waive the ban if, in a report to the Congress, the pres-
ident deems it important to the “national interest” of the United 
States or if there is an Article 98 bilateral immunity agreement 
with a nation. Exempted from this restriction are (1) NATO mem-
bers, (2) major non-NATO allies (Australia, Egypt, Israel, Japan, 
Jordan, Argentina, the Republic of Korea, and New Zealand), and 
(3) Taiwan. 
 If the ICC had the audacity to investigate and hold  Americans 
at The Hague, its permanent home base, Section 2008 authorizes 
the president to use “all means necessary and appropriate to bring 
about the release” of these U.S. detainees—and allied persons if 
the detainees ’  nation makes such a request to the United States. 
It also authorized legal assistance for such persons if the ICC, 
located in The Hague, was not attacked by U.S. forces ﬁ rst. 
 Section 2011 grants the president, in the role of commander in 
chief (and consistent with the executive power of the president), 
authority to cooperate with the ICC or to provide national secu-
rity information to the court, requiring only presidential notiﬁ ca-
tion to the Congress within 15 days of the president ’ s action. 
 The United States made an even stronger statement against 
the ICC on July 13, 2004, when Congressman George Nether-
cutt, a Republican legislator from Washington state, introduced 
in the U.S. House of Representatives an amendment to the For-
eign Operations Appropriation Bill. In December 2004, Congress 
adopted the Nethercutt Amendment. This legislation authorizes 
the loss of Economic Support Funds to all countries, including 
many key U.S. allies, that have ratiﬁ ed the ICC treaty but have 
not signed a bilateral immunity agreement (BIA) with the United 
States. 
 The Nethercutt provision was again debated in 2005 and was 
adopted in the joint appropriations bill for 2006. It was included 
in the ﬁ scal year 2006 and 2008 budget authorizations (although 
presidential exemptions and waivers for certain allies, including 
NATO countries, were authorized). 
 For example, if an ICC member such as Peru declined to enter 
into one of these BIAs with the United States, then Peru would 
lose money earmarked, for example, for efforts to reduce coca 
production and ﬁ ght drug trafﬁ cking. As pointed out, a number 
of America ’ s allies declined to enter into these side agreements 

America’s Position after the Signing of the Rome Treaty, 2001–2009 81
because they believed their obligations to the ICC prevented them 
from doing so. They were punished accordingly. 
 However, after the presidential election victory of  Democrat 
Barack Obama in 2008, by 2010, the amendment was ﬁ nally 
dropped out of the appropriations bill (  Goldberg 2009  ). (More 
will be said about the Obama administration ’ s views of the ICC 
below in this chapter.) Don Kraus, an ofﬁ cial with the NGO, Citi-
zens for Global Solutions, said, 
 Thanks in large part to the work of House Foreign Opera-
tions and State Subcommittee chair Nita Lowey (D-N.Y.) 
and her staff, the language has been removed from the 
appropriations bill. Although her counterpart in the 
Senate, Patrick Leahy (D-Vt.) has successfully kept this 
language out of the Senate bill for many years, House 
Republican opposition ensured it remained in the ﬁ nal 
bill that went to President Bush. With the removal of the 
Nethercutt language, the [bi-lateral immunity campaign] 
is now ofﬁ cially over. 
 The Bilateral Immunity Agreement (BIA) as Another 
Strategy of the Bush Administration to Weaken the ICC 
 The Bush administration, coming into ofﬁ ce in 2001 as formal 
court approval by 60 nations neared, adopted an extremely active 
opposition to the new court. Washington began to  negotiate bilat-
eral agreements with other countries, ensuring immunity of U.S. 
nationals from prosecution by the court. As leverage,  Washington 
threatened termination of economic aid, withdrawal of mili-
tary assistance, and other painful measures. These exclusionary 
steps clearly endangered the ﬂ edgling court and might seriously 
weaken its credibility and effectiveness. 
 In late June 2002, the United States had successfully pushed 
for action within the UN Security Council to exempt its soldiers 
from legal action against them. The tack taken by the United 
States quickly led to the adoption of Resolution 1422 on July 12, 
2002, less than two weeks after the “entry into force” of the ICC at 
The Hague. The actions of the United States were political hard-
ball from the beginning. In June 2002, the United States vetoed the 
adoption of a resolution regarding the renewal of the UN ’ s peace-
keeping mission in Bosnia-Herzegovina. “The underlying [U.S.] 

82 Special U.S. Issues
threat was to vote against all future resolutions establishing UN 
operations” unless American forces were excluded from the juris-
diction of the ICC (  Zappala 2002, 117  ). The threat ended when the 
Security Council passed a resolution (1422) guaranteeing “exon-
eration” from ICC jurisdiction for all personnel of nations that 
are not a State Party to the ICC Statute who were involved in all 
authorized UN peacekeeping operations or missions (see   Stahn 
2003  ). In addition the U.S. Department of State began to develop 
BIAs with State Parties to the ICC Statute to exempt from ICC 
jurisdiction “all American citizens” (  Zappala 2002, 115  ). By the 
end of the ﬁ rst decade of the 21st century, more than 100 bilateral 
agreements had been entered into by the United States. 
 Furthermore, in early 2002, the Bush administration warned 
foreign diplomats that their nations could lose all American 
military assistance if they became members of the ICC without 
pledging to protect Americans serving in their countries from 
its reach. The threat to withdraw military aid—including educa-
tion, training, and help ﬁ nancing the purchase of equipment and 
weaponry—would be felt by almost every nation that has rela-
tions with the United States, though the law exempts many of its 
closest allies. The law gave the president authority to waive the 
provision and decide to continue military aid if he determines it 
is in the national interest. “The president welcomes the law—I 
can ’ t underscore how important this is to us to protect American 
service members,” said Philip Reeker, a State Department spokes-
man ( Becker 2002, A1). 
 Another provision in the ASPA gives the president authority 
to free members of the armed services or other Americans who are 
in the court ’ s custody by any “necessary and appropriate means,” 
including use of the military. “It is easier to list what countries 
do not receive American military assistance than those that do,” 
said Navy Lt. Cmdr. Barbara Burfeind a Pentagon spokesperson. 
“Virtually every country but Cuba, Iraq, Iran and the other coun-
tries on the terrorist list receive some military training or aid from 
us.” Jonathan Grella, a spokesman for DeLay, said, “This is just 
an effective tool, and we have said numerous times that we have 
to do whatever it takes to protect our service members from this 
rogue court” ( Becker 2002, A1). 
 Human rights groups condemned the administration ’ s tactic 
of using the threat of withdrawing military assistance as a tool 
in the ICC discussions. “This makes the remote possibility of 
American prosecution by the court trump every other  deﬁ nition 

America’s Position after the Signing of the Rome Treaty, 2001–2009 83
of national interest—it is ﬁ xation to the point of craziness,” said 
Kenneth Roth, the executive director of Human Rights Watch 
( Becker 2002, A1). 
 Several foreign diplomats said they were angry and puzzled 
by this threatened cutoff of military assistance even to countries 
that provided valuable military cooperation to the United States 
in the world wars, the Vietnam War, the Gulf War and the cur-
rent campaign against terrorism. “Why is this court so important 
that Washington would risk our military friendship?” asked one 
diplomat who represents a country that was a wartime ally of the 
United States ( Becker 2002, A1). 
 Since passage of the 2002 ASPA, in capitals around the world, 
U.S. government representatives have been seeking BIAs, in an 
effort to shield U.S. citizens from the jurisdiction of the newly cre-
ated ICC. These United States–requested agreements provide that 
current or former government ofﬁ cials, military and other person-
nel (regardless of whether or not they are nationals of the state 
concerned), or nationals will not be transferred to the jurisdiction 
of the ICC. 
 To date, several versions of these bilateral agreements have 
been proposed: those that are reciprocal, providing that neither 
of the two parties to the accord would surrender the other ’ s “per-
sons” without ﬁ rst gaining consent from the other; those that are 
nonreciprocal, providing only for the nonsurrender to the ICC of 
U.S. “persons”; and those that are intended for states that have 
neither signed nor ratiﬁ ed the Rome Statute, providing that those 
states not cooperate with efforts of third-party states to surrender 
U.S. “persons” to the ICC. 
 Although 105 governments have reportedly signed BIAs 
through 2008, less than 40 percent of these agreements have been 
ratiﬁ ed by parliaments or signed as an executive agreement. In fact, 
many legal experts argue that the executive agreements (which 
make up 18 percent of the BIAs) are unconstitutional and require the 
approval of parliament, and are thus not valid agreements. Further-
more, more than half of States Parties have resisted signing BIAs—
despite large economic penalties imposed by the United States, and 
54 countries continue to publicly refuse to sign (including Brazil, 
Croatia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Kenya, Namibia, Peru, Samoa, South 
Africa, and Trinidad and Tobago). (See  Chapter 6, Documents, for a 
list of nations who have signed BIAs with the United States.) With 
the election of Barack Obama, the BIA has become a nonissue in 
American foreign relations.  

84 Special U.S. Issues
 The Status of U.S. Policy Regarding the 
ICC after the 2008 Election of Democratic 
President Barack Obama, 2009–2012 
 During the presidential campaign of 2008, most of the candidates 
spoke about the future of the ICC. John McCain, U.S. senator from 
Arizona and the Republican Party ’ s candidate for president, said, 
in 2005, “I want us in the ICC, but I ’ m not satisﬁ ed that there are 
enough safeguards.” 
 The Democratic candidate for president, U.S. senator Barack 
Obama, from Illinois, was just as circumspect in his response to 
questions relating to the U.S. future relationship with the ICC: 
 The ICC has pursued charges only in cases of the most 
serious and systematic crimes and it is in America ’ s 
interests that the most heinous of criminals, like the per-
petrators of genocide in Darfur, are held accountable. 
The [ICC] actions are a credit to the cause of justice and 
deserve full American support and cooperation. Yet the 
Court is still young,  many questions remain unanswered 
about the ultimate scope of its activities, and it is premature 
to commit the U.S. to any course of action at this time . (my 
emphasis) 
 During the campaign, in April 2008, Obama said: “the U.S. 
also needs to work with the ICC to ramp up the pace of indict-
ments of those responsible for war crimes and crimes against 
humanity.” His chief rival for the nomination was U.S. senator 
Hillary Clinton of New York. Although she voiced some of the 
misgivings her husband, President Bill Clinton, voiced in 2000, 
she did say, “Fortunately, some of the worst fears about the ICC 
have not been borne out. . . . Consistent with my overall policy of 
reintroducing the United States to the world, I will as President 
evaluate the record of the Court, and reassess how we can best 
engage with this institution and hold the worst abusers of human 
rights to account.” 
 Although Barack Obama, as president since January 2009, 
has been cautiously positive in his statements about the court, it 
is reasonably clear that he does not share the outright hostility to 
the court that was seen at the start of the Bush administration. 

The Status of U.S. Policy 85
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has stated, “[W]hether we work 
toward joining or not, we will end the hostility toward the ICC, 
and look for opportunities to encourage effective ICC action in 
ways that promote United States interests by bringing war crimi-
nals to justice.” 
 Obama has not explicitly stated a view on the extent to which 
the United States would be involved with the court stating that he 
“will consult thoroughly with our military commanders and also 
examine the track record of the Court before reaching a decision 
on whether the U.S. should become a State Party to the ICC.” 
 In the run-up to the election, Mark Lippert, a foreign affairs 
adviser for Obama, said that he “has a wait-and-see, go-slow 
approach. The policy is unchanged from where he has been.” The 
reactivation of the U.S. signature remains a viable option for the 
Obama administration, which could take place at any time, prob-
ably without signiﬁ cant repercussions. Furthermore, if the Obama 
administration should choose to provide information to the court 
or to attend the Review Conference scheduled for September 2010, 
this would, in fact, indicate a movement further in the direction of 
a wider and deeper relationship with the Court. 
 The progress of the court was noted by Hillary Clinton who 
stated in response to questions for the purpose of her conﬁ rma-
tion as secretary of state by the Senate, “Now that it is operational, 
we are learning more about how the ICC functions. Thus far, the 
ICC has operated with professionalism and fairness—pursuing 
perpetrators of truly serious crimes.” 
 Less than 10 days after Obama took the oath of ofﬁ ce, the 
U.S. ambassador to the UN, Susan Rice, “signaled a shift in U.S. 
policy toward support for the ICC . . . in her ﬁ rst speech to the UN 
Security Council. [There is] a pledge by the United States to work 
together with the United Nations and international organizations 
such as the International Committee of the Red Cross, in a new era 
in support for international humanitarian law” ( Varner 2009 ). 
 By March 2009, international law experts were saying that 
President Obama has dropped outright U.S. hostility toward the 
world ’ s ﬁ rst permanent war crimes court, “but it is still a far cry 
from joining it. . . . Our policy on the ICC is under review,” said a 
U.S. State Department ofﬁ cial in May. The ofﬁ cial voiced concerns 
shared by the military and conservative congresspersons: “Any 
look at the ICC has to include the basic fact that the United States 
has more troops deployed overseas than any other country in the 
world and that spurious charges against our troops could keep 

86 Special U.S. Issues
the court and the U.S. military tied up for decades” (   Agence France 
Presse 2009 ). 
 Unlike the Bush administration ’ s view of the ICC, the Obama 
experts do not stress the ICC ’ s “political” threat to America ’ s 
“national sovereignty.” A month earlier in February 2009, the 
American Society of International Law recommended that the 
Obama administration adopt a policy of “positive engagement 
with the ICC.” Other NGOs, including the Save Darfur Coalition, 
sent similar messages to the new administration urging greater 
cooperation with the ICC. 
 In August 2009,  The Guardian , a respected British publica-
tion, printed a major story that suggested a major policy change 
was coming from the Obama administration regarding the ICC. 
It reported that Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, in Kenya, “has 
signaled a signiﬁ cant shift by the U.S. in favor of the ICC.” Clinton 
was quoted as saying, “This is a great regret that we are not a sig-
natory. I think we could have worked out some of the challenges 
that are raised concerning our membership. But that has not yet 
come to pass” (  MacAskill 2009  ). (Clinton ’ s shift was a personal 
one as well. In 2002, as a Democratic senator, she voted for the 
ASPA, the harshly negative reaction by Congress to the perceived 
ICC threat to American sovereignty.) 
 Noah Weisbord, a scholar and a former prosecutor at the 
International Criminal Tribunal, Yugoslavia, said that Clinton ’ s 
words were “intriguing [and] marks an important moment in the 
courtship between the U.S. and the ICC” ( MacAskill 2009 ). 
 However, although Clinton and others in the administration 
urge movement toward ratifying the Rome Treaty, the Obama 
administration is divided on the issue. There are military and con-
gressional leaders who still have to be convinced that the ICC will 
not work against American foreign and military policies. They 
urge extreme “caution” in order to see how the new international 
court “evolves.” 
One response to Clinton ’ s comments was published a week 
later in  The Washington Post . John Bellinger III, wrote: 
 Although the Obama administration will undoubtedly 
make greater efforts to engage with the court, the United 
States is unlikely to join the ICC anytime soon. . . . The 
White House will have a hard time convincing the U.S. mil-
itary of the merits of joining the ICC unless the ﬂ aws iden-
tiﬁ ed by both Presidents Clinton and Bush are resolved, 

The Status of U.S. Policy 87
and it is highly unlikely that 67 senators would approve 
the treaty without such changes ( Bellinger 2009 ) .
 For Bellinger, the “thorniest issue for Obama will be how to 
approach the Rome Statute Tenth Anniversary Review Confer-
ence scheduled for next Summer in Uganda.” Obama, like his two 
predecessors, believes that there must be changes in the ICC that 
provide “stronger protections for Americans” (  Bellinger 2009  ) 
before there is the possibility of the Senate ’ s ratifying the treaty. 
 However, in November 2009, Stephan Rapp, the U.S. ambas-
sador at large for war crimes, announced that the United States 
would send representatives to The Hague “to explore issues 
involving the United States ’  possible participation in the ICC” 
(  Carl 2009  ). In addition, Rapp conﬁ rmed that an American del-
egation would attend the 10th anniversary ICC meeting in Africa: 
“The United States will return to engagement with the ICC,” he 
said. “For the ﬁ rst time in nearly eight years, the U.S. will par-
ticipate in a conference with members of the ICC, a decision that 
signals growing U.S. support for a war crimes tribunal the Bush 
administration once shunned” ( Lynch 2009 ). 
However, Rapp repeated the fears of many legislators and 
military men: “There remain concerns about the possibility that 
the United States . . . and its service members might be subject to 
politically inspired prosecutions” (  Lynch 2009  ). Underlining this 
concern was a story titled, “Prosecuting American ‘War Crimes ’ ” 
that appeared in the conservative daily,  The Wall Street Journal , on 
November 26, 2009. The reporter, Daniel Schwammenthal, quoted 
the chief prosecutor of the ICC, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, who said 
that the ICC has jurisdiction to open preliminary investigations 
into NATO and American military actions in Afghanistan because 
that nation is one of the signatories to the Rome Treaty and also 
said: 
 We have to check if crimes against humanity, war crimes, 
or genocide have been committed in Afghanistan. There 
are serious allegations against the Taliban and al Qaeda 
and serious allegations about warlords, even against 
some who are connected with members of the [Afghani-
stan] government. There are different reports about 
problems with bombings and there are also allegations 
about torture [committed by NATO] (  Schwammenthal 
2009 ) .

88 Special U.S. Issues
 For the reporter, these words are ominous ones and buttress 
the fears American political and military leaders hold about an 
independent ICC. Schwammenthal concluded his essay with the 
following words: “The fact that Mr. Ocampo mentioned the Suda-
nese perpetrator of genocide [President al-Bashir] in the same 
breath with alleged crimes of NATO soldiers shed light on  what 
the ICC may have in store for the U.S. in the future ” ( Schwammenthal 
2009, my emphasis). 
 Nonparticipation in the ICC, however, is not a new policy of 
American presidents and foreign policy makers, nor is it a purely 
Republican foreign policy position. It reﬂ ects “a deep-seated Amer-
ican ambivalence toward international institutions” that goes back 
nearly 100 years ( Bellinger 2009 ).  
 The Future of International Law
in the Nation-State Universe 
America ’ s “toleration of unspeakable atrocities, often committed 
in clear view” of the world ’ s people and their political leaders, 
clearly suggests that the United States “has consistently refused 
to take risks in order to suppress genocide”: 
 The United States is not alone. The states bordering 
genocidal societies and the European powers have 
looked away as well. . . . Despite public consensus that 
genocide should “never again” be allowed, the last 
decade of the twentieth century was one of the most 
deadly in the grimmest century in history (  Power 
2002, 508 ) .
 American military and foreign policy leaders, including the 
president, “did almost nothing to deter the crime.” Because 
American “vital national interests” were not involved, the ofﬁ -
cial American, as well as the and European, policy was reliance 
on negotiation and diplomacy. For many, as already noted, the 
 real reason  for American and European inaction “. . . was a lack 
of will. Simply put, American leaders did not act because they 
did not want to.” These decisions were “concrete actions” by 
the government; they were not “accidental products of neglect” 
( Power 2002, 508 ). 

The Future of International Law in the Nation-State Universe 89
 Until America moves from idleness to vital support of the 
actions of the ICC, even if not a signatory to the Rome Treaty, there 
will continue to exist in the international community weakness in 
the face of war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide. 
Unless there is a mechanism available to prevent or stop genocide 
before slaughtered human beings are seen on nightly television 
and unless there are effective international efforts to make sure 
that “never again” will the world witness genocide, unfortunately 
the  era of impunity  and  national sovereignty  will continue in the 21st 
century. 
 Underscoring this pessimistic assessment of the future of 
genocide and ethnic cleansing in a world of sovereign nation-
states is the latest explosion of violence in June 2010, this time in 
Kyrgyzstan, formerly of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. 
As has happened so often in the past 60 years, news headlines 
reported the ﬁ rst rumblings of another “ethnic cleansing.” 
 The   New York Times  headline cried out: “Ethnic Rioting Rav-
ages Kyrgyzstan” ( Schwirtz 2010 ).  The Washington Post headline 
read: “Ethnic Violence Spreads in Kyrgyzstan, Raising Fears of 
Humanitarian Crisis” (  Pan 2010a  ). The attacks began a few days 
earlier when Kyrgyz mobs began murdering the ethnic Uzbek 
minority in the southern Kyrgyzstan city of Osh and surrounding 
villages populated by ethnic Uzbeks. Hundreds were murdered, 
stores were emptied of food and goods and then burned, and cars 
and Uzbek homes were set aﬁ re by the Kyrgyz. “There was,” wrote 
the  Times  reporter, “a campaign of rage that moved from house to 
house through Uzbek neighborhood[s].” The recently installed—
but unelected—provisional government, in power because they 
ousted the Kyrgyz president in April 2010, was simply unable to 
stop the “murderous mobs” (  Schwirtz 2010;   see also   Pan 2010b  ). 
The Uzbek minority supported the new government, and Kyrgyz 
citizens saw a minority seize power in their nation. In a little more 
than a month, the ethnic cleansing began. As a consequence, the 
police and military had not been able to suppress the violence. 
While the Uzbek men remained to ﬁ ght back and protect their 
property in the city of Osh, within a few days more than 150,000 
women and children ﬂ ed the area and relocated in refugee camps 
in neighboring Uzbekistan. 
 The hatred between the majority Kyrgyz and the Uzbek 
minority (only about 15 percent of the nation ’ s population) has 
been a long-standing one in this central Asian nation with a 
mostly Muslim population of ﬁ ve million. Tensions were raw and 

90 Special U.S. Issues
clashes between the two ethnic groups had occurred repeatedly 
over land and water rights in the South. The problems, however, 
were never resolved; they were shelved until the next outbreak of 
violence. 
 In northern Kyrgyzstan, away from the violence, both  Russia 
and the United States have military air bases. (The American air 
base in the embattled nation was a critical piece of the NATO mis-
sion in neighboring Afghanistan.) However, both did not imme-
diately intervene to stop the killing and burning and looting in 
the South even though the interim government asked Russia to 
send in peacekeeping forces to restore order. Russian president 
Dmitry Medvedev “turned down the request, calling the violence 
 an internal matter ” ( Pan 2010a, my emphasis). 
 Immediately, human rights NGOs including Human Rights 
Watch “urged the international community to intervene with 
the deployment of a UN-mandated force. . . . [In addition,] aid 
organizations (the International Committee of the Red Cross) 
described a growing refugee crisis” ( Pan 2010a ). However, as has 
been the case in so many other such ethnic cleansings and geno-
cides discussed in this book, nothing has been done and nothing 
will be done by the international community other than the usual 
speeches decrying the murders and the destruction. 
 The UN has remained silent, except to observe that “the ﬁ ght-
ing was orchestrated, targeted and well-planned.” A spokesman 
for the Obama administration in Washington said it was too early 
to speculate about military intervention. In addition, a regional 
intergovernmental organization (IGO), the Collective Security 
Treaty Organization, met at the call of its most powerful member, 
Russia, but concluded that it should not intervene in the internal 
affairs of the small nation. 
 The events taking place in Kyrgyzstan tragically highlight 
the core elements discussed in this book. There still is an unwill-
ingness of nation-states to intervene in the “internal affairs” of 
a sovereign nation—even though tens of thousands of innocent 
citizens are murdered or become refugees, living in desperate 
squalor without medicine, food, and shelter. Although there 
are some human rights NGOs that call for concerted UN action, 
 including the use of military force to intervene , nothing seems to 
budge the international community to take some kind of action 
to save lives. Even though “more than humanitarian aid is 
needed to stabilize the situation” (quoted in   Pan 2010b  ), if the 
past is prelude to the continued reality of  nonintervention , then 

References 91
 nothing will happen in this latest outbreak of violence and  ethnic 
cleansing.  
 References 
 Agence France Presse . 2009. Under Obama, U.S. Drops Hostility 
to ICC: Experts. March 29.  http://www.commondreams.org/
headline/2009/03/23-24 . 
 Becker, E. 2002. US Ties Military Aid to Peacekeepers ’ Immunity. 
 New York Times August 10, A1. 
 Bellinger, J. B., III. 2009. A Global Quandary for the President.  The 
Washington Post August 10.  http://www.washingtonpost.com/
wp-dyn/content/article/2009/08/09/AR2009080902093.html . 
 Carl, M. 2009. Obama May Put Americans under World Judges ’ 
Power.  World Net Daily November 19, 2009.  http://www.wnd
.com/?pageId=116552 . 
 Crosette, B. 1998. US Budges at UN Talks on a Permanent International 
Criminal Tribunal.  New York Times March 18, A1. 
 Goldberg, M. L. 2009. Congress Reverses Bush-Era Policy on the ICC. 
March 12.  http://www.undispatch.com/node/7837 . 
 Goldman, T. R. 1998. A World Apart: U.S. Stance on a New ICC 
Concerns Rights Groups.  Legal Times June 8, 16. 
 Grossman, M. 2002. American Foreign Policy and the ICC. May 6. 
 http://www.amicc.org/docs/Grossman_5_6_02.pdf . 
 Jackson, D. W. 1998. Creating a World Criminal Court Is Like Making 
Sausage—Except It Takes Longer.  Texas Observer June 30, 19. 
 Lobe, J. 2002. Bush “Unsigns” War Crimes Treaty. May 6.  http://www
.alternet.org/story/13055 . 
 Lynch, C. 2009. U.S. to Attend Conference Held by War Crimes Court.
  The Washington Post November 17.  http://www.washingtonpost.com/
wp-dyn/content/article/2009/11/16/AR2009111603662.html . 
 MacAskill, E. 2009. U.S. May Join ICC, Hillary Clinton Hints.  The 
Guardian August 6.  http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/aug/06/
us-may-join-warcrimes-court .  
 MacMillan M. 2001.  Paris 1919: Six Months That Changed the World . 
New York: Random House, 159–165, 167–203. 
 Pan, P. P. 2010a. Ethnic Violence Spreads in Kyrgyzstan, Raising Fears of 
Humanitarian Crisis.  The Washington Post  June 14.   http://www.washington
post.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/06/13/AR2010061305069.html .  

92 Special U.S. Issues
 Pan, P. P. 2010b. Regional Bloc Led by Russia Plans to Send Equipment 
to Violence-torn Kyrgyzstan.  The Washington Post June 15, 1. 
 Power, S. 2002.  “A problem from Hell”: America and the Age of Genocide . 
New York: Basic Books. 
 Schwammenthal, D. 2009. Prosecuting American “War Crimes.”  The 
Wall Street Journal November 26.  http://online.wsj.com/article/SB1000
1424052748704013004574519253095440312.html . 
 Schwirtz, M. 2010. Ethnic Rioting Ravages Kyrgyzstan.  New York Times 
June 13.  http://www.nytimes.com/2010/06/14/world/asia/14kyrgyz.
html . 
 Stahn, C. 2003. The Ambiguities of Security Council Resolution 1422. 
 European Journal of International Law 14:85–104. 
 Stanley, A. 1998. U.S. Speciﬁ es Terms for War Crimes Court.  New York 
Times July 10, A1. 
 U.S. Department of State. 2002. Fact Sheet. The International Criminal 
Court. Ofﬁ ce of War Crimes Issues, Washington, D.C., May 6. 
 Varner, B. 2009. Obama ’ s Envoy Voices Support for International 
Court. January 29.  http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?
pid=newsarchive&sid=aYK_ULgi3Ix0 . 
 Zappala, S. 2002. The Reaction of the US to the Entry into Force of the 
ICC Statute: Comments on UN SC Resolution 1422 (2002) and Article 98 
Agreements.  Journal of International Criminal Justice 1:114–34. 

93
 4 
 Chronology 
 T
his genocide chronology begins with actions taken by nation-
states from 1900 to 2010. The timeline highlights signiﬁ cant 
events during this time and the great difﬁ culty the world com-
munity faced trying to stop genocide and, after 1948, enforcing 
the Genocide Convention. 
 Each of the following entries presents a brief analysis of 
the importance of the event. The men who instigated and car-
ried out these mass murders and genocides will be discussed in 
Chapter 5.  
 1904–1907—German South 
West Africa, Herreros 
 The Herreros were native African herdsmen who migrated to 
present-day Namibia in the 17th century. After Germany entered 
Africa as a colonial power in that region of Africa in the 19th 
 century, the Herrero territory was annexed in 1885 as a part of 
German South West Africa. After a series of uprisings against 
the German colonial farmers, the German military, between 1904 
and 1907, exterminated four-ﬁ fths of the Herrero  population. 
The extermination policy did not exclude women and children. 
Although the world community read about the slaughter of the 
native tribe, nothing was done to prevent the killings. One hun-
dred years later, the German government apologized for the 
killings.   

94 Chronology
 1915–1923—Ottoman Turkey, 
Armenians, 1.5–2 Million Dead 
 The Christian Armenian genocide was carried out by the Young 
Turk government of the Ottoman Empire from 1915 to 1923. 
The ethnic Armenian population, part of the Ottoman Empire 
since the 16th century, was the last major ethnic group remain-
ing in the Empire. In earlier decades, the Greeks, Romanians, 
Bulgarians, and Serbs had left Ottoman rule. When young 
Armenians, in the 1890s, pressed for political reforms, includ-
ing a constitutional government, the response was brutal per-
secutions of these leaders. In two years, 1894 to 1896, more 
than 100,000 ethnic Albanians were massacred by the military. 
A new Turkish leadership emerged in 1908 and greatly limited 
the Sultan ’ s powers. In 1913, three Young Turks seized con-
trol of the government and immediately became dictators with 
a plan for creating a new Turkish empire by expanding the 
borders of their nation eastward. Their new nation would be 
called Turan with one religion and one language. The major 
obstacle to the plan was the fact that the ethnic Albanians (10 
percent of the population) lived on territory that blocked east-
ward expansion. The Armenians were labeled infidels because 
they refused to convert to Islam. After World War I began, 
the new Turkish government saw the opportunity to solve 
their “Armenian problem.” They developed an extermina-
tion policy that targeted the large Armenian population, espe-
cially those who lived in the eastern sections of the Empire. 
In April 1915, the final solution began. Intellectual leaders, 
teachers, and local government officials were murdered. The 
40,000 Armenians serving in the Army were disarmed, placed 
in labor battalions, and then murdered. Then came the mass 
arrests of all Armenian men aged 15 to 70 across the nation and 
their extermination by the military and local citizens. Finally 
came the deportations of one million women, old people, and 
children. They were driven in death marches southward, over 
mountains toward the Syrian desert. Many of the women 
were raped and tortured by the Turkish soldiers. Although 
many thousands of young children were kidnapped by Turk-
ish officers and raised as Turkish Muslims (now referred to as 
“the leftovers of the sword,”) nearly two million Armenians 
were murdered during this eight-year extermination era (Dan 

Chronology 95
Bilefsky, Secrets Revealed in Turkey Revive Armenian Iden-
tity.   The New York Times   January 10, 2010, 9). A public  warning 
was issued by the Allies to the Turkish leaders: “The Allied 
governments announce publicly that they will hold all mem-
bers of the Ottoman government as well as such of their agents 
as are implicated, responsible for such matters.” Although the 
victorious allies tried to have the Turkish government try the 
leaders of the Young Turk government for their actions against 
the Armenians, the Turkish outcry against such war crimes tri-
als forced the government to stop the effort. The three leaders 
of the Young Turk government fled to Germany where they 
had been offered asylum. German officials refused to send the 
leaders back to Turkey to face trial. Ultimately, by 1923, all the 
major leaders of the Young Turk government were assassinated 
by Armenian gunmen in Germany.  
 1932–1933—USSR, Ukraine ’ s Forced 
Famine: 7 Million Dead 
 In 1917, with the collapse of tsarist rule, the Ukraine (about the 
size of France), declared itself to be an independent people ’ s 
republic. For four years, the Ukrainians fought the new Soviet 
government ’ s military until they were defeated in 1921. In 1924, 
Joseph Stalin became the dictatorial leader of the Soviet Union. 
Beginning in 1929, his forces rounded up more than 5,000 Ukrai-
nian professors, as well as political, cultural, economic, and reli-
gious leaders, and had them murdered. In 1932, Stalin, ordered 
a system of harsh land management, called collectivization, in 
the Ukraine. All privately owned farmland and livestock was 
seized by the Soviet government. He also targeted for exter-
mination a class of wealthy farmers, the Kulaks, whom Stalin 
believed would become the next set of insurrectionists. They 
were declared “enemies of the people” and stripped of all their 
possessions—from their land and homes to their kitchen uten-
sils. It is estimated that 10 million Kulaks were transported to 
Siberia and that more than three million died in this process. By 
the spring of 1933, about 25,000 people in the Ukraine died daily 
of starvation. Deprived of the food the farmers were harvesting, 
nearly 7 million (including 3 million children) died due to the 
artiﬁ cial famine created by the Soviet Union ’ s leader, Stalin.  

96 Chronology
 1937—Japan, The Rape of Nanking, 
China: 300,000 Dead Chinese 
 In another horrid slaughter of innocent men, women, and chil-
dren, in December 1937, the Japanese Imperial Army conquered 
China ’ s capital city of Nanking. The troops were ordered to kill all 
captives. In the succeeding six weeks, Japanese soldiers murdered 
half the city ’ s population of 600,000 (including about 90,000 Chi-
nese soldiers who had surrendered). They burned, stabbed, shot, 
and drowned their victims. Between 20,000 and 80,000 Chinese 
women were raped and then murdered by the troops. Less than 
two dozen foreign diplomats, in the effort to save the Chinese, 
created a 2.5-acre secure zone that enabled 300,000 Chinese to ﬁ nd 
sanctuary in that area. Even the Nazi consul participated in this 
humanitarian effort. He also wrote a letter to Hitler condemning 
the brutality of the Japanese. However, in a few years, after the 
attack on Pearl Harbor by the Japanese ﬂ eet, these two nations 
became allies in World War II. 
 1941–1945—The Nazi Holocaust: 
Approximately 6 Million Dead Jews, as well 
as Other Ethnic Groups and Nationalities: 
Roma-Sinti, Russians, and Poles 
 In 1933, the Jewish population across Europe stood at more than 
nine million Jews from Russia in the East to England in the West. 
Most of them lived in the 11 countries that the Nazis conquered 
and then occupied during the Second World War. In Germany 
itself, the Jewish population constituted only 1 percent of 55 mil-
lion Germans. When Adolf Hitler came to power in 1933, the Jews 
began to suffer. In 1935, for example, their German citizenship 
was revoked. In 1938,  Kristallnacht  (the Night of Broken Glass) 
occurred, and more than 500 synagogues were destroyed as well 
as hundreds of Jewish businesses. Just before the war began in 
1939, in a speech in Berlin, Hitler said that if there was a world 
war, it would result in the “annihilation of the Jewish race in 
Europe.” In 1942, the executions began in the Nazi concentration 
camps and death centers. By 1945, about six million Jews had been 

Chronology 97
 exterminated in the Nazi government ’ s Final Solution to the Jew-
ish Problem. Although the Jew was the prime target of the Nazi 
killing operations across the continent, there were other victims. 
Tens of thousands of Roma (Gypsies) were murdered by the Nazis 
and millions of Russians and Poles were exterminated through 
starvation, torture, and murder. Millions more were used as slave 
laborers for the Nazi war industry. Most died because of poor 
diets, lack of medical treatment, and beatings and torture. There 
were also political and religious groups targeted for destruction 
by the Nazi regime, including Communists,  Socialists, Trade 
Unionists, and Jehovah ’ s Witnesses. 
 1945–1948—International Military 
Tribunals Created in Germany and 
Japan at the Conclusion of the War 
 During World War II, the Allies called for unconditional surren-
der of the Axis Powers (Germany, Japan, and Italy). It was not 
until early 1945 that the Allies agreed to conduct international 
war crimes trials, with the leaders of the Nazi government and the 
Japanese Imperial government to be tried for their war crimes and 
crimes against humanity. The decision to bring them before the 
international bar of justice, charged with violations of the Hague 
and Geneva treaties, was to provide history with a written record 
of the enemy ’ s extermination patterns used by both the Nazi and 
the Japanese governments against innocent civilians across the 
world. The International Military Tribunals (IMT) in  Nuremberg, 
Germany, consisted of four representatives from the  victorious 
nations: the United States, the Soviet Union, England, and France. 
The Tokyo IMT consisted of one jurist from the 11 nations who 
fought against and/or were occupied by Japanese troops during 
the Paciﬁ c War. Most of the defendants were found guilty, and a 
majority of them were executed by the Allies. In addition to these 
two major trials, there were literally hundreds of trials held in the 
nations who suffered human losses during the lengthy occupa-
tion of their homelands by the enemy. The defendants in these 
lesser-known national tribunals ranged from medical doctors to 
lawyers and judges, from those who ran the concentration camps 
to the military commanders who did not attempt to control the 
brutal actions of the troops under their immediate command. 

98 Chronology
 1947–1948—UN: International 
Convention on Genocide Established 
 In 1947, while the trials of Nazi and Japanese defendants contin-
ued, the United Nations (UN) organized an ad hoc international 
convention to draft an international law that deﬁ ned genocide as 
an action that had “universal” condemnation and described the 
characteristics that were exhibited in the term. Raphael Lemkin 
took a major role in the drafting of the proposed treaty. In Decem-
ber 1948, with considerable modiﬁ cations reﬂ ecting the new realty 
of the Cold War between the Soviet Union and the West, it was 
ratiﬁ ed by the General Assembly. 
 1949—Communist China ’ s Great Leap 
Forward: 27 Million Die of Starvation 
 The People ’ s Republic of China came into being when, on October 1, 
1949, Chinese Communist Party leader Mao Tse-Tung made the 
announcement and immediately began the Communist effort to 
systematically destroy the ancient Chinese social and political sys-
tems. A major goal of the leadership was the collectivization of the 
peasants in China. The policy was called the Great Leap Forward, 
and the hope was that there would be dramatic economic and 
technical development of the nation. The reality was that by 1958 
the policy destroyed the agricultural system and led to a major 
famine in China in which 27 million Chinese starved to death. 
 1951—Genocide Convention in Force 
 By mid-1951, the requisite number of member states had signed 
the Genocide Convention, and the document “came into force” in 
the hope that genocide would “never again” occur. 
 1967–1970—Biafran War, Nigeria 
 Nigeria is a federation of states that are segregated by three major 
ethnic groups: the Ibo, Hausa/Fulani, and Yoruba. The  northern 

Chronology 99
tribes would not allow Biafra to secede from the  federation. 
The Biafran War, 1967–1970, resulted in 100,000 military casu-
alties. However, between 500,000 and 2 million Ibo civilians 
died from starvation during the war. On May 30, 1967, a formal 
announcement that Biafra would be an independent republic was 
announced. The reason for this was the Nigerian government ’ s 
inability to protect the lives of the Ibo, and its collaboration in 
genocide forced them to secede from the federation. The indepen-
dent republic failed, and Biafra was reintegrated into Nigeria after 
the cease-ﬁ re in January 1970. 
 1971—East Pakistan, East Bengal 
 The genocide that took place over nine months in 1971 had its 
beginning when India achieved independence from the United 
Kingdom in 1947. This immediately led to the partition between 
India (mostly Hindu) and Pakistan (mostly Muslim). After the 
partition, there was a mass exodus of Hindus from Pakistan to 
India (more than 5 million) and Muslims from India to Paki-
stan (nearly 9 million). Pakistan was divided into West and 
East Pakistan at the time. East Pakistan was home for millions 
of Bengali Muslims. In all of Pakistan, Bengali Muslims were in 
the majority. However, the ruling Muslim elite saw the Benga-
lis as Hindu-leaning and vowed to act to “cleanse” them from 
Hindu inﬂ uence. Because of this attitude, an autonomy move-
ment, called the Awami League, developed in East Pakistan in 
the 1950s and became the political voice of the Bengalis. In the 
December 1970 general election in Pakistan, its ﬁ rst democratic 
election, the Awami League won 167 of 169 seats and more than 
80 percent of popular votes in East Pakistan. Numerically, the 
Awami League had an absolute majority of seats in the Pakistan 
National Assembly (167 of the total 313 seats). Historically, East 
Pakistan was allocated only 36 percent of the total resources, 
and East Pakistanis occupied only 20 percent of the positions in 
the federal government in the United Pakistan. The outcome of 
the 1970 elections for the Awami League created an alternative 
power center for an already alienated people. In March 1971, 
however, the government  postponed the opening of the parlia-
ment. The Awami leaders immediately declared their indepen-
dence and called their new state Bangladesh. In response, on 
March 25, 1971, the Pakistani army, on President Yahya Khan ’ s 

100 Chronology
orders, initiated a campaign of terror that was to last till its ﬁ nal 
surrender to the Indian army on December 17, 1971. This terror 
campaign by the Pakistan army resulted in 10 million Bangla-
deshi refugees crossing over into India, 3 million Bangladeshi 
citizens killed, and 250,000 women and girls raped by Pakistani 
soldiers. The nine-month, bloody war ended in December 1971 
with the Indian military assistance. In addition to the millions 
murdered and raped by the Pakistan military, 10 million Bengalis 
ﬂ ed to India, and nearly 30 million Bengalis were displaced from 
the cities to the rural areas of the new nation-state.   
 1971–1979, Uganda ’ s Killing Fields 
 Idi Amin seized power and ruled Uganda from 1971 to 1979. The 
economy was devastated by Amin ’ s policies, including the expul-
sion of Indians, the  nationalization  of businesses and industry, 
and the expansion of the public sector. The real value of salaries 
and wages collapsed by 90 percent in less than a decade. The 
number of people killed as a result of his regime is unknown; 
estimates from international observers and human rights groups 
range from 100,000 to 500,000. Although jubilant at his success, 
Amin had the secret police redouble their efforts to uncover 
 subversives and other imagined enemies of the state. State terror-
ism was rampant. Political opponents and Christian groups were 
brutally murdered. These atrocities were greeted with interna-
tional condemnation, but apart from the continued trade boycott 
initiated by the United States in July 1978, verbal condemnation 
was not accompanied by action to stop the killings. In 1979 Amin 
was ousted from power by a group of Ugandan rebels, backed by 
Tanzanian soldiers. 
 1972—Burundi, 150,000 Hutus 
Executed in Two Months 
 On April 29, 1972, Hutu radicals in Burundi launched an uprising 
against the country ’ s Tutsi-dominated military, massacring sev-
eral thousand Tutsi civilians. In response, Micombero ’ s govern-
ment began a selective genocide, aimed at eliminating Hutu 
political aspirations for good. Any Hutu with any semblance of 

Chronology 101
education was rounded up and killed. Estimates of the death toll 
range from between 200,000 and 300,000, up to 3 percent of the 
population. Hundreds of thousands more ﬂ ed abroad. The inter-
national reaction was muted. Even the Hutu-dominated ruling 
party in neighboring Rwanda, which at various times had sought 
to characterize itself as the defender of Hutu interests against 
Tutsi domination, did not intervene. 
 1975–1979—Cambodian Khmer 
Rouge: 2 Million Dead Cambodians 
 From 1975 to 1979, the rebel Cambodian leader Pol Pot  overthrew 
the government and led his Khmer Rouge army in a reign of vio-
lence, fear, and execution of nearly 2 million of his domestic ene-
mies. Similar to China ’ s failed “Great Leap Forward,” Pol Pot ’ s 
goal was to create a Communist peasant farming society of local 
communities. His policy called for the destruction of the Cambo-
dian urban centers and the “reeducation” of all those who lived 
in the cities. This effort was to “purify” Cambodia of all Western 
culture, religion, foreign inﬂ uences, and city life. Small ethnic 
groups living in Cambodia, all those who were members of the 
“old society,” as well as Buddhist monks, intellectuals, and for-
mer government ofﬁ cials were exterminated. “What is rotten must 
be removed” was one of Pol Pot ’ s many phrases that explained 
his goals. In the end, more than 25 percent (nearly two million 
civilians) of Cambodia ’ s population was executed by the Khmer 
Rouge. After Vietnam invaded Cambodia in December 1978, Pol 
Pot ’ s reign of terror ended. There was no effort to punish the 
Khmer Rouge leaders.  
 1977–1978—Ethiopian Red Terror 
 Never colonized by the European powers, Ethiopia was ruled 
by emperors until 1974, and the ethnically diverse feudal soci-
ety was often characterized by regional, territorial, and religious 
discord. In 1930, Haile Selassie was crowned emperor of Ethio-
pia and established a more modern state by creating a structured, 
central bureaucracy, a judicial system with codiﬁ ed laws, and a 
constitution. Despite these accomplishments, however, revolts, 

102 Chronology
rebellions, droughts, and famine marked Selassie ’ s reign. The 
emperor ’ s unresponsiveness to the economic development of 
the country and the political needs of his people, speciﬁ cally his 
methods of dealing with (and concealing) the widespread famine 
that plagued the nation in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, is what 
most scholars believe ultimately led to his downfall. Although 
Selassie ordered the importation of grain into Addis Ababa, other 
sections of the country were neglected and hundreds of thou-
sands of peasants starved. The famine contributed to his down-
fall. By early 1974, strikes, protests, and demonstrations against 
the government were staged throughout the country. The govern-
ment ’ s unwillingness or inability to respond to these demands 
eventually led to the overthrow of Emperor Haile Selassie and 
the accession to power of the Dergue, a committee of nearly 120 
military ofﬁ cers. It abolished parliament, suspended the constitu-
tion and arrested Selassie. All land, industries, and institutions 
were nationalized. However, power struggles within the new rul-
ing elite led to the rise of a new leader, Mengistu Haile Mariam. 
As the undisputed leader of the Dergue and Head of State, he 
began a campaign to suppress the opposition groups that had 
begun to organize in response to the Dergue ’ s more violent tac-
tics and autocratic rule. Revolts by various right- and left-wing 
political groups demanding an elected government, and guerilla 
warfare by secessionist fronts spread throughout the country in 
the late 1970s. 
 In 1977, the Red Terror was ofﬁ cially unleashed. During this 
two-year campaign, tens of thousands of Ethiopians were arrested, 
tortured, and summarily executed. To assist in exterminating the 
Dergue ’ s political opponents and “enemies of the revolution,” 
Mengistu employed the secret police and issued arms to local 
government, or  kebele , ofﬁ cials. Mengistu then turned on his for-
mer allies. In October 1977, an estimated 3,000–4,000 people were 
killed, and by the end of the year, opposition members had been 
removed from all high-level government positions. The murder 
of others in more rural areas continued as well. By the end of the 
1980s, Mengistu ’ s regime faced international criticism and dwin-
dling ﬁ nancial and military support from the Soviet Union. In 
1989, several long-standing liberation movements took the oppor-
tunity to consolidate forces and formed a united front called the 
Ethiopian People ’ s Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF). In 
February 1991, they launched new offenses against Dergue forces 
and were able to overpower the army, which had become divided 

Chronology 103
and frustrated with the brutality of Mengistu ’ s rule. On May 21, 
the EPRDF entered Addis Ababa and took control of the coun-
try. Today, the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia is led by 
the EPRDF, and a number of political and economic reforms have 
been implemented. 
 1981–1983—Guatemala, Murder 
of the Indigenous Maya 
 The Guatemala genocide case arises from a period in that country ’ s 
long civil war where violence against noncombatant,  indigenous 
Mayans rose to the level of genocide. More than 200,000 Guate-
malans were killed or disappeared during the 1960–1996 internal 
conﬂ ict. According to the UN-sponsored Commission on Histori-
cal Clariﬁ cation (CEH), the Guatemalan military and paramili-
taries indiscriminately targeted indigenous communities, labor 
leaders, students, clergy and other civilians under the theory that 
they formed a subversive “internal enemy.” 
 The violence peaked in 1982–1983, when government forces 
launched a systematic campaign of genocide against the Mayan 
people. Drawing on an historical antipathy to the indigenous peo-
ples of Guatemala, the State justiﬁ ed the extermination of an esti-
mated 440 Mayan communities by claiming that they were part of a 
communist plot against the government. The army and its paramil-
itary teams—including “civil patrols” of forcibly conscripted local 
men—attacked more than 600 Mayan villages. They would cordon 
off a village, round up the inhabitants, separate men from women, 
and then kill them sequentially. Those who escaped were hunted 
from the air by helicopters. Extreme torture, mutilation, and sexual 
violence became commonplace, as was violence against children. 
This two-year period became known as the “Silent Holocaust.”  
 1987–1991—Iraq, Anfal Campaign 
against the Kurds 
 The Anfal was the Iraqi government ’ s organized attempt to 
eradicate the Kurds living in northern Iraq. Anfal means “the 
spoils.” It is also the name given by the Iraqis to a series of 

104 Chronology
military actions against the Kurds. There was an organized 
campaign incorporating prison camps, firing squads, and 
chemical attacks. The campaigns of 1987–1989 were char-
acterized by mass summary executions and the disappear-
ance of many tens of thousands of noncombatants, including 
large numbers of women and children, and sometimes the 
entire population of villages; the widespread use of chemical 
weapons; the wholesale destruction of about 2,000 villages, 
including homes, schools, mosques, and wells; the looting of 
civilian property; the arbitrary arrest and jailing in conditions 
of extreme deprivation of thousands of women, children, and 
elderly people; the forced displacement of hundreds of thou-
sands of villagers; and the destruction of the rural Kurdish 
economy and infrastructure. The Iraqi regime, led by Saddam 
Hussein, committed the crime of genocide.  
 1992–1995—Serbia, 200,000 
Bosnian Muslims Killed 
 With the death of Yugoslavian leader Josip Tito in 1980, the nation 
slowly disintegrated into ethnic and religious units. Serbia, one of 
the larger segments of the former Yugoslavia, began an effort to 
create, beginning in 1990, a “Greater Serbia.” In 1991, Croatia and 
Slovenia both declared their independence, which led to a brief 
(10-day) war between Serbia and Slovenia; also in 1991, Serbia 
attacked Croatia (which, unlike Slovenia, had about 12 percent 
Orthodox Serbs). In 1992, after Bosnia, with 32 percent Orthodox 
Serbs living there, declared its independence from the former 
Yugoslavia, Serbian military and Bosnian-Serb militias attacked 
Bosnia in the genocidal effort to “ethnically clean” Muslim Bosnia 
in order to protect the Serb minority (Orthodox Christians) liv-
ing in Bosnia. Although it had been for centuries home to ethnic 
Serbs and ethnic Croats (most of whom were Catholic), Bosnia 
also was home to a Muslim population. Serbia, led by Slobodan 
Milosevic, tried to remove the Croats and the Muslims and bring 
Bosnia into the “Greater Serbia.” Like earlier genocides in Tur-
key and Europe, the Serbs targeted for execution Muslim leaders, 
including government ofﬁ cials, religious leaders, teachers, and 
other intellectuals. Rape was used as a weapon to try to destroy 
the Bosnian Muslim culture. By 1995, when the ﬁ ghting ceased 

Chronology 105
because of pressure from Western nations, especially the United 
States, more than 200,000 Bosnian Muslims had been murdered 
by the Serbs and more than 2 million Bosnian Muslims became 
refugees during this time period. 
 1993—UN Resolution 827 Creates 
International Criminal Tribunal, Yugoslavia 
 The UN Security Council, responded to the situation in the former 
Yugoslavia and established the International Criminal Tribunal 
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). On October 6, 1992, the Security 
Council established the Commission of Experts to investigate the 
possible violations of international humanitarian law. The Security 
Council in due course received the report of the Commission of 
Experts, which concluded that grave breaches of the 1949 Geneva 
Conventions and other violations of international humanitarian 
law had been committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia, 
including willful killing, “ethnic cleansing,” mass killings, torture, 
rape, pillage and destruction of civilian property, destruction of cul-
tural and religious property, and arbitrary arrests. On February 22, 
1993, by Resolution 808, the Security Council decided that an 
international tribunal should be established and directed the sec-
retary general to submit speciﬁ c proposals for the  implementation 
of that decision. On May 25, 1993, in Resolution 827, the Security 
Council adopted the draft statute and established the ICTY. 
 1994—Rwanda, 800,000 Tutsis Killed 
by Hutu Militias in Three Months 
 Rwanda, with only 7 million people, was formerly a colony 
of Belgium, and during the colonial period the two major eth-
nic groups—the more populous Hutus (who were farmers) and 
the minority Tutsis (who were chosen by the Belgian occupiers 
to be incorporated into the local government and bureaucratic 
structure)—were treated very differently. The much taller Tutsis 
were clearly the favored ethnic group of the European colonialists. 
After independence in 1962, the Hutus seized power and governed 
Rwanda. More than 200,000 Tutsis ﬂ ed their homes and went into 

106 Chronology
neighboring nations. There they formed a rebel guerilla army, the 
Rwandan Patriotic Front. Periodic ﬁ ghting occurred between these 
two communities until 1990, when an agreement was reached 
where the two groups would share power. In April 1994, groups 
of ethnic Hutu militia, armed with farming instruments, including 
machetes, began a genocidal campaign against the Tutsi population 
and moderate Hutus. For nearly 100 days, the Hutus systematically 
targeted their enemy and executed them in the effort to wipe out the 
Tutsi population in Rwanda. The killings ended when Tutsi rebels, 
attacking from neighboring states, defeated the Hutus in July 1994. 
Although nearly 3,000 UN troops were present as peacekeepers in 
the nation when the exterminations began, they were not allowed 
to actively interfere with the Hutus in order to stop the genocide. In 
three months, 800,000 persons, more than one-tenth of the popula-
tion, were killed and hundreds of thousands of Tutsis managed to 
ﬂ ee their nation and settle in neighboring states.  
 1994—UN: Resolution 955, International 
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda Created 
 Recognizing that serious violations of humanitarian law were 
committed in Rwanda and acting under Chapter VII of the UN 
Charter, the Security Council created the International Criminal 
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) by Resolution 955 of November 8, 
1994. It was established for the prosecution of persons respon-
sible for genocide and other serious violations of international 
humanitarian law committed in the territory of Rwanda between 
January 1, 1994, and December 31, 1994. Identical to the protocols 
of the ICTY, the Rwandan Tribunal consists of three organs: the 
Chambers and the Appeals Chamber; the Ofﬁ ce of the Prosecu-
tor, in charge of investigations and prosecutions; and the Regis-
try, responsible for providing overall judicial and administrative 
support to the Chambers and the Prosecutor. 
 1998–2007—Democratic 
Republic of the Congo 
 Since 1998, ﬁ ghting, as well as disease and malnutrition resulting 
from armed conﬂ ict, have claimed an estimated 5.4 million lives 
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). The decade of 

Chronology 107
conﬂ ict has displaced a total of more than 3 million Congolese 
across eastern and southern DRC and hindered access to agri-
cultural land and traditional markets. On October 7, 2009, U.S. 
chargé d ’ affaires Samuel V. Brock declared a disaster in response 
to the ongoing humanitarian emergency in the DRC. In ﬁ scal year 
2009, the U.S. government provided more than $191 million for 
humanitarian assistance in the DRC, including nearly $34 million 
in funding for agriculture and food security, economic recovery 
and market systems, humanitarian coordination and informa-
tion management, health, nutrition, protection, shelter and settle-
ments, including water, sanitation, hygiene programs, and the 
provision of relief commodities. The conﬂ ict in the DRC may be 
the world ’ s most deadly crisis since World War II, and the death 
toll far exceeds those of other recent and more prominent crises, 
including those in Bosnia, Rwanda, Iraq, Afghanistan, and Dar-
fur. Since 1998, 5.4 million people have died, and 45,000 people 
continue to die every month. 
 2003–Present—Sudan, Darfur: 
400,000 Black Arabs Killed 
 Since February 2003, violence, destruction of hundreds of vil-
lages, and the murder of hundreds of thousands of black Suda-
nese has occurred in the Darfur region of western Sudan. Since 
that date, the Janjaweed, government-supported armed militias, 
have conducted a systematic campaign of slaughter, rape, starva-
tion, and forced displacement of the population in Darfur. It is 
estimated that more than 400,000 persons have died because of 
the actions of the Sudanese government and its militias. Nearly 
3 million persons have been forced from their villages, and 
more than 200,000 have ﬂ ed their country by entering Chad, a 
neighboring state. All the displaced live in miserable camps in 
Darfur and Chad where they are systematically attacked by the 
Janjaweed. Beyond the murderous attacks, people are dying of 
starvation and lack of medical treatment. For the very ﬁ rst time, 
nations have labeled the actions of the Sudanese government as 
“genocidal,” and the ICC has issued an arrest warrant for cap-
ture of its president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir. However, little has 
been done by the watchful world community to halt the geno-
cide in Darfur.  


109
 5 
 Biographical Sketches 
 T
his chapter provides the reader with brief biographies of two 
dozen major national leaders responsible for genocidal actions 
and mass exterminations during the 20th and 21st centuries. 
Most of these men have never been brought before a court of law, 
either national or international, to face charges of genocide or war 
crimes or crimes against humanity. A majority of them  were never 
indicted for their genocidal actions. 
 Hafez al-Assad (1930–2000) 
 Hafez al-Assad was born in rural Syria as part of the minority 
Alawite community. Because his family had no money to send 
him to university, al-Assad went to the Syrian Military Academy 
and received a free higher education. In 1951 he joined the Syrian 
military and was assigned to the Air Force division. Showing real 
aptitude, Assad was send to the Soviet Union to receive advanced 
training. Like many of Syria ’ s young ofﬁ cers, al-Assad was politi-
cally active. At age 16 he had joined the Ba ’ ath Party and as he 
rose through the ranks of the military became an important ﬁ g-
ure. Al-Assad opposed the creation of the United Arab Republic 
and despite being stationed in Cairo worked with other ofﬁ cers 
to end the union between Syria and Egypt. In the chaos that fol-
lowed the dissolution the Ba ’ athists seized power, and al-Assad 
was appointed head of the air force. Ofﬁ cially, the state was ruled 
by Amin al-Haﬁ z, a Sunni Muslim, but it was actually run by a 
coterie of young Alawites. In 1966 these Alawites launched a vio-
lent coup. Al-Assad became minister of defense and the true ruler 

110 Biographical Sketches
of the country. After being discredited by the failure of the  Syrian 
military in the Six Days War in 1967, al-Assad overthrew the civil-
ian government and became ruler of Syria in 1970. Al-Assad ruled 
Syria through the power of the army. He did achieve some popu-
larity because of his moderate reforms and the vast increase in 
Syria ’ s military power, but was always mistrusted by the popula-
tion for his secularism and his Alawite roots. Al-Assad ruled the 
country until his death in 2000 due to a heart attack while speak-
ing on the telephone with Lebanese prime minister Salim Hoss. 
He was succeeded by his son Bashar al-Assad. 
 Omar Hassan al-Bashir (1944–) 
 Omar al-Bashir is the current president of the Sudan. He came to 
power in 1989 when he led a group of military ofﬁ cers in a blood-
less coup that ousted the government. He called his action the 
“salvation revolution.” Once in power, he suspended all political 
parties and barred trade unions. He instituted Islamic law in parts 
of the nation (excluding the south, which was involved in a lengthy 
civil war with the Sudan government). In 1993 he ended military 
governance by naming himself president. In 1996, he won the elec-
tion (he was the sole candidate for president). In 2004, he ended the 
Sudanese civil war with insurgents from South Sudan by granting 
the area limited autonomy. However, at about the same time, 2003, 
al-Bashir initiated a violent bloodbath in Darfur, in the western part 
of Sudan. Unlike the civil war that was to end, which was based on 
religious differences, the Darfur genocide was and remains an eth-
nic war between al-Bashir ’ s Muslims and the Afro-Arab population 
in Darfur. Since 2003, nearly 400,000 residents of the Darfur region 
have been murdered by al-Bashir ’ s Muslim militia, the Janjaweed. 
Millions more have been displaced from their villages and living in 
poverty in camps in Darfur and across the border in Chad. 
 Guerrilla warfare continued into the second decade of the 
21st century. In July 2008, the International Criminal Court ’ s (ICC) 
prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, charged al-Bashir with geno-
cide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes. The ICC issued 
an arrest warrant for al-Bashir on March 4, 2009. It was delivered 
to the Sudanese government which, naturally, did not execute it. 
However, the precedent was set for al-Bashir ’ s being the ﬁ rst sit-
ting leader of a nation-state indicted by the new ICC. Al-Bashir 
ran for reelection as president in 2010. 

Biographical Sketches 111
 Idi Amin (1923/1925–2003) 
 Amin served in the military beginning in 1946 and in 1961 was 
made a lieutenant by the British. In 1962, Uganda received inde-
pendence from the United Kingdom. By 1964, Amin was made a 
colonel by the new government and deputy commander of the 
army and the air force. After a coup in 1966, Amin was made a 
major general and the commander of the military forces. In 1971, 
Amin staged a coup and was declared president and chief of the 
armed forces. To secure his seizure of power, Amin ordered the 
execution of his tribal enemies, murdering between 100,000 and 
300,000. Entire villages were wiped out and the civilian leader-
ship, including doctors, teachers, clergy, bankers, business lead-
ers, and journalists, were targeted and murdered. He created 
death squads, consisting of members of his presidential guard. 
Tyranny reigned across Uganda. In 1975, Amin promoted him-
self to ﬁ eld marshall and in 1976 named himself president for life. 
In 1979, Amin was forced out of power by invading Tanzanian 
military forces and settled in Saudi Arabia. Amin died in a Saudi 
hospital in 2003. 
 Ion Antonescu (1882–1946) 
 Born in a small village north of Bucharest, Romania, Antonescu 
attended French military schools, and by 1907 was an ofﬁ cer 
in the Romanian army. When World War I began in 1914, the 
nation remained neutral, but in 1916 declared war on Austria-
Hungary. At war ’ s end, because of the treaties dictated by the 
victorious Allies, Romania doubled its size, bringing into the 
nation new ethnic groups. This led to the rise of the strident 
nationalist party in the nation, which was strongly anti-Semitic. 
Antonescu remained in the military and during the between-wars 
era was military attaché in Paris and then London. Although an 
anti-Semite, he married a Jewish-French woman and had a son. In 
1934, he became a general and was appointed chief of the Roma-
nian general staff. During the 1930s the Iron Guard, an anti-
Communist, anti-Semitic organization was formed in Romania. 
During the period before the Second World War began, the Nazis 
funded the Iron Guard so that it could continue its brutal repres-
sion of Communists and the Jews. By the start of the Second World 

112 Biographical Sketches
War, there were almost 800,000 Jews living in Romania, the third-
largest Jewish population, following Russia and Poland. Shortly 
after the beginning of the war, the prime minister declared Roma-
nian neutrality. However, he was assassinated and very quickly the 
king agreed to Nazi demands. In 1940, Antonescu became prime 
minister and immediately demanded the resignation of the king. 
In this move, he had the support of the Iron Guard. He then estab-
lished a new government, called the National Legionary Govern-
ment and became its leader. Antonescu allowed the Nazi army 
to occupy the nation and introduced harsh anti-Semitic laws as 
well as restrictions on Greek and Armenian businessmen. In 1941, 
after a failed coup by the Iron Guard, Antonescu became dictator, 
army marshall, chief of state, and president. Further anti-Jewish 
measures were introduced with the intent of removing Jews from 
Romania. After attacking Russia alongside the Nazi armies in 
1941, Antonescu issued an order to the army: “Be merciless. . . . 
I am not disturbed if the world considers us barbarians. You can 
use your machine-guns if it is necessary. And I can tell you that 
the law does not exist. So let us give up all the formalities and 
use this complete freedom. I assume all responsibility and claim 
that the law does not exist.” In all, more than 300,000 Jews were 
exterminated under his orders. In all, by war ’ s end, more than 
420,000 Jews of Romania ’ s prewar Jewish population of 760,000 
died. In 1944, the government-in-exile returned, and Romania 
switched sides and supported the Allies, especially the Russian 
armies. After capture by the Russians, Antonescu was returned 
to his country to face trial as a war criminal. In May 1946, he was 
convicted for war crimes and was executed by ﬁ ring squad on 
June 1, 1946. 
 Col. Theoneste Bagosora (1941–) 
 Col. Theoneste Bagosora attended military academies in Rwanda 
and France. Bagosora was a colonel in Rwanda ’ s army. He was 
a Hutu and was a senior cabinet director in Rwanda ’ s defense 
ministry in 1994 when the genocide began against the Tutsi and 
moderate Hutus in that nation. He was part of the inner circle of 
extremist Hutus who planned and carried out the three-month 
extermination of 800,000 in his nation. The Hutu planning for 
the genocide began in 1990 and was implemented in April 1994. 
Colonel Bagosora convened a meeting of senior Hutu military 

Biographical Sketches 113
ofﬁ cers, and after it ended, the extermination of the Tutsi began. 
Hutu  militias, called the  Interahamwe , set up roadblocks across the 
nation, and all Tutsis were killed on the spot—often with garden 
tools or machetes. Bagosora was the person responsible for distrib-
uting the guns and machetes used by the militias to kill the Tutsis. 
Bagosora was the ﬁ rst ofﬁ cial of the Hutu military coup brought 
before the International Criminal Tribunal, Rwanda (ICTR) to face 
charges of genocide and war crimes. He was charged with geno-
cide. At the 2002 trial in Tanzania, the United Nations (UN) mili-
tary ofﬁ cer in charge of the UN peacekeepers, Canadian general 
Romeo Dallaire, called Bagosora the “kingpin” behind the geno-
cide who “controlled—as well as anyone could—the genocidal 
militia.” The tribunal sentenced Bagosora to life imprisonment 
for his central role in the murders of the Tutsi in 1994. He and two 
other leading members of the militia, Maj. Aloys Ntabakuze and 
Col. Anatole Nsengiyumva, were convicted for committing geno-
cide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes. The trial lasted six 
years, ending in 2008, and the court heard from 242 witnesses. 
 Ismail Enver (1881–1922) 
 Enver was born in 1881 to a wealthy family in Constantinople. He 
was sent to Germany for studies and became a passionate follower 
of German military leaders. He became one of the young radical 
Turks and a chief organizer of the 1908 Young Turk Revolution. 
In 1913, he led the coup that overturned the government and 
installed the Committee of Union and Progress (CUP) in power. 
In 1914, he became minister of war and, given his love of Ger-
many, convinced his colleagues to enter the war on the side of the 
Central Powers (Germany and Austria). He played a major role in 
the Armenian massacres that began in 1915. In his ministry Enver 
had a secret group of radical militants known as the Special Orga-
nization (SO). The sole task of the SO, led by a medical doctor, 
was the extermination of the Armenian population in the empire. 
The SO used mobile killing units and systematically killed the 
Armenians while the victims were marched to the desert. (During 
World War II, the Nazis replicated the SO with their own mobile 
detachments whose task was to hunt down and murder Jews.) 
At the war ’ s end, Enver ﬂ ed to Germany where he was associ-
ated with German Communists. In the postwar trials in Turkey, 
he was sentenced to death in absentia for his leadership role in the 

114 Biographical Sketches
massacre of the Armenians. In 1920, he offered his services to the 
newly created Soviet government. The Soviet military sent Enver 
to Central Asia to stop the Muslims there from rebelling against 
Soviet rule. Instead, Enver joined the Muslim revolutionaries. He 
was killed in action by Soviet military forces in Turkestan. 
 Gen. Romeo Lucas Garcia (1924–2006) 
 General Garcia was always associated with the military and right-
wing dictators in Guatemala. He graduated from the military 
academy in 1949 and was always associated with military leaders 
and dictators after the democratic government of Jacobo Arbenz 
was overthrown in 1954. In 1975, Garcia was appointed defense 
minister and head of the army general staff. From 1978 to 1982, 
Garcia was the dictatorial president of Guatemala. During his 
four years in power an average of 200 murders and “disappear-
ances” took place every month. His targets were social democrats, 
trade unionist leaders, and the indigenous Mayan peasantry. In 
two years, 1980–1982, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) 
uncovered no less than 344 massacres of Garcia ’ s enemies. His 
chosen successor in 1982 never took ofﬁ ce because of a coup by a 
military junta, led by General Rios Montt. 
 In 2000, Guatemala ’ s Association for Justice and Reconcilia-
tion sought to bring Garcia to justice in the national court system. 
Garcia and his close associates were charged with war crimes and 
genocide. The evidence was produced by forensic anthropologists 
who worked at identifying the “disappeared” at newly discovered 
massacre sites in the country. However, by this time, Garcia was 
very ill and suffered from Alzheimer ’ s disease. He died in 2006. 
 Adolf Hitler (1889–1945) 
 Adolf Hitler, the killer of over six million Jews between 1939 and 
1945 and millions of other civilians across Europe, was born in 
Austria, the son of an ofﬁ cious customs ofﬁ cial. He left school 
in 1905 and wandered aimlessly until the First World War began 
in 1914. He was living in Vienna and came into contact with the 
ultranationalist, anti-Semitic Christian Socialist Party. Between 
1907 and the outbreak of war in 1914, Hitler developed his 
extreme anti-Semitism and racial mythology/ideology of the 

Biographical Sketches 115
perfect and pure Aryan man. Joining the German army while 
he was in Munich, Germany, Hitler fought on the Western front 
where he was wounded twice and won a number of awards for 
bravery, including the Iron Cross, First Class. 
 When the war ended, Hitler, like so many other war veter-
ans, joined in the ﬁ ghting that took place in Munich between rival 
movements. In 1919, he became a political ofﬁ cer in the army in 
Munich. He attended a meeting of the nationalistic, socialistic, 
and Jew-hating German Workers ’  Party. Hitler found his home in 
the Party, and by 1921 he became  der Führer  of the renamed orga-
nization, the National Socialist German Workers Party (NSDAP), 
known as the Nazi Party. His leadership led to the growth of the 
party and by 1923, there were nearly 60,000 members of the Nazi 
Party, primarily located in Munich. In early November 1923,  Hitler 
staged the Beer Hall Putsch to try to force the Bavarian govern-
ment to join him in his march to Berlin. He failed and was tried for 
treason and sentenced to a year in the old fortress in Landsberg. 
While in prison, he wrote  Mein Kampf , a book that contained his 
political ideas and his strategy for coming to power in Germany. 
Laced throughout the book were his thoughts about the threat 
of the Jews to the German race and the need to exterminate the 
Jewish race because they were parasites and vermin who, if not 
exterminated, would destroy the Aryan race. Hitler ’ s Nazi Party 
reemerged because of the worldwide depression. 
 In the 1930 elections, the Nazi Party garnered almost 6.5 
 million votes and became a popular alternative to the German 
Communist Party. In 1932, President Hindenburg called on Hitler 
to head a coalition government of Nazis, German Nationalists, 
and a handful of independent politicians. By the time Hinden-
burg died, in 1934, Hitler had brutally terminated the coalition 
and had brought the German government under his control. He 
became der Führer, head of state, and commander in chief of the 
military forces. He immediately developed a propaganda machine 
that used the radio, the movies, and the press to rally the German 
masses behind his plans for a new Germany. Alongside the pro-
paganda machinery, run by Joseph Goebbels, Hitler created the 
necessary ingredient for maintaining total control of the nation. 
Heinrich Himmler was appointed the leader of the Nazi police 
system, which included the feared secret police, the Gestapo. 
 Beginning in 1934, there was a series of laws passed that 
stripped the German Jewish population of  all  rights—civil, politi-
cal, economic, and social. Jewish shops and factories were either 

116 Biographical Sketches
destroyed or Aryanized by the Nazis. With his total control of 
the Nation, Hitler turned to development of plans to grab “liv-
ing space” for the Aryan race of Germans—in central and eastern 
Europe: Poland, the Balkans, and Russia. He built up the Germany 
military, especially the air force and the army. He challenged the 
Western powers, the United Kingdom and France, with his rear-
mament plans, his taking back the Ruhr territory, the joining of 
Austria to Germany in 1938, and the dismemberment of Czecho-
slovakia in 1938 and 1939. He entered into a nonaggression pact 
with the Soviet Union in 1939. Hitler was ready for war with the 
West. Allied with Italy and Japan, the Axis powers, in September 
1939 Hitler attacked Poland and World War II began in Europe. 
With the start of the war, Hitler and his surrogates developed 
the Final Solution to the Jewish problem in Germany and across 
Europe: the Holocaust. Across Europe, Jews in the nations occu-
pied by Germany were deported to Polish and German killing 
centers where most were murdered within hours of their arrival 
at these concentration camps. More than 6 million Jews were 
slaughtered by the Nazis from 1939 to 1945. Until the very end of 
the war in May 1945, Hitler demanded that all the Jews be exter-
minated. With the Russians a few miles from Berlin, Germany, 
Hitler committed suicide on April 30, 1945. 
 Saddam Hussein (1937–2006) 
 Saddam Hussein, a Sunni Muslim, was dictator of Iraq from 1979 
until 2003, when his regime was overthrown by a U.S.-led inva-
sion. By the age of 20, Hussein had joined the revolutionary Baath 
Party while he was a university student. He launched his political 
career in 1958 by assassinating a supporter of Iraqi ruler Abdul-
Karim Qassim. Saddam rose in the ranks after a Baath coup in 
1963 (he had been in exile in Egypt from 1959 until his return in 
1963), and by 1979 he was Iraq ’ s president and de facto dictator. 
He led Iraq through a decade-long war with Iran, and in August 
1990 his forces invaded the neighboring country of Kuwait. A U.S.-
led alliance organized by the ﬁ rst President Bush ran Hussein ’ s 
forces out of Kuwait in the Gulf War, which ended in February 
1991. However, Saddam still remained in power. In addition to his 
Iranian enemies, Hussein hated the Kurds living in Iraq as well 
as Shiite Muslims. The Anfal campaign against the Kurds was the 
bloodiest slaughter during Hussein ’ s regime. Between 1986 and 

Biographical Sketches 117
1989, Hussein ’ s orders led to the extermination of 182,000  Kurdish 
men, women, and children—and all animals. Many of the Kurds 
were killed by deadly chemical gas. Hussein blamed the Iranians 
for the murders, which was untrue. Hussein came under renewed 
pressure in 2002 from the son of the ﬁ rst President Bush. Hussein ’ s 
regime was overthrown by an invasion of U.S. and British forces 
in March of 2003. Hussein disappeared, but U.S. forces captured 
him on December 13, 2003, after ﬁ nding him hiding in a small 
underground pit on a farm near the town of Tikrit. Late in 2005 he 
went on trial in Iraq for the 1982 deaths of over 140 Shiite Muslim 
men in the town of Dujail. On November 5, 2006, he was convicted 
and sentenced to death by hanging. The sentence was upheld after 
appeal, and Hussein was executed in Baghdad by hanging on the 
morning of December 30, 2006.  
 Shiro Ishii (1892–1959) 
 Shiro Ishii studied medicine and in 1920 became a doctor in the 
Japan Medical Corps. He left the army and received a Ph.D. but 
rejoined the army in 1927. His task was to learn about biologi-
cal and chemical weapons. In 1930, Ishii established a center for 
bacteriological research at the Tokyo Army Medical College. After 
Japan annexed Manchuria, Ishii, who was promoted to Colonel, 
in 1940, was placed in command of the Epidemic Prevention and 
Water Puriﬁ cation Department of the Army located near Harbin, 
Manchuria, later designated as Unit 731. His task was to develop 
and test biological and chemical weapons for use in war. Toward 
that end, Japan ’ s captives, mainly Chinese but including some 
prisoners of war, were used as guinea pigs to test the viability 
of these weapons. They were injected with pathogens—anthrax, 
typhoid, gas, gangrene, botulism, meningitis, and yellow fever, 
among others—and then were left to die. While some were still 
alive, autopsies were performed on these conscious prisoners. 
Furthermore, Ishii ’ s Unit 731 provided the army with typhoid 
and other killer bacteria to “ﬁ eld test” on Chinese civilians. By the 
war ’ s end, more than 200,000 were killed because of the actions of 
Unit 731, including 3,000 killed in the autopsy rooms. At the end 
of the war, Ishii went into hiding to escape punishment for war 
crimes. In 1946, he was captured by American forces. However, 
he was never indicted and received immunity from prosecution 
from the Americans because he gave them all the data Unit 731 

118 Biographical Sketches
collected from its experiments during the war. Unit 731 was not 
mentioned at the Tokyo war crimes tribunal; none of its leaders, 
including Ishii faced the bar of justice for their crimes. Unit 731 ’ s 
activities disappeared from history until the early 1980s, when 
stories were published describing its nefarious activities during 
the war. Ishii died of cancer in 1959. 
 Radovan Karadzic (1945–) 
 Karadzic was born in Montenegro. During the Second World 
War, his father was a Chetnik who fought the Nazis and the 
Communists. In 1960, he moved to Sarajevo, the capital city of 
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) to study medicine. He graduated 
as a physician and psychiatrist. Until the demise of Yugosla-
via in 1990, he worked in a number of medical facilities in the 
country. In 1990, he helped create the Serbian Democratic Party 
(SDP) and became its president. He was supported by Slobodan 
Milosevic, the president of Serbia. Elections were held that year 
in BiH, with the votes split between Muslim Party of Democratic 
Action (86 seats), the SDP (72 seats), and the Croatian Demo-
cratic Union of BiH (44 seats). In 1992, after a number of states 
in the former Yugoslavia chose independence (Croatia and Slo-
venia), a referendum was held in BiH on whether to secede from 
Yugoslavia. The Muslims and Croats voted in favor; the Bosnian 
Serbs did not. And after that, the war began between BiH and 
the Bosnian Serbs (supported by Serbian troops and supplies). 
Sarajevo, surrounded on three sides by Bosnian Serb troops, was 
constantly bombarded for three years. Karadzic, the SDP leader, 
proclaimed the formation of a Bosnian Serb Republic in BiH—
Republika Srpska. As the war continued, with the Bosnian Serbs 
winning, there was a concerted effort to expel the Muslims and 
Croats from Serb-held territory. This largely successful effort 
had a name soon to be known by the world: “ethnic cleansing.” 
Women were placed in rape camps, and about 100,000 men and 
young men were exterminated by the Bosnian Serb army and the 
militias. After the war ended in 1995, both men were indicted for 
numerous crimes by the ICTY, which wrote: Karadzic and Gen. 
Ratko Mladic were “Criminally responsible for the unlawful 
conﬁ nement, murder, rape, sexual assault, torture, beating, rob-
bery and inhumane treatment of civilians.” Thirteen years after 
the end of the war, in 2008, Karadzic was captured and turned 

Biographical Sketches 119
over to the International Criminal Tribunal, Yugoslavia (ICTY) 
to answer the many charges against him. His trial has continued 
to the present time (2010). General Mladic is still a free man.  
 Haile Mariam Mengistu (1937–) 
 Haile Mengistu was born in 1937 in Kefa province, Ethiopia, and 
was an army ofﬁ cer and head of state (1974–1991). In 1974 Meng-
istu headed a group of rebel soldiers that overthrew Emperor 
Haile Selassi. After assassinating his rivals, Mengistu became the 
new regime ’ s acknowledged strongman. Elected as one of its rep-
resentatives to the military council (or  Derg ) that seized power in 
September 1974, he soon became one of its most outspoken radical 
nationalist members. He became vice chairman in November 1974 
and chairman in February 1977, after a shoot-out in which his pre-
decessor and hundreds of military ofﬁ cers in the coup were killed. 
He ruthlessly eliminated his civilian opponents—especially the 
“counter revolutionaries,” students, and people associated with 
the Ethiopian People ’ s Revolutionary Party—in the Red Terror 
of 1976–1978. He sought an alliance with the Soviet Union. He 
was able to defeat the Somali invasion of 1977–1978, with massive 
Soviet and Cuban military aid, and sought to build a powerful 
and centralized Ethiopian state on Marxist-Leninist principles. 
By 1978 he had crushed a major rebellion in Eritrea, and, with 
Soviet and Cuban help, beat down an invasion of the nation by the 
Somalis. In the 1980s he faced new rebellions in Eritrea and Tigray, 
and devastating droughts and famines drew attention to his failed 
agricultural policies. 
 The culminating point of this process, the formation of the 
Workers ’  Party of Ethiopia in September 1984, coincided with a 
terrible famine that cost hundreds of thousands of lives. Meng-
istu ’ s centralizing dictatorship aroused increasing opposition, 
especially from the northern regions of Eritrea, where effective 
guerrilla insurgencies contested his rule. In May 1991, with guer-
rilla armies closing on the Ethiopian capital, Addis Ababa, the Der-
gue was overthrown, and he ﬂ ed to exile in Zimbabwe. In 1999, he 
went to South Africa for medical treatment. However, he immedi-
ately returned to his safe haven in Zimbabwe. Mengistu ’ s trial in 
absentia began in Ethiopia in 1994 and ended in 2006. Mengistu ’ s 
charge sheet and evidence list was 8,000 pages long. The evidence 
against him included signed execution orders, videos of torture 

120 Biographical Sketches
sessions, and personal testimonies. Mengistu was found guilty as 
charged on December 12, 2006, and was sentenced to life in prison 
in January 2007. In addition to the genocide conviction, he was 
also found guilty of imprisonment, illegal homicide, and illegal 
conﬁ scation of property. 
 Slobodan Milosevic (1941–2006) 
 The ﬁ rst European head of state to be prosecuted for genocide 
and war crimes, Slobodan Milosevic emerged to embody the dark 
side of European leadership. In short, he became Europe ’ s chief 
menace, the most dangerous ﬁ gure in post–Cold War Europe. 
From 1991 to 1999, he presided over mayhem and mass mur-
der in southeastern Europe. In a long list of villains, he was the 
central ﬁ gure. To the civilian victims of Srebrenica and Vukovar, 
Sarajevo and Dubrovnik, Pristina and Banja Luka, he personi-
ﬁ ed the evil men can do. However, although a brilliant tactician 
who ran rings around his peers and rivals in Croatia, Bosnia and 
Kosovo, confounded the Serbian opposition, and outwitted an 
endless array of international mediators, Milosevic was a lousy 
strategist. With no ultimate aim except short-term gain, he won 
most of the battles and lost all the wars. In the process, he left a 
legacy of more than 200,000 dead in Bosnia and 2 million people 
(half the population) homeless. He ethnically cleansed more than 
800,000 Albanians from their homes in Kosovo. He had political 
opponents and former friends and colleagues in Belgrade mur-
dered. In Bosnia, he triggered the worst crisis in transatlantic 
relations before the Iraq War and left the UN and the European 
Union looking spineless and humiliated, their foreign policy 
making and peacekeeping credibility in tatters. Milosevic was 
ﬁ rst indicted for war crimes in Kosovo in March 1999 by Lou-
ise Arbour, the Canadian chief prosecutor for the ICTY in The 
Hague. Arbour ’ s successor, the Swiss jurist Carla Del Ponte, 
extended the charge sheet to include indictments on Croatia and 
Bosnia, in the latter case accusing him of genocide for his alleged 
collusion in the massacre of more than 7,000 Muslim males at 
Srebrenica in July 1995. Speciﬁ cally, on November 23, 2001, 
Milosevic was charged with the following crimes: “(1) Genocide 
and complicity in Genocide; (2) Crimes against humanity involv-
ing persecution, extermination, murder, imprisonment, torture, 
deportation and inhumane acts (forcible transfers); (3) Grave 

Biographical Sketches 121
breaches of the Geneva Conventions of 1949 involving willful 
killing, unlawful conﬁ nement, willfully causing great suffering, 
unlawful deportation or transfer, and extensive destruction and 
appropriation of property; (4) Violations of the laws or customs 
of war involving inter alia attacks on civilians, unlawful destruc-
tion, plunder of property and cruel treatment.” That he ended 
up in the dock in The Hague at all surprised many who have 
studied the man through the 1990s. Given his predisposition for 
violence, his apparent lack of remorse for the pain and suffering 
he caused, and a troubled family history of suicides and death, 
it was always thought that Milosevic would go down in a blood-
bath in Belgrade or opt to kill himself rather than be turned over 
to the ICTY and die while on trial in The Hague.  
 Gen. Ratko Mladic (1943–) 
 Ratko Mladic was born in BiH. His father was killed in the Second 
World War by the Ustase (the Croatian allies of the Nazis). He 
entered the Yugoslav military and reached a command position 
in the 1970s. In 1991, he was appointed commander of the 9th 
Corps of the Yugoslavian army in Croatia. In 1992, he took com-
mand of the 80,000 soldiers stationed in the BiH. They became the 
military backbone of the Bosnian Serb forces battling the Muslims 
and Croats. This force was joined by the notorious Bosnian-Serb 
militias and, in less than two months, under the leadership of 
Radovan Karadzic and Mladic, seized control of two-thirds of the 
country. The UN, in 1993, tried to form six safe areas where non-
Bosnian Serbs would be protected by the UN peacekeepers. These 
areas included Srebrenica, Bihac, Tuzla, Zepa, Sarajevo, and Gora-
zde. However, near the end of the war, Bosnian Serbs captured 
the safe areas of Srebrenica and Zepa. More than 40,000 Muslims 
were expelled, and another 8,000 were exterminated by the Bos-
nian Serb militias, on the orders of General Mladic. In 1995, the 
siege of Sarajevo was lifted as part of a peace treaty. In three years, 
more than 10,000 persons were killed, including 1,500 children. 
More than 200,000 lost their lives during the war, and more than 
three million lost their homes and property. In July 1995, Karadzic 
and Mladic were indicted by the ICTY on 16 counts, including 
genocide, war crimes, crimes against civilians, the taking of UN 
peacekeepers as hostages, and the destruction of places of wor-
ship. Both men avoided capture until Karadzic ’ s arrest. However, 

122 Biographical Sketches
as of 2010, Mladic is still free, allegedly living openly in Serbia and 
being protected by the Serbian government and military. 
 Jose Efrain Rios Montt (1926–) 
 Montt began his military career in the Guatemalan army in 1946 
and by 1972 was a general. He is a born-again evangelical Protestant 
with ties to Christian fundamentalists in the United States. Begin-
ning in 1962, a 34-year civil war broke out between leftist guerilla 
groups and the government for control of the nation. The military 
forces increased troops in uniform and developed a sophisticated 
intelligence network to deal with the rebel groups—assisted by 
the United States. In the 1960s, “death squads” were organized 
to exterminate the rebels—but also indigenous Mayans. Gen. Jose 
Efrain Rios Montt headed the Guatemala military government 
from 1982 to 1983, succeeding Gen. Romeo Lucas Garcia through a 
military coup in 1982. He headed the three-person junta and imme-
diately annulled the constitution and dissolved parliament. Politi-
cal parties were banned, and the election law was cancelled. His 
leadership came in a period during which the government carried 
out extensive human rights violations. In June 1982, he disbanded 
the junta and assumed the presidency. His 14 months in power was 
seen by many as the bloodiest reign in more than 400 years. While 
he was dictator, 100,000 Guatemalans were killed or disappeared, 
and between 500,000 and 1.5 million others were forced to ﬂ ee from 
the death squads. He remains an inﬂ uential and powerful politi-
cian and currently holds a seat in the Guatemalan Congress after 
being elected in September 2007. Rios Montt ’ s brief presidency was 
probably the most violent period of the 36-year internal conﬂ ict 
in Guatemala, which resulted in thousands of deaths of mostly 
unarmed indigenous civilians. A UN-sponsored truth commission 
concluded that acts of genocide had been committed “through 
methods whose cruelty has outraged the moral conscience of the 
civilized world.” Led by Nobel Prize laureate Rigoberta Menchú, 
survivors frustrated by severe delays, obstruction, and harassment 
in Guatemalan courts petitioned Spain ’ s National Court to hear 
a case charging Rios Montt and other former ofﬁ cials with seri-
ous crimes under international law, using the principle of  univer-
sal jurisdiction . In July 2006, Spain ’ s National Court (SNC) charged 
Rios Montt and the other former senior ofﬁ cials with genocide, ter-
rorism, torture and illegal detention. The SNC subsequently issued 

Biographical Sketches 123
warrants for their arrest, and Guatemalan authorities took some 
of the accused into custody to ensure that they would not ﬂ ee the 
country. In December 2007, however, the Guatemalan Constitu-
tional Court granted the appeal of two of the suspects wanted by 
the Spanish court, ruling that they were not extraditable to Spain 
for trial. Although the appeal was brought forward by only two 
of the suspects, the decision makes it unlikely that the Guatema-
lan court will move to extradite Rios Montt to Spain to face the 
charges against him. The case in Spain will continue. In the winter 
and spring of 2008, courageous witnesses gave testimony to courts 
in both Guatemala City and Madrid despite grave personal risk. 
The court in Guatemala was acting on behalf of the Spanish court. 
In short, the international warrants for the arrest of Rios Montt and 
the other high level ofﬁ cials wanted by the SNC won ’ t go away. 
However, experts have observed that unless one of the defendants 
leaves Guatemala and is arrested, the case in Spain will not come 
to trial because Spain does not recognize a trial in which the defen-
dant is not present for court proceedings.  
 Anton Pavelic (1889–1959) 
 Pavelic was born a short distance south of Sarajevo, BiH. After 
attending a Jesuit seminary for secondary school, he studied law 
at the University of Zagreb, located in the capital of Croatia. After 
graduation from law school, Pavelic opened a law ofﬁ ce in Zagreb. 
He became a member of an extreme right-wing nationalist party 
that advocated freedom for Croatia. In 1919, he was made interim 
secretary of a nationalist organization. For Pavelic, the only reality 
was, as he wrote: “a free and independent Croat state comprising 
the entire historical and ethnic territory of the Croat people.” He 
said that Croatia ’ s enemies were the Serbian government, interna-
tional Freemasonry, Jews, and Communists. After the end of the 
First World War, the Allies created Yugoslavia, which consisted of 
Serbs, Croats, Bosnians, Macedonians, and Slovenes. In the 1920s 
he was an active member of the Croat nationalist party and won a 
seat in the Parliament. In 1929, the king dissolved the legislature 
and created a “Royal Dictatorship.” 
 All civil liberties were denied, political parties were banned, 
and self-government was abolished. Pavelic ﬂ ed to Vienna where 
he took control of the Croat Youth Movement. He came into 
 contact with the new Italian dictator, Benito Mussolini, and by 

124 Biographical Sketches
1932, relocated to Rome and then turned the Youth Movement 
into what would become the dreaded Ustase, a terrorist organi-
zation known for its hatred of Serbs and Bosnians. In 1934, the 
Yugoslavian king was assassinated in France by Ustase terrorists. 
Pavelic, who was still in Italy, was tried in absentia and sentenced 
to death by a French court. Italy refused to send Pavelic to France 
for his punishment. In 1939, the Second World War began and by 
1941 Germany coerced Yugoslavia to sign the Tripartite Pact, join-
ing that nation (and other eastern European nations) to the Axis 
powers, Germany, Italy, and Japan. 
 However, anti-Fascist air force pilots mutinied against the 
Pact and Pavelic, from Italy, called on Croat soldiers to “use your 
weapons against the Serbian soldiers and ofﬁ cers. We are ﬁ ght-
ing shoulder to shoulder with our German and Italian allies.” In 
April 1941, the victorious German army marched into Zagreb, 
and Pavelic ’ s deputy (the Ustase leader in Croatia) proclaimed the 
Independent State of Croatia. A few days later Pavelic returned to 
Zagreb after more than a decade away from his homeland. Soon 
after his return, the Nazis, at the urging of Mussolini, made Pavelic 
chieftain of the Croat government. His ﬁ rst speech set the tone for 
the rest of the war in Yugoslavia. The primary task of his govern-
ment was to “purify” Croatia and to bring about the “elimination 
of alien elements.” His major weapon was the Ustase, which was 
used to torture, deport, and exterminate the two million alien ele-
ments then living in Croatia: Jews, Gypsies, and Serbs. South of 
Zagreb, Pavelic established the Jasenovac concentration camp to 
hold and then murder these elements. Joining the Ustase terror-
ists in this killing task were some Croatian Catholic clergy. By 
the war ’ s end, the Ustase, under Pavelic ’ s leadership, extermi-
nated 30,000 Jews, about 29,000 gypsies, and between 300,000 and 
600,000 Serbs. Pavelic once again left Croatia in 1945 for Rome, 
Italy, where he was protected by the Vatican. In 1948, he moved 
to a monastery near Rome, disguised as a Catholic priest. Later 
that year, Vatican agents smuggled him out of harm ’ s way to 
Argentina, where he revived the Ustase movement and served 
as an advisor to Argentinian president Juan Peron. Between 
1946 and 1948, nearly 8,000 Ustase arrived in Argentina under 
Peron ’ s protection. In 1957, the Yugoslavian secret police ﬁ nally 
located Pavelic and planned his assassination. He was seriously 
wounded in the attempt and ﬂ ed to fascist Spain, led by military 
dictator Fransisco Franco. In 1959, Pavelic died from his wounds 
while living in Madrid.   

Biographical Sketches 125
 Gen. Augusto Pinochet (1915–2006) 
 Pinochet was a Chilean army general who became a dictatorial 
president of Chile. From 1973 to 1998, he was commander in chief 
of the army, president of the Chilean Junta from 1973 to 1981, and 
president of the Republic of Chile from 1974 until 1990, when the 
country went back to democratic rule. In 1973, he led the junta 
(including the army, navy, air force, and the Carabineros lead-
ers) that overthrew democratically elected president Salvadore 
Allende, banned all leftist and communist parties, and established 
a military dictatorship. All other political parties were subse-
quently banned from functioning in Chile. His regime murdered 
thousands of political opponents, almost 100,000 Chilean civilians 
were interned, and more than 30,000 tortured. Others “disap-
peared” because of their political views. More than 200,000 other 
Chileans went into exile because of fears for their lives. After he 
retired as commander in chief in 1998, he became senator for life. 
During that year, he visited the United Kingdom for medical treat-
ment and was arrested on a Spanish provisional warrant for the 
murders and disappearances of hundreds of Spanish citizens liv-
ing in Chile while Pinochet was president. A second  provisional 
arrest warrant was issued by a Spanish judge Baltasar Garzon 
charging the former dictator with systematic torture, murder, ille-
gal detention, and forced disappearances. These 1998 warrants 
were the ﬁ rst ones ever issued to a former head of state arrested 
on the principle of universal jurisdiction. He was eventually 
released in March 2000 on medical grounds and returned to Chile. 
In December 2000, he was indicted by Chile for the disappear-
ances or kidnapping of 75 political opponents. In 2002, the Chilean 
Supreme Court dismissed all charges for medical reasons. In 2004, 
the Chilean Supreme Court overturned its earlier decision; it con-
cluded that Pinochet was medically ﬁ t to stand trial and placed 
him under house arrest. He was indicted again in 2006 for murder 
and disappearances. However, he died in December 2006 without 
ever being convicted of the many charges against him.  
 Pol Pot (1928–1998) 
 Pol Pot was born Saloth Sar on May 19, 1928, near Anlong Veng, 
Cambodia. He was educated by Buddhists and at a  private 
 Catholic institution in Phnom Penh and then enrolled at a 

126 Biographical Sketches
 technical school in the town of Kompong Cham to learn carpen-
try. He later obtained a government scholarship to study radio 
and electrical technology in Paris. However, in France Pol Pot 
began to spend less time studying and more time becoming 
involved with the Communist Party. After returning to Cambo-
dia in 1953, Pol Pot drifted into the Vietnamese-inﬂ uenced United 
Khmer Issarak (Freedom) Front of Cambodian Communists. The 
Front was one of many Cambodian groups that opposed French 
control of Cambodia as well as the government of Prince Noro-
dom Sihanouk. After Cambodia won its independence from the 
French in 1954, Pol Pot became involved with the Khmer Peo-
ple ’ s Revolutionary Party (KPRP), the ﬁ rst Cambodian Commu-
nist Party. Pol Pot and his army, called the Khmer Rouge, came to 
power in Cambodia (Kampuchea) in 1975. He was named prime 
minister of the new communist government in 1976 and began 
a program of violent reform. The Khmer Rouge abolished cur-
rency, religion, and private property and evacuated cities in the 
hopes of creating an agrarian society that emulated the Chinese 
Communist experiment, free of Western inﬂ uence. Under his 
regime, forced labor, executions, and famine killed between 1.5 
and 2 million Cambodians (more than 20 percent of the popula-
tion). When Vietnam invaded Cambodia in 1979, Pol Pot—called 
Brother Number One by followers—was ousted from the capital, 
Phnom Penh, but continued to lead the Khmer Rouge army in 
exile. He resigned as leader of the army in 1985, and by the late 
1990s a split in the Khmer Rouge caused his former comrades to 
turn on him and imprison him for murder. He died unrepentant 
in 1998; the cause of death is still a mystery: some say he had a 
heart attack, some say he was murdered, and some say he killed 
himself.  
 Joseph Stalin (1879–1953) 
 Stalin was born in 1879 to a poor family in Georgia. Scarred by 
smallpox and with a somewhat deformed arm, these maladies 
led to a life-long distrust of others in society, especially when 
he was around intellectuals. His mother sent Stalin to the capi-
tal, Tiﬂ is, to study for the priesthood. He never ﬁ nished his 
religious studies. Instead, he joined the young revolutionaries 
in the city and helped them by organizing workers, delivering 

Biographical Sketches 127
 revolutionary leaﬂ ets, and engaging in robberies to help fund the 
revolutionaries. After the start of the Russian Revolution in 1917, 
he was appointed by Vladimir Lenin to a number of positions 
in the new Soviet government. In 1922, Stalin was appointed as 
general secretary of the Communist Party ’ s Central Commit-
tee. He used this bureaucratic position to gain enormous power 
through his appointment of men and women to ﬁ ll positions in 
the new government. Lenin died in 1924, and Stalin went about 
consolidating his power by having his Communist Party rivals 
executed. He capped his rise to absolute power when he had his 
last remaining enemies brought before show trials and charged 
with being “enemies of the people.” His last enemy, Leon Trotsky, 
was killed in 1940 in Mexico City with an ice pick wielded by 
one of Stalin ’ s men. Stalin ’ s major task after consolidating his 
power was to have backward Russia become a major industrial 
power in the world. In his effort to achieve this goal, he national-
ized agriculture into collective farms and created Five-Year Plans 
to coordinate these efforts toward industrialization. This effort 
came at a tremendous human cost. Millions of Kulaks starved 
to death, and millions more were brought into the Gulag system 
where they worked for the state until they died. In 1939, Stalin 
negotiated a nonaggression pact with Hitler ’ s Germany. In 1941, 
Hitler attacked the Soviet Union. Stalin was totally unprepared 
for war; during the 1930s, he had decimated the military ofﬁ -
cer class with his purge trials. The Nazi armies quickly seized 
the Ukraine and Belarus. Leningrad was under constant siege 
by Nazi artillery, and the Nazi armies were just a few miles from 
the Kremlin in Moscow. The tide turned after the Soviet armies 
broke the siege at Stalingrad in 1943. The Germans suffered a 
disastrous defeat in the winter of 1943 and began their long 
retreat back to the West with the Soviet army following them and 
liberating the captive eastern European nations. After the war, 
at a number of conferences with his Western allies, the United 
Kingdom, the United States, and France, at Teheran and Yalta, 
and Potsdam, Stalin succeeded in maintaining the Soviet Union 
as a major world power. Stalin was able to bring these Eastern 
European nations under his sphere of inﬂ uence, thus beginning 
the Cold War with the West. He continued to purge his enemies 
after the war, calling them traitors, sending them to the Gulag 
or having them murdered. In 1953, Stalin died, and the purges 
generally ended with his death.  

128 Biographical Sketches
 Haji Suharto (1921–2008) 
 Born June 8, 1921, in Kemusu Argamulja, Java, Dutch East Indies, 
Haji Suharto was the second president of Indonesia (1967–1998). 
Suharto initially served in the Dutch colonial army, but after the 
Japanese conquest (1942) he joined a Japanese-sponsored defense 
corps. After Japan ’ s surrender he joined the guerrilla forces seek-
ing independence from the Dutch. When Indonesia became 
independent (1950), he was a lieutenant colonel. A strong anti-
communist, he crushed what was purported to be an attempted 
communist coup d ’ état in 1965 with a ruthless purge of com-
munists and leftists throughout the country that left as many as 
1,000,000 dead. That moment came on September 30, 1965, when 
the PKI (Communist Party) leader, Dipa Nusantara Aidit (appar-
ently acting on his own), and a small group of leftwing ofﬁ cers 
launched a botched coup in which six senior generals were killed. 
Suharto, who mysteriously survived, quickly suppressed the 
uprising. Over the next six months, army units and local vigilante 
groups launched a nationwide purge of so-called communists, a 
catch-all label that included labor and civic leaders and thousands 
of others who would never have even heard of Karl Marx. Most 
were shot, stabbed, beaten to death, or thrown down wells in 
acts of horrifying violence. Suharto deposed the sitting president, 
Sukarno, and appointed himself president in 1967. He established 
authoritarian rule and was repeatedly elected without opposi-
tion. Vast numbers of political opponents were killed, jailed, or 
sent to labor camps during three decades of Suharto ’ s rule, with 
tens of thousands dying in East Timor alone following its illegal 
annexation in 1975. A severe economic downturn focused public 
attention on his government ’ s corruption, and this led to massive 
demonstrations that prompted his resignation in 1998, after 31 
years in power. 
 Pasha Mehmat Talat (1874–1921) 
 Talat was one of the leaders of the new Turkish government, the 
Committee of Union and Progress (CUP or the Young Turk Move-
ment), that reigned during the First World War. Along with two 
other leaders of the CUP, Enver Pasha and Djemal Pasha, the trio, 
known as the Three Pashas, ran the government until nearly the 

Biographical Sketches 129
end of the war. As interior minister, Talat, in April 1915, ordered 
the arrest of 235 Armenian leaders in Constantinople (present-
day Istanbul). One month later, Talat was responsible for passage 
of the Tehcir Law of May 1915. This law began the massacre of 
ethnic Armenians living in the Ottoman Empire. As minister of 
the interior, the deportation of Turkey ’ s Armenian population fell 
under his jurisdiction. On September 16, 1915, Talat sent the fol-
lowing message to the Prefecture of Aleppo: “you have already 
been advised that the Government . . . has decided to destroy 
completely all the indicated persons [Armenians] living in Tur-
key. . . . Their existence must come to an end, however tragic the 
means may be; and no regard must be paid to either age or sex, or 
to conscientious scruples. Minister of the Interior, Talat.” 
 In 1917, Talat became the Grand Vizier, but he was unsuc-
cessful in turning the tide of the war. Between 1917 and his hur-
ried departure on a German submarine in early November 1918, 
the Turkish armies were defeated in Jerusalem and in Baghdad 
by British forces. After the war ended, there were Turkish trials 
against the leading CUP leaders for having ordered and imple-
mented the Armenian Massacre. In July 1919, Talat and other 
CUP leaders were condemned to death in absentia. (At this time, 
Talat was living in Berlin.) German ofﬁ cials were very reluctant 
to return Talat to the new government. He was assassinated by an 
Armenian revolutionary in Berlin, Germany, on March 15, 1921. 
 Father Joseph Tiso (1887–1947) 
 Joseph Tiso was a Catholic priest in Slovakia. After World War 
I ended, there was the geographic and political destruction of 
the Austro-Hungarian Empire and the creation of Czechoslova-
kia. Tiso, who had been on an upward trajectory in the Catholic 
Church, immediately dropped his church afﬁ liation and declared 
himself to be a Slovak nationalist and entered politics in the newly 
created nation. 
 Although anti-Semitic, during the interwar period he became 
minister of health and kept his views about the Jews secret. By 1938, 
however, Jews in Slovakia came under harsh attacks; they saw 
their civil rights destroyed by the government, which supported 
Hitler ’ s efforts on the continent. By now, Tiso had become presi-
dent of Slovakia and was in support of Hitler ’ s plans for extermi-
nating Jews. Jewish property was taken by the  government. With 

130 Biographical Sketches
the beginning of the war, Hitler invaded Czechoslovakia and 
offered the Slovaks an independent state in exchange for an alli-
ance with Germany. In 1940, Tiso ’ s  government began deporting 
Jews at the request of the Nazi government. Although the Vatican 
and Jewish groups tried to persuade Tiso not to follow the Nazi 
requests, he continued the deportations with the full knowledge 
that the Jews were being sent to their deaths. In 1944,  Time mag-
azine described Tiso as a “canny bulletheaded nationalist. With 
political craft and German aid, Tiso has fed his countrymen rela-
tively well, provided state jobs, promoted Slovaks in government 
service, and suppressed pro-Czechs by deporting them or threat-
ening to” ( Time , April 17, 1944, Foreign News: Pride and a Priest, 
at   www.time.com  ). After a 1944 civilian anti-Fascist revolt in Slo-
vakia, Tiso lost domestic support and, because the German army 
occupied the country, he became a puppet leader for the Nazis and 
continued to deport Jews to the death camps. Slovakia was the 
only nation to pay the Nazis 500 marks to “cover the expenses” of 
relocating Slovakian Jews to the death camps. Almost 70,000 of 
Slovakia ’ s 90,000 Jews were exterminated by the Nazis. In 1947, 
Tiso was tried by the new government for his actions against the 
Jews, found guilty, and executed. 
 Mao Tse-Tung (1893–1976) 
  Mao Tse-Tung  (Zedung) was a child of farmers in Hunan prov-
ince. As a young man, he came into contact with Chinese revolu-
tionaries and the ideas of Karl Marx and Lenin. By 1921, he was 
a member of the Chinese Communist Party. By 1925, ﬂ eeing from 
the Nationalist Party of Chiang Kai-Shek, he returned to Hunan. 
After studying the plight of the farmers in the province, Zedung 
was convinced that the Chinese Communist revolution would 
begin with the farmers and other rural workers, not in the cit-
ies. Constantly hounded by the Nationalist Party, between 1934 
and 1935, he led the Long March to Yan ’ du, where they built their 
party headquarters and Mao became chairman of the Chinese 
Communist Party. During the late 1930s both the Communists 
and the Nationalists joined against their common enemy, Japan. 
After the war, with the help of the Soviet Union, Mao ’ s armies won 
decisive battles against the Nationalists and took control of the 
nation in 1949. Like Stalin, Mao wanted to modernize as quickly 
as possible through Land Reform and Five-Year Plans and what 

Biographical Sketches 131
he termed The Great Leap Forward in 1958. The Great Leap led to 
a  horrendous famine that took 20 million lives between 1959 and 
1962. The next innovation Mao introduced was the Cultural Revo-
lution of 1966–1976. This led, until Mao ’ s death in 1976, to the Red 
Guards, groups of young adults who set up tribunals across China 
to try and to punish the bourgeois segments in the nation. During 
this decade, millions of these Chinese were prosecuted and ulti-
mately killed. The killing ended with Mao ’ s death in 1976.  
 Gen. Jorge Raphael Videla (1925–) 
 Jorge Rafael Videla Redondo was the 43rd president of Argen-
tina from 1976 to 1981. He was named commander in chief by 
President Isabel Perón in 1975. Perón, former vice president to 
her husband, Juan Peron, succeeded to the presidency follow-
ing his death. Her authoritarian administration was unpopular 
and ineffectual. Videla headed a military coup that deposed her 
on March 24, 1976. A military junta made up of himself, repre-
senting the army, Adm. Emilio Massera (navy), and Brig. Gen. 
Orlando Ramon Agosti (air force). Two days after the coup, 
Videla formally assumed the presidency, and the newly installed 
military government arrested, detained, tortured, and killed sus-
pected terrorists and political opponents. Human rights viola-
tions became commonplace. According to estimates, at least 9,000 
and up to about 30,000 Argentinians were subject to forced dis-
appearance ( desaparecidos ) and most probably were killed; many 
were illegally detained and tortured, and others ﬂ ed the country. 
Politically, all legislative power was concentrated in the hands of 
Videla ’ s nine-man junta, and every single important position in 
the national government was ﬁ lled with loyal military ofﬁ cers. 
The junta banned prohibited labor unions and strikes by work-
ers, abolished the nation ’ s judiciary, and suspended civil liberties. 
Despite these cruel abuses, Videla ’ s regime continued to have the 
backing of the Argentine Roman Catholic Church and the local 
media. Democracy was restored in 1983, and Videla was put on 
trial and found guilty. He was sentenced to life imprisonment 
and was discharged from the military in 1985. The tribunal found 
Videla guilty of homicide, disappearances, torture, and many 
other crimes. Videla was imprisoned for only ﬁ ve years. 
 In 1990, President Carlos Menem pardoned Videla together 
with many other former members of the military regime. Menem 

132 Biographical Sketches
cited the need to get over past conﬂ icts as his main reason. Videla 
brieﬂ y returned to prison in 1998 when a judge found him guilty 
of the kidnapping of babies during the Dirty Wars. Videla spent 
38 days in prison, and was later put under house arrest because 
of his declining health. Since 2003, the new government has not 
recognized Videla as having been a legal president of the coun-
try, and his portrait has been removed from the military school. 
There have also been many legal prosecutions of ofﬁ cials associ-
ated with the crimes of the regime. Although pardoned in 2006, 
in April 25, 2007, a federal court struck down his presidential par-
don and restored his human rights abuse convictions. In 2008, he 
was once again placed under house arrest. 
 Lothar Von Trotha (1848–1920) 
 Von Trotha was the German military commander responsible for 
the slaughter of the Herreros in 1906–1908. Born in Magdeburg, 
he joined the Prussian Army in 1865 and fought in a number of 
wars for which he was awarded the Iron Cross 2nd Class. In 1894, 
Trotha was appointed commander of the colonial force in German 
East Africa. In 1904, he was appointed commander in chief of 
German South West Africa. It was at the beginning of the Herrero 
wars, and the German troops were having great difﬁ culty with the 
native tribesmen. Trotha devised a military plan to chase the Her-
rero into the western portion of the Kalahari Desert. He ordered 
his troops to poison the wells and to shoot any Herrero on sight, 
whether man, woman, or child. He then issued an Extermina-
tion Order, which read: “Within the German borders, every Her-
rero, whether armed or unarmed, with or without cattle, will be 
shot. I shall not accept any more women or children. I shall drive 
them back to their people—otherwise I shall order shots to be 
ﬁ red at them.” The outcry in Germany was so great that the Kai-
ser removed Trotha from his command. He returned to Germany 
in November 1905 and was made general of infantry in 1910. He 
died in 1920 of typhoid fever.  

133
 6 
Documents
 Documents 
 General Orders No. 100: Instructions for the 
Government of Armies of the United States 
in the Field by Francis Lieber: April 24, 1863 
  This Military Order established limitations on Union forces regarding 
their treatment of captured Confederate soldiers. It was adopted by Gen-
eral Lee for use in the Confederate army. Subsequently, many nations 
adopted these rules for their own armies. 
 SECTION III 
 Prisoners of War, Hostages, Booty on the Battleﬁ eld. 
 Article 49 
 A prisoner of war is a public enemy armed or attached to the hostile 
army for active aid, who has fallen into the hands of the captor, either 
ﬁ ghting or wounded, on the ﬁ eld or in the hospital, by individual 
surrender or by capitulation. 
 All soldiers, of whatever species of arms; all men who belong to the 
rising en masse of the hostile country; all those who are attached to 
the army for its efﬁ ciency and promote directly the object of the war, 
except such as are hereinafter provided for; all disabled men or ofﬁ cers 
on the ﬁ eld or elsewhere, if captured; all enemies who have thrown 
away their arms and ask for quarter, are prisoners of war, and as such 

134 Documents
exposed to the inconveniences as well as entitled to the privileges of a 
prisoner of war. 
 . . . 
 Article 56 
 A prisoner of war is subject to no punishment for being a public 
enemy, nor is any revenge wreaked upon him by the  intentional 
inﬂ iction of any suffering, or disgrace, by cruel imprisonment, want of 
food, by mutilation, death, or any other barbarity. 
 Article 60 
 It is against the usage of modern war to resolve, in hatred and 
revenge, to give no quarter. No body of troops has the right to declare that 
it will not give, and therefore will not expect, quarter; but a commander is 
permitted to direct his troops to give no quarter, in great straits, when his 
own salvation makes it impossible to cumber himself with prisoners. 
 Article 61 
 Troops that give no quarter have no right to kill enemies already 
disabled on the ground, or prisoners captured by other troops. 
 Article 62 
 All troops of the enemy known or discovered to give no quarter in 
general, or to any portion of the army, receive none. 
 . . . 
 Article 68 
 Modern wars are not internecine wars, in which the killing of 
the enemy is the object. The destruction of the enemy in modern war, 
and, indeed, modern war itself, are means to obtain that object of the 
belligerent which lies beyond the war. Unnecessary or revengeful 
destruction of life is not lawful. 
 Article 70 
 The use of poison in any manner, be it to poison wells, or food, 
or arms, is wholly excluded from modern warfare. He that uses it puts 
himself out of the pale of the law and usages of war. 
 Article 71 
 Whoever intentionally inﬂ icts additional wounds on an enemy 
already wholly disabled, or kills such an enemy, or who orders or 
encourages soldiers to do so, shall suffer death, if duly convicted, 
whether he belongs to the Army of the United States, or is an enemy 
captured after having committed his misdeed. 
 . . . 

Documents 135
 Article 75 
 Prisoners of war are subject to conﬁ nement or imprisonment such 
as may be deemed necessary on account of safety, but they are to be 
subjected to no other intentional suffering or indignity. The conﬁ nement 
and mode of treating a prisoner may be varied during his captivity 
according to the demands of safety. 
 Article 76 
 Prisoners of war shall be fed upon plain and wholesome food, 
whenever practicable, and treated with humanity. 
 . . . 
 Article 80 
 Honorable men, when captured, will abstain from giving to the enemy 
information concerning their own army, and the modern law of war 
permits no longer the use of any violence against prisoners in order to 
extort the desired information or to punish them for having given false 
information. 
 The Hague Peace Conference, 1899 
 This conference, one of a number convened in the last decade of the 19th century 
and the ﬁ rst decade of the 20th century, was an international effort to proscribe 
certain acts of war that were cruel and/or unnecessary.  
 Final Act of the International Peace Conference; July 29, 1899 
 . . . In a series of meetings, between the May 18 and the July 29, 1899, in 
which the constant desire of the above-mentioned Delegates has been to 
realize, in the fullest manner possible, the generous views of the August 
Initiator of the Conference and the intentions of their Governments, the 
Conference has agreed, for submission for signature by the Plenipo-
tentiaries, on the text of the Conventions and Declarations enumerated 
below and annexed to the present Act: 
 Convention for the peaceful adjustment of international 
I. 
differences. 
 Convention regarding the laws and customs of war by land.  
II. 
 Convention for the adaptation to maritime warfare of the 
III. 
principles of the Geneva Convention of the August, 22, 
1864. 
 Three Declarations: 
IV. 
 1.  To prohibit the launching of projectiles and 
explosives from balloons or by other similar 
new methods.  

136 Documents
 2.  To prohibit the use of projectiles the only object of 
which is the diffusion of asphyxiating or deleterious 
gases. 
 3.  To prohibit the use of bullets which expand or ﬂ atten 
easily in the human body, such as bullets with a hard 
envelope, of which the envelope does not entirely cover 
the core, or is pierced with incisions. 
 
   . . . Guided by the same sentiments, the Con-
ference has adopted unanimously the following 
Resolution: 
 
   “The Conference is of opinion that the restric-
tion of military charges, which are at present a 
heavy burden on the world, is extremely desirable 
for the increase of the material and moral welfare of 
mankind.” 
 
 It has, besides, formulated the following wishes: 
 . . . 
 4.  The Conference expresses the wish that the questions 
with regard to riﬂ es and naval guns, as considered by 
it, may be studied by the Governments with the object 
of coming to an agreement respecting the employment 
of new types and calibers.  
 5.   The Conference expresses the wish that the Govern-
ments, taking into consideration the proposals made 
at the Conference, may examine the possibility of an 
agreement as to the limitation of armed forces by land 
and sea, and of war budgets. 
 . . . 
 6.  The Conference expresses the wish that the proposal 
to settle the question of the bombardment of posts, 
towns, and villages by a naval force may be referred to 
a subsequent Conference for consideration. 
 The Kellogg-Briand Pact, 1928, Excerpts 
 This was an international effort to try to end all wars in the future by rejecting 
warfare as an instrument of national policy. Shortly after it was signed, in 1931, 
Japan began its war against China. 
 This treaty between the United States and other Powers providing for 
the renunciation of war as an instrument of national policy. Signed at Paris, 

Documents 137
August 27, 1928; ratiﬁ cation advised by the Senate, January 16, 1929; rati-
ﬁ ed by the President, January 17, 1929; instruments of ratiﬁ cation depos-
ited at Washington by the United States of America, Australia, Dominion 
of Canada, Czechoslovakia, Germany, Great Britain, India, Irish Free State, 
Italy, New Zealand, and Union of South Africa, March 2, 1929: by Poland, 
March 26, 1929; by Belgium, March 27 1929; by France, April 22, 1929; by 
Japan, July 24, 1929; proclaimed, July 24, 1929. 
 ARTICLE I 
 The High Contracting Parties solemnly declare in the names of their 
respective peoples that they condemn recourse to war for the solution 
of international controversies, and renounce it, as an instrument of 
national policy in their relations with one another. 
 ARTICLE II 
 The High Contracting Parties agree that the settlement or solution of all 
disputes or conﬂ icts of whatever nature or of whatever origin they may 
be, which may arise among them, shall never be sought except by paciﬁ c 
means. 
 ARTICLE III 
 The present Treaty shall be ratiﬁ ed by the High Contracting Parties 
named in the Preamble in accordance with their respective constitu-
tional requirements, and shall take effect as between them as soon as 
all their several instruments of ratiﬁ cation shall have been deposited at 
Washington. 
 This Treaty shall, when it has come into effect as prescribed in the preced-
ing paragraph, remain open as long as may be necessary for adherence 
by all the other Powers of the world. Every instrument evidencing the 
adherence of a Power shall be deposited at Washington and the Treaty 
shall immediately upon such deposit become effective. 
 Raphael Lemkin, Axis Rule in Occupied Europe: Laws 
of Occupation, Analysis of Government, and Proposals 
for Redress, 1944 
 Raphael Lemkin coined the new word “genocide” in 1943 (see the book ’ s preface, 
dated November 15, 1943) both as a continuation of his  1933 Madrid Proposal  
and as part of his analysis of German occupation policies in Europe. In this 670-
page book,  Axis Rule , Lemkin introduced and directly addressed the question of 
genocide in 16 pages of Chapter IX entitled “Genocide.” 

138 Documents
 Chapter IX. Genocide—A New Term and New Conception 
for Destruction of Nations, Excerpts 
 New conceptions require new terms. By “genocide” we mean the 
destruction of a nation or of an ethnic group. This new word, coined 
by the author to denote an old practice in its modern development, 
is made from the ancient Greek word  genos (race, tribe) and the Latin 
 cide (killing), thus corresponding in its formation to such words as 
tyrannicide, homicide, infanticide, etc.  Generally speaking, genocide 
does not necessarily mean the immediate destruction of a nation, 
except when accomplished by mass killings of all members of a 
nation. It is intended rather to signify a coordinated plan of different 
actions aiming at the destruction of essential foundations of the life of 
national groups, with the aim of annihilating the groups themselves. 
The objectives of such a plan would be disintegration of the political 
and social institutions, of culture, language, national feelings, religion, 
and the economic existence of national groups and the destruction of 
the personal security, liberty, health, dignity, and even the lives of the 
individuals belonging to such groups. Genocide is directed against 
the national group as an entity, and the actions involved are directed 
against individuals, not in their individual capacity, but as members 
of the national group. 
 . . . It required a long period of evolution in civilized society to mark 
the way from wars of extermination . . . to the conception of wars as 
being essentially limited to activities against armies and states. In the 
present war, . . . the Germans prepared, waged, and continued a war 
not merely against states and their armies but against peoples. For 
the German occupying authorities war thus appears to offer the most 
appropriate occasion for carrying out their policy of genocide. . . . 
Because the imposition of this policy of genocide is more destructive 
for a people than injuries suffered in the actual ﬁ ghting, the German 
people will be stronger than the subjugated peoples after the war 
even if the German army is defeated. In this respect genocide is a new 
technique of occupation aimed at winning the peace even though the 
war itself is lost. 
 . . . Even before the war Hitler envisaged genocide as a means of chang-
ing the biological interrelations in Europe in favor of Germany. Hitler ’ s 
conception of genocide is based not upon cultural but biological pat-
terns. He believes that “ Germanization can only be carried out with the 
 soil and never with  men .” 

Documents 139
 . . . The plan of genocide had to be adapted to political considerations in 
different countries. It could not be implemented in full force in all the 
conquered states, and hence the plan varies as to subject, modalities, 
and degree of intensity in each occupied country. Some groups—such 
as the Jews—are to be destroyed completely. A distinction is made 
between peoples considered to be related by blood to the German 
people (such as Dutchmen,  Norwegians, Flemings, Luxembourgers) 
and peoples not thus related by blood (such as the Poles, Slovenes, 
Serbs). The populations of the ﬁ rst group are deemed worthy of being 
Germanized. . . .  
 Constitution of the International Military Tribunal (The 
Nuremberg Charter), 1945, Excerpts 
 In the course of World War II the Allied governments issued several declara-
tions concerning the punishment of war criminals. On October 7, 1942, it was 
announced that a United Nations War Crimes Commission would be set up for 
the investigation of war crimes. It was not, however, until October 20, 1943, that 
the actual establishment of the Commission took place. In the Moscow Declara-
tion of October 30, 1943, the three main Allied powers (United Kingdom, United 
States, USSR) issued a joint statement that the German war criminals should 
be judged and punished in the countries in which their crimes were committed, 
but that, “the major criminals, whose offences have no particular geographical 
localization,” would be punished “by the joint decision of the Governments of the 
Allies.” The Agreement was drafted at a conference held in London from June 26 
to August 8, 1945. 
 ARTICLE 1 
 In pursuance of the Agreement signed on the 8th day of August 1945 
by the Government of the United States of America, the Provisional 
Government of the French Republic, the Government of the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government 
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, there shall be established an 
International Military Tribunal (hereinafter called “the Tribunal”) for 
the just and prompt trial and punishment of the major war criminals of 
the European Axis. 
 ARTICLE 2 
 The Tribunal shall consist of four members, each with an alternate. One 
member and one alternate shall be appointed by each of the Signatories. . . . 
 . . . 

140 Documents
 ARTICLE 6 
 The Tribunal established by the Agreement referred to Article 1 hereof for 
the trial and punishment of the major war criminals of the European Axis 
countries shall have the power to try and punish persons who, acting in 
the interests of the European Axis countries, whether as individuals or as 
members of organizations, committed any of the following crimes. 
 The following acts, or any of them, are crimes coming within the jurisdic-
tion of the Tribunal for which there shall be individual responsibility: 
 (a)  CRIMES AGAINST PEACE : namely, planning, prepara-
tion, initiation or waging of a war of aggression, or a war 
in violation of international treaties, agreements or assur-
ances, or participation in a common plan or conspiracy 
for the accomplishment of any of the foregoing; 
 (b)  WAR CRIMES : namely, violations of the laws or customs 
of war. Such violations shall include, but not be limited 
to, murder, ill-treatment, or deportation to slave labor 
or for any other purpose of civilian population of or in 
occupied territory, murder or ill-treatment of prisoners of 
war or persons on the seas, killing of hostages, plunder of 
public or private property, wanton destruction of cities, 
towns or villages, or devastation not justiﬁ ed by military 
necessity; 
 (c)  CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY : namely, murder, 
extermination, enslavement, deportation, and other inhu-
mane acts committed against any civilian population, 
before or during the war; or persecutions on political, 
racial, or religious grounds in execution of or in connec-
tion with any crime within the jurisdiction of the Tribu-
nal, whether or not in violation of the domestic law of the 
country where perpetrated. 
 Leaders, organizers, instigators, and accomplices participating in the 
formulation or execution of a common plan or conspiracy to commit 
any of the foregoing crimes are responsible for all acts performed by 
any persons in execution of such plan. 
 ARTICLE 7 
 The ofﬁ cial position of defendants, whether as Heads of State or respon-
sible ofﬁ cials in Government Departments, shall not be considered as 
freeing them from responsibility or mitigating punishment. 
 ARTICLE 8 
 The fact that the Defendant acted pursuant to orders of his Govern-
ment or of a superior shall not free him from responsibility, but may be 

Documents 141
considered in mitigation of punishment if the Tribunal determines that 
justice so requires. 
 . . . 
 ARTICLE 14 
 Each Signatory shall appoint a Chief Prosecutor for the investigation of 
the charges against and the prosecution of major war criminals. 
 The Chief Prosecutors shall act as a committee for the following 
purposes: 
 (a)  to agree upon a plan of the individual work of each of the 
Chief Prosecutors and his staff, 
 (b)  to settle the ﬁ nal designation of major war criminals to be 
tried by the Tribunal, 
 (c)  to approve the Indictment and the documents to be sub-
mitted therewith,  
 (d)  to lodge the Indictment and the accompany documents 
with the Tribunal,  
 (e)  to draw up and recommend to the Tribunal for its 
approval draft rules of procedure, contemplated by Arti-
cle 13 of this Charter. The Tribunal shall have the power 
to accept, with or without amendments, or to reject, the 
rules so recommended. 
 The Committee shall act in all the above matters by a majority vote 
and shall appoint a Chairman as may be convenient and in accordance 
with the principle of rotation: provided that if there is an equal division 
of vote concerning the designation of a Defendant to be tried by the 
Tribunal, or the crimes with which he shall be charged, that proposal 
will be adopted which was made by the party which proposed that the 
particular Defendant be tried, or the particular charges be preferred 
against him. 
 . . . 
 ARTICLE 16 
 In order to ensure fair trial for the Defendants, the following proce-
dure shall be followed: 
 (a)  The Indictment shall include full particulars specifying 
in detail the charges against the Defendants. A copy of 
the Indictment and of all the documents lodged with 
the Indictment, translated into a language which he 

142 Documents
understands, shall be furnished to the Defendant at 
reasonable time before the Trial.  
 (b)  During any preliminary examination or trial of 
a Defendant he will have the right to give any explana-
tion relevant to the charges made 
against him.  
 (c)  A preliminary examination of a Defendant and his Trial 
shall be conducted in, or translated into, a language 
which the Defendant understands.  
 (d)  A Defendant shall have the right to conduct his own 
defense before the Tribunal or to have the assistance 
of Counsel.  
 (e)  A Defendant shall have the right through himself or 
through his Counsel to present evidence at the Trial in 
support of his defense, and to cross-examine any witness 
called by the Prosecution. 
 ARTICLE 17 
 The Tribunal shall have the power 
 (a)  to summon witnesses to the Trial and to require 
their attendance and testimony and to put questions 
to them 
 (b)  to interrogate any Defendant, 
 (c)  to require the production of documents and other eviden-
tiary material,  
 (d)  to administer oaths to witnesses, 
 (e)  to appoint ofﬁ cers for the carrying out of any task 
designated by the Tribunal including the power to have 
evidence taken on commission. 
 . . . 
 ARTICLE 19 
 The Tribunal shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence. It shall 
adopt and apply to the greatest possible extent expeditious and non-
technical procedure, and shall admit any evidence which it deems to be 
of probative value. 
 ARTICLE 22 
 The permanent seat of the Tribunal shall be in Berlin. . . . The ﬁ rst trial 
shall be held at Nuremberg, and any subsequent trials shall be held at 
such places as the Tribunal may decide. 

Documents 143
 ARTICLE 24 
 The proceedings at the Trial shall take the following course: 
 (a)  The Indictment shall be read in court. 
 (b)  The Tribunal shall ask each Defendant whether he pleads 
“guilty” or “not guilty.”  
 (c)  The prosecution shall make an opening statement.  
 (d)  The Tribunal shall ask the prosecution and the defense 
what evidence (if any) they wish to submit to the Tribu-
nal, and the Tribunal shall rule upon the admissibility of 
any such evidence.  
 (e)  The witnesses for the Prosecution shall be examined and after 
that the witnesses for the Defense. Thereafter such rebutting 
evidence as may be held by the Tribunal to be admissible 
shall be called by either the Prosecution or the Defense.  
 (f)  The Tribunal may put any question to any witness and to 
any defendant, at any time.  
 (g)  The Prosecution and the Defense shall interrogate and 
may cross-examine any witnesses and any Defendant 
who gives testimony.  
 (h)  The Defense shall address the court.  
 (i)  The Prosecution shall address the court.  
 (j) 
 Each Defendant may make a statement to the Tribunal. 
 (k)  The Tribunal shall deliver judgment and pronounce sentence.  
 . . . 
 ARTICLE 26 
 The judgment of the Tribunal as to the guilt or the innocence of any 
Defendant shall give the reasons on which it is based, and shall be ﬁ nal 
and not subject to review. 
 ARTICLE 27 
 The Tribunal shall have the right to impose upon a Defendant, on convic-
tion, death or such other punishment as shall be determined by it to be just. 
 Source: United Nations,  Charter of the International Military Tribunal—
Agreement for the Prosecution and Punishment of the Major War Criminals 
of the European Axis , August 8, 1945. Reproduced with permission of the 
United Nations Publication Board. 
 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, December 10, 1948 
 On December 10, 1948, the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted 
and proclaimed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights the full text of 
which appears below. Following this historic act the Assembly called upon all 

144 Documents
Member countries to publicize the text of the Declaration and “to cause it to be 
 disseminated, displayed, read, and expounded principally in schools and other 
educational institutions, without distinction based on the political status of 
countries or territories.” 
 PREAMBLE 
 Whereas recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and 
inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation 
of freedom, justice and peace in the world, 
 Whereas disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in 
barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind, and the 
advent of a world in which human beings shall enjoy  freedom of speech 
and belief and freedom from fear and want has been proclaimed as the 
highest aspiration of the common people, 
 Whereas it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to have recourse, 
as a last resort, to rebellion against tyranny and oppression, that human 
rights should be protected by the rule of law, 
 Whereas it is essential to promote the development of friendly relations 
between nations, 
 Whereas the peoples of the United Nations have in the Charter reaf-
ﬁ rmed their faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and 
worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and women 
and have determined to promote social progress and better standards of 
life in larger freedom, 
 Whereas Member States have pledged themselves to achieve, in co-
operation with the United Nations, the promotion of universal respect 
for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms, 
 Whereas a common understanding of these rights and freedoms is of 
the greatest importance for the full realization of this pledge, 
 Now, Therefore THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY proclaims THIS UNI-
VERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS as a common 
standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations, to the end 
that every individual and every organ of society, keeping this Dec-
laration constantly in mind, shall strive by teaching and education 
to promote respect for these rights and freedoms and by progres-
sive measures, national and international, to secure their universal 
and effective recognition and observance, both among the peoples 
of Member States themselves and among the peoples of territories 
under their jurisdiction. 
 Article 1 
 All human beings are born free and equal in dignity 
• 
and rights. They are endowed with reason and 

Documents 145
conscience and should act towards one another in a 
spirit of brotherhood.  
 Article 2 
 Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth 
• 
in this Declaration, without distinction of any kind, such 
as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other 
opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other 
status. Furthermore, no distinction shall be made on the 
basis of the political, jurisdictional or international status of 
the country or territory to which a person belongs, whether 
it be independent, trust, non-self-governing or under any 
other limitation of sovereignty. 
 Article 3 
 Everyone has the right to life, liberty, and security of 
• 
person. 
 Article 4 
 No one shall be held in slavery or servitude; slavery and 
• 
the slave trade shall be prohibited in all their forms. 
 Article 5 
 No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or 
• 
degrading treatment or punishment. 
 Article 6 
 Everyone has the right to recognition everywhere as a 
• 
person before the law. 
 Article 7 
 All are equal before the law and are entitled without 
• 
any discrimination to equal protection of the law. All are 
entitled to equal protection against any discrimination in 
violation of this Declaration and against any incitement to 
such discrimination. 
 Article 8 
 Everyone has the right to an effective remedy by the com-
• 
petent national tribunals for acts violating the fundamental 
rights granted him by the constitution or by law. 
 Article 9 
 No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest, 
• 
detention or exile. 

146 Documents
 Article 10 
 Everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair and public 
• 
hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal, in the 
determination of his rights and obligations and of any 
criminal charge against him. 
 Article 11 
 1.  Everyone charged with a penal offence has the right to be 
presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law in 
a public trial at which he has had all the guarantees neces-
sary for his defence. 
 2.  No one shall be held guilty of any penal offence on account 
of any act or omission which did not constitute a penal 
offence, under national or international law, at the time 
when it was committed. Nor shall a heavier penalty be 
imposed than the one that was applicable at the time the 
penal offence was committed. 
 Article 12 
 No one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with his 
• 
privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor to attacks 
upon his honour and reputation. Everyone has the right 
to the protection of the law against such interference or 
attacks. 
 Article 13 
 1.  Everyone has the right to freedom of movement and resi-
dence within the borders of each state. 
 2.  Everyone has the right to leave any country, including his 
own, and to return to his country. 
 Article 14 
 1.  Everyone has the right to seek and to enjoy in other coun-
tries asylum from persecution. 
 2.  This right may not be invoked in the case of prosecutions 
genuinely arising from non-political crimes or from acts 
contrary to the purposes and principles of the United 
Nations. 
 Article 15 
 1.  Everyone has the right to a nationality. 
 2.  No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his 
nationality nor denied the right to change his nationality. 

Documents 147
 Article 16 
 1.  Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to 
race, nationality or religion, have the right to marry and to 
found a family. They are entitled to equal rights as to mar-
riage, during marriage and at its dissolution. 
 2.  Marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full 
consent of the intending spouses. 
 3.  The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of 
society and is entitled to protection by society and the 
State. 
 Article 17 
 1.  Everyone has the right to own property alone as well as in 
association with others. 
 2.  No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his property. 
 Article 18 
 Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience 
• 
and religion; this right includes freedom to change his 
religion or belief, and freedom, either alone or in com-
munity with others and in public or private, to manifest 
his religion or belief in teaching, practice, worship and 
observance. 
 Article 19 
 Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expres-
• 
sion; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without 
interference and to seek, receive and impart information 
and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers. 
 Article 20 
 1.  Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly 
and association. 
 2.  No one may be compelled to belong to an association. 
 Article 21 
 1.  Everyone has the right to take part in the govern-
ment of his country, directly or through freely chosen 
representatives. 
 2.  Everyone has the right of equal access to public 
service in his country. 
 3.  The will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of 
government; this will shall be expressed in periodic and 
genuine elections which shall be by universal and equal 

148 Documents
suffrage and shall be held by secret vote or by equivalent 
free voting procedures.   
 Article 22 
 Everyone, as a member of society, has the right to social 
• 
security and is entitled to realization, through national effort 
and international co-operation and in accordance with the 
organization and resources of each State, of the economic, 
social and cultural rights indispensable for his dignity and the 
free development of his personality.  
 Article 23 
 1.  Everyone has the right to work, to free choice 
of employment, to just and favourable 
conditions of work and to protection against 
unemployment. 
 2.  Everyone, without any discrimination, has the right to 
equal pay for equal work. 
 3.  Everyone who works has the right to just and favour-
able remuneration ensuring for himself and his family an 
existence worthy of human dignity, and supplemented, if 
necessary, by other means of social protection. 
 4.  Everyone has the right to form and to join trade unions for 
the protection of his interests. 
 Article 24 
 Everyone has the right to rest and leisure, including rea-
• 
sonable limitation of working hours and periodic holidays 
with pay. 
 Article 25 
 1.  Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate 
for the health and well-being of himself and of his family, 
including food, clothing, housing and medical care and 
necessary social services, and the right to security in the 
event of unemployment, 
sickness, disability, widowhood, old age or other lack of 
livelihood in circumstances beyond his control. 
 2.  Motherhood and childhood are entitled to special care and 
assistance. All children, whether born in or out of wedlock, 
shall enjoy the same social protection. 
 Article 26 
 1.  Everyone has the right to education. Education 
shall be free, at least in the elementary and fundamental 

Documents 149
stages. Elementary education shall be 
compulsory. Technical and professional education shall be 
made generally available and higher education shall be 
equally accessible to all on the basis of merit. 
 2.  Education shall be directed to the full development of the 
human personality and to the strengthening of respect for 
human rights and fundamental freedoms. It shall pro-
mote understanding, tolerance and friendship among all 
nations, racial or religious groups, and shall further the 
activities of the United Nations for the maintenance of 
peace. 
 3.  Parents have a prior right to choose the kind of education 
that shall be given to their children. 
 Article 27 
 1.  Everyone has the right freely to participate in the cultural 
life of the community, to enjoy the arts 
and to share in scientiﬁ c advancement and its beneﬁ ts.  
 2.  Everyone has the right to the protection of the moral and 
material interests resulting from any scientiﬁ c, literary or 
artistic production of which he is the author. 
 Article 28 
 Everyone is entitled to a social and international order in 
• 
which the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration 
can be fully realized. 
 Article 29 
 1.  Everyone has duties to the community in which alone the 
free and full development of his personality is possible. 
 2.  In the exercise of his rights and freedoms, everyone shall 
be subject only to such limitations as are determined by 
law solely for the purpose of securing due recognition and 
respect for the rights and freedoms of others and of meet-
ing the just requirements of morality, public order and the 
general welfare in a democratic society. 
 3.  These rights and freedoms may in no case be exercised con-
trary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.  
 Article 30 
 Nothing in this Declaration may be interpreted as implying 
• 
for any State, group or person any right to engage in any 
activity or to perform any act aimed at the destruction of 
any of the rights and freedoms set forth herein. 

150 Documents
 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the 
Crime of Genocide, December 9, 1948 
 The Convention on Genocide was among the ﬁ rst United Nations conventions 
addressing humanitarian issues. It was adopted in 1948 in response to the 
atrocities committed during World War II and followed G.A. Res. 180(II) of 
December 21, 1947, in which the UN recognized that “genocide is an inter-
national crime, which entails the national and international responsibility of 
individual persons and states.” The Convention has since then been widely 
accepted by the international community and ratiﬁ ed by the overwhelming 
majority of States. 
 Noteworthy, the Convention provides for a precise deﬁ nition of the crime of 
genocide, in particular in terms of the required intent and the prohibited acts 
(Article II). It also speciﬁ es that the crime of genocide may be committed in time 
of peace or in time of war. 
 The Contracting Parties, 
 Having considered the declaration made by the General Assembly 
of the United Nations in its resolution 96 (I) dated December 11, 1946, 
that genocide is a crime under international law, contrary to the 
spirit and aims of the United Nations and condemned by the 
civilized world 
 Recognizing that at all periods of history genocide has inﬂ icted great 
losses on humanity, and 
 Being convinced that, in order to liberate mankind from such an odious 
scourge, international co-operation is required, 
 Hereby agree as hereinafter provided: 
 Article 1 
 The Contracting Parties conﬁ rm that genocide, whether committed in 
time of peace or in time of war, is a crime under international law which 
they undertake to prevent and to punish. 
 Article 2 
 In the present Convention, genocide means any of the following acts 
committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethni-
cal, racial or religious group, as such: 
 (a)  Killing members of the group; 

Documents 151
 (b)  Causing serious bodily or mental harm to members of the 
group;  
 (c)  Deliberately inﬂ icting on the group conditions of life 
calculated to bring about its physical destruction in whole 
or in part;  
 (d)  Imposing measures intended to prevent births within the 
group;  
 (e)  Forcibly transferring children of the group to another group.  
 Article 3 
 The following acts shall be punishable: 
 (a)  Genocide; 
 (b)  Conspiracy to commit genocide; 
 (c)  Direct and public incitement to commit genocide;  
 (d)  Attempt to commit genocide; 
 (e)  Complicity in genocide. 
 Article 4 
 Persons committing genocide or any of the other acts enumerated in 
article III shall be punished, whether they are constitutionally respon-
sible rulers, public ofﬁ cials or private individuals. 
 . . . 
 Article 6 
 Persons charged with genocide or any of the other acts enumerated in 
article III shall be tried by a competent tribunal of the State in the ter-
ritory of which the act was committed, or by such international penal 
tribunal as may have jurisdiction with respect to those Contracting 
Parties which shall have accepted its jurisdiction. 
 . . . 
 Source : Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime 
of Genocide, adopted by Resolution 260 (III) A of the United Nations 
General Assembly on December 9, 1948.  http://www.hrweb.org/legal/
genocide.html . Reprinted with  permission of the United Nations Publi-
cations Board.  
 Summary of Geneva Conventions, 1949 
 The Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols are at the core of inter-
national humanitarian law, the body of international law that regulates the 

152 Documents
conduct of armed conﬂ ict and seeks to limit its effects. They speciﬁ cally protect 
people who are not taking part in the hostilities (civilians, health workers, and 
aid workers) and those who are no longer participating in the hostilities, such as 
wounded, sick, and shipwrecked soldiers and prisoners of war. The Conventions 
and their Protocols call for measures to be taken to prevent or put an end to all 
breaches. They contain stringent rules to deal with what are known as “grave 
breaches.” Those responsible for grave breaches must be sought, tried, or extra-
dited, whatever nationality they may hold. 
 The ﬁ rst Geneva Convention protects wounded and sick soldiers on 
land during war. 
 This Convention represents the fourth updated version of the Geneva 
Convention on the wounded and sick following those adopted in 1864, 
1906, and 1929. It contains 64 articles. These provide protection for the 
wounded and sick, but also for medical and religious personnel, medi-
cal units, and medical transports. The Convention also recognizes the 
distinctive emblems. It has two annexes containing a draft agreement 
relating to hospital zones and a model identity card for medical and 
religious personnel. 
 The second Geneva Convention protects wounded, sick, and ship-
wrecked military personnel at sea during war. 
 This Convention replaced Hague Convention of 1907 for the Adapta-
tion to Maritime Warfare of the Principles of the Geneva Convention. 
It closely follows the provisions of the ﬁ rst Geneva Convention in 
structure and content. It has 63 articles speciﬁ cally applicable to war at 
sea. For example, it protects hospital ships. It has one annex containing 
a model identity card for medical and religious personnel. 
 The third Geneva Convention applies to prisoners of war. 
 This Convention replaced the Prisoners of War Convention of 1929. It 
contains 143 articles whereas the 1929 Convention had only 97. The 
categories of persons entitled to prisoner of war status were broadened 
in accordance with Conventions I and II. The conditions and places 
of captivity were more precisely deﬁ ned, particularly with regard to 
the labor of prisoners of war, their ﬁ nancial resources, the relief they 
receive, and the judicial proceedings instituted against them. The Con-
vention establishes the principle that prisoners of war shall be released 
and repatriated without delay after the cessation of active hostilities. 
The Convention has ﬁ ve annexes containing various model regulations 
and identity and other cards. 

Documents 153
 The fourth Geneva Convention affords protection to civilians, includ-
ing those in occupied territory. 
 The Geneva Conventions, which were adopted before 1949, were con-
cerned with combatants only, not with civilians. The events of World 
War II showed the disastrous consequences of the absence of a conven-
tion for the protection of civilians in wartime. The Convention adopted 
in 1949 takes account of the experiences of World War II. It is com-
posed of 159 articles. It contains a short section concerning the general 
protection of populations against certain consequences of war, without 
addressing the conduct of hostilities, as such, which was later exam-
ined in the Additional Protocols of 1977. The bulk of the Convention 
deals with the status and treatment of protected persons, distinguishing 
between the situation of foreigners on the territory of one of the parties 
to the conﬂ ict and that of civilians in occupied territory. It spells out the 
obligations of the Occupying Power vis-à-vis the civilian population 
and contains detailed provisions on humanitarian relief for populations 
in occupied territory. It also contains a speciﬁ c regime for the treatment 
of civilian internees. It has three annexes containing a model agreement 
on hospital and safety zones, model regulations on humanitarian relief 
and model cards. 
 Common Article 3 
 Article 3, common to the four Geneva Conventions, marked a 
breakthrough, as it covered, for the ﬁ rst time, situations of 
non-international armed conﬂ icts. These types of conﬂ icts vary greatly. 
They include traditional civil wars, internal armed conﬂ icts that spill 
over into other States, or internal conﬂ icts in which third States or a 
multinational force intervenes alongside the government. Common 
Article 3 establishes fundamental rules from which no 
derogation is permitted. It is like a mini-Convention within the 
Conventions as it contains the essential rules of the Geneva 
Conventions in a condensed format and makes them applicable 
to conﬂ icts not of an international character:  
 It requires humane treatment for all persons in enemy 
• 
hands, without any adverse distinction. It speciﬁ cally 
prohibits murder, mutilation, torture, cruel, humiliating 
and degrading treatment, the taking of hostages and unfair 
trial. 
 It requires that the wounded, sick and shipwrecked be col-
• 
lected and cared for. 
 It grants the ICRC the right to offer its services to the par-
• 
ties to the conﬂ ict. 

154 Documents
 It calls on the parties to the conﬂ ict to bring all or parts 
• 
of the Geneva Conventions into force through so-called 
special agreements. 
 It recognizes that the application of these rules 
• 
does not affect the legal status of the parties to the conﬂ ict. 
 Given that most armed conﬂ icts today are non-international, applying 
Common Article 3 is of the utmost importance. Its full respect is required. 
 Statute of the International Tribunal for the Former 
Yugoslavia, May 1993, Amended May 1998, 2000, Excerpts 
 Having been established by the Security Council acting under Chapter VII of the 
Charter of the United Nations, the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of 
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of Inter national Humanitarian Law 
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 (hereinafter 
referred to as “the International Tribunal”) shall function in accordance with the 
provisions of the present Statute. 
 Article 1 
 Competence of the International Tribunal 
 The International Tribunal shall have the power to prosecute persons 
responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law 
committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia since 1991 in accor-
dance with the provisions of the present Statute. 
 Article 2 
 Grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions of 1949 
 The International Tribunal shall have the power to prosecute persons com-
mitting or ordering to be committed grave breaches of the Geneva Con-
ventions of 12 August 1949, namely the following acts against persons or 
property protected under the provisions of the relevant Geneva Convention: 
 (a)  willful killing; 
 (b)  torture or inhuman treatment, including biological 
experiments;  
 (c)  wilfully causing great suffering or serious injury to body 
or health;  
 (d)  extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not 
justiﬁ ed by military necessity and carried out unlawfully 
and wantonly;  

Documents 155
 (e)  compelling a prisoner of war or a civilian to serve in the 
forces of a hostile power; 
 (f)  wilfully depriving a prisoner of war or a civilian of the 
rights of fair and regular trial;  
 (g)  unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful conﬁ nement 
of a civilian;  
 (h)  taking civilians as hostages. 
 Article 3 
 Violations of the laws or customs of war 
 The International Tribunal shall have the power to prosecute persons 
violating the laws or customs of war. Such violations shall include, but 
not be limited to: 
 (a)  employment of poisonous weapons or other 
weapons calculated to cause unnecessary 
suffering; 
 (b)  wanton destruction of cities, towns or villages, 
or devastation not justiﬁ ed by military 
necessity;  
 (c)  attack, or bombardment, by whatever means, of unde-
fended towns, villages, dwellings, or buildings;  
 (d)  seizure of, destruction or wilful damage done to institu-
tions dedicated to religion, charity and education, the arts 
and sciences, historic monuments and works of art and 
science;  
 (e)  plunder of public or private property. 
 Article 4 
 Genocide 
 1.  The International Tribunal shall have the power to prose-
cute persons committing genocide as deﬁ ned in paragraph 2
of this article or of committing any of the other acts enumer-
ated in paragraph 3 of this article.  
 2.  Genocide means any of the following acts committed with 
intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, 
racial or religious group, as such: 
 (a)  killing members of the group; 
 (b)  causing serious bodily or mental harm to members of 
the group; 

156 Documents
 (c)  deliberately inﬂ icting on the group conditions of life 
calculated to bring about its physical destruction in 
whole or in part; 
 (d)  imposing measures intended to prevent births within 
the group; 
 (e)  forcibly transferring children of the group to another 
group. 
 . . . 
 Article 5 
 Crimes against humanity 
 The International Tribunal shall have the power to prosecute per-
sons responsible for the following crimes when . . . directed against any 
civilian population: 
 (a)  murder; 
 (b)  extermination;  
 (c)  enslavement;  
 (d)  deportation;  
 (e)  imprisonment;  
 (f)  torture;  
 (g)  rape;  
 (h)  persecutions on political, racial and religious grounds;  
 (i)  other inhumane acts. 
 . . . 
 Article 9 
 Concurrent jurisdiction 
 1.  The International Tribunal and national courts shall have 
concurrent jurisdiction to prosecute persons for serious 
violations of international humanitarian law committed 
in the territory of the former Yugoslavia since January 1, 
1991.  
 2.  The International Tribunal shall have primacy over 
national courts. At any stage of the procedure, the Inter-
national Tribunal may formally request national courts to 
defer to the competence of the International Tribunal in 
accordance with the present Statute and the Rules of Proce-
dure and Evidence of the International Tribunal. 

Documents 157
 Organization of the International Tribunal 
 The International Tribunal shall consist of the following organs: 
 (a)  the Chambers, comprising three Trial Chambers and an 
Appeals Chamber; 
 (b)  the Prosecutor; and 
 (c)  a Registry, servicing both the Chambers and the Prosecutor.  
 . . . 
 Article 18 
 Investigation and preparation of indictment 
 1.   The Prosecutor shall initiate investigations  ex ofﬁ cio or on the 
basis of information obtained from any source, particularly 
from Governments, United Nations organs, intergovern-
mental and non-governmental organisations. The Prosecu-
tor shall assess the information received or obtained and 
decide whether there is sufﬁ cient basis to proceed.  
 2.  The Prosecutor shall have the power to question suspects, 
victims and witnesses, to collect evidence and to conduct 
on-site investigations. In carrying out these tasks, the Pros-
ecutor may, as appropriate, seek the assistance of the State 
authorities concerned. 
 3.  If questioned, the suspect shall be entitled to be assisted by 
counsel of his own choice, including the right to have legal 
assistance assigned to him without payment by him in 
any such case if he does not have sufﬁ cient means to pay 
for it, as well as to necessary translation into and from a 
language he speaks and understands. 
 4.  Upon a determination that a prima facie case exists, the 
Prosecutor shall prepare an indictment containing a 
concise statement of the facts and the crime or crimes with 
which the accused is charged under the Statute. The indict-
ment shall be transmitted to a judge of the Trial Chamber. 
 Article 19 
 Review of the indictment 
 1.  The judge of the Trial Chamber to whom the indictment 
has been transmitted shall review it. If satisﬁ ed that a 
prima facie case has been established by the Prosecutor, he 
shall conﬁ rm the indictment. 
 
 If not so satisﬁ ed, the indictment shall be dismissed. 

158 Documents
 2.  Upon conﬁ rmation of an indictment, the judge may, at the 
request of the Prosecutor, issue such orders and warrants for 
the arrest, detention, surrender or transfer of persons, and any 
other orders as may be required for the conduct of the trial.  
 Article 20 
 Commencement and conduct of trial proceedings 
 1.  The Trial Chambers shall ensure that a trial is fair and 
expeditious and that proceedings are conducted in accor-
dance with the rules of procedure and evidence, with full 
respect for the rights of the accused and due regard for the 
protection of victims and witnesses. 
 . . . 
 Article 21 
 Rights of the accused 
 1.  All persons shall be equal before the International 
Tribunal. 
 2.  In the determination of charges against him, the accused 
shall be entitled to a fair and public hearing, subject to 
article 22 of the Statute. 
 3.  The accused shall be presumed innocent until proved 
guilty according to the provisions of the present Statute. 
 4.  In the determination of any charge against the accused 
pursuant to the present Statute, the accused shall be enti-
tled to the following minimum guarantees, in full equality: 
 (a)  to be informed promptly and in detail in a language 
which he understands of the nature and cause of the 
charge against him; 
 (b)  to have adequate time and facilities for the prepara-
tion of his defence and to communicate with counsel 
of his own choosing; 
 (c)  to be tried without undue delay; 
 (d)  to be tried in his presence, and to defend himself in 
person or through legal assistance of his own choosing; 
to be informed, if he does not have legal assistance, of 
this right; and to have legal assistance assigned to him, 
in any case where the interests of justice so require, 
and without payment by him in any such case if he 
does not have sufﬁ cient means to pay for it;  
 (e)  to examine, or have examined, the witnesses against 
him and to obtain the attendance 

Documents 159
and examination of witnesses on his behalf under the 
same conditions as witnesses against him; 
 (f)  to have the free assistance of an interpreter if he can-
not understand or speak the language used in the 
International Tribunal; 
 (g)  not to be compelled to testify against himself or to con-
fess guilt.  
 Article 22 
 Protection of victims and witnesses 
 The International Tribunal shall provide in its rules of 
procedure and evidence for the protection of victims and 
witnesses. Such protection measures shall include, but shall 
not be limited to, the conduct of in camera proceedings and 
the protection of the victim ’ s identity. 
 Article 23 
 Judgement 
 1.  The Trial Chambers shall pronounce judgements 
and impose sentences and penalties on persons 
convicted of serious violations of international 
humanitarian law.  
 2.  The judgement shall be rendered by a majority of 
the judges of the Trial Chamber, and shall be delivered 
by the Trial Chamber in public. It shall be accompanied 
by a reasoned opinion in writing, to which separate 
or dissenting opinions may be appended. 
 Article 24 
 Penalties 
 1.  The penalty imposed by the Trial Chamber shall be 
limited to imprisonment. In determining the terms of 
imprisonment, the Trial Chambers shall have recourse 
to the general practice regarding prison sentences in the 
courts of the former Yugoslavia.  
 2.  In imposing the sentences, the Trial Chambers should 
take into account such factors as the gravity of the 
offence and the individual circumstances of the 
convicted person. 
 3.   In addition to imprisonment, the Trial Chambers may 
order the return of any property and proceeds acquired 
by criminal conduct, including by means of duress, to 
their rightful owners.  

160 Documents
 Article 25 
 Appellate proceedings 
 1.  The Appeals Chamber shall hear appeals from persons 
convicted by the Trial Chambers or from the Prosecutor on 
the following grounds: 
 (a)  an error on a question of law invalidating the decision; or  
 (b)  an error of fact which has occasioned a miscarriage of 
justice. 
 2  The Appeals Chamber may afﬁ rm, reverse or revise the 
decisions taken by the Trial Chambers. 
 . . . 
 Article 27 
 Enforcement of sentences 
 Imprisonment shall be served in a State designated by the Interna-
tional Tribunal from a list of States which have indicated to the Security 
Council their willingness to accept convicted persons. Such imprison-
ment shall be in accordance with the applicable law of the State con-
cerned, subject to the supervision of the International Tribunal. 
 . . . 
 Source : Updated Statute of the International Criminal Tribunal for the 
Former Yugoslavia, at  http://www.icty.org/sid/135 . Reproduced with 
permission from the United Nations Publication Board. 
 Statute of the International Criminal Tribunal for the 
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and 
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian 
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan 
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such 
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring 
States, between January 1, 1994 and December 31, 1994 
 ICTR, Excerpts 
 Having been established by the Security Council acting under Chapter VII 
of the Charter of the United Nations, the International Criminal Tribunal 
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious 

Documents 161
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of 
Rwanda and Rwandan citizens responsible for genocide and other such viola-
tions committed in the territory of neighbouring States, between January 1, 
1994 and December 31, 1994 (hereinafter referred to as “the International 
Tribunal for Rwanda”) shall function in accordance with the provisions of 
the present Statute. 
 Article 1 
 The International Tribunal for Rwanda shall have the power
 to prosecute persons responsible for serious violations of 
international humanitarian law committed in the territory of Rwanda 
and Rwandan citizens responsible for such violations committed 
in the territory of neighbouring States, between January 1, 1994 
and December 31, 1994, in accordance with 
the provisions of the present Statute. 
 Article 2 
 Genocide 
 . . . 
 Article 3 
 Crimes against humanity 
 . . . 
 Article 6 
 Individual criminal responsibility. . . . 
 . . . 
 Article 10 
 The International Tribunal for Rwanda shall consist of the 
following organs: 
 (a)  The Chambers, comprising two Trial Chambers and an 
Appeals Chamber; 
 (b)  The Prosecutor; and 
 (c)  A Registry. 
 . . . 

162 Documents
 Preamble and Selected Articles, Rome Statute of the 
International Criminal Court, July 17, 1998 
 The United Nations has been considering the establishment of a permanent 
international criminal court since its creation. After years of negotiations, 
a Diplomatic Conference was held from June 15 to July 17, 1998, in Rome 
which ﬁ nalized and adopted the statute for the International Criminal Court 
(ICC). The statute was ﬁ nally adopted by a vote where 120 were in favor, 7 
against, and 21 abstained. The establishment of an ICC represents a major 
progress for better implementation of international humanitarian law and a 
clear step forward in the battle against impunity. The ICC will be established 
in The Hague and will have jurisdiction over suspected perpetrators of geno-
cide, crimes against humanity, war crimes or aggression, including superiors 
or military commanders. The court may exercise its jurisdiction, if the State 
on the territory of which the act or omission occurred or the State of national-
ity of the suspect is Party to the statute or has accepted the jurisdiction of the 
court. The Prosecutor can refer cases  proprio motu (on his/her own initiative). 
The court has not a retroactive effect. The ICC is not intended to take over 
jurisdiction exercised by national courts: the ICC is intended to exercise its 
jurisdiction only when the state is unwilling or genuinely unable to prosecute. 
States continue to have the primary duty to prosecute suspected war criminals 
before their own courts. 
 PREAMBLE 
 The States Parties to this Statute , 
 Conscious that all peoples are united by common bonds, their 
cultures pieced together in a shared heritage, and concerned that this 
delicate mosaic may be shattered at any time, 
 Mindful that during this century millions of children, women and 
men have been victims of unimaginable atrocities that deeply shock the 
conscience of humanity, 
 Recognizing that such grave crimes threaten the peace, security 
and well-being of the world, 
 Afﬁ rming that the most serious crimes of concern to the inter-
national community as a whole must not go unpunished and that 
their effective prosecution must be ensured by taking measures at the 
national level and by enhancing international cooperation, 
 Determined to put an end to impunity for the perpetrators of these 
crimes and thus to contribute to the prevention of such crimes, 
 Recalling that it is the duty of every State to exercise its criminal 
jurisdiction over those responsible for international crimes, 
 Reafﬁ rming the Purposes and Principles of the Charter of the 
United Nations, and in particular that all States shall refrain from the 

Documents 163
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political inde-
pendence of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the 
Purposes of the United Nations, 
 Emphasizing in this connection that nothing in this Statute shall be 
taken as authorizing any State Party to intervene in an armed conﬂ ict or 
in the internal affairs of any State, 
 Determined to these ends and for the sake of present and future 
generations, to establish an independent permanent International 
Criminal Court in relationship with the United Nations system, with 
jurisdiction over the most serious crimes of concern to the international 
community as a whole, 
 Emphasizing that the International Criminal Court established 
under this Statute shall be complementary to national criminal 
jurisdictions, 
 Resolved to guarantee lasting respect for and the enforcement of 
international justice, 
 Have agreed as follows . . . 
 PART 1. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE COURT 
 Article 1 
 The Court 
 An International Criminal Court (“the Court”) is hereby estab-
lished. It shall be a permanent institution and shall have the power to 
exercise its jurisdiction over persons for the most serious crimes of inter-
national concern, as referred to in this Statute, and shall be complemen-
tary to national criminal jurisdictions. The jurisdiction and functioning 
of the Court shall be governed by the provisions of this Statute. 
 . . . 
 Article 3 
 Seat of the Court 
 1.  The seat of the Court shall be established at The Hague in 
the Netherlands (“the host State”). 
 . . . 
 Article 4 
 Legal status and powers of the Court 
 1.  The Court shall have international legal personality. It shall 
also have such legal capacity as may be necessary for the 
exercise of its functions and the fulﬁ lment of its purposes. 

164 Documents
 2.  The Court may exercise its functions and powers, as 
provided in this Statute, on the territory of any State Party 
and, by special agreement, on the territory of any other 
State.  
 Article 5 
 Crimes within the jurisdiction of the Court 
 1.  The jurisdiction of the Court shall be limited to the most 
serious crimes of concern to the international community 
as a whole. The Court has jurisdiction in accordance with 
this Statute with respect to the following crimes: 
 (a)  The crime of genocide; 
 (b)  Crimes against humanity; 
 (c)  War crimes; 
 (d)  The crime of aggression. 
 2.  The Court shall exercise jurisdiction over the crime of 
aggression once a provision is adopted in accordance with 
articles 121 and 123 deﬁ ning the crime and setting out the 
conditions under which the Court shall exercise jurisdic-
tion with respect to this crime. Such a provision shall be 
consistent with the relevant provisions of the Charter of 
the United Nations. 
 . . . 
 Article 13 
 Exercise of jurisdiction 
 The Court may exercise its jurisdiction with respect to a crime 
referred to in Article 5 in accordance with the provisions of 
this Statute if: 
 (a)  A situation in which one or more of such crimes appears 
to have been committed is referred to the Prosecutor by a 
State Party in accordance with article 14; 
 (b)  A situation in which one or more of such crimes 
appears to have been committed is referred to 
the Prosecutor by the Security Council acting under 
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations; or  
 (c)  The Prosecutor has initiated an investigation in respect of 
such a crime in accordance with article 15.  

Documents 165
 Article 14 
 Referral of a situation by a State Party 
 1.  A State Party may refer to the Prosecutor a situation in which 
one or more crimes within the jurisdiction of the Court 
appear to have been committed requesting the Prosecutor 
to investigate the situation for the purpose of determining 
whether one or more speciﬁ c persons should be charged with 
the commission of such crimes.  
 2.  As far as possible, a referral shall specify the relevant 
circumstances and be accompanied by such supporting 
documentation as is available to the State referring the 
situation. 
 Article 15 
 Prosecutor 
 1.  The Prosecutor may initiate investigations proprio motu 
on the basis of information on crimes within the jurisdic-
tion of the Court. 
 . . . 
 Article 17 
 Issues of admissibility 
 1.  Having regard to paragraph 10 of the Preamble and article 
1, the Court shall determine that a case is inadmissible 
where: 
 (a)  The case is being investigated or prosecuted by a 
State which has jurisdiction over it, unless the State is 
unwilling or unable genuinely to carry out the investi-
gation or prosecution; 
 (b)  The case has been investigated by a State which has 
jurisdiction over it and the State has decided not to 
prosecute the person concerned, unless the decision 
resulted from the unwillingness or inability of the 
State genuinely to prosecute; 
 (c)  The person concerned has already been tried for 
conduct which is the subject of the complaint, and a 
trial by the Court is not permitted under article 20, 
paragraph 3; 

166 Documents
 (d)  The case is not of sufﬁ cient gravity to justify further 
action by the Court. 
 2.  In order to determine unwillingness in a particular case, 
the Court shall consider, having regard to the principles of 
due process recognized by international law, whether one 
or more of the following exist, as applicable: 
 (a)  The proceedings were or are being undertaken or the 
national decision was made for the purpose of shield-
ing the person concerned from criminal responsibility 
for crimes within the jurisdiction of the Court referred 
to in article 5; 
 (b)  There has been an unjustiﬁ ed delay in the proceedings 
which in the circumstances is inconsistent with an 
intent to bring the person concerned to justice;  
 (c).  The proceedings were not or are not being conducted 
independently or impartially, and they were or are 
being conducted in a manner which, in the circum-
stances, is inconsistent with an intent to bring the 
person concerned to justice.  
 3.  In order to determine inability in a particular case, the 
Court shall consider whether, due to a total or substan-
tial collapse or unavailability of its 
national judicial system, the State is unable to obtain 
the accused or the necessary evidence and testimony or 
otherwise unable to carry out its proceedings.  
 Article 18 
 Preliminary rulings regarding admissibility 
 1. When a situation has been referred to the Court pursu-
ant to article 13 (a) and the Prosecutor has determined 
that there would be a reasonable basis to commence an 
investigation, or the Prosecutor initiates an investigation 
pursuant to articles 13 (c) and 15, the Prosecutor shall 
notify all States Parties and those States which, taking 
into account the information available, would normally 
exercise jurisdiction over the crimes concerned. The 
Prosecutor may notify such States on a conﬁ dential basis 
and, where the Prosecutor believes it necessary to protect 
persons, prevent destruction of evidence or prevent the 
absconding of persons, may limit the scope of the infor-
mation provided to States. 
 . . . 

Documents 167
 3. The Prosecutor ’ s deferral to a State ’ s investigation shall be 
open to review by the Prosecutor six months after the date 
of deferral or at any time when there has been a signiﬁ cant 
change of circumstances based on the State ’ s unwillingness 
or inability genuinely to carry out the investigation. 
 . . . 
 5. When the Prosecutor has deferred an investigation in 
accordance with paragraph 2, the Prosecutor may request 
that the State concerned periodically inform the Prosecutor 
of the progress of its investigations and any subsequent 
prosecutions. States Parties shall respond to such requests 
without undue delay. 
 6. Pending a ruling by the Pre-Trial Chamber, or at any time 
when the Prosecutor has deferred an investigation under 
this article, the Prosecutor may, on an exceptional basis, 
seek authority from the Pre-Trial Chamber to pursue 
necessary investigative steps for the purpose of preserving 
evidence where there is a unique opportunity to obtain 
important evidence or there is a signiﬁ cant risk that such 
evidence may not be subsequently available. 
 . . . 
 Article 21 
 Applicable law 
 1. The Court shall apply: 
 (a)  In the ﬁ rst place, this Statute, Elements of Crimes and 
its Rules of Procedure and Evidence; 
 (b)  In the second place, where appropriate, applicable 
treaties and the principles and rules of international 
law, including the established principles of the inter-
national law of armed conﬂ ict;  
 (c)  Failing that, general principles of law derived by 
the Court from national laws of legal systems of the 
world including, as appropriate, the national laws 
of States that would normally exercise jurisdiction 
over the crime, provided that those principles are 
not inconsistent with this Statute and with inter-
national law and internationally recognized norms 
and standards. 
 . . . 

168 Documents
 3. The application and interpretation of law pursuant to this 
article must be consistent with internationally recognized 
human rights, and be without any adverse distinction 
founded on grounds such as gender as deﬁ ned in article 7, 
paragraph 3, age, race, colour, language, religion or belief, 
political or other opinion, national, ethnic or social origin, 
wealth, birth or other status. 
 Article 22 
 Nullum crimen sine lege 
 1.  A person shall not be criminally responsible under this Stat-
ute unless the conduct in question constitutes, at the time it 
takes place, a crime within the jurisdiction of the Court.  
 . . . 
 Article 24 
 Non-retroactivity ratione personae 
 1.  No person shall be criminally responsible under this Stat-
ute for conduct prior to the entry into force of the Statute. 
 . . . 
 Article 25 
 Individual criminal responsibility 
 1.  The Court shall have jurisdiction over natural persons 
pursuant to this Statute. 
 2.  A person who commits a crime within the jurisdiction of 
the Court shall be individually responsible and liable for 
punishment in accordance with this Statute. 
 . . . 
 Article 27 
 Irrelevance of ofﬁ cial capacity 
 1.  This Statute shall apply equally to all persons without any 
distinction based on ofﬁ cial capacity. In particular, ofﬁ cial 

Documents 169
capacity as a Head of State or Government, a member of a 
Government or parliament, an elected representative or a 
government ofﬁ cial shall in no case exempt a person from 
criminal responsibility under this Statute, nor shall it, in 
and of itself, constitute a ground for reduction of sentence. 
 . . . 
 Article 28 
 . . . 
 (a)  A military commander or person effectively acting as 
a military commander shall be criminally responsible 
for crimes within the jurisdiction of the Court com-
mitted by forces under his or her effective command 
and control, or effective authority and control as the 
case may be, as a result of his or her failure to exercise 
control properly over such forces, where: 
 
(i)  That military commander or person either 
knew or, owing to the circumstances at the time, 
should have known that the forces were commit-
ting or about to commit such crimes; and 
 
(ii)  That military commander or person failed to 
take all necessary and reasonable measures 
within his or her power to prevent or repress 
their commission or to submit the matter to 
the competent authorities for investigation and 
prosecution. 
 (b)  With respect to superior and subordinate relationships 
not described in paragraph (a), a superior shall be 
criminally responsible for crimes within the jurisdic-
tion of the Court committed by subordinates under 
his or her effective authority and control, as a result 
of his or her failure to exercise control properly over 
such subordinates, where: 
 
(i)  The superior either knew, or consciously disre-
garded information which clearly indicated, that 
the subordinates were committing or about to 
commit such crimes; 
 
(ii)  The crimes concerned activities that were within 
the effective responsibility and control of the 
superior; and 
 
(iii)  The superior failed to take all necessary and 
reasonable measures within his or her power to 
prevent or repress their commission or to submit 

170 Documents
the matter to the competent authorities for inves-
tigation and prosecution. 
 Article 29 
 Non-applicability of statute of limitations 
 The crimes within the jurisdiction of the Court shall not be subject 
to any statute of limitations. 
 Article 30 
 Mental element 
 1.  Unless otherwise provided, a person shall be criminally 
responsible and liable for punishment for a crime within 
the jurisdiction of the Court only if the material elements 
are committed with intent and knowledge. 
 . . . 
 Article 33 
 Superior orders and prescription of law 
 1.   The fact that a crime within the jurisdiction of the Court has 
been committed by a person pursuant to an order of a Gov-
ernment or of a superior, whether military or civilian, shall 
not relieve that person of criminal responsibility unless: 
 (a)  The person was under a legal obligation to obey 
orders of the Government or the superior in question; 
 (b)  The person did not know that the order was unlawful; 
and  
 (c)  The order was not manifestly unlawful. 
 . . . 
 Article 34 
 Organs of the Court 
 The Court shall be composed of the following organs: 
 (a)  The Presidency; 
 (b)  An Appeals Division, a Trial Division and a Pre-Trial 
Division;  
 (c)  The Ofﬁ ce of the Prosecutor;  
 (d)  The Registry.  
 . . . 

Documents 171
 Article 36 
 Qualiﬁ cations, nomination and election of judges 
 1. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 2, there shall be 18 
judges of the Court. 
 . . . 
 3. (a) The judges shall be chosen from among persons of high 
moral character, impartiality and integrity who possess 
the qualiﬁ cations required in their respective States for 
appointment to the highest judicial ofﬁ ces. 
 . . . 
 Article 38 
 The Presidency 
 1. The President and the First and Second Vice-Presidents 
shall be elected by an absolute majority of the judges. They 
shall each serve for a term of three years or until the end 
of their respective terms of ofﬁ ce as judges, whichever 
expires earlier. They shall be eligible for re-election once. 
 . . . 
 3. The President, together with the First and Second Vice-
Presidents, shall constitute the Presidency, which shall be 
responsible for: 
 (a)  The proper administration of the Court, with the 
exception of the Ofﬁ ce of the Prosecutor;. . . . 
 Article 39 
 Chambers 
 1.  As soon as possible after the election of the judges, the 
Court shall organize itself into the divisions speciﬁ ed in 
article 34, paragraph (b). The Appeals Division shall be 
composed of the President and four other judges, the Trial 
Division of not less than six judges and the Pre-Trial Divi-
sion of not less than six judges. The assignment of judges 
to divisions shall be based on the nature of the functions to 
be performed by each division and the qualiﬁ cations and 
experience of the judges elected to the Court, in such a way 

172 Documents
that each division shall contain an appropriate combina-
tion of expertise in criminal law and procedure and in 
international law. The Trial and Pre-Trial Divisions shall 
be composed predominantly of judges with criminal trial 
experience. 
 . . . 
 Article 40 
 Independence of the judges 
 1.  The judges shall be independent in the performance of 
their functions. 
 2.  Judges shall not engage in any activity which is likely to 
interfere with their judicial functions or to affect conﬁ -
dence in their independence. 
 3.  Judges required to serve on a full-time basis at the seat of 
the Court shall not engage in any other occupation of a 
professional nature. 
 . . . 
 Article 42 
 The Ofﬁ ce of the Prosecutor 
 1. The Ofﬁ ce of the Prosecutor shall act independently as 
a separate organ of the Court. It shall be responsible for 
receiving referrals and any substantiated information on 
crimes within the jurisdiction of the Court, for examining 
them and for conducting investigations and prosecutions 
before the Court. A member of the Ofﬁ ce shall not seek or 
act on instructions from any external source. 
 2. The Ofﬁ ce shall be headed by the Prosecutor. The Prosecutor 
shall have full authority over the management and admin-
istration of the Ofﬁ ce, including the staff, facilities and other 
resources thereof. The Prosecutor shall be assisted by one or 
more Deputy Prosecutors, who shall be entitled to carry out 
any of the acts required of the Prosecutor under this Statute. 
The Prosecutor and the Deputy Prosecutors shall be of differ-
ent nationalities. They shall serve on a full-time basis.  
 3. The Prosecutor and the Deputy Prosecutors shall be per-
sons of high moral character, be highly competent 
in and have extensive practical experience in the 

Documents 173
prosecution or trial of criminal cases. They shall have an 
excellent knowledge of and be ﬂ uent in at least one of the 
working languages of the Court.  
 4. The Prosecutor shall be elected by secret ballot by an 
absolute majority of the members of the Assembly of States 
Parties. The Deputy Prosecutors shall be elected in the same 
way from a list of candidates provided by the Prosecutor. 
The Prosecutor shall nominate three candidates for each 
position of Deputy Prosecutor to be ﬁ lled. Unless a shorter 
term is decided upon at the time of their election, the 
Prosecutor and the Deputy Prosecutors shall hold ofﬁ ce for 
a term of nine years and shall not be eligible for re-election. 
 . . . 
 7. Neither the Prosecutor nor a Deputy Prosecutor shall partici-
pate in any matter in which their impartiality might reasonably 
be doubted on any ground. They shall be disqualiﬁ ed from a 
case in accordance with this paragraph if, inter alia, they have 
previously been involved in any capacity in that case before 
the Court or in a related criminal case at the national level 
involving the person being investigated or prosecuted.  
 . . . 
 Article 43 
 The Registry 
 1.  The Registry shall be responsible for the non-judicial 
aspects of the administration and servicing of the Court, 
without prejudice to the functions and powers of the Pros-
ecutor in accordance with article 42. 
 . . . 
 Article 44 
 Staff 
 1.  The Prosecutor and the Registrar shall appoint such 
qualified staff as may be required to their respective 
offices. In the case of the Prosecutor, this shall include 
the appointment of investigators.  
 . . . 

174 Documents
 Article 48 
 Privileges and immunities 
 1.  The Court shall enjoy in the territory of each State Party 
such privileges and immunities as are necessary for the 
fulﬁ lment of its purposes. 
 2.  The judges, the Prosecutor, the Deputy Prosecutors and 
the Registrar shall, when engaged on or with respect to 
the business of the Court, enjoy the same privileges and 
immunities as are accorded to heads of diplomatic mis-
sions and shall, after the expiry of their terms of office, 
continue to be accorded immunity from legal process of 
every kind in respect of words spoken or written and 
acts performed by them in their official capacity.  
 3.  The Deputy Registrar, the staff of the Ofﬁ ce of the Prosecu-
tor and the staff of the Registry shall enjoy the privileges 
and immunities and facilities necessary for the perfor-
mance of their functions, in accordance with the agreement 
on the privileges and immunities of the Court. 
 4.  Counsel, experts, witnesses or any other person required 
to be present at the seat of the Court shall be accorded such 
treatment as is necessary for the proper functioning of the 
Court, in accordance with the agreement on the privileges 
and immunities of the Court. 
 Article 51 
 Rules of Procedure and Evidence 
 1.  The Rules of Procedure and Evidence shall enter into force 
upon adoption by a two-thirds majority of the members of 
the Assembly of States Parties. 
 . . . 
 Article 53 
 Initiation of an investigation 
 1. The Prosecutor shall, having evaluated the information 
made available to him or her, initiate an investigation 
unless he or she determines that there is no reasonable 
basis to proceed under this Statute. 
 . . . 

Documents 175
 (b)  In addition, the Pre-Trial Chamber may, on its own 
initiative, review a decision of the Prosecutor not to 
proceed if it is based solely on paragraph 1 (c) or 2 (c). 
In such a case, the decision of the Prosecutor shall be 
effective only if conﬁ rmed by the Pre-Trial Chamber. 
 . . . 
 4. The Prosecutor may, at any time, reconsider a decision 
whether to initiate an investigation or prosecution based 
on new facts or information. 
 Article 54 
 Duties and powers of the Prosecutor with respect to 
investigations 
 1. The Prosecutor shall: 
 (a)  In order to establish the truth, extend the investigation 
to cover all facts and evidence relevant to an assess-
ment of whether there is criminal responsibility under 
this Statute, and, in doing so, investigate incriminat-
ing and exonerating circumstances equally; 
 (b)  Take appropriate measures to ensure the effective 
investigation and prosecution of crimes within the 
jurisdiction of the Court, and in doing so, respect the 
interests and personal circumstances of victims and 
witnesses, including age, gender as deﬁ ned in article 
7, paragraph 3, and health, and take into account the 
nature of the crime, in particular where it involves 
sexual violence, gender violence or violence against 
children; and 
 (c)  Fully respect the rights of persons arising under this 
Statute. 
 . . . 
 3. The Prosecutor may: 
 (a)  Collect and examine evidence; 
 (b)  Request the presence of and question 
persons being investigated, victims and witnesses;  
 (c)  Seek the cooperation of any State or intergovernmen-
tal organization or arrangement in accordance with its 
respective competence and/or mandate; 
 (d)  Enter into such arrangements or agreements, not 
inconsistent with this Statute, as may be necessary 
to facilitate the cooperation of a State, intergovern-
mental organization or person;  

176 Documents
 (e)  Agree not to disclose, at any stage of the proceedings, 
documents or information that the Prosecutor obtains 
on the condition of conﬁ dentiality and solely for the 
purpose of generating new evidence, unless the pro-
vider of the information consents; and 
 (f)  Take necessary measures, or request that necessary 
measures be taken, to ensure the conﬁ dentiality of 
information, the protection of any person or the pres-
ervation of evidence. 
 Article 55 
 Rights of persons during an investigation 
 1.  In respect of an investigation under this Statute, a person: 
 (a)  Shall not be compelled to incriminate himself or her-
self or to confess guilt; 
 (b)  Shall not be subjected to any form of coercion, duress 
or threat, to torture or to any other form of cruel, inhu-
man or degrading treatment or punishment; 
 (c)  Shall, if questioned in a language other than a lan-
guage the person fully understands and speaks, have, 
free of any cost, the assistance of a competent inter-
preter and such translations as are necessary to meet 
the requirements of fairness; and 
 (d)  Shall not be subjected to arbitrary arrest or detention, 
and shall not be deprived of his or her liberty except 
on such grounds and in accordance with such proce-
dures as are established in this Statute. 
 2.  Where there are grounds to believe that a person has com-
mitted a crime within the jurisdiction of the Court and that 
person is about to be questioned either by the Prosecu-
tor, or by national authorities pursuant to a request made 
under Part 9, that person shall also have the following 
rights of which he or she shall be informed prior to being 
questioned: 
 (a)  To be informed, prior to being questioned, that there 
are grounds to believe that he or she has committed a 
crime within the jurisdiction of the Court; 
 (b)  To remain silent, without such silence being a consid-
eration in the determination of guilt or innocence; 
 (c)  To have legal assistance of the person ’ s choosing, 
or, if the person does not have legal assistance, to 
have legal assistance assigned to him or her, in any 
case where the interests of justice so require, and 

Documents 177
without payment by the person in any such case if 
the person does not have sufﬁ cient means to pay for 
it; and  
 (d)  To be questioned in the presence of counsel unless 
the person has voluntarily waived his or her right to 
counsel. 
 . . . 
 Article 57 
 Functions and powers of the Pre-Trial Chamber 
 1. Unless otherwise provided in this Statute, the Pre-Trial 
Chamber shall exercise its functions in accordance with the 
provisions of this article. 
 . . . 
 3. In addition to its other functions under this Statute, the 
Pre-Trial Chamber may: 
 (a)  At the request of the Prosecutor, issue such orders and 
warrants as may be required for the purposes of an 
investigation; 
 (b)  Upon the request of a person who has been arrested 
or has appeared pursuant to a summons under 
article 58, issue such orders, including measures 
such as those described in article 56, or seek such 
cooperation pursuant to Part 9 as may be necessary 
to assist the person in the preparation of his or her 
defence;  
 (c)  Where necessary, provide for the protection and 
privacy of victims and witnesses, the preservation of 
evidence, the protection of persons who have been 
arrested or appeared in response to a summons, and 
the protection of national security information; 
 (d)  Authorize the Prosecutor to take speciﬁ c investi-
gative steps within the territory of a State Party 
without having secured the cooperation of that State 
under Part 9 if, whenever possible having regard 
to the views of the State concerned, the Pre-Trial 
Chamber has determined in that case that the State 
is clearly unable to execute a request for coopera-
tion due to the unavailability of any authority or 

178 Documents
any component of its judicial system competent to 
execute the request for cooperation under Part 9.  
 (e)  Where a warrant of arrest or a summons has been 
issued under article 58, and having due regard to 
the strength of the evidence and the rights of the 
parties concerned, as provided for in this Statute 
and the Rules of Procedure and Evidence, seek the 
cooperation of States pursuant to article 93, para-
graph 1 (k), to take protective measures for the 
purpose of forfeiture, in particular for the ultimate 
beneﬁ t of victims.  
 Article 58 
 Issuance by the Pre-Trial Chamber of a warrant of arrest or a 
summons to appear 
 1. At any time after the initiation of an investigation, the Pre-
Trial Chamber shall, on the application of the Prosecutor, 
issue a warrant of arrest of a person if, having examined 
the application and the evidence or other information 
submitted by the Prosecutor, it is satisﬁ ed that: 
 (a)  There are reasonable grounds to believe that the per-
son has committed a crime within the jurisdiction of 
the Court; and 
 (b)  The arrest of the person appears necessary: 
 
(i)  To ensure the person ’ s appearance at trial, 
 
(ii)  To ensure that the person does not obstruct or 
endanger the investigation or the court proceed-
ings, or  
 
(iii)  Where applicable, to prevent the person from 
continuing with the commission of that crime or 
a related crime which is within the jurisdiction 
of the Court and which arises out of the same 
circumstances. 
 . . . 
 4. The warrant of arrest shall remain in effect until otherwise 
ordered by the Court. 
 . . . 
 7. As an alternative to seeking a warrant of arrest, the 
Prosecutor may submit an application requesting that 
the Pre-Trial Chamber issue a summons for the person to 

Documents 179
appear. If the Pre-Trial Chamber is satisﬁ ed that there are 
reasonable grounds to believe that the person commit-
ted the crime alleged and that a summons is sufﬁ cient 
to ensure the person ’ s appearance, it shall issue the 
summons, with or without conditions restricting liberty 
(other than detention) if provided for by national law, for 
the person to appear.  
 . . . 
 Article 59 
 Arrest proceedings in the custodial State 
 1. A State Party which has received a request for provisional 
arrest or for arrest and surrender shall immediately take 
steps to arrest the person in question in accordance with 
its laws and the provisions of Part 9. 
 . . . 
 3. The person arrested shall have the right to apply to the 
competent authority in the custodial State for interim 
release pending surrender. 
 . . . 
 7. Once ordered to be surrendered by the custodial State, the 
person shall be delivered to the Court as soon as possible. 
 Article 60 
 Initial proceedings before the Court 
 1. Upon the surrender of the person to the Court, or the per-
son ’ s appearance before the Court voluntarily or pursuant 
to a summons, the Pre-Trial Chamber shall satisfy itself 
that the person has been informed of the crimes which 
he or she is alleged to have committed, and of his or her 
rights under this Statute, including the right to apply for 
interim release pending trial. 
 2. A person subject to a warrant of arrest may apply for 
interim release pending trial. If the Pre-Trial Chamber 
is satisﬁ ed that the conditions set forth in article 58, 

180 Documents
paragraph 1, are met, the person shall continue to be 
detained. If it is not so satisﬁ ed, the Pre-Trial Chamber 
shall release the person, with or without conditions. 
 . . . 
 11. Once the charges have been conﬁ rmed in accordance with 
this article, the Presidency shall constitute a Trial Chamber 
which, subject to paragraph 9 and to article 64, paragraph 
4, shall be responsible for the conduct of subsequent 
proceedings and may exercise any function of the Pre-Trial 
Chamber that is relevant and capable of application in 
those proceedings. 
 PART 6. THE TRIAL 
 . . . 
 Article 63 
 Trial in the presence of the accused 
 1.  The accused shall be present during the trial. 
 2.  If the accused, being present before the Court, continues 
to disrupt the trial, the Trial Chamber may remove the 
accused and shall make provision for him or her to observe 
the trial and instruct counsel from outside the court-
room, through the use of communications technology, if 
required. Such measures shall be taken only in exceptional 
circumstances after other reasonable alternatives have 
proved inadequate, and only for such duration as is strictly 
required. 
 Article 64 
 Functions and powers of the Trial Chamber 
 . . . 
 2. The Trial Chamber shall ensure that a trial is fair and expe-
ditious and is conducted with full respect for the rights of 
the accused and due regard for the protection of victims 
and witnesses. 
 . . . 

Documents 181
 7. The trial shall be held in public. The Trial Chamber may, 
however, determine that special circumstances require that 
certain proceedings be in closed session for the purposes 
set forth in article 68, or to protect conﬁ dential or sensitive 
information to be given in evidence. 
 8.  (a)   At the commencement of the trial, the Trial Chamber 
shall have read to the accused the charges previously 
conﬁ rmed by the Pre-Trial Chamber. The Trial Chamber 
shall satisfy itself that the accused understands the nature 
of the charges. It shall afford him or her the opportunity 
to make an admission of guilt in accordance with article 
65 or to plead not guilty.  
 (b)  At the trial, the presiding judge may give directions 
for the conduct of proceedings, including to ensure 
that they are conducted in a fair and impartial man-
ner. Subject to any directions of the presiding judge, 
the parties may submit evidence in accordance with 
the provisions of this Statute. 
 9. The Trial Chamber shall have, inter alia, the power on 
application of a party or on its own motion to: 
 (a) 
 Rule on the admissibility or relevance of evidence; and  
 (b) 
 Take all necessary steps to maintain order in the 
course of a hearing. 
 10. The Trial Chamber shall ensure that a complete record 
of the trial, which accurately reﬂ ects the proceedings, 
is made and that it is maintained and preserved by the 
Registrar.  
 . . . 
 Article 66 
 Presumption of innocence 
 1.  Everyone shall be presumed innocent until proved guilty 
before the Court in accordance with the applicable law. 
 2.  The onus is on the Prosecutor to prove the guilt of the 
accused. 
 3.  In order to convict the accused, the Court must be con-
vinced of the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable 
doubt. 
 Article 67 
 Rights of the accused 
 1.  In the determination of any charge, the accused shall 
be entitled to a public hearing, having regard to the 

182 Documents
provisions of this Statute, to a fair hearing conducted 
impartially, and to the following minimum guarantees, in 
full equality: 
 (a)  To be informed promptly and in detail of the 
nature, cause and content of the charge, in a lan-
guage which the accused fully understands and 
speaks;  
 (b)  To have adequate time and facilities for the 
preparation of the defence and to communicate 
freely with counsel of the accused ’ s choosing in 
conﬁ dence;  
 (c)  To be tried without undue delay; 
 (d)  Subject to article 63, paragraph 2, to be present at the 
trial, to conduct the defence in person or through legal 
assistance of the accused ’ s choosing, to be informed, 
if the accused does not have legal assistance, of this 
right and to have legal assistance assigned by the 
Court in any case where the interests of justice so 
require, and without payment if the accused lacks suf-
ﬁ cient means to pay for it; 
 (e)  To examine, or have examined, the witnesses 
against him or her and to obtain the attendance and 
examination of witnesses on his or her behalf under 
the same conditions as witnesses against him or her. 
The accused shall also be entitled to raise defences 
and to present other evidence admissible under this 
Statute;  
 (f)  To have, free of any cost, the assistance of a competent 
interpreter and such translations as are necessary to 
meet the requirements of fairness, if any of the proceed-
ings of or documents presented to the Court are not in 
a language which the accused fully understands and 
speaks;  
 (g)  Not to be compelled to testify or to confess guilt 
and to remain silent, without such silence being 
a consideration in the determination of guilt or 
innocence;  
 (h)  To make an unsworn oral or written statement in his 
or her defence; and 
 (i)  Not to have imposed on him or her any reversal of the 
burden of proof or any onus of rebuttal. 
 . . . 

Documents 183
 Article 68 
 Protection of the victims and witnesses and their participation 
in the proceedings 
 1.  The Court shall take appropriate measures to protect the 
safety, physical and psychological well-being, dignity and 
privacy of victims and witnesses. 
 . . . 
 Article 69 
 Evidence 
 1. Before testifying, each witness shall, in accordance with 
the Rules of Procedure and Evidence, give an undertaking 
as to the truthfulness of the evidence to be given by that 
witness. 
 . . . 
 4. The Court may rule on the relevance or admissibility of any 
evidence, taking into account, inter alia, the probative value 
of the evidence and any prejudice that such evidence may 
cause to a fair trial or to a fair evaluation of the testimony 
of a witness, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure and 
Evidence.  
 . . . 
 Article 73 
 Third-party information or documents 
 If a State Party is requested by the Court to provide a document or infor-
mation in its custody, possession or control, which was disclosed to it in 
conﬁ dence by a State, intergovernmental organization or international 
organization, it shall seek the consent of the originator to disclose that docu-
ment or information. If the originator is a State Party, it shall either consent 
to disclosure of the information or document or undertake to resolve the 
issue of disclosure with the Court, subject to the provisions of article 72. If 
the originator is not a State Party and refuses to consent to disclosure, the 
requested State shall inform the Court that it is unable to provide the docu-
ment or information because of a pre-existing obligation of conﬁ dentiality to 
the originator. 

184 Documents
 Article 74 
 Requirements for the decision 
 1.  All the judges of the Trial Chamber shall be present at 
each stage of the trial and throughout their deliberations. 
The Presidency may, on a case-by-case basis, designate, 
as available, one or more alternate judges to be present at 
each stage of the trial and to replace a member of the Trial 
Chamber if that member is unable to continue attending. 
 2.  The Trial Chamber ’ s decision shall be based on its evalua-
tion of the evidence and the entire proceedings. The deci-
sion shall not exceed the facts and circumstances described 
in the charges and any amendments to the charges. The 
Court may base its decision only on evidence submitted 
and discussed before it at the trial. 
 3.  The judges shall attempt to achieve unanimity in their 
decision, failing which the decision shall be taken by a 
majority of the judges. 
 4.  The deliberations of the Trial Chamber shall remain secret. 
 . . . 
 Article 75 
 Reparations to victims 
 1.  The Court shall establish principles relating to repara-
tions to, or in respect of, victims, including restitution, 
compensation and rehabilitation. On this basis, in its 
decision the Court may, either upon request or on its 
own motion in exceptional circumstances, determine the 
scope and extent of any damage, loss and injury to, or in 
respect of, victims and will state the principles on which 
it is acting.  
 . . . 
 Article 76 
 Sentencing 
 1. In the event of a conviction, the Trial Chamber shall 
consider the appropriate sentence to be imposed and shall 

Documents 185
take into account the evidence presented and submissions 
made during the trial that are relevant to the sentence. 
 . . . 
 4. The sentence shall be pronounced in public and, wherever 
possible, in the presence of the accused. 
 . . . 
 Article 77 
 Applicable penalties 
 1.  Subject to Article 110, the Court may impose one of the fol-
lowing penalties on a person convicted of a crime referred 
to in Article 5 of this Statute: 
 (a)  Imprisonment for a speciﬁ ed number of years, which 
may not exceed a maximum of 30 years; or  
 (b)  A term of life imprisonment when justiﬁ ed by the 
extreme gravity of the crime and the individual cir-
cumstances of the convicted person. 
 2.  In addition to imprisonment, the Court may order: 
 (a)  A ﬁ ne under the criteria provided for in the Rules of 
Procedure and Evidence; 
 (b)  A forfeiture of proceeds, property and assets derived 
directly or indirectly from that crime, without prejudice 
to the rights of bona ﬁ de third parties.  
 . . . 
 Article 81 
 Appeal against decision of acquittal or conviction or against 
sentence 
 1.  A decision under article 74 may be appealed in accor-
dance with the Rules of Procedure and Evidence as 
follows: 
 (a)  The Prosecutor may make an appeal on any of the fol-
lowing grounds: 
 
 (i)  Procedural error, 
 
(ii)  Error of fact, or 
 
(iii)  Error of law; 

186 Documents
 (b).  The convicted person, or the Prosecutor on that 
person ’ s behalf, may make an appeal on any of the 
following grounds: 
 
(i)  Procedural error, 
 
(ii)  Error of fact, 
 
(iii)  Error of law, or 
 
(iv)  Any other ground that affects the fairness or reli-
ability of the proceedings or decision. 
 . . . 
 Article 82 
 Appeal against other decisions 
 1.  Either party may appeal any of the following decisions in 
accordance with the Rules of Procedure and Evidence: 
 (a)  A decision with respect to jurisdiction or admissibility; 
 (b)  A decision granting or denying release of the person 
being investigated or prosecuted; 
 (c)  A decision of the Pre-Trial Chamber to act on its own 
initiative under article 56, paragraph 3; 
 (d)  A decision that involves an issue that would signiﬁ cantly 
affect the fair and expeditious conduct of the proceed-
ings or the outcome of the trial, and for which, in the 
opinion of the Pre-Trial or Trial Chamber, an immedi-
ate resolution by the Appeals Chamber may materially 
advance the proceedings.  
 Article 83 
 Proceedings on appeal 
 1. For the purposes of proceedings under article 81 and this 
article, the Appeals Chamber shall have all the powers of 
the Trial Chamber. 
 2. If the Appeals Chamber ﬁ nds that the proceedings appealed 
from were unfair in a way that affected the reliability of the 
decision or sentence, or that the decision or sentence appealed 
from was materially affected by error of fact or law or proce-
dural error, it may: 
 (a)  Reverse or amend the decision or sentence; or 
 (b)  Order a new trial before a different Trial Chamber.  
 5. The Appeals Chamber may deliver its judgement in the 
absence of the person acquitted or convicted. 
 . . . 

Documents 187
 Article 86 
 General obligation to cooperate 
 States Parties shall, in accordance with the provisions of this Stat-
ute, cooperate fully with the Court in its investigation and prosecution 
of crimes within the jurisdiction of the Court. 
 Article 87 
 Requests for cooperation: general provisions 
 . . . 
 5. (a)   The Court may invite any State not party to this Statute 
to provide assistance under this Part on the basis of an 
ad hoc arrangement, an agreement with such State or 
any other appropriate basis.  
 . . . 
 Article 89 
 Surrender of persons to the Court 
 1.  The Court may transmit a request for the arrest and sur-
render of a person, together with the material support-
ing the request outlined in article 91, to any State on the 
territory of which that person may be found and shall 
request the cooperation of that State in the arrest and sur-
render of such a person. States Parties shall, in accordance 
with the provisions of this Part and the procedure under 
their national law, comply with requests for arrest and 
surrender. 
 . . . 
 Article 93 
 Other forms of cooperation 
 1.  States Parties shall, in accordance with the provisions of this 
Part and under procedures of national law, comply with 
requests by the Court to provide the following assistance in 
relation to investigations or prosecutions: 
 (a)  The identiﬁ cation and whereabouts of persons or the 
location of items; 
 (b)  The taking of evidence, including testimony under oath, 
and the production of evidence, including expert opin-
ions and reports necessary to the Court;  

188 Documents
 (c)  The questioning of any person being investigated or 
prosecuted; 
 (d)  The service of documents, including judicial 
documents; 
 (e)  Facilitating the voluntary appearance of persons as 
witnesses or experts before the Court; 
 (f)  The temporary transfer of persons as provided in 
paragraph 7; 
 (g)  The examination of places or sites, including the exhu-
mation and examination of grave sites; 
 (h)  The execution of searches and seizures; 
 (i)  The provision of records and documents, including 
ofﬁ cial records and documents; 
 (j) 
 The protection of victims and witnesses and the pres-
ervation of evidence; 
 (k)  The identiﬁ cation, tracing and freezing or seizure 
of proceeds, property and assets and instrumentali-
ties of crimes for the purpose of eventual forfeiture, 
without prejudice to the rights of bona ﬁ de third 
parties; and  
  (l) 
  Any other type of assistance which is not prohibited by 
the law of the requested State, with a view to facilitat-
ing the investigation and prosecution of crimes within 
the jurisdiction of the Court.  
 . . . 
 Article 103 
 Role of States in enforcement of sentences of imprisonment 
 1.  (a)   A sentence of imprisonment shall be served in a State 
designated by the Court from a list of States which 
have indicated to the Court their willingness to accept 
sentenced persons. 
 (b)  At the time of declaring its willingness to accept 
sentenced persons, a State may attach conditions to its 
acceptance as agreed by the Court and in accordance 
with this Article 
 (c)  A State designated in a particular case shall promptly 
inform the Court whether it accepts the Court ’ s 
designation. 
 . . . 

Documents 189
 Article 104 
 Change in designation of State of enforcement 
 1.  The Court may, at any time, decide to transfer a sentenced 
person to a prison of another State. 
 2.  A sentenced person may, at any time, apply to the Court to 
be transferred from the State of enforcement. 
 Article 105 
 Enforcement of the sentence 
 1.  Subject to conditions which a State may have speciﬁ ed in 
accordance with article 103, paragraph 1 (b), the sentence 
of imprisonment shall be binding on the States Parties, 
which shall in no case modify it. 
 . . . 
 Article 106 
 Supervision of enforcement of sentences and conditions of 
imprisonment 
 1.  The enforcement of a sentence of imprisonment shall be 
subject to the supervision of the Court and shall be consis-
tent with widely accepted international treaty standards 
governing treatment of prisoners. 
 . . . 
 Article 107 
 Transfer of the person upon completion of sentence 
 1.  Following completion of the sentence, a person who is not 
a national of the State of enforcement may, in accordance 
with the law of the State of enforcement, be transferred 
to a State which is obliged to receive him or her, or to 
another State which agrees to receive him or her, taking 
into account any wishes of the person to be transferred to 
that State, unless the State of enforcement authorizes the 
person to remain in its territory. 
 . . . 

190 Documents
 Article 112 
 Assembly of States Parties 
 1.  An Assembly of States Parties to this Statute is hereby 
established. Each State Party shall have one represen-
tative in the Assembly who may be accompanied by 
alternates and advisers. Other States which have signed 
this Statute or the Final Act may be observers in the 
Assembly.  
 2.  The Assembly shall: 
 (a)  Consider and adopt, as appropriate, recommendations 
of the Preparatory Commission; 
 (b)  Provide management oversight to the Presidency, the 
Prosecutor and the Registrar regarding the adminis-
tration of the Court; 
 (c)  Consider the reports and activities of the Bureau 
established under paragraph 3 and take appropriate 
action in regard thereto; 
 (d)  Consider and decide the budget for the Court; 
 (e)  Decide whether to alter, in accordance with article 36, 
the number of judges; 
 (f)  Consider pursuant to article 87, paragraphs 5 and 7, 
any question relating to non-cooperation; 
 (g)  Perform any other function consistent with this 
Statute or the Rules of Procedure and Evidence.  
 3.  (a)   The Assembly shall have a Bureau consisting of a 
President, two Vice-Presidents and 18 members elected 
by the Assembly for three-year terms. 
 (b)  The Bureau shall have a representative character, tak-
ing into account, in particular, equitable geographical 
distribution and the adequate representation of the 
principal legal systems of the world. 
 . . . 
 Article 113 
 Financial Regulations 
 Except as otherwise speciﬁ cally provided, all ﬁ nancial matters 
related to the Court and the meetings of the Assembly of States Parties, 
including its Bureau and subsidiary bodies, shall be governed by this 
Statute and the Financial Regulations and Rules adopted by the Assem-
bly of States Parties. 
 . . . 

Documents 191
 Article 119 
 Settlement of disputes 
 1.  Any dispute concerning the judicial functions of the Court 
shall be settled by the decision of the Court. 
 2.  Any other dispute between two or more States Parties 
relating to the interpretation or application of this Statute 
which is not settled through negotiations within three 
months of their commencement shall be referred to the 
Assembly of States Parties. The Assembly may itself seek 
to settle the dispute or may make recommendations on 
further means of settlement of the dispute, including refer-
ral to the International Court of Justice in conformity with 
the Statute of that Court. 
 . . . 
 Article 125 
 Signature, ratiﬁ cation, acceptance, approval or accession 
 1.  This Statute shall be open for signature by all States in 
Rome, at the headquarters of the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations, on July 17, 1998. 
Thereafter, it shall remain open for signature in Rome at 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Italy until October 17, 
1998. After that date, the Statute shall remain open for 
signature in New York, at United Nations Headquarters, 
until December 31, 2000.  
 2.  This Statute is subject to ratiﬁ cation, acceptance or 
approval by signatory States. Instruments of ratiﬁ ca-
tion, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations. 
 3.  This Statute shall be open to accession by all States. Instru-
ments of accession shall be deposited with the Secretary-
General of the United Nations. 
 Article 126 
 Entry into force 
 1.  This Statute shall enter into force on the ﬁ rst day of the 
month after the 60th day following the date of the deposit 
of the 60th instrument of ratiﬁ cation, acceptance, approval 

192 Documents
or accession with the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations. 
 2.  For each State ratifying, accepting, approving or acceding 
to this Statute after the deposit of the 60th instrument of 
ratiﬁ cation, acceptance, approval or accession, the Statute 
shall enter into force on the ﬁ rst day of the month after the 
60th day following the deposit by such State of its instru-
ment of ratiﬁ cation, acceptance, approval or accession.  
 Article 127 
 Withdrawal 
 1.  A State Party may, by written notiﬁ cation addressed to the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations, withdraw from 
this Statute. The withdrawal shall take effect one year after 
the date of receipt of the notiﬁ cation, unless the notiﬁ ca-
tion speciﬁ es a later date. 
 . . . 
 Source : Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,  http://
untreaty.un.org/cod/icc/index.html . Reproduced with permission from 
the United Nations Publications Board. 
 Proposed Text of Article 98 Agreements with the United 
States, July 2002 
 In an effort to bypass the jurisdiction of the ICC, the United States, beginning 
in 2001, entered into bilateral agreements with other nations. A sample BIA 
follows. 
 A  Reafﬁ rming the importance of bringing to justice those who 
commit genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes,  
 B  Recalling that the Rome Statute of the International Crimi-
nal Court done at Rome on July 17, 1998 by the United 
Nations Diplomatic Conference of Plenipotentiaries on 
the Establishment of an International Criminal Court is 
intended to complement and not supplant national crimi-
nal jurisdiction, 
 C  Considering that the Government of the United States of 
America has expressed its intention to investigate and to 
prosecute where appropriate acts within the jurisdiction 
of the International Criminal Court alleged to have been 
committed by its ofﬁ cials, employees, military personnel, 
or other nationals, 

Documents 193
 D  Bearing in mind Article 98 of the Rome Statute, 
 E  Hereby agree as follows: 
  1.  For purposes of this agreement, “persons” are current 
or former Government ofﬁ cials, employees (including 
contractors), or military personnel or nationals of one 
Party. 
 2. 
 Persons of one Party present in the territory of the 
other shall not, absent the expressed consent of the 
ﬁ rst Party, 
   
(a)   be surrendered or transferred by any means to the 
International Criminal Court for any purpose, or  
 
(b)  be surrendered or transferred by any means to 
any other entity or third country, or expelled to a 
third country, for the purpose of surrender to or 
transfer to the International Criminal Court. 
 3.  When the United States extradites, surrenders, or other-
wise transfers a person of the other Party to a third coun-
try, the United States will not agree to the surrender or 
transfer of that person to the International Criminal Court 
by the third country, absent the expressed consent of the 
Government of X. 
 4.  When the Government of X extradites, surrenders, or oth-
erwise transfers a person of the United States of America 
to a third country, the Government of X will not agree to 
the surrender or transfer of that person to the International 
Criminal Court by a third country, absent the expressed 
consent of the Government of the United States. 
 5.  This Agreement shall enter into force upon an exchange of 
notes conﬁ rming that each Party has completed the neces-
sary domestic legal requirements to bring the Agreement 
into force. It will remain in force until one year after the date 
on which one Party notiﬁ es the other of its intent to termi-
nate this Agreement. The provisions of this Agreement shall 
continue to apply with respect to any act occurring, or any 
allegation arising, before the effective date of termination.  
 Article 98 Waivers Signed by the United States and a 
Second Nation-State, 2002–2008 
 The Rome Statute includes Article 98, which states: Article 98(2)  Cooperation 
with respect to waiver of immunity and consent to surrender : The Court may 
not proceed with a request for surrender which would require the requested State 
to act inconsistently with its obligations under international agreements pursu-
ant to which the consent of a sending State is required to surrender a person 
of that State to the Court, unless the Court can ﬁ rst obtain the cooperation of 

194 Documents
the sending State for the giving of consent for the surrender. Starting in 2002, 
the United States began negotiating these agreements with individual countries, 
and has concluded at least one hundred such agreements. Countries that sign 
these agreements with the United States agree not to surrender Americans to 
the jurisdiction. 
 Source :  www.georgetown.edu/guides/article_98.cfm . 
 Countries That Have Signed Article 98 Agreements with the United 
States 
 Afghanistan; entered into force August 23, 2003. 
 Albania; entered into force July 7, 2003. 
 Algeria; entered into force April 13, 2004. 
 Angola; entered into force October 6, 2005. 
 Antigua and Barbuda; entered into force September 29, 2003. 
 Armenia; entered into force March 17, 2005. 
 Azerbaijan; entered into force August 28, 2003. 
 Bangladesh; entered into force March 29, 2004. 
 Belize; entered into force December 8, 2003. 
 Benin; entered into force August 25, 2005. 
 Bhutan; entered into force August 16, 2004. 
 Bosnia-Herzegovina; entered into force July 7, 2003. 
 Botswana; entered into force September 28, 2003. 
 Brunei; entered into force March 3, 2004. 
 Burkina Faso; entered into force October 14, 2003. 
 Burundi; entered into force July 24, 2003. 
 Cambodia; entered into force June 29, 2005. 
 Cameroon; entered into force December 1, 2003. 
 Cape Verde; entered into force November 19, 2004. 
 Central African Republic; entered into force January 19, 2004. 
 Chad; entered into force June 30, 2003. 
 Colombia; entered into force September 17, 2003. 
 Comoros; entered into force June 30, 2004. 
 Congo; entered into force June 2, 2004. 
 Congo, Democratic Republic of the; entered into force July 22, 2003. 
 Cote D ’ Ivoire; entered into force October 16, 2003. 
 Djibouti; entered into force July 2, 2003. 
 Dominica; entered into force May 10, 2004. 
 Dominican Republic; entered into force August 12, 2004. 
 East Timor; entered into force October 30, 2003. 
 Egypt; entered into force March 5, 2003. There is also an extension 
agreement. 
 Equatorial Guinea; entered into force May 6, 2004. 
 Eritrea; entered into force July 8, 2004. 
 Fiji; entered into force December 17, 2003. 

Documents 195
 Gabon; entered into force April 15, 2003. 
 Gambia; entered into force June 27, 2003. 
 Georgia; entered into force June 26, 2003. 
 Ghana; entered into force October 31, 2003. 
 Grenada; entered into force March 11, 2004. 
 Guinea; entered into force March 25, 2004. 
 Guinea Bissau; entered into force February 8, 2005. 
 Guyana; entered into force May 18, 2004. 
 Haiti; entered into force January 12, 2004. 
 Honduras; entered into force June 30, 2003. 
 India; entered into force December 3, 2003. 
 Israel; entered into force November 27, 2003. 
 Kazakhstan; entered into force October 10, 2004. 
 Kiribati; entered into force March 4, 2004. 
 Laos; entered into force December 24, 2003. 
 Lesotho; entered into force June 21, 2006. 
 Liberia; entered into force November 3, 2003. 
 Macedonia; entered into force November 12, 2003. 
 Madagascar; entered into force August 4, 2003. 
 Malawi; entered into force September 23, 2003. 
 Maldives; entered into force July 8, 2003. 
 Marshall Islands; entered into force June 26, 2003. 
 Mauritania; entered into force July 6, 2003. 
 Mauritius; entered into force June 30, 2003. 
 Micronesia; entered into force June 30, 2003. 
 Mongolia; entered into force June 27, 2003. 
 Montenegro; entered into force April 19, 2007. 
 Morocco; entered into force November 19, 2003. 
 Mozambique; entered into force March 2, 2004. 
 Nauru; entered into force December 4, 2003. 
 Nepal; entered into force July 22, 2003. 
 Nicaragua; entered into force September 12, 2003. 
 Nigeria; entered into force October 6, 2003. 
 Oman; entered into force August 1, 2004. 
 Pakistan; entered into force November 6, 2003. 
 Palau; entered into force July 7, 2003. 
 Panama; entered into force November 6, 2003. 
 Papua New Guinea; entered into force September 30, 2004. 
 Philippines; entered into force May 13, 2003. 
 Rwanda; entered into force July 11, 2003. 
 Saint Kitts and Nevis; entered into force January 31, 2005. 
 Sao Tome and Principe; entered into force November 12, 2003. 
 Senegal; entered into force June 27, 2003. 
 Seychelles; entered into force July 17, 2003. 
 Sierra Leone; entered into force May 20, 2003. 
 Singapore; entered into force October 17, 2003. 

196 Documents
 Solomon Islands; entered into force March 17, 2004. 
 Sri Lanka; entered into force July 4, 2003. 
 Swaziland; entered into force September 20, 2006. 
 Tajikistan; entered into force June 23, 2003. 
 Thailand; entered into for June 3, 2003. 
 Togo; entered into force January 15, 2004. 
 Tonga; entered into force March 24, 2004. 
 Tunisia; entered into force December 22, 2003. 
 Turkmenistan; entered into force January 30, 2004. 
 Tuvalu; entered into force February 3, 2003. 
 Uganda; entered into force October 23, 2003. 
 United Arab Emirates; entered into force February 15, 2004. 
 Uzbekistan; entered into force January 7, 2003. 
 Yemen; entered into force December 17, 2003. 
 Zambia; entered into force July 2, 2003. 
 Nongovernmental Organization Coalition Letter to 
Congress Regarding Bilateral Immunity Agreements, 
May 30, 2008 
 Hundreds of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) participated in the draft-
ing of the ICC and lobbied successfully for its ratiﬁ cation. All were opposed to 
American efforts to circumvent the ICC through the mechanism of the bilateral 
immunity agreements (BIA). The following is a memo regarding the legitimacy 
of these bilateral agreements. 
 Dear Member of Congress, 
 As Congress begins the FY09 appropriations process, we, the 
undersigned organizations, would like to bring to your attention an 
important policy matter tied to the State/Foreign Operations appro-
priations bill. Since the summer of 2002, the Bush administration has 
aggressively sought to conclude bilateral immunity agreements (BIAs) 
with almost all countries, including every country in the world that has 
ratiﬁ ed the International Criminal Court (ICC) treaty. Many nations 
have refused to sign a BIA because they believe that doing so would 
breach their legal obligations under the Rome Statute, the treaty that 
established the Court. Countries, including those not party to the Court, 
have also refused in order to protect their sovereignty and out of respect 
for the ICC ’ s values and purposes. 
 BIA agreements are of dubious beneﬁ t and the quest to secure 
them is a source of considerable friction between the U.S. and its allies 
in Europe, Africa, and Latin America. In the meantime the ICC has 
opened cases in Sudan, Uganda, and the Democratic Republic of Congo 
in an attempt to bring to justice some of the world ’ s most heinous crimi-
nals. Rather than continue to support a policy that empowers non-coop-
eration with the Court, we urge Congress instead to include text in this 

Documents 197
year ’ s appropriations bill that has been suggested by Representative 
Betty McCollum (D-Minn.), stipulating that “none of the funds made 
available in this Act under the heading ‘Economic Support Fund’ shall 
be restricted based on the relationship between any government and the 
International Criminal Court.” 
 The ICC treaty known as the Rome Statute, respects the Status of 
Forces (SOFA) and Status of Mission (SOMA) agreements that protect 
U.S. service personnel and civilian ofﬁ cials. Unfortunately, BIAs go 
much further by shielding private citizens and foreign U.S. contractors 
from the ICC. This makes BIAs especially offensive to other countries 
by forcing them to give up their sovereign right to apply their own legal 
procedures—in this case making use of the ICC—to persons who com-
mit crimes on their territory. 
 Moreover, because they are bilateral in nature, BIAs can also shield 
foreign war criminals from the Court ’ s jurisdiction, even if they are in 
U.S. custody. We strongly believe the current Congress should not con-
tinue to support this failed Bush administration initiative. 
 In 2004, Congress passed the Nethercutt Amendment, which 
threatened to cut off vital Economic Support Funds (ESF) to countries 
unwilling to sign BIA agreements. Former Rep. Jim Kolbe, then Repub-
lican chair of the Appropriations Subcommittee, spoke strongly against 
this amendment when it came to the House ﬂ oor: “At a time when we 
are ﬁ ghting the war on terrorism, reducing this tool of diplomatic inﬂ u-
ence is not a good idea. If we accept [this amendment], the U.S. will be 
hamstringing itself, placing a straitjacket on its diplomatic tools . . .” 
Although the Nethercutt language was not included in the FY07 Foreign 
Operations appropriations bill, it was unfortunately included, at the 
request of House appropriators, in the Consolidated Appropriations 
Act, 2008 (H.R. 2764, Section 671). 
 Congress has already recognized the negative impact of the 
BIA campaign and wisely voted to repeal two similar BIA related 
sanctions which were signed into law by the president: on Foreign 
Military Financing (FMF) and International Military Education 
and Training (IMET). House appropriators should bring a complete 
end to this counterproductive policy by adopting the McCollum 
language as part of the FY09 State/Foreign Operations 
appropriations bill. 
 One of our staff members will be in contact with your staff to 
answer any questions or respond to any concerns. We look forward to 
thanking you for your support on this important matter. 
 Sincerely, 
 Americans for Democratic Action 
 Amnesty International USA 
 Better World Campaign 
 Center for American Progress 
 Church Women United 

198 Documents
 Citizens for Global Solutions 
 Council for a Livable World 
 Evangelical Lutheran Church in America 
 Friends ’ Committee on National Legislation 
 Genocide Intervention Network 
 Human Rights First 
 Human Rights Watch 
 Maryknoll Ofﬁ ce for Global Concerns 
 National Association of Social Workers 
 National Education Association 
 National Association of Evangelicals 
 Open Society Policy Center 
 Peace Action and Peace Action Education Fund 
 Presbyterian Church USA 
 United Church of Christ, Justice and Witness Ministries 
 United Methodist Church, General Board of Church and Society 
 United Nations Association—USA 
 Universal Human Rights Network 
 Unitarian Universalist Association of Congregations 
 World Organization for Human Rights, USA 
 Chapter 7, UN Charter, 1945: Action with Respect to 
Threats to the Peace, Breaches of the Peace, and Acts of 
Aggression 
 Article 39 
 The Security Council shall determine the existence of any threat to the 
peace, breach of the peace, or act of aggression and shall make recom-
mendations, or decide what measures shall be taken in accordance 
with Articles 41 and 42, to maintain or restore international peace and 
security. 
 . . . 
 Article 41 
 The Security Council may decide what measures not involving 
the use of armed force are to be employed to give effect to its decisions, 
and it may call upon the Members of the United Nations to apply such 
measures. These may include complete or partial interruption of eco-
nomic relations and of rail, sea, air, postal, telegraphic, radio, and other 
means of communication, and the severance of diplomatic relations. 

Documents 199
 Article 42 
 Should the Security Council consider that measures provided for in 
Article 41 would be inadequate or have proved to be inadequate, it 
may take such action by air, sea, or land forces as may be necessary to 
maintain or restore international peace and security. Such action may 
include demonstrations, blockade, and other operations by air, sea, or 
land forces of Members of the United Nations. 
 Article 43 
 All Members of the United Nations, in order to contribute to the 
maintenance of international peace and security, undertake to make 
available to the Security Council, on its call and in accordance with a 
special agreement or agreements, armed forces, assistance, and facilities, 
including rights of passage, necessary for the purpose of maintaining 
international peace and security. 
 . . . 
 Article 45 
 In order to enable the United Nations to take urgent military 
measures Members shall hold immediately available national air-force 
contingents for combined international enforcement action. 
 . . . 
 Article 46 
 Plans for the application of armed force shall be made by the Secu-
rity Council with the assistance of the Military Staff Committee. 
 Article 47 
 1.  There shall be established a Military Staff Committee to 
advise and assist the Security Council on all questions 
relating to the Security Council ’ s military requirements 
for the maintenance of international peace and secu-
rity, the employment and command of forces placed at 
its disposal, the regulation of armaments, and possible 
disarmament.  
 2.  The Military Staff Committee shall consist of the Chiefs of 
Staff of the permanent members of the Security Council or 
their representatives. Any Member of the United Nations 
not permanently represented on the Committee shall be 
invited by the Committee to be associated with it when 

200 Documents
the efﬁ cient discharge of the Committee ’ s responsibilities 
requires the participation of that Member in its work.  
 . . . 
 Article 49 
 The Members of the United Nations shall join in affording mutual 
assistance in carrying out the measures decided upon by the Security 
Council. 
 . . . 
 Article 51 
 Nothing in the present Charter shall impair the inherent right of 
individual or collective self-defense if an armed attack occurs against 
a Member of the United Nations, until the Security Council has taken 
measures necessary to maintain international peace and security. Mea-
sures taken by Members in the exercise of this right of self-defense shall 
be immediately reported to the Security Council and shall not in any 
way affect the authority and responsibility of the Security Council under 
the present Charter to take at any time such action as it deems necessary 
in order to maintain or restore international peace and security. 

201
 7 
 Directory of Organizations 
 T
his chapter presents the reader and researcher with links to 
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and government 
organizations whose work addresses the need to prevent, 
stop, or punish perpetrators of genocide across the world. The 
directory that follows lists but a small number of such organiza-
tions. The Internet provides the reader/researcher with  all Web 
sites that deal with these important legal and political issues. 
 NGOs Working on Genocide 
and Human Rights Issues 
 There are many hundreds of private NGOs, many of which are 
international in scope, that deal with genocide and Holocaust 
issues. The amount of information on NGOs on the Internet is 
enormous, so locating NGO information by subject or geography 
can be time-consuming. However, the following links can help 
you get started. The University of California, Berkeley libraries 
also obtain print publications from NGOs, which can be located 
by searching in the Pathﬁ nder or Melvyl directories. 
 There is also an NGO Code of Ethics and Conduct that these 
NGOs follow in their national and international activities. Some 
of the more important of these shared fundamental principles 
follow: 
 A.  Responsibility, Service, and Public Mindedness: 
Responsibly maintaining itself, an NGO should 

202 Directory of Organizations
conduct its activities for the sake of others, whether 
for the public at large or a particular segment of the 
public. . . . 
 B.  Cooperation Beyond Boundaries: Signiﬁ cant 
progress toward world peace and global well-being 
can be fostered through interreligious, intercultural, 
and interracial work and across artiﬁ cial barriers of 
politics and ethnicity that tend to separate people 
and their institutions. NGOs should maintain ethi-
cal, cooperative relationships with other NGOs and 
should partner where possible and appropriate for 
the sake of the greater public good. An NGO should 
be willing to work beyond borders of politics, reli-
gion, culture, race, and ethnicity, within the limits of 
the organizing documents and with organizations 
and individuals that share common values and 
objectives. 
 C.  Human Rights and Dignity: As the Universal Dec-
laration of Human Rights states, “All human beings 
are born free and equal in dignity and rights, are 
endowed with reason and conscience, and should 
act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood” 
(Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Article 1). 
The family is the fundamental natural group unit of 
society promoting human rights and human dignity 
(Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Article 16). 
An NGO should not violate any person ’ s funda-
mental human rights, with which each person is 
endowed. An NGO should recognize that all people 
are born free and equal in dignity. . . . 
 D.  Religious Freedom: “Everyone has the right of 
freedom of thought, conscience and religion; this 
right includes freedom to change his religion or 
belief, and freedom, either alone or in community 
with others and in public or private, to manifest 
his religion or belief in teaching, practice, worship 
and observance” (Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights, Article 18). An NGO should respect religious 
freedom. . . . 
 E.  Truthfulness and Legality: An NGO should be 
honest and truthful in its dealings with its donors, 
project beneﬁ ciaries, staff, membership, partner 

NGOs Working on Genocide and Human Rights Issues 203
organizations, government, and the public in gen-
eral, and should respect the laws of any jurisdiction 
in which it is active. An NGO should give out accu-
rate information, whether regarding itself and its 
projects, or regarding any individual, organization, 
project, or legislation it opposes or is discussing (see 
World Association of Nongovernmental Organiza-
tions for the Full Code of NGO Ethics, at  www
.wango.org .).  
 The NGO Directory 
 Some of the major NGOs, along with their e-mail addresses, are 
listed below. 
 Adalah 
 http://www.adalah.org 
 Adalah (“justice” in Arabic) is an independent human rights orga-
nization and legal center. It was established in November 1996 to 
promote and defend the rights of Palestinian Arab citizens of Israel 
(close to 20 percent of the population, or about 1.2 million people) 
and Palestinians living in the Occupied Palestinian Territory. 
 Advocacy Project 
 http://www.advocacynet.org 
 The goal of the Advocacy Project is to produce social change 
by helping marginalized communities claim their rights. They 
believe that change is best achieved by those who are most 
directly affected and partner with advocates to represent those 
communities. 
 African Rights 
 http://www.afrights@gn.apc.org 
 This organization is dedicated to working on issues of grave 
human rights abuses, conﬂ ict, famine, and civil reconstruction in 
Africa, recognizing the limitations upon existing human rights, 
humanitarian, and conﬂ ict resolution approaches to Africa ’ s most 
pressing problems. 

204 Directory of Organizations
 Al-Haq 
 http://www.al-haq.org 
 Al-Haq works in the Occupied Palestinian Territory to uphold 
the rule of law and respect for human rights. Al-Haq is an inde-
pendent Palestinian nongovernmental human rights organization 
that focuses on monitoring, documenting, and advocating against 
the violations of the individual and collective rights of Palestin-
ians under international law, irrespective of the identity of the 
perpetrator, using both national and international mechanisms. 
This Web site provides the reader with the NGO ’ s policies, pro-
grams, and strategies for realizing its mission. 
 American Association of Jurists (AAJ) 
 http://www.aaj.org 
 The AAJ ’ s fundamental principles and objectives are the struggle 
for self-determination of peoples: full economic independence 
as well as sovereignty of the State over its wealth and natural 
resources; the struggle against imperialism, fascism, and colonial-
ism and the discrimination against women, the indigenous peo-
ple, and national minorities; the defense of real peace based on the 
principle of peaceful coexistence between States of different social 
and economic systems; and the defense and promotion of human 
rights and the realization of better and more effective guarantees 
to their protection. 
 Amnesty International 
 http://www.amnesty.org 
 Amnesty International conducts research and generates action to 
prevent and end grave abuses of human rights and to demand 
justice for those whose rights have been violated. It exerts inﬂ u-
ence on governments, political bodies, companies, and intergov-
ernmental groups. Activists conduct mass demonstrations, vigils, 
and direct lobbying as well as online and ofﬂ ine campaigning. 
 Armenian National Institute, Washington, D.C. 
 http://www.armenian-genocide.org 
 This site provides information about the Armenian genocide 
(statements, resolutions, proclamations, trial extracts),  educational 

NGOs Working on Genocide and Human Rights Issues  205
resources (how to teach about genocide, resource guides,  curricula, 
and information on video documentaries), and genocide research 
(chronology, sample documents, photos, survey to press cover-
age, and guide to bibliographies). 
 Australian Institute for Holocaust and Genocide Studies 
 http://www.aihgs.com 
 This site contains lists of courses, staff, center publications, a very 
brief genocide bibliography (A–Z), a list of other genocide Web 
sites, and a special “Pontian Genocide and Asia Minor Holocaust 
Research Unit,” which collects and translates archives and eye-
witness testimonies. 
 Cambodian Genocide Project, Yale University, New Haven, 
Connecticut 
 http://www.yale.edu/cgp 
 This is a data-based Web site contains thousands of ﬁ les of records 
of Khmer Rouge genocide; most are bilingual, with summaries in 
both Khmer and English. 
 Campaign against Genocide 
 http://www.campaignagainstgenocide.org 
 Campaign against Genocide is a coalition of NGOs, led by Geno-
cide Watch. Its goal is to use past history of genocides in order to 
build a better future. The coalition seeks to educate people about 
what genocide is and why it must be stopped. This campaign is a 
single, grassroots “spark designed to ignite a wildﬁ re across the 
consciousness of the developed world” until every person knows 
genocide as a part of world history and is determined that it will 
never again be a part of the future. The Web site provides the 
reader/researcher with data regarding past and ongoing geno-
cidal actions across the world. 
 Center for Constitutional Rights (CCR) 
 http://www.ccrjustice.org 
 The Center for Constitutional Rights (CCR) was founded in 1966 
by attorneys who represented civil rights movements in the 

206 Directory of Organizations
South. CCR is a nonproﬁ t legal and educational  organization 
dedicated to advancing and protecting the rights guaranteed by 
the U.S. Constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. CCR supports the creative use of law as a positive force 
for social change. Its work began on behalf of civil rights activ-
ists, and over the last four decades CCR has lent its expertise 
and support to virtually every popular movement for social 
justice. 
 Center for Human Rights  & Constitutional Law 
 http://www.centerforhumanrights.org 
 The Center for Human Rights & Constitutional Law is a nonproﬁ t, 
public interest legal foundation dedicated to furthering and pro-
tecting the civil, constitutional, and human rights of immigrants, 
refugees, children, and the poor. 
 Citizens for Global Solutions 
 http://www.globalsolutions.org 
 This organization focuses on getting the U.S. government to 
adopt speciﬁ c measures to stop genocide from happening in the 
ﬁ rst place. Citizens for Global Solutions promotes international 
law and the corresponding international institutions such as the 
UN and the International Criminal Court. 
 Coalition for International Justice (CIJ) 
 http://www.haguejusticeportal.net 
 The Coalition for International Justice (CIJ) supports the interna-
tional war crimes tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugosla-
via and criminal and transitional justice initiatives for East Timor, 
Sierra Leone, Cambodia, and Sudan. CIJ, an international, non-
proﬁ t organization, initiates and conducts advocacy and public 
education campaigns, targeting decision makers in Washington 
and other capitals, media, and the public. In conjunction with 
other NGOs around the world, CIJ helps focus and maximize the 
impact of individual and collective advocacy with regard to inter-
national and hybrid tribunals. In the ﬁ eld, CIJ provides practical 
assistance on legal, technical, and outreach matters to the tribu-
nals and other justice initiatives. Its Web site provides information 
to the reader regarding the status of these judicial initiatives as 

NGOs Working on Genocide and Human Rights Issues  207
well as giving viewers its advocacy arguments for international 
justice. 
 The Committee on Conscience of the U.S. Holocaust Memorial 
Museum 
 http://www.ushm.org/conscience 
 This Web site publishes “genocide watch” and “genocide warning” 
notices for particular countries and situations with brief overviews. 
 Concordia University, Montreal, Montreal Institute for Geno-
cide and Human Rights Studies (MIGS) 
 http://migs.concordia.ca 
 This site reviews human rights NGOs and related sites, special-
ized sites by country or region, and general news sources that 
relate to genocide and human rights issues. 
 Crimes of War 
 http://www.crimesofwar.org 
 This site discusses the rules of war and gives deﬁ nitions and case 
studies of crimes of war, crimes against humanity, and genocide. 
It also examines contemporary conﬂ ict situations and trials, show-
ing the range of legal opinions. It contains good Web links to legal 
and human rights sources. 
 Danish Center for Holocaust and Genocide Studies 
 http://www.dchf.dk 
 This site presents information in Danish and English including 
material on Danish Jews during the Holocaust. 
 Derechos 
 http://www.derechos.org 
 This NGO was the ﬁ rst group formed on the Internet in order to 
address human rights and their violation by governments across 
the world. Its Web site contains up-to-date information about 
human rights violations occurring across the world, with a special 
emphasis on the dilemmas associated with the “disappeared” in 
Central and South America. 

208 Directory of Organizations
 Genocide Watch 
 http://www.genocidewatch.org 
 This Web site is the coordinator of the International Campaign 
to End Genocide, founded at The Hague Appeal for Peace 
Conference. 
 Human Rights First 
 http://www.humanrightsﬁ rst.org 
 Human Rights First, formerly The Lawyer ’ s Committee for Human 
Rights, works particularly on the legal side of human rights pro-
tection, promoting respect for the legal protections promised in 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and subsequent inter-
national or multipartite human rights legal documents. 
 Human Rights Watch (HRW) 
 http://www.hrw.org 
 HRW is one of the world ’ s leading independent organizations 
dedicated to defending and protecting human rights. By focus-
ing international attention where human rights are violated, the 
NGO gives voice to the oppressed and hold oppressors account-
able for their crimes. Their researchers engage in rigorous, objec-
tive investigations wherever human rights have been violated by 
governments. The organization also develops strategic, targeted 
advocacy in order to build intense pressure for action and raise 
the cost of human rights abuse. Since its founding in 1978 (then 
called Helsinki Watch), Human Rights Watch has worked tena-
ciously to lay the legal and moral groundwork for deep-rooted 
change and has fought to bring greater justice and security to peo-
ple around the world. 
 Institute for the Study of Genocide (ISG) 
 http://www.instituteforthestudyofgenocide.org 
 The Institute for the Study of Genocide (ISG), located at John Jay 
College of Criminal Justice of the City University of New York, is 
an independent nonproﬁ t organization chartered by the Univer-
sity of the State of New York. The ISG promotes and disseminates 
scholarship and policy analyses on the causes, consequences, and 

NGOs Working on Genocide and Human Rights Issues  209
prevention of genocide. It was founded in 1982 to ﬁ ll a gap in 
the academic and the human rights communities, which did not 
recognize the continued prevalence of genocide. 
 International Association of Genocide Scholars 
 http://www.genocidescholars.org 
 This NGO ’ s focus is the  prevention  of genocide, but it also covers 
the full spectrum of scholarship of genocide. 
 International Committee of Jurists (ICJ) 
 http://www.icj.org 
 The International Commission of Jurists (ICJ) is dedicated to the 
primacy, coherence, and implementation of international law and 
principles that advance human rights. The ICJ supports an impar-
tial, objective, and authoritative legal approach to the protection 
and promotion of human rights through the rule of law. The ICJ 
provides legal expertise at international and national levels to 
ensure that developments in international law adhere to human 
rights principles and that international standards are imple-
mented at the national level. 
 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) 
 http://www.icrc.org 
 The mission of the International Committee of the Red Cross 
(ICRC) is to protect the lives and dignity of victims of armed 
conﬂ ict and other situations of violence and to provide them 
with assistance. The ICRC also endeavors to prevent suffering 
by promoting and strengthening humanitarian law and univer-
sal humanitarian principles. Established in 1863, the ICRC is at 
the origin of the Geneva Conventions and the International Red 
Cross and Red Crescent Movement. It directs and coordinates 
the  international activities conducted by the Movement in armed 
conﬂ icts and other situations of violence. 
 International Human Rights Law Group (IHRG) 
 http://www.ihrg.org 
 The IHRG is dedicated to the belief that religious freedom is the 
ﬁ rst, most important, freedom given to all persons. Its goal is to 

210 Directory of Organizations
work with various government and ministry leaders to assure 
that this ﬁ rst freedom is protected and even encouraged through-
out the World. The NGO believes that democracy thrives where 
religious freedom thrives. Whether it is the right to share ones ’  
religious beliefs in a public area, the right to determine the edu-
cational choices of ones own children, or the right to exist as a 
recognized religious organization, it is important to those who 
believe and to those who do not believe that these rights are 
protected. 
 Kurdish Human Rights Protect (KHRP) 
 http://www.khrp.org 
 KHRP ’ s expert fact-ﬁ nding and trial observation delegations to 
the Middle East ’ s conﬂ ict regions continue to lend a sense of inter-
national solidarity to the most disadvantaged living there, while 
warning perpetrators that their contravention of international 
human rights norms will not go unchecked. Through independent 
investigations of allegations and concerns, fact-ﬁ nding and trial 
observation missions play an essential part in monitoring human 
rights abuses. The missions also help maintain vital links with vic-
tims and survivors of human rights abuse and their defenders, 
who are frequently also the subject of human rights abuse. 
 Lawyers against the War (LAW) 
 http://www.lawyersagainstthewar.org 
 Lawyers against the War (LAW) is an international group of law-
yers and others who support the use of national and international 
law to settle disputes, prosecute offenders, and protect human 
rights; oppose the illegal use of force between states, in particu-
lar the illegal U.S.-led use of force against Afghanistan and Iraq; 
and, support the rule of law and adherence to international law. 
 Montreal Institute for the Study of Genocide and Human Rights 
Studies 
 http://www.institueforthestudyofgenocide.org 
 The Institute seeks to understand the underlying reasons for geno-
cide and other crimes against humanity. It also presents concrete 
policy recommendations to resolve conﬂ icts before they intensify 
and spiral into mass atrocity crimes. 

NGOs Working on Genocide and Human Rights Issues  211
 Oxfam 
 http://www.oxfam.org 
 Oxfam works to reduce the number of people who become ill, 
are displaced, or are killed in armed conﬂ icts. This NGO tries to 
ensure that children, who are innocent victims of any conﬂ ict, are 
protected. Preventing conﬂ ict starts at the local level, and Oxfam 
helps communities identify the root causes of conﬂ ict and ﬁ nd cre-
ative ways to build peace. Oxfam ’ s peace and security initiatives 
are built on a central tenet: conﬂ ict violates the inherent rights of 
all people. Its work is designed to build local capacity for peace, to 
confront those who proﬁ t from conﬂ ict, and to advocate for peace. 
Its Web site provides the researcher with accurate data regarding 
armed conﬂ icts, including genocidal actions by governments. 
 Prevent Genocide International 
 http://www.preventgenocide.org 
 This site is a global education and action network working to 
prevent the crime of genocide. This Web site is available in mul-
tiple languages. It includes genocide law in the criminal codes of 
70 nations, the Genocide Convention in 35 languages, the word 
“genocide” in 70 languages, and a collection of the writings of 
Raphael Lemkin, who coined the word genocide in 1943. 
 Refugees International 
 http://www.refugeesinternational.org 
 Refugees International was started in 1979 as a citizens ’  movement to 
protect Indochinese refugees. Since then, it has expanded to become 
the leading advocacy organization that provokes action from global 
leaders to resolve refugee crises. It does not accept government or 
UN funding. Its expert recommendations are highly valued by the 
very people whose decisions bring immediate relief and lifesaving 
solutions to refugees: senior ofﬁ cials of the U.S. administration, the 
UN, and governments around the world, and members of the U.S. 
Congress. Each year, Refugees International conducts 20 to 25 ﬁ eld 
missions to identify displaced people ’ s needs for basic services such 
as food, water, health care, housing, access to education, and protec-
tion from harm. Because of its on-site knowledge of humanitarian 
emergencies, the NGO successfully challenges policy makers and aid 
agencies to improve the lives of displaced people around the world. 

212 Directory of Organizations
 The Sikh Genocide Project 
 http://www.sikhgenocide.org 
 The Sikh Genocide Project Web site focuses on the 20th anniver-
sary of state-sponsored extermination of Sikhs in India. It also 
presents “Third Sikh Holocaust,” a four-part QuickTime movie. 
 Silent Voices Speak 
 http://www.silentvoicesspeak.org 
 This site has a mixed-media art exhibition, based primarily on art-
ist Barbara Shilo ’ s archival photographs of the Holocaust, with 
an accompanying text that uses art to “enhance public under-
standing of the Holocaust and its relation to present day social 
injustice.” It sponsors a lecture series on contemporary genocide, 
ethnic cleansing, racism, and anti-Semitism. 
 Society for Threatened People (STP) 
 http://www.gfbv.de 
 The Society for Threatened Peoples (STP) is an independent 
international human rights organization. It encourages ethnic, 
linguistic, and cultural diversity and is an independent voice 
for minorities and indigenous peoples worldwide. The NGO ’ s 
most important activities involve the protection of minorities and 
threatened peoples, the promotion of human rights, and the ﬁ ght 
against human rights violations. This Web site informs, through 
publicity and campaigns, the world ’ s public about the situations 
impacting threatened peoples. With these activities the group 
aims to create an awareness of its concerns and their efforts in 
the community. It also provides an extensive documentation on 
various issues for any people interested in its work and human 
rights in general. 
 Sudan Organization against Torture (SOAT) 
 http://www.soatsudan.org 
 This NGO is a human rights organization established in 1993 
working in Sudan and the UK and has members worldwide. 
SOAT ’ s primary objective is preventing torture and challeng-
ing impunity. SOAT works to rehabilitate Sudanese survivors of 
torture; to provide legal assistance to survivors and individuals 

Intergovernmental Organizations (IGOs) Working on Genocide Issues 213
threatened with inhumane and degrading punishments; to pro-
vide human rights education; and to research, document, and 
campaign against human rights abuses in Sudan on both national 
and international levels. 
 University of Minnesota, Center for Holocaust and Genocide 
Studies 
 http://www.chgs.umn.edu/ 
 The site includes a “Virtual Museum of Holocaust and Genocide 
Art”; historical narratives and documents; and links, bibliographies, 
and educational resources. The section on the Armenian Genocide 
features a collection of editorial cartoons about the genocide at the 
time it occurred. 
 World Federalist Association ’ s (WFA) “Campaign to End 
Genocide” 
 http://www.endgenocide.org 
 This site has information about the policy goals supported by the 
WFA, which they believe are necessary to end genocide. 
 Intergovernmental Organizations (IGOs) 
Working on Genocide Issues 
 Since 1945, the UN system, including their specialized agencies, 
has been the major IGO in the modern world. This section enu-
merates the goals and purposes of those UN agencies dedicated 
to human rights, security for innocent persons caught in civil 
war, and resolving issues that touch on crimes against humanity 
and genocide. 
 AccessUN 
 http://www.libraries.iub.edu/scripts/countResources.php?
resourceId=6 
 The site indexes and makes available UN documents from 1946 
to date. Most documents are included in the microﬁ che collection 

214 Directory of Organizations
from 1984. Hard copy is located in the Public Documents and 
Maps Department, Indiana University, Bloomington. 
 International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia 
(ICTY) 
 http://www.icty.org 
 The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia 
(ICTY) is a UN court of law dealing with war crimes that took 
place during the conﬂ icts in the Balkans in the 1990s. Since its 
establishment in 1993 it has irreversibly changed the landscape of 
international humanitarian law and provided victims an oppor-
tunity to voice the horrors they witnessed and experienced. In its 
precedent-setting decisions on genocide, war crimes, and crimes 
against humanity, the Tribunal has shown that an individual ’ s 
senior position can no longer protect from prosecution. It has now 
shown that those suspected of bearing the greatest responsibil-
ity for atrocities committed can be called to account, as well as 
that guilt should be individualized, to protect entire communi-
ties from being identiﬁ ed as “collectively responsible.” Its Web 
site contains all documents, including trial transcripts, of the cases 
heard and decided by this court. 
 International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) 
 http://www.ictr.org 
 Recognizing that serious violations of humanitarian law were 
committed in Rwanda, and acting under Chapter VII of the UN 
Charter, the Security Council created the International Criminal 
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) by Resolution 955 of November 8, 
1994. The purpose of this measure is to contribute to the process 
of national reconciliation in Rwanda and to the maintenance of 
peace in the region. The ICTR was established for the prosecution 
of persons responsible for genocide and other serious violations 
of international humanitarian law committed in the territory of 
Rwanda between January 1, 1994, and December 31, 1994. It may 
also deal with the prosecution of Rwandan citizens responsible for 
genocide and other such violations of international law commit-
ted in the territory of neighboring States during the same period. 
This ofﬁ cial Web site of the ICTR contains all documents and trial 
transcripts of those who were charged with committing acts of 
genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes. 

Intergovernmental Organizations (IGOs) Working on Genocide Issues 215
 The UN System 
 UN Children ’ s Fund (UNICEF) 
 http://www.unicef.org 
 This site has information regarding data and policies developed 
to meet the needs of children. Recently, in 1990s, the organiza-
tion has provided therapy for children traumatized by war and 
genocide. 
 UN Department of Peacekeeping Operations (UNDPKO) 
 http://www.un.org/Depts/dpko 
 This site is an important one for it is the public face of the UN ’ s 
efforts to organize and direct peacekeeping operations across the 
world. Between 1988 and 2000, there were 46 peacekeeping opera-
tions. Since 2000, there have been nearly two dozen peacekeeping 
missions. 
 UN Documentation Center 
 http://www.un.org/en/documents/index.shtml 
 The site includes full text resolutions and decisions, selected 
documentation, speeches, and press releases from the General 
Assembly, the Security Council, and the UN ’ s Economic and 
Social Council. 
 UN Human Rights Documents 
 http://www. un .org/Depts/dhl/resguide/spechr.htm 
 This site provides detailed information about the human 
rights documentation of the UN and presents key documents 
of the Charter-based bodies, such as the UN ’ s Human Rights 
Council. 
 UN International Labor Organization (ILO) 
 http://www.ilo.org 
 This Web site provides the researcher with data and policies of the 
ILO regarding the condition of workers in military and industrial 
industries who contribute to a nation ’ s war efforts. Its major goal 
is to provide social justice for workers. 

216 Directory of Organizations
 UN International Law Commission (ILC) 
 http://www.un.org/law/ilc 
 The ILC, a creation of the UN General Assembly, “shall have for 
its object the promotion of the progressive development of inter-
national law and its codiﬁ cation.” The ILC ’ s work on a topic usu-
ally involves some aspects of the progressive development as well 
as the codiﬁ cation of international law, with the balance between 
the two varying depending on the particular topic. Its Web site 
provides the reader with a comprehensive presentation of all of 
the ILC ’ s sessions and accomplishments in international criminal 
law since its creation in 1949. 
 UN NGO Global Network 
 http://www.ngo.org 
 This site is the home page for the UN ’ s global NGO commu-
nity. Its aim is to help promote collaborations between NGOs 
throughout the world, so that together they can more effectively 
partner with the UN and each other to create a more peace-
ful, just, equitable, and sustainable world for this and future 
generations. 
 UN Ofﬁ ce for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
 http://www.reliefweb.int/dha_ol/about/cont.html 
 This site offers readers an understanding of the dynamics of the 
UN ’ s efforts to address the myriad of humanitarian dilemmas 
that crop up across the world, including emergency responses to 
critical humanitarian issues. 
 UN Ofﬁ ce of the High Commissioner for Human Rights/
Commission on Human Rights 
 http://www.ohchr.org 
 The OHCHR is the principal human rights ofﬁ ce of the UN. The 
OHCHR spearheads the UN ’ s human rights efforts. Its Web site 
educates and encourages individuals to take action and assist 
States in upholding human rights. 

Intergovernmental Organizations (IGOs) Working on Genocide Issues 217
 UN World Food Program (WFP) 
 http://www.wfp.org 
 This site enumerates the varied activities of the organization to 
provide food aid to people living in areas where poverty is ram-
pant—due to civil war and natural disasters. 
 U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) 
 http://www.usaid.gov 
 This Web site is a resource for those interested in how U.S. for-
eign assistance works, who the beneﬁ ciaries are, and what impact 
assistance has on countries all over the world. 
 U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum, Washington, D.C. 
 http://www.ushmm.org 
 This site contains extensive information about the museum, 
library, collections, and archives and the U.S. Holocaust Memo-
rial Council. Using the site, a researcher can do a search from the 
collections and archives online; help is available. 
 U.S. Institute of Peace (USIP) 
 http://www.usip.org 
 The U.S. Institute of Peace (USIP) is an independent, nonparti-
san, national institution established and funded by Congress. 
USIP provides the analysis, training, and tools that prevent and 
end conﬂ icts, promotes stability, and professionalize the ﬁ eld 
of peace building. It is essential that the United States, work-
ing with the international community, play an active part in 
preventing, managing, and resolving conﬂ icts. Fragile states, 
ethnic and religious strife, extremism, competition for scarce 
resources, and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction 
all pose signiﬁ cant challenges to peace. The resulting suffering 
and destabilization of societies make effective forms of manag-
ing conﬂ ict imperative. The USIP is dedicated to meeting this 
imperative in new and innovative ways. Its goals are to help 
prevent and resolve violent international conﬂ icts; promote 
postconﬂ ict stability and development; and increase conﬂ ict 
management capacity, tools, and intellectual capital worldwide. 

218 Directory of Organizations
The Institute does this by empowering others with knowledge, 
skills, and resources, as well as by directly engaging in peace-
building efforts around the globe. 
 USAID Directory of Registered NGOs 
 http://www.pvo.net/usaid 
 This is a link to a list of all private voluntary organizations (PVO) reg-
istered with USAID. Many groups ﬁ nd it beneﬁ cial to partner with 
other NGOs, including groups registered with USAID as PVOs. 
 Yad Vashem Home Page, Yad Vashem, Jerusalem 
 http://www1.yadvashem.org/yv/en/visiting/index.asp 
 This site contains extensive information on the Yad Vashem 
museum and library, International Campaign for Gathering and 
Commemorating the Names of Holocaust Victims (one can sub-
mit testimonies online), Task Force for International Cooperation 
on Holocaust Education, Remembrance and Research, Teacher 
Training Seminars in North America and more. 
 NGOs Afﬁ liated with the UN and Its 
Agencies or Afﬁ liated with Other IGOs 
 A number of NGOs have cooperative relationships with govern-
mental agencies, at both national and international levels. The fol-
lowing enumeration of such groups illustrates the breadth of these 
NGOs and their cooperation with governmental organizations. 
 Association for the Prevention of Torture (APT) 
 http://www.apt.ch 
 The APT is the international NGO, based in Geneva, behind 
the ground-breaking Optional Protocol to the UN Convention 
against Torture (OPCAT). The APT believes that the risk of tor-
ture and other ill treatment exists everywhere in the world. The 
challenge and mission of the APT is how to prevent it. For 30 
years the APT has been a leading force in prevention by pro-
moting three integrated elements: (1) transparency of detention 
institutions through regular visits by independent experts; (2) 

NGOs Afﬁ liated with the UN and Its Agencies  219
the capacity strengthening to reform practices of detention; and 
(3) effective legal frameworks. 
 Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL) 
 http://www.civil-society.oas.org 
 The Center for Justice and International Law (CEJIL) is a regional 
NGO that defends human rights in the Americas and the Carib-
bean. It operates ofﬁ ces in Costa Rica, Brazil, the United States, 
and the Caribbean and has representatives in Argentina, Chile, 
and Paraguay. 
 Coalition for Women ’ s Human Rights in Conﬂ ict Situations 
 http://www.womensrightscoalition.org 
 The mandate of the Coalition for Women ’ s Human Rights in Con-
ﬂ ict Situations is to ensure that crimes committed against women 
in conﬂ ict situations are adequately examined and prosecuted. 
The Coalition seeks solutions to the invisibility of women ’ s 
human rights abuses in conﬂ ict situations, to condemn the prac-
tice of sexual violence and other inhumane treatment of women 
as deliberate instruments of war, and to ensure that these actions 
are prosecuted as war crimes, torture, crimes against humanity, 
and crimes of genocide, where appropriate. Working at the local 
and international levels, Coalition members act as a resource for 
consultation and debate on substantive issues related to the inte-
gration of a gender perspective in postconﬂ ict transitional justice 
systems. Coalition efforts also seek to strengthen international 
and regional capacity to monitor the respect of women ’ s human 
rights in conﬂ ict and postwar situations through the creation of 
appropriate mechanisms of accountability and the assessment of 
their transferability to other contexts. 
 Doctors without Borders/Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) 
 http://www.doctorswithoutborders.org 
 Doctors without Borders/Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) is an 
international medical humanitarian organization created by doctors 
and journalists in France in 1971. It provides aid in nearly 60 coun-
tries to people whose survival is threatened by violence, neglect, 
or catastrophe, primarily due to armed conﬂ ict, epidemics, mal-
nutrition, exclusion from health care, and natural disasters. MSF 

220 Directory of Organizations
provides independent, impartial assistance to those most in need. 
MSF reserves the right to speak out to bring attention to neglected 
crises, to challenge inadequacies or abuse of the aid system, and 
to advocate for improved medical treatments and protocols. In 
1999, MSF received the Nobel Peace Prize. 
 Human Rights Advocates (HRA) 
 http://www.humanrightsadvocates.org 
 HRA is a human rights organization based in Berkeley, California. 
It is dedicated to promoting and protecting international human 
rights in the United States and abroad. HRA participates actively 
in the work of various UN human rights bodies, using its status 
as a fully accredited NGO. HRA is most involved at the UN Coun-
cil on Human Rights, the Commission on the Status of Women, 
the Commission on Sustainable Development, and several treaty 
bodies, including the Human Rights Committee and the Commit-
tee on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 
 Institute of World Affairs (IWA) 
 http://www.iwa.org 
 Founded in 1924, IWA is an NGO working across cultural and 
political boundaries to advance creative approaches to conﬂ ict 
analysis, conﬂ ict management, and postconﬂ ict peacebuilding. 
Since its founding, it has been actively engaged in studying the 
sources of conﬂ ict in the international arena and in develop-
ing approaches to conﬂ ict management that attempt to address 
root causes. IWA ’ s efforts focus on critical issues in access, par-
ticipation, rule of law, and security along a pre- to postconﬂ ict 
continuum. 
 International League for Human Rights 
 http://www.ilhr.org 
 The International League for Human Rights (ILHR) is a human 
rights organization with headquarters in New York City. The 
oldest human rights organization in the United States, the 
ILHR deﬁ nes its mission as “defending human rights advocates 
who risk their lives to promote the ideals of a just and civil 
society in their homelands.” In 1947, the League was granted 
consultative status with the UN Economic and Social Council 

Intergovernmental Organizations, Other Than the UN and Its Agencies  221
(ECOSOC), giving it the right to testify before that body about 
human rights abuses. 
 Lawyers without Borders 
 http://www.lawyerswithoutborders.org 
 Lawyers without Borders ’  mission is to protect the integrity of 
legal process, serve the underserved, and promote the culture 
of pro bono service in the legal profession—all with a neutral 
orientation. It fulﬁ lls its mission through advocacy training, 
cultivating lawyer skill sets to create effective strategies in the 
human rights and development sectors, neutral observation and 
engagement in programs that provide capacity building, and 
technical assistance in developing regions and regions emerging 
from conﬂ ict. 
 Organization for Defending Victims of Violence (ODVV) 
 http://www.idealist.org 
 The ODVV ’ s goals are to promote a culture of nonviolence and 
to defend and support victims of violence. The Organization is 
active in Iran and in the Middle East. It publishes a monthly 
bulletin entitled  Defenders ’ Newsletter , which covers informa-
tion about human rights violations and articles on specific 
issues.  
 Intergovernmental Organizations (IGOs), 
Other Than the UN and Its Agencies, 
with a Focus on Human Rights 
and Peacekeeping Operations 
 An IGO is created when two or more governments sign a multilat-
eral treaty to form such an entity, agree to the goals and purposes of 
the IGO, and agree on a formula for ﬁ nancing its operations. IGOs 
are recognized in international law; they can enter into  treaties and 
conventions, and the staff of an IGO possess  diplomatic  status. 
What follows are examples of these regional intergovernmental 
organizations. 

222 Directory of Organizations
 Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) 
 http://www.asean.or.id 
 The task of this regional organization of 10 member states has been 
to safeguard the political and economic stability of the members. 
It has also been tasked to resolve conﬂ icts between the members, 
by peaceful means if possible. 
 Commonwealth 
 http://www.thecommonwealth.org 
 This site provides data and policies developed by this 54 nation orga-
nization of former members of the British commonwealth. The major 
goals are conﬂ ict prevention and to strengthen democratic values. 
 Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) 
 http://www.cis.minsk.by/main.aspx?uid=74 
 This IGO, made up of 12 former Soviet Republics who created the 
organization in 1991, has as its primary focus, maintaining peace-
ful relations between the member states, including the creation of 
peacekeeping operations if they are necessary. The Web site is for 
the Executive Committee of the CIS (English version). 
 Council of Europe 
 http://www.coe.int/ 
 Created in 1941 to provide political and social protection for the 
41 member nation-states. It also is tasked with addressing and 
resolving human rights issues that emerge in the organization. 
 Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) 
 http://ecowas.int/ 
 This site provides information about the efforts of 16 West African 
nations to provide collective self-reliance, maintain peace, and 
protect human rights within this regional IGO. 
 European Union (EU) 
 http://europa.eu/index_en.htm 
 Created in 1957 for the 15 member states to mediate disputes in 
their region of Europe. It has been involved in the reconstruction 

Intergovernmental Organizations, Other Than the UN and Its Agencies  223
of the former Yugoslavia. The Web site provides annual data and 
policies that have been created to fulﬁ ll its mission. 
 Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) 
 http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/gulf/gcc.htm 
 This site, reﬂ ecting the goals and policies of six states, was created 
in 1981, in response to the war between Iran and Iraq. It has made 
efforts, so far unsuccessful, to create a regional peacekeeping force. 
 League of Arab States 
 http://www.arableagueonline.org 
 This site provides data and policy making of the 22 member states ’  
efforts to handle disputes between its members. 
 North American Treaty Organization (NATO) 
 http://www.nato.int 
 This organization, which now has more than two dozen mem-
ber states (including nations that were formerly part of the Soviet 
Union ’ s regional defense and economic organization), provides 
military protection to member states and has intervened in Yugo-
slavia and Kosovo to end genocide and ethnic cleansing. The site 
provides information about the structure and the general goals of 
this IGO. 
 Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) 
 http://www.osce.org 
 This pan-European security organization, with 55 member states, 
has developed policies on arms control and human rights prob-
lems that have surfaced in the region. 
 Organization of African Unity (OAU) 
 http://www.african-union.org 
 This organization, created in 1963, provides its 53 member states 
with policies that seek to defend sovereign territorial integrity 
after colonialism ended after World War II. Its goal is the peace-
ful resolution of conﬂ icts between member states and that has 
meant, at times, mediation, military action, and peacekeeping 
operations. 

224 Directory of Organizations
 Organization of American States (OAS) 
 http://www.oas.org 
 This Web site provides data on the structure of the OAS, as well as 
policies that have been created since 1951 to protect the sovereign 
integrity—maintenance of peace and security—of the 35 mem-
ber states. It is committed to the peaceful settlement of disputes 
between the members. 

225
 8 
 Resources 
 A
s one can image, there are many thousands of  resources—
print and nonprint—whose focus is on genocide, geno-
cides, efforts to explain the social, psychological, religious, 
political aspects of genocide, prevent genocides from occurring, 
and steps taken to provide justice for the victims after geno-
cide ends. This listing includes books, journal articles, essays 
in newspapers, documents, ﬁ lms, television and videos, and 
genocide websites on the Internet. The materials enumerated in 
this chapter merely touch the surface. However, they give the 
reader a starting point for further research. I have listed some 
of the more important resources that focus on genocide.  
 Print Resources 
 Print resources provide readers and researchers with an abundance 
of materials on genocide, both general scholarship on the meaning 
of genocide and genocides as well as books written about major 
genocides such as the Turkish genocide of their ethnic Armenians, 
the German slaughter of millions of Jews, Pol Pot ’ s effort to create 
a new Cambodian society by killing millions of his countrymen 
who did not have a place in his new world. In addition, I have 
presented examples of the type of coverage given to the subject of 
genocide in the daily press and in scholarly journals. 

226 Resources
 General 
 Aall, Pamela, Daniel Milternberger, and Thomas G. Weiss.  Guide 
to IGOs, NGOs, and the Military in Peace and Relief Operations . 
3rd ed. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Institute of Peace Press, 2003. 
 This is a very useful book that provides the reader and researcher 
with succinct observations about the major intergovernmental 
organizations and NGOs. 
 Anderson, Martin E.  Dossier Secreto: Argentina ’ s Desaparecidos and 
the Myth of the “Dirty War.” Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1993.  
 This scholarly book examines the brutal events that took place in 
Argentina in the second half of the 20th century when the country 
was ruled by a right-wing military junta and their opposition was 
slaughtered and tortured, and many of their bodies “disappeared.” 
 Arendt, Hannah.  Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banal-
ity of Evil . New York: Penguin Classics, 2007. 
 Now a classic, and controversial study, of the trial of Adolph Eich-
mann in Jerusalem after he was abducted by Israeli agents from his 
home in Argentina and brought to Israel. Arendt was captivated 
by the bland, banal, and thoroughly bureaucratic behavior of Eich-
mann and others who participated in the roundup, transportation, 
and killing of millions of Jews in Nazi Germany ’ s killing centers.  
 Ball, Howard.  Prosecuting War Crimes and Genocide . Lawrence: 
University Press of Kansas, 1999. 
 One of many scholarly books written about the genocides of the 
20th century, beginning with the slaughter of the Herreros by 
Germany through the bloody events in Bosnia and Rwanda. It 
also focuses on the ways in which the international community 
responded to these tragedies. 
 Ball, Howard.  War Crimes and Justice . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-
CLIO, 2002. 
 This is a reference book that provides the reader with information 
about war crimes that have occurred in the 20th century and the 
international community ’ s responses to these actions. It contains 
a chronology of events and a bibliography. 
 Bass, Gary Jonathan.  Stay the Hand of Vengeance: The Politics of 
War Crimes Tribunals . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000.  

Print Resources 227
 This book focuses on the intense interactions between law and 
international politics that accounted for the creation of the two ad 
hoc war crimes tribunals, the ICTY and the ICTR. It is also a his-
tory of the clash between law and politics as nations attempted to 
create tribunals from after the First World War through the mili-
tary tribunals after World War II ended. 
 Becker, Jasper.  Hungry Ghosts: Mao ’ s Secret Famine . New York: 
Henry Holt, 1998. 
 This book examines the brutal 1958–1962 starvation of millions of 
Chinese by the Communist leadership in order to swiftly move the 
society forward as an industrial behemoth. This effort was called 
“The Great Leap Forward.” It raises the question, as do so many 
books, whether intentionally creating the conditions of famine is 
itself the intent to destroy a group within society prohibited by 
the 1948 Genocide Convention. 
 Berry, Nicholas O.  War and the Red Cross: The Unspoken Mis-
sion . New York: St. Martin ’ s Press, 1997. 
 This book examines the role of the International Committee of the 
Red Cross (ICRC) as it has evolved since its creation in the middle 
of the 19th century in Switzerland. The mission he describes is 
that of the ICRC secretive efforts to stop genocides. 
 Brackman, Arnold C.  The Other Nuremberg: The Untold Story of 
the Tokyo War Crimes Trials . New York: William Morrow, 1987. 
 Although the German leaders trial in Nuremberg in 1945 was a 
major event—and story—the War Crimes Trial of the leading Japa-
nese military men and political leaders was not covered as exten-
sively and was very different from the Nuremberg trial. This book 
examines the similarities and the differences between these ﬁ rst 
two ad hoc international military tribunals.  
 Cameron, Maxwell A., Robert J. Lawson, and Brian Tomlin, eds. 
 To Walk without Fear: The Global Movement to Ban Landmines . 
Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1998. 
 Ths book examines the strategy of advocate NGOs to convince the 
international community of the human rights beneﬁ ts of banning 
land mines from manufacture, sale, and use by armed groups—
both state and insurgent groups. 
 Chang, Iris.  The Rape of Nanking . New York: Penguin, 1998. 

228 Resources
 This is a powerful account of the Japanese slaughter and rape of 
half the Chinese population of Nanking, China (300,000 dead) at 
the start of the 1937 war against China. 
 Chang, Jung, and Jon Halliday.  Mao: The Unknown Story . New 
York: Knopf, 2005. 
 This massive book touches on every aspect of the Chinese 
 Communist leader ’ s life and rise to power. It is an excellent—and 
savage—political biography of a major tyrant of the 20th century. 
 Charney, Israel W., ed.  The Encyclopedia of Genocide . 2 vols. 
Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 1999. 
 This is a useful reference work on the subject of genocide, although 
somewhat dated. 
 Dedijer, Vladimir.  The Yugoslav Auschwitz and the Vatican: The 
Croatian Massacre of the Serbs during World War II . New York: 
Prometheus Books, 1992. 
 The author, a close ally of Marshall Tito and the Yugoslav ambassa-
dor to the United Nations, writes about the long history of enmity 
between the Croats (Catholic) and the Serbs (Orthodox) and how 
this hatred led to the World War II killing of more than 200,000 
Serbs by the Croatian government—which was allied with Nazi 
Germany against the Serbs and Tito ’ s partisans. These historic 
insights go far toward explaining the continuing wars between 
the Croats and the Serbs in the early and mid-1990s. 
 Drechsler, Horst.  Let Us Die Fighting: The Struggle of the Herrero 
and Nama against German Imperialism, 1884 – 1915 . London: Zed 
Press, 1980. 
 This is a translation from the German of a historical account of the 
German military slaughter of most of the Herreros in what is now 
Namibia. It is, the author concludes, another example of Western 
imperialism in the 19th and early 20th centuries that led to the 
mass murder of the African native tribes at that time. 
 Durch, William J., ed.  UN Peacemaking, American Policy, and the 
Uncivil Wars of the 1990s . New York: St. Martin ’ s Press, 1996. 
 This is a well-documented account of the failure of both American 
foreign policy and the weakness and lack of will on the part of the 
United Nations in the face of brutal civil wars in Rwanda, Soma-
lia, Bosnia, and Kosovo. 

Print Resources 229
 Ebrahim, Alnoor.  NGOs and Organizational Change: Discourse, 
Reporting, and Learning . Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2003. 
 This is a scholarly examination of the relationship between NGOs 
and their funding problems, including examples of how different 
NGOs have successfully maintained the stream of funds needed 
for their operations to continue. 
 Fein, Helen.  Genocide: A Sociological Perspective . London, Eng-
land: Sage, 1993. 
 The author has presented a succinct examination of genocide from 
a sociological perspective. 
 Fromkin, David.  A Peace to End All Peace: The Fall of the Otto-
man Empire and the Creation of the Modern Middle East . New 
York: Henry Holt, 1989. 
 The author, a noted historian, has carefully examined the rise and 
fall of the Ottoman Empire (at the end of the First World War) and 
how that led to the devastating problems of war, peace, and geno-
cide that confront the world community in the 21st century. 
 Gellately, Robert, and Ben Kiernan, eds.  The Specter of Genocide: 
Mass Murder in Historical Perspective . New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 2003. 
 This book of collected essays provides the reader with the lat-
est scholarship on the history—as well as acute analyses—of the 
nature of genocide as well as data bases explaining the many geno-
cides that have occurred in the 20th century. The essays discuss the 
Armenian genocide, Stalin ’ s use of terror, Japan ’ s mass murders 
of its enemies during the World War II, the Holocaust, Yugoslavia, 
Cambodia, Ethiopia, Rwanda, East Timor, and Guatemala. 
 Ghiglieri, Michael P.  The Dark Side of Man: Tracing the Origins 
of Male Violence . Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books, 2000. 
 A very interesting book, based on monkey social behavior and 
psychological experiments, that argues that men are born to form 
bonds with their kin and ﬁ ght and kill other men from different 
communities. 
 Goldhagen, Daniel Jonah.  Worse Than War: Genocide, Elimina-
tionism, and the Ongoing Assault on Humanity . New York: Pub-
lic Affairs Press, 2009. 

230 Resources
 This controversial book attempts to argue that genocide, as 
deﬁ ned in the Convention and international law, does not fully 
explain and account for man ’ s cruelty to man. He posits that the 
concept of eliminationism is the most appropriate term to use in 
the effort to understand crimes against humanity. 
 Goldstone, Richard J.  For Humanity: Reﬂ ections of a War Crimes 
Investigator . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2000. 
 This book, written by an international lawyer who has  participated 
in national (South Africa ’ s Truth and Reconciliation Commission) 
and international (the initial prosecutor for the ICTY) actions 
that attempt to deal with the consequences of mass murder and 
genocide, provides the reader with insights based on Goldstone ’ s 
experiences. 
 Gutman, Roy, and David Rieff.  Crimes of War . New York: Nor-
ton, 1999. 
 This is an excellent reference book—accompanied by brutal pho-
tographs—on war crimes committed in the 20th century. There are 
succinct essays that cover the range of such crimes—for example, 
child soldiers, death squads, just and unjust wars, and humanitar-
ian intervention—with acute assessments of the consequences of 
these actions. 
 Hewitt, William L., ed.  Deﬁ ning the Horriﬁ c: Readings on Geno-
cide and Holocaust in the Twentieth Century . Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Pearson, 2004. 
 Hinton, Alexander L., ed.  Annihilating Difference: The Anthropology 
of Genocide . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2002.  
 This is another excellent social science and anthropological effort 
to explain the nature of 20th-century genocide. 
 The author has put together a series of articles that focus on the 
major genocides of the 20th century. 
 Iles, Greg.  The Devil ’ s Punchbowl . New York: Scribner ’ s, 2009. 
 A novel that, in part, explores man ’ s capacity for doing evil. 
 Jones, Adam.  Genocide: A Comprehensive Introduction . New 
York: Routledge, 2006 (3rd ed. 2010). 
 This book is an outstanding starting point for anyone interested 
in an all-embracing examination of the multidimensionality of 
genocide. It exposes the reader to social science explanations of 

Print Resources 231
the concept as well as providing clearly written explanations of 
speciﬁ c genocides and the world community ’ s efforts to prevent 
or stop genocides from occurring. 
 Jones, Adam, ed.  Genocide, War Crimes and the West: History 
and Complicity . London: Zed Books, 2004. 
 This book is, much like Jones ’  book  Genocide , an extensive and 
very comprehensive examination of Western responsibility for 
mass atrocity. 
 Jones, Adam, ed.  Gendercide and Genocide . Nashville, TN: Vander-
bilt University Press, 2004.  
 Jones has placed in this book a wide variety of articles that exam-
ine speciﬁ c case studies of gender select murders in genocides 
occurring in the last half of the 20th century. 
 Jones, Adam, ed.  New Directions in Genocide Research . New 
York: Routledge, 2010. 
 This book contains the latest set of scholarly essays that focus on 
theories of comparative genocide. Its essays also focus on core 
issues associated with genocide, including humanitarian interven-
tionism, gender and genocide, and the use of children to achieve 
the destruction of a targeted group. The ﬁ nal section of this book 
focuses on a number of case studies of genocide. It is an excellent 
resource for those researching genocide and core issues associated 
with genocide. 
 Kiernan, Ben.  Blood and Soil: A World History of Genocide and 
E xtermination from Sparta to Darfur . New Haven, CT: Yale Uni-
versity Press, 2007. 
 This large important book by a noted genocide scholar provides 
the reader with an absorbing presentation of the global history 
of genocide and mass murder from the time of the Greeks to the 
continuing tragedy of Darfur in the Sudan. Lying beneath these 
tragedies is the burning desire of tyrannical leaders to acquire new 
territories or to build the New Serbia or the New Germany, as well 
as the mad desire to purify their race by exterminating all those 
who foul it.  
 Klee, Ernest, Willi Dressen, and Volker Riess, eds.  The Good Old 
Days: The Holocaust As Seen by Its Perpetrators and Bystanders . 
New York: The Free Press, 1991. 

232 Resources
 This book ’ s contribution is to present ﬁ rsthand accounts of the 
perpetrators of the Holocaust as well as the voices of bystanders 
who witnessed aspects of state genocidal policy. 
 Kornbluh, Peter.  The Pinochet File: A Declassiﬁ ed Dossier on 
Atrocity and Accountability . New York: The New Press, 2003. 
 This book, using recently declassiﬁ ed documents, presents a fac-
tual portrait of the Pinochet tyranny as well as chronicling two 
decades, 1970 to 1990, of American awareness of the tyrannical 
actions of the Pinochet government. In addition the book presents 
a clear case of American complicity in his efforts to eliminate com-
munists and other enemies of the state. 
 Kuper, Leo.  The Prevention of Genocide . New Haven, CT: Yale 
 University Press, 1985. 
 This book offers a critical examination of the United Nations ’  
efforts to prevent, stop, and punish perpetrators of genocide. 
 Lemkin, Raphael.  Acts Constituting a General (transnational) Danger 
Considered as Offences against the Law of Nations . Report presented at 
the 5th Conference for the Uniﬁ cation of Penal Law, Madrid, Spain, 
October 14–20, 1933.  www.preventgenocideinternational.org .  
 This is the core article written by Raphael Lemkin that ﬁ rst raised 
the specter of mass murder, which he labeled “barbarity,” and 
was his effort in 1933 to convince international lawyers that there 
must be international law written to prohibit what he would, in 
1944, label as genocide. 
 Lewis, Paul H.  Guerillas and Generals: The “Dirty War” in Argen-
tina . Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers, 2002.  
 Another historic/political account of the actions of the brutal 
military junta that ruled Argentina for decades and their battles 
against the rebel guerilla forces that led to murder, “disappear-
ances,” and the repression of liberties in the nation. 
 Lipstadt, Deborah.  Denying the Holocaust: The Growing Assault 
on Truth and Memory . New York: Plume, 1994. 
 An important book that provides readers with the views of those 
who deny that the genocide of Jews occurred. 
 McCormack, Tim, and Jann K. Kleffer, eds.  Yearbook of Inter-
national Humanitarian Law. 2008 , vol. 11. The Hague: Asser 
Press, 2010.  

Print Resources 233
 This annual resource book provides a truly international forum 
for high-quality, peer-reviewed academic articles focusing on this 
highly topical branch of international law. It also includes a selec-
tion of documents from the reporting period, many of which are 
not accessible elsewhere. There is an excellent detailed index. It 
serves as a useful reference tool for scholars, practitioners, mili-
tary personnel, civil servants, diplomats, human rights workers 
and students. 
 Milgram, Stanley.  Obedience to Authority: An Experimental 
View . New York: Harper Perennial, 1995. 
 The book is the laying out of the “Milgram Experiments on 
Humans,” which answered questions about why people accept 
orders to cause pain on other people. 
 Munoz, Heraldo.  The Dictator ’ s Shadow: Life under Augusto 
Pinochet . New York: Basic Books, 2008.  
 Another well-documented history of life in the Chile run by the 
dictatorial government led by General Pinochet. 
 Nardin, Terry, and Melissa S. Williams, eds.  Humanitarian Inter-
vention: Nomos XLVII . New York: NYU Press, 2006. 
 An excellent set of essays, written by political philosophers, that 
explore the scope of humanitarian intervention in international 
law and politics. 
 Neier, Aryeh.  War Crimes: Brutality, Genocide, Terror, and the 
Struggle for Justice . New York: Times Books, 1998. 
 The author, who had been executive director of the ACLU and, after 
that, Human Rights Watch, has written a book that focuses princi-
pally on the creation and function of the two ad hoc international 
criminal tribunals created by the UN in the 1990s: the ICTY and 
the ICTR. His book raises disturbing questions regarding the trials 
outcomes: can a handful of trials establish individual criminal guilt 
and break the cycle of collective ascription?  
 Newman, Leonard S., and Ralph Erber, eds.  Understanding 
G enocide: The Social Psychology of the Holocaust . Oxford, Eng-
land: Oxford University Press, 2002. 
 Essays written by psychologists that attempt to explain the behav-
ior of both the victims and the perpetrators of genocide. 
 Patterson, James.  Cross Country . New York: Vision, 2008. 

234 Resources
 A novel that takes place, in great part, in Darfur in the Sudan 
 during the early days of the mass murders by the Janjaweed. 
 Power, Samantha.  “A Problem from Hell”: America and the Age 
of Genocide . New York: Basic Books, 2002. 
 This book has quickly become the standard for those interested 
in understanding America ’ s historic role in the effort to end mass 
murder and genocide. Her focus is to answer the fundamental 
question: Why have American foreign policy leaders—in the 
White House and Congress—after pledging “never again” repeat-
edly fail to use their power to stop genocide? 
 Roberts, Adam, and Richard Guelff, eds.  Documents on the Laws 
of War . 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2000. 
 This is a basic text, containing documents, conventions, treaties, 
and military rules of engagement, from 1859 to the present. 
 Robertson, Geoffrey.  Crimes against Humanity: The Struggle for 
Global Justice . 2nd ed. London: Penguin, 2002. 
 This is an extraordinarily valuable book that discusses general themes 
associated with genocide—the context that gives rise to genocides, 
ending impunity, the legal mechanisms for dealing with the perpetra-
tors of genocide, the ethical questions—as well as providing insights 
into speciﬁ c genocides and mass killings such as the Pinochet era, 
the Balkan trials at the ICTY, and 21st-century terrorism.  
 Schabas, William A.  Genocide in International Law: The Crime of 
Crimes . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
 This huge reference book is a basic jump-off point for research-
ers who focus on the legal basis for the crime of genocide. It has 
an excellent bibliography and includes the three drafts—written 
over two years—of the 1948 Genocide Convention. 
 Sewall, Sarah B., and Carl Kaysen, eds.  The United States and 
the International Criminal Court: National Security and Interna-
tional Law . Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littleﬁ eld, 2000.  
 The authors have collected a series of essays that examine, histori-
cally, America ’ s antipathy for an international criminal court. 
 Shaw, Martin.  War and Genocide: Organized Killing in Modern 
Society . Cambridge, MA: Polity Press, 2003. 
 This is an outstanding treatment of the symbiotic relationship 
between war (civil, regional, and world) and the genocides that 
have taken place during wartime. 

Print Resources 235
 Shaw, Martin.  What Is Genocide? Malden, MA: Polity Press, 2007.  
 His focus in this book is on the structure of conﬂ ict situations, 
that is, attacks on the unarmed by the armed forces of the state. 
For the author, genocide is a type of war directed at “civilian ene-
mies,” and the book is an effort to explain his view of genocide. 
 Sheldon, Dinah, ed.  Encyclopedia of Genocide and Crimes 
against Humanity . Detroit: Macmillan Reference, 2005. 
 This is a huge addition to genocide reference books, updating 
Charney ’ s edited volume published in the 1990s. 
 Sluka, Jeffrey A., ed.  Death Squad: The Anthropology of State 
Terror . Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2000. 
 An anthology, also written by social anthropologists, that exam-
ines the nature and the use of state terror as policy to destroy 
undesirable residents of a country. 
 Smith, Dan, Kristin Ingstad Sandberg, Pavel Baev, and Wenche 
Hauge.  The State of War and Peace Atlas . New York: Penguin, 1997. 
 This small atlas provides the reader with an excellent visual lay-
out of the areas of the world where civil wars, mass murder, and 
genocide have taken place since 1945. 
 Staub, Ervin.  The Roots of Evil: The Origins of Genocide and 
Other Group Violence . Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University 
Press, 1989, 2007. 
 This is an early examination of the psychology of those who par-
ticipate in genocidal actions. Explaining the roots of genocide, 
according to the author, means the weaving of an explanatory 
mosaic containing descriptions of social, economic, cultural, polit-
ical, and group patterns in a society, and how this knowledge can 
be used to prevent the outbreak of genocide. 
 Stiglmayer, Alexandra, ed.  Mass Rape: The War against Women in 
 Bosnia-Herzegovina . Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1995.  
 This is a powerful book that examines how rape of enemy women 
became a tactic used by Bosnian Serbs to destroy the Bosnian 
Muslim culture. 
 Tanaka, Yukiko.  Hidden Horrors: Japanese War Crimes in World 
War II . Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1997. 
 This book focuses on the biological experiments and other crimes 
of the infamous Unit 731 whose men were never brought to justice 
after the Second World War ended in the Paciﬁ c.  

236 Resources
 Totten, Samuel, and William S. Parsons, eds.  Century of Geno-
cide: Critical Essays and Eyewitness Accounts . 3rd ed. New York: 
Routledge, 2009. 
 This is an important collection of essays, eyewitness accounts, 
and memoirs that account for the many crimes against humanity 
and genocides that have occurred in the 20th century and early 
21st century (Darfur). 
 van den Berge, Pierre L., ed.  State Violence and Ethnicity . Boul-
der, CO: University Press of Colorado, 1990. 
 An excellent book to begin research about the use of state terror 
and how it folds into a policy of genocide. 
 Varney, Steven, and Hunt Tooley, eds.  Ethnic Cleansing in 
 Twentieth-Century Europe . New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2003. 
 An anthology that contains various perspectives about the  concept 
of ethnic cleansing—deﬁ nitions and events—that was actualized 
in late 20th-century Europe. 
 Waller, James.  Becoming Evil: How Ordinary People Commit 
Genocide and Mass Killing . 2nd ed. New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2007. 
 An important social psychologist ’ s effort to explain why ordinary 
people willingly kill other people. He writes about his theory of 
“extraordinary human evil,” his attempt to explain why seem-
ingly ordinary men become willing participants in genocidal 
actions.  
 Weiss, Thomas G., and Cindy Collins.  Humanitarian Challenges 
and Interventions . 2nd ed. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 2000. 
 This small book provides a brief history of and an excellent analy-
sis of the many problems associated with humanitarian interven-
tion to end genocide. 
 Welsh, Claude E., Jr., ed.  NGOs and Human Rights: Promise 
and P erformance . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania 
Press, 2001.  
 An excellent source book for researchers and readers interested 
in the creation of and actions taken by advocacy organizations, 
NGOs, to confront human rights abuses and genocide. In the last 
quarter of the 20th century, these organizations have become major 

Print Resources 237
players in the effort to end human rights abuses by government. 
This book carefully examines their growth and development into 
forces for good in the international community. 
 Wheeler, Nicholas.  Saving Strangers: Humanitarian Intervention 
in International Society . Oxford, England: Oxford University 
Press, 2000.  
 Since its publication in 2000, the book has become a major refer-
ence point focusing on the issue of humanitarian intervention. 
 Whitaker, Benjamin.  Revised and Updated Report on the Ques-
tion of the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide . 
New York: United Nations, 1985. 
 This book/report was an effort to address the criticism leveled by 
critics of the 1948 Genocide Convention. The report did recom-
mend some revisions of the Convention based on the perceived 
narrowness of the 1948 document ’ s deﬁ nitions of genocide. 
 Ziegler, David W.  War, Peace, and International Politics . 7th ed. 
New York: Longman, 1997. 
 This book, in its seventh edition, provides the reader with a 
 realist ’ s understanding of the fundamental interconnections 
between international relations and one of its primary realities: 
war. The author also spells out a variety of efforts taken by the 
world community that will end war and bring peace. 
 Speciﬁ c Genocides and Mass Murders 
 There have been thousands of books written on the major geno-
cides of the 20th century, especially the Holocaust. Many of these 
books are memoirs by young persons, middle-aged adults, and 
senior survivors whose memories have been transcribed by their 
family members. Books that focus on genocides not enumerated, 
for example, the Chinese Silent Genocide (famine in 1958–1962) 
in this section of the bibliography are listed in the section above. 
 Armenian “Genocide,” 1915–1918 
 Ahmad, J.  The Young Turks . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1969. 
An early historic and political account of the radical movement in 
the Ottoman Empire at the turn of the 20th century that led to the 
overturn of the government by these revolutionaries called “Young 
Turks.”  

238 Resources
 Balakian, Grigoris.  Armenian Golgotha: A Memoir of the Arme-
nian Genocide, 1915 – 1918 . New York: Vintage Books, 2010. 
 A shocking, revealing memoir of an ethnic Armenian cleric who 
survived nearly two dozen arrests during the time of the Armenian 
Genocide. It is, at once, a moving, frank telling of the horrid story.  
 Balakian, Peter.  The Burning Tigris: The Armenian Genocide and 
America ’ s Response . New York: HarperCollins, 2003. 
 The book does an excellent job of focusing on the plight of the 
ethnic Armenians living in Turkey and the American reaction and 
response to the tragedy. 
 Bryce, James, and Arnold Toynbee.  The Treatment of Armenians 
in the Ottoman Empire, 1915–1916 . (British Blue Book) London, 
England, 1916.  www.cilicia.com/bryce/a00c.htm . 
 This is an important document, written by two well-respected 
historians for the British government during the First World War, 
that describes in detail the beginning of the Armenian genocide. 
 Cetin, Fethiye.  My Grandmother: A Memoir . New York: Verso, 1988. 
 This is another memoir that gives additional insight into the pro-
cess of genocide as carried out by the state and its military. 
 Dadrian, Vahakin.  Warrant for Genocide: Key Elements of the Turko-
Armenian Conﬂ ict . New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Press, 1999.  
 The reader is given a clear portrait of how the policy and the 
mechanics of the Turkish genocide against the ethnic Armenians 
was developed and implemented. 
 Hovannisian, Richard, ed.  Remembrance and Denial: The Case of the 
Armenian Genocide . Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1999.  
 An examination of the arguments presented by those who deny 
that there was ever an Armenian genocide during and after the 
First World War. 
 Hovannisian, Richard, ed.  The Armenian Genocide in Perspective . 
New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1987.  
 A collection of scholarly essays on the Armenian genocide before 
and during World War I. 
 Miller, Donald E., and Lorna Touryan Miller,  Survivors: An Oral 
History of the Armenian Genocide . Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press, 1999. 

Print Resources 239
 This book provides an oral history that examines the experiences 
of Armenian children who were not killed in the death marches. 
 Morgenthau, Henry.  Ambassador Morgenthau ’ s Story . Garden City, 
NY: Doubleday, Page, and Co., 1918.   http://www.armeniapedia
.org/index.php?title=Ambassador_Morgenthau%27s_Story .  
 Ambassador Morgenthau was America ’ s Ambassador to the Otto-
man Empire, stationed in Constantinople, and witnessed, ﬁ rsthand 
and from reports to him from the ﬁ eld, the horrors of the genocide. 
The book contains his strained relationships with the leaders of the 
Young Turk Movement.  
 Stalin ’ s Terror: The Forced Famine in the Ukraine, 
1929–1933 
 Applebaum, Anne.  Gulag: A Histor y. London: Penguin, 2003. 
 Another well-written historical account of the creation of the 
Gulag forced-labor camp system and its primary purpose in the 
ﬁ rst decades of the new Soviet system. 
 Conquest, Robert.  The Harvest of Sorrow: Soviet Collectiviza-
tion and the Terror-Famine . New York: Oxford University Press, 
1986. 
 A powerful indictment of Stalin ’ s successful effort to destroy 
seven million Kulaks brought on by the state-run Ukrainian fam-
ine of 1929–1933. The book also shows how the American Relief 
Administration and other NGOs fed more than 12 million starv-
ing Russians, which is one of the most successful humanitarian 
interventions in the history of the 20th century. 
 Davies, R. W., and Stephen G. Wheatcraft,  The Years of Hunger: 
Soviet Agriculture, 1931 – 1933 . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2004. 
 Another critical examination of the forced collectivization of Rus-
sian agriculture by Stalin that led to the starvation deaths of mil-
lions of Kulaks. 
 Dolot, Miron.  Execution by Hunger: The Hidden Holocaust . New 
York: W.W. Norton, 1985. 
 A chilling memoir of the Ukrainian famine of the early 1930s that 
killed millions of Ukrainians. 
 Service, Robert.  Stalin: A Biography . Cambridge, MA: Belknap 
Press, 2005. 

240 Resources
 A well-written biography of Stalin, one of the 20th century ’ s most 
notorious dictators. 
 Solzhenitsyn, Alexander.  The Gulag Archipelago, 1918 – 1956 . 
New York: HarperPerennial, 2002. 
 This is a classic study by a noted author who survived Sta-
lin ’ s brutal concentration camp system. It was a cruel system 
where millions of prisoners—political, agricultural, military, 
and social enemies of the state—were sent to work and to die 
anonymously.   
 Nazi Germany and the Jewish Genocide (Holocaust), 1939–1945 
 There have been thousands of books written about the Nazi geno-
cide of the European Jews. More books have been written about 
this six-year tragedy than any other genocide that occurred in the 
20th century. Included in this huge set are memoirs written by 
Jews who experienced the Holocaust, controversial history texts, 
and books that try to gauge the impact of sociology, psychology, 
law, politics, and anthropology in accounting for the mass slaugh-
ter of more than six million Jews across the whole of Europe. What 
follows are examples of the scope and multidimensionality of the 
writings that focus on the Nazi Germany efforts from 1939 to 1945 
to destroy the Jewish communities in Europe. 
 Hahn Beer, Edith, with Susan Dworkin,  The Nazi Ofﬁ cer ’ s Wife: 
How One Jewish Woman Survived the Holocaust . New York: 
Harper Perennial, 2000. 
 This is a memoir of one German Jewish woman ’ s survival in 
Nazi Germany—married to a German military person. Her story 
begins in prewar Germany and chronicles her escapes from cap-
ture by the Germans; it ends in postwar Germany where she is a 
judge with a small child and her husband, a military ofﬁ cer, is in 
a Russian gulag in Siberia. 
 Bloxham, Donald.  Genocide on Trial: War Crimes Trials and 
the Formation of Holocaust History and Memory . New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2001. 
 This small book is based on a controversial premise. Bloxham 
argues that the Nuremberg War Crimes Trials “did little to clarify 
conceptualizations of Nazi criminality in the public sphere any-
where. . . . They drew away from the victims of Nazi genocide and 
onto much more ambiguous symbols of suffering.”

Print Resources 241
 Bonhoeffer, Dietrich.  Letters and Papers from Prison . New York: 
Touchstone, 1997. 
  Bonhoeffer, a Lutheran clergyman, was imprisoned and eventually 
executed by the Nazis because of his sermons ’  condemnation of the 
brutality and immorality of the Nazi regime. This book is a collec-
tion of notes and correspondence covering the period from Dietrich 
Bonhoeffer ’ s arrest in 1943 to his execution by the Gestapo in 1945. 
 Browning, Christopher.  Ordinary Men: Reserve Police Battalion 
101 and the Final Solution in Poland . New York: Perennial, 1993.  
 A book that, using newly uncovered documents, examines how 
ordinary German policemen had no difﬁ culty participating in 
the brutal slaughter of Jews in conquered Eastern European and 
Russian territory. Browning underscores the importance of group 
dynamics and pressure as well as the shared anti-Semitism of these 
nonideological, ordinary men to account for their willingness to 
participate in the genocide of the Jews and other  untermenschen . 
 Burleigh, Michael.  Ethics and Extermination: Reﬂ ections on Nazi 
Genocide . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1997.  
 The book contains essays written by the author on a variety of 
 subjects, including Germany ’ s euthanasia policy, the racial state, and 
the treatment of Russians, Poles, and Jews when the war began.  
 Cornwell, John.  Hitler ’ s Pope: The Secret History of Pius XII . 
New York: Viking Press, 1999. 
 This book explores a controversial piece of Holocaust history: 
the relationship between Hitler and the Catholic Pope, Pius XII 
(who served as papal nunciate in Germany from 1917 to 1929). 
The author argues that there was a conﬂ ict between the Pope ’ s 
quest for power and the Church ’ s spiritual beliefs and goals. The 
outcome was the Pope ’ s collusion with Hitler ’ s mad tyranny that 
led to increased violence without the Church ’ s efforts to block the 
Nazi killing machine. 
 Frank, Anne.  The Diary of a Young Girl: The Deﬁ nitive Edition . 
New York: Doubleday, 1995. 
 This is the world ’ s most familiar diary of a young Jewish woman 
during the Holocaust. Anne, who lived in Amsterdam, hid—with 
her family—for three years and wrote in her diary during all that 
time. She was captured by the Germans and sent to her death in a 
concentration camp. 

242 Resources
 Friedlander, Henry.  The Origins of Nazi Genocide: From Eutha-
nasia to the Final Solution . Chapel Hill: University of North 
Carolina Press, 1995. 
 This book examines the precursor of the genocide policy against 
Jews: Germany ’ s euthanasia project begun as soon as Hitler 
became the Fuhrer in 1933. From this beginning, killing lives not 
worth living, the development of the Nazi genocide policy is 
traced by the author. 
 Gellately, Robert, and Nathan Stolzfus, eds.  Social Outsiders in 
Nazi Germany . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001. 
 The authors bring together important essays on the “others” in 
Nazi Germany, the social outsiders, i.e., homosexuals, the inﬁ rm, 
mentally ill, gypsies, and Jews, who had to be eliminated in order 
for Nazi Germany to purify itself in the march toward the New 
Aryan Germany. 
 Goldhagen, Daniel J.  Hitler ’ s Willing Executioners: Ordinary 
Germans and the Holocaust . New York: Vintage, 1997.  
 Unlike Browning ’ s argument that, given peer pressure dynamics, 
ordinary men found it easy to murder Jews, Goldhagen ’ s book, 
using the same archival data, maintains that the single cause of 
the success of the Holocaust was the German citizen ’ s deep-rooted 
hatred of the Jewish community. 
 Hilberg, Raul.  The Destruction of the European Jews . 3 vol., 3rd 
ed. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2003. 
 Hilberg ’ s outstanding scholarship on the Nazi effort to destroy the 
Jewish communities in Europe has led to this classic set of books. 
It is an account, highlighting the bureaucratization of the slaugh-
ter across the continent, of the events that is the starting point for 
any serious understanding of the Nazi genocide. His account is 
based on a careful examination of the thousands of documents 
produced by the Germans. From these data, his book constructs a 
factual record of the Holocaust. 
 Hirschﬁ eld, Gerhard, ed.  The Politics of Genocide: Jews and 
Soviet Prisoners of War in Nazi Germany . Boston: Allan and 
Unwin, 1986.  
 The book draws parallels between the Nazi treatment of Russian 
prisoners of war and the Jewish communities in Europe. Both 
were seen as  untermenschen not worthy of life. 

Print Resources 243
 Hitler, Adolf.  Mein Kampf. Mannheim, Ralph, trans. Boston, 
MA: Houghton Mifﬂ in, 1943.  
 This book, written by Hitler while serving a year in prison, was ﬁ rst 
published in 1926. It lays out his grandiose plans for the New Ger-
many as well as his virulent hatred of Jews and what he thought 
Germany must do to relieve the society of these parasites. 
 Kennealy, Thomas.  Schindler ’ s List . New York: Touchstone, 1993.  
 A fact-based story about a famous rescuer of Jews working in his 
factory in Crakow, Poland. A moving, Oscar-winning movie was 
made of this story. 
 Klemperer, Victor.  I Will Bear Witness: A Diary of the Nazi Years . 
2 vol. New York: Modern Library, 1999, 2001. 
 Klemperer ’ s books are a memoir of a Jew living in Berlin dur-
ing the war. He survived the horror because he was married to a 
non-Jewish woman and, under Nazi law, was treated differently. 
His book examines life in Nazi Germany during the entire Nazi 
period, 1933–1945. 
 Landau, Ronnie S.  The Nazi Holocaust . Chicago, IL: Ivan R. 
Dee, 1994. 
 A well-written insightful examination of the origins of the geno-
cide against the Jews. 
 Laskier, Rutka.  Rutka ’ s Notebook: A Voice from the Holocaust . 
Jerusalem, Israel: Yad Veshem, 2008. 
 This memoir is a diary written by a 14-year-old Polish Jewess 
over three months before her transportation to Auschwitz in 1943 
where she perished. It accounts the horror of captivity and living 
in the Bedzin ghetto and the depravity of the German soldiers 
who guarded them. 
 Levi, Primo.  Survival in Auschwitz . New York: Touchstone, 1996. 
 The author, a Jewish survivor of the Nazi death camps, provides 
the reader with a unforgettable account of his almost two years in 
these camps. 
 Lewy, Guenter.  The Nazi Persecution of the Gypsies . Oxford, 
England: Oxford University Press, 2000. 
 A controversial examination of the Nazi extermination policy 
employed against European Roma (Gypsies). 

244 Resources
 Lifton, Robert J.  The Nazi Doctors: Medical Killing and the Psy-
chology of Genocide . New York: Basic Books, 1986. 
 The author examines the psychology behind the actions of medi-
cal doctors in Nazi Germany in order to explain their participa-
tion in inhumane killings of human guinea pigs (Jews, Russian 
prisoners, and other groups). 
 Marrin, Albert.  Hitler . New York: Viking, 1987. 
 The book examines the childhood inﬂ uences and failures as a 
young adult (including an aborted painting career) that led to 
Hitler ’ s destructive, racist personality that emerged after World 
War I had ended. 
 Persico, Joseph E.  Nuremberg: Infamy on Trial . London: Penguin 
Press, 1995. 
 A very readable account of the German leaders who stood in 
the docket and faced war crimes and crimes against humanity 
charges. The author was able to interview many of them during 
the trial and the reader is presented with insights into the minds 
of these Nazi murderers. 
 Plant, Richard.  The Pink Triangle: The Nazi War against Homo-
sexuals . New York: Owl Books, 1988. 
 The author, who survived the Nazi regime, has written a book that 
examines the Nazi persecution and extermination of homosexuals. 
 Schlink, Bernhard.  The Reader . New York: Vintage Books, 1997. 
 This is an excellent, moving novel about a woman who was a con-
centration camp guard in the Crakow area of Poland and, years 
later, long after the war has ended, ﬁ nds herself and other guards 
on trial for their actions against Jews at the camp. 
 Toland, John.  Adolf Hitler . Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1976. 
 Toland ’ s book uses previously unpublished documents, diaries, 
notes, photographs, and dramatic interviews with Hitler ’ s col-
leagues and associates to create his portrait of the Nazi leader. 
 Wander, Fred, and Michael Hofmann, trans.  The Seventh Well . 
New York: Norton, 2005. 
 This is a novel about the lives of Jewish prisoners in Buchenwald, 
the last of the author ’ s 20 concentration camps. It focuses on how 
survival in the camps is the task of more than one person, the 
community of prisoners is the key to survival. 

Print Resources 245
 Weiss, John.  Ideology of Death: Why the Holocaust Happened in 
 Germany . Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 1996. 
 The book examines why Germany developed the Final Solution 
for the Jewish problem even though most European societies were 
generally anti-Semitic. 
 Weisel, Elie.  Night . Boston: Schocken Books, 2001. 
 In this, his ﬁ rst book, the noted author describes his concentration 
camp experiences. 
 Pol Pot and the Cambodian Genocide, 1975–1979 
 Becker, Elizabeth.  When the War Was Over: Cambodia and the 
Khmer Rouge Revolution . New York: Public Affairs, 1998. 
 The book examines the rationale behind the grim reality of the 
killing ﬁ elds. A very readable history of the Khmer Rouge years 
in power. 
 DePaul, Kim, ed.  Children of Cambodia ’ s Killing Fields: Mem-
oirs by Survivors . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1997. 
 Like so many collections of memoirs written by children and teen-
agers, this is a series of harrowing tales of human survival in the 
most difﬁ cult of conditions: the Killing Fields of Cambodia. 
 Hinton, Alexander L.  Why Did They Kill? Cambodia in the Shadow 
of Genocide . Berkeley: University of California Press, 2005.  
 The author, an anthropologist, offers the reader an anthropologi-
cal explanation of the killings during the Khmer Rouge era. 
 Kamm, Henry.  Cambodia: Report from a Stricken Land . New 
York: Arcade Publishing, 1998. 
 This is a Pulitzer Prize–winning journalist ’ s account of the Cam-
bodian tragedy, from 1970 into the last decade of the 20th century. 
He also provides a history of the Khmer empire from the earliest 
time. He analyzes the history of revolution, invasion, government 
overthrow, and genocide in Cambodia on the basis of his personal 
knowledge of Cambodian leaders and many interviews. It is an 
excellent read. 
 Kiernan, Ben.  The Pol Pot Regime: Race, Power, and Genocide in 
 Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge, 1975 – 1979 . New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press, 1996. 
 Another ﬁ ne, detailed study—based in part on more than 500 
interviews with survivors of the Killing Fields—of the violent 

246 Resources
beginning of the Pol Pot years, written by a scholar who is an 
expert in the area of genocide and directs the Yale University 
genocide project. He sets out to answer a question raised in every 
genocidal event: Why did Cambodians—many highly educat-
ed—impose the cruelest genocide on fellow Cambodians.  
 Ung, Loung.  First They Killed My Father: A Daughter of Cambo-
dia Remembers . New York: HarperCollins, 2000. 
 A frightening memoir, written by a Chinese-Cambodian young 
woman, about her survival during the Pol Pot regime. 
 Milosevic and the Bosnian Genocide, 1992–1995 
 Bass, Gary Jonathan.  Stay the Hand of Vengeance: The Politics 
of War Crimes Tribunals . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 2000.  
 This book provides the reader with an inside view of the politics 
surrounding the creation of war crimes trials, beginning with an 
examination of the Nuremberg and Tokyo tribunals and ending 
with the politics of the creation of the ICTY and the ICTR. 
 Boyle, Francis A.  The Bosnian People Charge Genocide: Proceedings 
at the International Court of Justice Concerning BOSNIA V. SER-
BIA on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide . 
Amherst, MA: Alethia Press, 1996.  
 The author was the legal advisor for the leaders of two break-
away nations, Croatia and Bosnia, in their legal proceedings in 
the International Court of Justice. This book presents the case he 
made for the people of Bosnia-Herzegovina in the effort to stop 
the killings. 
 Brkic, Courtney Angela.  The Stone Fields: Love and Death in the 
 Balkans . New York: Picador, 2004. 
 This is a very moving story of a young forensic anthropologist, 
part of a UN-sponsored forensic team sent to Bosnia after 1995 to 
ﬁ nd the missing bodies in the area of Srebrenica and, using foren-
sic skills, to try to identify the bones of these victims of Bosnian-
Serb ethnic cleansing. What makes this a special experience is that 
the author is a Bosnian Muslim whose family lived in the very 
area where she was doing her forensic work. 
 Crnobrnja, Mihailo.  The Yugoslav Drama . 2nd ed. Montreal: 
McGill-Queen ’ s University Press, 1996. 

Print Resources 247
 The author was the Yugoslav ambassador to the European 
 Community before the nation deteriorated after Tito ’ s death in 
1980. His book, based on his experiences as a politician/diplomat, 
provides some new insights into the destruction of Yugoslavia and 
the emergence of nationalist leaders such as Slobodan Milosevic.  
 Doder, Dusko, and Louise Branson,  Milosevic: Portrait of a 
Tyrant . New York: Free Press, 1999. 
 This biography of a key ﬁ gure in the disintegration of Yugoslavia 
examines his upbringing that led to his uncanny ability to manip-
ulate and to mobilize citizens in order to create a New Serbia. 
These actions include the ethnic cleansing of Croatia, Bosnia, and 
Kosovo, and the authors describe his 1999 actions and his indict-
ment by the ICC. 
 Filipovic, Zlata.  Zlata ’ s Diary: A Child ’ s Life in Sarajevo . New 
York: Viking Penguin, 1994. 
 This is another diary written by a young teenaged girl that 
describes the conditions in Sarajevo during the three years of 
bombardment, 1992–1995, by Bosnian Serb artillery and snipers 
in the mountains overlooking the city. 
 Fromkin, David.  Kosovo Crossing: American Ideals Meet Reality 
on the Balkan Battleﬁ elds . New York: The Free Press, 1999. 
 This book by a noted historian examines the relationship between 
American ideals and the reality of events in Bosnia and the impli-
cations of this clash between values and brutal reality. 
 Hagen, John.  Justice in the Balkans: Prosecuting War Crimes in The 
Hague Tribunal . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2003.  
 Hagen ’ s book argues that although the ICTY, at its inception, was 
seen as a throw-away institution that would have little lasting 
impact, it has become a major model and resource for providing 
justice to the victims of the genocide. A key to the change, for the 
author, has been the very high quality of its prosecutors and its 
judges. Their actions are written about in this book. 
 Honig, Jan Willem, and Norbert Both.  Srebrenica: Record of a 
War Crime . New York: Penguin Books, 1996. 
 This small book provides the reader with a frank and brutal look, 
based on documents and eyewitness reports, at the Bosnian Serb 
march into Srebrenica, one of the six “safe areas”  supposedly 
under the control and protection of UN peacekeepers. The 

248 Resources
roundup of nearly 30,000 Bosnian Muslims is recounted in grim 
detail,  especially the murder of more than 8,000 boys and men. 
 Malcolm, Noel.  Kosovo: A Short History . New York: NYU Press, 
1999. 
 The author, a historian, provides the reader with an excellent 
overview of the history of the Balkan provinces from 850 ce, 
including their existence on the Ottoman Empire, the long-
standing differences and clashes between Kosovars, Serbs, Alba-
nians, Croats, and Bosnians, the impact of the First World War 
on these regions, and the tragedy of Kosovo while Milosevic was 
the Serbian president.  
 Neuffer, Elizabeth.  The Key to My Neighbor ’ s House: Seeking 
Justice in Bosnia and Rwanda . New York: Picador, 2001. 
 The author is a journalist who has covered the events in Bosnia and 
Rwanda for more than a decade. Her book depicts the events in 
those two areas through the telling of three stories of survivors of 
these genocides. She bases her writing on extensive interviews 
with perpetrators and victims of both tragedies, with forensic 
experts, and with judges who sat on the two ad hoc tribunals 
established by the United Nations in 1993 and 1994, respectively. 
 Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).  Kos-
ovo/Kosova: As Seen As Told . October 1998–October 1999.   http://
www.osce.org/search/?displayMode=3&lsi=18q=kosovo%2Fko
seva%3Aas+seen+as+told&GO=GO 
 An excellent, very detailed report on the atrocities committed by 
the Serbs in Kosovo. 
 Rohde, David.  Endgame: The Betrayal and Fall of Srebrenica, 
Europe ’ s Worst Massacre since World War II . Boulder, CO: West-
view Press, 1998. 
 The author has penned a moving story about the Serb devastation 
of Srebrenica, the brutal killing of nearly 8,000 boys and men, and 
the rape of thousands of Bosnian women. 
 Sarhandi, Daoud, and Alina Boboc.  Evil Doesn ’ t Live Here: Posters 
from the Bosnian War . London: Laurence King Publishing, 2001.  
 This is a shocking but visually stunning book that contains post-
ers from the combatants in the Bosnian wars—Croatian, Bosnian, 
and Serbian art that presents the visual propaganda battle that 
was waged from 1992 to 1995. 

Print Resources 249
 Scharf, Michael P.  Balkan Justice: The Story Behind the First 
International War Crimes Trial since Nuremberg . Durham: 
Carolina Academic Press, 1997.  
 Examines the events that led to the creation of the ICTY in 1993 by 
the United Nations as well as carefully explaining and describing 
the very ﬁ rst trial, that of Dusko Tadic. 
 Sell, Louis.  Slobodan Milosevic and the Destruction of Yugosla-
via . Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2002. 
 An important historical account of the life of the most important 
of the radical nationalists who emerged as leaders after the death 
of Tito in 1980. It is a story of how men such as Milosevic, with 
their grand visions of a New Serbia, led to the bloody genocides 
in the former Yugoslavia during the 1990s. 
 Sells, Michael A.  The Bridge Betrayed: Religion and Genocide in 
Bosnia . Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996. 
 In this book, Sells describes the genocide in Bosnia as a result of 
the clash of religious forces in the region: Orthodox Serb, Catholic 
Croat, and Muslim Bosnian. The leaders of these communities, 
especially the Serb nationalists (Milosevic) used these religious 
differences to mobilize the groups to wage war in the former 
Yugoslavia in the 1990s. 
 Silber, Laura, and Allan Little.  Yugoslavia: Death of a Nation . 
New York: TV Books, 1995. 
 This is one of the ﬁ rst books about the Bosnian wars and remains 
an excellent starting point for those interested in this particular 
genocidal event. It does a masterful job of showing the literal 
breakdown of a nation into warring provinces. 
 Stiglmayer, Alexandra, ed.  Mass Rape: The War against Women in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina . Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1995.  
 Since its 1995 publication this collection of essays has become a 
basic starting point for research on sexual violence against women 
as genocide. 
 Stover, Eric, and Gilles Peress.  The Graves: Srebrenica and Vukovar . 
New York: Scalo Zurich, 1999.  
 An amazing, frightening collection of stories about forensic exca-
vations in Bosnia to ﬁ nd the Bosnian Muslims murdered by Bos-
nian Serb militias. The research and photographs in the book were 
collected in Bosnia and Croatia between 1992 and 1997. 

250 Resources
 The Hutu Genocide of the Tutsi, Rwanda, 1994 
 Dallaire, Romeo.  Shake Hands with the Devil: The Failure of 
Humanity in Rwanda . New York: Carroll and Graf, 2004. 
 This is a powerful indictment of the failure of the UN to use its 
on-station UN troops to stop the genocide from taking place. The 
author was the Commander of the peacekeeping force in Rwanda 
who tried unsuccessfully to convince the UN bureaucrats to allow 
his troops to act. 
 Des Forges, Alison.  Leave None to Tell the Story: Genocide in 
Rwanda . New York: Human Rights Watch, 1999. 
 This is an important report on the destruction of human rights 
within the Rwanda genocide. 
 Gourevitch, Philip.  We Wish to Inform You That Tomorrow We 
Will Be Killed with Our Families: Stories from Rwanda . New 
York: Farrar, Strauss, and Giroux, 1998. 
 This is a powerful—and best-selling—book, based on extensive 
interviews with Rwandans, that dramatically lays out the context 
within which the Rwandan genocide took place. 
 Prunier, Gerard.  The Rwanda Crisis: History of a Genocide . New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1997. 
 This book, very carefully documented, has become the start-
ing point for researchers and readers who focus on the 1994 
genocide. 
 Scherrer, Christian P.  Genocide and Crisis in Central Africa: 
Conﬂ ict Roots, Mass Violence, and Regional War . Westport, CT: 
Praeger, 2002. 
 This book is an expansive account of the many civil wars, mass 
killings, and genocides that have occurred in Africa over the past 
four decades. 
 al-Bashir and the Darfur Genocide, Sudan, 2003– 
 De Waal, Alex.  Famine That Kills: Darfur, Sudan . 2nd ed. Oxford, 
England: Oxford University Press, 2004. 
 The author has provided researchers on genocide and mass mur-
der with a ﬁ rst-rate examination of the events that are taking place 
in the Sudan. 

Print Resources 251
 Prunier, Gerard.  Darfur: The Ambiguous Genocide . Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 2005. 
 The author, who has also written about the Rwanda genocide, has 
provided the reader with an excellent detailed examination of the 
Darfur genocide. 
 Press Coverage 
 This listing provides the reader with the ﬂ avor of journalistic 
coverage of world events that have exhibited mass murder and 
genocide. Major newspapers, for example,  The New York Times, 
The Washington Post, The Guardian  (UK), always carry stories that 
examine outbreak of war and the mass killings that occur as a 
manifestation of these hostilities. 
 Anderson. Scott. “How Did Darfur Happen?”  The New York Times. 
October 17, 2004. 
 Becker, Elizabeth. “U.S. Ties Military Aid to Peacekeepers ’  Immunity.” 
 New York Times.  August 10, 2002.  
 Bellinger, John B., III. “A Global Quandary for the President.”  The 
Washington Post. August 10, 2009.  www.washingtonpost.com .  
 Carl, Michael. “Obama May Put Americans under World Judges ’  
Power.”  World Net Daily. November 19, 2009.  www.wnd.com . 
 Crosette, Barbara. “US Budges at UN Talks on a Permanent Inter-
national Criminal Tribunal.”  New York Times. March 18, 1988, A1. 
 Danner, Mark. “The Killing Fields of Bosnia.”  New York Review of 
Books. September 24, 1998. 
 Draculic, Dlavenka. “Rape after Rape after Rape [in Bosnia].”  New 
York Times. December 13, 1992, A1. 
 Dworkin, Anthony. “Cambodian War Crimes Tribunal Given 
 Go-Ahead.” May 5, 2005.  www.crimesofwarproject.org . 
 Franchi, Howard. “International Court Eyes Role beyond War-
Crimes Trials.”  Christian Science Monitor. September 12, 2009, 1. 
 Goldman, T. R. “A World Apart, U.S. Stance on a New ICC Con-
cerns Rights Groups.”  Legal Times.  June 8, 1998. 
 Jackson, Donald W. “Creating a World Criminal Court Is Like 
Making Sausage—Except It Takes Longer.”  Texas Observer. June 
30, 1998, 19. 

252 Resources
 Lake, Anthony. “The Limits of Peacekeeping.”  New York Times. 
February 6, 1994, D17. 
 Lynch, Colum. “U.S. to Attend Conference Held by War 
Crimes Court.”  The Washington Post. November 17, 2009.   www
.washingtonpost.com .  
 MacAskill, Ewen. “U.S. May Join ICC, Hillary Clinton Hints.”  The 
Guardian. August 6, 2009.   www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009  .   
 Mydans, Seth. “Cambodia ’ s Leader Says Top Khmer Rouge 
Defectors Will Be Spared.”  New York Times.  December 29, 1998, A1.   
 Mydans, Seth. “Two Khmer Rouge Leaders Spend Beach Holiday 
in Shadow of Past.”  New York Times. January 1, 1999, A1. 
 Ryle, John. “Disaster in Darfur.”  New York Review of Books. August 
12, 2004. 
 Simons, Marlise. “International Court Begins First Trial.”  New 
York Times. January 29, 2009. 
 Schwammenthal, 
Daniel. 
“Prosecuting 
American 
‘War 
Crimes,’”  The Wall Street Journal . November 26, 2009.   www
.online.wsj.com .  
 Stanley, Alessandra. “U.S. Speciﬁ es Terms for War Crimes Court.” 
 New York Times.  July 10, 1998, A1. 
 Timberg, Craig. “Rwanda ’ s Tormentors Emerge from the Forest to 
Haunt Congo: Hutu Guerillas Find New Victims.”  The Washington 
Post. February 10, 2005. 
 Journals/Reports 
 Aksar, Yusuf. “‘Victimized Group’ Concept in the Genocide Con-
vention and the Development of International Humanitarian Law 
through the Practice of Ad Hoc Tribunals.”  Journal of Genocide 
Research 5, no. 2 (2003): 211–24. 
 Amnesty International Report 1998 . London: Amnesty International, 
1999. 
 This report is published annually by this very important NGO. 
 Bassiouni, M. Cherif. “From Versailles to Rwanda in Seventy-ﬁ ve 
Years: The Need to Establish a Permanent International Criminal 
Court.”  Harvard Human Rights Journal 10 (1997): 11–17. 
 CBC News. “The Genocide Convention.” September 18, 2006. 
 www.cbc.org . 

Journals/Reports 253
 Frontline Special Report. “The Crime of Genocide.” 1995.  http://
www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/rwanda/reports/
dsetexhe.html . 
 Goldberg, Mark L. “Congress Reverses Bush-Era Policy on the 
ICC.” March 12, 2009,  Report: Center for Strategic and International 
Studies .  www.csis.org . 
 Harff, Barbara. “No Lessons Learned from the Holocaust? 
 Assessing Risks of Genocide and Mass Murder.”  American Politi-
cal Science Review 97, no. 1 (February 2003): 57–73. 
 Howard-Hassman, Rhoda E. “Genocide and State-Induced Fam-
ine: Global Ethics and Western Responsibility for Mass Atrocities 
in Africa.”  Perspectives on Global Development and Technology  4, no. 
3–4 (2005): 487–516. 
 Human Rights. 2008. “Five Controversies on Genocide (. . .But 
Not the Only Five).”   http://humanrights.change.org/blog/
view/5_controversies_on_genocide_but_not_the_only_ﬁ ve . 
 Human Rights Tribune . “Value of UN Genocide Convention Ques-
tioned.” International Center for Transitional Justice, December 
17, 2008.  http://www.hrtribune.com . 
 International Committee of the Red Cross. “The Impact of 
Armed 
Conﬂ ict 
on 
Women.” 
  www.reliefweb.int/library/
documents/2001/icrc-women-17oct.pdf . 
 This report examines how women have been treated during wars, 
especially civil wars that took place in Rwanda, the Congo, and 
the Sudan. 
 Kiernan, Ben. “The Demography of Genocide in Southeast Asia: 
The Death Tolls in Cambodia, 1975–1979, and East Timor, 1975–
1980.”  Critical Asian Studies 35, no. 4 (2003): 585–97. 
 Kuperman, Alan J. “Provoking Genocide: A Revised History of 
the Rwanda Patriotic Front.”  Journal of Genocide Research  6, no. 1 
(March 2004): 61–84. 
 Marcus, David. “Famine Crimes in International Law.”  American 
Journal of International Law 97 (2003): 245–81. 
 McDonald, Garbrielle Kirk. “The Changing Nature of the Laws of 
War.”  Military Law Journal 156 (June 1998): 9–29. 
 Menoz Report. Report of the Special Advisor on the Prevention of 
Genocide—Visit to Darfur, Sudan, September 19–26, 2005. 
 Powell, Colin. Testimony before U.S. Congress. U.S. Participa-
tion in UN Peacekeeping Activities. House Committee on Foreign 
Affairs, September 18, 2006.  www.cbc.org . 

254 Resources
 Rudolph, Christopher. “Constructing an Atrocities Regime: The 
Politics of War Crimes Tribunals.”  International Organization 55, 
no. 3 (Summer 2001): 655–91. 
 Stahn, C. “The Ambiguities of Security Council Resolution 1422.” 
 European Journal of International Law 14 (2003): 85–104. 
 Stanley Foundation. “The UN Security Council and the ICC: How 
Should They Relate.” Arden House, New York, February 20–22, 1988.   
 Stanton, Gregory H.  The 8 Stages of Genocide . 1998. (Originally 
presented as a brieﬁ ng paper at the U.S. State Department
in 
1996.) 
 http://www.genocidewatch.org/aboutgenocide/
8stagesofgenocide.html .  
 Straus, Scott. “Darfur and the Genocide Debate.”  Foreign Affairs 
84, no.1 (2004): 123–33. 
 U.S. Department of State. Fact Sheet. “The International Criminal 
Court.”  Ofﬁ ce of War Crimes Issues , Washington, D.C., May 6, 2002.  
 Varner, Bill. Obama ’ s Envoy Voices Support for International 
Court. January 29, 2009.  http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/
news?pid=newsarchive&sid=aYK_ULgi3Ix0 . 
 Wisner, Frank. Report Presented in U.S. Congress,  International 
Peacekeeping and Peace Enforcement , U.S. Senate Committee on 
Armed Forces, 1993. 
 Zappala, Salvatore. “The Reaction of the US to the Entry into Force 
of the ICC Statute: Comments on UN SC Resolution 1422 (2002) 
and Article 98 Agreements.”  Journal of International Criminal Justice 
1 (2002): 114–34. 
 Nonprint Resources 
 There have been many dozens of ﬁ lms made—in America and in 
Europe—that tell about genocidal events in 20th-century history. 
Listed is a sampling of the available ﬁ lms. All are available on DVD. 
 Films 
 Armenia 
 Ararat, 2002 
 Lark Farm, 2007 
 Mayrig, 2000 
 Screamers, 2006 

Nonprint Resources 255
 Bosnia 
 Behind Enemy Lines, 2001 
 Grafﬁ ti Street, 2007 
 Harrison ’ s Flowers, 2000 
 No Man ’ s Land, 2001 
 Cambodia 
 The Killing Fields, 1984 
 Nazi Germany 
 Deﬁ ance, 2008 
 Diary of Anne Frank, 1959 
 Escape from Sobibor, 1987 
 Europa, Europa, 1990 
 Everything Is Illuminated, 2005 
 Jakob the Liar, 1999. 
 Judgment at Nuremberg, 1961 
 Life Is Beautiful, 1998 
 Man in the Glass Booth, 1975 
 Night and Fog, 2003 
 Out of the Ashes, 2003 
 Playing for Time, 1980 
 Schindler ’ s List, 1993 
 Sophie ’ s Choice, 1982 
 The Black Book, 2006 
 The Couple, 2004 
 The Garden of the Finzi-Continis, 1970 
 The Grey Zone, 2001 
 The Juggler, 1953 
 The Last Stop, 1948 
 The Music Box, 1990 
 The Pawnbroker, 1964 
 The Pianist, 2002 
 The Reader, 2008 
 The Shop on Main Street, 1966 
 The Sorrow and the Pity, 1972 
 The Wall, 1982 
 Rwanda 
 Beyond the Gates, 2007 
 The Devil Came on Horseback, 2007 
 Hotel Rwanda, 2005 
 Munyurangabo, 2009 
 Shooting Dogs, 2005 
 Sometimes in April, 2005 

256 Resources
 A Sunday in Kigali, 2006 
 South American Military Juntas 
 Missing, 1984 (Chile) 
  Documentaries 
 Armenia 
 Assignment Berlin, 1981 
 The Armenian Genocide: 1915–1923, 2007 
 The Greek Holocaust: 1915–1922, 2007 
 The River Ran Red, 1993 
 Voices from the Lake, 2007 
 Bangladesh 
 Earth, 1998 
 Bosnia 
 Beyond Reasonable Doubt, 2005 
 Human Tragedy: The Faces of Kosovo, 2001 
 Living in Emergency: Stories of Doctors without Borders, 2010 
 Milosevic on Trial, 2007 
 Resolution 819, 2008 
 Savior, 1998 
 Shot through the Heart, 1998 
 Srebrenica: A Genocide Foretold, 2005 
 Vukovar, 1994 
 Welcome to Sarajevo, 1997 
 Yellow Wasps: Anatomy of a War Crime, 1996 
 Cambodia 
 New Year Baby, 2006 
 Pol Pot: A Man of Genocide, 2002 
 Rain Falls from Earth, 2007 
 S-21: The Khmer Rouge Killing Machine, 2002 
 Scarred by History: Among the Disappeared, 2002  
Darfur 
 A Journey to Darfur, 2007 
 Darfur Destroyed, 2009 
 Darfur Diaries, 2006 
 Darfur Now, 2008 
 God Grew Tired of Us, 2005 
 Sand and Sorrow, 2007 
 The Devil Came on Horseback, 2007 
 Unholy War: Christian Genocide in Sudan, 2008 

Nonprint Resources 257
 East Timor 
 Death of a Nation, 1994 
 Iraq 
 Chemical Ali ’ s Anfal, 2005 
 In the Name of Honor, 2000 
 Japan 
 Declassiﬁ ed: Human Experimentation, 2008 
 The Rape of Nanking: China and Japan at War, 2005  
 Nazi Germany 
 A Day in October, 1991 
 All My Loved Ones, 2000 
 And the Violins Stopped Playing, 1988 
 Kaddish, 1984 
 KZ, 2005 
 Out of the Ashes, 2003 
 Shanghai Ghetto, 2002 
 Shoah, 1985 
 Sobibor, October 14, 1943, 4 p.m., 2001 
 The Children Remember the Holocaust, 1995 
 The Eternal Jew, 1940 
 The Lost Children of Berlin, 1997 
 The Memory of Justice, 1976 
 The Warsaw Ghetto, 1966 
 We Live Again, 1946 
 Russia 
Alexander Solzhenitsyn ’ s First Circle, 1989 
 The Soviet Story, 2010 
 Rwanda 
 As We Forgive, 2009 
 Keepers of Memory, 2005 
 100 Days, 2001 
 Rwanda—Do Scars Ever Fade? 2008 
 Rwanda—Hope Rises, 2010 
 Shake Hands with the Devil: The Journey of General Dallaire, 2004  
 Triumph of Evil, 1998 
 South American Military Juntas 
 Pinochet ’ s Last Stand, 2006 
 Romero, 1989 (El Salvador) 
 Social Genocide, 2005 (Argentina) 
 Sweet Country: The 1973 Chile Coup d ’ état, 1976 
 The Disappeared, 2007 (Argentina) 

258 Resources
 The Hour of the Furnaces, 1968 (Argentina) 
 The Ofﬁ cial Story, 1985 (Argentina) 
 Television/Videotapes 
 ABC News Classic:  Cambodia: This Shattered Land , 2008 
 ABC News Nightline:  Starvation in Srebrenica , 2007 
 ABC News Nightline:  The Sudan , 2007 
 ATV: Year Zero:  The Silent Death of Cambodia , 1979 
 BBC:  The Death of Yugoslavia , 2002 
BBC Miniseries:  QBVII , 1974 
 CBC:  Nuremberg , 2000 
 CNN:  Scream Bloody Murder , 2008 
 NBC:  Diary of Anne Frank , 1967, 1980 
NBC Miniseries:  The Holocaust , 1979 
 PBS Bill Moyers ’ Journal:  Srebrenica: A Cry from the Grave , 1999. 
 PBS Frontline:  Ghosts of Rwanda , 2004 
 PBS Frontline:  Memory of the Camps , 2006 
 PBS Frontline: Special Report, “ The Crime of Genocide .” 1995 
 PBS Frontline:  The Armenian Genocide , 2006 
 PBS Frontline:  Valentina ’ s Nightmare in Rwanda , 1997 
 PBS:  Playing for Time , 1980 
 PBS The American Experience:  The Nuremberg Trials , 2006 
 Touchstone:  Anne Frank: The True Story , 2001 (TV mini-series) 
 WNET:  Srebrenica: A Cry from the Grave , 1999. 
 Databases/Web Sites 
 Anne Frank Center USA at  www.annefrank.com . 
 Armenian Genocide Museum-Institute at   www.gen-mus.am/
eng/index.php . 
 Armenian Genocide at  www.armenian-genocide.org . 
 Armenian National Institute at  www.armenian-genocide.org . 
 Armenian Research Center at   www.umd.umich.edu/dept/
armenian . 
 Bangladesh Genocide Archive at  www.genocidebengladesh.org . 
 Bosnia Genocide Research at  www.cco.caltech.edu/-bosnia . 
 Cambodia Genocide Project at  www.yale.edu/cgp . 
 China Famine Study at  www.genocideproject.net . 
 Coalition for the ICC at   www.iccnow.org/documents/usandtheicc
.html . 

Nonprint Resources 259
 Committee on Conscience at  www.ushmm.org/conscience . 
 Council on Hemisphere Affairs (focus on South America) at   www
.coha/org . 
 Crimes of War at  www.crimesofwar.org . 
 Cybrary of the Holocaust at  www.remember.org . 
 East Timor Genocide Project at  www.yale.edu/gsp/east_timor . 
 Gendercide Watch at  www.gendercide.org . 
 Genocide and Human Rights Institute at  www.niu.edu . 
 Genocide Documents Center at   www.ess-uwe.ac.uk/genocide
.htm . 
 Genocide Intervention at  www.genocideintervention.net/index.php . 
 Genocide 
Research 
Project 
at 
  www.people.memphis.edu/
genocide . 
 Genocide Studies Program at  www.yale.edu/gsp . 
 Genocide Watch at  www.genocidewatch.org . 
 Holocaust Education through Art at  www.holocaust-art.org . 
 Holocaust History Project at  www.holocaust-history.org . 
 Holocaust New at  www.h-net.org . 
 Holocaust Teachers Resource Center at  www.holocaust-trc.org . 
 Human Rights USA at  www.hrusa.org . 
 Human Rights Watch at  www.hrw.org . 
 IDEA: Journal of Social Issues at  www.wiley.com/bw/journal
.asp?ref=0022-4537 
 International Association of Genocide Scholars at  www.
instituteforthestudyofgenocide.org . 
 International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) at  www.ictr.org . 
 International Criminal Tribunal for former Yugoslavia (ICTY) at 
 www.icty.org . 
 International Law-Genocide at  www.in_law.site.weslyn.an.edu/
tag/genocide . 
 International Military Tribunal for Germany, at   http://avalon
.law.yale.edu/subject_menus/imt.asp . 
 Nizkor Project at  www.nizkor.org . 
 Posen Bibliographic Project on Antisemitism at  www.sicsa.huji.ac-il . 
 Prevent Genocide International at  www.preventgenocide.org . 
 Russian Famine at  www.infoukes.com/hist/famine/index.html . 
 Rwanda Development Gateway at  www.rwandagateway.org . 
 Rwanda Genocide at  www.hrw.org/reports/1999/rwanda . 
 Simon Wiesenthal Center at  www.wiesenthal.com . 
 Special Court for Sierra Leone, SCSL at  www.sc-sl.org . 
 Sudan Genocide at  www.unitedhumanrights.org/sudan_ geocide_
genocide_in_sudan.php .

260 Resources
 Sudan Research, Analysis, and Advocacy at  www.sudanreeves.org . 
 The  Armenian  Genocide  at    www.unitedhumanrights.org/
Genocide/armenian_genocide.htm . 
 The International Criminal Court (ICC) at   www.icc-cpi.int/
MENUS/ICC?lan=en-GB 
 Ukrainian State Archives of Ukrainian Genocide Famine at   www
.archives.gov-ua .
 UN Human Rights page at  www.un.org/en/rights/index.shtml . 
 U.S. Department of State at  www.state.gov . 
 U.S. Department of State Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, 
and Labor at  www.state.gov/g/drl . 
 U.S. Department of State Ofﬁ ce of War Crimes Issues at   www.state
.gov/s/wci . 
 U.S. Department of State Ofﬁ ce of Special Envoy to Monitor and 
Combat Antisemitism at  www.state.gov/g/drl/seaa . 
 U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum at  www.ushmm.org . 
 Yad Veshem, The Holocaust Martyrs ’  and Heroes ’  Remembrance 
Authority at  www.yadveshem.org . 
 Yale Avalon Project at  www.avalon.law.yale.edu . 

261
 Glossary 
 Ad Hoc International Criminal Tribunals  These are criminal courts that 
hear cases involving major crimes universally condemned by the civilized 
world community. These crimes are crimes against humanity, war crimes, 
and genocide. The ﬁ rst two such ad hoc courts were convened by the victo-
rious Allies after the end of World War II: the Nuremberg, Germany Inter-
national Military Tribunal and, in Tokyo, Japan, the International Military 
Tribunal. Judges heard testimony regarding the actions of major German 
and Japanese political and military leaders. At the present time, ad hoc 
courts are created by UN resolutions to indict, arrest, and try persons 
accused of committing one or more of the major crimes enumerated above, 
in wars that took place in the former Yugoslavia (the ad hoc International 
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, 1993) and in Rwanda (the ad 
hoc International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, 1994). The UN Security 
Council sets the parameters for these courts, including dates and scope of 
the tribunal ’ s coverage, its organization, and its judicial processes before, 
during, and after trial.  
 Age of Impunity  This term reﬂ ects the primacy of the sovereign nation-
state. It covers the period from the late 18th century to the present time 
and is the basis for the present-day dilemma surrounding the failure of 
the world community to halt genocide before it can be implemented by 
a nation ’ s leaders or the leaders of armed forces engaged in a civil war 
within a nation. Leaders who engage their military forces in genocidal 
acts against a group or groups within the nation have been immune from 
any international intervention to stop the genocide because of the respect 
given to the notion of national sovereignty. Tyrants such as Hitler in Nazi 
Germany, Stalin in the Soviet Union, Idi Amin in Uganda, and Pol Pot in 
Cambodia exterminated their enemies with impunity. 
 Bilateral Immunity Agreements  These are bilateral treaties that were 
entered into by the United States and another sovereign nation between 2002 
and 2008. The nation agrees not to enforce an International Criminal Court 
(ICC) arrest warrant against any American personnel even though the nation 
has formally ratiﬁ ed the ICC. It reﬂ ects the concern on the part of American 

262 Glossary
leaders that U.S. military leaders and personnel and political leaders would 
face partisan efforts by other nation-states to indict and arrest Americans for 
alleged war crimes, crimes against humanity, or genocidal actions.  
 Collectivization of Agriculture  This process, which has occurred in 
nations led by tyrants (Stalin in the Soviet Union, Mao Tse-Tung in China, 
and Pol Pot in Cambodia), is a brutal process of forming agricultural col-
lective communities, where the agricultural products and property are 
controlled by the state. Ostensibly introduced as a method of creating 
greater efﬁ ciency in agricultural production than in the privately owned 
agricultural property, in reality, wherever collectivization was intro-
duced, famine—the silent genocide—occurred. 
 Command Responsibility  This term was ﬁ rst made part of the interna-
tional law of war in the 1945 trial of major Nazi leaders at Nuremberg, Ger-
many. It was codiﬁ ed in the 1949 Geneva Conventions. Although troops 
under the command of a military leader had committed genocide or war 
crimes or crimes against humanity  without  a general ’ s orders or even his 
 knowledge , that military commander was not absolved “from penal disci-
plinary responsibility” for the actions of his subordinates in the ﬁ eld.  
 Complementarity  This term reﬂ ects the relationship between a nation ’ s 
criminal justice system and the newly created, 1998, ICC. Paragraph 10 
of the Rome Statute states that “the ICC established under this Statute 
shall be complementary to national criminal jurisdictions.” Therefore, 
the initial legal actor in bringing before the bar of justice those persons 
accused of committing genocide, war crimes, or crimes against humanity 
is a nation ’ s own courts and judges. If that nation cannot or will not so 
act, then the ICC can take whatever legal action necessary to bring the 
perpetrators to justice. 
 Crimes against Humanity  Such crimes are deﬁ ned in the 1998 Rome 
Statute that created the ICC. They are “particularly odious offenses in that 
they constitute a serious attack on human dignity or grave humiliation or 
degradation of one or more human beings.” These crimes are an aspect of 
a government policy aimed at destroying a group; they are not isolated 
instances of atrocities. They usually occur in concert with genocide and 
war crimes. The Nuremberg and Tokyo tribunals concluded that the lead-
ers of these Axis powers had committed crimes against humanity.  
 Dehumanization       This is a social, psychological process in which mem-
bers of a national ethnic or racial group target another group within the 
region for extermination. An initial stage in the genocidal process is to per-
ceive the targeted group—racial, ethnic, foreign, or religious—as an  infe-
rior  one that jeopardizes the health and future development of that society. 
The inferiority of the targeted group becomes reﬂ ected in  discriminatory 
laws, the use of vile names such as “cockroach” (in Rwanda), parasite 
and vermin (in Nazi Germany), and other propaganda, the goal of which 
is to deprive the offensive group of all human qualities. 

Glossary 263
 Ethnic Cleansing  This term was ﬁ rst heard by the international com-
munity during the Bosnian War between Serb and Bosnian Serb forces 
on one side and Bosnian Muslims on the other. President Milosevic of 
Serbia and Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, spoke about 
the need to purify Bosnia of its Muslim population in order to create a 
“Greater Serbia” free of that religious group. Functionally, the concept 
has existed and has been practiced for centuries. Generally, it connotes 
the idea of literally moving ethnic or religious groups out of—or elimi-
nating them from—a particular region. The ethnic cleansing actions, for 
example, of Albanians from Turkey, of Hindus from Pakistan, of Tutsis 
from Rwanda, and of Jews from Europe were part of an overarching 
state policy of genocide.   
 Final Solution  This was the term used by the Nazi government when, 
in 1940, its leaders developed the policy of mass extermination of Jews 
in areas occupied by the German forces in Europe. The Final Solution 
was to kill all those, Jews and other inferior groups, who were unwor-
thy of life.  
 Genocide       The 1948 Genocide Convention said that genocide was a 
formal state policy made “with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a 
national, ethnical, racial or religious group, as such.”  
 Grave Breaches  The 1949 Geneva Conventions enumerated the ways 
wars were fought on land and on the sea, how civilians were to be treated 
in war, and how prisoners of war had to be handled by their capturers. 
Grave breaches are violations committed by an enemy against civilians 
and belligerents and include killing, torture, inhumane treatment, and 
willfully causing great, unnecessary suffering. 
 The Hague Conventions  These were a series of international treaties 
signed by a number of nations in 1899 and 1907 that tried to limit military 
excesses during war. 
 Hybrid International Criminal Courts  These courts are similar to ad 
hoc international courts except for the makeup of the prosecutors ’  ofﬁ ce 
and the judges. They are called hybrid because they are composed of 
national judges as well as jurists and prosecutors from other nations sit-
ting alongside the domestic contingent. Sierra Leone, East Timor, Cambo-
dia, and Afghanistan are four nations that have used such a court or have 
contemplated using such a court. 
 Interhamwe       These were civilian death squads of Hutus who, in the 
1994 Rwanda genocide, were tasked by their leaders with the extermina-
tion of the Tutsi enemy. 
 Janjaweed       These are armed Arabic Muslim militias in Sudan who 
are largely responsible for the murders of nearly 400,000 Africans, the 
destruction of hundreds of villages, and the rape of thousands of women 
living in the Darfur region. 

264 Glossary
 Kristallnacht        On the night of November 9, 1938, the beginning of the 
end of life as they knew it for German Jews began. It was to lead to 
the Final Solution. Across Germany and Austria, Nazis burned syna-
gogues, smashed stores owned by Jews, plundered homes of Jews, and 
killed many Jews during the night. It was called Kristallnacht because of 
all the broken glass littering the streets in front of the destroyed syna-
gogues. It was followed by more brutal and discriminatory laws that 
targeted Jewish assets and freedom to travel and denied them basic 
human rights.  
 Military Immunity from Prosecution  Until the end of the Second 
World War, military leaders charged with war crimes argued successfully 
that they were obeying orders from their superiors and were immune 
from prosecution. With Nuremberg and Tokyo, that concept ended. They 
could be tried and punished for failing to prevent illegal actions by their 
troops or for obeying orders that violated international laws of war. 
 PrepCom       In 1988, the UN secretary-general, in anticipation of the 
convening of nations to create an ICC, created preparatory commit-
tees—PrepComs—to begin to draft a proposed treaty for review and rati-
ﬁ cation. Ten years later, in 1998, the Rome Statute for the creation of the 
ICC was debated by more than 120 nations and was ratiﬁ ed. It came into 
force in 2002.  
 The “Disappeared”       These are civilians who opposed a military regime 
and who “disappeared” from society, having been killed by the regime; 
most of their bodies were never found. It has been a term used in military 
junta–controlled states such as Argentina, Guatemala, and Chile. How-
ever, in any genocide, there are thousands of dead who have disappeared, 
having been buried in mass graves known only to the perpetrators. 
 The “Other”  This is a term used to deﬁ ne enemies of a dictatorship. 
They are inferior outsiders not considered an integral element in that 
society and are targeted for dehumanization, discrimination, and the 
Final Solution. 
 Unit 731, Japanese Army  This was a highly secret medical-military 
unit in the Japanese Army that functioned in China from 1937 to 1945. 
They conducted medical experiments, including those with chemical and 
biological materials, on Chinese civilians and Allied prisoners of war. 
The unit developed and implemented chemical gas attacks on Chinese 
populations during the war. The leaders of this unit were never charged 
with war crimes or crimes against humanity. Instead, in return for this 
immunity, the medical personnel turned over all their data to American 
forces after the war ended. 
 Universal Jurisdiction  The Nuremberg and Tokyo war crimes tribunals 
concluded that there were certain crimes—war crimes and crimes against 
humanity (and, after 1948, genocide)—that were universally condemned. 

Glossary 265
Therefore any national court could claim jurisdiction and bring to the 
bar of justice those accused of committing such universal crimes against 
persons—even though the crimes were not committed in that nation. 
 War Crimes       This is considered a crime subject to universal jurisdiction. 
A war crime is a grave breach of the laws of war because of excessive and 
cruel actions taken against civilians and military personnel. 


267
 Index  
 “Acts of Barbarity,”  9,  232 
 “Acts of Vandalism,”  9,  16 
 Adalah,  203 
 Ad hoc International Criminal 
Tribunals,  48–49 
 Advocacy Project,  203 
 African rights,  203 
 African Union (AU),  40 
 African Union Mission in 
Sudan (AMIS),  40 
 age of impunity,  33,  38,  261 
 Agosti, Orlando Ramon,  131 
 Aidit, Dipa Nusantara,  128 
 Akayesu, Jean-Paul,  33 
 Al-Haq,  204 
 Allied Powers,  139 
 American Association of Jurists 
(AAJ),  204 
 American Civil War,  7 
 American Service-Members ’ Pro-
tection Act (ASPA),  76 
 Amin, Idi,  111 
 amnesty,  42–44 
 Amnesty International,  204 
 Anfal campaign, in Iraq,  103–104 
 Annan, Koﬁ ,  39,  48,  54 
 Anti-Landmines Convention,  60 
 Antonescu, Ion,  111–112 
 Arbenz, Jacobo,  114 
 Arbour, Louise,  120 
 Arendt, Hannah,  24 
 Armenian “Genocide,”  94–95 
 resources,  237–239 
 Armenian National Institute, 
Washington, D.C.,  204–205 
 Article 98 Waivers Signed by the 
United States and Second 
Nation-State, 2002–2008, 
 193–196 
 Association for Justice and 
Reconciliation, 
Guatemala,  114 
 Association for the Prevention 
of Torture (APT),
  218–219 
 Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations 
(ASEAN),  222 
 Australian Institute for 
Holocaust and 
Genocide Studies,  205 
 Awami League,  99 
 Axis Powers,  97 
 Bagosora, Theoneste,  112–113 
 “barbarization of warfare,”  18 
 Belgium,  2,  37,  105,  137 
 Bellinger, John III,  86 
 Biafran War, in Nigeria,  98–99 
 bilateral immunity agreement 
(BIAs),  80–83,  196–197, 
 261–262 
 Bixby, Martha,  3–4 
 Bolton, John,  75 

268 Index
 Bosnia,  16,  22,  29,  31–32,  34, 
 48–49,  63,  65,  70,  104, 
 107,  118,  120 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
(BiH),  16,  118,  121,  123 
 Bosnian Genocide (1992–1995), 
resources,  246–249 
 Bosnian War,  15,  32 
 Burundi 
 Hutus, execution of,  100–101 
 Bush, George W.,  67,  74 
 ASPA legislation,  77–81 
 strategy to weaken 
ICC,  81–83 
 unsigning of Rome 
statute,  74–77 
 Byrd, James,  78 
 Cambodia,  19,  22,  27,  33,  42, 
 46,  49,  51,  64,  101,  125–126, 
 194,  206 
 Cambodian Genocide 
(1975–1979), resources, 
 245–246 
 Cambodian Genocide 
Project,  205 
 Cambodian Khmer Rouge 
(1975–1979),  101 
 Campaign against Genocide,  205 
 Center for Constitutional Rights 
(CCR),  205–206 
 Center for Human Rights & 
Constitutional Law,  206 
 Center for Justice and 
International Law 
(CEJIL),  219 
 “certiﬁ cation waiver,”  79 
 Cheney, Dick,  76 
 China,  35,  54,  72,  96,  98,  101, 
 131,  136 
 Rape of Nanking (1937),  96 
 Christian American genocide,  94 
 Churchill, Winston,  7,  69 
 Citizens for Global Solutions, 
 81,  197,  206 
 Clinton, Bill,  36,  37,  39,  67, 
 71,  73,  84 
 Clinton, Hillary,  85,  91 
 Coalition for Independent 
Criminal Court (CICC),  54 
 Coalition for International 
Justice (CIJ),  206–207 
 Coalition for Women ’ s 
Human Rights in 
Conﬂ ict Situations,  219 
 Cold War,  13 
 Collective Humanitarian 
Intervention 
Organization,  46 
 Collective Security Treaty 
Organization,  90 
 collectivization,  95 
 collectivization of 
agriculture,  262 
 command responsibility,  262 
 Commission of Experts,  105 
 Commission on Historical 
Clariﬁ cation (CEH),  103 
 Commission on Sustainable 
Development,  220 
 Committee for Human 
Rights,  208 
 Committee of Enquiry,  68 
 Committee of Union and 
Progress (CUP),  113 
 commonwealth,  222 
 Commonwealth of Independent 
States (CIS),  222 
 Communist China, Great Leap 
Forward (1949),  98 
 Communist Party,  35,  126–128 
 Communist Revolution,  17 
 complementarity,  70,  262 
 Confederate Army,  8 
 Consolidated Appropriations 
Act,  197 
 Constitution of the International 
Military Tribunal (The 
Nuremberg Charter), 1945 
(excerpts),  139–143 

Index 269
 controversies, on genocide,  31 
 Convention on the Prevention and 
Punishment of the Crime of 
Genocide, December 9, 1948, 
 150–151 
 crimes, against humanity,  262 
 Crimes of War,  207 
 Croat Youth Movement,  123 
 Cultural Revolution,  131 
 “culture of impunity,”  17 
 Danish Center for Holocaust and 
Genocide Studies,  207 
 Darfur Genocide,  107 
 resources for,  250–251 
 Defense Department (DoD) 
Authorization Act,  78 
 dehumanization,  262 
 Democratic Republic of 
Congo (DRC) (1998–2007), 
 106–107,  196 
 Derechos,  207 
 diplomatic will, lack of, by 
UN and western 
powers,  38–40 
 Doctors without Borders, 
 219–220 
 East Bengal (1971),  99–100 
 East Pakistan(1971),  99–100 
 East Timor,  40,  45,  50,  128, 
 194,  206 
 Economic Community of 
West African States 
(ECOWAS),  222 
 Economic Support Funds 
(ESF),  197 
 Enver, Ismail,  113–114 
 Ethiopian People ’ s 
Revolutionary Democratic 
Front (EPRDF),  102 
 Ethiopian Red Terror
(1977–1978),  101–103 
 ethnic cleansing,  89,  90,  105, 
 118,  263 
 European Union (EU),  120, 
 222–223 
 Extraordinary Chambers in 
the Courts of Cambodia 
(ECCC),  43 
 Fascists,  19 
 Final Act of International 
Peace Conference 
July 29, 1899,  135–136 
 ﬁ nal solution,  25,  97,  116,  263 
 First World War,  7,  68,  114, 
 123,  128 
 Foreign Military Financing 
(FMF),  197 
 Foreign Operations 
Appropriation Bill,  80 
 Foreign Relations 
Authorization Act,  78 
 France,  54,  68,  95,  97,  112,  124, 
 127,  137,  219 
 gacaca trials, in Rwanda, 
 57–58 
 Garcia, Romeo Lucas,  114 
 Gasana, Anastase,  39 
 General Garcia,  114,  122 
 General Lee,  133 
 General Orders No. 100: 
Instructions For the 
Government of Armies 
of the United States in 
the Field by Francis 
Lieber: April 24, 1863, 
 133–135 
 General Suharto,  32 
 Geneva Conventions,  8, 
 13,  31,  34,  51,  105,  121, 
 135,  151–154,  209 
 genocide,  263 
 background of,  1–4 
 deﬁ nition of,  8–16 
 early twentieth century,  16–19 
 events that led to,  5 
 history of,  1–4 

270 Index
 genocide  ( continued ) 
 issues associated with,  20–29 
 occurrence of,  21–24 
 perpetrators, victims, and 
bystanders,  24–26 
 sovereign nation-state and,  5–6 
 stages leading to,  26–29 
 Genocide—A New Term 
and New Conception 
for Destruction of Nations, 
(excerpts),  138–139 
 Genocide Convention,  6, 
 13–15,  31–35,  37,  39–40
  47,  51,  53,  63,  69–70,  93, 
 98,  211 
 critics of,  33–36 
 solutions for,  40–58 
 Genocide Watch,  205,  208 
 German Communist Party,  115 
 German Nationalists,  115 
 German South West Africa 
 Herreros (1904–1907),  93 
 Germanization,  138 
 Germany 
 International Military 
Tribunals (IMT) in,  97 
 military tribunals in,  19–20 
 Nazi Holocaust,  96–97 
 Gestapo,  115 
 Ghraib, Abu,  21 
 Goebbels, Joseph,  115 
 “grave breaches,”  152,  263 
 Great Leap Forward (1949), 
 101,  131 
 in Communist China,  98 
 Grella, Jonathan,  82 
 Grossman, Marc,  75 
 Guatemala,  45,  61,  103,  114, 
 122–123 
 Guatemala Genocide,  103 
 Guatemalan Constitutional 
Court,  123 
 guerilla warfare,  110 
 Gulf Cooperation Council 
(GCC),  223 
 Hague,  33,  38,  40–41,  48,  52, 
 56,  80–81,  87,  120–121, 
 162–163 
 Hague Conventions,  8,  37,  263 
 Hague Peace Conference, 
1899,  135–136 
 Hague Treaty,  7 
 Helms, Jesse,  78 
 Helsinki Watch,  208 
 Herreros (1904–1907),  13, 
 17,  132 
 in German South West 
Africa,  93 
 Hindenburg,  115 
 Hitler,  15,  22,  24–25,  35, 
 96,  114–116,  127, 
 129–130,  138 
 Hitler, Adolf,  8,  15,  22, 
 24–25,  35,  96,  114–116, 
 127,  129–130,  138 
 Holocaust,  34,  116,  201, 
 207–208,  212–213 
 in Germany,  96–97 
 resources,  240–245 
 Human Rights Advocates (HRA), 
 220 
 Human Rights First,  208 
 Human Rights Watch (HRW),  43, 
 208 
 humanity, crimes 
against,  262 
 Hun Sen,  42–43 
 Hussein, Saddam,  33,  104,  116–117 
 Hutu Genocide (1994), resources, 
 250 
 Hutus,  2,  48,  57,  70,  100–101, 
 105–106,  112–113 
 hybrid ICCs, to deal with 
genocidists,  49–51 
 Hybrid International Criminal 
Courts,  263 
 ICC, permanent,  52–57 
 ICC treaty,  197 
 Iles, Greg,  21 

Index 271
 India,  46,  99–100,  137,  195,  212 
 Indonesia,  32,  50,  128 
 Institute for the Study of Genocide 
(ISG),  208,  209 
 Institute of World Affairs (IWA), 
 220–221 
 Institutional Center for Transi-
tional Justice,  51 
 intergovernmental Organizations 
(IGO),  221–224 
 working on genocide issues, 
 213–215 
 interhamwe,  263 
 International Association of 
Genocide Scholars,  209 
 International Committee of Jurists 
(ICJ),  209 
 International Committee of 
the Red Cross (ICRC),  59, 
 209–210,  227 
 International Convention on 
Genocide (1947–1948),  98 
 in United Nations,  98 
 International Criminal Court 
(ICC) 
 American antipathy towards, 
 68–71 
 International Criminal Tribunal 
for Rwanda (ICTR),  33,  106, 
 214–215 
 International Criminal Tribunal 
for the Former Yugoslavia 
(ICTY),  33,  105,  214 
 International Human Rights Law 
Group (IHRG),  59,  210 
 international law, future of,  88–91 
 International Law Commission 
(ILC),  53 
 International League for Human 
Rights (ILHR),  220 
 International Military Education 
and Training (IMET),  197 
 International Military Tribunals 
(IMT) 
 in Germany,  97 
 in Japan,  97 
 international nongovernmental 
organizations (INGO),  59 
 campaigning,  61–62 
 categories of,  62 
 operational,  61–62 
 in preventing genocide,  58–62 
 International Peace 
Conference,  135 
 International Red Cross 
and Red Crescent 
Movement,  209 
 International Tribunal for 
Rwanda, The,  161 
 Iran,  72,  82,  116,  221,  223 
 Iraq,  33,  37,  72,  82,  107,  116–117, 
 210,  223 
 Anfal campaign against 
Kurds,  103–104 
 Ishii, Shiro,  117–118 
 Israel,  24,  72,  80,  195,  203 
 Istanbul,  36 
 Janjaweed,  1–2,  36,  107, 
 110,  263 
 Japan 
 International Military 
Tribunals (IMT),  97 
 military tribunals in,  19–20 
 Japan Medical Corps,  117 
 Japanese Imperial Army,  96 
 Jerusalem,  129,  218 
 Jews,  10,  15,  22,  24–25,  27,  96–97, 
 111–112,  115–116,  123–124, 
 129–130,  139 
 Jones, Adam,  8 
 Jordan,  80 
 justice, and national 
sovereignty,  62–63 
 Kaing Gech Eav,  43 
 Karadzic, Radovan,  118–119 
 Kellogg-Briand Pact,  8,  136–137 
 Khan, General Tikka,  32 
 Khan, Yahya,  99 

272 Index
 Khmer People ’ s Revolutionary 
Party (KPRP),  126 
 Kinaibe, Baba Gana,  39 
 Kolbe, Jim,  197 
 Kristallnacht ,  96, 264 
 Kurdish Human Rights Protect 
(KHRP),  210 
 Kurds,  33,  103–104,  116–117 
 Kyrgyzstan,  89–90,  92 
 Lake, Anthony,  37 
 “language and imagery,”  22 
 Lansing, Robert,  68 
 Lawyers against the War 
(LAW),  210 
 Lawyers without 
Borders,  221 
 League of Arab States,  223 
 Lemkin, Raphael,  9,  98, 
 137,  211 
 Lenin, Vladimir,  127 
 Leningrad,  127 
 Lieber, Francis,  8,  133 
 Lockerbie Agreement,  41 
 Lome Treaty,  50 
 Lowey, Nita,  81 
 Lubanga, Thomas,  56 
 Mao Tse-Tung,  32,  35, 
 98,  130 
 Marx, Karl,  128,  130 
 mass murders, resources,  237 
 McCain, John,  84 
 McGufﬁ n, David,  39 
 Médecins Sans Frontières 
(MSF),  219–220 
 Mein Kampf ,  115 
 Mendez, Juan,  34 
 Mengistu, Haile Mariam, 
 119–120 
 military immunity, from 
prosecution,  264 
 military tribunals, international 
 in Germany,  19–20 
 in Japan,  19–20 
 Milosevic, Slobodan,  41, 
 120–121 
 resources,  246–249 
 Mladic, Ratko,  119,  121–122 
 Montreal Institute for 
Genocide and Human 
Rights Studies (MIGS), 
 207,  211 
 Montt, Jose Efrain Rios, 
 114, 122 
 Mussolini, Benito,  123 
 Nationalist Party,  130 
 National legal tribunals, to 
indicted genocidists,  48 
 National Legionary 
Government,  112 
 National Socialism,  17 
 National Socialist German 
Workers Party 
(NSDAP),  115 
 national sovereignty, 
and justice,  62–63 
 Nazi Germany,  22,  26,  69 
 Nazi Holocaust.  See Holocaust 
 Nazi Party,  115 
 Nethercutt Amendment,  80,  197 
 Nigeria, and Biafran War 
(1967–1970),  98–99 
 no enforcement mechanism,  8 
 to stop genocide,  36–38 
 Nongovernmental 
Organization 
Coalition Letter to 
Congress Regarding 
Bilateral Immunity 
Agreements, 
May 30, 2008,  196–198 
 nongovernmental 
organizations (NGO) 
 Code of Ethics and 
Conduct,  201 
 directory,  203–213 
 and human rights 
issues,  201–203 

Index 273
 working on genocide, 
 201–203 
 North American Treaty 
Organization 
(NATO),  223 
 Nuremberg Charter,  20 
 Nuremberg Principles,  53 
 Obama, Barack,  4,  67,  83–84 
 on ICC,  84–88 
 Ocampo, Luis Moreno,  56,  87 
 Ofﬁ ce of High Commissioner 
for Human Rights,  47 
 Organization for Defending 
Victims of Violence 
(ODVV),  221 
 Organization for Security 
and Cooperation in 
Europe (OSCE),  223,  248 
 Organization of African 
Unity (OAU),  223–224 
 Organization of American 
States (OAS),  224 
 Ottoman Empire,  18,  94,  129 
 Armenian “Genocide,”  94–95 
 Oxfam,  211 
 Pakistan,  32,  99–100,  195 
 parties, mediation between 
 on genocide,  51–52 
 Patterson, James,  1 
 Pavelic, Anton,  123–124 
 permanent ICC,  52–57 
 Perón, Isabel,  131 
 Peron, Juan,  124,  131 
 Pinochet, Augusto,  40,  125 
Pol Pot,  125–126 
 resources,  245–246 
 Poland,  10,  112,  116,  137 
 political will, lack of, by UN 
and western powers, 
 38–40 
 Pontian Genocide and Asia 
Minor Holocaust 
Research Unit,  205 
 Powell, Colin,  36,  37 
 Power, Samantha,  32 
 Preparatory Committee 
(PrepCom),  70,  264 
 Prevent Genocide 
International,  211 
 Prisoners of War 
Convention,  152 
 problems of genocide,  31 
 Proposed Text of Article 98 
Agreements with United 
States, July 2002,  192–193 
 Punic War,  8 
 race murder.  See genocide 
 Rape of Nanking (1937), 
China,  96 
 Raphael Lemkin, Axis Rule 
in Occupied Europe: 
Laws of Occupation, 
Analysis of Government, 
and Proposals for 
Redress, 1944 
(Washington, D.C.: 
Carnegie Endowment 
for International Peace, 
1944),  79–95,  137 
 Rapid Reaction Force 
(RRF),  37 
 Rapp, Stephan,  87 
 Reagan, Ronald,  14 
 Red Cross,  59,  90,  209 
 Red Guards,  131 
 Red Terror,  102,  119 
 Reeker, Philip,  82 
 refugees international,  211–212 
 resources 
 databases/Web sites,  258–260 
 documentaries,  256–258 
 ﬁ lms,  254–256 
 general,  226–237 
 journals/reports,  252–254 
 mass murders,  237 
 nonprint,  254 
 press coverage,  251–252 

274 Index
 resources ( continued ) 
 print,  225 
 television/videotapes,  258 
 “restorative justice,”  44 
 “retroactive justice,”  44 
 Rice, Susan,  85 
 Rios Montt, Jose Efrain,  122–123 
 Rockefeller Foundation,  61 
 Romania,  111–112 
 Rome,  8,  40,  52,  54,  70–73,  124,  161, 
 191–192 
 Rome Statute,  197 
 Rome treaty of ICC,  71–74 
 Roosevelt, President Franklin D.,  69 
 Roth, Kenneth,  83 
 “Royal Dictatorship,”  123 
 Russia,  10,  19,  35,  54,  90,  92,  96, 
 116.  See also USSR 
 Russian Revolution,  19,  127 
 Rwanda 
 gacaca trials in,  57–58 
 Tutsis killed by Hutu 
Militias,  105–106 
 Rwandan Patriotic Front,  106 
 Rwanda Tutsis,  13 
 “salvation revolution,”  110 
 Save Darfur Coalition,  3–4,  86 
 Scheffer, David,  71 
 Schwammenthal, Daniel,  87 
 Second World War,  7,  10,  47,  69, 
 111,  118,  124 
 Selassie, Haile,  101–102 
 Serbia 
 Bosnian Muslims, 
killing of,  104–105 
 Serbian Democratic Party 
(SDP),  118 
 Serbs,  47,  50,  94,  104–105, 
 123–124,  139 
 Sikh Genocide Project,  212 
 “Silent Holocaust,”  103 
 Silent Voices Speak,  212 
 Society for Threatened People 
(STP),  212–213 
 solutions, for Genocide 
Convention,  40–58 
 Ad hoc ICTs, to indicted 
genocidists,  48–49 
 amnesty,  42–44 
 creating permanent 
ICC,  52–57 
 gacaca trials in Rwanda, 
 57–58 
 hybrid ICCs, to deal with 
genocidists,  49–51 
 National legal tribunals, 
to indicted genocidists,  48 
 replacement of UN with 
new organization,  46–48 
 Truth and Reconciliation 
Commissions (TRC),  44–46 
 South Africa,  42,  76,  83,  119 
 sovereign nation-state, and 
genocide,  5–6 
 Soviet Bloc,  70 
 Soviet Union,  13,  53,  56,  95, 
 97–98,  102,  109,  116,  119, 
 127,  130,  223 
 Spain ’ s National Court 
(SNC),  122 
 Special Organization 
(SO),  113 
 Stalin, Joseph,  95,  126–127 
 Stalin ’ s Terror: Forced Famine 
in Ukraine (1929–1933) 
 resources,  239–240 
 Stalingrad,  127 
 “State Party,”  55 
 Status of Forces (SOFA),  197 
 Status of Mission (SOMA),  197 
 Statute of the International 
Criminal Tribunal for the 
Prosecution of Persons 
Responsible for 
Genocide and Other 
Serious Violations of 
International Humanitarian 
Law Committed in the 
Territory of Rwanda and 

Index 275
Rwandan Citizens 
Responsible for Genocide 
and Other Such Violations 
Committed in the Territory 
of Neighbouring States, 
between January 1, 1994 
and December 31, 1994,  160 
 Statute of the International 
Tribunal for the Former 
Yugoslavia, May 1993, 
Amended May 1998, 2000, 
(excerpts),  154–160 
 Sudan Organization against 
Torture (SOAT),  213 
 Suharto, Haji,  128 
 Summary of Geneva 
Conventions, 1949,  151–154 
 Tadic, Dusko,  49 
 Talat, Pasha Mehmat, 
 128–129 
 Tanzania,  113 
 “Third Sikh Holocaust,”  212 
 Three Pashas,  128 
 Tiso, Joseph,  129–130 
 Tokyo,  19,  49,  53,  118 
 war crimes tribunal,  19 
 “transitional justice,”  44 
 treaties and conventions, to 
restrain military action,  6–8 
 Tripartite Pact,  124 
 Trotha, Lothar Von,  132 
 Trotsky, Leon,  127 
 Truth and Reconciliation 
Commissions (TRC),  44–46 
 Tse-Tung, Mao,  35 
 Tutsis,  2,  57–58,  70,  100–101, 
 105–106,  112–113 
 Uganda,  46,  56,  87,  111,  196 
 killing ﬁ elds,  100 
 Ukraine ’ s Forced Famine 
(1932–1933),  95 
 UN Charter, 1945 Action with 
Respect to Threats to Peace, 
Breaches of Peace, and Acts 
of Aggression,  198–200 
 UN Charter,  38–39,  106,  198,  214 
 UN Children ’ s Fund (UNICEF), 
 215 
 UN Department of Peacekeeping 
Operations (UNDPKO),  215 
 UN Documentation Center,  215 
 UN-East Timorese Crimes 
Tribunal,  50 
 UN Economic and Social 
Council (ECOSOC),  221 
 UN General Assembly,  215 
 UN Human Rights 
Documents,  215 
 UN system,  215–218 
 with governmental 
organizations,  218–221 
 Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics,  89,  139 
 Unit 731, Japanese Army,  264 
 United Arab Republic,  109 
 United Kingdom,  68–69,  99, 
 111,  125,  127,  139 
 United Nations (UN) 
 Human Rights Committee, 
  220 
 Human Rights Council,  215 
 international convention 
on genocide,  98 
 International Criminal 
Tribunal for Rwanda 
(ICTR),  33,  106,  214–215 
 International Criminal 
Tribunal for the 
Former Yugoslavia 
(ICTY),  33,  105,  214 
 International Labor 
Organization (ILO),  215 
 International Law 
Commission (ILC),  215 
 NGO Global Network,  216 
 Ofﬁ ce for Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs 
(OCHA),  216 

276 Index
 United Nations (UN) ( continued ) 
 Ofﬁ ce of the High 
Commissioner for Human 
Rights/Commission on 
Human Rights,  216 
 replacement of,  46–48 
 World Food Program 
(WFP),  47,  217 
 United States,  4,  10,  36,  39, 
 53–56,  60,  67–69,  71–88, 
 100,  105,  122,  127,  133–134, 
 136,  192–194,  218–221 
 and International Criminal 
Court (ICC),  67 
 and Rome treaty of 
ICC,  71–74 
 after signing Rome treaty, 
 74–83 
 Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights,  13, 
 143–149,  202,  206,  208 
 universal jurisdiction,  70, 
 264–265 
 University of Minnesota, 
Center for Holocaust 
and Genocide Studies,  213 
 U.S. Agency for International 
Development (AID),  217 
 U.S. Holocaust Memorial 
Council,  217 
 U.S. Holocaust Memorial 
Museum,  207,  217 
 U.S. House of Representatives, 
 77,  80 
 U.S. Institute of Peace 
(USIP),  3,  217–218 
 U.S. Senate Foreign 
Relations Committee,  36 
 U.S. State Department,  10 
 U.S. War Department,  10 
 USAID Directory of 
Registered NGOs,  218 
 USSR.  See also Russia 
 Ukraine ’ s Forced 
Famine,  95 
 Vermot Mangold, Ruth-Gaby,  33, 
 51,  52 
 Versailles Peace Treaty,  52 
 Versailles Treaty,  68 
 Videla, Jorge Raphael,  131–132 
 Vietnam War,  83 
 war crimes,  265 
 Warner, Paul,  78 
 Weisbord, Noah,  86 
 Welch, Claude E.,  58 
 Welch, Claude E. Jr.,  58 
 West Timor,  50 
 White House,  4,  56,  60,  86 
 Wilhelm, Kaiser II,  68 
 Wilson, Woodrow,  68 
 Workers ’ Party of Ethiopia,  119 
 World Federalist Association ’ s 
(WFA),  213 
 World War I.  See First World War 
 World War II.  See Second 
World War 
 Yad Vashem Home Page, Yad 
Vashem, Jerusalem,  218 
 Young Armenians,  94 
 Young Turk Revolution,  113 
 “Young Turks,”  237 
 Yugoslavia,  32,  37,  40,  43,  49,  86, 
 105,  118–119,  123–124,  223 
 Zimbabwe,  119 

  About the Author 
 Howard Ball is Professor of Political Science Emeritus, University 
Scholar, at the University of Vermont. He is the author of 34 books 
on the U.S. Supreme Court, war crimes, and domestic and inter-
national justice. He has also taught at Hofstra University, Missis-
sippi State University, The University of Utah, and Dartmouth 
College. Overseas, he has been Fulbright Distinguished Professor 
at Soﬁ a University Law School in 2002 and John Marshall Distin-
guished Professor at the University of Szeged, in Szeged, Hun-
gary, in 2006–2007. 

