Geodemographics,
GIS and Neighbourhood
Targeting
Richard Harris
University of Bristol
Peter Sleight
Target Market Consultancy
and
Richard Webber
Visiting Professor, Centre for Advance Spatial Analysis, UCL


Geodemographics, GIS and
Neighbourhood Targeting

Mastering GIS:Technology, Applications and
Management series
Location-Based Services and Geomatic Engineering, Allan Brimicombe and
Chao Li (forthcoming)
GIS & Crime, Spencer Chainey and Jerry Ratcliffe (forthcoming)
GIS: Mastering the Legal Issues, George Cho
Landscape Visualisation: GIS Techniques for Planning & Environmental
Management, Andrew Lovett, Katy Appleton and Simon Jude (forthcoming)
Integration of GIS and Remote Sensing, Victor Mesev (forthcoming)
GIS for Public Sector Spatial Planning, Scott Orford, Andrea Frank and Sean
White (forthcoming)
GIS Techniques for Habitat Management, Nigel Waters and Shelley Alexander
(forthcoming)

Geodemographics,
GIS and Neighbourhood
Targeting
Richard Harris
University of Bristol
Peter Sleight
Target Market Consultancy
and
Richard Webber
Visiting Professor, Centre for Advance Spatial Analysis, UCL

Copyright © 2005
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate,
Chichester, West Sussex PO19 8SQ, England
Telephone
(44) 1243 779777
Email (for orders and customer service enquiries): cs-books@wiley.co.uk
Visit our Home Page on www.wileyeurope.com or www.wiley.com
All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except under
the terms of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 or under the terms of a licence issued by the Copyright
Licensing Agency Ltd, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1T 4LP, UK, without the permission in writing of the
Publisher. Requests to the Publisher should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons Ltd,
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex PO19 8SQ, England, or emailed to permreq@wiley.co.uk, or
faxed to (44) 1243 770620.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names
and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their
respective owners. The Publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter
covered. It is sold on the understanding that the Publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. 
If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be
sought.
Other Wiley Editorial Offices
John Wiley & Sons Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
Jossey-Bass, 989 Market Street, San Francisco, CA 94103-1741, USA
Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH, Boschstr. 12, D-69469 Weinheim, Germany
John Wiley & Sons Australia Ltd, 33 Park Road, Milton, Queensland 4064, Australia
John Wiley & Sons (Asia) Pte Ltd, 2 Clementi Loop #02-01, Jin Xing Distripark, Singapore 129809
John Wiley & Sons Canada Ltd, 22 Worcester Road, Etobicoke, Ontario, Canada M9W 1L1
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be
available in electronic books.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Harris, Richard, 1973–
Geodemographics, GIS, and neighbourhood targeting/Richard Harris, Peter Sleight, Richard Webber.
p.
cm.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-470-86413-3 (cased) — ISBN 0-470-86414-1 (pbk.)
1. Target marketing.
2. Geographic information systems.
3. Demography.
I. Sleight, Peter, 1944–
II. Webber, Richard, 1947–
III. Title.
HF5415.127.H37 2005
304.6′0285—dc22
2004021912
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 0-470-86413-3 (HB)
ISBN 0-470-86414-1 (PB)
Typeset in 11/13 pt Times by Integra Software Services Pvt. Ltd, Pondicherry, India
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Antony Rowe Ltd, Chippenham, Wiltshire
This book is printed on acid-free paper responsibly manufactured from sustainable forestry in which at least two
trees are planted for each one used for paper production.

For Rhys


vii
Contents
List of Case Study Contributors
xi
Preface
xiii
1
Introducing Geodemographics
1
Learning Objectives
1
Introduction
2
1.1
The use of geodemographics
3
1.2
A simple application: opening a coffee shop in 
Atlantic City
5
1.3
Another application: guiding neighbourhood 
regeneration funding
10
1.4
Using geodemographics for retail targeting
12
1.5
How it works: a short theory of geodemographics
14
Case study: modelling price sensitivity and geodemographic
categories in the restaurant market
19
Case study: using geodemographics in the public sector
21
1.6
Where next? An overview of the following chapters
24
1.7
Conclusion
26
Summary
26
Further Reading
27
2
London to Chicago and Back Again! The Origins of
Geodemographics
29
Learning Objectives
29
Introduction
30
2.1
The life and labours of an early neighbourhood analyst
30
2.2
From London to Chicago and beyond!
37
2.3
A note on measuring deprivation
42
Case study: Charles Booth – yesterday once more?
45
2.4
Conclusion
49
Summary
50
Further Reading
51

Contents
viii
3
The Evolution of Geodemographics and the Market Today
53
Learning Objectives
53
Introduction
54
3.1
From census to commerce
55
3.2
Geodemographics today
61
Case study: the US market for geodemographics
67
3.3
The role of market research linkages
70
3.4
Use of non-census data
70
3.5
Conclusion
73
Summary
75
Further Reading
75
4
Geodemographics and GIS
77
Learning Objectives
77
Introduction
78
4.1
Principles of GIS
79
4.2
Mapping geodemographic information with GIS
88
4.3
An interesting pattern?
92
4.4
Confounded by choropleths!
95
Case study: Using GIS for neighbourhood analysis and 
targeting – a commercial perspective
99
4.5
Spatial interaction models
103
4.6
Conclusion
106
Summary
107
Further Reading
108
5
Geodemographic Information Systems and Analysis
109
Learning Objectives
109
Introduction
110
5.1
Data collection and input
111
5.2
Data analysis
115
5.3
Data visualization and output
137
Case study: Different neighbourhoods, different policing styles
141
5.4
Conclusion
143
Summary
144
Further Reading
145
6
How Geodemographic Classifications are Built
147
Learning Objectives
147
Introduction
148
6.1
Data input – sources of data for neighbourhood 
classification
148

Contents
ix
6.2
Preparing the data for classification
150
6.3
Evaluation of input variables
152
6.4
Selecting weights
159
6.5
Clustering
160
6.6
Optimization process and manual intervention
166
6.7
Forming a cluster hierarchy
168
6.8
Labels, portraits and visualization tools
171
6.9
A worked example of clustering
173
6.10 Conclusion
181
Summary
182
Further Reading
183
7
Geodemographics Around the World
185
Learning Objectives
185
Introduction
186
7.1
The internationalization of geodemographics
187
Case study: a brief comparison of selected censuses from 
across the world
189
7.2
Census data sources – some differences in what is 
asked and where
193
7.3
Differences in the availability of non-census data 
sources
195
7.4
Variations in the detail of the postal delivery system
196
7.5
Geographies of neighbourhood worldwide
196
7.6
Conclusion
204
Summary
205
Further Reading
206
8
‘But Does It Work?’ Geodemographics in the Dock
207
Learning Objectives
207
Introduction
208
8.1
The case for the prosecution
209
8.2
The case for the defence
225
‘Witness’ 1: Example of the Nottingham Youth Justice Board
228
‘Witness’ 2: Example of Shotton Paper Company plc
230
‘Witness’ 3: Example of The University of Central Lancashire
231
‘Witness’ 4: Example of Camelot Group plc
233
Validating geodemographics – the Luton case study
236
8.3
Conclusion
239
Summary
240
Further Reading
241

Contents
x
9
New Data, New Approaches: from Geodemographics to
Geolifestyles
243
Learning Objectives
243
Introduction
244
Case study: Lifestyles analysis and new approaches
246
9.1
Using GIS to map lifestyle data
249
9.2
Looking for ‘hot spots’
257
9.3
From revelation to explanation
261
9.4
Data-handling issues
263
9.5
Conclusion
271
Summary
271
Further Reading
272
10
Postscript: There are three Is in geodemographics!
273
References
279
Index
289

xi
List of Case Study
Contributors
Stewart Berry
Caliper Corporation
Newton, MA
USA
Martin Callingham
School of Geography
Birkbeck College
University of London
UK
Keith Dugmore
Demographic Decisions Ltd
London
UK
Gordon Farquharson
Streetwise Analytics Ltd
Windsor, Berkshire
UK
Peter Furness
Peter Furness Ltd, Surrey
UK
Barry Leventhal
Teradata, a division of NCR
UK

List of Case Study Contributors
xii
David Miller
Claritas, Arlington, VA
USA
Scott Orford
Department of City and Regional Planning
Cardiff University
UK
Tom Williamson
Institute of Criminal Justice Studies
University of Portsmouth
UK

xiii
Preface
As ‘lead author’ my colleagues have invited me to write the preface and
acknowledgements for this book. This may be a strategy to distance them-
selves from any blame. However, I suspect it is more an act of courtesy
and one that I appreciate. Still, I regard the production of this book as very
much a team effort and I am extremely grateful to Peter and to Richard for
all that they have contributed to it. In other words, you guys aren’t getting
off that easily!
The publication of this book reflects a chance to put into print
our longstanding interest and involvements in – as the title identifies –
geodemographics, GIS and neighbourhood targeting. Together with our
contributors we have spent a rather frightening amount of time preoccu-
pied by these fields of employment and research – over 100 years in fact!
Had those years not been concurrent we might have had a chance to have
met some of the originators of present-day geodemographics – Charles
Booth in London and the ‘Chicago School’ of urban sociologists working
in . . . well, the name is a giveaway!
How much of the consumer behaviours, preferences and socio-
economic characteristics of individuals are revealed by where they live?
The answer to that question is of enduring interest to us and so, therefore,
are recently developed methods of spatial analysis that can be applied to
new sources of lifestyle data to search for and quantify the elusive neigh-
bourhood effects which are said to lie at the heart of geodemographics.
Do birds of a feather flock together? Can we really know something
about who you are if we know where you live? These are questions that
interest us enormously and, although we don’t have all the answers, we do
offer some suggestions as to why it is that geodemographics ‘works’, has
grown and has evolved as an industry and method of analysis, and has
been applied successfully in a variety of contexts.
The purpose of this book is to consider the relevance, strengths
and limitations of the geodemographic idea for public- and private-sector
decision making. Its authorship is somewhat unusual in that we approach
the subject from differing perspectives – both academic and commercial.

Preface
xiv
Appealing to both audiences is by no means an easy task but, we hope, a
worthwhile aim. Certainly, we have found our shared discussions useful and
illuminating. Those at the front line of marketing and commercial decision
making need to get things done with the most effective tools and the most
accurate data that currently are available. Those in ‘ivory towers’ (or, more
likely, concrete carbuncles) often have the luxury of time to critique (albeit
less time than they used to) and don’t always understand business environ-
ments, the nature of business relationships or the strategic needs and require-
ments of the users of geodemographic systems. At the same time, academic
writers have offered a number of extremely useful insights concerning
geodemographics, its strengths, weaknesses and possible development, but
these are not always brought to the attention of users because the ‘two sides’
don’t talk as often as they might. In this book we look at best practice
when using geodemographic methods, software and systems, and so aim to
balance academic theorizing with the practicalities of commercial life.
Because the seeds of this book lie in an MSc completed during my
first stint at Bristol and germinated thereafter with my jaunts eastwards,
then westwards along the Great Western Railway, there are a number of
people to whom I owe thanks. It’s not much by way of recompense but I am
grateful to the following for providing support, advice and, most import-
antly, friendship over that time: Siân, mum, dad, Nikki, Wilma, Margaret,
Elwyn, Ann, Bill, Ed, Revd. Andy, Jo, Liz, Scott, Katy, Kate, Fiona,
Paul Longley, Victor Mesev, colleagues at Birkbeck College (especially
Andrew Jones, Martin Frost, Zunqiu Chen, Melanie Roy, Tessa Hilder, John
Shepherd and Dave Unwin), the GIS group at the University of Glamorgan
(Gary Higgs, Chris Brunsdon, George Taylor, Mitch Langford, Mark Ware
and Dave Kidner), the spatial modelling group at the University of Bristol
(Ron Johnston, Paul Plummer, Les Hepple, Tony Hoare, Kelvyn Jones) and
the members of various house groups at Christ Churches Downend and
Clifton. To all and any omissions: 2 Corinthians 9:15.
All three authors would like to thank our families, the contributors to
this book – Martin Callingham, Keith Dugmore, Scott Orford, Dave Miller,
Stewart Berry, Barry Leventhal, Peter Furness, Gordon Farquharson, Tom
Williamson and Gillian Harper – and the staff at Wiley, especially Keily
Larkins and Lyn Roberts. Finally, we are grateful to the following companies
for supplying data and software that have been incorporated during the
longer course of this project: Experian, Claritas UK, Caliper Corporation
and CACI UK. Any errors in interpretation or analysis are our own.
Rich Harris
Bristol

1
1
Introducing
Geodemographics
Learning Objectives
In this chapter we will:
●
Define geodemographics as the analysis of people by where
they live.
●
Explore why it is a useful framework for public- and private-sector
decision making.
●
Offer initial explanations and worked examples of how geodemo-
graphics ‘works’.
●
Introduce Tobler’s ‘first law of geography’ and the concept of
spatial autocorrelation.
●
Present two of the specially commissioned case studies that
appear throughout this book. The first is authored by Martin
Callingham, formerly the group manager of market research for
Whitbread plc and is about using the geodemographic approach
to model price sensitivity in the restaurant market.The second is
by Keith Dugmore of Demographic Decisions Ltd and chair of
the Demographics User Group, and is about using geodemo-
graphics in the public sector.
Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
Richard Harris, Peter Sleight and Richard Webber
© 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
ISBNs: 0-470-86413-3 (HB); 0-470-86414-1 (PB)

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
2
Introduction
Geodemographics is the ‘analysis of people by where they live’ (Sleight,
1997, p. 16). It is the suggestion that where you are, says something
about who you are; that knowing where someone lives provides useful
information about how that person lives. To quote some product adver-
tising, it is the possibility that ‘we know who you are, because we
know where you live.’ Figure 1.1 illustrates this link between people
and places. It is a simple idea – one that has shown itself to be of com-
mercial value and the catalyst of a rapidly growing and globalizing
industry.
The purpose of this book is to consider the relevance, strengths
and limitations of the geodemographic idea for public- and private-sector
decision making. We provide an introduction to and overview of the
methods, theory and classification techniques that provide the founda-
tions of neighbourhood analysis and commercial geodemographic prod-
ucts. We give examples of using geodemographic analysis effectively
to target resources and offer guidance to best practice that draws upon
our contributors’ experiences of working within the geodemographic
industry.
Me
Who I am
What I like
What I do
How I behave…
My neighbourhood
Where it is
What it is like
What the population does
How they behave…
Figure 1.1 Geodemographics is ‘the analysis of people by where they live’, linking people
to places

Introducing Geodemographics
3
Within the book, particular focus is given to linking geodemo-
graphics with the theories and products of geographical information sci-
ence, notably geographic information systems (GIS). Our aim throughout
is to provide reader-friendly theory and moderate statistical explanation,
supported by relevant case studies, short vignettes and applied ‘how to’
sections that will appeal to an international and professional audience
at work in business and service planning, and to students of marketing,
geography or other spatial, social science. Along the way we include some
formulae and mathematical notation as often these provide the most suc-
cinct and accurate way of describing a particular calculation or procedure.
However, we know such notation will not suit everybody so we also take
time to explain, in words, what the symbols summarize. In this chapter we
introduce the core principles and ideas that underpin the use of geodemo-
graphic information for neighbourhood profiling and set out the agenda for
the rest of the book.
1.1 The use of geodemographics
We are neither the first to take an interest in geodemographics; nor, we
hope, will we to be the last! Over a decade ago Brown (1991, p. 221)
commented that,
[g]eodemographics has come into use as a shorthand label for both the devel-
opment and the application of area typologies [neighbourhood classifications]
that have proved to be powerful discriminators of consumer behaviours and
aids to ‘market analysis’.
The ‘proof’ is found in the increased value of the geodemo-
graphic market. In Britain this was estimated at a value of £25 million in
1992 (Sleight, 1997, p. 15, citing Mitchell, 1992). By 1995 the same
market was valued at £54 million. In 1998, Directions Magazine
(www.directionsmag.com) reported its ‘conservative estimate’ of 20,000
companies in the USA and Canada using commercial neighbourhood
classifications as part of their marketing information. Weiss (2000)
reports that US marketers spend an estimated $300 million annually on
clustering techniques (see Chapter 7), profiling the behaviour of the
nation’s 100 million households: ‘cluster-based marketing has gone
mainstream and is now used by corporate, nonprofit, and political groups
alike to target their audiences’ (p. 4). As we shall show in Chapters 3, 7
and 9, the market has continued to evolve, the most recent stimulants
being the release of twenty-first-century census data and the emergence

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
4
of extensive ‘data warehouses’ associated with a growing trade in
consumer-oriented data.
It is also over 10 years ago that Leventhal (1993, p. 223) recog-
nized the potential of geodemographics to inform strategic marketing,
planning and communications, presenting examples of its application to
the Market Research Society under three main headings:
●Survey design (‘samples may be stratified or selected using
geodemographics, and many large-scale surveys take advantage
of this facility’).
●Retail planning (‘knowledge of the types of people living in a
catchment area can be a key ingredient in understanding store
performance and the same information can help in deciding on
store location’).
●Direct marketing (‘the selection of prospects [prospective cus-
tomers] can be improved by using geodemographics, whether
for direct mail, “door-to-door” distribution or sales calls’).
Those three themes correspond to the market research, market analysis and
direct marketing streams identified by Curry (1993, p. 200) and summar-
ized by Figure 1.2. Curry also outlines a fourth role for geodemographics
in advertising and media analysis (as do Sleight, 1997, pp. 117–21 and
Webber, 1985). Each author recognizes the value of geodemographics
as an important business tool that offers a type of analysis which is
both understandable and operational within an applied, decision-making
environment.
Figure 1.2 offers a marketing perspective on geodemographic
applications. We shall also consider the role of neighbourhood analysis in
public-sector policy and planning, avoiding the impression that geodemo-
graphics is a solely commercial affair, driven by the needs of market
analysis and consumer profiling. Although these commercial elements
certainly are important aspects of the field, Chapter 2 reveals that the
origins and evolution of neighbourhood classification have an academic
pedigree in urban geography, urban sociology and in urban planning.
Batey and Brown (1995, p. 78) record that,
[t]he pragmatic approach of the marketing analyst has much in common with
that of the urban planner. In both cases an area classification system is
required to provide up-to-date information that is actionable, and the test of a
good system is whether it works in practice. It is perhaps not surprising, there-
fore, that classifications generated for use in public policy-making ultimately
found their way into the private sector.

Introducing Geodemographics
5
1.2 A simple application: opening a coffee shop
in Atlantic City
A traditional, American Monopoly board (Figure 1.3) has 40 locations to
land on, of which 22 are streets in Atlantic City. These streets are grouped
together by eight distinct colour bands that indicate the cost of acquisi-
tion, development and rental value of the land (in the early twentieth
century). Each street belongs to one and only one of the eight colour
groups. Therefore, Mediterranean Avenue is either in the brown group or
it isn’t (it is); Boardwalk is either in the green group or it isn’t (it is not, it
is in the dark blue group). No street is only part in a group – each is either
Market
research
Advertising
media
Market
analysis
Direct
marketing
Survey
analysis
Concept
testing
Image and
awareness
Product
positioning
New product
information
Site selection
New product
rollout
Market share
analysis
Market entry
planning
Trade area
analysis
Test
marketing
Media
analysis
Subscription
building
Creative
development
Ad/Product
positioning
Media
scheduling
Ad budget
allocation
Spot TV
analysis
Advertising
sales
Local media
analysis
Mailing list
selection
Response
analysis
Freestanding
inserts
Program
evaluation
GEODEMO-
GRAPHICS
Figure 1.2 Some commercial applications of geodemographics. Source: adapted from
Curry (1993, p. 200)

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
6
Figure 1.3 An early geodemographic classification. Source: US Patent 2,026,082 (United
States Patent and Trademark Office)

Introducing Geodemographics
7
entirely in else it is entirely out (this is known as Boolean logic where a
proposition is either true or false). Furthermore, if a location does not
belong to the one group then it must belong to another. If necessary, loca-
tions can be placed in a ninth, residual category of ‘Other’ (see Table 1.1).
Table 1.1 Segmentation of sample data by street and by neighbourhood
Group Code Description
Streets
Outlet 
Customers % Sample 
here?
per street
per group
Brown
A
Low rental value, Mediterranean Ave.
No
10
1.34
construction cost Baltic Ave.
No
0
and low 
maintenance
Light
B
Oriental Ave.
No
0
4.30
blue
Vermont Ave.
No
13
Connecticut Ave.
Yes
19
St. Charles Place
Yes
81
Pink
C
States Ave.
Yes
94
23.52
Virginia Ave.
No
0
St. James Place
Yes
136
Orange D
Tennessee Ave.
No
0
18.28
New York Ave.
No
0
Kentucky Ave.
Yes
124
Red
E
Indiana Ave.
Yes
153
37.23
Illinois Ave.
No
0
Atlantic Ave.
Yes
58
Yellow F
Ventnor Ave.
No
0
9.41
Marvin Gardens
No
12
Pacific Ave.
No
0
Green
G
North Carolina Ave. No
34
4.57
Penn Ave.
No
0
Dark 
H
High rental value, Park Place
No
9
1.21
blue
construction cost Boardwalk
No
0
and high 
maintenance
Other
Z
Other types 
Reading Railroad
No
0
of location,
Municipal Jail
No
0
including 
Electric Company
No
1
utilities and 
Water Works
No
0
railroad stations
Penn Railroad
No
0
0.13
Parking Lot
No
0
B & O Railroad
No
0
Shortline Railroad
No
0
Internal Revenue
No
Service
Total
744
100

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
8
Travelling clockwise around the board from ‘Go’, the potential
revenues from the properties increase but so too do the maintenance costs.
In summary, the board is a simple, area-level classification of Atlantic
City that uses economic value as the variable that differentiates between
types of street and permits them to be grouped together on a like-with-like
basis. The classification is both mutually exclusive and collectively
exhaustive (Curry, 1993) – every location is classified as belonging
entirely to one and only one neighbourhood type (albeit ‘other’). A classi-
fication tree is shown in Figure 1.4.
Now we have our neighbourhood classification, what can we do
with it? To answer the question, imagine you are the owner of Caffeine-II-
Goad, a small coffee chain operating in Atlantic City. You have inter-
viewed a sample of customers visiting your stores, finding out where they
have travelled from to collect their coffee. That data is shown in Table 1.1,
together with information about where your existing outlets are located.
You find that the highest percentage of your sample is from streets of the
red type (37.23%). Assuming the sample you have taken is representative of
the customers you have not sampled – a critical assumption! – then, as pro-
prietor, make the following decision: where will you open your next outlet?
Your answer:
Your reasons:
The site we have chosen is Illinois Avenue. The rationale is that
this street is of the same neighbourhood type as both Kentucky and
Indiana avenues. On this basis, we feel more able to attract customers to
our brand of store if we open on Illinois than if we open on, say, Baltic. Of
course, the neighbourhood classification cannot guarantee that we will

Introducing Geodemographics
9
Figure 1.4 Classification tree for neighbourhood classification of Atlantic City
Is the location a street?
YES
NO
Mortgage value
$30
$50–$60
Mediterranean Ave.
Baltic Ave.
$70–$80
Oriental Ave.
Vermont Ave.
Connecticut Ave.
$90–$100
$110–$120
$130–$140
$150–$160
$175–$200
St. Charles Place
States Ave.
Virginia Ave.
St. James Place
Tennessee Ave.
New York Ave.
Kentucky Ave.
Indiana Ave.
Illinois Ave.
Atlantic Ave.
Ventnor Ave.
Marvin Gardens
Pacific Ave.
North Carolina Ave.
Pennsylvania Ave.
Park Place
Boardwalk
Other
Cluster A
Cluster B
Cluster C
Cluster D
Cluster E
Cluster F
Cluster G
Cluster H
Cluster Z

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
10
attract more customers but it has helped us to ‘play the odds’ and identify
where potential customers might visit. Our strategy is not dissimilar to
that of completing a colour set in Monopoly. However, it is not the only
way of playing the game! In practice the decision is much more complex,
requiring consideration of the number of people in each street (market
size), the location of competitors’ outlets (competition), distance from our
existing outlets (catchments) and, not least, our business objectives (strat-
egy). Nevertheless, the neighbourhood classification can help to inform
the decision-making processes and help focus on a set of possibilities.
1.3 Another application: guiding neighbourhood
regeneration funding
Imagine that instead of indicating the mortgage values of streets in
Atlantic City, the monies shown in Figure 1.4 now represent the average
weekly household incomes of people living in the different neighbour-
hoods (the values are not realistic but for the purposes of our discussion
this does not matter). The question to answer now is, given that the city
has received funding to promote regeneration of the most deprived neigh-
bourhoods, where will you, as a city planner, target the funds?
Your answer:
Your reasons:
The streets we have chosen are Mediterranean and Baltic avenues.
Our reasoning seems obvious – these streets appear to contain the lowest
income households! What is less clear is why we chose only these two
streets and did not include also, for example, Oriental, Vermont and

Introducing Geodemographics
11
Connecticut Avenues. The answer is we chose the 10% most-deprived
streets (the top decile, ranking the streets by average income from most to
least deprived), making the assumption that deprivation correlates with
average household income.
Again, in practice things are more complicated than our explan-
ation reveals. First, the 10% threshold is an arbitrary cut-off and has the
effect of segmenting the streets and consequently the resident households
into two groups (or cluster types): those that are deemed deprived and
those that are not; alternatively, those areas that will receive funding and
those that will not. This approach could be regarded as ‘heavy handed’ –
might those streets near the 10% threshold receive some of the funding,
albeit a lower proportion?
Second, classifying ‘deprived’ streets is not the same thing as
classifying deprived households – they exist at different geographic
scales. A critical issue is how similar households are to the average for the
street; how similar are they to each other? In areas of socio-economic
diversity an average value (with no knowledge of the variance around that
average) can give misleading results. It is possible to find pockets of
deprivation in areas that otherwise appear affluent and these pockets risk
being overlooked. Unfortunately we often only have the average or sum
total values for an area (this is particularly true for national census data),
with little knowledge of the within-area variations and population diver-
sity (Harris and Longley, 2004).
Third, household income is not necessarily a robust indicator of
deprivation. We ought to make corrections for the number of people living
in the household and perhaps also allow for regional housing costs (e.g.
the fact that London is more expensive to live in than Liverpool), the age
of the population (retired persons would tend to have lower incomes, does
this mean they are necessarily deprived?), the number of dependents
(children are expensive to raise!) and so forth. Furthermore, although
income may reasonably be regarded as an important factor in determining
social inequalities (Hall and Pfeiffer, 2000), it is not the only measure of a
person’s standard of living or their level of integration within (or exclu-
sion from) society. Deprivation indicators usually take a more rounded
view, taking a selection of variables to create a multivariate profile or
score of a neighbourhood’s position in relation to others in the country
(Lee, Murie and Gordon, 1995; ODPM, 2004). In the same way, commer-
cial geodemographic classifications do not classify neighbourhoods based
on a single variable such as mortgage value (in Figure 1.4) but take a
range of data to better emphasize the differences between neighbourhood
types.

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
12
1.4 Using geodemographics for retail targeting
Our example of using geodemographic classification in Atlantic City can
be generalized to a retail company that takes its client list and sorts it into
different types of consumer, making its judgement by where the client
lives. The sorting first begins by linking the address of each client to a pre-
determined classification of the type of area that address is found in. As a
consequence, the clients are segmented into groups not actually on the
basis of their own, individual characteristics but according to some sort of
social average for the area in which they live – by the type of area in
which they reside (this distinction is important and one we return to). The
area type is defined by the classification used to sort the consumers into
groups. Such a classification would normally be purchased from a third-
party data vendor (see Chapter 3 for examples). A ‘look-up’ file then
allows the retail company to determine in which type of neighbourhood
each of its customers lives.
As we discuss in Chapter 6, the neighbourhood classification is
produced by the data vendor as a statistical amalgam of small-area (often
census) data for the N mapping units of the region concerned (usually a
country or nation). There are, for example, N  175,434 small output
areas in England and Wales following the 2001 Census. There are
approximately N  8.5 million blocks recorded in the 2000 US Census
and there are N  38,366 meshblocks covering New Zealand for its 2001
Census. The geodemographic classification is produced by grouping the
N areas into a much smaller number of k classes, on a like-with-like
basis. Commonly k is in the range from about 101 (10 clusters or area
types) to 102 (100 clusters or area types), depending on the level of granu-
larity required for the analysis. For example, the 1991 Census-based
SuperProfiles classification of the UK has k  160, k  40 and k  10
available to choose from, allowing the user some choice in the precision
of geodemographic analysis desired. That hierarchy of clusters is shown
in Figure 1.5.
The retail company completes its analysis by comparing the
proportion of its clients in each of the k classes with the corresponding
proportions for all consumers within the company’s catchment area
(or some other suitable measure). This comparison of the observed dis-
tribution by neighbourhood type with an otherwise expected baseline
distribution allows the retail company to infer useful information about
its core customers and market to them accordingly (see Chapter 5 and
also Birkin, 1995).

Introducing Geodemographics
13
An interesting and somewhat contentious real-world application of
the SuperProfiles classification has been by the Higher Education Funding
Council for England (HEFCE). It has used geodemographics as part of its
programme of widening participation in higher education by increasing the
recruitment and retention of students from under-represented social groups.
HEFCE (1998, Annex A, paragraph 17; and 1999, paragraphs 24 and 22)
make clear that:
Our preferred method of measuring the socio-economic background of students
is through the use of the postcode to identify the neighbourhoods of students’
homes. We have found that the Super Profiles geodemographic classifier is able
to distinguish between neighbourhood types with markedly different higher
education participation rates and, currently, this classifier is our first choice for
funding allocations. [para 17]
146441
Census zones
590 clusters
160 clusters
SuperProfiles
40 clusters
Target Markets
10 clusters
Lifestyles
Affluent Achievers
Thriving Greys
Settled Suburbans
Nest Builders
Urban Venturers
Country Life
Senior Citizens
Producers
Hard-Pressed Families
The ‘Have Nots’
Figure 1.5 The post-1991 Census, SuperProfiles classification hierarchy. Source: based
on Batey and Brown (1995, p. 94)

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
14
[T]he additional funding will be applied to young full-time undergraduate
entrants to HE [Higher Education] from lower than average participating
geodemographic groups in each institution. [para 24]
Although we recognise that there are some flaws in the use of geodemo-
graphic data, we believe this is the best measure currently available for
allocating funds in respect of students from disadvantaged backgrounds.
Therefore, we will use this measure until any better and more precise meas-
ures are developed in the future. [para 22]
At the time of writing, an education-specific version of the UK
Mosaic geodemographic classification (see Chapter 3) was being devel-
oped in conjunction with the UK’s Universities and Colleges Admissions
Service (UCAS) (Farr and Singleton, 2004).
1.5 How it works: a short theory of
geodemographics
In seeking to define the nature of geodemographics, one of us (Harris,
2003, p. 225) has suggested it is ‘the analysis of socio-economic and
behavioural data about people, to investigate the geographical patterns
that structure and are structured by the forms and functions of settle-
ments.’ Taking time to consider what that long-winded statement actually
means sheds light on why neighbourhood classifications may be useful,
predictive tools for analysis and decision taking.
First, the statement suggests that identifying geographical pat-
terns or trends within societies is an important step towards understanding
the processes and phenomena that gave rise to those patterns in the first
place. Where appropriate, those processes or geographical events can then
be managed. Admittedly, it is a simplistic ‘theory’ and the link between
pattern and process is often much more ambiguous. For example: two or
more completely different processes can result in similar outcomes (geo-
graphical patterns); particular socio-economic processes do not operate in
isolation from others present at the same time and in the same place, so
disentangling the effects of any one from the others may be difficult,
perhaps even pointless; any one outcome may be unique to a particular
time and place and, in such a case, ought not be generalized; and, finally,
since order can arise from chaos, simple notions of cause and effect may
not be tenable (cf. Flake, 1998).
Such caveats are important and increasingly central to geograph-
ical and other disciplinary understandings of how settlements and societies

Introducing Geodemographics
15
form and function (see, for example, Longley and Batty, 2003). However,
Webber (1975) suggests that whereas most social scientific research is
undertaken in order to investigate existing hypotheses (the deductive
approach), one of the key purposes of a geodemographic classification is
to generate new ideas and insights that can then become subject to further
debate and analysis (an inductive approach; cf. Chapter 9, Section 9.2.2).
In this regard, geodemographics is regarded as a data exploration tool, not
a statistical method of hypothesis confirmation or rejection. While we fully
recognize and will explore a number of limits to the geodemographic
method, at the same time we echo the sentiments of an editorial written
in response to an article by one of us, in which had been questioned the
merits of the geodemographic approach (Harris, 1999). The editor wrote:
The elegant simplicity of the insights that can still be gained into the overall
profile of one’s customers by a simple analysis of postcodes is one which
continues to impress this practitioner. [. . .] Mapping and geodemographics
continue to offer powerful benefits (Whitehead, 1999, pp. 109–10).
If we consider again an analysis of neighbourhood deprivation
that is intended to guide the allocation of finances to local regeneration
schemes, it is self-evident that targeting resources to the right commu-
nities requires that the locations of those communities first should accu-
rately be determined (Policy Action Team 18, 2000). Cross-referencing
those locations with, for example, an analysis of house prices might give
an indication of the sorts of socio-economic processes (in this case, the
effects of housing markets) that cause the geographical differentiation
of communities and which lead to social exclusion. The fact that various
socio-economic forces can ‘filter’ people to live in certain ‘types’ of
neighbourhood is the basis for how neighbourhood analysis predicts
the likely population characteristics to be found in any given area. Hence,
pattern reveals process, and process invites prediction – of, for example,
changing consumer markets (Miles, Anderson and Meethan, 2001) or of
the growth of urban sprawl (Besussi and Chin, 2003).
However, the relationship between places and people is neither
one way nor solely the consequence of external factors. When people
speak of ‘their neighbourhood’or ‘their community’they do so in a way that
suggests an attachment to place. Harris (2003) implies that there is an inter-
relationship between people and places – the link illustrated by Figure 1.1.
Therefore, the physical, social and economic properties of settlements in
some way reflects the character, choices, preferences, ideals, affluence,
consumer lifestyles (and so forth) of past and present populations living in
those settlements but also are a consequence of governmental policies, for

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
16
example in respect of planning controls and social housing initiatives.
Because a place usually pre-dates the residents, so the relationship is two
way: the style and character of the settlement ‘draws in’ certain population
groups, perhaps by choice, perhaps by necessity; those residents then
shape further evolution of the area. Longley and Batty (1996, p. 76)
write that:
[t]he behaviour of individuals in [geographic] space together contribute to the
development of places over time and these place effects in turn condition
subsequent spatial [geographical] behaviour.
The interrelationship suggests that measures of the physical,
social and economic properties of settlements can yield useful informa-
tion about the characteristics, preferences and lifestyle choices of the
populations resident within those settlements, because people and places
are dependent on each other.
These theoretical ideas are summed up by the adage ‘birds of a
feather flock together’. This, according to Flowerdew and Leventhal
(1998) is the basic tenet of geodemographics. In fact, birds of a feather
may not just flock together but also increasingly become alike. This is
because very few of us (the birds) live in complete isolation from the rest
of the society (even if there are times when we wish otherwise!). It is
likely that many of our behaviours, choices, aspirations and ideals are
influenced by those with whom we interact in our everyday lives (and vice
versa) and to assume otherwise is known as the atomistic fallacy (see
Chapter 9). Despite the emergence of cyberspace and the popularity of
online chat rooms or other forms of communication, it remains reasonable
to suppose that geographical distance and location impart constraints on
who we meet and when. Weiss (2000, p. 25) argues that there is value in
classifying populations at a neighbourhood level and it relates to a ‘core
truth . . . you are like your neighbors.’
The geographical effects of ‘birds’ flocking together are expressed
by Waldo Tobler’s often quoted first law of geography: ‘Everything is
related to everything else, but near things are more related than those far
apart’ (Tobler, 1970; see also the forum discussing the law in the Annals of
the Association of American Geographers 94(2)). This ‘law’ is an expres-
sion of what spatial statisticians refer to as spatial autocorrelation (Cliff
and Ord, 1973). This type of autocorrelation is present in a dataset if it can
be shown that particular attributes of the population (such as low-income
pensioners, lone-parent households, eat-out regularly couples or sports-
car-owning adults) display a non-uniform and non-random patterning but,
instead, are clustered into particular localities.

Introducing Geodemographics
17
Geodemographic methods assume (positive) spatial autocorrel-
ation when residents of the same neighbourhood are taken to share, in
broad terms at least, some common socio-economic and/or behavioural
characteristics. This stance permits the consumer profile of a non-sampled
person living in a certain neighbourhood to be inferred from data about
other persons living in the same neighbourhood – the assumption being
that proximity is related to similarity. However, Tobler’s first law does
need to be modified when looked at in a geodemographic context. The
geodemographic methods that are the subject of this book assume not
only that proximate populations are related but so also are populations
living in the same ‘class’ of neighbourhood. In other words, near and far
things are related – by neighbourhood type.
The use of the word ‘neighbourhood’ is problematic here because,
as we explore in later chapters, it can have formal and informal, adminis-
trative and sociological meaning (Martin, 1998b). Moreover, from an
‘internal’ perspective, Weiss (2000) identifies that while geodemographic
literature has often interchanged the words cluster and neighbourhood –
for reasons that if not already apparent will become so in Chapter 6 – such
synonymy is no longer always appropriate. The reason is that classifica-
tions have been built at increasingly fine resolutions. The evolution in the
UK, for example, has been first electoral wards, then census small areas,
then even smaller unit postcodes and, finally, households and individuals.
Intuitively, at some scale between wards and households, the importance of
neighbourhood has disappeared – but at which scale?
The answer, we suggest, is none. Unless we believe that people
live in a social vacuum, that physical proximity to others has no effect on
our own behaviours and that everyone has an entirely unconstrained
choice about where they live, then geography remains important and
so the presence of ‘neighbourhood effects’ will be captured even if we
collect data at an individual or household scale. Geography matters and is
usually there somewhere within the data, not least because apparently
individual or household classifications usually incorporate areal data to
improve the robustness of those geodemographic models.
These considerations partly explain why we prefer the term
neighbourhood over cluster type and use it more frequently (though not
exclusively) throughout this book. It is also because the use of the word
neighbourhood helps identify the origins of geodemographics in social
research (Chapter 2). Finally and most pragmatically, the majority of
this book is about classifying small areas (‘neighbourhoods’ in a strictly
technical sense) and about using geography as the basis for modelling,
even inferring people’s demographic, socio-economic and behavioural

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
18
characteristics. We do not ignore individual or household classifications
but the focus is more geographical.
It may also seem ornithological! Returning to birds of a feather,
neighbourhood classifications use multivariate (many variable) clustering
techniques to model geographies of ‘the flocks’. They simplify a complex
geographic reality to make the basis and process of decision making
easier, faster and more intelligible to stakeholders such as boards of direct-
ors or front-line operatives, including store managers and divisional
superintendents. Like any other geographic model, geodemographics can
both be criticized and praised for the level of abstraction they impart. This
is especially true of multivariate techniques that numerically summarize
often complex spatial patterning within datasets and consequently create
an uneasy, operational tension of trying to express that complexity using a
simple and understandable, ‘everyday language’. The tension appears
most acute when geodemographic vendors attempt to sum up each type of
neighbourhood produced by their classification techniques using evoca-
tive vocabulary. Unsurprisingly it is these verbal labels or ‘pen portraits’
that have attracted most criticism within some academic literature
(notably Goss, 1995; Curry, 1998). In any case, there are conceptual, the-
oretical and practical limits to what any area classification or dataset can
usefully reveal about the character of populations living within neigh-
bourhoods (we discuss some of these in Chapter 8). Accordingly, there are
times when neighbourhood analysis is appropriate and times when it is
not. Discerning between these two instances is important and by means of
this book we hope to facilitate such a judgement.
One important use of neighbourhood classification is when ana-
lysts encounter the task of predicting the likely behaviours and needs of
existing or potential new customers or clients in the absence of direct
information about those customers, clients or consumers. If the scenario
sounds unlikely then consider that for various reasons which include
privacy laws and the regulation of personal data, specific personal data
about individuals is usually less easily obtainable (and then more expen-
sive to purchase) than aggregate, summary information about groups of
people. In some cases, obtaining individual information may actually
be illegal! Even supposing that individual-level data were available to
the analyst, it is rare for such a source dataset to be fully relevant, com-
prehensive and complete for the entire population to be analysed (see
Chapter 9 for a discussion of these issues in the context of ‘lifestyle data-
bases’). Geodemographic information can therefore fill holes in our
knowledge base. In the absence of more specific information, knowledge
about neighbourhoods provides a useful (and perhaps only) step towards

Introducing Geodemographics
19
knowledge about people. Combining this knowledge with what is revealed
from loyalty card, EPOS (electronic point-of-sale) or other sources of
consumer/population data is the first step towards, for example, building
predictive models of consumer behaviour or to targeting accurately
community funding.
Case study: modelling price sensitivity and
geodemographic categories in the restaurant
market
Martin Callingham, professor in geography, Birkbeck College, University of
London (formerly group manager of market research for Whitbread plc)
This case study is about how geographically to tailor prices within a mar-
ket. Specifically the work was done in the restaurant market for a chain of
about 280 pub restaurants called Brewers Fayre that was geographically
dispersed about the UK. The sites selected to build these restaurants were
semi-rural and the product offering was a low price but substantial,
traditional English, full restaurant meal. The chain was very successful
(a brand leader) and this appeared to offer potential for increasing the
overall prices. However, there was concern that such an increase would
negatively impact upon outlets located in poorer areas and this in turn
suggested differential pricing should be introduced. To make this intro-
duction, two questions needed to be addressed:
●How to identify the range of prices to be used.
●How to allocate each restaurant to a price band.
To answer these questions a highly novel approach was adopted and used
to attribute a price-sensitivity index to ACORN classes of neighbourhood
type (ACORN is a commercial geodemographic classification). From
existing knowledge of the ACORN mix within each of the restaurants’
catchment area it would then be possible to model the collective price
sensitivity around each restaurant. However, an important methodological
issue had first to be addressed. Specifically, what should be optimized by
varying the price? Is it the number of trips to the outlet or the profit that
accrues from the trips? Clearly it would be possible to lower prices and
increase total trip numbers but this is of no value to the company or its
shareholders if the effect is to lower net cash profit. The intent, therefore,
was for the restaurants to be more profitable.

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
20
The method adopted was to construct a market research survey of
1200 people stratified by neighbourhood type (200 per ACORN category)
and where each person was located within the catchment area of an estab-
lished Brewers Fayre restaurant. To enable the efficient use of interview-
ers, 30 (about 10%) restaurants were selected at random from the chain
list, using an interval sampling method. Interviews, which were con-
ducted face to face, broadly were quota controlled by ACORN category
within each catchment area and interviewers were given a postal address
list to help them achieve this.
The price-sensitivity questions used were a modification of the
method developed by Van Westendorf. This is an unusual method that
allows individuals to select prices at their personal conceptual break-
points. Specifically there are four breakpoints: two ‘outside’ prices – the
price which is so low that the quality of the product would be in doubt and
the price at which the product is too expensive – and two ‘intermediate’
prices at which the product seems either on the cheap side or is becoming
too expensive. Respondents were asked to select a price for a typical main
meal at a Brewers Faye restaurant from a choice of possible prices cover-
ing the entire sensible range (and more!) and broken into a non-obvious
interval to avoid conceptual ‘rounding up’: in this case the prices differed
by seven pence units. The meal was described to interviewees using a
show card.
The resulting data are normally analysed by a cumulative process
that suggests the proportion of the sample that is prepared to pay a particu-
lar price for a particular meal. However, in this study a more insightful
modelling method was preferred. This was based on asking two additional
questions about behaviour at two of the prices given – specifically, the
breakpoint prices identified by each respondent (and therefore differing
from individual to individual). At the two outside prices, where the prod-
uct either is too cheap or too expensive, no sale would be expected so the
frequency of visiting a restaurant would be zero. However, at the two
intermediate prices, sales would be expected, so the interviewee’s likely
frequency of visiting a restaurant at these two prices was asked.
Generally, though not always, the frequency was higher for the lower of
the two prices.
The price sensitivity of each individual was then modelled using
three linear equations: one for the prices between ‘too cheap’ and ‘on the
cheap side’; one for prices between ‘on the cheap side’ and ‘on the expen-
sive side’; and one for prices between ‘on the expensive side’ and ‘too
expensive’. Subsequently, the three equations were used to impute an
expected visiting frequency of each individual at any specified price. The

Introducing Geodemographics
21
derived frequency of visiting a restaurant for each respondent was calcu-
lated within a fixed range of prices: in this case for 25p differences from
£3.50 to £8.50 giving 21 different prices in all (the current price for a main
meal was actually £5.40).
Next, the individual frequencies were grouped by ACORN cat-
egory. This permitted the mean frequency of visiting (and its variance) to
be calculated by neighbourhood type, giving a grid of six ACORN cate-
gories by 21 imputed frequencies. At each position in the grid the cash
profit for a trip to a Brewers Fayre was calculated by applying financial
analysis rules to determine profitability. (Profit is generally taken at the
outlet level to be the sales less the costs of achieving them but how
costs are attributed to sales is quite complicated. Some costs per sale, such
as the cost of capital, get less as the sales increase since there are more
sales to spread the ‘fixed costs’over. Some costs go through steps changes
as sales increase – the need to put on more staff, for example – and some
costs, such as ingredients, stay very similar per meal sold.)
The resulting (second) grid of net cash profit was then separately
multiplied by the ACORN profile of each of the restaurant catchments
where the profile expressed the actual number of people of each neigh-
bourhood type that were to be found within each catchment. This gave the
modelled net cash profit that could be expected for each restaurant at
each of the 21 price points and thereby suggested the most effective
profit-generating price for each specific restaurant. A distribution of these
‘most effective’ prices was made and from this three price bands were
selected to be applied across the chain. Each restaurant was allocated to
a price band according to the geodemographic profile of its catchment
and according to the modelled price sensitivity of that particular socio-
economic mix.
Case study: using geodemographics in the
public sector
Keith Dugmore, Demographic Decisions Ltd and chair of The Demographics
User Group
The development of geodemographics in the public sector of the UK really
has been rather odd! Taking the core of the public services to be central
government departments, local authorities and health authorities, interest in
area classifications based on Census statistics began to develop as early as
the 1960s and blossomed in the 1970s. There were several strands. In local

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
22
government, the Greater London Council (GLC) was very active, producing
classifications of boroughs and then electoral wards. Liverpool Council
developed a finer scale Enumeration District (ED) level classification
focused on deprivation. In central government, the Office of Population
Censuses and Surveys published a national classification of local authority
districts, while in the mid-1970s work in this field was pushed further
forward at the Centre for Environmental Studies (CES), developing nation-
wide classifications down to ward level. This early history of geodemo-
graphics is discussed in more detail in the following chapter.
Meanwhile, in another part of ‘the forest’ during the late 1970s,
area classifications began to be applied for target marketing. This topic is
covered in more detail in Chapter 3 of this book. Suffice to say that starting
with ACORN, which provided an ED level classification for the whole of
Great Britain, there were two vital innovations. First, the statistical clusters
were popularized using names, descriptions and photographs. More import-
antly, the EDs were matched to the Central Postcode Directory to produce
a postcode to geodemographic code look-up table – a means to link a
person’s property address to their neighbourhood type.
It was this that led to a great leap forward, also enabling area
classifications to be linked to other datasets and thus giving birth to
geodemographic analysis, rather than just standalone area classifications.
Analysis took three main forms and opened up new territory for users in
thousands of commercial companies. It also sets the scene for considering
geodemographic developments within the public services. These forms are:
●Coding and analysing sample surveys. By taking records of
respondents coded with a postal unit identifier and attaching a
geodemographic code to these it became possible to profile sam-
ple surveys. The most celebrated early example was the contrast
between the profiles of Daily Telegraph and Guardian readers
exposed by the Target Group Index survey (a consumer research
survey – see Chapter 3).
●Coding and profiling customer files, seeking variations between
different segments of the data for such topics as consumption of
goods and services, and customer profitability.
●Area analysis, profiling non-standard areas such as postal sectors and
store catchments (see Chapter 5). When combined with profiles from
surveys or customer files, this opened up the potential for estimating
and comparing market potential in different parts of the country.
Such analyses have proven to be of great value to commercial companies.
Suppliers have vied to produce new geodemographic classifications and

Introducing Geodemographics
23
their use has expanded in the last two decades to become second nature in
almost all large and medium-sized companies which sell in the consumer
marketplace.
Meanwhile, following the arrival of the 1981 and then 1991
Censuses, the public services continued their keen interest in area classifi-
cations. But how much geodemographic analysis, linking datasets, was
done? The answer is: remarkably little! Taking the three forms of analysis
done by commercial companies, there are several examples but these are
sporadic.
Some sample surveys have been coded. The Home Office’s
British Crime Survey was first coded with ACORN back in the 1980s and
this led to some fascinating analysis of fear of crime in different types of
neighbourhood. More recently, the ONS’ Expenditure and Food Survey
has been coded with both ACORN and Mosaic but this is another rare
exception among the very large number of government surveys.
Turning to the coding of customers or administrative files,
progress has been very patchy. Following the report of the Korner
Committee on Health Service information (The Korner Committee, 1984),
health authorities began during the 1980s systematically to postcode
patients’ files and this led to some interest in geodemographic coding.
Some police forces have also shown interest (although this has often evap-
orated when the pioneer responsible was promoted). In general, few local
authorities have sought to code files and it is significant that the addition
of postcode analysis to the ubiquitous SASPAC Census software in 1991
was little used.
As for area analysis, the interest in producing area classifications
has continued unabated, with both general and specific (for example
health) classifications being produced for a variety of standard administra-
tive areas. In some cases, such as the Index of Multiple Deprivation 2000
and the updated Index of 2004 (DETR, 1998; ODPM, 2004), non-census
data sources have also been included but the classifications themselves
usually have been treated as free-standing, rather than integrated with
survey or administrative data to estimate, for example, the incidence of
smoking in small areas.
There appears to be no single reason for this slow progress but the
factors probably include the traditional cultural divide and mutual incom-
prehension between private and public sectors in Britain, manifested in this
case by a reluctance to adopt techniques that are used by marketers and
also the fact that the commercial geodemographic classifications have not
been available free of charge. The result has been that the use of geodemo-
graphics has not become everyday in most public-service organizations.

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
24
However, this looks set to change. From a policy point of view,
governments have become more interested in targeting their resources,
both to areas and individuals, and this seems likely to continue. The policy
of neighbourhood renewal in the UK has triggered a demand of better data
for small areas and the development of the various neighbourhood stat-
istics services (see Chapter 3, Section 3.2). This will increase the use
of multiple datasets for small areas and should encourage more creative
integration of sources.
Turning to the supply side, the most dramatic change is that the
ONS is producing an area classification down to the finest census output
area (OA) level for the first time. This is for the whole of the United
Kingdom and, when allied with the postcode to OA look-up directory and
digital boundaries, which are freely available as part of the Census Access
project, will provide an immensely valuable resource. The door is now
open to much more adventurous exploration of geodemographic analyses
by public services. The most obvious starting point would be for the new
classification to be appended to all government surveys and for profiles
to be produced as standard products for a wide range of topics such as
crime, health and education. Both these and profiles derived from coded
administrative files – such as the Inland Revenue – could be included as
part of the Neighbourhood Statistics website. The availability of such
information from central government would then have every chance of
encouraging similar developments among local government, heath author-
ities and police services.
1.6 Where next? An overview of the following
chapters
In this chapter we have introduced geodemographics as the analysis of
people by where they live, identified how neighbourhood classifications
might be used for both public- and private-sector decision making and
offered some ideas on how neighbourhood-based analysis can be a useful
way of making sense of geographical information.
In the next chapter we look at the precursors to the present geode-
mographic industry, in particular Charles Booth’s studies of poverty
within London and the Chicago School of urban sociologists. Our gaze
is more than one of academic curiosity but views also the origins of the
geodemographic method, including its strength and weaknesses as an

Introducing Geodemographics
25
analytical approach. Here we introduce the risk of ecological fallacy,
something that has been described as the stick by which geodemographics
is beaten. In Chapter 3 we continue our study of the evolution of geodemo-
graphics exploring how it came to be commercialized and the ‘big
players’ that have emerged within the sector.
In Chapter 4 we shift our attention sideways to look at another
field where analysing geographical information is paramount. Here we
outline the principles of geographical information systems (GIS) but do so
from the perspective of a geodemographic user. We also make connec-
tions between GIS and geodemographics but go on, in Chapter 5, to sug-
gest that GIS are not always necessarily the best software to undertake
typical sorts of geodemographic analysis such as neighbourhood profiling
or catchment analysis. Therefore, in Chapter 5 we also compare and
contrast GIS with what have been labelled geodemographic information
systems (GDIS). We describe the sorts of functionality a user might
expect from a GDIS and demonstrate the types of analysis that may be
carried out within it.
Chapter 6 is about building a neighbourhood classification
and considers in detail the data sourcing, validation and grouping
strategies employed by commercial vendors, as well as the sorts of
issues they encounter when constructing a neighbourhood typology.
Chapter 7 considers some of the differences in the construction and
geographies of neighbourhood classifications that have been built
around the world.
Chapter 8 adopts a more critical perspective and asks – ‘but does
geodemographics work?’ Here some of the shortfalls of the geodemo-
graphic method are addressed, notably the problems of diversity within
neighbourhood types, modifiable units and whether geographical data
require explicitly geographical ways of analysing them. The critique is
counterbalanced by the ultimately pragmatic consideration ‘well, it has
worked for many!’ and suggests why. Examples of where geodemograph-
ics has proved useful are given.
Chapter 9 brings with it a change of scale. Whereas all the
preceding chapters are about top-down, area classifications, here the
application of segmentation techniques to individual or household data
are considered, together with ‘bottom-up’ geolifestyle methods. Such
approaches require that special consideration be given to personal data
protection issues; issues of data uncertainty must also be addressed.
Finally in what we have referred to as a postscript, we identify the ‘three
Is’ that gave rise to geodemographics and continue to shape its future.

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
26
1.7 Conclusion
Geodemographics is the analysis of people based on a statistical classifi-
cation of the area in which they live. The classification aims to capture the
important socio-economic ‘dimensions’ of, and differences between,
neighbourhoods. The geodemographic approach has been found by many
to be a useful aid for guiding decision making and the management of
geographical information.
Neighbourhood classifications usually are produced by grouping
together a large number of usually administrative units into a much smaller
number of groups, clusters or neighbourhood types on a like-with-like basis.
A common choice of data to define the similarity, or otherwise, of neigh-
bourhoods are national census statistics. Such classifications have been the
bedrock of a rapidly growing industry that has its origins in urban geography
and sociology. Present applications include survey design, retail planning,
direct marketing and media analysis, as well as other strategic marketing,
planning and decision taking in both the public and private sectors.
Neighbourhood classifications can be used to look for geographical patterns
in various socio-economic, behavioural, attitudinal or consumer datasets.
The usefulness of neighbourhood classifications derives from the
idea that knowing where someone lives provides useful information about
how someone lives. A simple theory of geodemographics is there is an
inter-relationship between people and places, and also between individ-
uals and the people they regularly meet. The adage, ‘birds of a feather
flock together’ and Tobler’s ‘first law of geography’ go some way to
explaining why neighbourhood classifications can usefully be applied to
extract information about people from information about places. When
direct knowledge about potential customers, clients or consumers is not
consistent, neighbourhood analysis provides an inferential tool linking
what is known to what is not.
Summary
●Geodemographics has been described as the analysis of people by
where they live.
●It has been widely used to inform strategic marketing and planning.
●Neighbourhood classifications usually are produced by grouping
a large number of administrative units into a smaller number of
clusters, on a like-with-like basis.

Introducing Geodemographics
27
●An assumption is that ‘birds of a feather flock together’ such that
populations living in the same neighbourhood type share broad
socio-economic and consumer characteristics.
●Multivariate classification techniques simplify a complex geo-
graphic reality to make the basis and process of decision making
easier, faster and more intelligible to stakeholders.
●Geodemographics is better for exploratory analysis than for
hypothesis testing.
Further Reading
●
Longley, P. and Clarke, G. (eds) (1995) GIS for Business and Service
Planning, GeoInformation International, Cambridge, Chapters 5–6.
●
Sleight, P. (2004) Targeting Customers: How to Use Geodemographic
and Lifestyle Data in Your Business, World Advertising Research
Center, Henley-on-Thames.
●
Weiss, M. (2000) The Clustered World, Little, Brown, New York.
●
Our website: www.geodemographics.info.
●
The Geodemographics Knowledge Base: www.geodemographics.org.uk –
a comprehensive list of websites for people interested in the application of
geodemographics and geospatial analysis, produced by the Census and
Geodemographics Group of The Market Research Society.


29
2
London to Chicago and
Back Again! The Origins
of Geodemographics
Learning Objectives
In this chapter we will:
●
Look at the early history of geodemographics, in particular
Charles Booth’s maps of London and the Chicago School of
urban sociology.
●
Discuss how these inform current geodemographic practices,
including their strengths and weaknesses.
●
Introduce the risk of ecological fallacy and the need to consider
population diversity within neighbourhoods.
●
Discuss what we mean by neighbourhood.
●
Explore the parallels and divergences between commercial
geodemographic classifications and governmental measures of
deprivation.
●
Introduce the third of our expert case studies, entitled ‘Charles
Booth – yesterday once more?’, written by Scott Orford of the
Department of City and Regional Planning, University of Cardiff.
Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
Richard Harris, Peter Sleight and Richard Webber
© 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
ISBNs: 0-470-86413-3 (HB); 0-470-86414-1 (PB)

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
30
Introduction
‘Why,’ you might be thinking, ‘would anyone other than misguided
academics or amateur historians be interested in the evolution of geodemo-
graphics?’ The answer, of which we hope to convince you, is that know-
ledge of how present-day neighbourhood classification methods ‘came to
be’, sheds light on the advantages and disadvantages of current practices,
and permits a first look at some of the strengths and weaknesses of the
geodemographic method, to be explored further throughout this book.
Of course, few if any ideas spring from nowhere; most apparently
original thinking builds on preceding ideas or conventions. Consequently,
identifying the one true origin of neighbourhood analysis and targeting
would be a problematic venture. Fortunately, our objectives here are more
limited: our intention is to review early examples of neighbourhood clas-
sification and show, by chronological review in this and the following
chapter, how these underpin the ‘state of play’ in today’s geodemographics
industry. Our focus is less on the historical detail but on the ideas, theories
and applications that have interwoven current geodemographic systems
and methods of neighbourhood targeting. A particular focus of this chapter
is on neighbourhood measures of deprivation and poverty. In the next we
focus more of our attention on private-sector applications.
2.1 The life and labours of an early
neighbourhood analyst
Published in 1889, Charles Booth’s Descriptive Map of London Poverty
arguably is the first example of applied geodemographics. The history
of this map – the 1898–9 revision of which can be viewed online
at http://booth.lse.ac.uk/ – begins a few years earlier, specifically the
10 September 1886, when Booth began his research into what would
become known as the Life and Labour of the People of London (Booth,
1902–3). Seventeen years and 17 volumes later, his enquiries were complete!
What was Booth’s motivation for such an extensive and privately
funded undertaking? Pfautz (1967, p. 21) argues that the clue is to be
found in an autobiography of H. M. Hyndman of the Social Democratic
Federation (Hyndman, 1911, p. 303). In the autumn of 1885 the
Federation had published the results of a sample study it had conducted,
determining that 25% of the workers of London’s metropolis earned
insufficient wages to prevent ‘the slow but sure physical deterioration’ of

The Origins of Geodemographics
31
themselves, their wives and their children. Although, Booth had experi-
enced the unhealthy conditions of London neighbourhoods during an
unsuccessful contest for a parliamentary seat in 1865, he did not believe
that unyielding impoverishment affected as much as one-quarter of the
capital’s population. According to Pfautz (1967, p. 21),
[T]his [claim] was too much for Booth’s essentially conservative point of
view; he felt that the publication of such a figure was incendiary [. . .] Beyond
Booth’s understandable desire to prove the Socialists wrong in their estimate
of the extent of the poverty in London, the urgency of some kind of action
was further motivated by the run of events [. . .] [T]he Pall Mall Gazette sup-
ported the federation’s findings [. . .] ‘shortly afterwards, rioting again broke
out in the West End, and it was rumoured that the unemployed had been
incited to these extremities by Hyndman in person’ (citation from Simey and
Simey, 1960, p. 69).
Ironically, Booth’s own study was to actually indicate 30.7% of
London’s population as below the poverty line: 6% more than the
Federation’s original estimate!
Booth began his study at Tower Hamlets in London’s East End
(Booth, 1887), extending the inquiry a year later to include the people of East
London and Hackney (Booth, 1888). Having been encouraged by the support
of the press and the public, Booth subsequently turned his attention to gath-
ering data on the rest of the city (Pfautz, 1967, p. 29). It is here that present-
day geodemographics emerges! For the London-wide study, an ambitious
undertaking was conceived. The outline of each street in London was care-
fully shaded on a base map to indicate the general socio-economic condition
of the residents. The basis of the classification was the reports of the school
board visitors to households in each street. These reports contained detailed
records, compiled from continuous home visits, of every family with chil-
dren of school age. The classification scheme is shown in Table 2.1.
Unlike our geodemographic classification of Atlantic City
(Chapter 1), where each street was assigned to one and only one neigh-
bourhood type (or class), Booth permitted some streets to be assigned to
multiple socio-economic groups, recognizing the population diversity
existing in some places:
[H]ere and there an attempt has been made to give a little more elasticity to the
system by combining the colours. Dark blue in especial will frequently be
found with a black line upon it, to indicate that great poverty is mixed with
something worse; or a red line has been introduced in connection with pink or
yellow to show the presence of a middle-class element amongst working class
or wealthy surroundings (Booth, 1967, p. 192, see Pfautz, 1967).

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
32
In modern terminology, Booth was developing a type of ‘fuzzy’
classification with a degree of overlap between the classes (see
Flowerdew and Leventhal, 1998; Feng and Flowerdew, 1998). Instead of
constraining a street to be of a single socio-economic type only, Booth
represented some streets to be of a mixed character. In other words, it was
possible for a street of households to be part made up of socio-economic
type ‘A’ and partly of socio-economic type ‘B’. The ‘all-or-nothing’ rule of
mutual exclusivity that characterizes most modern classifications (where
Table 2.1 Booth’s classification of streets in London by general condition of inhabitants.
Source: Booth (1967, pp. 182, 191–2, see Pfautz, 1967) after Booth (1902–3, Poverty series)
Colour
Description
Class
Description
code
(or ‘pen portrait’)
(or ‘pen portrait’)
Black
The lowest grade (corresponding to
A
The lowest class – 
Class A), inhabited principally by 
occasional labourers,
occasional labourers, loafers and 
loafers and semi-criminals
semi-criminals – the elements 
of disorder
Dark 
Very poor (corresponding to Class B),
B
The very poor – casual 
blue 
inhabited principally by casual
labour, hand-to-mouth 
labourers and others living from
existence, chronic want
hand to mouth
Light 
Standard poverty (corresponding to 
C and D
The poor – including alike
blue
Classes C and D) inhabited principally
those whose earnings 
by those whose earnings are small (say
are small, because of 
18 s [shillings – a unit of currency] 
irregularity of 
to 21 s a week for moderate family),
employment, and those 
whether they are so because of 
whose work, though 
irregularity of work (C) or because 
regular, is ill-paid
of a low rate of pay (D)
Purple
Street mixed with poverty (usually 
E and F
The regularly employed 
C and D with E and F, but including 
and fairly paid working 
Class B in many cases)
class of all grades
Pink
Working class comfort (corresponding
G and H
Lower and upper middle 
to Classes E and F, but containing also
class and all above this 
a large proportion of the lower middle
level
class of small tradesman and Class G).
These people usually keep no servant
Red
Well-to-do; inhabited by middle-class
families who keep one or two servants
Yellow
Wealthy; hardly found in East London
and little found in South London; 
inhabited by families who keep three 
or more servants, and whose houses 
are rated at £100 or more

The Origins of Geodemographics
33
a neighbourhood is designated to be of one type or another but not both)
was not imposed by Booth. By avoiding the rule, Booth hoped to avoid
implying a false uniformity within localities (Booth, 1967, p. 193, see
Pfautz, 1967):
[I]n comparing the one set of figures with the other it must be borne in mind
that every street is more or less mixed in character, that the Black streets taken
together contain some of every class from A to F, or (including the publicans)
even G; the same thing is true of the Pink streets also, and even those with a red
line are not without a sprinkling of poor people mixed with the better-to-do.
Booth’s reminder that socio-economic landscapes rarely consist
of perfectly uniform localities is an early warning to the users of neigh-
bourhood classification of assuming otherwise. The warning is pertinent
‘in especial’ to those interested in area-based deprivation indicators for
targeting regeneration funding. Because ‘poor’ households are not exclu-
sively located in ‘poor’ neighbourhoods, so area-based policies aimed at
improving the life chances of the impoverished or socially excluded risk
missing a subset of that population they ideally would seek to reach
(Harris and Johnston, 2003). In general terms, the false assumption that
knowledge of the general characteristics of a neighbourhood will always
yield accurate and precise information about specific individuals or con-
sumers within those neighbourhoods is known as the ecological fallacy.
The problem is illustrated by Figure 2.1. In this light, the geodemographic
advertising, cited in Chapter 1 and proclaiming ‘we know who you are,
because we know where you live’ might overstate its message and could
be entirely wrong.
Yet, for all his cautions and caveats, Booth at heart appears every
bit the pragmatist, an advocate of neighbourhood classification, aware
that the loss of localized detail is a necessary consequence of establishing
benchmarks for generalization:
At best the graphic expression of an almost infinite complication and endless
variety of circumstances, cannot but be very imperfect, and a rainbow of
colour could not accomplish it completely. But in order to group and mass our
information we need to sink minor differences, and to this end the shades and
combination used may be taken as representing so many types of streets
inhabited for the most part by the corresponding classes of people.
[T]here is dark blue and dark blue, light blue streets vary in character, and
there are many shades of black; but the likeness far transcends the difference,
and those who know well how the poor or vicious live in one district
know pretty well how they live in all other districts. I would even venture to
say that the conditions of life do not vary much in any of our great cities, and

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
34
the picture I shall try to give for the benefit of those who have no such detailed
personal experience may, I believe, be taken as applicable in Liverpool or
Manchester or Birmingham, and even in the poorer parts of much smaller
places.
Booth, then, thought it possible to generalize across urban spaces,
sinking ‘minor’ differences to illuminate better the centrality of social
class in the social organization and functioning of a city. Similar
sentiments are echoed a century later by Longley and Harris (1999) who
contend that ‘generalisation is a cornerstone to rational planning policy’
and in Chapter 1 we argued that ‘geodemographic classifications simplify
a complex geographic reality to make the process of decision making
easier, faster and often more understandable to stakeholders.’ The risk is
Social average 
for the area 
(a)
Social average 
for the area 
(b)
Figure 2.1 We know who you are, because we know where you live? Illustrating the eco-
logical fallacy. In area (a) the specific characteristics of the two households are broadly
similar and could be adequately represented by an average index value for the area. In area
(b) the characteristics of the two households diverge, so any social average that ‘smooths
out’ the differences will represent neither of them well

The Origins of Geodemographics
35
that geodemographics oversimplifies, obscuring diversity within neigh-
bourhoods while at the same time exaggerating differences between
neighbourhood groups – an issue we return to in Chapter 8.
Undoubtedly, Booth’s poverty studies were the analysis of people
by where they live – geodemographics by any other name! An apparent
difference between Booth’s classification of London streets and latter
commercial methods is the source of data: Booth’s first classification was
based on the opinions of the school board visitors whereas commercial
systems frequently are dominated by national census data (Birkin, 1995).
Yet, interestingly there has been a trend within the data-marketing indus-
try to make greater use of more unusual and less standard sources of data
(in Chapters 6 and 7 of this book we provide examples). Although such
information can bring with them issues of uncertainty in the quality and
‘representativeness’ of the data, it can also be more geographically (and
temporally) precise, relevant and interesting than more orthodox sources
of information. Such data are often placed under the umbrella term
‘lifestyles data’ – see, in particular, Chapter 9.
Booth’s choice of data necessarily was constrained by what was
available at that time. He in fact regarded the 1881 UK Census as entirely
unsatisfactory and so became a member of the official committee for the
1891 Census, with recommendations for its improvement! From the
results of that later census, Booth developed a less subjective, general
classification of the people, albeit one that could only be applied to the
less detailed geography of the 127 registration sub-districts in London
(see Table 2.2).
Booth also produced an Index Map of London to conclude the
seventeenth and final volume of his study. Fifty districts were coloured
according to an index of their ‘comparative social condition’:
The thirty registration districts were the areas [originally] selected, but some
of these are inconveniently large and not sufficiently homogenous for useful
comparison. By a regrouping of the sub-districts for all of which separate stat-
istics are published by the Register-General, the irregularities have been to
some extent obviated, and the whole metropolitan area divided into fifty dis-
tricts fairly convenient for comparison (Booth, 1902–3, vol. 17, p. 10, cited by
Pfautz, 1967, p. 80).
The 50 districts were arranged in five rank orders relative to their
average percent of poverty, percent of crowding, birth rate, death rate and
rate of early marriage. A global average ‘social index’ was then calcu-
lated based on an averaging of the five ranks. Succinctly, a simple multi-
variate analysis was applied to census data to produce a classification of

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
36
Table 2.2 Booth’s “General Classification of the People”
Class
Classification
Lower Class
1
4 or more persons to each room
Families
2
3 and under 4 persons to each room
occupying
3
2 and under 3 persons to each room
less than
4
1 and under 2 persons to each room
five
Central Class
5
Less than 1 person to each room
rooms
Families occupying 5 rooms or more
without servants
a
4 or more persons to 1 servant
Families
Upper Class
b
3 or less with 1 servant
employing
4 or more with 2 servants
domestic
c
3 or less with 2 servants
indoor
5 or more with 3 servants
servants
d
3 or 4 with 3 servants
” ”
5 or 6 with 4 servants
” ”
7 or more with 5 servants
” ”
e
3 or 4 with 3 servants
” ”
5 or 6 with 5 servants
” ”
7 or more with 6 servants
” ”
f
3 or 4 with 5 servants
” ”
5 or 6 with 6 servants
” ”
6 or 7 with 7 servants
” ”
and other families where number of servants
” ”
about equals that of members of family
g
1 or 2 with 5 servants
” ”
3 or 4 with 6 servants
” ”
4 or 5 with 7 servants
” ”
and other families with 8 or more servants, where
” ”
members of family equal the number of servants
h
1 or 2 with 6 servants
” ”
1, 2 or 3 persons with 7 servants
” ”
and all families with more than 8 servants, where
” ”
the members of family are less in number
than the servants
Source: Booth (1967, p. 221, see Pfautz, 1967) after Booth (1902–3, Industry series).
neighbourhoods by their social condition. Another multivariate methodol-
ogy is described in Chapter 6 and is the bedrock of present data geode-
mographics and neighbourhood targeting techniques. And, the more
specific method of ranking neighbourhoods according to different factors
(or ‘domains’) of deprivation and then combining those ranks to produce
an overall social index is nearly identical to the thinking behind the UK

The Origins of Geodemographics
37
government’s Indices of Deprivation 2000 (DETR, 2000) and 2004
(ODPM, 2004).
A difference between the components of Booth’s index and multi-
variate geodemographic classifications is that Booth’s was applied to
ordinal not interval data. Ordinal data are ranked and what is lost is the
amount of difference between the ranks. For example, it cannot be known
that there is a greater change in the poverty conditions from rank 1 to 2
than from rank 2 to 3 unless interval/ratio data are also available which
reveal (for instance) that the proportions of poverty are 0.7, 0.5 and 0.45
in the first, second and third ranked areas, respectively. The contrast
between interval/ratio measures and ordinal ones are that only the former
provide information about both the order and difference along an assumed
scale (cf. O’Sullivan and Unwin, 2003).
2.2 From London to Chicago and beyond!
Pfautz (1967, p. 6) argues that in Booth’s classic study ‘. . . are both theor-
etical and methodological contributions that make it one of the principal
antecedents of the research methods and interests informing the rise of an
empirical sociology of the city in America in the twenties . . .’Much of this
research took place within the ‘Chicago School’ (see, in particular, Park,
Burgess and McKenzie, 1925) who instituted a paradigmatic and enduring
interest among urban sociologists and geographers in establishing general
principles about the internal spatial and social structure of cities. These
principles were informed by the statistical analysis of social, demographic
and economic data, and the focus of the work became on establishing
general (statistical) relationships between urban systems and structure,
rather than on studying any one particular place or characteristic with
more idiosyncratic detail (compare Robson, 1969 or Carter, 1995 with
Pile and Thrift, 2000). Significant features of the general urban system or
structure could then be summarized using a multidimensional area classi-
fication or model, of which perhaps the most famous is Burgess’ concen-
tric rings model (Figure 2.2). This modelled the flow of immigration into
the centre of Chicago and the movement of existing residents out towards
the suburbs, aided by the development of modern, suburban transportation
systems to connect them back to their workplaces.
In Figure 2.2, the apparently sharp and fixed boundaries between
the various zones of the model are misleading. Burgess actually was
describing a process with origins in a biological metaphor of invasion and

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
38
succession. At the risk of mixing metaphors, the rings can be likened to
the ripples that flow outwards if you drop a stone into water (the stone is
the immigration). The model differs from a geodemographic map of
neighbourhood types such as that shown in Plate 1 which is a snapshot in
time of certain neighbourhood types in Bristol, England. Plate 1 shows the
geographical distribution of the neighbourhood types but is static. It is not
intended to convey any particular urban process, although as we discussed
in Chapter 1 we might perhaps infer the processes that gave rise to the
neighbourhood patterns from the map.
We have recognized that much of the early work in identifying
urban spatial structure was carried out for specific American cities, often
Chicago. Park’s work involved defining ‘natural areas’ in cities, typifying
a field which became known as ‘human ecology’ (Theodorsen, 1961) –
observe again the biological metaphor! Natural areas were conceived as
‘geographical units distinguished both by physical individuality and by
Figure 2.2 Burgess’concentric rings model of the growth of Chicago. Source: Park, Burgess
and McKenzie (1925, p. 55), reproduced by permission of The University of Chicago Press
[Image not available in this electronic edition.]

The Origins of Geodemographics
39
the social, economic and cultural characteristics of the population’
(Gittus, 1964, p. 6). The idea of a natural unit provides one conceptual
definition of what we mean when we talk of neighbourhood analysis – the
analysis of areal (polygonal) units within which we hope the character-
istics of the population are sufficiently similar to each other and also
sufficiently different from the populations of other areas that we can rea-
sonably describe each area, and its population, as being and belonging to
a neighbourhood; as being a distinct geographical feature.
Set against this object view of neighbourhoods, Kearns and
Parkinson (2001, p. 2103) argue that ‘there is no single, generalisable inter-
pretation of the neighbourhood.’Although their statement is true in principle
(it undoubtedly being the case that different people carry with them different,
though not necessarily entirely disparate, mental geographies and therefore
different perceptions of what constitutes their neighbourhoods and com-
munities; cf. Jackson, 1989) in policy practice generalized and standardized
definitions of neighbourhood are used, albeit that they are usually drawn
up for administrative convenience, not to define ‘natural areas’, express
notions of community or to delimit areas of social–economic cohesion.
Generalizable interpretations of neighbourhoods exist de facto, although
there are many of them, specified at a variety of scales: residential addresses;
mail delivery units; census enumeration districts; electoral wards; areas of
local governance; and so forth. The important point – which we return to in
Chapter 8 – is that whichever is chosen for analysing the socio-economic
characteristics of population distributions should be fit for purpose. We need
to be wary of assuming that the objects of analysis are in any sense ‘natural’
or necessarily delimit true geographical features in any meaningful way.
Batey and Brown (1995) record that human ecological research
was stimulated by the increasing availability of US Census data, issued by
census tract (each with a population of about 4000). Local advisory cen-
tres helped to define tracts with permanent, recognizable borders, seeking
to delimit populations of similar racial and economic status, and residing
in similar types of housing. The work of Shevky (Shevky and Williams,
1949; Shevky and Bell, 1955) typified the social area analysis of the time.
Three indices were proposed, devised from one to three census variables
that measured tract populations on scales of economic, family and ethnic
status. The tracts were then sorted into social areas on the basis of
their index scores (Berry and Horton, 1970, p. 314). Extension of the
analysis to a wider range of cities revealed shortcomings in the original
choice of census variables. Subsequently, a greater number of variables
were included and the multivariate technique, factor analysis applied –
spawning the phrase ‘factorial ecology’.

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
40
In Britain, early studies of urban spatial structure were hampered
by a lack of census data at fine geographical scales (Batey and Brown,
1995). Small-area data became available following the 1951 Census at the
level of the enumeration district (ED) – the administrative units that
together form the geography of data collection for UK censuses. By 1969
the Centre for Urban Studies (University College London) had experi-
mented with 1961 Census data at the political ward and more detailed, ED
level (Norman, 1969). A six-fold classification of EDs was produced for
inner London using various data-reduction techniques (specifically, prin-
cipal components analysis and a least-square cluster analysis method)
(Howard, 1969). Batey and Brown (1995, p. 82) show an example of this
classification for the Camden area of London, noting the naming of the
clusters (Upper Class, Bed Sitter, Poor, Stable Working Class, Local
Authority Housing, Almost Suburban). Each class of ED can be compared
to the others and to inner London as a whole, against 28 different census
variables, of which 14 are shown in Table 2.3. For example, proportion-
ally a greater than inner London average of children aged under five were
to be found living in the Poor and Working Class EDs. Such a finding has
resonance in ambitious present-day desires to eradicate childhood poverty
in the UK.
Foreshadowing the future use of geodemographics in policy making
and management, the 1960s witnessed an increasing interest in small-area
classifications from local authorities. For example, the Liverpool Social
Malaise Study (Liverpool City Council, 1969) sought to identify areas in the
city with concentrations of social problems. It is also an early example of the
use of data fusion and ‘joined-up government’ whereby the classification
based on the 1961 Census data was then linked to social statistics routinely
collected by each council department. (The non census data sources were not
used to build the classification, only to interpret it; Webber, 1975.)
The Chicago, inner London and Liverpool studies are pioneering
examples of small-area analysis. However, they were also restricted to rela-
tively limited geographical regions. During the 1970s, one of us, working
at the Centre for Environmental Studies, London, began to develop national
classifications at the ward, parish and local authority levels that permitted
clusters of EDs to be compared with the national mean for particular
census variables (Webber, 1977; Webber, 1978; Webber and Craig, 1978).
The classification, subsequently acquired by the company CACI and
rebranded ACORN, was then linked to the mail delivery (postcode) geog-
raphy, enabling it to be used in the private sector to discriminate between
the different types of consumer behaviours associated with different neigh-
bourhood classes. Batey and Brown (1995, p. 85) record that ‘significantly

Table 2.3 Selected mean characteristics of six types of enumeration districts in inner London, 1961 Census. Source: adapted from Norman (1969,
p. 393)
Classification of enumeration district
All inner London
Upper
Bed-sitter
Poor
Working 
Local authority
Almost
Mean
Standard 
class
class
housing
suburban
deviation
% population under 5
4.0
4.2
9.8
7.8
6.9
6.0
7.0
2.6
% population under 15
11.2
9.9
21.1
20.1
25.6
17.7
19.2
6.0
% population 65 and over
14.2
11.1
9.8
12.2
9.1
11.8
4.0
Female : male ratio, all ages
1462
1175
1030
1082
1059
1149
1123
237
Female : male ratio, 25–44
1265
919
874
951
1066
1055
1005
226
% women aged 20–24 never married
22.7
26.1
60.6
63.6
43.4
53.1
50.9
20.2
% adults single
40.0
47.8
29.0
25.2
25.4
24.9
28.7
8.6
% one-person households
33.5
46.1
25.2
21.1
13.0
17.4
22.5
11.5
% one- and two-person households
66.0
75.7
53.3
52.2
37.3
50.8
52.6
13.2
% households of five or more persons
8.4
5.4
12.0
11.7
19.7
11.4
12.4
6.2
% all households overcrowded
3.4
11.0
15.7
6.3
5.9
2.2
6.9
5.7
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
% early school leavers
33.9
40.5
85.1
84.0
86.6
69.7
73.5
21.3
% males in professional/managerial 
43.4
25.2
6.6
7.2
5.2
16.9
13.2
14.6
occupations
% males in manual occupation
28.7
41.1
77.6
75.2
77.1
55.3
65.3
21.2

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
42
better discrimination was achieved, for example in newspaper readership,
than had been obtained previously using conventional indicators such as
age or social class.’ The results of this experimental work (Baker,
Bermingham and McDonald, 1979) were presented at the Market Research
Society Conference. The presentation was ‘the [UK] marketing commu-
nity’s first exposure to this promising new geodemographic approach.’
The seeds had been sown for a new industry to grow and we
discuss the commercial development of geodemographics further in the
following chapter. It was now possible to compare one census area against
another in terms of their neighbourhood profile. However, this offered
only limited analytical flexibility, being bound by the geography of the
census. What if the user wanted to reach the next stage and undertake the
sort of procedure described in Chapter 1: to take a specific client list and
sort it into different types of consumer based on the class of neighbour-
hood within which each client lived?
One further catalyst was required for the geographic industry to
blossom: the ability to link people to places (see Figure 1.1, Chapter 1). This
has been achieved with the growth of the geographic information industry
and increasingly precise and accurate methods to ‘tie’ specific geographic
features to particular geographical locations – methods that include GPS
(the global positioning system). In fact, the growth of geodemographics has
paralleled the rapid rise of geographic information-handling technologies,
notably GIS, which primarily we discuss in Chapter 4.
2.3 A note on measuring deprivation
In this chapter we have observed that much of the early development of
neighbourhood classification has been associated with a desire to meas-
ure, map and understand geographical patterns of urban deprivation and
poverty. This is by no means to imply that deprivation and issues of social
exclusion are solely an urban concern, only to recognize that the pioneer-
ing studies which nurtured geodemographics were concerned with under-
standing the built and social structures of cities.
Deprivation is an elusive concept to define and measure. Different
conceptions lead to different geographical representations of physical and
social conditions, and any classification of deprived neighbourhoods
inevitably will reflect the priorities, ideologies, beliefs, knowledge and
so forth of those who undertake the classification; the broader social,
economic and political climate of the time; and also the technological and

The Origins of Geodemographics
43
data infrastructure available, within which to undertake the classification.
There is neither a ‘pure object’ that is indisputably deprivation nor any
perfectly objective and apolitical measures independent of prevailing
interests and value systems. (The UN’s definition of absolute poverty is a
possible exception, giving lack of access to food, clean water, health, shel-
ter and education as the indicators.)
We are not suggesting that deprivation or related notions of
poverty and social exclusion are socially constructed to the degree that
they have no physical (real) existence – to do so would be an academic
indulgence extraordinarily dismissive of the circumstances of those who
actually are deprived – only that the methods and understandings used to
conceptualize, measure and to target the ‘deprived’ or, indeed, any other
expression of neighbourhood condition are imbued with all sorts of sub-
jective (and hence contestable) social meaning, theory and praxis. The
way deprivation is conceived conditions the way that it is measured and,
according to the Greater London Authority (Mayor of London, 2002,
p. xvi) ‘there is no consensus about what is meant by deprivation or poverty,
or about the best methods or indicators used to measure them’ (although
see Lee, Murie and Gordon, 1995). It follows that there is likely to be con-
siderable debate concerning what might be the policy interventions that
are most likely to be effective in different, highly deprived localities.
Uncertainties about how best to profile neighbourhood conditions
are not necessarily a weakness. To the contrary, they can enable different
researchers and practitioners to tailor a solution to the problem. However,
they can also give rise to dispute! Consider, for example, Table 2.4,
which shows the proportion of the most deprived electoral wards in
Table 2.4 Proportion of the most deprived wards in England that are also within London
according to three governmental measures
Percentage of London
Percentage of London
wards falling into the
wards falling into the
10% most deprived
5% most deprived
in England
in England
Index of Local Conditions 
46
35
(DoE, 1994)
Index of Local Deprivation 
40
26
(DETR, 1998)
Index of Multiple Deprivation
20
10
(DETR, 2000)
Source: Mayor of London, 2002, p. 102.

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
44
England that are also within London, defined by various governmental
measures. It could be concluded from the table that between 1998 and
2001 the proportion of the most nationally deprived wards at least halved
within London. Possible but unlikely! What is more likely is that the
different indices vary too greatly in their construction and sources of data
for one index sensibly to be compared against another. The difficulty for
London’s authorities is that the newest of the indices – the Index of
Multiple Deprivation (IMD) 2000 – is, at the time of writing, the one
used to allocated neighbourhood regeneration monies, with the principal
criterion for receiving funding being whether a ward is one of the 10%
most deprived. (The IMD 2000 has just been superseded by the IMD
2004; ODPM, 2004.)
Despite the fact that different indices use different variables in
different ways, there has still been some agreement about the most
important correlates of deprivation (and/or poverty). Common measures
used in the UK include levels of unemployment, households that live
in overcrowded properties, single-parent households and households
not owning a car (Lee, Murie and Gordon, 1995). As we explained in
Chapter 1, these and other indicators of deprivation are usually combined
in such a way as to give a multivariate profile or score indicating the level
of deprivation in a given neighbourhood. If we denote x1, x2, x3, . . . , xn
as the predictor or independent variables to be included in an index (for
example, x1 could be the proportion of households not owning a car per
neighbourhood), then the overall score (y) can be denoted as a function
of the predictor variables:
yf(x1, x2, x3, . . . , xn)
(2.1)
For example, the Breadline Britain index (Gordon and Forrest,
1995; Lee, Murie and Gordon, 1995; Gordon and Pantazis, 1997a, 1997b)
estimates the percentage of poor households for 1991 Census wards and
districts as:
y  0.2025x1  0.2174x2  0.1597x3  0.1585x4
 0.0943x5  0.1079x6
(2.2)
where y is the estimated percentage of poor households (per census ward
or district) and x1 to x6 refer to the following 1991 Census variables,
respectively: % households not owner-occupied; % households with no
car; % lone-parent households; % households where household head is
of partly skilled or unskilled occupation; % economically active popula-
tion unemployed; and % households containing a person with a limiting

The Origins of Geodemographics
45
long-term illness. Note (in Equation (2.2)) that the designers of the index
gave increased weight (importance) to, for example, ‘households with no
car’ relative to ‘economically active population unemployed’ as an indica-
tor of poverty. In Equation (2.2) we have followed convention and used y
and x1 to x6 to denote the dependent and independent variables, respec-
tively. Unfortunately this also risks confusion when x and y are used to
denote geographical coordinates in a GIS (see Chapter 4).
There are many methodological similarities between neighbour-
hood classifications used for measuring deprivation and commercial clas-
sifications used for consumer profiling. Both attach multivariate profiles
to neighbourhoods. Both often draw on governmental, particularly census
data to help define the profiles. And, for both, what the profiles come to
represent exists at the interplay between the real world and the set of
methods and meanings used to make sense of it.
However, there are also differences. Most obviously, consumer pro-
filing is interested in accurately identifying the characteristics of different
sorts of consumer, while deprivation classifications seek to identify deprived
neighbourhoods and their residents. Less obviously, commercial classifica-
tions are usually formed by grouping neighbourhoods into clusters or types
on a like-with-like basis, with the likeness being defined by the multivariate
profile (Chapter 6). Deprivation profiles tend to be ranked from most to least
poor neighbourhood and are then essentially sorted into two types, above or
below what is ultimately an arbitrary threshold (for example, the top 10%
most deprived) – neighbourhoods that are treated as deprived and neigh-
bourhoods that are not. A third difference is in the end use. Many interven-
tions that governments make, such as raising standards in schools or
recruiting more police personnel, are targeted on broad geographical areas
such as electoral wards, local authority districts, police constabularies or
journey-to-work zones. By contrast the programs which direct marketers
employ (but less so retailers) usually take place at the individual or house-
hold level and therefore make use of data for finer geographical scales.
Case study: Charles Booth – yesterday
once more?
Scott Orford, Lecturer in GIS and Spatial Analysis, Department of City and
Regional Planning, University of Cardiff
Charles Booth is probably best remembered for his colourful and innova-
tive maps that accompanied his groundbreaking research on the ‘Life

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
46
and Labour of the People of London’. These maps vividly illustrated the
social characteristics of the inhabitants of late Victorian inner London
for a variety of circumstances and spatial scales. Perhaps his most
famous map – and the one that interests us here – is his Descriptive Map
of London Poverty. This large-scale map shows the streets of inner
London, building by building, each one coloured to correspond to one
of seven categories reflecting the condition of poverty of the resident
household. The seven categories used on the map are described in
Table 2.1 (above).
The classification scheme designed by Booth resulted in a sur-
prising amount of discrimination between different household types
across very small geographical areas. For instance, the neighbouring areas
of Westminster and Pimlico have streets classified using every single cat-
egory in his scheme: from the ‘elements of disorder’ around Great Peter
Street near Westminster Abbey, through the mixed streets of poverty and
affluence in Pimlico, to the wealthy yellow coloured main roads of
Belgrave Road, St George’s Road and Victoria Street.
This situation is not so different from that of today, with numer-
ous small areas in inner London continuing to demonstrate a wide diver-
sity of social characteristics, and with the wealthy and the poor still living
in close proximity. In order to investigate the extent to which the social
landscape has changed since Booth’s day, Booth’s poverty map was digit-
ized and georeferenced to the Ordnance Survey UK’s (OS) National Grid
coordinate system. Because the Registrar General’s social class scheme
used in the 1991 UK Census of population is in part derived from Booth’s
work (and based on five categories of occupation), it is possible to com-
pare Booth’s data with 1991 census data.
A GIS (see Chapter 4) was used to construct poverty indices for
the digitized Booth data and occupation data from the 1991 Census stat-
istics, with 1991 Census wards used as the comparative spatial unit. The
poverty indices are akin to dissimilarity indices used in the analysis of
social segregation in the sense that they measure the incidence of relative
poverty within each ward by taking into account the relative mix of
social classes. Although poverty in its absolute sense has changed
beyond all recognition since Booth’s day, the degree of relative poverty
and affluence within each area may be much more stable; inequalities
may remain.
Comparing the ward poverty indices reveals some very interest-
ing insights into the changing nature of the social hierarchy of small
areas of London. There is a very strong correlation between the two
indexes (a Pearson correlation, r of 0.73, with no more than 1%

The Origins of Geodemographics
47
likelihood, p of the association being due to chance), implying a close
‘fit’ between areas of relative poverty in Booth’s time and the same
areas in 1991. However, the indices also reveal that, on average, there is
less social polarization (between the very rich and the very poor) in
1991 than in Booth’s time. Areas in inner London have generally con-
verged over the last 100 years, with less number of areas classified at the
extremes of rich or poor and with a corresponding growth in middle-
income areas.
A more detailed description of changes in ward-level poverty may
be gained by examining how wards have changed in their relative pos-
ition, ranked from rich to poor. Table 2.5 compares quartiles of wards
based on the two ward poverty indexes, one being the richest quartile (the
‘top’ 25%) and four being the poorest (the ‘bottom’ 25%). It can be seen
that almost half of the wards (46%) have not changed their relative pos-
ition with respect to poverty between Booth’s time and 1991 (the middle
diagonal). The greatest shifts in relative position occur in the middle quar-
tiles with very little change at the two extremes, particularly with wards
that were richest in Booth’s time. The table shows that three-quarters of
the most affluent quartile wards have maintained their premier position in
the social hierarchy throughout the 100-year period. This compares to the
wards in the poorest quartile of which just under half (45%) moved up to
a richer quartile by 1991.
A more dramatic illustration of how Booth’s classification of
inner London continues to have resonance today is provided by examin-
ing the correlations between the Booth poverty index and a variety of con-
temporary standardized mortality ratios for different causes of death.
Table 2.6 shows the simple and partial correlations between the poverty
indices and the standardized mortality ratios. The Booth poverty index
contributed more to predicting deaths from stroke and stomach cancer in
Table 2.5 A comparison of the Booth and the 1991 Census ward poverty indexes by
quartiles
Number and percentage of wards in each quartile
Quartile
1991 census data
1
2
3
4
Booth
1
25 (76%)
5 (15%)
2 (6%)
1 (3%)
map
2
6 (18%)
11 (33%)
14 (42%)
2 (6%)
data
3
2 (6%)
12 (36%)
7 (21%)
12 (36%)
4
0 (0%)
5 (15%)
10 (30%)
18 (55%)

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
48
the late twentieth century than that derived from the 1991 census! For
other causes of death, the modern index contributed more. The results of
further correlation analyses suggest that for deaths under the age of 65
the 1991 index makes a slightly greater contribution to predicting all
cause mortality (r  0.56; p  0.01) than does the Booth index (r  0.46;
p  0.01). When only deaths at ages greater than 65 are considered,
however, both indexes make a similar contribution to the model: the cor-
relation coefficients are r  0.56 and r  0.57, respectively (p  0.01 in
both cases).
The fact that the Booth poverty index performs so strongly as a
predictor of mortality is perhaps partly because the median age of death
of the people dying in the period 1991–5 is approximately 78. This
means that, while very few would have been alive at the time Booth
drew his map, almost half would have been born before 1915. The
majority of these individuals, however, will have migrated in the inter-
vening period. Hence the predictive power of the Booth poverty index
demonstrates how the nature and social hierarchy of different areas of
London has remained stable, despite constant changeover of the resi-
dent individuals. Surprisingly then, Charles Booth’s classification of
Victorian London still produces a significant amount of discrimination
of the social composition of inner London today. It would appear that
wholesale shifts of neighbourhoods within the social hierarchy of
the city are a rare occurrence, even over a 100-year time period. It is
perhaps this stability that leads geodemographics ‘to work’ (see also
Orford et al., 2002).
Table 2.6 Correlations between poverty in 1896 and 1991 and standardized mortality
ratios for all ages for death in 1991–95
Simple
Partial
Simple
Partial 
correlation
correlation
correlation
correlation
Booth
Booth
1991
1991
All causes
0.56
0.22
0.60
0.35
Coronary heart disease
0.58
0.21
0.65
0.41
Stroke
0.40
0.22
0.36
0.11*
All cardiovascular disease
0.56
0.20
0.61
0.37
Chronic obstructive
0.58
0.24
0.61
0.35
pulmonary disease
Pneumonia
0.26
0.07*
0.30
0.17
Lung cancer
0.61
0.30
0.62
0.33
Stomach cancer
0.49
0.24
0.47
0.20
*Insignificant at 5% level.

The Origins of Geodemographics
49
2.4 Conclusion
In this chapter we have charted the origins of geodemographics in
Charles Booth’s descriptive maps of poverty in nineteenth-/twentieth-
century London and in the Chicago School’s studies of ‘the city’. The
history we have given necessarily is selective and incomplete but has
provided opportunity to discuss some methods of geodemographic
study – notably multivariate analysis of national census data and its use
in the measurement of social conditions within ‘neighbourhoods’.
Whether neighbourhood is ‘packaged’ more in terms of natural units or
as formal administrative zones depends on the choice of dataset and the
scale at which it is specified. Whether the distinction matters, largely
depends on the application – it is, for instance, of more importance when
considering where to target community funding than it is for using geo-
demographic classifications to guide direct marketing communications.
In the next chapter we explore the private-sector evolution of
geodemographics and show how its growth parallels the increased, more
widespread and ease of availability of geographical information, and of
low-cost technological solutions to store, manipulate and analyse such
data. We examine the close relationship between geodemographics and
GIS further in Chapter 4, but then go on to look at the different software
needs of GIS and geodemographic users in Chapter 5.
Before doing so, we may add a ‘footnote’ regarding the position
of geodemographic methods within UK (urban) geography. As we have
seen, a range of multivariate, social area and factor analyses were playing
a pivotal role in enhancing understandings of the spatial and social struc-
ture of cities during the 1960s and 70s. However, by the 1980s interest in
this approach had largely waned within academic quarters. The reasons
for this are complex but include: a rising interest in the contingent and the
particular, and how these ‘shape’ urban settlements and lifestyles; unease
with applying quasi-scientific methods of research to understanding
social systems and human agency; the apparent decoupling of analysis
from theory, with concern that the methods were primarily data led and
technique driven; an emerging political climate that tended to eschew ana-
lytical and evidence based policy making; and increased awareness that
the ways geographical data are aggregated into reporting areas have
effects on analysis that cannot be ignored – most famously, Openshaw and
Taylor (1979) showed that the same data could be aggregated in different
ways, producing correlations between variables spanning the entire range
from 1.0 to 1.0!

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
50
Ironically, the movement away from geodemographics within
urban geography coincided with the acceptance, then development of
the methods within a commercial arena. Fortunately, the disengagement
has never been absolute. A number of geographers have applied their
skills successfully, particularly to the retail sector and, in recent time,
there has been something of a rapprochement. This, coupled with the
proliferation of geographical data and their associated technologies, has
usefully led to some ‘old’ ideas being revisited and new ones devel-
oped. An example of the latter is a recent classification of British sur-
names which helps to identify how names originate in different
locations and reveals some of the historic patterns in the movement of
national and cultural groups (Lloyd, Webber and Longley, 2004; see
www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/surnames/). There is also increasing interest in
using advanced geosimulation techniques to model and study complex
urban systems (Benenson and Torrens, 2004).
Summary
●The historical precursors to present geodemographics include
Booth’s studies of deprivation within London and the Chicago
School of urban sociology.
●The development of human ecology, social area analysis and factor
ecology was aided by the increasing availability of census datasets
and the development of multivariate methods to analyse them.
●In the same way, modern data-handling technologies and the pro-
liferation of geographical data are offering new opportunities to
further develop geodemographic methodologies and insight.
●Booth initially developed a type of ‘fuzzy’ classification and
warns that socio-economic landscapes rarely consist of entirely
uniform localities.
●The ecological fallacy can be understood as making an (inappro-
priate) assumption that any specific individual necessarily shares
the general characteristics of her or his neighbourhood and its
population.
●Formal, administrative definitions of neighbourhood delimit ‘nat-
ural’ and homogeneous groupings of the population to a greater
and lesser extent, dependent on scale, location and the purpose of
their design. The more ‘artificial’ the neighbourhood unit the
greater the risk of ecological fallacy.

The Origins of Geodemographics
51
●The risk of committing the ecological fallacy is greatest in areas
of population diversity and so varies geographically. The severity
of the risk needs to be judged with respect to the context and aims
of the analysis.
Further Reading
●
Batey, P. and Brown, P. (1995) In GIS for Business and Service Plan-
ning (eds, Longley, P. and Clarke, G.) GeoInformation International,
Cambridge, pp. 77–103.
●
The online Charles Booth Archive, http://booth.lse.ac.uk, hosted by the
London School of Economics and Political Science.
●
The Center for Spatially Integrated Social Science at the University of
California, Santa Barbara provides overviews of some of the classic
papers and research in spatial analysis – including those of Charles
Booth and of the Chicago School: http://www.csiss.org/classics/.


53
3
The Evolution of
Geodemographics and
the Market Today
Learning Objectives
In this chapter we will:
●
Explore the evolution and globalization of the geodemographic
industry.
●
Look at how that growth has been characterized by periods of
innovation and merger.
●
Show how the development of new and updated products trad-
itionally has been linked to the periodic release of small-area
census data.
●
Identify some alternative sources of data that increasingly are
incorporated within or linked to geodemographic classifications.
●
Use the UK as a case study to identify more generic develop-
ments within the geodemographic industry.
●
Present an overview of the US market for geodemographics,
written by Dave Miller, senior vice president, Data Research
and Development, Claritas USA.
Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
Richard Harris, Peter Sleight and Richard Webber
© 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
ISBNs: 0-470-86413-3 (HB); 0-470-86414-1 (PB)

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
54
Introduction
In the preceding chapter we looked at some of the historical antecedents
to the present-day geodemographic industry. The foundations of the
industry were found to be in academic and social research, so how did it
cross that sometimes ‘great divide’ between business and academia?
In this chapter we explore how a set of specialist suppliers
have come to develop the set of geodemographic tools and services
that are now used by leading consumer brands and organizations
around the world. Our experiences and working lives predominantly
have been associated with the UK market and, accordingly, it is there
where we focus attention. However, there are a number of more generic
observations that will be of interest to an international audience.
These are:
●Mergers within and rationalization of the industry.
●The emergence of the ‘big players’ operating within an inter-
national market.
●Yet also new opportunities for entrepreneurialism and smaller
‘start-up’ firms (often led by former staff of the bigger com-
panies), facilitated by reduced cost access to neighbourhood and
other data.
●The broadening of classifications to include non-census based
sources of information.
●The emergence of data warehouses storing information not on
neighbourhoods but on specific individuals and/or their house-
holds.
●The parallel development of geographical information tech-
nologies as a catalyst to the more widespread collection,
dissemination and analysis of various geodemographic data, as
well as to the continued evolution of the industry and the devel-
opment of new products, supported by new national spatial data
infrastructures.
●An increased concern with data privacy and protection (which we
consider in more detail in Chapter 9).
●The sorts of business models and relationships offered by vendors
to the users of geodemographic systems.
We also include a review of the ‘state of play’ in the US market for geo-
demographics.

The Evolution of Geodemographics
55
3.1 From census to commerce
In Chapter 2 we left the story of geodemographics at the Centre for
Environmental Studies and its studies of deprivation within Merseyside
and North London (Webber, 1977; Webber and Craig, 1978). At the
Centre, cluster analysis of census variables had been used to show that the
type of deprivation in different neighbourhoods was itself different in
nature, requiring different remedies. This work probably would never
have come to the attention of the commercial sector had it not been for a
combination of circumstances.
While one of us was addressing a conference about our experi-
ence of census analysis, an executive from the British Market Research
Bureau (BMRB) happened to be in the audience and was interested in an
electoral ward-level classification as a possible tool for improving the
sample frame used by BMRB’s Target Group Index (TGI) survey – a sur-
vey investigating consumption of various products, services, brands and
media. Subsequently, BMRB coded the TGI survey with the ward classi-
fication codes and found interesting differences between neighbourhood
types. A paper was presented to the Market Research Society Annual
Conference in March 1979 (Baker, Bermingham and McDonald, 1979),
which excited considerable interest in the marketing, media and research
communities.
It was media research where the greatest initial impact was felt. The
often-quoted finding was that the neighbourhood classification was better
able to differentiate between Guardian and Telegraph readers than ‘stand-
ard’ demographics. In terms of age, sex and social grade, there was little
difference between readers of the two publications (except that Guardian
readers were somewhat younger, on average). However, when analysing by
neighbourhood, whereas Guardian readers tended to be ‘inner-city high
status’, Telegraph readers were predominantly ‘suburban high status’.
Apart from BMRB noticing the potential of geodemographics,
another organization developing an interest was CACI, a US-based com-
pany. CACI had set up an office in London in the mid-1970s to offer a
service, SITE, whereby retailers could obtain online access to census stat-
istics summarized for bespoke catchment areas. The potential of the elec-
toral ward-level classification was spotted and rebranded as ACORN
(A Classification of Residential Neighbourhoods). The UK commercial
geodemographics industry was off and running! A similar development
was occurring in the USA with the launch of PRIZM (Potential Rating
Index for Zip Markets) by Claritas in 1978 under the direction of

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
56
Jonathan Robbin, the company’s founder (Claritas had also introduced a
census-based cluster system in 1947: see Monmonier, 2002, p. 146).
CACI soon produced an ACORN classification at the more
detailed, census output area level and linked to the SITE system. (At the
time the UK census output geography was the same as the input geography
of data collection and output areas, OAs, were actually referred to as
enumeration districts, EDs. The separation out of these two geographies
occurred post-2001 with recognition that the two should be designed for
different purposes – one for efficient census administration, the other for
meaningful census analysis. See Martin, 1998a, 2000.) Two milestone
developments followed. The first was the ability to link the somewhat
opaque census geography to the more widely used and understood geog-
raphy of mail delivery – unit postcodes (Raper, Rhind and Shepherd, 1992)
(these being broadly similar in purpose to the ZIP codes used in the USA).
In GIS parlance, the process of linking the census and postal
geographies involved a proximity analysis that related a point grid
reference near the centre of any given postcode (the centroid) to the
nearest point grid reference representing the centre of an enumeration dis-
trict. The postcode centroids were provided by a file variously known as
POSTZON and the Central Postcode Directory (CPD), originally devel-
oped for a regional highway traffic model. The accuracy of the matching
process was limited by the technology and geographical datasets of the
period. In particular, the resolution (the greatest possible level of detail) of
the postcode centroid coordinates was only 100 m, with the assumed
centre of each postcode being offset to the south-west corner of the 100 m
 100 m National Grid cell in which it fell (Martin, 1992). Nevertheless,
if postcodes could be linked to census output areas then so too could a
person’s property address (via the postcode), making profiling of cus-
tomers and cross-tabulation of market research respondents much easier.
With each successive census that linkage has become stronger!
From the 1981 Census onwards in Scotland the postcode boundaries
had been digitized and the postcodes of census respondents had been
recorded, permitting a more accurate, population-weighted match of post-
code to census geography. For the 2001 Census of England and Wales the
output geography was thoroughly redesigned, with the OAs being specif-
ically built as aggregations (groups) of contiguous unit postcodes and
offering, for the first time, near congruence of postal and census geogra-
phies at the OA scale (previously, postcodes could be split across cen-
sus boundaries adding imprecision to the matching process). Over the
same time the resolution credited to unit postcode centroids has increased
one hundred fold, reflecting more general trends in the evolution of

The Evolution of Geodemographics
57
geographical information technologies and data handling. At the time of
writing, Ordnance Survey UK was offering their Code-Point product with
a 1 m coordinate resolution for postcode centroids.
The second milestone development was an agreement between
CACI and CCN (now Experian) to link the former’s ACORN classifica-
tion to the latter’s computerized electoral register. The electoral register of
Great Britain offers (in principle) the names and addresses of all adults
resident in England, Wales and Scotland (there is also a Register for
Northern Ireland) – since it is a legal requirement to register to vote – and,
at the time, there was no restriction on who could buy a digital copy of the
full list of voters. The agreement enabled the Register to be queried by
ACORN type, leading to many mass mailshots. In retrospect, this was
better news for the geodemographic and direct mail industries than it was for
the many recipients! Eventually agencies such as the Mailing Preference
Service (www.mpsonline.org.uk) emerged to help prevent unsolicited
mail and the geodemographic market developed with two main appli-
cation areas: direct marketing; and retail, or quasi-retail. Quasi-retail
includes applications such as the door-to-door distribution of leaflets and
samples, which will often take (for example) the characteristics of the
grocery, retail catchment areas into account.
For the four years from 1979 to 1983, CACI was the UK geo-
demographics market! However, competition emerged during the remainder
of that decade. Pinpoint Analysis opened for business in January 1983,
concentrating initially on applications of census data that did not involve
multivariate classifications: for example, the KIDS targeting system
(targeting households with high concentrations of children, using ‘raw’
census variables). But when no competitor to ACORN had emerged by
mid-1984, Pinpoint decided to produce its own, launching PiN (Pinpoint
identified Neighbourhoods).
The mid-1980s saw the geodemographic market liven up consider-
ably. Webber left CACI in 1985 and joined CCN, which then launched
Mosaic in early 1986. Mosaic introduced non-census data, such as credit
activity counts and county court judgements into the otherwise census-based
classification. At much the same time, SuperProfiles was launched.
SuperProfiles’ initial development was conducted at the University of
Newcastle by Stan Openshaw and colleagues. Details of the methods used to
create the classification were published in the academic literature (Charlton,
Openshaw and Wymer, 1985) and subtitled ‘a poor man’s ACORN’! The
paper provides an excellent (and more technical) overview of the sorts
of classification methods that we also consider, in Chapter 6. Members of
the University of Liverpool also contributed to the commercialization of

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
58
SuperProfiles. Much of that history is recorded by Batey and Brown (1995).
Openshaw went on to propose a number of alternatives to the ‘conventional’
methods of geodemographic classification (Openshaw, 1989; Blake and
Openshaw, 1995; Openshaw and Wymer, 1995; Openshaw, Blake and
Wymer, 1995; Openshaw and Turton, 1996).
SuperProfiles was launched onto the market by a subsidiary of
OE McIntyre but was swiftly acquired and marketed by CDMS, a
Littlewoods subsidiary. Meanwhile, Pinpoint had developed and launched
FiNPiN (Financial PiN), using National Opinion Poll’s (NOP’s) Financial
Research Survey data in its construction – the first ‘market-specific’classifi-
cation. Indeed, in the mid-1980s the financial services sector was by far the
fastest growing sector of the UK geodemographics market, spurred on by the
Financial Services Act that had opened up the financial market to greater
competition. By early 1987, there were five neighbourhood classifications
jostling for market share: ACORN; PiN; FiNPiN; Mosaic and SuperProfiles.
The emergence of desktop computing technologies paved the way
for the development of PC-based market analysis systems in the late
1980s. Prior to this, standard reports and maps had either been obtained
using a computer bureau or via a telephone ordering service. Alternatively,
postcode directories of classifications could be purchased to enable clients
to append geodemographic codes to their own customer records. First from
the blocks was Sales Performance Analysis (SPA), which developed a
product branded ‘The Marketing Machine’. In autumn 1987, CCN bought
out the rights to The Marketing Machine from SPA and, linking it to
Mosaic, rebranded it ‘Mosaic Systems’ (subsequently Micromarketer: see
Chapter 5). This positioned CCN in the market as a provider of services
through a ‘do-it-yourself software’channel by contrast to the ‘call in’chan-
nel on which users were previously reliant. In response to this market
threat CACI started work on the development of its own system, InSite,
which was launched in 1988. Pinpoint launched GEOPiN at much the
same time. While Mosaic Systems and InSite essentially were geodemo-
graphic analysis systems, integrated with mapping written in-house,
Pinpoint took a different approach, writing geodemographic applications
to run on ESRI PC-ARC/INFO, GIS software.
One reason for Pinpoint’s GIS-oriented approach was its chair-
man, Gurmukh Singh and his interest in such technology. Singh had sat
on the Chorley Committee (the Committee of Enquiry for the Handling
of Geographic Information) during 1986/7. The Chorley Committee
reported in mid-1987 (Department of the Environment, 1987) and raised
the profile of GIS in both the commercial and academic sectors (eventu-
ally leading to the establishment of the Association for Geographic

The Evolution of Geodemographics
59
Information: www.agi.org.uk). One of the recommendations of the
Chorley Report was the use of the unit of address as a geographic ‘build-
ing block’ for GIS-based analysis. Pinpoint’s PAC (Pinpoint Address
Code) fulfilled this function.
In more recent times Ordnance Survey (UK) has produced
Address-Point with normally a 0.1 m resolution coordinate ascribed to resi-
dential, business and public postal addresses in Great Britain. (Address-
Point is also used to calculate the geographical centre of postcodes recorded
in the Code-Point file.) Ordnance Survey has also launched MasterMap,
promoted as ‘the definitive map of Great Britain’. There are similarities in
the development of this product and the creation of a National Spatial Data
Infrastructure (NSDI) in the USA (National Research Council, 1993, 1994,
1995; Executive Order 12906 (Clinton, 1994); Federal Geographic Data
Committee, 1997; Executive Order 13286 (Bush, 2003)). In fact, recogni-
tion of the strategic importance of geographic information for so many
areas of governance, business and commerce has led to the development of
NSDIs throughout the world. Longley et al. (2001, p. 416) list 28 countries
that had NSDIs in the year 2000.
Returning to the turn of the 1990s, Infolink joined the geode-
mographics market by launching DEFINE, which was unusual in having
two interlinked classifications: one census based; the other credit based. The
Unit for Retail Planning Information (URPI) formed The Data Consultancy
and contributed to the continuing integration of geodemographics and
GIS by writing its Illumine analysis software to run on MapInfo GIS.
GeoMatrix launched its Prospex GIS software, which was subsequently
acquired by Beacon Dodsworth. Meanwhile, the University of Leeds,
School of Geography, which had been operating in the commercial sector
through ULIS (University of Leeds Industrial Services) formed GMAP as
an outlet for its gravity modelling expertise in the retail and financial service
sectors (Birkin et al., 1996; Birkin, Clarke and Clarke, 2002).
A new census decade started with the release of the 1991 UK
Census data in the summer of 1993. Twelve organizations signed up as
census agencies (CACI, CCN, CDMS, Capscan, Chadwyck-Healey,
Claymore Services, Equifax Europe (UK), GMAP, Infolink Decision
Services, Pinpoint Analysis, SPA marketing systems and The Data
Consultancy) but only six elected to produce neighbourhood classifica-
tions, largely because the cost of (effectively) buying out the census
offices’ royalty to do so was too expensive. For example, commercial
users of the 1991 Census area statistics wanting to have a comprehensive
set of variables nationally at the output area level could pay £100,000 –
90% of which was royalties.

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
60
Pinpoint was first to market post-1991 geodemographics with the
launch of its new PiN and FiNPiN classifications (September 1993).
However, as an early sign of the consolidation of the geodemographic
industry that was to follow, Pinpoint was taken over by CACI within
weeks. CACI’s own updated ACORN and CCN’s new Mosaic were next to
emerge; then CDMS with SuperProfiles and Infolink with DEFINE.
EuroDirect launched Neighbours and Prospects. Later, in 1994, Infolink
launched PORTRAIT, based mainly on lifestyle data (data about individ-
uals and/or their households, collected from survey information: see
Chapter 9). One month later, Infolink was acquired by Equifax; so Equifax
instantly had a stake in the geodemographics market.
Outside the market for neighbourhood classifications – but in the
associated lifestyles arena – two of the big players (NDL and CMT) came
together to form the Calyx Group. This new company took a different
view regarding the use of NDL data within PORTRAIT and negotiated its
return to the Calyx Group. Calyx was then acquired by VNU, who owned
Claritas in the USA and, in January 1997, Calyx was renamed Claritas
UK. The Calyx Group subsidiary had already launched a desktop analysis
and mapping system (Catalyst) on a MapInfo platform, and also a UK
version of PRIZM, built from lifestyle data (therefore, effectively a suc-
cessor to PORTRAIT). Two more organizations joined the census agency
line-up: GEOPLAN and Business Geographics. However, both Pinpoint
and Infolink had ‘disappeared’ through acquisition, and Claymore had
relinquished census agency status, so the total number of agencies shrank
to 11. CCN changed its name to Experian in June 1997.
Further market developments followed in 1998. Littlewoods
decided that CDMS was ‘non-core’ and closed it down. Claritas UK
bought the SuperProfiles classification and signed up as a census agency.
GUS, owners of Experian, acquired Metromail in the USA and with it
also acquired ICD in the UK (ICD were the third of the ‘big three’ UK
lifestyle database operators, alongside CMT and NDL). ICD was ‘folded’
into Experian, which at a stroke became one of the two largest UK
lifestyle database operators, as well as one of the big two geodemographic
agencies – alongside CACI. MapInfo acquired The Data Consultancy and
its census agency status. EuroDirect was majority acquired by the Skipton
Building Society and in 2000 EuroDirect acquired the MicroVision and
DEFINE classifications from Equifax (although Equifax continued to sell
what were now EuroDirect’s classifications under licence). EuroDirect
rebranded its Neighbours and Prospects classification as CAMEO.
In 2001, Claritas and MapInfo announced a strategic alliance
across Europe, by which Claritas would supply its data into a joint

The Evolution of Geodemographics
61
product (branded TargetPro), but Claritas would adopt MapInfo software
as its delivery platform. GMAP was acquired by the Skipton Building
Society and put together with EuroDirect within the Skipton Information
Group (GMAP being rebranded GMAP Consulting). Claritas Europe was
acquired by Acxiom in December 2003 who also subsequently acquired
Consodata, which has largely operated in the European consumer data
market (Lawson, 2004).
At the end of 2001, a High Court decision had the effect of ‘freez-
ing’ access to the UK electoral register until 2002 and restricted access
thereafter (see Chapter 9, Section 9.4). While this did not affect the use of
the electoral register for credit referencing – i.e. to help credit lenders
check names, addresses and the potential credit risk of customers – it did
create problems for direct marketing and geodemographic applications as
some voters chose not to permit their personal information to be passed on
to third parties (they ‘opted out’). In December 2002 the opt-out rate was
just above 20% but rising: the newer, ‘rolling register’ has an opt-out of
nearly 24%; and the December 2003 Register has 26%. The coverage is
uneven geographically, with some local authorities in effect encouraging
opt-out. In 2003 Bridgend (Wales) had an opt-out of 85%! (sources:
Database Marketing, 2003; www.dmarket.co.uk).
3.2 Geodemographics today
Despite the increased use of lifestyle data, the core of most geodemo-
graphic classifications is census-based. It follows that there are periodic
waves of increased activity within the geodemographic industry and that
these reach the commercial shoreline following each new arrival of small-
area, census data.
A major change in attitude within the UK has been a move to an
American model that recognizes the public utility of making census data
as widely available as possible. Accordingly, the census outputs are effect-
ively free at the point of use, and licences for re-use and publication are
also free (www.statistics.gov.uk/census2001). The data for England
and Wales can be accessed via the Neighbourhood Statistics website
(http://neighbourhood.statistics.gov.uk; for Scotland see www.scotland.
gov.uk/stats and for Northern Ireland see www.ninis.nisra.gov.uk), which is
similar in function to the US Census Bureau website (www.census.gov) –
although without the latter’s ability to output data in a ‘GIS friendly’format
(specifically, in the TIGER/Line format: see, for example, Wise, 2002).

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
62
However, for academic users in the UK the output of census data in a GIS
format has been possible for some time, by means of the CasWeb system
(www.census.ac.uk/casweb). GIS vendors such as ESRI (through their
ProCENSUS system) have also developed packages to integrate census
information with mapping and analytical functionality. MapInfo has imple-
mented a similar scenario with its TargetPro system.
Post-2001, not only are the UK Census data free to end-users but
also intermediaries can resell either ‘raw’ data or derived data such as
neighbourhood classifications, without royalty to the various census
offices (including the Office for National Statistics, the General Register
Office for Scotland and the Northern Ireland Statistics and Research
Agency). This situation has made it possible for smaller organizations to
enter the industry. Consequently it is anticipated that many more neigh-
bourhood classifications will appear on the market and it will be interest-
ing to see how these new entrants compete (perhaps on a price platform
with the established companies trading on their past experience, expertise
and customer support: see chapter conclusion for an elaboration on this).
By early 2004, the UK market had seen two new or, rather,
updated neighbourhood classification launches: ACORN from CACI and
Mosaic from Experian. A further 12 were known about but not yet
launched – the main reason being delays to the release of the 2001 Census
Area Statistics. Table 3.1 lists the companies who had either launched or
declared their intention to launch at the time of writing.
Table 3.1 Neighbourhood classifications announced in the UK
post 2001 Census
Company
Classification
CACI
ACORN
GeoBusiness
ATOMICube
EuroDirect
CAMEO
AFD
Censation
Allegran
Gnuggets
Streetwise
Likewise
Business Geographics
Locale
Experian
Mosaic
Beacon Dodsworth
P2 People and Places
Claritas
PRIZM
ISL
RESIDATA Lifetypes
ONS
2001 Area Classifications
The Clockworks
SONAR
Acxiom
Personicx Geo
Source: After Sleight (2004a, p. 38).

The Evolution of Geodemographics
63
On the face of it, the new version of ACORN looks similar
to its predecessor. The 2001-based version has a hierarchy of five top-
level categories, which divide into 17 groups and 56 types. The 1991-based
version had six, 17 and 56, respectively. However, this apparent com-
monality masks some very different data inputs and a different build
methodology from previous ACORNs. From 1979 up until 2000, ACORN
had always exclusively been built from census data. A year 2000 update
had introduced lifestyle date for the first time and also signalled a move to
a unit postcode classification. Now the 2003 version is built using 2001
Census data, with further information including income, house prices,
shareholdings, lifestyle data, electoral register information, the PAF and
neighbourhood statistics – the latter, introduced above, being governmental
initiatives to compare or download statistics for local areas on a wide
range of subjects including population, crime, health and housing.
CACI adopted a new, two-stage classification process that
involved selecting census variables to profile neighbourhoods and then
clustering those profiles to produce a stage 1 solution. Stage 2 involved
classifying postcodes. Starting with the ACORN code of the census OA
from stage 1, new datasets were introduced at the more detailed, unit post-
code level. Postcodes with data suggesting they did not match their OA
classification were reassigned to other neighbourhood types using decision
algorithms. The same process will facilitate subsequent updates. The fact
that postcodes need to be reassigned relates and to some extent addresses
the problem of the ecological fallacy described in Chapter 2. Specifically,
it highlights that there can be important socio-economic and other popula-
tion diversity within apparently uniform neighbourhood units. In this
particular case classification at the postcode level helps reveal diversity
that a coarser, census classification would otherwise conceal.
Experian’s build methodology is discussed in detail in Chapter 6.
First, data for all residents and households in the country are collected
then combined with data from higher levels of geography (including unit
postcodes and OAs). All the input variables are then tested for discrimina-
tion, robustness and correlation to other variables. Once the final list of
input variables has been selected, a set of input weights is applied as part
of the clustering process. The result is a list of variables that have differing
importance to the clustering methodology, determined by how well they
discriminate at differing levels of geography.
The actual structure of the finished Mosaic classification is similar
to the previous version: a two-tier classification, with 11 groups as before but
this time there are 61 types, versus 52 formerly. The inclusion of Northern
Ireland makes the new Mosaic a full UK version and this accounts, in part,

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
64
for the larger number of types. A significant innovation is that, on this
release, Mosaic classifications can be applied to individual households either
on the basis of the attributes of their household or their postcode. The post-
code classification is built in a conventional way using data values from a
variety of sources and a variety of levels of geographic resolution, such as the
electoral register, the postal address file, lifestyle data and the census. In the
household-level classification, addresses are matched to best fit Mosaic clus-
ters using information some of which, such as the census, is accessed at OA
level, other variables, such as lifestyle data, at postcode level, but a number
of key variables, such as those from the electoral register and the PAF at the
address level. While all addresses within a postcode will share common
values across, for example, the census, different addresses will have different
values for variables drawn from address level data. As a result there will be
some instances where different addresses within the same postcode will be
best described by different Mosaic codes and instances where the best-fit
Mosaic code for the address will be different from the best-fit Mosaic code
for the postcode in which the address belongs.
Splitting the other, proposed classifications into two groups – and
dealing first with the established ‘players’in the geodemographics market –
new classifications were expected from Claritas and EuroDirect. Claritas
are not anticipated to launch an updated version of PRIZM until the third
quarter of 2004. It is expected to be built mainly from Claritas lifestyle data,
with some census data influence.
EuroDirect have also moved from census-only classifications to
ones that include a wider range of data. In addition to 2001 Census data,
EuroDirect’s latest CAMEO postcode-level classification utilizes: house
value data (specifically, council tax bandings weighted by Land Registry
data); shareholder data from share registers (the Financial Times top 500
companies, i.e. the FTSE 500); information about company directors;
credit risk data; information about household composition and length of
residency from the electoral register; and building type and age of resident
data from EuroDirect’s Data Exchange data cooperative. The latest ver-
sion of CAMEO was launched in March 2004, with 10 groups and 58
types; while previous versions have operated at the scale of census output
zones, the new version operates at postcode level. The new CAMEO
group codes, descriptions and their share of UK households may be
viewed at www.eurodirect.co.uk.
In addition to their area-based classifications, many of the estab-
lished geodemographic companies also have a portfolio of individual and
household-level classifications, and/or other national ‘data lists’, intended
for a range of direct or interactive marketing applications. Many of these

The Evolution of Geodemographics
65
are summarized in Table 3.2. Some of the advantages and disadvantages
of these micro-level datasets vis-à-vis the neighbourhood-based approach
are considered in Chapter 9.
The second group of post 2001 Census classification authors are
essentially newcomers to the market (although some of the developers
had previous involvement in building classifications for other com-
panies). Some of the expected characteristics of these new products are
reviewed in Table 3.3. Among these are classifications produced by the
Office for National Statistics (ONS) at four levels of geography: local
authority, ward, health authority and output area. Although ONS has
developed classifications of England, Scotland and Wales after each
census since 1971, the post 2001 classifications are the first to include
Northern Ireland and also the first to extend classification (in conjunc-
tion with the University of Leeds) to the most geographically detailed
census units (i.e. output areas). These classifications are most likely to
be used extensively in public-sector applications, although they could
also freely be used in commercial applications, subject to ONS’ terms
Table 3.2 Some of the individual/household classifications and sources of lifestyles data
available in the UK as of early 2004
Company
Product
Type
Market served
CACI
LifestylesUK
List
General
PeopleUK
Classification
General
etypes
Classification
Online
ChannelChoice
Classification
Channels
Fresco
Classification
Financial
Claritas
Lifestyle Universe
List
General
P$YCLE
Classification
Financial
PRIZM Household
Classification
General
Onliners
Classification
Online
ConsumerValues
Classification
General
Consodata
OmniLifestyle
List
General
Equifax
Dimensions
List
General
MicroMatch
Classification
Financial
EuroDirect
CAMEO Choices
List
General
CAMEO Lifestyles
Classification
General
Experian
Pixel
Classification
General
Canvasse
List
General
Financial Strategy Segments
Classification
Financial
Touchpoint Segments
Classification
Channels
Fashion Segments
Classification
Fashion
Mosaic Household
Classification
General

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
66
Table 3.3 New geodemographic classifications expected in the UK following the 2001
Census
Vendor
Product
Data sources used
AFD Software Ltd
Censation
2001 Census
52 residential clusters ranked 
Electoral Register
by affluence (plus other 
Lifestyles data
non-residential clusters)
Allegran Ltd
Gnuggets
2001 Census
A segmentation of online 
Website registration data 
behaviour
(e.g. age, sex, address)
Advertising ‘click through’data
Online purchasing data
Beacon Dodsworth
P2 People and Places
2001 Census
Being built under the guidance 
PAF
of some of the developers of 
Retail access data
1991 SuperProfiles
Neighbourhood Statistics
The Clockworks
SONAR
2001 Census
Two-tier hierarchical 
A postcode-based wealth 
classification: 80 detailed 
classification
clusters; 24 groups 
Consumer activity data
(characterized by lifestage 
(e.g. new car ownership, credit
and relative wealth)
card usage, house-moving)
2002 Land Registry house 
price data
GeoBusiness 
ATOMICube
2001 Census
Solutions Ltd
Will be available at three 
Non-Census data (e.g. income 
levels of solution at 
and household data)
differing prices
Intermediary 
RESIDATA Lifetypes
2001 Census
Systems Ltd (ISL)
A market-specific product 
RESIDATA housetypes 
used by the insurance industry.
classification
Three-tier classification:
PAF
100 clusters aggregate into 
Spatial variables (e.g. distance 
35 segments and then 10 groups
to major shopping centre,
distance to motorway junction)
Office of National
2001 Area Classifications
2001 Census
Statistics (ONS)
The local authority classification,
At local authority, health area 
for example, has been produced 
and ward level scales; and for 
at three hierarchical levels: there
output areas (forthcoming,
are eight clusters at supergroup 
with the University of Leeds)
level, 13 clusters at group level 
and 24 clusters at subgroup level
Streetwise 
Likewise
2001 Census
Analytics Ltd
Expected to be an address-level,
House price data (to help 
postcode and possibly 
differentiate income from 
OA system
cost of living)

The Evolution of Geodemographics
67
and conditions. Further details are at www.statistics.gov.uk (under
National Statistics 2001 Area Classification).
Case study: the US market for geodemographics
Dave Miller, senior vice president, Data Research and Development, Claritas
USA
The release of the statistics from successive US Censuses increasingly has
been an important business event over the last 30 years. The impact started
with the first release of low-level, machine-readable census information, at
the postal area level, in the mid-1970s. The relative ease of joining this
with consumer information spawned the first US geodemographic segmen-
tation systems and jump-started the demographics industry.
When looking into this industry in the USA, one of the principal
considerations to be kept in mind is that, in contrast to the UK or Canada
for example, the US Census has not been copyrighted. As a result, the
information has always been ‘freely’ available for redistribution. This
does not mean that acquiring the data is completely free! There has
always been a stipulation that the cost of producing the media was recov-
erable. In the 1980s this meant that a reel of tape would cost about $150.
As the entire census at low level required many hundred tapes, this cost
did add up. In response, the US industry has competed on the value-added
aspects in terms of simplifying organization of the data, ease of access,
simplicity of use, customization to business sector and the creation of
inter-censal updates.
The release of a census has always provided a good opportunity
for a start-up business that focuses on the repackaging and redistribution
of the census data. Although this opportunity has declined somewhat with
the improved access provided by the Bureau of the Census itself, there
is a wide array of companies providing access to the Census 2000 data.
However, the business niche of maintaining and updating the census infor-
mation is quite small. There are only five companies providing regular
inter-censal updates in the USA at a low geographic level (e.g. block
group). They are: Claritas; Easy Analytic Software Inc.; ESRI Business
Information Solutions (ESRI-BIS, newly incorporating the demographic
arm of CACI); MapInfo; and Applied Geographic Solutions (AGS). Of
these companies, those with the longest history of providing data are
Claritas and ESRI-BIS both of which can trace their roots to the start of the
geodemographic business in the mid-1970s. The users of this information

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
68
can be found in every business sector and virtually all major companies
obtain and use this type of data.
Although the production of demographic estimates and projections
is one aspect of the geodemographic industry, the integration of this infor-
mation into software that addresses various business needs is an equally
important sector that is also invigorated by the release of new census data.
The players in the site location and evaluation business are: Claritas;
MapInfo/Thompson; SRC; ESRI-BIS; AGS; GeoVue; and ScanUS. This
market is vibrant and very competitive and the changes in the product lines
are continuous. Direct changes in the market due to the census are some-
what small.
The release of the census information does, however, have a
large impact on the design of the geodemographic segmentation systems.
The businesses space for geodemographic oriented segmentation sys-
tems includes: Claritas (PRIZM, P$YCLE and ConneXions); ESRI-BIS
(ACORN and Community Tapestry); MapInfo (PSYTE); and Experian
(Mosaic). As this is written, all are involved in updating their segments.
The need for updating segments reflects a number of demo-
graphic shifts that characterized the 1990s in the USA. The ageing of the
baby-boom generation has moved this important and large segment from
early mid-life to late mid-life with the associated transition from family-
raising to child-launching. A second aspect has been the loss of manufac-
turing jobs and their replacement with service sector jobs. The greying
of America not only reflects the shift in age but also the movement from
traditional ‘blue-collar’ manufacturing to ‘grey-collar’ service. Further,
recent data from the 2000 Census shows that the trend in increasing
education levels has for the first time resulted in more than half of the
adult population having had some exposure to college. The cumulative
effect of these and other changes is both to alter the way we measure the
population and socio-economic characteristics that are important in seg-
mentation, and to modify the balance of segment sizes. It is useful to note
that while the underlying concepts behind geodemographic segmentation
systems (affluence, family composition, age, etc.) have not changed over
the years, their census indicators and balance is continually shifting. It is
this effect that leads to the need to redevelop the classification segments:
to reflect changing populations and changing geographies of population.
At this point most of the systems are either in the early stages of
deployment or in the late stages of development. Claritas made a number
of changes in its PRIZM system and extended it to the household level
providing both geodemographic assignments (ZIP4 and others) and
household-level assignments in the same schema. ESRI-BIS redeveloped

The Evolution of Geodemographics
69
its ACORN system as Community Tapestry. The system is planned to pro-
vide segment assignments at the ZIP4 level. An overview of the US
Census and postal geographies is provided by Table 3.4. It can be seen
there that ZIP4 is a close approximation to the UK unit postcode,
although a little less populated: the average unit postcode in the UK con-
tains about 12–16 households.
MapInfo’s PSYTE system was updated at the census block group
level but has maintained the same schema as in 1990. Experian’s new
Mosaic was launched in the fall of 2003, with 12 groups and 60 types. It
operates at ZIP4 level, with a household-level equivalent due in the
third quarter of 2004. A demographic segmentation system but one that
does not provide geographical focus is Personicx from Acxiom. This is a
demographic, household-level segmentation system developed from char-
acteristics maintained on the Acxiom compiled (lifestyle) list.
The segmentation space is also shared by a number of other
non-geodemographic systems, including: Cohorts from Looking Glass;
VALS from SRI Consulting Business Intelligence; and MindBase from
Yankelovich. The Cohorts system was developed from survey data and
incorporates behaviour, demographics and lifestyles. VALS from SRI is
one of the earliest attitudinal-oriented systems. VALS provides differenti-
ation based on survey data. MindBase from Yankelovich couples certain
demographics with survey-based data to create its attitudinal segments.
One focus of these systems is on the creation of different advertising
messages to each segment. Attitudinal segmentation is not, however, new:
a ‘socio-styles’ system was developed by French researchers during the
1970s (Cathelat, 1990; Birkin, 1995).
Table 3.4 Common US geographic levels
Level
Areas
Average number of households
Census
State
51
2068237
County
3141
33582
Tract
65443
1612
Block
208790
505
Group
Block
8205582
12.9
Postal*
ZIP Code
29800
3540
ZIP4
29000000
3.6
* Please note that the postal counts represent residential codes and do not
include business or other types

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
70
3.3 The role of market research linkages
Commercial uses of geodemographics are much enhanced by the ability
to link them to market research. As we noted earlier, the precedent for this
was set in the late 1970s, when BMRB executives tested the electoral
ward, CRN classification on their Target Group Index (TGI) survey.
Following this initiative, the TGI played an important role in the develop-
ing the UK geodemographics market – and it still does today! The reason
for this is that BMRB has encouraged companies that develop and market
commercial neighbourhood classifications to provide ‘look-up’ tables of
geodemographic codes for unit postcodes, thus permitting the survey
respondents to be coded by neighbourhood type. This enables the survey
results to be grouped by neighbourhood and so the users of the products,
brands and media covered by the TGI survey can be profiled. An example
is provided by Table 3.5.
The geodemographic coding of market research helps inform
understanding of products, brands and media in terms of the type of
people who consume them, with what frequency, with what ‘weight of
consumption’ and with what level of monthly value. Moreover, the infor-
mation can directly be used in a key application of geodemographics –
small-area market estimation. By deriving a consumption profile from a
source such as the TGI, it is then possible to relate the profile to other
small areas of the same neighbourhood type in the UK and thus estimate
the likely market value of a particular product in a particular area or
region. The methodology is explained by one of our contributors in a
study used to validate geodemographics (Chapter 8, Section 8.3; see also
the case study on using geodemographics in the restaurant market:
Chapter 1). As a caveat, the estimation is improved by constraining
national totals to some reliable known source (such as national income
and expenditure data) and by taking into consideration regional and other
important geographical differences.
3.4 Use of non-census data
During our account of the history of commercial geodemographics, refer-
ence has been made to the growing use of non-census data in neighbour-
hood classifications. Such data have included: credit references and
county court judgements; postal address files; electoral registers; share
registers; company directors information; unemployment data; insurance

Table 3.5 Target Group Index cross-tabulation by ACORN – households with unit trust investments
ACORN 2001 groups
Profile (1000)
%
Base (1000)
%
Penetration
Standard error
Z-Score
Index
1.A
Wealthy Executives
306
14
1640
6
19
0.76
10.5
225
1.B
Affluent Greys
265
13
1608
6
16
0.72
8.6
198
1.C
Flourishing Families
224
11
1955
8
11
0.67
4.3
138
2.D
Prosperous Professionals
111
5
597
2
19
0.48
6.0
224
2.E
Educated Urbanites
120
6
1012
4
12
0.50
3.4
143
2.F
Aspiring Singles
63
3
984
4
6
0.37
2.4
77
3.G
Starting Out
45
2
749
3
6
0.31
2.6
72
3.H
Secure Families
355
17
4323
17
8
0.81
0.2
99
3.I
Settled Suburbia
162
8
1775
7
9
0.58
1.2
110
3.J
Prudent Pensioners
70
3
591
2
12
0.39
2.5
143
4.K
Asian Communities
13
1
198
1
7
0.17
1.0
79
4.L
Post-Industrial Families
69
3
1264
5
5
0.39
4.4
66
4.M
Blue-Collar Roots
114
5
2714
11
4
0.49
10.7
51
5.N
Struggling Families
152
7
3943
15
4
0.56
14.8
46
5.O
Burdened Singles
28
1
1289
5
2
0.25
15.1
26
5.P
High-Rise Hardship
7
0
396
2
2
0.12
9.8
21
5.Q
Inner City Adversity
14
1
447
2
3
0.18
6.2
38
6.U
Unclassified
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
0.0
0
Total
2118
100
25485
100
8
Source: © BMRB and CACI UK.

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
72
ratings; retail access information; house price data; and, increasingly popu-
lar, lifestyle data. Indeed, lifestyle data have now extensively been used
in neighbourhood classification, and also for building individual- and
household-level classifications for micromarketing.
Many of these various datasets have been used in imaginative, if
not necessarily sophisticated ways! Postal address files, which are avail-
able for many counties including Australia and the UK, can be used to
shed light on certain aspects of neighbourhoods. For example, the pres-
ence of ‘Farm’ in an address may be indicative of a rural area, particularly
if the nearest neighbour properties also appear to be farms. The street
name ‘Royal York Terrace’ is a good clue to the type of buildings that are
to be found there. And houses with names rather than numbers may be a
useful indicator of status!
Electoral registers usually record the name, date of birth (eligi-
bility to vote) and gender of each member of a household. Such data,
where they are made available, can be used to model family composition
and, by comparing successive registers, length of residency can be esti-
mated. Fore and surnames are also of interest because they are indicative
of age, since certain names come in and out of fashion. One of us shares
the 99th most popular first name for baby boys in England and Wales in
2003 (www.statistics.gov.uk) while another of us is not in the top 100,
though his son’s name is 52nd! Table 3.6 shows that in 2003 the most
popular name in the two countries was Jack for baby boys and Emily for
baby girls. In 1904 the most popular boys’ name was William; the most
popular girls’ name, Mary.
Table 3.6 The most popular names for babies in England and Wales, various years
1904–2003
1904
1934
1964
1994
1999
2003
Males
1st
William
John
David
Thomas
Jack
Jack
2nd
John
Peter
Paul
James
Thomas
Joshua
3rd
George
William
Andrew
Jack
James
Thomas
4th
Thomas
Brian
Mark
Daniel
Daniel
James
5th
Arthur
David
John
Matthew
Joshua
Daniel
Females
1st
Mary
Margaret
Susan
Rebecca
Chloe
Emily
2nd
Florence
Jean
Julie
Lauren
Emily
Ellie
3rd
Doris
Mary
Karen
Jessica
Megan
Chloe
4th
Edith
Joan
Jacqueline
Charlotte
Jessica
Jessica
5th
Dorothy
Patricia
Deborah
Hannah
Sophie
Sophie
Source: Office for National Statistics.

The Evolution of Geodemographics
73
The first company to exploit these changing fashions was CACI
with its MONICA system in the 1980s. The examples given by CACI
were clearly associated with age cohorts and included: Michelle, Sharon,
Kevin and Gary (then 18 to 24 years, now 40 somethings!); Pamela, Janet,
Philip and Brian (24 to 44 years); Sylvia, Brenda, Kenneth and Raymond
(45 to 64 years); Hilda, Ethel, Percy and Herbert (then 65 years, now a
rare breed!). There is potential to develop this approach to consider not
only age but also regional differences. As we noted in the conclusion to
Chapter 2, a project looking at the current and historical geographies of
surnames is taking place at the Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis,
University College London.
3.5 Conclusion
In this chapter we have reviewed some aspects of the commercialization
of geodemographics, and its growth into an international and multimillion
dollar industry. What is striking is how a simple idea has endured, evolved
and been ‘repackaged’ into a number of different products.
We have three suggestions to why this has happened. The first is:
because it is simple! Not only that, it has proved to be useful in a wide
range of applications. These two facts are not unrelated: the simplicity of
the methods makes it easy to understand, apply and transfer to a variety of
analytical contexts. Furthermore, the basic method can be ‘tweaked’to best
suit a particular setting – perhaps by customizing the classification with the
most relevant sources of data as in market-specific classifications.
The second reason was alluded to by David Miller in the case
study: society does not sit still. Many people move and those that don’t
certainly age! Consequently, with each new release of, in particular,
census data there is a need to rebuild classifications to better reflect the
demographic, social and economic patterns of the time. If nothing ever
changed there would be little need for a census of the population – it
would be little more than a number-generating exercise!
Third, the growth of geodemographics has coincided with an
increased interest in the utility of geographical information and in methods
(both technological and analytical) to make better use of it. The two trends
are mutually reinforcing. Building an accurate neighbourhood classification
first requires accurate data and the technological platform to handle it.
Interest in the classification generates demands for improvements, ideally
leading to better data, better methods, better classifications and so forth.

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
74
These underlying reasons for market growth have been exploited
by the geodemographic suppliers, which have built a thriving and sophis-
ticated market. Over the last two decades, robust business models have
been developed which have the following characteristics:
●Suppliers can define key types of analysis that cater for a very
high proportion of client business needs and embed these in the
analysis and mapping software they supply. As the number of
experienced users grows and they become familiar with these
tools there is less requirement for consultancy advice.
●Most large users purchase a package of data plus software. The
software is customized to handle the vendor’s proprietary classifi-
cations, plus other bundled data (see Chapter 5). Therefore, rolling
contracts are the norm, rather than once-only sales.
●Annual data updates are one reason for annual licensing
arrangements. Datasets such as population updates and changes
to postal geography must be updated at least annually by users
and vendors can help achieve this. Training, helpdesk support
and general consultancy advice is also included in the annual
contract.
●The established suppliers back their classifications with extensive
support material (for example, multimedia visualization of the
neighbourhood types: see Chapter 5). They believe this is valu-
able to support both internal ‘experts’ within client companies
(who may need to pass on understanding to non-experts) and also
to give more ‘qualitative’ understanding of different types of
neighbourhood within the vendor’s own team.
●In cases where the classification is being used as a long-term
strategic tool within a client organization, this level of qualitative
understanding is particularly important, given the need for a clear
understanding of the target market; the likelihood of needing to
disseminate this knowledge widely within non-specialist depart-
ments is much greater.
Taken collectively, the business practices employed by the estab-
lished suppliers represent their brand equity and their best strategy to
defend their market shares against newcomers. It is noticeable that new
entrants to the market tend to acknowledge this and adopt different
strategies – mainly price-based. Only time will tell how much impact
the new entrants will have on directing the continued evolution of the
industry.

The Evolution of Geodemographics
75
Summary
●Two of the earliest commercially marketed geodemographic clas-
sifications were ACORN in the UK and PRIZM in the USA.
●The former built on work at the Centre for Environmental Studies
looking at how types of deprivation varied by neighbourhood.
●The development of geographical information-handling technolo-
gies has permitted linkages to be made between census, postal
and, more recently, individual/household datasets, fuelling the
growth of the geodemographic and data-selling industries.
●Although the geodemographic industry is characterized by con-
solidation and merger, new entrants to the market have been
encouraged by free access to census datasets.
●Data vendors increasingly incorporate a mix of census and other
data when building and updating classifications.
●Established geodemographic vendors have developed a business
model that is characterized by the annual licensing of the classifi-
cation itself, supporting software and analytical tools, data updates
and consultancy services. Together these form their ‘brand equity’.
Further Reading
●
Charlton, M., Openshaw, S. and Wymer, C. (1985) Some new classifica-
tions of census enumeration districts in Britain: a poor man’s ACORN,
Journal of Economic and Social Measurement, 13, 69–96.
●
Sleight, P. (2004) Targeting Customers: How to Use Geodemographic
and Lifestyle Data in Your Business, World Advertising Research
Center, Henley-on-Thames.
●
Webber, R. (1985) The use of census-derived classifications in the
marketing of consumer products in the United Kingdom, Journal of
Economic and Social Measurement, 13, 113–24.
●
Journal of the Market Research Society, Special Issue on Geodemo-
graphics (1989, 31, 1–150).
●
The Geodemographics Knowledge Base: www.geodemographics.org.uk.


77
4
Geodemographics
and GIS
Learning Objectives
In this chapter we will:
●
Define geographic information systems (GIS) and consider
some of the ways they are used to manage and make sense of
geographic information.
●
Introduce some of the principles of GIS, and some of the
methods and ideas of the interdisciplinary field of geographical
information science.
●
Consider the ways in which GIS and geodemographics may be
regarded as complimentary technologies.
●
Focus on the vector data model in GIS and how it represents
real-world entities as points, lines or polygons.
●
Look at some methods for mapping geodemographic informa-
tion with GIS and some of the problems of doing so.
●
Offer a commercial perspective on using GIS for neighbourhood
analysis and targeting, written by Stewart Berry of Caliper
Corporation.
Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
Richard Harris, Peter Sleight and Richard Webber
© 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
ISBNs: 0-470-86413-3 (HB); 0-470-86414-1 (PB)

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
78
Introduction
Geographic information systems have been described as a set of technolo-
gies that help us to see our small blue planet in better ways (Longley et al.,
1999). More commonly referred to by the acronym GIS, applications
include: local governance; business and service planning; logistics; and
environmental management and modelling (see Longley et al., 1999,
Part 4; Longley et al., 2001, Chapter 2). In both public- and private-sector
research, GIS are used to manage geographic information, help identify
geographical trends and patterns and to model spatial processes.
However, GIS have been described as a ‘nearly’ technology for
marketers (McLuhan, 2003). Beyond the hype, the actual use of GIS
presently is limited to the larger retailers and suppliers, with little
expansion into marketing applications. This, despite widespread agree-
ment that the true value of geographical information is only revealed
once that information is analysed geographically! McLuhan (2003) cites
a survey by GeoBusiness Solutions revealing that only 28% of company
boards fully understand the operation and marketing benefits of GIS,
with the perceived (and often, actual) high cost of investing in GI
software and data products being one of the barriers to GIS reaching its
potential.
In this and the following chapter we agree with those who see
virtue in GIS as tools for managing, analysing and visualizing geograph-
ical information; who use them to look at where things happen (or not), to
help explain what occurrences are associated with which places and why,
and to use that knowledge for planning and management. Yet, we shall
also argue that the sorts of tools and methods required by a ‘typical’
geodemographic user are not necessarily those provided by a standard
desktop GIS, which has its origins, for instance, in environmental research.
A distinction will be made between geographical information systems
(GIS) in a broad sense and geodemographic information systems (GDIS)
that cater for a more specific clientele.
The differences between GIS and GDIS will be explored fully in
Chapter 5. In this chapter we set the scene for that discussion by first out-
lining some of the more general principles of neighbourhood analysis that
are conducted within a computerized environment and by providing an
introduction to some of the principles, theories and methods of the inter-
disciplinary subject known as geographical information science (GISc).
Readers who wish to ‘dig deeper’ into this field should refer to the sug-
gested further reading listed at the close of this chapter.

Geodemographics and GIS
79
4.1 Principles of GIS
With the proliferation and diversity of GIS applications it is not surprising
that there are many definitions of GIS, each reflecting the nuance and per-
spectives of different users’ interests. Nevertheless, there is much shared
ground and this leads to a commonly recognized view of GIS as a system
of ‘component tools used to capture, store, transform, analyse, and display
geographical data’ (Haggett, 2001, p. 719). Such tools are integrated
into the off-the-shelf, desktop GIS software that include ESRI’s ArcGIS
(www.esri.com),
Autodesk Map (www.autodesk.com),
Intergraph’s
GeoMedia Professional (www.ingr.com), MapInfo (www.mapinfo.com),
Clark Lab’s Idrisi (www.clarklabs.org) and Caliper’s Maptitude (www.
caliper.com).
In addition to these commercial software, there are a number of
open source and free GIS available (see http://freegis.org/), of which
probably the most well known is GRASS (http://grass.baylor.edu/). There
are also viewers available to open and manipulate maps created in GIS
packages, including ERMC’s MapWindow (www.mapwindow.com) and
ESRI’s ArcExplorer (www.esri.com).
Haggett’s definition of GIS raises the question of ‘what are geo-
graphical data?’ Literally these are data that describe processes, events or
activities that take place on or near the Earth’s surface and which record
where those process, events or activities take place. The key characteristic of
a geographic dataset is that it contains both attribute information and infor-
mation about location. Attribute information is about the process, event or
activity being measured (e.g. the temperature is 26 °C; the building density is
30 dwellings per hectare; the customers on average visit once a week).
Location adds where the data were collected or apply to (e.g. the temperature
in Paris is 26 °C; the building density within postcode BS16 7DX is
30 dwellings per hectare; the customers visiting the Southbridge store at grid
reference x  529600, y  181500 do so on average once a week).
There are several terms to describe the act of assigning location to
attribute information, including georeferencing (our preference), geolocat-
ing and geocoding (Longley et al., 2001). It is the act of georeferencing that
transforms data from being non-geographical (aspatial) to geographical
(spatial). Georeferencing data is usually a first step towards the mapping
and analysis of attribute information within a GIS to create, for example,
maps of customer records, population data or neighbourhood statistics.
Table 4.1 records earnings data from the 2001 Census for Canada,
its provinces and territories. The first column of the table (labelled

Table 4.1 Selected earnings data from the 2001 Census for Canada
[Text not available in this electronic edition.]

Geodemographics and GIS
81
‘Name’) contains the location component: the name of the territory or
province. The remaining columns contain attribute information: the distri-
bution of each region’s population across the earnings groups; average
earnings; and percentage change (1990–2000). Table 4.2 gives the total
population for the same geographical divisions as those reported in Table
4.1. Again, the first column gives location and the remaining columns give
attribute information.
It is easy to combine the information shown in Tables 4.1 and
4.2 and calculate, for instance, that an estimated 54.7% of the Canadian
population were economically active and earning at the time of the
census (16,415,785  30,007,094  100). Regionally, the econom-
ically active proportion of the regional population is highest in
Yukon Territory (18,780  28,674  65.5%) and lowest in Nunavut
(12,355  26,745  46.2%).
It is possible to make these calculations because both tables
contain the same georeferencing system: the name of the territory or
province. The common georeferencing permits a relational join to be
made between the two tables. The join bridges the two tables in the way
Figure 4.1 illustrates. Figure 4.2 shows the same relational join but this
time expressed as a Query within Microsoft Access.
Table 4.2 Selected population data from the 2001 Census for Canada
[Text not available in this electronic edition.]

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
82
Consider again Tables 4.1 and 4.2. Both of these contain a set of
georeferences and a set of attribute data. It is geographical information,
yet at this stage it is not easily mapped in a GIS because to the computer a
name like Newfoundland and Labrador is simply bits of ASCII text. They
have no intrinsic geographic meaning that can be comprehended by the
computer, in the same way that one of us revealing our address to be 15,
Camberwick Green is unlikely to mean much to you. It is not then suffi-
cient to have the names Newfoundland and Labrador only. What also is
required is one or more geographical coordinates that define where the
Figure 4.1 Relating tables by a common georeference
Figure 4.2 Using Microsoft Access to achieve the relational join of Figure 4.1
LOCATION
Yukon
ATTRIBUTE
Population earning: 18,780 
ATTRIBUTE
Total population: 28,674 

Geodemographics and GIS
83
province is located in geographical space and which can be encoded and
stored in a machine-readable database.
A conceptually simple way of defining the locations of
Newfoundland and Labrador is to consider their perimeter (their outer
edge or border). In the same way that the perimeter of a square consists of
four lines (one for each of the four sides) and if we walk around the
perimeter we will eventually get back to where we started, so the perim-
eters of Newfoundland and Labrador can each be represented by a series
of line segments that link together to form a closed, two-dimensional
shape – a polygon. Quite how good a representation of the perimeter each
shape will be depends on how many segments there are relative to how
complex a shape the real-world object has. As their number decreases,
then so too does the detail of the representation and the outline is said to
be more generalized. It is not correct to presume that generalization ought
therefore be avoided, since the greater the detail the greater the storage
and processing demands on the computer. A more parsimonious (simple)
representation may be preferred if it remains fit for purpose, consistent
with the detail offered by other sources of information or if the additional
expense of increasing the complexity produces only marginal analytical
gains. (We saw in Chapter 1 that a similar ‘defence’ can be made of the
‘elegant simplicity’ of geodemographic classification.)
A polygon can be defined by the line segments that form its
perimeter. In turn, a straight-line segment may be defined by a start point
and an end point; or, more correctly, by a start node and an end node.
Nodes are portrayed by the map symbols  and  in Figure 4.3(a). The
location of each node is defined by a grid reference. For example, the
enlarged and shaded node is at position (0.81, 1.33). Linking the nodes
together in the manner of a ‘join the dots’ puzzle produces an outline
map of the province of Newfoundland and Labrador – Figure 4.3(b). What
we have created is a boundary file of the province. The boundary file
utilizes the vector data model that is common in GIS research and analy-
sis. For a larger study region involving more provinces and territories the
approach can be extended to incorporate further information such as
recording the province to the left or right of each line segment. To do so
encodes what is known as topological information in the geographical
database and is useful for increasing the speed of various analytical oper-
ations, error checking and preventing the unnecessary duplication of
the same line segment shared by two or more neighbouring polygons
(Wise, 2002).
The vector model typically represents real-world objects and enti-
ties as points (zero dimension), lines (one-dimensional) or areas/polygons

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
84
(two-dimensional). These characterize the dimensionality of many of the
more common objects represented in a GIS. In a drive-time analysis to
define the catchment area of a retail store, the store’s location could be
defined as a point and the surrounding road network as a series of line
segments. Assuming that customers are unlikely to travel for more than
30 minutes to reach the store permits the outer boundary of the store’s
catchment to be estimated, given knowledge of the length of the roads and
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
X
Y
Labrador
Newfoundland
(0.81, 1.33)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
X
Y
Labrador
Newfoundland
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3 Defining the boundaries of Newfoundland and Labrador. (a) Nodes define the
start and end of line segments. (b) The line segments define the boundaries

Geodemographics and GIS
85
the speed of traffic movement along them. The store’s catchment area can
then be represented as a discrete polygon, also known as a buffer zone
around the central point. Linking the catchment model to a geodemo-
graphic classification of neighbourhoods permits analysis of the types of
neighbourhood and, by extension, the types of consumer to be found in
proximity to the store – Figure 4.4; see also Chapter 5, Section 5.2.5.
A boundary file will be required in most applications of mapping
neighbourhood data. They are usually obtained from national statistics
agencies such as the US Census Bureau (www.census.gov), UK National
Statistics (www.statistics.gov.uk), Statistics Canada (www.statcan.ca) or the
Australian Bureau of Statistics (www.abs.gov.au); or from an online data
warehouse such as ESRI’s Geography Network (www.geographynetwork.
com). Once a suitable boundary file has been obtained, then provided it
can be linked to attribute information through common georeferencing,
the attribute data can be visualized. Figure 4.5 maps some of the income
information given in Table 4.1.
Of course, dimensions other than zero, one and two do exist: a rep-
resentation of a city can be more lifelike when modelled with a third
dimension (height, giving volume to buildings) (Raper, 2000; Unwin and
Fisher, 2001; Hudson-Smith and Evans, 2003); modelling flows such as
pedestrian movement along a street requires consideration of a further
dimension – time (Batty, 2003); and there is, in fact, no need (conceptually,
Figure 4.4 Vector representation of the geodemography of a retail store’s catchment area.
The store is modelled as a point, the roads as line segments and the catchment as a poly-
gon. The model is linked to a classification of the types of neighbourhood within the catch-
ment; the different shadings indicate different neighbourhood types

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
86
at least) to restrict dimension to whole numbers: fractions of dimension, or
fractals, usefully have been employed, for example to measure decentral-
ization as people move out of cities (a fractal dimension of 1.3 suggests
a less compact city than one with 1.7 – the current fractal dimension of
London – because less space is filled) (Batty and Longley, 1994; Ravilious,
2004).
Nevertheless, points, lines and polygons are the typical shapes to be
seen on the screen of a vector GIS, revealing its origins in cartography. Like
traditional maps the vector approach is well suited to the mapping and pre-
sentation of much geodemographic information. Some GIS software exclu-
sively is vector based. A second data model to be found in the GIS literature
is the raster model, often associated with remote sensing (aerial photog-
raphy and satellite observation) and environmental process modelling.
An example of a raster GIS is PCRaster (http://pcraster.geog.uu.nl).
Raster data can be understood as a grid with values: the raster data model
uses a regular grid to cover the study region, each grid cell has a value
Figure 4.5 Average incomes in Canada. Note: Boundary file based on digital data from
the National Atlas Base Map series (http://atlas.gc.ca). Those data are used under agree-
ment but © 1999, Government of Canada with permission from Natural Resources Canada

Geodemographics and GIS
87
assigned to it and that value is in some way characteristic of the geographic
feature or phenomenon to be found at the location occupied by the cell
(see Longley et al., 2001; Chang, 2003). Accordingly, a raster grid can be
defined by a simple text file that stores: the geographical coordinates of one
corner of the grid; the number of cells in the ‘x’ direction (the number of
columns); the number of cells in the perpendicular ‘y’direction (the number
of rows); the real-world length of a side of the cell square (e.g. 500 metres);
a no data value (e.g. 9999) to tell the computer that no reading or obser-
vation has been recorded at any cell location assigned that value; and then
a series of attribute values – one for each cell. An example of this type of file
is given in Chapter 9, Section 9.1.1. The no data value is different from
a value of zero. The latter usually records a known absence of a particular
geographic phenomenon from the cell location. A no data value indicates
that whether the phenomenon is present or not is unknown.
Figure 4.6 gives a coarse raster representation of Newfoundland
and Labrador. To store this information in the computer a value should be
given to each grid cell. One option would be to give cells representing the
land mass of Newfoundland a value of one, cells representing Labrador a
value of two and all remaining cells a value of zero. This is a simple and
sensible way of encoding the model. However, since another user may
come along and wonder what it is the values zero, one and two represent,
it would be as well to record in an associated ‘look-up table’ that they
indicate sea, Newfoundland and Labrador, respectively.
Labrador
Newfoundland
Figure 4.6 Raster representation of Newfoundland and Labrador

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
88
The blocky nature of Figure 4.6 (albeit exaggerated) reveals why the
vector model usually is preferred for mapping demographic and socio-
economic information – it is more aesthetically pleasing. An obvious way to
reduce the ‘blockiness’(pixilation) of the raster image is to increase the num-
ber of grid cells which, for a fixed study area, means reducing their individ-
ual size. There are two caveats. First, halving the length along any side of the
cells will quadruple the total number of cells required. Each of these cells
must have a value associated with them and these must be stored somewhere
in the computer’s memory. Although a number of techniques are available to
compress raster datasets and so reduce their storage requirements (such as
run length encoding, quadtrees and wavelets, see: Longley et al., 2001; Wise,
2002; O’Sullivan and Unwin, 2003), raster data are often very demanding of
memory and produce large file sizes.
Second, it would be misleading but possible to increase the appar-
ent resolution of the cell sizes beyond that afforded by the accuracy and
precision of the source data. If the original data were recorded with an
accuracy of 1 km it would be erroneous to present that same data within
a 100 m  100 m grid. The same note of caution is applicable to vector
representations that can give a false visual impression of the apparently
high precision and accuracy of the underlying data.
In practice, the vector data model frequently is used to represent dis-
crete, geographical objects – those with or deemed to have definite borders
or edges – while the raster model commonly is associated with continuous
fields such as elevation. The distinction between discrete objects and fields
raises an important question in the context of neighbourhood classification
and analysis: to what degree can neighbourhoods and the populations they
contain adequately be represented as discrete (neighbourhood) objects with
definite boundaries, as they usually are? We discuss this issue further in
Chapter 8. For now it is noted that a number of techniques are available to
transform object-based models of population distributions into often more
realistic, continuous field views and that these often involve a vector-to-
raster data conversion. Some of these techniques are reviewed by Donnay
and Unwin (2001) and also at http://census.ac.uk/cdu/software/surpop.
4.2 Mapping geodemographic information
with GIS
We have commented that geodemographics is the analysis of people
by where they live. Linking this to a GIS framework, the knowledge
of where people live, work or socialize is the location component.

Geodemographics and GIS
89
Data about what people do to live, work or socialize is the attribute
information. In other words, Location  Attributes  Geography 
Demographics  Geodemographics!
Neighbourhood classifications often provide the base map onto
which other sorts of geodemographic data are overlaid and analysed.
Consider Figure 4.7. This shows a neighbourhood classification of the
City of Bristol, England created from the Leeds Geodemographic
Analysis System, online at the Centre for Computational Geography
at the University of Leeds (www.ccg.leeds.ac.uk). It is a sub-region of
a national classification of 1991 UK Census enumeration districts into
10 neighbourhood types (or geodemographic clusters). Only nine of those
Neighbourhood Classification
Not classified
Cluster group 1 (Pl = 102)
Cluster group 2 (Pl = 106)
Cluster group 3 (Pl = 111)
Cluster group 4 (Pl = 96)
Cluster group 5 (Pl = 73)
Cluster group 7 (Pl = 106)
Cluster group 6 (Pl = 86)
Cluster group 8 (Pl = 81)
Cluster group 10 (Pl = 86)
0
2
4
6
Kilometers
Penetration Index (PI) has a global mean of 100
Figure 4.7 Geodemographic classification of Bristol, England, shaded according to the
level of readership of West Country World within each neighbourhood cluster group. The
mean readership across all groups has an index value of 100

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
90
clusters are shown in Figure 4.7 because the city, unsurprisingly, does not
include any of the rural type (the tenth group). Some areas in Bristol either
are entirely or predominantly non-residential and are shown as not classi-
fied. Although being non-residential does not preclude classification, it
does require the use of data drawn from somewhere other than a national
census of (residential) population. In most geodemographic classification
systems the category ‘unclassified’ refers not only to non-residential
neighbourhoods but also neighbourhoods comprising institutions such as
prisons, boarding schools or monasteries that do not contain normal
household structures.
Figure 4.7 is a choropleth map where the style of shading indi-
cates to which geodemographic cluster each of the 834 census areas
belongs. Moreover, the density (darkness) of shading indicates the relative
amount of a certain attribute within each neighbourhood group. The
attribute is the proportion of respondents in each geodemographic cluster
who indicated, during a hypothetical survey, that they read the West
Country World newspaper. The darker the shading, the greater the propor-
tion of the local population that reads the newspaper.
The proportions were determined in five stages. First, a boundary
file of Bristol was obtained that gave a georeference (an ID) for each of the
834 localities. That file was loaded into the GIS and mapped on-screen –
a visual check for any obvious errors it might have contained. As no errors
were apparent, the second stage was to join the boundary file to a table of
values containing both the same set of georeferences (the same IDs) and
also a geodemographic attribute code for each area, as obtained from the
Leeds classification system.
The third stage involved grouping together the 834 census areas
into their nine (plus ‘other’) neighbourhood cluster groups (recalling that
there is no rural type to be found). This process of aggregation, also known
as dissolving, is illustrated by Figures 4.8(a) and (b). In Figure 4.8(a) there
are 18 neighbourhood features each with a goedemographic attribute value
indicating their neighbourhood classification (this attribute is represented
by the shading). The result of aggregating by neighbourhood type is illus-
trated by Figure 4.8(b). Although the geography of the neighbourhoods
appears unchanged, there are now only six features, labelled I to VI –
one per neighbourhood type. The fact that map feature I is disjointed is
irrelevant; it is now wholly one object. To use a physical analogy, where
previously there were 18 islands, there are now six archipelagos.
The fourth stage was to overlay the aggregated neighbourhood
objects upon the survey data at the same time requesting the GIS to
calculate how many respondents live within each neighbourhood type (an

Geodemographics and GIS
91
operation known as a point-in-polygon analysis) and, of those, how many
read the West Country World. This stage is illustrated by Figure 4.8(c).
To complete the analysis and to map the survey data requires the
locations of respondents be given a geographical coordinate consistent with
the referencing system used in the boundary file. In the Bristol example the
coordinate system is the British National Grid. Either of UK Ordnance
Survey’s Address-Point or Code-Point data products could be used to assign
a National Grid reference to the residential (or business) address of survey
respondents (see Chapter 3, Section 3.1 for details). Having calculated
the number of sample respondents within each neighbourhood type it is a
simple undertaking to calculate the proportion that read the newspaper
per neighbourhood group and consider whether the proportion is above
or below average for the region (Figure 4.8(c)).
2
4
1
5
3
17
18
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
16
15
II
II
I
IV
III
I
III
I
IV
I
V
III
V
VI
IV
VI
V
V
Total Surveyed = white counters + black counters = 43
Total black counters = 17
Proportion of counters that are black = 17/43 = 39.5%
Total Surveyed in Type I neighbourhoods = 15
Total black counters in Type I neighbourhoods = 7
 Proportion of counters black in Type I neighbourhoods = 7/15 = 46.7%
Type I has 46.7/39.5 = 1.18 more black counters than average
Index value for black counters in Type I neighbourhoods = 1.18 × 100 = 118
 (An index value of 100 is average).
(a)
(c)
(b)
Figure 4.8 Calculating the proportion of respondents per neighbourhood type. (a) and (b)
Aggregating the neighbourhoods together into geodemographic clusters. (c) Calculating
the proportion of respondents per cluster. In this example, the black counters indicate a
survey respondent

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
92
4.3 An interesting pattern?
Let us assume that the hypothetical survey had managed to contact 2835
households – approximately 1.5% of all households in Bristol. Of these,
imagine 577 (20.4%) were found to read West Country World. The GIS is
used to overlay the aggregated boundary file upon the locations of survey
respondents finding the numbers of survey respondents in each neigh-
bourhood class. The results are shown in Table 4.3 and suggest that the
newspaper is most popular in Type 3 neighbourhoods and least popular in
Type 5 neighbourhoods.
Suppose that Type 3 neighbourhoods are the ‘Settled Suburbans’
group of the 1991 SuperProfiles classification (see Figure 1.5). This group
is described by Brown and Batey (1994, Table 3) as follows.
These families are well established in their semi-detached suburban homes.
The Settled Suburbans are employed in white collar and middle management
positions. The presence of many part-time working wives ensures a fairly
affluent lifestyle. For example, this group can afford to take one or two pack-
aged holidays every year and purchase newer cars. They have taken advantage
of government share offers in the past and are happy to use credit cards for
their purchase. Many are mail order agents. Typical publications read include
The Daily Mail, The Express, Ideal Home and Family Circle.
The description is known as a pen picture (or portrait) – an evocative ver-
bal description that highlights the special features of each neighbourhood
cluster that differentiates it from the rest (see Chapter 6, Section 6.8 for a
discussion of some of the advantages and disadvantages of this type of
labelling). In the example case, the geodemographic analysis of the
survey data can help the editors of the newspaper understand their core
readership and position the content accordingly.
Or, can it? The answer, in fact, is no! The survey data segmented
by neighbourhood type in Table 4.3 were actually a set of randomly gen-
erated locations. This is not to suggest there are no patterns present in the
data; just that they are insignificant. Any apparent geodemographic pat-
terns are entirely due to a random process of selection. This raises an
important caution to all sorts of geographic analysis: there is a risk of
attributing importance to apparent spatial patterns in geographical infor-
mation when the patterns actually are of little significance. A chi-squared
(2) statistical analysis of the observed relative to the expected counts in
Table 4.3 suggests that there is a 46% likelihood that the geodemographic
distribution of the newspaper’s sample readership is due to chance. By
contrast, the distribution shown in Table 4.4 has less than 1% likelihood.

Table 4.3 Geodemographic analysis of the survey data. Neighbourhood patterns in the data are actually due to a random process of selection
Cluster
Total number
Read West
Read West
Ratio
Relative index
Rank
Read West
(O  E)2/E
group
of survey 
Country World
Cty. World
value  
 100
Country World
(k)
respondents 
(observed, O)
(p, %)
(expected, E) 
(nj)
nj/n  O
1
394
82
20.8
1.02
102
4
80
0.03
2
887
191
21.5
1.06
106
3
181
0.55
3
609
138
22.7
1.11
111
1
124
1.51
4
127
25
19.7
0.96
96
5
26
0.03
5
108
16
14.8
0.73
73
9
22
1.66
6
57
10
17.5
0.86
86
6
12
0.23
7
51
11
21.6
1.06
106
2
10
0.03
8
295
49
16.6
0.81
81
8
60
2.09
9
0
0
0
–
–
–
0
–
10
211
37
17.5
0.86
86
7
43
0.85
n  2739
O  559
1.00
100
E  559
2  6.98
(pchance  46%)
Other
96
18
  2835
  577
p  20.4
p/ p
p : p

Table 4.4 Geodemographic analysis of alternative survey data. Neighbourhood patterns in the data appear much less likely to be due to chance
Cluster
Total number
Read West
Read West
Ratio
Relative index
Rank
Read West
(O  E)2/E
group
of survey 
Country World
Country
value  
 100
Country World
(k)
respondents 
(observed, O)
World
(expected, E) 
(nj)
(p, %)
nj/n  O
1
394
87
22.1
1.08
108
4
80
0.54
2
887
198
22.2
1.09
109
3
181
1.59
3
609
150
24.6
1.21
121
1
124
5.32
4
127
21
16.5
0.81
81
5
26
0.93
5
108
10
9.3
0.45
45
9
22
6.58
6
57
9
15.8
0.77
77
6
12
0.60
7
51
12
23.5
1.15
115
2
10
0.24
8
295
41
13.9
0.68
68
8
60
6.13
9
0
0
0
–
–
–
0
–
10
211
31
14.7
0.72
72
7
43
3.38
n  2739
O  559
1.00
100
E  559
2  25.31
(pchance
0%)

p  20.4
p/ p
p : p

Geodemographics and GIS
95
INCOME ($, Average in 2000)
22,000 to 24,999 (3)
33,000 to 36,999 (2)
29,000 to 32,999 (4)
25,000 to 28,999 (3)
0
600
1,200
1,800
Kilometers
Based on data from Statistics Canada's Internet Site
(a)
Figure 4.9 Income maps of Canada. (a) Classification by nested averages
Although superficially similar to Table 4.3 the underlying process of
selection no longer was entirely random.
4.4 Confounded by choropleths!
Being led to misinterpret patterns in geographical information is a
particular problem with choropleth maps. Figure 4.9(a) shows again the
Canadian income data previously mapped in Figure 4.5. Figures 4.9(b)
and (c) plot the same data but modify the way the regions of the map
are grouped together and shaded (the changes are indicated by the
legends). It can be argued that different handling of the same data alters
the geographical knowledge and understanding of the income distribu-
tions which are read from the map. This circumstance relates to the old
adage that ‘a picture tells a thousand words’. The visual characteristics
of a map are extremely persuasive, so much so that they can lead to
a sometimes false sense of security in the objectiveness, neutrality

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
96
INCOME ($, Average in 2000)
22,000 to 24,999 (3)
31,000 to 33,999 (3)
34,000 to 36,999 (2)
28,000 to 30,999 (1)
25,000 to 27,999 (3)
0
600
1,200
1,800
Kilometers
Based on data from Statistics Canada's Internet Site
(c)
Figure 4.9 (Continued) (b) Classification by quartiles. (c) Classification by equal interval
bin widths
INCOME ($, Average in 2000)
22,000 to 24,999 (3)
33,000 to 36,999 (3)
29,000 to 32,999 (3)
25,000 to 28,999 (3)
0
600
1,200
1,800
Kilometers
Based on data from Statistics Canada's Internet Site
(b)

Geodemographics and GIS
97
and ‘truthfulness’ of the map and its designer. In practice maps, like
statistics, can be manipulated to paint very particular pictures (Pickles,
1992; Harley, 1992; Monmonier, 1996) – a property that is useful but
open to abuse.
Taking the maps in reverse order, Figure 4.9(c) has five classes,
each with an equal class size interval. This means the difference between
the upper and lower values – the ‘bin width’ or the range – is the same for
each class, in this case a difference of 2999 Canadian dollars (i.e. 36,999 
34,000, or 33,999  31,000, etc.). Holding the bin widths constant provides
no guarantee that there will be the same number of map features (the
provinces and territories) in each class. Indeed, the distribution across the
classes is 3, 3, 1, 3 and 2.
By contrast, Figure 4.9(b) does have an equal number of features
in each class. It is a quantile classification and, specifically, a quartile
grouping (since there are four classes; a decile classification would have
10 classes and a quintile classification would have five). To accommodate
this (and because the map features are not uniformly distributed across the
income range) the bin widths are no longer equal. It is only possible to
place an exactly equal number of features into each class if the number of
features is an integer multiple of the number of classes (in other words,
dividing the number of features by the number of classes gives a whole
number and no remainder). If not the case, as when 13 features are
grouped into four classes, the GIS will produce a near fit, for example 3,
3, 3 and 4.
Figure 4.9(a) has been produced by looking for natural breaks in
the data. A number of algorithms exist to do this and in this case it is by
a process of nested averages. The features are first split into two classes:
above and below the mean average income for all provinces and territor-
ies. The average income is then found for each subset of features in a
class and the classes again bisected at the average for the subset. This
process can continue to create 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, (etc.) classes. There may
be neither equal bin widths nor an equal number of features in each
class.
There are many other ways we could have classified, symbolized
and mapped the income data. Each would have given a different impres-
sion of the distribution of incomes across Canada. Monmonier (1996,
pp. 1–2) comments ‘a single map is but one of an indefinitely large number
of maps that might be produced for the same situation or from the
same data.’ He warns that ‘because of personal computers and electronic
publishing, map users can now easily lie to themselves – and be unaware
of it.’ Marketing experts specifically are mentioned!

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
98
Looking again at Figure 4.7 – the geodemographic map of Bristol –
there are three limitations to it that are true also of the income maps,
Figures 4.9(a)–(c):
●First, it is implied that populations are distributed uniformly
within each area and that all zones are fully occupied by residents
(there are, apparently, no non-residential spaces within each area).
●Second, it is also implied that populations are socio-economically
uniform within each area division – ‘one size fits all’ with all res-
idents within a neighbourhood assigned the same map label.
●Third, the map implies that all change in geodemographic condi-
tion occurs only at the borders between zones.
Each of these implications may be demonstratively false. Not all zones are
uniformly populated (Figure 4.10), neighbourhood populations are not
uniform in their characteristics (Figure 4.11) and geodemographic change
need not be at the boundaries of administrative zones (Plate 2). The limita-
tions of the choropleth map as a tool to visualize neighbourhood data helps
explain why point maps are often used instead in the sorts of geodemo-
graphic information systems that we discuss in the following chapter.
Figure 4.10 By using a GIS to overlay the boundaries of 2001 UK Census output areas
onto a remotely sensed image of a coastal region it can be seen that not all the Census OAs
are uniformly populated

Geodemographics and GIS
99
Case study: Using GIS for neighbourhood
analysis and targeting – a commercial
perspective
Stewart Berry, GIS specialist, Caliper Corporation
There are an almost overwhelming number of geographic data and software
products that cater to those wishing to differentiate target populations accord-
ing to the neighbourhoods in which those populations live. Applications of
these technologies are diverse and include marketing and direct mailing, and
the identification of deprived communities or ‘at-risk’populations.
The primary source of neighbourhood information for these prod-
ucts is typically a national census. This usually provides the most import-
ant government data for neighbourhood analysis due to its scope and the
wealth of descriptive variables that are enumerated. Associated boundary
information, produced to support and enable the collection of the census
data, also facilitate subsequent analysis.
Figure 4.11 Within Bristol, over 90% of 1991 Census EDs were represented by at least
five different household income groups from a total of seven in the range less than £5000
to over £40,000 per annum. Source: Adapted from Harris and Longley (2002)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Number of income groups present within an ED
Frequency (%)
%EDs
Cumulative

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
100
Big steps have been made in the USA and the UK to provide cen-
sus data in easily accessible media, often with the specific intention of
allowing the data to be effectively analysed in a GIS. In the USA, restric-
tions largely have been removed on the use of census data and on govern-
mental geographic data such as administrative boundary files. The data
are made freely available as a resource for both census users and commer-
cial data providers. Census data are also freely available in the UK but the
associated geographic boundary files are subject to licence restrictions if
used commercially. These prohibitions are seen by some as an obstacle to
market driven and value-added GIS census products in the UK but are
required to protect the copyright interests of the Ordnance Survey.
In the USA and UK (respectively) the principal government por-
tals for the provision of neighbourhood and census data are the GeoSpatial
One-Stop (www.geodata.gov/gos) and the Neighbourhood Statistics
website (http://neighbourhood.statistics.gov.uk; but see also Chapter 3,
Section 3.2). Whether such portals also offer the necessary ease of access
required by some users may be a moot point. This is because many GIS
users do not want to have to wade through different websites or to order
multiple CDs to get the data they need, and then have to spend time getting
it into their preferred mapping system in a suitable format.
Consequently, and despite the progress in making census outputs
available to users, obtaining, mapping and joining GIS boundary files
to other neighbourhood data may still prove to be a time-consuming
process (see Figure 4.12(a)). Not only can the digital boundaries be non-
coincident with the user’s target area of interest, the resolution of the data
also varies depending on the source or version. For example, the 2001 UK
Census output areas have been made available as either high-resolution or
low-resolution boundaries and in such cases the user needs to determine
the most appropriate product to use.
Complicating matters further, the data can be (and often are!) in
any one of several different formats due to competing commercial offer-
ings, and further non-commercial and governmental file types. The task is
made easier by GIS software from vendors such as ESRI, MapInfo and
Caliper Corporation that support the major formats directly, as well as
having the ability to import an extensive number of formats into their own
proprietary file types. There is also other format conversion software
available such as the Feature Manipulation Engine from Safe Software
(www.safe.com), and the Geographic Translator from Blue Marble
Geographics (www.bluemarblegeo.com).
In addition, there can be issues involving projections, coord-
inate systems and even datums. This is often the least understood aspect

Geodemographics and GIS
101
of integrating data in a GIS, mainly due to the specialized knowledge
that is required. A good starting point is Datums and Map Projections
(Iliffe, 1999).
The census data themselves are not problem-free. Although a
valuable source of information that is generally agreed to be the most reli-
able and complete population coverage available, spatial and temporal
inaccuracies exist which are caused by undercounts (particularly in the
USA where a mail out, mail back survey method is used) and the infre-
quency of collection (typically decennial but every five years in countries
including Canada). Census surveys also do not always ask the questions
of most interest to some users – notable in this respect is the absence of an
income question in the UK. Additionally, those identifying target market
populations generally are not interested in the variations described by the
‘raw’ census statistics but prefer to consider matters in terms of neigh-
bourhood typologies such as ‘Educated Urbanites’.
Due to such considerations, commercial databases have been devel-
oped that augment census datasets. These include population projections for
non-census years and neighbourhood (geodemographic) classifications.
With regards to the former and in the UK, the Joint Industry Committee on
Determine data formats
(a)
(b)
Identify data sources
(both geographic and tabular)
Map the data
Import data into GIS
Analyse the data
Explore and correct
errors/omissions in join fields
Join to appropriate geography
(typically to boundaries)
Identify GIS software with out-
of-the-box neighbourhood data
and analysis tools
Utilize GIS interface to access
neighbourhood data
Assess the ‘fitness-for-purpose’
of the resultant maps and data
Analyse the data
Figure 4.12 Using GIS for neighbourhood mapping and analysis. (a) A ‘loose coupling’
of census data with a GIS. (b) An integrated provision of census data with a GIS

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
102
Population Statistics (JICPOPs), a media industry trade group, has imposed a
requirement of rival geodemographic suppliers to use consistent annual popu-
lation estimates for postcode sectors. The latter are derived from the model-
ling of population distributions by applying cluster and principal components
techniques to aggregate census data (cf. Chapter 6). Classifying neighbour-
hoods in this way obscures underlying variability in the population.
A different approach is to use consumer-derived databases that
describe the attributes of individuals or their households (‘lifestyle’ prod-
ucts, see Chapter 9). This information is typically obtained from sources
other than a census, including shopping surveys, share ownership data,
court judgements and consumer goods warrantees (Birkin, 1995).
Although using lifestyle data can in some applications sidestep the prob-
lem of the ecological fallacy – the problem of inferring the characteristics
of individuals from the characteristics of places – the use of lifestyle data
has its own problems, most notably that the data are partial, in the sense
that they are only a sample of the complete population. The various geo-
demographic and lifestyle products available are discussed elsewhere in
this book (see, in particular, Chapter 3).
Frustration with identifying and preparing the required census
data for use in a GIS (Harris, 2003), coupled with the difficulty of
‘unlocking’ the perceived value of census data, has led some to look
to GIS systems that include value-added census and other information
in an integrated environment. The vendors of these GIS products have
made steps to move away from generic GIS tools towards out-of-the-box
‘total solutions’, such as MapInfo’s PSYTE products which come with
clustering and customer identification tools, and Microsoft’s MapPoint
software that is supplied with demographics and consumer purchase
behaviour information. Caliper Corporation facilitate access to the hun-
dreds of tables in the US and UK censuses through their Table Chooser
Tools that group the tables by category such as gender, income (US only)
or age, each with associated sub-tables such as gender by age. These vari-
ables are then mapped via the tool and Caliper’s GIS system (Maptitude)
to the user’s target area boundaries such as: tracts (US); blocks (US);
output areas (UK); or postal geographies (US and UK).
Provided above is a simplified description of the steps required to
map neighbourhood data in a GIS. Figure 4.12(a) shows the procedure for
integrating external data with a GIS. Figure 4.12(b) describes the use of a
purpose-built interface to access the neighbourhood data, simplifying the
process but limiting access to the built-in data. Of course, each method
could be used in conjunction with the other, subject to the task at hand, the
GIS employed, the available data and the expertise of the user.

Geodemographics and GIS
103
Deciding which data and system to employ and from where to
obtain them are the first steps in the process of neighbourhood analysis
and targeting. While more complex issues such as the modifiable areal
unit problem (MAUP, Chapter 8) and the ecological fallacy (Chapter 2)
should always be considered, concerns about price, usability and ‘fitness-
for-purpose’ can be the critical factors in a project where commercial pri-
orities may outweigh what are considered more academic concerns.
4.5 Spatial interaction models
Before concluding this chapter it is instructive to consider how the follow-
ing retail question might be answered within a GI analytical environment.
Suppose a consumer lives at location i (to be found at coordinate xi, yi)
then what is the likelihood that they will visit a particular retail store at
some other location j (at coordinate xj, yj)?
To answer this question, two ideas seem intuitive. First, that the
attraction of the store to the consumer depends on what the store has to
offer. This we shall quantify as the store’s mass (Mj), for reasons that will
become clear. Second, that the consumer would prefer to travel a shorter
distance to visit a store than a longer one and so the attraction of the store
is related to the distance between locations i and j. These two assumptions
allow the following spatial interaction model to be formed:
(4.1)
where Fj(i) is the ‘force’of attraction that the store at j exerts on the consumer
at i, increasing with the store’s ‘mass’ but decreasing with the distance
between i and j (the symbol 	 means proportional to). The power function,
c, controls the distance. The higher its value, the less attractive the store is to
a consumer at a far distance relative to a consumer closer to the store. If c is
given the value two and a constant g is introduced then Equation (4.1) can
become:
(4.2)
Equation (4.2) is now analogous to a simple gravity equation
expressing the force acting on an object i that is due to a body of mass Mj
at distance dij from i.
Fj(i)  g Mj
(dij)2
Fj(i) 	 Mj
(dij)c

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
104
So far only a single customer has been considered. S/he would
have to have deep pockets to ensure the long-term success of the store!
Extending Equation (4.2), the total attraction of the store for n customers
could be found by calculating and summing together the attraction for
each individual consumer in turn:
(4.3)
(The symbol 
means sum of; for example 
)
However, recalling the geodemographic-based model of price
sensitivity in a restaurant market described as a case study in Chapter 1
and also the model of survey respondents per neighbourhood type illus-
trated by Figure 4.8, it is expected that consumers living in a particular
type of neighbourhood may have a different demand for the store com-
pared to consumers living in another neighbourhood type. If the type of
neighbourhood is denoted as k then neighbourhood differences in demand
can be incorporated by giving each type a separate value of g and c. If
there are nk consumers in neighbourhoods of type k then the total attrac-
tion of the store to them is:
(4.4)
But, given different numbers of consumers per neighbourhood
type, then a better basis to compare neighbourhoods is with regards to the
average attraction:
(4.5)
Equation (4.5) is less complicated than it may first appear!
Remember, it only formalizes the assumptions made: that consumers are
more likely to travel to a store with larger ‘mass’; that consumers are
unlikely to travel to a store that is too far away; that demand for the store
varies by neighbourhood type; and so too does the distance decay function
(it is known, for example, that poorer neighbourhoods tend to do more of
their shopping locally than richer neighbourhoods).
A measure of mass could be the size of the store or the number of
specialist product lines it sells, while a survey could be used to measure
differences in demand by neighbourhood (as in the restaurant case study).
Fjk 

nk
i1
Fj(i)k
nk


nk
i1
gk
Mj
(dij)ck
nk

nk
i1
Fj(i)k  
nk
i1
gk
Mj
(dij)ck
4
1  1  2  3  4


n
i1
Fj(i)  
n
i1
g Mj
(dij)c

Geodemographics and GIS
105
Distance is more ambiguous. The shortest, straight-line distance between
any i and j is easy to calculate given knowledge of their x and y locations
(dMIN: Equation (4.6)) but is an unrealistic measure if that shortest path
cannot actually be traversed. Travelling from one to the opposite corner of
a block in a city built to a grid plan often requires travelling east/west then
north/south (or vice versa) where the diagonal path is blocked by build-
ings. In this circumstance the ‘Manhattan distance’ could be a more real-
istic measure of the length travelled (dMAN: Equation (4.7)). Moreover,
often what is meant by distance is really accessibility, in which case the
‘distance’ between i and j is a function of the road and other transport net-
works, their length and the speed of travel along them – a speed that will
likely change with the time of day and with the season. It may also be that
consumers travel to the store not from home but from their workplace.
(4.6)
(4.7)
(The vertical ‘brackets’ . . . mean find the absolute difference between the
two quantities, so ignore the negative sign if the subtraction creates a value
less than zero. For example, if xj  10 and xi  20 then 10  20  10
not 10. Similarly, if yj  30 and yi  50, then 30  50  20. The
Manhattan distance from i to j is therefore 10  20  30, which makes
more sense than saying we travelled a (negative) length of 30 units.)
Issues of how to quantify the components of Equation (4.5) are
neither trivial nor insurmountable but require further assumptions (simpli-
fications of reality) to be made. Having done so, Equation (4.5) could be
used to estimate the attractiveness of a series of stores and that informa-
tion used to calculate potential profitability, or to identify over- or under-
performing stores. It could be used to identify potential locations for new
stores on the basis of the local neighbourhood profiles provided by a geo-
demographic classification and it could also be used to estimate the
impact on existing stores of a new store opening. For example, if a store is
opened at the centre of a neighbourhood type that has above-average like-
lihood of residents visiting that particular chain then it is unlikely that
those residents will travel further distances to visit existing stores. If the
average spend of residents of the particular neighbourhood type is known
and an estimate of how many of the local population travel to existing
stores can be provided, then the impact of the new store on the existing
network can be modelled.
Whether the simplifying assumptions of the model are realistic or
not depends a great deal on the context. There may be external influence
dMAN  xj  xi  yj  yi
dMIN  √((xj  xi)2  (yj  yi)2)

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
106
(externalities) that lead consumers to prefer one shopping centre over
another. Consumers may not act as rationally as the model assumes. The
impact of competitor stores and their marketing strategies will almost cer-
tainly be relevant. All these additional factors suggest that our simple
interaction model has potential for considerable development. For a
chronological review Birkin, Clarke and Clarke (2002) suggest: Wilson
(1974); Fotheringham and O’Kelly (1989); Sen and Smith (1995); and
Fischer and Getis (1999).
Some words of caution apply. In 1996, Birkin et al. (pp. 71, 72)
wrote ‘there is no effective way in most GIS of estimating the new store
revenue in light of the competition’ and ‘proprietary GIS are often too
inflexible to handle the variety of real decision-making environments that
the complex modern retail environment demands.’In the following decade
most of the same authors (Birkin, Clarke and Clarke, 2002, p. 151) were
still of the view that
there are few commercial packages available to enable a retail analyst to run a
suite of spatial interaction models [. . .] The analyst could use one of the pro-
prietary models available in some GIS packages [. . .] However, these models
tend to be very aggregate (and simple) models and prove to be poor predictors
in complicated retail markets.
4.6 Conclusion
As the name implies, geodemographics is the coupling of information
recording location (the geo) with other demographic, attribute data. This
coupling defines a geographical dataset and, since GIS are systems to
capture, store, transform, analyse, and display geographical data, it should
not be surprising that GIS and geodemographics can be stablemates.
Geodemographic mapping is aligned to vector GIS which have
their origins in cartography. Under the vector model, neighbourhoods are
usually represented as two-dimensional areas – as polygons. Mapping
geodemographic data usually requires a boundary file to be obtained to
represent the neighbourhood and to which the attribute information is
joined. Other GIS functions such as an overlay, aggregation or a point-in-
polygon analysis may be required. The result may reveal apparent geo-
demographic patterns in a sample dataset. However, there is a risk that the
patterns are due to chance and so the significance of any result should be
tested. Maps can lie!
The process of collecting, managing and analysing neighbour-
hood information can be time consuming and difficult. Recognizing this

Geodemographics and GIS
107
situation and the market opportunity it presents, a number of GI software
and data vendors have begun offering more joined-up solutions, making
the process of acquiring, handling and visualizing neighbourhood data
easier. Such systems can be extremely useful for all sorts of geographical
enquiry and the cost of purchase is reducing. For example, at the time of
writing a single-user licence of Maptitude GIS was priced at $495 (£400
for a UK version).
GIS have their critics (limited spatial analysis, 3D visualization
and temporal modelling are some of the complaints) but are nevertheless
widely used to solve real-world problems and ‘to improve many of our
day-to-day working and living arrangements’ (Longley et al., 2001,
pp. 30–1). Longley et al. (1999) give examples of GIS applications in: the
utilities; telecommunications; transportation management; emergency
management; land administration; urban planning; the military; public
libraries; health care; politics; monitoring land cover and land use; land-
scape conservation; agriculture; environmental assessment and even
rebuilding a country!
Yet this ‘galley of applications’ also hints at why GIS could be a
‘nearly’ technology for marketers. GIS are powerful and flexible, perhaps
too much so, offering more functionality but, consequently, requiring
more expert knowledge of how to use the software than a ‘typical’ geo-
demographic user may actually require. In this light and again spotting a
market niche, geodemographic vendors have developed their own analysis
and visualization systems – what we, in the following chapter, call a geo-
demographic information system (GDIS).
Summary
●GIS are software used to capture, store, transform, analyse and
display geographical data.
●A geographic dataset contains both attribute and location infor-
mation. The act of georeferencing adds geography to data.
●A common georeference permits tables of data to be related and
jointly manipulated.
●The vector model commonly represents real-world objects as
points, lines or polygons that are defined by a single or series of
point coordinates.
●A raster can be understood as a grid with associated attribute values.
●GIS functions connected with geodemographic types of investiga-
tion include aggregation, overlay and point-in-polygon analysis.

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
108
●There is a risk of attributing importance to apparent spatial pat-
terns in geographical information when the patterns actually are of
little or no significance. A related problem is that maps can ‘lie’.
●Despite their many proven applications, GIS have been described
as a ‘nearly technology’ in marketing.
Further Reading
●
Birkin, M., Clarke, G. and Clarke, M. (2002) Retail Geography and
Intelligent Network Planning, Wiley, Chichester.
●
Longley, P., Goodchild, M., Maguire, D. and Rhind, D. (2001 and 2005)
Geographic Information Systems and Science, Wiley, Chichester.
Supplementary material at www.wiley.co.uk/gis.
●
O’Sullivan, D. and Unwin, D. (2003) Geographic Information Analysis,
Wiley, New York.

109
5
Geodemographic
Information Systems
and Analysis
Learning Objectives
In this chapter we will:
●
Introduce what we mean by the term geodemographic informa-
tion system (GDIS).
●
Compare and contrast our characterization of GDIS with con-
ventional understandings of geographic information systems
(GIS).
●
Discuss the types of data input, analysis and output functions
associated with a GDIS.
●
Provide worked examples of neighbourhood profiling and catch-
ment analysis undertaken with GDIS software.
●
Give a case study of how geodemographic profiling has been
used to align styles of policing with types of neighbourhood.
●
Highlight the risk of making inappropriate inferences about
populations when using a neighbourhood-based approach.
Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
Richard Harris, Peter Sleight and Richard Webber
© 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
ISBNs: 0-470-86413-3 (HB); 0-470-86414-1 (PB)

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
110
Introduction
In the preceding chapter we took the systems view of geographic infor-
mation systems (GIS), describing such technologies as a set of linked
components used to capture, store, transform, analyse and display geo-
graphical data (after Haggett, 2001, p. 719). In early GIS each of these
components might exist as separate programs, with the output from one
forming the input to another. Today users expect much greater integration
and interoperability, and desktop GIS have become powerful and widely
used tools for managing a wide range of geographical information.
However, that entire range is not required for geodemographic
types of analysis such as neighbourhood classification and targeting. With
geodemographics the focus is on collecting data about, classifying and
visualizing socio-economic, demographic and consumer patterns, usually
for predefined, small area geographies. Typically census or postal zones
are used and in Chapter 4 we described how such interpretations of neigh-
bourhood formally can be encoded in a GIS, treating each neighbourhood
zone as a distinct and clearly bounded geographical entity. This entails an
object or mosaic view of the socio-economic landscape and tends to
favour the vector data model.
In Chapter 4 we also outlined some GIS functions used for
analysing and manipulating neighbourhood objects within an applied,
geodemographic context. These included the ability to:
●join generic GIS databases about neighbourhoods and their popu-
lations to local sources of information such as survey data or
customer records;
●group zones together based on a common geography (e.g. sum
together population counts for all unit postcodes in sector BS8 1);
●profile groups of zones by ‘neighbourhood type’;
●calculate and model a catchment area around a given point or zone
and determine that catchment’s neighbourhood composition;
●summarize and visualize information or analysis by means of
tables and maps.
We expect these functions to be present too in what we here
describe as a geodemographic information system (GDIS, after Goss,
1995). Yet, we also anticipate differences between ‘regular GIS’ and
systems that are specifically built for neighbourhood profiling and
micromarketing. This is because the aims, objectives and users of the
two types of system are not the same. Whereas GIS are used in many

Geodemographic Information Systems and Analysis
111
areas of commerce, service delivery, environmental modelling and
research, GDIS are understood as particularly designed for:
●identifying which customers buy what and where;
●identifying new customers based on the residential characteristics
of existing ones; and
●branch and network planning, including measuring branch per-
formance.
Undoubtedly GDIS overlap with GIS, both drawing upon the
interdisciplinary pool of ideas and thinking that characterize geographical
information science. And, without question, GIS can be well suited to
querying, layering and mapping neighbourhood objects, as well as relat-
ing those objects to sources of neighbourhood data. Nevertheless, it is in
our opinion wrong to view GDIS as simply ‘slimline’ GIS. To do so is to
overlook the important differences in purpose and users of the two types
of system. The requirements, ways of working and analytical methods
used by a retail company’s marketing department are not the same as
those of an environmental scientist, for example, and so the rubric of
GDIS will be seen to differ from that of GIS.
In this chapter, then, we contrast GDIS with more general notions
of GIS, noting their commonalities but also the differences. The particular
GDIS shown in the screenshots and used for analysis is Experian’s
Micromarketer (www.experian.com). However, our intention is not to
provide a comprehensive review of this particular software and its func-
tions but instead to offer a more generic description of a GDIS and its
functionality, alongside worked examples of geodemographic types of
analysis. Other products that we might characterize as GDIS include
CACI’s InSite (www.insite.info), Claritas’ COMPASS (www.claritas.com)
and EuroDirect’s MICROVISION (www.microvision.info).
5.1 Data collection and input
GIS often contain a wide variety of geographic data types originating from
many sources. Longley et al. (2001) suggest that data capture accounts for
up to 85% of the total cost of implementing a GIS. Methods of data capture
which they cite are: remote sensing (satellite and aerial observation);
ground surveying; global positioning service (GPS); raster scans of maps
and documents; manual or automated vector digitization; photogrammetry;
and obtaining data via specialist geographic data warehouses such as the US

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
112
National Spatial Data Infrastructure Clearinghouse, http://130.11.52.184, or
the Geography Network, www.geographynetwork.com.
To the list of geographic data sources, Burrough and McDonnell
(1998) add carrying out a survey and interpolation (estimating unknown
information at non-sampled locations from known information at sampled
locations – an important component of geodemographic analyses where
neighbourhood type is used as the inferential mechanism). Burrough and
McDonnell (1998, p. 76) warn that
in all cases the data must be geometrically registered to a generally accepted
and properly defined coordinate system and coded so that they can be stored in
the internal database structure of the GIS being used. The desired result should
be a current, complete database which can support subsequent data analysis
and modelling.
Consequently they view creating a GIS database as ‘a complex
operation which may involve data capture, verification, and structuring
processes’ (op. cit.).
5.1.1 Data collection for GDIS
We envisage that the typical GDIS user will want shielding from as
much of the complex operation identified by Burrough and McDonnell
(above) as possible! What is required is a system where the sorts of geo-
graphical information the user most needs are already encoded within
the database. Such data could include some or all of the following:
neighbourhood classifications; local market and consumer survey data;
local market demographics; and trend indicators such as population
projections.
The task of data collection could therefore be said mostly to fall
upon the system vendor. However, it does not absolve the user of all
responsibility because ideally the data supplied with the system would be
the best match to the user’s requirements. Such a match is best achieved
by a two-way dialogue between the user and vendor, and is most achiev-
able if the user (department or corporation) has clearly defined analytical
goals and strategic marketing objectives, which translate well into data
and system needs.
Even with such a dialogue, it is unlikely that the user will escape
all aspects of data preparation and collation, because the users will likely
be using the GDIS to analyse some of their own data – for example, client
lists, customer data or the locations of stores. That data may not be held in
one single database and may require a non-trivial process of finding,

Geodemographic Information Systems and Analysis
113
organizing, collating, encoding and cleaning data to some agreed, organ-
izational standard (which may itself need to be determined).
During the process of organizing the data, the user is likely to
encounter ‘holes’ (absent records), inconsistencies in the ways informa-
tion has been collected and encoded, data entry error, duplication and so
forth. The user may also wish to check how up to date certain information
is by validating names and addresses against some suitable gazetteer (e.g.
the latest electoral register but see recent problems with this approach in
the UK: Chapter 9, Section 9.4.2). If the database is to be used for direct
marketing, then good practice would advise flagging records of house-
holds that have requested not to receive ‘junk mail’ or telephone market-
ing. Then, having cleaned the database, the user may want to supplement
it with additional attribute information purchased from data warehouses
such as CACI’s DataDepot (www.datadepot.co.uk) or EuroDirect’s Data
Exchange (www.eurodirect.co.uk). At all times the development and stor-
age of the database must take place within the remits of data protection
and privacy legislation such as European Union Directive 95/46/EC or
The Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act of
Canada (www.privcom.gc.ca). Publicly funded institutions may also need
to consider Freedom of Information Acts such as those of the USA or the
UK (www.informationcommissioner.gov.uk).
With the above in mind and recalling that GDIS deal with only
a subset of the information usually handled by GIS, it is easy to appreciate
Longley et al.’s (2001, p. 206) view that ‘data collection still remains
a time consuming, tedious and expensive process.’
5.1.2 Input geographies
It is unlikely that the data collection tedium can ever fully be avoided by
users of GDIS – and good fortune if it is! However, the more specified
nature of geodemographics does make life a little simpler. Whereas GIS
are designed to accommodate and convert between data recorded using
multiple datums, projections and georeferencing systems, users of GDIS
benefit from systems that are usually tailored to specific nation states and
while most people know their residential (or business) zip-/postcodes,
very few could express their location in terms of a grid coordinate system
or by longitude and latitude. In other words, in most countries for which
the systems are customized there exists a de facto standard for referencing
small area units. These units can be used as the common ‘brick’ or build-
ing block to link data tables and to carry out analysis.

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
114
In the UK it makes sense to use the unit postcode as that brick-level
geography. However, problems in doing so emerge when Longley et al.’s
(2001, p. 80) characterization of a useful georeference is considered: it
should be unique to one location; its meaning may be shared and under-
stood; and it should persist (stay constant) through time. Unfortunately,
postcodes do not stay constant: new properties are built that require new
postcodes; industrial areas are redeveloped into residential properties that
require a subdivision of postcodes; and, periodically, as the internal compos-
ition of settlements markedly changes so the postal geography may become
antiquated, requiring more structured and wholesale change. Together, all
these changes mean that though unit postcodes are probably the georefer-
encing system of socio-economic information most widely used in the UK,
they meet only the unique and comprehensibility criteria for a georeference,
not constancy.
Given a brick-level geography that is not constant over time, it is
important that a GDIS checks for outdated codes and brings them up to
date. Figure 5.1 gives an example of this. It shows a short Excel file
recording the address and postcode of some of the institutions where one
Figure 5.1 A spreadsheet with georeferencing updated and neighbourhood data appended
by a GDIS

Geodemographic Information Systems and Analysis
115
of us has worked. Below the rows of data the same information is shown,
having been brought into Micromarketer. The GDIS – which incorporates
postcode update information published by Royal Mail – correctly has
identified that postcode W1T 1LL supersedes W1P 2LL, recording the
change in the data view.
The additional and user-requested attribute data shown appended
to each row include the neighbourhood type of each postcode (although,
as it happens, each unit postcode is non-residential and recorded ‘not clas-
sified’). Further appended is the postal sector location – information
which would permit a more extensive set of data to be aggregated into
these larger geographical units and joined to survey data either not avail-
able or not robust enough at the finer postcode resolutions. The software
has also created metadata (‘data about data’) to summarize the new
data view: when it was created; from which source file; and including
which data.
5.2 Data analysis
A criticism sometimes made of conventional GIS is that they take a narrow
view of (geographic) space, seeing it as absolute and as a container. Under
this view a neighbourhood is solely defined by the innermost surface of the
polygonal object that bounds it. That the place is surrounded by other
neighbourhood objects is irrelevant to its own intrinsic definition because
objects are deemed to exist independently of any other (Curry, 1998; see
also Raper, 2000).
The perspective, which is Aristotelian and Newtonian in concep-
tion, is said to engender a false sense of separation between the users of a
GIS and the world contained and represented on their computer screen.
The separation in turn plays to a belief that the user is independent of and
external to the apparently naturally forming objects that appear on screen
and able, therefore, to gain an impartial and objective understanding of
the objects, primarily by collecting data about them (Goss, 1995).
Although these and related criticisms have not always been wel-
comed by the GIS community (see Openshaw, 1997 for an impassioned
rebuttal), they do apply in part to data analysis conducted within a GDIS.
It is true, for example, that the vector-based method of defining and encod-
ing populated zones can reduce ‘neighbourhoods’ merely to containers
(of population). This particularly is problematic where zones are drawn
around populations for administrative purposes and without consideration

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
116
to the boundaries of any socio-economic and demographic phenomena the
zones ultimately are used to measure. This issue is discussed further in
Chapter 8.
However, it is important to recognize that the absolute view is not
the only one to permeate geographic data-handling systems. In fact, analy-
sis tends to be relational: vector data structures usually also store the topo-
logical (spatial) relationships between objects because this speeds up
geographical enquiries of the database; tables of data are related and
joined, combining datasets to create new information; zones are associated
with larger zones higher up a census hierarchy; mapping crime rates high-
lights areas with the highest incidences, relative to the rest; and so forth.
The relational view especially is important in geodemographics:
neighbourhood clusters are formed by grouping areas that appear most
alike; a ranking by deprivation score of census wards says that higher
ranked wards are areas of greater deprivation, relative to the lower; a catch-
ment area only makes sense in terms of what it is the catchment for, be it a
school, store or whatever. These and the examples that follow highlight the
importance of expressing the relationships between vector-encoded point,
line and polygonal objects in geodemographic types of analysis. Whereas
conventional GIS offer a variety of geometric, spatial, geostatistical and
3D analysis, within a GDIS the emphasis is on assigning data to and
comparing neighbourhood profiles.
5.2.1 Profiling and comparing datasets by neighbourhood
Table 5.1 provides illustration of why relationships are important and how
the best matches are the most enduring! It shows by Mosaic group the
number of households responding to a third-party, behavioural survey
investigating the types of holidays taken by residents of a large settlement
located within the West Midlands region of England. The table shows that
11,651 households responded, of which 1398 (12.00%) reside in
‘Symbols of Success’ postcodes, 1166 (10.01%) in ‘Happy Families’
areas, and so forth. The 11 UK Mosaic groups have been chosen for
brevity; the more extensive list of 61 UK Mosaic (neighbourhood) types
could instead have been used (see Chapter 6, Section 6.7 for further
details of the classification hierarchy).
For Table 5.1(a) a catchment area has been defined as all post-
code sectors that contain a survey respondent. In principle these sectors
could be identified by a point in polygon analysis of the households’
(x, y) coordinate locations, if known. In practice there is no need. Recall,

Geodemographic Information Systems and Analysis
117
Table 5.1 Neighbourhood characteristics of respondents to a consumer survey undertaken
within the West Midlands of England. (a) The profile is relative to a catchment area
defined as the postcode sectors within which respondents live. (b) The profile is relative to
the distribution of households by neighbourhood group within the West Midlands. (c) The
profile is relative to persons aged 15 over who live in the Scottish National Health Service
(NHS) region – and is meaningless!
(a)
Survey
Target
Catchment
Base
Penetration
Index
count
%
(households)
%
A Symbols of Success
1398
12.00
33648
10.52
0.0415
114
B Happy Families
1166
10.01
31786
9.94
0.0367
101
C Suburban Comfort
2194
18.83
54307
16.98
0.0404
111
D Ties of Community
2613
22.43
75642
23.65
0.0345
95
E Urban Intelligence
370
3.18
16997
5.31
0.0218
60
F Welfare Borderline
436
3.74
16257
5.08
0.0268
74
G Municipal
592
5.08
18083
5.65
0.0327
90
Dependency
H Blue Collar
1292
11.09
30748
9.61
0.0420
115
Enterprise
I Twilight Subsistence
321
2.76
10024
3.13
0.0320
88
J Grey Perspectives
742
6.37
20050
6.27
0.0370
102
K Rural Isolation
527
4.52
12317
3.85
0.0428
117
Totals
11651
100.00
319859
100.00
0.0364
100
(b)
Survey
Target
West
Base
Penetration
Index
count
%
Midlands
%
(households)
A Symbols of Success
1398
12.00
168168
7.66
0.0083
157
B Happy Families
1166
10.01
203734
9.29
0.0057
108
C Suburban Comfort
2194
18.83
351686
16.03
0.0062
117
D Ties of Community
2613
22.43
466186
21.25
0.0056
106
E Urban Intelligence
370
3.18
65415
2.98
0.0057
107
F Welfare Borderline
436
3.74
120065
5.47
0.0036
68
G Municipal
592
5.08
204806
9.33
0.0029
54
Dependency 
H Blue Collar
1292
11.09
303186
13.82
0.0043
80
Enterprise
I Twilight Subsistence
321
2.76
77186
3.52
0.0042
78
J Grey Perspectives
742
6.37
122334
5.58
0.0061
114
K Rural Isolation
527
4.52
111447
5.08
0.0047
89
Totals
11651
100.00
2194213
100.00
0.0053
100

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
118
that unit postcodes are the preferred brick-level geography, which is well
suited to the survey data that include a postcode identifier. Given the
hierarchical nature of the UK postal geography it is easy to determine,
for example, that sector DY1 1 contains unit postcode DY1 1HP.
Table 5.1(a) records that the catchment contains 319,859 households, of
which 33,648 are in Symbols of Success postcodes, 31,786 in Happy
Families, and so forth. The distributions by neighbourhood group of the
survey responding and all catchment households were calculated auto-
matically (at the user’s request) by the GDIS, using data supplied with
and preloaded into the system.
Relating the sum of survey households (the numerator) to the
total number of households within the catchment (the base or denomin-
ator) reveals that a proportion of 11,651  319,859  0.0364 of the total
population were surveyed (3.64%). This ‘penetration rate’ (P) can also be
calculated by neighbourhood group. Where n denotes the survey count per
neighbourhood group and N is the corresponding catchment count then:
(5.1)
For the region defined by the catchment, the highest penetration
is within ‘Rural Isolation’ postcodes (0.0428). The lowest is among the
P  n
N
Table 5.1 (Continued)
(c)
Survey
Target Scottish
Base 
Penetration
Index
count
%
NHS
%
(persons 15)
A Symbols of Success
1398
12.00
373893
8.92
0.0037
135
B Happy Families
1166
10.01
405650
9.67
0.0029
103
C Suburban Comfort
2194
18.83
313592
7.48
0.0070
252
D Ties of Community
2613
22.43
301788
7.20
0.0087
312
E Urban Intelligence
370
3.18
235609
5.62
0.0016
57
F Welfare Borderline
436
3.74
699377
16.68
0.0006
22
G Municipal
592
5.08
285143
6.80
0.0021
75
Dependency
H Blue Collar
1292
11.09
745702
17.78
0.0017
62
Enterprise
I Twilight Subsistence
321
2.76
274367
6.54
0.0012
42
J Grey Perspectives
742
6.37
258899
6.17
0.0029
103
K Rural Isolation
527
4.52
299781
7.15
0.0018
63
Totals
11651
100.00
4193801
100.00
0.0028
100

Geodemographic Information Systems and Analysis
119
‘Urban Intelligence’ (0.0218). These differences are reflected in the
final column of index values (again, in Table 5.1(a)). The index (I) for
any neighbourhood group is the proportion of the survey count allocated
to the group (the target proportion), relative to the proportion of the
catchment count allocated to same group (the base proportion), with the
case of both proportions being equal given a value of 100. Where n and
N are as for Equation (5.1) and K indicates the number of neighbour-
hood groups, then:
(5.2)
which is equivalent to:
(5.3)
where T% and B% are respectively the target and base percentages
for the neighbourhood group. Therefore the index value for the Rural
Isolation group is 4.52  3.85  100  117 and for Urban Intelligence it
is 3.18  5.31  100  60. A value above 100 indicates more of the sur-
vey respondents are of the neighbourhood group than would be expected
when looking at the distribution of the population within the catchment
(an index of 117 indicates 17% more), and a value below 100 indicates
less than expected (an index of 60 indicates 40% less).
The index and penetration values are generated automatically by
the GDIS. They compare the neighbourhood distribution of the survey
data (the observed distribution) against some baseline distribution (the
expected distribution). In the case of Table 5.1(a) the base is all house-
holds in postal sectors containing a survey respondent. It appears that rela-
tive to all households in the catchment, the survey has under-enumerated
the Urban Intelligence group.
It may be that that the user is less interested in how representative
the survey is of the immediate vicinity to respondents and more interested
in how representative it is of a larger geographical region such as the
whole of the West Midlands. Such a comparison is made in Table 5.1(b).
The numerator – the survey data – remains the same but the base is now
the neighbourhood distribution of all households living in postcode sec-
tors within the government region of the West Midlands.
 T%
B%  100
I  T%100
B%100  100
I  n∑K
1n
N∑K
1N  100

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
120
It now appears that the survey disproportionately oversamples
the Urban Intelligence group (by 7%). This finding does not contradict
the previous one because it is obtained using a different base. Rather, it
suggests that Urban Intelligence group are spatially concentrated into
particular localities and therefore not evenly or randomly distributed
across the West Midlands region. Given the spatial patterning of this
and other neighbourhood groups it is to be expected that changing
the analytical base will lead to non-uniform and non-random changes
to the index and penetration values, and requires the base be carefully
chosen.
Interestingly, Table 5.1(b) provides evidence of a socio-economic
divide in terms of the groups represented in the survey (not base) data
relative to the West Midlands. Reading through the neighbourhood group
names it can be inferred that, with the possible exception of the elderly, it is
the more affluent neighbourhoods that are oversampled and the least afflu-
ent that are undersampled. This result may link to concerns of a ‘digital
divide’with respect to the sorts of people data vendors are most interested in
collecting information about and the sorts of decisions that are made on the
basis of the data they sell. However, this ‘divide’is not always so apparent –
see Chapter 9, Section 9.4.1).
For Table 5.1(b) the base was changed to the to the West Midlands
government region, though we could instead have chosen local authority or
Nielsen region, among others. However, it is not only the geography of the
base that can be changed; it is also the comparative attribute data. The
survey data is by household so it has been compared with other household
distributions. Nevertheless, we could have chosen total population, total
population aged 15 or above, or total population aged 18 or above, had
these been more appropriate, comparative indicators.
For the survey data we are fortunate that a sensible base readily is
identifiable. This may not always be the case and in such circumstances
selecting the base will require careful consideration of the data available
and the information sought from it. It is entirely possible to obtain appar-
ently meaningful information describing a nonsensical relationship. Table
5.1(c) demonstrates this point by comparing the survey data with a base-
line of persons aged 15 or over who live in the Scottish National Health
Service (NHS) region. In this example both the geography and attribute of
the base are mis-specified. Yet, results are still obtained: relative to the
proportion of persons aged 15 or over within the Scottish NHS region,
there is a much higher proportion of survey-responding households within
the West Midland settlement that live in ‘Ties of Community’ postcodes.
Quite what this result usefully tells us is somewhat of a mystery!

Geodemographic Information Systems and Analysis
121
5.2.2 Profiling classed attributes by neighbourhood
An extension to the profiling methodology described above is to investi-
gate whether different types of holiday are associated with different types
of neighbourhood. The survey data have been coded with five classes of
holidaymaker: those who only holiday in the UK; those who only holiday
in Europe; those who holiday in the UK or Europe but not elsewhere;
those who holiday in the UK and Europe, and/or outside Europe; and
those who do not holiday at all. The penetration and index values can be
calculated for any particular class, where the numerator is now the subset
of households belonging to the class, while the base is all households in
the survey. The GDIS can create multiple profiles – one for each of the
classes of holidaymaker – and these will be comparable since they are
each related to the same, all-survey households base.
The profiles are shown in Table 5.2 in the form of a cross-tabulation
between the neighbourhood groups and the holiday destinations. Again, the
cell counts and statistics are automatically generated after the user has
specified the classes to compare and the cell information to include. The
index values are interpreted as saying that of the households surveyed:
holidaying in the UK only is mostly a characteristic of ‘Welfare Borderline’
neighbourhoods; holidaying in Europe only is marginally a characteristic of
the ‘Happy Families’ group; UK and Europe destinations most characterize
‘Symbols of Success’ (though only narrowly more than Happy Families);
holidaying outside Europe is a characteristic of Symbols of Success neigh-
bourhoods; and no-holiday households are concentrated most in the ‘Blue
Collar Enterprise’ and ‘Municipal Dependency’ areas.
5.2.3 Issues of interpretation when using the index values
Looking back at Table 5.2, careful inspection of the cross-tabulation
reveals the need for caution when interpreting the index values in the
ways described. Notably, the values compare only vertical differences in
the table. These address the relative differences between groups but not
the actual cases within groups.
Looking at the column percentages it is true that of the 1235
survey respondents where the household does not holiday, 215 (17.41%)
are in Blue Collar Enterprise postcodes. This compares with 11.09% of all
respondents who live in these areas, giving an index value of 17.41 
11.09  100  156.99. However, it is an ecological fallacy to assume that
because pro rata and en masse the Blue Collar postcodes have higher

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
122
Table 5.2 A cross-tabulation of neighbourhood groups and holiday destinations. The
shaded cells show that although no holiday appears to be a characteristic of Blue Collar
Enterprise neighbourhoods, in fact the UK is a more common holiday choice within
those areas
UK only
Europe UK &
UK, Europe No
Totals
Cell 
only
Europe
&/or other
holiday
contents
Symbols
314.00
134.00
382.00
490.00
78.00
1398.00
Count
of Success
22.46
9.59
27.32
35.05
5.58
100.00
Row %
8.29
10.53
15.48
16.97
6.32
12.00
Column %
69.08
87.80
129.00
141.40
52.64
100.00
Cell Index
Happy
297.00
144.00
315.00
343.00
67.00
1166.00
Count
Families
25.47
12.35
27.02
29.42
5.75
100.00
Row %
7.84
11.32
12.76
11.88
5.43
10.01
Column %
78.34
113.12
127.54
118.68
54.21
100.00
Cell Index
Suburban
597.00
233.00
521.00
654.00
189.00
2194.00
Count
Comfort
27.21
10.62
23.75
29.81
8.61
100.00
Row %
15.76
18.32
21.11
22.65
15.30
18.83
Column %
83.69
97.27
112.10
120.26
81.27
100.00
Cell Index
Ties of
941.00
312.00
520.00
545.00
295.00
2613.00
Count
Community
36.01
11.94
19.90
20.86
11.29
100.00
Row %
24.84
24.53
21.07
18.87
23.89
22.43
Column %
110.77
109.37
93.95
84.14
106.51
100.00
Cell Index
Urban
86.00
42.00
83.00
122.00
37.00
370.00
Count
Intelligence
23.24
11.35
22.43
32.97
10.00
100.00
Row %
2.27
3.30
3.36
4.22
3.00
3.18
Column %
71.49
103.97
105.90
133.02
94.34
100.00
Cell Index
Welfare
210.00
51.00
59.00
51.00
65.00
436.00
Count
Borderline
48.17
11.70
13.53
11.70
14.91
100.00
Row %
5.54
4.01
2.39
1.77
5.26
3.74
Column %
148.14
107.14
63.88
47.19
140.64
100.00
Cell Index
Municipal
264.00
66.00
83.00
82.00
97.00
592.00
Count
Dependency
44.59
11.15
14.02
13.85
16.39
100.00
Row %
6.97
5.19
3.36
2.84
7.85
5.08
Column %
137.16
102.12
66.19
55.88
154.58
100.00
Cell Index
Blue Collar
552.00
138.00
188.00
199.00
215.00
1292.00
Count
Enterprise
42.72
10.68
14.55
15.40
16.64
100.00
Row %
14.57
10.85
7.62
6.89
17.41
11.09
Column %
131.41
97.83
68.69
62.14
156.99
100.00
Cell Index
Twilight
142.00
30.00
52.00
49.00
48.00
321.00
Count
Subsistence
44.24
9.35
16.20
15.26
14.95
100.00
Row %
3.75
2.36
2.11
1.70
3.89
2.76
Column %
136.06
85.60
76.47
61.58
141.07
100.00
Cell Index

Geodemographic Information Systems and Analysis
123
concentrations of non-holidaying households relative to other neighbour-
hoods, so all or even a majority of the survey respondents living in those
postcodes must share that characteristic. They do not! Looking at the row
percentages it is found that only 16.64% of the survey respondents living
in Blue Collar neighbourhoods do not have holidays – a value that is
greatly exceeded by the 42.72% that holiday in the UK and nearly
matched by the 15.40% that holiday in the UK, Europe and/or elsewhere.
A second limitation when interpreting the index values (but not
revealed by the cross-tabulation) is the difficulty in gauging the signifi-
cance of apparent differences between neighbourhoods (although note the
z-score column in Table 3.5). The index values only compare the aggregate
differences between the neighbourhood groups and they could conceal a
complex pattern of holiday choices within the groups. In general terms, the
more diversity there is within groups, the less significant the differences
between groups are.
Admittedly, practical difficulties would emerge were a measure of
diversity to be calculated, for example to look at differences between unit
postcodes within a group. Given the survey has an overall penetration rate
of 3.64% and knowing there is an average of about 15 households per post-
code then this suggests an average of about one survey record per post-
code. Therefore, for the average postcode the number of the population
that is characterized by any particular attribute is constrained to be either
zero or one (0 or 100%). Consequently, small-number effects will lead to
extremely unreliable postcode-level estimates. Yet, without a measure such
as the standard deviation between postcodes (see Chapter 6, Section 6.3.1
for an explanation of standard deviation), the interpretation of the index
values rests on the ability of the clustering methodology accurately to
define neighbourhood groups that place like population with like.
Grey
233.00
74.00
149.00
200.00
86.00
742.00
Count
Perspectives
31.40
9.97
20.08
26.95
11.59
100.00
Row %
6.15
5.82
6.04
6.93
6.96
6.37
Column %
96.58
91.35
94.80
108.74
109.34
100.00
Cell Index
Rural
152.00
48.00
116.00
153.00
58.00
527.00
Count
Isolation
28.84
9.11
22.01
29.03
11.01
100.00
Row %
4.01
3.77
4.70
5.30
4.70
4.52
Column %
88.71
83.43
103.91
117.12
103.83
100.00
Cell Index
Totals
3788.00
1272.00
2468.00
2888.00
1235.00
11651.00
Count
32.51
10.92
21.18
24.79
10.60
100.00
Row %
100.00
100.00
100.00
100.00
100.00
100.00
Column %
100.00
100.00
100.00
100.00
100.00
100.00
Cell Index

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
124
A third problem with the index values is their tendency to give
disproportionate attention to the relative overabundance of a particular
characteristic at the expense of less than expected values. Greater than
expectation is usually indexed as above 100 and tends to ‘draw the eye’.
Although in itself an apparently minor matter, it does give rise to a visual-
ization problem when indices are plotted on a histogram, because all
below-average values are constrained to fall in the finite range 0 to 100,
whereas all above-average values are in the range 100 to infinity. As we
shall show later in this chapter, if the index axis of the histogram has an
equal length interval between 0 to 100, 100 to 200, 200 to 300 and
so forth, then the histogram will almost certainly appear dominated by
above-average values.
The fact that an above-average value can range to infinity also
means that care should be taken to ensure sample sizes are sufficiently
large to warrant the interpretation of the index values. Deceptively high
index values can be obtained, notably when the sample size is small and
when the expected fraction of the attribute count to be found in any
neighbourhood group is low. For instance, imagine a survey where only
10 from a total of 1000 respondents were found to be of a particular
neighbourhood group and where a subset of 50 of the survey respondents
(from all neighbourhoods) was found to display a certain consumer
attribute. If ‘by chance’ a single member of that subset is located in the
one neighbourhood then an index value of (1/50  10/1000  100) 
200 is obtained. If the subset were only 25 in size then the index value
becomes 400. And if the subset were 25 but there were initially 5000
respondents then the value is 2000 – very high for what in absolute terms
is a one-off occurrence and providing a second example of small-number
effects.
5.2.4 Volume profiles
A second ecological fallacy in addition to that discussed in the preceding
subsection would be to assume that the results of the cross-tabulations
shown in Table 5.2 are necessarily representative of a larger geography
such as the West Midlands as a whole. Indeed, there is good reason to
suspect they are not – we have already detected an economic divide with
regards to the groups that have been over- or undersampled relative to the
region’s neighbourhood composition (Table 5.1(b)). One way to correct
for this is to give each household responding to the survey a weight cal-
culated as 100 divided by the ‘survey vs. West Midlands (households)’

Geodemographic Information Systems and Analysis
125
index value of the neighbourhood group to which the household belongs.
The weights mean that households resident in neighbourhoods with an
index value less than 100 in Table 5.1(b) are given higher weight (1)
because as a group they have been undersampled relative to the West
Midlands, whereas households in neighbourhoods with an index value
greater than 100 are given lower weight (1) because relatively they
have been oversampled.
For any of the classes of holiday destination, the weighted pene-
tration rate per neighbourhood, relative to the West Midlands, may be
calculated as the weighted count of households allocated to the group
and travelling to the particular destination, divided by the total (non-
weighted) count of all households in the West Midlands assigned to the
group. If wi is the weight assigned to the ith household in a group, nk is
the number of households in the kth of K groups, Nk is the regional count
of households in the same group and zi acts as a filter, taking a value of
one if the household does go to the particular holiday destination and
zero otherwise, then:
(5.4)
Similarly, the index value is the weighted count of survey respond-
ents holidaying at a particular destination and living in neighbourhood type
k, divided by all survey respondents (from all neighbourhoods) who travel
to the same destination and expressed relative to the fraction of all West
Midland households who reside in the same neighbourhood group, k:
(5.5)
As previously, these calculations are not ‘hand cranked’ but auto-
matically undertaken at the user’s request. The volume calculations are
analogous to the simpler penetration and index values shown previously
(Equations (5.1) and (5.2)) with one exception: households within a group
are no longer treated equally but in accordance to the weight or ‘volume’
data attached to them.
As it happens, in our example the weight attached to each
household within a group is the same because the weights were gener-
ated at the neighbourhood, not household level. As a consequence
Ik 
zi  
nk
i1
wi
K
1zi  
nk
i1
wi
Nk
K
1Nk
 100    zi  {0,1}
Pk 
zi  
nk
i1
wi
Nk
    zi  {0,1}

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
126
Equations (5.4) and (5.5) could be simplified. However, it is often the
case that genuine household-level differences will be specified. For
example, the analyst may have information about the amount spent by
each household per holiday and want to use this to calculate the average
spend on each class of holiday for each neighbourhood group. In this
example, the weight (a function of household spend) really would vary
by household. The type of analysis is often known as volume profiling.
Table 5.3 demonstrates the effects of the weights on the neigh-
bourhood profiles for two of the holiday classes: Europe and/or other; and
no holiday taken. They particularly act to emphasize that surveyed house-
holds living in the Welfare Borderline and Municipal Dependency post-
codes of the West Midlands are more likely than expected not to holiday.
Without weighting, the opposite appears true. Table 5.4 takes the analysis
a stage further and considers the distribution of lone-parent households
who do not holiday, relative to the West Midlands household distribution
by neighbourhood groups. Non-holidaying lone parents are also found to
be especially concentrated in the Municipal Dependency and Welfare
Borderline postcodes. Note, however, that the number of survey respond-
ents per subset is low.
5.2.5 Comparing neighbourhood rankings
We know, from Table 5.4, that the highest than expected concentration of
non-holidaying, lone parents is within the Municipal Dependency neigh-
bourhoods, with a volume index of 222. This group can therefore be
ranked as 1. The next highest volume index is 217 for the Welfare
Borderline group, which is ranked 2 . . . and so on until the Happy
Families group which has the lowest volume index and is ranked 11.
Table 5.5 compares the ranked distribution by neighbourhood
group of the non-holidaying, lone-parent volume indices with two other
sets of ranked indices derived from the survey data: the first indicates the
neighbourhood concentrations of high-income households (gross family
income estimated as greater than £50,000 per annum); the second of
lower income households (£10,000 p.a.). The highest ranked neighbour-
hood group in terms of high household income is Symbols of Success,
while the lowest ranked are the Municipal Dependency and Welfare
Borderline groups. The Welfare Borderline and Municipal Dependency
groups are highest ranked with regards their relative concentrations of
lower income households; Happy Families neighbourhoods are lowest
ranked for such households.

Table 5.3 Volume profiles, weighting survey respondents by the over- or under-enumeration of their neighbourhood groups, relative to the West
Midlands. The shaded cells show the effect of weighting is to raise the proportion of non-holidaying respondents in the Welfare Borderline and
Municipal Dependency groups from below- to above-average expectation
UK, Europe
Count
Target %
Weighted
Volume %
West Midlands
Base %
Penetration
Volume
Index
Volume
&/or other
count
(households)
Penetration
Index
(volume)
A Symbols of
490
16.97
312
11.55
167972
7.66
0.0029
0.0019
222
151
Success
B Happy Families
343
11.88
318
11.75
203718
9.29
0.0017
0.0016
128
127
C Suburban
654
22.65
559
20.68
351320
16.02
0.0019
0.0016
141
129
Comfort
D Ties of
545
18.87
514
19.02
466163
21.26
0.0012
0.0011
89
90
Community
E Urban
122
4.22
114
4.22
65415
2.98
0.0019
0.0017
142
141
Intelligence
F Welfare
51
1.77
75
2.78
120065
5.47
0.0004
0.0006
32
51
Borderline
G Municipal
82
2.84
152
5.62
204806
9.34
0.0004
0.0007
30
60
Dependency
H Blue Collar
199
6.89
249
9.20
303166
13.82
0.0007
0.0008
50
67
Enterprise
I Twilight
49
1.70
63
2.32
77186
3.52
0.0006
0.0008
48
66
Subsistence
J Grey Perspectives 
200
6.93
175
6.49
122256
5.57
0.0016
0.0014
124
116
K Rural Isolation
153
5.30
172
6.36
111105
5.07
0.0014
0.0015
105
126
Totals
2888
100.00
2703
100.00
2193172
100.00
0.0013
0.0012
100
100

Table 5.3 (Continued)
No holiday
Count
Target %
Weighted
Volume %
West Midlands
Base %
Penetration
Volume
Index
Volume
count
(households)
Penetration
Index
(volume)
A Symbols of
78
6.32
50
3.73
167972
7.66
0.0005
0.0003
82
49
Success
B Happy Families
67
5.43
62
4.66
203718
9.29
0.0003
0.0003
58
50
C Suburban
189
15.30
162
12.13
351320
16.02
0.0005
0.0005
96
76
Comfort
D Ties of
295
23.89
278
20.89
466163
21.26
0.0006
0.0006
112
98
Community
E Urban
37
3.00
35
2.60
65415
2.98
0.0006
0.0005
100
87
Intelligence
F Welfare
65
5.26
96
7.17
120065
5.47
0.0005
0.0008
96
131
Borderline
G Municipal
97
7.85
180
13.48
204806
9.34
0.0005
0.0009
84
144
Dependency
H Blue Collar
215
17.41
269
20.17
303166
13.82
0.0007
0.0009
126
146
Enterprise
I Twilight
48
3.89
62
4.62
77186
3.52
0.0006
0.0008
110
131
Subsistence
J Grey Perspectives
86
6.96
75
5.66
122256
5.57
0.0007
0.0006
125
102
K Rural Isolation
58
4.70
65
4.89
111105
5.07
0.0005
0.0006
93
97
Totals
1235
100.00
1332
100.00
2193172
100.00
0.0006
0.0006
100
100

Table 5.4 The distribution by neighbourhood group of lone-parent households who do not holiday, relative to the West Midlands household
distribution
Lone parent,
Count
Target %
Weighted 
Volume %
West Midlands 
Base %
Penetration
Volume
Index
Volume
no holiday
count 
(households)
Penetration
Index
(volume)
A Symbols 
8
5.67
5
3.16
167972
7.66
0.0000
0.0000
74
41
of Success
B Happy Families 
6
4.26
6
3.45
203718
9.29
0.0000
0.0000
46
37
C Suburban 
14
9.93
12
7.43
351320
16.02
0.0000
0.0000
62
46
Comfort
D Ties of 
35
24.82
33
20.50
466163
21.26
0.0001
0.0001
117
96
Community
E Urban 
10
7.09
9
5.80
65415
2.98
0.0002
0.0001
238
194
Intelligence
F Welfare 
13
9.22
19
11.87
120065
5.47
0.0001
0.0002
168
217
Borderline
G Municipal 
18
12.77
33
20.69
204806
9.34
0.0001
0.0002
137
222
Dependency
H Blue Collar 
22
15.60
28
17.07
303166
13.82
0.0001
0.0001
113
123
Enterprise
I Twilight 
5
3.55
6
3.98
77186
3.52
0.0001
0.0001
101
113
Subsistence
J Grey Perspectives
6
4.26
5
3.27
122256
5.57
0.0000
0.0000
76
59
K Rural Isolation
4
2.84
4
2.79
111105
5.07
0.0000
0.0000
56
55
Totals
141
100.00
161
100.00
2193172
100.00
0.0001
0.0001
100
100

Table 5.5 Derivation of Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (rS) for ‘Lone parent, no holiday’ vs. ‘Household income  £50 k’ and ‘Lone parent, no
holiday’ vs. ‘Household income  £10 k’ by neighbourhood group
Neighbourhood
Lone parent,
Household income  £50 k
Household income  £10 k
group
no holiday
Volume Rank 1
Volume index
Rank 2
D2 
Volume index
Rank 3
D2 
index
(rank 1  rank 2)2
(rank 1  rank 3)2
A Symbols of
41
10
385
1
81
45
10
0
Success
B Happy Families
37
11
203
3
64
36
11
0
C Suburban
46
9
82
4
25
67
8
1
Comfort
D Ties of
96
6
35
8
4
93
6
0
Community
E Urban
194
3
82
4
1
74
7
16
Intelligence
F Welfare
217
2
18
10
64
244
1
1
Borderline
G Municipal
222
1
7
11
100
213
2
1
Dependency
H Blue Collar
123
4
33
9
25
162
3
1
Enterprise
I Twilight
113
5
48
7
4
155
4
1
Subsistence
J Grey Perspectives
59
7
67
6
1
97
5
4
K Rural Isolation
55
8
335
2
36
55
9
1
(A)
6  d2
2430
(A)
6  d2
156
(B)
n(n2  1)
1320
(B)
n(n2  1)
1320
Vs. lone parent
rS  1  A/B
0.84
Vs. lone parent
rS  1  A/B
0.88

Geodemographic Information Systems and Analysis
131
The bottom row of Table 5.5 quantifies the level of association
between paired sets of ranked values. In the leftmost case the level of asso-
ciation between the neighbourhood rankings of non-holidaying, lone par-
ents and high-income households is calculated; for the right-hand case it
is the level of association between non-holidaying, lone parents and lower
income households. The measure of association used is Spearman’s rank
correlation coefficient, the value of which is denoted as rS.
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient is a ‘distribution free’ or
non-parametric statistical test which does not make certain assumptions
about the background population from which the samples are drawn
(Hammond and McCullagh, 1978). It does not assume, as a number of
‘classical’ or parametric tests would, that the volume indices are normally
distributed around the mean average, an assumption known to be inappro-
priate for two reasons: first, because the range of possible values above
and below the mean of 100 is not equal; second, because the indices have
been sorted onto a ranked (or ordinal scale) which does not preserve the
interval between each ranked value (looking at the lone-parent ranking in
Table 5.5, ranks 1 and 2 have a ranked difference of 1 but an index differ-
ence of 217  222  5; ranks 2 and 3 also have a ranked difference of
1 but an index difference of 194  217  23).
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (rS) is calculated as:
(5.6)
where n is the number of ranks, equal to 11 in Table 5.5, and d2 is the
sum of the squared difference between the pairs of ranks for each of the n
ranked observations. The coefficient, rS can take a maximum value of 1
for a perfectly positive association, obtained when the two sets of ranks
are identical, and a minimum of 1 for a perfectly negative association,
obtained when the sets would be identical if one were to be ranked in
reverse of its present order. A value of zero implies no association.
Table 5.5 shows how a coefficient value of 0.84 is derived for the
neighbourhood rankings of non-holidaying, lone parents versus high-
income households, and of 0.88, for non-holidaying, lone parents versus
lower income households. These values mean that lower than expected
concentrations of high-income households tend to be found in areas with
higher than expected concentrations of the lone parents (the concentrations
move in different directions and are negatively related); and that higher
than expected concentrations of lower income households tend to be found
in areas with higher than expected concentrations of the lone parents
rS  1
6∑d2
n(n2  1)

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
132
(the concentrations move in the same direction and are positively related).
The significance of the results can be evaluated from the knowledge that
has a t-distribution with n  1 degrees of freedom (Rogerson,
2001). The observed values of t are therefore 
and
. From these and using standard statistical tables it is
found that the correlation 0.84 has about 2.5% likelihood of being due to
chance; the correlation 0.88 has about 1% likelihood.
It is important not to draw unsubstantiated conclusions from the
Spearman’s correlations. While it may be said that higher than expected
levels of non-holidaying, lone-parent households tend to be found in the
same neighbourhood groups as lower income households, it should not be
stated that therefore lone parents have lower incomes. The correlation
coefficient only summarizes a relationship at the neighbourhood scale
while to say ‘lone parents households are lower income households’ is to
express a relationship at a household scale. To presume that a relationship
found at one scale holds true at another is to commit the ecological fallacy
(Martin and Longley, 1995). Even if it is known that one-half (0.5) of a
neighbourhood’s population are lone-parent households and also that one-
half of the population are lower income households, there is no guarantee
that it is the same half in both cases. It is only when the average of the two
proportions exceeds 0.75 that it is possible to be certain that the majority
of households are indeed both lone parents and of lower incomes.
Fortunately, for our study we can return to the survey data and
find the proportion of non-holidaying, lone-parent households that are
also classed as lower income households. The answer is 0.65 (65%).
Often, however, socio-economic data are only available having been pre-
aggregated into neighbourhood units and so the cross-tabulation at the
household level that we used to find the answer will not be possible to do.
A frustration with census and other aggregated datasets is that while many
variables are cross-tabulated, it always seems to be the ones that are not
that would be of most interest to us!
There is a final problem with the Spearman’s rank methodology:
what happens where the ranks are tied? Usually the average is calculated
so, for example, the observations with a value of 4 in the set {1, 2, 3, 4, 4,
6, 7, 7, 7, 10} are ranked fourth and fifth and given the average rank of
4.5. Similarly, the observations with a value of 7 are ranked seventh, eight
and ninth and given an average of 8. Unfortunately, Equation (5.6) is not
really appropriate when there are tied ranks. The correct Spearman coeffi-
cient is obtained by calculating the Pearson’s correlation, using the ranks
as observations (Rogerson, 2001). Alternatively, Kendall’s correlation
coefficient (	), which is better for very small samples, could be calculated
0.88 11  1  2.78
0.84 11  1  2.32
rS n  1

Geodemographic Information Systems and Analysis
133
with a correction factor if necessary (see Hammond and McCullagh,
1978, pp. 228–33).
5.2.6 Catchment profiling
There is a final type of neighbourhood profiling that particularly is rele-
vant to branch and network planning – catchment profiling. An example
of its use was given in Chapter 1, where it helped inform the introduction
of differential meal pricing within a restaurant chain. For this the neigh-
bourhood profile of the population located within a critical threshold
distance of each restaurant was calculated and the restaurant allocated to a
price band according to the prevailing demographic and socio-economic
characteristics of the locality. Restaurants located within or among neigh-
bourhoods where the residents were prepared to pay more for a meal (rela-
tive to other neighbourhood groups) were assigned to the more expensive
bands.
There are three principal ways of devising a catchment around
a particular store or outlet, the location of that store or outlet itself
being defined as either a point (x, y) coordinate or by a polygon (or in
principle by a line which makes more sense for calculating the flood
zone of a river, for example). The first is to define the catchment as all
postal or other administrative zones containing a certain number of
people who are known to visit the store. This approach is analogous to
the way the survey catchment was defined for Table 5.1(a), above.
Defined in this manner it is possible that the catchment will not include
the zone of the store itself, which is sensible if the outlet is found in a
location such as an out-of-town retail park. Specifying a minimum
number of customers per zone that must be met before the zone is con-
sidered a part of the catchment is useful, for example, to exclude chance
visitors who happened to pass through the area but would not usually
shop at the store.
The second way is to include within the catchment all zones
within a threshold distance, d, from the outlet. This is equivalent to pro-
ducing a circular buffer around the outlet with the distance from it to the
edge of the catchment being of length d in all directions. The main prob-
lems with this approach are threefold. First, the specified length of d is
usually arbitrary. Secondly, it leads to a sudden and also arbitrary ‘cross-
ing of the line’ where the characteristics of populations at the edge but
within the circle are included in the catchment’s profile but those just out-
side the circle are not. This is the same problem as with choropleth maps

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
134
that imply all change in geodemographic condition occurs only at the
borders between zones and arises because the catchment is represented as
a discrete vector object with apparently very definite boundaries. Thirdly,
profiling the catchment assumes the outlet is equally accessible to all
neighbourhoods within it, regardless of any geographical variations in the
transport infrastructure to be found there.
To address the accessibility issue, in terms of road access at
least, a catchment can be modelled in terms of the maximum permitted
drive time to the store. Roads are encoded as a network of generalized
line segments within the GDIS database and each class of road is
assigned a typical speed for a vehicle travelling along it. The time, t,
taken to travel from any particular node to the outlet may then be calcu-
lated as:
(5.7)
where ls is the length of line segment s, vs is the speed of travel along it
and n is the number of segments between the node and the outlet. The
time taken depends on the assumed speed achieved along a section of road
which, in turn, would vary during the day (and also by season though that
is less often considered). The default speeds for Micromarketer are shown
in Table 5.6. These settings can be modified by the analyst.
The three types of catchment are summarized by Figure 5.2.
There a fourth type of catchment is also introduced. Superficially this is
the same as the circular method. However, in calculating the neighbour-
hood profile of the catchment, increased weight is given to zones that
t  
n
s1
ls vs
Table 5.6 Default travel speeds along UK roads in Experian’s Micromarketer software
Non-peak 
Peak rush
Weekday
Weekend 
rush hour
hour
off-peak
& night
(kph)
(mph)
(kph)
(mph)
(kph)
(mph)
(kph)
(mph)
Motorway
105
65
89
55
113
70
113
70
Primary dual
77
48
56
35
92
57
97
60
Primary single
45
28
34
21
56
35
64
40
A road dual
58
36
42
26
71
44
80
50
A road single
40
25
31
19
48
30
56
35
B road dual
34
21
26
16
42
26
48
30
B road single
29
18
21
13
35
22
40
25
Unclassified dual
23
14
18
11
27
17
32
20
Unclassified single
23
14
18
11
27
17
32
20

Geodemographic Information Systems and Analysis
135
are nearest to the store, and lower weight to those further away but still
within the circle. This amounts to a catchment that tapers away with
increasing distance from the store and therefore does not have the sharp
‘is in the catchment’/‘is not in the catchment’ break that the first circular
method has. In GIS terminology, the catchment is now modelled as a
field instead of an object. This inverse distance weighting approach (as
the distance from the outlet increases so the influence of the zone
decreases) is often employed in types of ‘hot-spot’ analysis as we shall
show in Chapter 9.
Figures 5.3 and 5.4 show the neighbourhood profiles of catch-
ments drawn around hypothetical store locations within the West
Midlands study region. For Figure 5.3 a three-mile catchment has been
defined around two stores. In Figure 5.4 the catchment around one of
those stores has been defined twice: first by road travel time at weekday
peak; and second, for comparison, by weekend off-peak times. Together
Figures 5.3 and 5.4 stress that the profiles of the stores depend on how
their catchments are defined since the socio-economic characteristics of a
store’s customer base may vary at different times of the day.
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)
Figure 5.2 Four types of catchment area defined around a store. (a) The catchment is
defined by zones containing at least two customers. (b) The catchment is defined by a
circular buffer drawn around the store. (c) The catchment is defined by travel time by
road to the store. (d) The catchment profile gives increased importance to zones nearest
the store

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
136
0
100
200
300
400
500
K Rural Isolation
J Grey Perspectives
I Twilight Subsistence
H Blue Collar Enterprise
G Municipal Dependency
F Welfare Borderline
E Urban Intelligence
D Ties of Community
C Suburban Comfort
B Happy Families
A Symbols of Success
Index value
Store A
Store B
0
100
200
300
400
500
K Rural Isolation
J Grey Perspectives
I Twilight Subsistence
H Blue Collar Enterprise
G Municipal Dependency
F Welfare Borderline
E Urban Intelligence
D Ties of Community
C Suburban Comfort
B Happy Families
A Symbols of Success
Index value
Off peak
Peak time
Figure 5.3 Neighbourhood profiles of the population located within three-mile catch-
ments around two stores in the West Midlands
Figure 5.4 Neighbourhood profile of the population within 15 minutes of store A at
weekday peak travel time and weekend off-peak time

Geodemographic Information Systems and Analysis
137
5.3 Data visualization and output
Two of the three most common types of data summary used in a GIS have
already been shown in this chapter – tabulations and graphs, usually
histograms (bar charts). It has also been suggested that because below-
average index values are constrained to the range 0 to 99, whereas
above-average index values lie in the range 101 to infinity, then plotting
index values on an equal interval histogram will lead to the below-average
values being squashed in a small portion of the graph. This can be seen in
Figure 5.4, where values less than 100 are plotted into one-fifth of the area
of the graph, while values above 100 occupy four-fifths. Consequently the
eye tends to focus upon the above-average differences between neigh-
bourhoods.
A partial solution to this problem is to stretch the space on the
graph given to values below 100 by plotting the indices on a logarithmic
scale. This is shown in Figure 5.5, where the distances along the index axis
are no longer of an equal interval; instead, the interval increases exponen-
tially. Although a useful way of exploring below-average differences
1
10
100
1000
K Rural Isolation
J Grey Perspectives
I Twilight Subsistence
H Blue Collar Enterprise
G Municipal Dependency
F Welfare Borderline
E Urban Intelligence
D Ties of Community
C Suburban Comfort
B Happy Families
A Symbols of Success
Index value
Off peak
Peak time
Figure 5.5 Neighbourhood profile of the population within 15 minutes of store A at week-
day peak travel time and weekend off-peak time, index values plotted on a logarithmic scale

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
138
between neighbourhoods the logarithmic scale still does not give equal
space to values above and below the 100 line but, in effect, reverses the
previous situation by now squashing above-average values into a small part
of the graph.
An alternative to Figure 5.5 is to plot the change in the neighbour-
hood profile of store A from weekday peak travel time to weekend off-peak
time, as in Figure 5.6. This makes clear that the neighbourhood profile of
store A’s catchment is less made up of Symbols of Success neighbourhoods
and more comprised by Happy Families at weekend, off-peak times rela-
tive to weekday peak times. Understanding that it is a relative change is
important: the Symbols of Success neighbourhoods that were in the week-
day catchment remain in the weekend catchment and they still have a
higher than expected presence compared to the Happy Families group.
What has changed is that the number of zones in the catchment rises from
weekday to weekends (because traffic moves faster) and the Symbols of
Success neighbourhoods constitute a lower proportion of the total.
A third type of output, possibly the one most associated with geo-
graphical information, is cartographic. Plate 3 maps the Mosaic UK
groups of postcodes within a 45-minute drive time of Bluewater Shopping
Centre, Kent – one of the largest shopping centres in the UK. The drive
times are calculated at peak traffic times and off-peak, at weekends. The
use of a ‘point map’ helps to retain a sense of the settlement patterns
within the catchment zones and therefore a general ability to distinguish
–200
–100
0
100
200
K Rural Isolation
J Grey Perspectives
I Twilight Subsistence
H Blue Collar Enterprise
G Municipal Dependency
F Welfare Borderline
E Urban Intelligence
D Ties of Community
C Suburban Comfort
B Happy Families
A Symbols of Success
Off-peak travel time index – peak time index
Figure 5.6 Change in the neighbourhood profile of store A from weekday peak travel
time to weekend off-peak time

Geodemographic Information Systems and Analysis
139
highly populated areas from low or non-populated ones (compare Plate 3
with the census mapping of Figure 4.7).
Visualization is an important component of presenting, exploring,
revealing and explaining patterns of geographic information in a GIS
(Unwin and Hearnshaw, 1994) and, in the same way, geodemographic clas-
sifications and systems often incorporate extensive visualization tools such
as multimedia guides that help the user to interpret the typologies and clus-
ter labelling. Such guides can include libraries of images, text descriptions,
photographs, maps, customer profiles and other supporting material. Figure
5.7 is a collage helping to explain the characteristics of a neighbourhood
type ‘New Urban Colonists’. Figure 5.8 is a bar chart showing the extent to
which people in different types of neighbourhood are more or less likely
than average to select ‘prices’as the reason why they chose the grocery shop
that they do. Finally, Figure 5.9 shows what is known as a ‘tree’and colours
the 61 UK Mosaic types according to the proportion of survey respondents
saying that they shop where they do on the basis of price. Around the border
of the tree are located both demographic and attitudinal characteristics com-
monly associated with clusters in that area of the tree.
Figure 5.7 Screenshot from a geodemographic multimedia guide displaying a collage that
helps to explain the characteristics of a neighbourhood type. Source: Reproduced by
permission of Experian UK

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
140
Figure 5.8 Bar chart showing the extent to which people in different types of neighbour-
hood are more or less likely to select ‘prices’ as the reason why they chose their grocery
shop. Source: Reproduced by permission of Experian UK
Figure 5.9 A tree visualization, colouring neighbourhood types according to the propor-
tion of survey respondents saying that they shop where they do on the basis of price.
Source: Reproduced by permission of Experian UK

Geodemographic Information Systems and Analysis
141
Case study: Different neighbourhoods, different
policing styles
Based on research undertaken by Tom Williamson, of the Institute of Criminal
Justice Studies at the University of Portsmouth and by Richard Webber, in
collaboration with Devon & Cornwall Constabulary. Reproduced with their
permission.
The British Crime Survey currently is the leading national source of infor-
mation on crime and victimization. Until recently the survey was under-
taken on a biennial basis and recorded the response of some 22,000
residents to a wide range of questions ranging from: their attitudes
towards the neighbourhood, the police and the criminal justice system;
their experience of crime; and the response of the police to the crime.
Although the survey has been criticized for possible under-
recording of repeat victimization there is no inherent reason why it should
not be a reliable source of information on the relative level of victimization
between different types of neighbourhood. It is for this reason that the col-
laborators obtained the approval of the Home Office to code year 2000
respondents according to a geodemographic classification of the postcodes
in which they live – specifically, the Mosaic classification. The aim was to
identify the types of neighbourhood in which respondents are most likely,
for example, to have experienced theft from a car, to know the identity of
an offender or to cite noisy neighbours as a serious social problem in their
neighbourhood.
When the British Crime Survey results are analysed by type of
neighbourhood it is clear that there is a very wide disparity between types
of neighbourhood in terms of not just the overall level of crime but also
the mix of crime. Neighbourhoods characterized by ‘Symbols of Success’
and ‘Suburban Comfort’ are generally likely to experience low levels of
crime. Residents in these areas usually live at some distance from the
types of neighbourhoods in which offenders are concentrated and benefit
from vigilant neighbours and effective security. These are areas in which
people tend to support the police and to help them identify offenders.
Neighbourhoods characterized by ‘Ties of Community’ and ‘Blue
Collar Enterprise’ are likely to have levels of crime similar to the national
average. In these areas incidents often result from drunkenness and domes-
tic disputes. On council estates, whether low or high rise, respondents are
most likely to say that they do not like their neighbourhood. These are areas
where petty crime and vandalism, abandoned cars and drug addiction are
cited as serious problems. Theft and burglary from dwellings are relatively

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
142
more serious in these neighbourhoods than thefts from cars. Many people in
these neighbourhoods know their attackers by sight but respondents say
they are less likely to report crimes to the police and often do not want to get
involved as witnesses.
Residents in the neighbourhood types ‘South Asian Industry’ and
‘Settled Minorities’ are the most likely to say that they suffer racial abuse
and physical attacks. However, in other predominantly white areas of
older terraced housing, such as ‘Industrial Grit’, it is evident that people
feel they benefit from helpful neighbours and feel that the community is
more effective in deterring criminal elements than the police.
In areas of ‘Urban Intelligence’, respondents complain that their
neighbours are not helpful, that they (the respondents) suffer snatches of
valuables in the street and that they experience break-ins to their homes.
These events are perhaps due to the inner city locations of these neigh-
bourhoods.
In areas of ‘Grey Perspectives’, residents like the neighbourhood
where they live and look out for each other. These areas suffer low levels of
crime, largely because they are distant from locations where offenders are
most likely to live. Respondents to the survey who live in areas of ‘Rural
Isolation’, if they do experience crime, are most likely to experience it in car
parks or when visiting entertainment centres in cities. They feel particularly
safe in their neighbourhoods, are strong supporters of the police and on aver-
age suffer very low levels of victimization. They are most likely to believe
that crime is the result of poverty rather than lack of parental discipline.
As well as identifying different experiences of and attitudes to
crime, neighbourhood classifications can be used to target certain types of
policing within a police authority. If, for example, we want to map in
Exeter the extent to which noisy neighbours is likely to be a serious prob-
lem in different communities, then the first step is to identify the neigh-
bourhood type of each of the individual postcodes making up the town.
The next stage is to look up for each postcode the score of its classification
on the profile of ‘noisy neighbours’ appended to the British Crime Survey.
If, for example, a postcode is classified as ‘Town Gown Transition’ and if
the national index for Town Gown Transition on noisy neighbourhoods is
181, then it can be assumed that the postcode is of a sort which is more
likely than average to suffer from this source of annoyance (given a value
of 100 as the average, then 181 is 1.81 times greater than average). If in
a local community of 20 postcodes, all 20 are of a neighbourhood type
that nationally have noisy neighbours values of, for instance, over 150
(1.5 times average) then it is likely that noise will be a particular problem
in the community, even if not necessarily in each and every postcode.

Geodemographic Information Systems and Analysis
143
5.4 Conclusion
In this chapter we have provided an overview of the sorts of data input,
analysis and output functions that we would expect to be present in what
we have described, after Goss (1995), as a geodemographic information
system (GDIS). Throughout, we have contrasted our general conception of
a GDIS against wider notions of geographical information systems (GIS)
and what they are used for. Recalling that GIS can be described as software
used to capture, store, transform, analyse and display geographical data,
then GDIS similarly could be described but as applying to geodemo-
graphic data.
Geodemographic datasets are understood as containing informa-
tion about people and the places those people live in but with the data usu-
ally only available aggregated into (postal or census) zones. Accordingly,
it is not actually individual people or households that are analysed and
compared in GDIS but groups of populations, sorted by neighbourhood
type. Often what is conducted is a method of interpolation whereby the
characteristics of non-sampled persons are inferred from the fact they
reside in the same type of neighbourhood as those who were sampled.
Such inferences always are susceptible to the ecological fallacy but will
be most successful if the underlying neighbourhood classification has
successfully grouped zones of like with like and if there is clear evidence
that different types of population attribute are associated with different
sorts of neighbourhood.
Although geodemographic information rightly can be regarded
as a subset of geographical information, it does not follow, in our opin-
ion, that GDIS should be regarded as just a type of GIS. The reason for
this is a desire to emphasize the different types and needs of users.
These differences are reflected by the different sorts of data libraries
and analytical ‘wizards’ incorporated within GIS and GDIS. Within the
latter there are particular foci on linking datasets to commonly used
and understood ‘building block’ geographies, and on making relative and
neighbourhood-based comparisons between some source of geodemo-
graphic information and some other baseline, geodemographic dataset.
Nevertheless, we recognize that the distinction is not always so clearly
cut, particularly when geodemographic software are built within pre-
existing GIS architecture. Longley et al.’s (1999, p. 1) generic descrip-
tion of GIS as a ‘term denoting the use of computers to create and depict
digital representations of the Earth’s surface’ could encompass GDIS,
although we give more emphasis to representing the socio-economic

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
144
attributes of populated places than to the physical properties of land-
scape.
A final comparison of GIS and GDIS is offered by Table 5.7. In
summary we may characterize GDIS as offering bounded flexibility, rela-
tive to GIS. By focusing on the geodemographic subset of all geograph-
ical data types available, GDIS offer specific flexibility to handle and
relate geodemographic information in ways the analyst may find harder to
achieve in conventional GIS.
Summary
●Geodemographic information systems (GDIS) are software used
to capture, store, transform, analyse and display geodemographic
data.
Table 5.7 Summary comparison of geographic and geodemographic information systems
GIS
GDIS
Primary data types
Raster, vector
Vector
Primary data
RS, surveying, GPS, scanning,
Public surveys and census,
sources
digitization, photogrammetry,
commercial marketing
public surveys and census, data
information, data
warehouses
warehouses, client lists
Typical
Agriculture, conservation,
Retail, marketing and
applications
environmental assessment and
service management
management, emergency manage-
ment, land-cover analysis, land-use
monitoring, landscape conservation,
military, public-service delivery,
utility, telecommunication and
transportation management
Typical types of
Data overlay, geoprocessing, image
Neighbourhood profiles
analysis
analysis, feature extraction, attribute
and comparisons,
query, ‘hot-spot’ analysis,
cross-tabulations, frequency
geostatistics, 3D modelling
analysis, ranked
correlations, catchment
analysis
Scales of analysis
Flexible
Hierarchical, defined by the
‘building block’ geography
Primary types of
Tabular, charts, maps
Tabular, charts, maps
output

Geodemographic Information Systems and Analysis
145
●Geodemographic data offer information about people and the
places where they live but are usually aggregated into postal
or census zones that define a ‘building block’ geography for
analysis.
●A GDIS will be built around a pre-given classification of the neigh-
bourhood zones and may include other local market, consumer and
demographic data.
●Linking proprietary data to the neighbourhood classification may
first require a period of ‘cleaning’ the data, for example removing
duplicate records and cross-referencing the accuracy of the infor-
mation against other sources of data.
●Data analysis in a GDIS – including neighbourhood profiling and
catchment analysis – is relational; to also be meaningful requires
that sensible relationships be specified.
●Interpretation issues can arise when comparing and relating
apparent differences between neighbourhoods so it is important
not to draw conclusions that are not substantiated by the data.
●The risk of ecological fallacy (in various guises) needs especially
to be considered.
Further Reading
●
Johnson, M. (1997, originally 1989) The application of geodemographics
to retailing: meeting the needs of the catchment, Journal of The Market
Research Society, 39, 203–24.
●
Openshaw, S. and Blake, M. (1995) Geodemographic segmentation sys-
tems for screening health data, Journal of Epidemiology and Community
Health (supplement), 49, 34–8.
●
Tickle, M., Brown, P., Blinkhorn, A. and Jenner, T. (2000) Comparing
the ability of different area measures of socio-economic status to seg-
ment a population according to caries prevalence, Community Dental
Health, 17, 138–44.


147
6
How Geodemographic
Classifications are Built
Learning Objectives
In this chapter we will:
●
Look at the techniques used by one company, Experian, to build
geodemographic classifications.
●
Review the sources of data used, how they are prepared for
classification, the role of manual intervention in the clustering
process, the formation of a cluster hierarchy and the production
of supporting material to describe, represent and help users
make sense of the clusters.
●
Consider the need for data standardization, variable weighting
and the avoidance of small sample sizes, and the methods used
to achieve these.
●
Consider how minimum spanning trees, principal components
analysis and variable weighting can be used to identify and
correct for cross-correlations within the variable set.
●
Outline some of the advantages and disadvantages of two
clustering techniques – the stepwise, top-down approach and
the iterative allocation-reallocation method (K-means).
●
Present a worked example of the K-means method.
Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
Richard Harris, Peter Sleight and Richard Webber
© 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
ISBNs: 0-470-86413-3 (HB); 0-470-86414-1 (PB)

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
148
Introduction
In this chapter we consider the techniques used to build geodemographic
classifications. When scientists develop methods for classifying geo-
logical series, climatic zones or vegetation cover, they build classification
systems that cross geopolitical boundaries. By contrast, while common-
alities can be identified for types of neighbourhood in different countries
(and we do so in Chapter 7), there are many practical reasons why it is
better for geodemographic classifications at first to be optimized on a
country-by-county basis. These reasons include the fact that no two
countries have the same data infrastructure; that different sources of data
are available for different countries; that these data are available at vari-
ous levels of geographic detail; because regulations governing access to
data also vary; because countries do not all have the same data update
frequency; and, while there is increasing harmonization on the questions
covered by national censuses, no two census agencies make available the
same (identical) set of variables for use in building classifications.
Despite these variations, the methods used by different companies
to build classifications in different countries have many similarities.
Companies, including Claritas, CACI and EuroDirect (see Chapter 3) use
statistical methods for building classifications that have many elements in
common with those described in this chapter but will seek to use exclusive
sources of data that make their classifications unique. Here we look at the
sources of data used by Experian, how they are prepared for classification
and then evaluated, how weights are selected, the clustering method
employed and how the process is ‘optimized’, the sorting of the clusters
into a hierarchy and their labelling with a ‘pen portrait’. In addition, we
give a worked example of how a dataset can be clustered.
6.1 Data input – sources of data for
neighbourhood classification
We have already commented that no two countries’ data infrastructure is the
same; the developer can only work with what there is available! In many
countries, such as China, Hong Kong and Peru, the census is the sole source
of data used to build geodemographic classifications. However, in many
other countries the census is supplemented with statistics from other sources.
Examples of these other sources are electoral registers (UK, Australia,
Spain), the files of mail order companies (Netherlands), car registration files

How Geodemographic Classifications are Built
149
(Italy), property registers (Germany, New Zealand, UK), registers of share-
holders and of directors (UK), statistics on house prices and on council tax
bands (UK), and registers of addresses (Australia, UK). In the Netherlands,
where census statistics are not published at a small-area level, market
research respondent files are used. In the UK the results from lifestyle ques-
tionnaires (see Chapter 9) can be incorporated into the build.
These non-census sources of information may be useful for a
number of reasons. Understandably, questions in national censuses tend
more strongly to focus on measures of disadvantage than on measures of
affluence, asking their populations about their literacy (as in Brazil, China),
long-term illness (UK) or unemployment (in Australia, for example).
Information from non-census sources, such as director or shareholder
registers, often is helpful in redressing the balance and in providing greater
detail about the location of more privileged members of the community.
A second advantage of using non-census sources is that in many
instances it is available at a finer level of geographic detail than that at
which census statistics are published. A third advantage is that in many
markets the use of non-census sources makes it possible to update the clas-
sification codes given to existing areas as their population profile changes
over the 5- or 10-year interval between most censuses. Likewise, by using
non-census data sources it is possible to assign classification codes to
neighbourhoods built since the date of the last census.
While originally Experian were wary of introducing variables that
were not demographic in nature into the classification process, in the 1991
Great Britain (excludes Northern Ireland) and more recently in the 2001
Australian and UK classifications, increased emphasis has been placed on
the use of statistics that measure the accessibility of zones to shopping
centres, proximity to the ocean and generalized measures of closeness to
other populated areas.
Where the census is the sole source of information used to clas-
sify neighbourhoods then the classification will be built at whatever level
of geography the census authorities use for the publication of their small-
est area statistics. However, where information used originates from mul-
tiple sources, the unit of classification may be more detailed than that of
the census. So, in the UK, for example, where there are usually about
5–10 postcodes for each census output area (OA), different postcodes
within a single OA may be assigned to different types of neighbourhood.
A problem with focusing on the minutiae, though, is that it loses
sight of the bigger picture. For example, areal units with apparently simi-
lar census profiles may nevertheless be characterized by quite different
social processes, opportunities or economic circumstances according to

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
150
their separate locations and regional contexts. Since 2003, Experian now
incorporate into each new Mosaic build from the census, which are calcu-
lated for a series of concentric circles drawn outwards from each small
area zone and including more and more of the regional context with each
step out. The purpose of this innovation was to differentiate suburban
areas in very small service towns serving agricultural hinterlands from
areas of similar demographics located in the inner areas of larger metro-
politan suburbs.
Table 6.1 shows, for two postcodes (A and B) in England, two
such variables, standardized against a UK index value of 100 as the mean
average for each variable. Looking at the relative proportion of profes-
sional persons in each postcode it is found that when represented at the OA
scale, postcodes A and B appear similar (A has an above average index
value of 122, B has 138). However, if all OAs within a buffer zone of 5 km
from each postcode are considered, then A is shown to have half the
average proportion of the population classified as professional, whereas B
is almost average. Looking at the proportions of agricultural workers it
should be clear which of the two postcodes lies within an agricultural
hinterland! The concentric circle method (not to be confused with Burgess’
model, see Chapter 2) has also proved to be very efficient in improving the
ability of the classifications systems to predict variations in the level of
factors such as risk of crime (cf. case study Chapter 5, Section 5.3).
6.2 Preparing the data for classification
When the information gathered for the classification system is not
consistent in terms of its geographical resolution, it is necessary to
link together the data for these different levels into a single ‘rectangular’
Table 6.1 Standardized index values for two postcodes using census
variables first at the OA scale and then aggregated using a 5 km
buffer zone
Aggregate census 
OA
5 km
index
A
B
A
B
Professionals
122
138
50
99
Agricultural
128
0
1846
39
Note: An index value of 100 indicates the national average (50 is half, 200
is twice the national average).
Source: Adapted from Howick (2004).

How Geodemographic Classifications are Built
151
database, spreading data for larger geographical units across all the lower
level geographic units that fall within them. Building the relationship
between the larger and the smaller units can often take some time, espe-
cially where the postcode system used to report non-census data sources
does not mesh with the administrative geography in terms of which
census statistics usually are reported. One key advance in the design of
the 2001 UK Census is that the areas for which census statistics are
published generally now consist of combinations of whole postcodes
(see Chapter 8, Section 8.1.1).
Assuming statistics have been sourced from available databases
and that they have been linked together into a single geography, the next
stage in the process of building a classification is to create a set of vari-
ables as input into the clustering algorithm that is used to build the classi-
fication system. As a general rule, but within limits, the more variables
that are used in the clustering algorithm and the more different sources
they come from the more meaningful (nuanced not idiosyncratic) the
resulting set of clusters is likely to be. However, it is important that vari-
ables should be included in the clustering process only if they can be seen
to be reliable, robust and as adding new information (not repeating what is
already known). The evaluation and weighting process described below
therefore is an important stage in the build process.
Very often the sourced data items will arrive in the form of counts,
such as total numbers of cars. Each of these counts needs to be related to
a corresponding base count. For example, total cars in a given zone (the
numerator) could be related to the base count of total population, to the
base count of total adults or to the base count of total households (each
could serve as the denominator). Alternatively the count could be used
against all three base counts to create three separate variables for use in
the classification system (notwithstanding the issues of correlation and
duplicating information raised above).
The classification builder will also spend time at this stage decid-
ing how to group some of the counts. For example there may be available
from the census the number of residents aged 0–4, 5–9, 10–14, 15–17, 18,
19–20 and so on. Should each of these separate counts be divided by total
residents to create variables for each of these individual age groups? Or,
would the number of persons aged 18 be too small to create a variable in its
own right? Would it be better to form fewer more robust indicators, for
example 0–4, 5–9, 10–14, 15–20? Should even coarser bands be created?
Alternatively should the clustering process use both finer five-year bands
as well as coarser 20-year bands? Likewise when we examine the statistics
on employment by industry, should construction be included as a variable

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
152
in its own right or should it be grouped with energy and transportation into
a less specific but statistically more robust variable? Decisions of this sort
need to be informed by the statistical reliability of the possible variables
and by knowledge of whether, by merging adjacent classes, the detail that
is lost is significant.
In general terms the classification builder, when in doubt, is likely
to create a number of alternative measurements of any particular topic and
to develop a set of strategies for evaluating which of these alternatives are
likely to be most appropriate for inclusion in the classification process.
6.3 Evaluation of input variables
In this stage of the process the classification builder will apply various
strategies for evaluating the appropriateness for including different vari-
ables as the basis for clustering.
It may be that some variables, for whatever reason, are not
deemed appropriate for use in the clustering process. Of those that are to
be included, an equally important outcome of the evaluation process is a
decision on the weight that should be given to each variable. Consider this
by analogy to a recipe, which sets out not only the ingredients to be
included in a stew but also the relative quantities of the ingredients that
should be used (e.g. the gristle to dumplings ratio). Likewise with the
cluster algorithm, the choice exists as to how much emphasis is to be
placed on each of the different input variables when calculating, for each
zone, the cluster than it is statistically ‘closest’ to.
6.3.1 Standardization and the problem of skew
One important consideration is the extent to which a variable is skewed.
In an ideal world we would include as clustering variables only those
which have a bell curved, normal (or Gaussian) distribution. In practice
many important dimensions that need to be included in a classification are
not normally distributed. The residential location of people who work for
the military tends very tightly to be concentrated in a small number of gar-
rison locations. Newly arrived immigrant ethnic groups tend to cluster
into particular localities (indeed, this was the basis for the Burgess model
in Chapter 2). People who work in agriculture tend also to be concentrated
in a limited number of census OAs. These groups of people are not nor-
mally distributed across geographical space.

How Geodemographic Classifications are Built
153
Transforming input variables involves subtracting, from the zonal
value for each variable (zj), the national mean for that variable (m) and
then dividing the result by the national standard deviation (s), which is
the square root of the national variance around the mean – a measure of
the diversity between areas in terms of how much of the variable they
have:
(6.1)
where
(6.2)
and
(6.3)
N is the number of zones (e.g. census or ZIP code areas) to be clustered.
The result of the transformation is to express each zonal value in
terms of its standard deviation from the mean for the variable. The resulting
value is called a ‘z-score’ (unfortunately this risks confusion with the
notation adopted in some GIS texts where z generally indicates an attribute
value). The reason for producing z scores is to allow comparison across a
range of variables of how different from average a particular area is. The
standardization is required because whereas a shift of, say, 10 percentage
points from the mean may not seem overly unusual with regard to a vari-
able exhibiting considerable variance between areas, the same percentage
shift for a variable exhibiting less variability could be unusual. For exam-
ple, if three-quarters of all observations have a value between 30 and 70,
then the fact that one particular area has a value of 40 is hardly unusual.
However, if three-quarters of observations were in the narrower range
45–55 (suggesting less variance) then a value of 40 is more surprising and
would result in a higher z-score.
A problem with comparing sets of z-scores for different input
variables is the assumption that the distribution of each set is symmetrical
about the mean and has the same shape for each variable, otherwise like is
not compared with like. Assessment of the statistical significance of any
 

N
j1
zj
N
2 

N
j1
(zj  )2
N
z*j  zj  


Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
154
given z-score conventionally also requires the distributions to be normal.
A skewed (non-normal, non-uniform) distribution violates these assump-
tions. When an extreme outlier on a highly skewed distribution exists for a
zone it will be given a z value of very large magnitude, which could have
a disproportionate effect on determining that area’s cluster membership.
This is clearly unsatisfactory and various strategies can be used to avoid it
happening. For example, the variable can be transformed using a log func-
tion. Alternatively, an upper limit can be applied to the values, with all
values exceeding the threshold being reduced to it. Both these methods
are quite appropriate for variables such as population density or distance
from the coast. However, for many demographic variables Experian clas-
sification builders normally refrain from using these methods, preferring
instead to reduce the weight given to much-skewed variables to levels at
which extreme scores do not override all other criteria when assigning
zones to their best-fit clusters.
6.3.2 Avoiding small sample size
Another important consideration is the extent to which variables have
adequate samples. Suppose we had access from the (UK) census to the
number of people by OA aged over 100. Although this might at first
glance be a very interesting variable to include in the classification, we
have to bear in mind that there is likely on average to be only one person
aged over 100 in every 20 census OAs. When we consider that perhaps
95% of the people who were over 100 on census night, April 2001, are
likely to have died by the time the census results are published, September
2003, it is evident that this variable, if used in a classification, is not going
to be particularly useful for describing a census output area in 2004 let
alone in 2010, the year before the next census!
Small sample size also is a particular issue when variables are
sourced from files which are not universal in their coverage – for example,
market research files in the Netherlands and lifestyle surveys in the UK.
In these instances it is best to use variables which combine a large mean
(such as people who smoke) and which have a large standard deviation at
the OA level (such as people who have a garden or live in a house built
before 1945). One strategy for using these variables may be to avoid over-
confidence in their geographic detail. For example, though the proportions
of smokers may be calculated at a postcode level the sample size is small
and it may be safer to use the variable only at the much coarser OA level
(cf. Chapter 9, Section 9.1).

How Geodemographic Classifications are Built
155
The variable ‘aged over 100’is a good example not just of a variable
which has too small an average value for the unit of geography for which it
is calculated but also of a variable with an unstable value over time. Given
the longevity of a classification, it makes sense, other things being equal,
to select variables whose values at a small area level change only slowly
over time (such as the percentage of households living in apartments, the
percentage of buildings constructed before 1945). It makes less sense to use
variables whose rank order of zones is likely to be volatile from year to year.
Examples of the latter are variables relating to change itself, such as the
number of houses sold in the previous year, the proportion of households
who have moved, changes in the level of house prices, unemployment and so
forth. High values on any one of these variables in any one year are seldom
reliable indicators of continuing high values at any subsequent point in time.
6.3.3 Can the variables be updated?
Another important consideration when evaluating the suitability of candi-
date variables is whether or not they reliably can be updated over time. The
importance of census variables to the classification process is that they
tend to have a high level of reliability and a near complete national cover-
age. The disadvantage of census variables is that they are updated only as
often as the census is, which in most countries is only once in 10 years.
While non-census data sources are seldom as robust and reliable as the
census, updatability may justify giving them a greater weight in the classi-
fication process than otherwise would be the case.
6.3.4 Variable cross-correlation and the minimum
spanning tree
Once the various measures have been evaluated in this way the candidate
variables are then correlated with each other and the results expressed in
the form of a minimum spanning tree, as in Figure 6.1. The value of the
minimum spanning tree, or single linkage analysis as it is often called, is
that it identifies sets of variables which have particularly high correlations
with each other, whether positive or negative. The tree will therefore high-
light ‘duplicate’ or nearly duplicated variables. In Figure 6.1 each variable
has been linked to the other variable in the dataset with which it has high-
est correlation, whether positive or negative. The thickness of the lines
indicates the strength of the correlation. Care is needed when interpreting
the minimum spanning tree. Correlations are positive between pairs of

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
156
variables when either both of them have a ‘’ (when the value of one vari-
able goes up so does the other) or when both of them have a ‘’(when one
goes down, so does the other; this is the same as saying both rise together).
Otherwise the correlations are negative (as one goes up the other goes
down and vice versa).
The classification builder may wish to choose from among duplicate
variables the one(s) which have links with the larger number of other vari-
ables, signifying a higher level of correlation – this being an indication of the
extent to which the variable is likely to be reliable and robust. Alternatively
more than one near duplicate variable may be included in the classification
process but with each one being given a lower weight than would otherwise
have been the case.
The ability of the minimum spanning tree to group variables into
‘islands’ can also be helpful for classification builders since it will alert
them to factors or domains which are under or over represented in the
dataset. Classification builders may want to ensure that rural areas are
clearly identified by the classification. Taking ‘rurality’as a domain we see
from Figure 6.1 that it is covered by variables from a number of different
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
+
–
–
–
+
+
–
+
+
–
–
+
+
–
–
–
No hot
water
Never attended
School
Self-built
house
Rooms per
household
Home
Pre 1949
Rent public
housing
Work 7 days
a week
Public servant
occupations
Race = Hanzu
Aged 0–4
Occupation =
Housewife
Unemployed
Industry =
Farming
Source of fuel=
wood
Industry =
retailing
Employee
Aged 20–24
Students
Home – average
square metres
Aged 40–44
Aged 65+
Mixed business/
residential
Owner affordable
housing
Built
1990–2000
Aged
15–19
Occupation = farmer
Industry =
Arts/education
Industry =
Scientific research Industry =
manufacturing
Education =
General university
+
Figure 6.1 Minimum spanning tree of variables for three cities in China

How Geodemographic Classifications are Built
157
topics in the census, for instance by occupation (farmer), by industry
(farming) by employment status (housewife) and by mode of heating
(wood). Knowing the extent to which the domain is covered by the variable
set is important when decisions are taken about the weight given to indi-
vidual variables.
6.3.5 Principal components analysis
One approach that is not used in the Experian methodology is principal
components analysis (PCA) or the related technique of factor analysis.
These are methods used to isolate the main differentiating factors or
components of a group of correlated variables (Robinson, 1998). To use
the example above, the factor common to ‘farmer’, ‘farming’ and ‘wood’
is rurality. Experian’s experience has been that use of these methods tends
to blur rather than clarify fine distinctions between cluster types.
However, PCA has been applied when building some geodemographic
typologies – for example, the post-1981 UK Census version of the
SuperProfiles classification. The rest of this section describes how PCA
operates. It is a little technical and can, if desired, be understood as saying
that PCA trims the initial dataset, removing redundant but perhaps also
important information. With that knowledge you can safely skip to the
next section!
To build the post-1981 SuperProfiles classification, Charlton,
Openshaw and Wymer (1985) report that a preliminary selection of
465 census variables was made. These variables were grouped together
according to their similarities with each other and those groups refined to
leave 55 cluster formative variables. PCA was then applied to those
remaining variables. The first stage of the PCA was to calculate the inter-
correlation or r-matrix of m (55) cluster formative variables across the
N (130,000) zones to be clustered. The correlations are in the range
from 1 to 1.
The second stage of a PCA procedure is to transform the raw data
matrix by the inverse cosine of each correlation found at the first stage.
Describing the geometry of PCA in detail, Robinson (1998, pp. 121–3)
notes that this stage is equivalent to calculating an angle between each
pair of variables. These angles will be in the range from 0° to 180° since
cosine1 of r  1.0 is 0° and cosine1 of r  1.0 is 180°. Furthermore,
each variable can now be represented as a vector, each of length d from
a fixed origin (O), where the angle between each pair of variables is
defined by the transformed correlation matrix. Since vector quantities are

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
158
analogous to forces, since each variable (or ‘force’) pulls upon the origin in
different directions and since each force has constant magnitude (defined
as d above), so the resultant force can be found. This is the combined
effect of each of the individual forces (or variables) and gives the direction
the origin would be forced to move were it not fixed. The resultant is called
an eigenvector and is known as the first principal component.
The principal component eigenvector, like the input variables,
can be described as a force directed out from the same fixed origin, O.
By extension, the angle between each variable and the principal compon-
ent may be calculated (u1 . . . um). The smaller the angle, the more it
may be said that the variable and the first component are ‘pulling in the
same direction’. A new correlation matrix giving the correlation between
each variable and the principal component is derived as the cosine of the
angle between them, u (this is the inverse of the transformation under-
taken in the second stage). A perfectly correlated variable has u  0° and
thus r  1.0.
Each correlation defines the loading of a variable on the compon-
ent. The variance among the variables that is explained by the component
is equal to the sum of the squares of the loadings across the m variables.
The first component will always explain the most variance, while each sub-
sequent component will explain less than the component which preceded
it. The second component is erected at a right angle to the first and each
consecutive component is also arranged in the same way (orthogonally).
The procedure can be continued until there are as many components as
there are input variables (m). However, since PCA is intended to eliminate
duplicated information within the variable set so the actual number of
components selected will be that sufficient to explain a certain threshold of
variance among the variables.
For the SuperProfiles classification, 27 components (based on
55 input variables) were needed to account for over 90% of the variance of
the initial correlation matrix. Curry (1993, p. 204) considers these types of
procedure more generally, arguing that it is largely redundant information
that is removed and that upwards of 80% of the valid or non-redundant
information contained in the original data matrix will be retained in the
trimmed matrix. Of course, the same figure could also be quoted as a loss
of 20% of the valid data – perhaps too much, especially if it is the fine
distinctions between cluster types that are lost.
The last stage of PCA is to replace the initial m  N data matrix
(the input variables) with the smaller q  N matrix, where q indicates
the chosen quantity of components (q  N). Assuming the original data
are expressed in terms of their standard, or z-scores per variable (see

How Geodemographic Classifications are Built
159
Equation 6.1, above) then the component score, cju, of the uth component
for the jth area is:
(6.4)
where luv is the component loading of the vth variable on component u and
is the standardized value of the vth variable for area j. A complete matrix of
‘reduced data’is obtained by calculating each of the component scores in the
same way for the total of N zones and q components (cf. Robinson, 1998).
Aside from the potential problem of information loss, a difficulty
with PCA is making sense of the outcome! This is not necessarily a prob-
lem for geodemographic classifications that feed the trimmed matrix into
the subsequent cluster analysis and which then seek to explain the charac-
teristics of the clusters by cross-referencing back to the ‘raw’ (and other)
data – see the discussion on labelling, Section 6.8 below. However, there
are cognitive disadvantages when working with a dataset that is no longer
‘intuitive’ – particularly when the whole nature of cluster analysis is as
much an art as a science.
6.4 Selecting weights
Instead of using PCA, Experian’s strategy is to give careful consideration
to the appropriateness of the weights given to different variables in the
clustering procedure. Assigning weights has the effect of reducing (or
increasing) the influence of variables which, from the minimum spanning
tree, are known to share information (or not) with other variables.
As we have seen, there are many considerations that need to be
taken into account when setting the weights. A useful check on the appro-
priateness of the weighting strategy is to calculate the share of the total
weight that is accorded to variables belonging to different ‘domains’. In
the Australian classification, fixed proportions of the total weight were
assigned in advance to the sets of variables pertaining to: housing; social
and economic status; age; household composition and cultural identity;
and, finally, accessibility. Likewise, decisions were made as to the relative
weight to be accorded to the three levels of geography used in the classifi-
cation: street segments, census collection districts and concentric circles.
The weight initially given to every variable after the evaluation process
was then adjusted to ensure appropriate overall weights for these domains
and geographic levels.
z *
jv
cju  
m
v1
zjv* luv

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
160
Table 6.2 illustrates the weights given to different age bands in the
construction of UK Mosaic. From this table you can see that overlapping
class intervals have been selected at the upper bands of the age distribu-
tion but also that these have been given lower weight than those allocated
to the younger age groups.
6.5 Clustering
Once the variables have been defined, selected and given appropriate
weight, the clustering process begins. It is important to understand that the
categories of neighbourhood used in a geodemographic classification are
not defined in advance. The builder does not start with the requirement to
find a category called ‘Rural Isolation’ or ‘Mortgaged Families’. Such
categories may or may not emerge from the cluster build. However, from
his or her prior experience in different countries, the builder of a geodemo-
graphic system will have some expectation that the computer programs
will identify a number of neighbourhood types bearing strong similarity
to those identified in other markets. It is for this reason that Experian has
been able to identify a set of 13 global ‘lifestyle groups’ ranging from
‘Agrarian Heartland’ to ‘Shack and Shanty’ that tend to be found repeat-
edly across each of the 18 different national markets where its systems
operate. Needless to say not every category is found in every market and
there are types of neighbourhood that are specific to particular countries.
We discuss these categorizations further in Chapter 7.
There are a number of clustering algorithms available but the
most common can be broadly grouped into two types: stepwise, top-down
methods and iterative allocation-reallocation procedures (two alternatives,
Table 6.2 Weights assigned to age variables when building UK Mosaic
Variable
Weight
Variable
Weight
Variable
Weight
Aged 0–4
20
Aged 30–34
40
Aged 60–64
40
Aged 5–9
40
Aged 35–39
40
Aged 65
40
Aged 10–14
40
Aged 40–44
40
Aged 65–74
4
Aged 15–19
40
Aged 45–49
40
Aged 75–84
4
Aged 18–24
10
Aged 45–64
40
Aged 85
15
Aged 20–24
40
Aged 50–54
40
Aged 85–89
2
Aged 25–29
40
Aged 55–59
40
Aged 90
5
Aged 25–44
40

How Geodemographic Classifications are Built
161
simulated annealing and neural network classifiers are described by
Openshaw and Wymer, 1995, pp. 255–66).
6.5.1 The stepwise, top-down method
Of the more common types, the stepwise approach conceptually is the
simpler. If initially there are N zones then these are each taken to be a
‘cluster’. Hence, there are as many clusters as there are zones – too many!
To reduce the number of clusters the two that are most alike are grouped
together. These are found by considering every possible pair of clusters in
turn and determining how alike or close together they are with respect to
the set of input variables used for the clustering. Once a pair is identified
and merged the values of each of the variables are recalculated for the
merged clusters by taking an average of their constituent members.
There are now K  N  1 clusters left to consider at the second
step (i.e. one less than previously). Again, the two that are now closest are
identified and merged, and the input variables averaged for the group. The
process of grouping like-with-like can be repeated until there is only K  1
cluster left (i.e. all the zones are merged into one). In practice the process
would stop before this, at the value of K that was felt to achieve the best bal-
ance of differentiating between neighbourhood types while at the same time
avoiding too much heterogeneity (variance) within neighbourhood types.
The major disadvantage with the top-down approach is how long
it takes to compute. If N zones are finally grouped into K clusters then the
total number of cluster pairs that must be checked to see whether they are
closest together is actually equal to:
(6.5)
If this checking involves looking along m cluster variables, then the total
number of calculations that must be performed is at least:
(6.6)
To put the formula into some sort of perspective: if N  100,000
zones are grouped into K  10 clusters on the basis of m  100 input vari-
ables then the total number of calculations that must be performed to arrive
at the solution is approximately 1016 – ten thousand trillion! Worse still,
there is no guarantee that it is actually the best cluster solution possible
m
6 [N(N  1)(N  1)  K(K  1)(K  2)]
1
6 [N(N  1)(N  1)  K(K  1)(K  2)]

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
162
because making the ‘best’ decision at each particular step does not neces-
sarily lead to an optimal result overall. Consider, for example, a stepwise
algorithm at the point that it had created a three-cluster solution. At the
next step a two-cluster solution would be created by merging two of the
clusters. However, a better solution likely would be achieved if, instead,
one of the three clusters were split, with some of its members going to both
of the two remaining clusters.
6.5.2 The iterative allocation-reallocation method
(K-means)
Unlike top-down methods, iterative procedures start with zones imperfectly
arranged into the final number of clusters and then repeatedly refine the
‘solution’to obtain a better fit. Although there is a computational saving that
comes by specifying from the outset how many clusters there should be
(thus avoiding the long stepwise process of merging zones/clusters one at a
time), the principal benefit of this method is that it generates solutions
which retain a higher proportion of the variance of the source variables and
clusters which are more equal in population size, particularly where the
number of clusters is small in relation to the total number of input zones. To
begin, the classification builder has to specify the number of clusters (K)
that s/he thinks would be appropriate for the market being clustered, bearing
in mind the range of data available, the level of geography used and the
complexity of the market.
The next stage in the clustering process used by Experian involves
the calculation of the means and standard deviations of the input variables,
and the standardization of the data. An important feature of this process
is that these, and all subsequent, computations are population weighted.
That is to say that when calculating the means and standard deviations the
algorithm gives correspondingly more attention to the values of zones with
high populations than to those with low:
(6.7) (cf. (6.1))
where
(6.8) (cf. (6.2))
2 

N
j1
(wj zj  )2

N
j1
wj
zj*  wj zj  


How Geodemographic Classifications are Built
163
(6.9) (cf. (6.3))
and wj is the weight assigned to the jth area and is proportional to that area’s
population count.
The population weighting particularly is important insofar as
the populations of rural and inner city zones will in many markets tend
to be lower than the populations of zones containing new housing
estates on the edge of urban centres. Without using population weight-
ing the clustering process ignores that fact that some places contain a far
greater population – and likely more diversity – than others. It would not
be desirable for a cluster solution to have, for example, as many differ-
ent types of rural neighbourhood as it does urban types if the rural areas
contain the much smaller proportion of the total population. In practice
it could be appropriate to select numbers of households or adults instead
of the entire populace as the basis for weighting.
The next stage of the clustering process involves the selection of
a set of seed zones. If the classification builder has required the cluster
algorithm to create a 45-cluster solution then 45 zones in the dataset will
at this stage be selected to form the initial nucleus or centre of each clus-
ter. The zones will be selected on a fixed interval basis with a probabil-
ity proportionate to their population. The selection of the first zone
occurs once half of the sampling interval is reached. The method of
selection is quasi-random in that the zones are not pre-sorted on any
particular variable. They do not enter in any systematic order other than
by county so there is likely to be some regional stratification in the
selection of seeds.
The algorithm will now examine every zone in the database and,
taking into account the standardized data and the weight assigned to each
variable, calculate a measure of similarity between that zone and each of
the 45 seeds. This measure is known as the k-mean squared distance
(because k means or centres have been selected as the basis for clustering).
It is calculated by taking the squares of the differences between the stan-
dardized scores of the zone and the standardized scores of the seed zone,
summing across all variables and weighting by variable:
(6.10)
d2  
m
v1
wv (z*jv  z*kv)2
 

N
j1
wj zj

N
j1
wj

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
164
where m is the total number of input variables, z*jv is the value of the
vth variable for area j, z*kv is the corresponding value of the same variable for
the kth seed, and wv is the weight assigned to the variable. The zone is then
assigned to the seed for which this measure of distance is lowest, in other
words the zone to which it is most similar.
Note that if there were only two variables then:
(6.11)
or
(6.12)
Comparing Equation (6.12) to the measure of distance expressed
in Chapter 4, Equation (4.6) reveals that the k-mean squared distance is an
expression of the Euclidean distance between zones and seeds, and is only
one of a number of distance measures that might be used (see Berry and
Linoff, 1997).
Once the allocation process has been repeated across all zones,
the situation will arise when each zone is assigned to its nearest or
‘best-fit’ cluster. The program will then take all the zones which were
found to be closer to seed one than to any other seed and calculate the
average value of this set of zones on each of the input variables used in
the clustering process. This set of calculations is repeated for all the
other 44 seeds.
At this point the algorithm will commence a second loop (or
iteration) during which it reviews for each of the zones in the database
which of the 45 seeds it is now closest to in terms of similarity. For
many of the zones the result of this computation will be the same as it
was on the previous iteration. However, since the averages of the seed
zones have now been replaced by the averages of the zones assigned to
them after the first iteration, a number of zones will now find them-
selves shifting from the cluster to which they were first assigned to a
different cluster.
At the end of this iteration the averages are recalculated for
each of the 45 seed clusters and a further iteration is done. This process
continues, often for more than 20 iterations. However, each additional
iteration will usually lead to a smaller number of zones moving from
one cluster to another (compared to the last) and also progressively
smaller changes in the values of the variable averages for each cluster.
Eventually, when an iteration generates no further change, the process
comes to an end. The algorithm has reached a local optimum beyond
d  √w1(z*j1  z*k1)2  w2(z*j2  z*k2)2
d2  w1(z*j1  z*k1)2  w2(z*j2  z*k2)2

How Geodemographic Classifications are Built
165
which it cannot improve and is said to have converged. The stages of
the allocation–reallocation procedure are summarized by Figure 6.2.
As the final solution is in part dependent on the initial seed selection so
it is sensible to either repeat the process to see if different seed selec-
tions produce improved results and/or make manual interventions as
described below.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.2 Example of an allocation–reallocation classification with K  5 means. (a) The
initial allocation of areas to seeds. (b) The clusters after three iterations. (c) The clusters upon
convergence. (d) Movement of centroids during classification. Source: Cameron (2004)

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
166
6.6 Optimization process and manual
intervention
Once the cluster algorithm has found the local optimum it orders the
resulting clusters such that clusters that broadly are similar are given
consecutive numbering. It then reports to the cluster builder a number of
diagnostics from which s/he can assess the effectiveness of the solution.
It is likely that by skilful modification the classification builder can
improve on the result and so at this stage the classification builder will
consider and probably implement a number of manual adjustments.
One particularly important diagnostic that the classification builder
will consider is whether the two most similar clusters are so alike that the
user is unlikely to be able to tell them apart, in which case the system should
have fewer clusters; or whether there are clusters which are so heterogeneous
that a better solution could be achieved by being set to run with more clus-
ters. Particular diagnostics support these decisions but, as a general rule of
thumb, a good solution is likely to be one where the two most similar clusters
could be merged for a loss of variance of 0.22% of the total in the dataset.
This consistently appears to be the limit below which further divisions of
clusters are indistinguishable.
The classification builder will now use a number of functions to
try to improve the classification. These include ones which cause two or
more specified clusters to be fused together into a single cluster, which
allow individual clusters to be deleted and which allow individual clus-
ters to be split. Sometimes it appears sensible to use all three of these
functions. When these modifications are made, the cluster algorithm,
having remembered the previous solution, makes the specified modifi-
cations and then undertakes as many further iterations as are necessary
to come up with a revised solution. Often this optimal solution will
account for more variance in the original dataset than the previous one,
even for no change in the total number of clusters. In this case it is likely
to be a better local solution, although not necessarily yet the best overall
solution.
At the same time as s/he merges, splits or deletes clusters from an
old solution the classification builder may want to review the weights that
were assigned to the different variables. If, for example, the clusters appear
to be over influenced by population density to the exclusion of other
important differences, the classification builder may want to reduce the
weight given to that variable and re-run from the old solution but with new
weights. Alternatively the classification builder might want to improve

How Geodemographic Classifications are Built
167
definition in particular areas of the classification, for example by splitting
the most high status of the clusters into two, to assist marketers, or by
splitting specific ethnic minority clusters, in order to assist in deprivation
studies.
There are circumstances, for example in the identification of
different types of rural area, where it may be appropriate on completion of
the area classification to actually remove the rural areas altogether from
the ‘solution’ and build a new bespoke classification solely for the rural
zones. Such a bespoke solution would perhaps use a different number of
rural clusters than that identified at the national level and would almost
certainly apply a different set of variable weights. The separate classifica-
tion can then be linked back into the main classification. This bespoke
method is particularly effective for dealing with clusters that are picked
out by highly skewed variables, as rural clusters often tend to be. By
applying this method it has proved possible in the UK to avoid rural clas-
sifications being differentiated solely on the basis of level of rurality
(which otherwise happens) and instead introduce qualitatively different
types of rural community, such as nucleated villages supporting arable
farming, as opposed to areas of self-employed dairy and cattle farmers
more often living in scattered farmsteads.
Typically it may take five to a dozen different runs of the cluster
algorithm before an ideal solution is finally agreed and much time can be
spent evaluating which of the alternative solutions is the best one. One
method of evaluating the solutions is to see which one explains the most
(weighted) variance in the input variables. All things being equal this is a
sensible approach. However, it is not an entirely fair adjudication procedure
if the number of clusters has been changed or if there have been alterations
in the variable weights between the two solutions. A fairer evaluation is
to compare the extent to which alternative classifications are effective in
predicting variations in behaviour on datasets that were not used to build the
classification. Tests against 100 external files enabled Experian to improve
the efficiency of their 2001 census-based UK Mosaic by 3% compared
with what it otherwise would have been. This process of evaluation is
particularly effective in determining the most appropriate set of weights
to give to variables in different domains and, perhaps even more important,
the set of weights to give to variables at different levels of geographic
aggregation.
Other important evaluation methods used at this stage of the build
process involve the mapping of the clusters in towns familiar to the classi-
fication builder. Likewise, when building UK Mosaic, Experian undertook
a photographic tour of the UK, which generated over a thousand pictures

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
168
of different postcodes. Alternative solutions were then partly evaluated
with reference to whether the new cluster allocation seemed to provide a
better representation of the photographed postcodes than did the previous
cluster allocation.
6.7 Forming a cluster hierarchy
In relatively small and homogeneous countries, such as Ireland, Hong Kong
or Peru, a classification will be able to identify around 25 to 30 distinct
cluster types. In larger and more heterogeneous countries, such as the USA
and the UK, it is possible to recognize a larger number of types, as many as
60 to 65. However, because it is difficult for users to remember each of these
types individually, the more detailed neighbourhood ‘types’ (as they are
called) are usually classed hierarchically into a smaller number of neigh-
bourhood ‘groups’, typically ranging from 7 to 12.
Once the solution is finally signed off at the cluster-type level,
attention shifts to the process of arranging the clusters into groups. This
process initially is undertaken using a stepwise algorithm, which is inte-
grated within the main cluster program. This process starts by considering
which pair of clusters could be merged together while causing least loss of
variability in the original dataset. The pair of clusters that could best be
merged in this way is likely to be a pair that is very similar in terms of
their average scores on the input variables. They are also likely to be ones
with relatively small populations. Table 6.3 illustrates how this process
operated in the build of a Mosaic for three city regions in China. This is a
good classification in so far as the first pair of clusters to merge – clusters
28 and 29 – do so for a loss of variance of only 0.22%. The line after step
27 indicates a seeming step change in the loss of variance for subsequent
mergers, implying that this is a good point at which to stop, setting the
number of groups at seven.
The stepwise process can be used both to arrange cluster types
into a chosen number of cluster groups but also to identify from a set of
clusters (either groups or types) which are the most similar, permitting the
cluster groups or the cluster types to be numbered consecutively and on
an ordinal (rank-ordered) scale. There may, however, be other important
considerations that the automated procedure alone does not adequately
address. For example, one might want to ensure that the percentage of the
population in each of the groups exceeded a threshold of 4% while not
exceeding 20% and one might reasonably wish to ensure that all groups

Table 6.3 Stepwise fusion process for three cities within China
Step
Fusing 
To
% loss in 
Step
Fusing
To
% loss in
Step
Fusing
To
% loss in
cluster
cluster
variance
cluster
cluster
variance
cluster
cluster
variance
1
28
29
0.22
12
23–24
25
0.53
23
6–7
8–12
0.98
2
4
5
0.25
13
6
7
0.58
24
33
34
1.26
3
26
27
0.29
14
17
18
0.59
25
23–27
28–29
1.57
4
2
3
0.30
15
30
31
0.60
26
6–12
13–14
1.74
5
13
14
0.36
16
15
16
0.64
27
17–19
20–22
1.90
6
10
11
0.37
17
20–21
22
0.64
28
30–32
33–34
2.60
7
20
21
0.43
18
23–25
26–27
0.68
29
15–16
17–22
3.46
8
23
24
0.44
19
8–9
10–12
0.73
30
15–22
23–29
4.70
9
8
9
0.47
20
1–3
4–5
0.75
31
1–5
6–14
5.29
10
10–11
12
0.50
21
17–18
19
0.88
32
15–29
30–34
7.47
11
1
2–3
0.51
22
30–31
32
0.88
33
1–14
15–34
21.22

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
170
contained more than one cluster but not more than seven – this being the
maximum number of subcategories, which on an empirical basis it seems
practical to distinguish between at any one time.
This process of manual intervention is facilitated by the drawing
of a ‘family tree’. This diagram, which in structure is not unlike the mini-
mum spanning tree of variables, links each cluster to another cluster which
it is most similar to within the set. However, unlike the situation with the
stepwise process, linked clusters are not combined only associated; within
each linked pair of clusters the tree will identify the one (of the two) which
has the highest degree of similarity with a cluster belonging to another
grouping. Figure 6.3 shows a minimum spanning tree of clusters for UK
Mosaic. Note that each cluster is coloured according to the group that it
belongs to. Note also indicators around the perimeter of the tree showing
the polarities both in terms of demographics and marketing orientation.
This device has consistently proved helpful in identifying the major dimen-
sions of differentiation within the system and these are often set out around
the outside of the tree to orient the user. The final decision on how the
clusters should be best organized into groups is seldom undertaken without
some reference to such a diagram.
Figure 6.3 Minimum spanning tree of clusters for UK Mosaic. Source: Reproduced by
permission of Experian UK

How Geodemographic Classifications are Built
171
6.8 Labels, portraits and visualization tools
When the clusters have been arranged into groups it is necessary to under-
take a final re-ordering in which it is customary to assign the category ‘one’
to the cluster with the highest status, whether in terms of income, social class
or value of housing. Next begins the complex process of assigning ‘labels’,
typically of up to 20 characters, to each category. These labels will then be
supplemented by ‘portraits’, each portrait being a comprehensive account of
the demographics and behavioural features that make each cluster distinc-
tive. In some markets these portraits will run to an average of 200 words. In
better-developed markets such as the UK typically they average 1000 words.
While it is usually the portraits rather than the labels that are used in analysis
and targeting, the labels are understandably more convenient for day-to-day
communication among teams of people already familiar with a particular
classification.
The labelling process is often contentious if only because the
expectations and requirements of marketers, public sector users and
academics can differ. Marketers typically want to communicate among
each other using labels (such as ‘Caring Professionals’), which are both
recognizable and memorable. The more the label provides insight into
the perceived mindset of residents of the cluster, the better. Public sec-
tors users are more mindful of the political correctness of the labels and
associated issues of stereotyping, bearing in mind that geodemographics
may be used in reports to elected representatives. They would ideally like
‘labels’ which focused on demographics and which were rather more
‘matter of fact’.
Academics tend to seek research evidence to substantiate the
labels used but are often unaware of the more detailed portraits that
already exist. When confronted with a label such as ‘Low Horizons’ they
understandably ask on the basis of what evidence (and whose opinion)
could such an attribute be selected? The answer to such questions is
usually found not just in the set of portraits which accompany the labels
but also in the extensive visualization and multimedia material which
will support any professionally developed neighbourhood classification
(see Chapter 5, Section 5.3). By and large, academic critiques of geode-
mographics have tended to focus only on the labels. This is not surprising
given the labels are written as evocative ‘snapshots’, designed to catch
the eye and usually are prominent in promotional literature. By focusing
only on the labels, there is risk of critiques ‘down playing’ the wider
range of portraits and visualizations available and contributing to a

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
172
misunderstanding of both how geodemographic classifications are used,
and also the consultative nature of the relationship between vendors and
their clients. Nevertheless, there is room for legitimate debate on the
extent and ways by which some applications of marketing and geograph-
ical information systems over-simplify the complexity and diversity of
human subjects.
Label selection is a very important part of the build process. Good
labels are ones which can only be true of the type they are given to, which
accurately can be applied to virtually all postcodes within that type, which
are memorable and which are not offensive. ‘Fledgling Nurseries’ is a good
example of a label that meets all these criteria. An important rule applied by
Experian is that type labels should be no more than 20 characters in length.
This precludes the tendency for labels created by committee to become long,
bland and lacking in insight.
The more people in the organization involved in the labelling of
the categories the more intelligible they are likely to be. However, writing
up the descriptions of the categories is a more solitary task. Typically the
clusters types and groups will each be subject to a textual portrait. This
portrait will look at the clusters from different dimensions: their physical
appearance; their historical origins; the types of people who live in them;
their values; their consumption patterns; the patterns of movement into
and out of the clusters; and ways in which it is likely that they will change
over time.
The evidence on which these portraits are created includes a wide
range of census and non-census indicators, often a wider range than the
restricted set that were used in the build process. Much of this evidence
will also typically be included in the accompanying visualization tools.
Besides the labels, the portraits and large number of photographs which
illustrate the different categories, these tools will typically include
libraries of demographic and behavioural variables showing variations
between the types and groups in the form of tables and bar charts (see
Figures 5.7–5.9 in Chapter 5).
Together with the tables showing demographic and behavioural
differences these tools are likely to include charts and maps showing the
regions of the country, the local authorities and the constituencies in
which they occur. These have proved helpful in enabling users to uncover
subtle distinctions between otherwise similar types of places. It is this
evidence base that we have relied on in the following chapter to describe
some differences in the patterns of residential segregation between
Mediterranean and Northern Europe, North and Latin America, and
Australia and China. (Multimedia guides for classification systems are

How Geodemographic Classifications are Built
173
often freely available from the developers. For details of Experian’s prod-
ucts contact bus.helpdesk@uk.experian.com.)
The process of producing the cluster portraits involves a fusion of
art and science, of the qualitative and the quantitative and is best under-
taken without interruption and with copious supplies of caffeine!
6.9 A worked example of clustering
Imagine you were asked to cluster the hypothetical areas in Table 6.4 into two
types, based on the single column of information described as attribute A
(ignore the other columns for the time being). The clusters need not be
equally sized (in fact, in this case they cannot be) but all areas must belong to
one and only one cluster type. Given 30 seconds to find a solution, which
areas would you put into which clusters?
Your answer:
Your reasons:
Chances are that you immediately assigned areas a, c, d, e and k
into one cluster (call it type I) and areas f, g, h, i and j into the second (call
it type II). If so, then to start with, all areas in type I had an attribute A
value beginning with a 1 (i.e. in the range 10–19) and all areas in type II
had an attribute value beginning with a 3 (in the range 30–39).
This partial solution still leaves area b with an attribute value of
24 to deal with. You were not given the option of not classifying it at all so
probably it was assigned to cluster I, given that 24 is closer along the
number line to 19 than it is to 30. On this basis you could claim that area
b is more similar to the members of the first cluster than it is to the second.

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
174
Thinking through the classification process in a little more detail,
if you were indeed guided by the fact that nearly half the areas have an
attribute value in the range 10–19, and the other half in the range 30–39,
then what you may have done (consciously or otherwise) is imagine two
cluster centres or averages, the first with a value somewhere in the 10 s,
the second with a value somewhere in the 30 s. Each area was then
assigned to the cluster with centre closest along the number line to the
area’s own attribute A value. Therefore, area a, with an attribute value of
11, seems closer to the cluster with its centre in the 10 s than it does to the
other. Going on to assign the ‘awkward’ area b to what we came to call
cluster type I simply follows the same logic of looking at the difference or
distance along the number line between the centre of each cluster and any
particular area’s own attribute value. This is illustrated by Figure 6.4.
Things seem more complicated when we introduce a second
attribute, B in Table 6.4. However, the rationale remains as simple: the
cluster with the closest centre is where areas will be allocated to. The only
change is that the centres of our clusters are positioned not along a single
Table 6.4 Area data for worked example
Area 
Attribute
Attribute 
Attribute 
z-score
z-score
z-score
ID
A
B
C
A
B
C
a
11
70
2
1.36
1.51
1.51
b
24
65
11
0.09
1.21
1.21
c
19
60
20
0.58
0.90
0.91
d
15
55
29
0.97
0.60
0.60
e
13
50
38
1.16
0.30
0.30
f
33
45
47
0.79
0.00
0.00
g
36
40
56
1.08
0.30
0.31
h
37
35
65
1.18
0.60
0.61
i
34
30
74
0.89
0.90
0.91
j
35
25
83
0.98
1.21
1.22
k
17
20
91
0.77
1.51
1.48
m (mean)
25
45
47
0.00
0.00
0.00
s (sd)
10
17
30
1.00
1.00
1.00
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Attribute A
I
II
Figure 6.4 Areas are grouped into clusters according to their position along the number line

How Geodemographic Classifications are Built
175
number line but in a two-dimensional ‘space’ – one dimension for attri-
bute A, the other for attribute B. Fortunately, two dimensions are still easy
to visualize and the data have been plotted in Figure 6.5. It is now easy to
perceive to which cluster each area belongs. In this example, the ‘diffi-
cult’ area is k, which is located out at the edge of cluster II.
So far the classification method seems to work. However, difficul-
ties will arise when there are too many areas, too many clusters and/or too
many dimensions (attributes) for it to be clearly seen which cluster centre is
at least distance to any particular area. Try reproducing something like
Figure 6.5 for a set of 100,000 census zones, 10 clusters and 100 variables
(actually, don’t!). What is needed, therefore, is a way of formalizing the
classification procedure so that we are not reliant on grouping the areas by
eye. The method we will describe is the K-means one.
In addition to attributes A and B, Table 6.4 has a third: attribute C.
However, looking back at Figure 6.5 it can already be seen that there will be
problems making direct comparisons between these variables: there is less
variance (or standard deviation) along the attribute A axis where the spread
of values is between 11 and 37, than there is along the attribute B axis where
the spread is between 20 and 70. Table 6.4 records that attribute C has even
greater standard deviation (s) and therefore variance around the mean (m)
than either A or B. Consequently, a unit increase in the C value is rather less
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Attribute A
Attribute B
I
II
0
10
20
30
40
Figure 6.5 Areas are grouped into clusters according to their position within a two-
dimensional space

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
176
surprising than a unit increase in B which, in turn, is less unusual than a unit
increase in A. In order, therefore, to compare like with like, we will now
consider the standardized (z-score) values of A, B and C, obtained by using
Equation (6.1) and also listed in Table 6.4. For example, the standardized
value of attribute A for area a is (11  25)  10 which is 1.36, i.e. almost
one and one half standard deviations below the all-area average for attribute
A (that it is below is indicated by the minus sign).
To proceed with the clustering we need a starting-point – in fact,
not just one but as many as there are clusters sought (K). For illustrative
purposes, we will set K to three (one more cluster than before). Previously
it was possible to ‘see’ the centre of each cluster and allocate areas to
neighbourhood types accordingly. Now, however, those starting points are
not clear. To solve this problem we can either randomly draw three seed
areas and take their attribute values as the acting centres of the clusters, or
we can instead arbitrarily allocate areas to clusters and then calculate the
centres of these arbitrary groupings as the averages of the attribute values
per cluster.
To demonstrate how an iterative process of allocation–reallocation
gradually improves upon the initial allocations we will use the second
option, grouping areas a, b and c into cluster I, areas f and g into cluster II,
and areas d, e, h, i, j and k into cluster III. Averaging the attribute values by
cluster gives centres at (0.68, 1.21, 1.21), (0.94, 0.15, 0.16) and
(0.03, 0.55, 0.55), respectively, where (A, B, C) correspond to the three
standardized attribute values. The members of each cluster and the average
values are shown in Table 6.5. For this example, each of the areas is
assumed to be as important as another and so the averages are not weighted.
Having established the starting points, areas are removed from their
initial cluster groupings and reallocated to clusters with centres closest to
their own attribute values. Therefore, each area needs to be compared with
each of the three clusters to find the one at least distance from it. That
distance is found by comparing pairs of attribute values. Recalling that the
temporary centre of the first cluster (I) is at (0.68, 1.21, 1.21) and know-
ing, from Table 6.4, that area a is located at (1.36, 1.51, 1.51), then the
square of the distance between area a and cluster I can be found as:
d2  0.64
(cf. (6.11))
With the aid of a spreadsheet the distance from every area to
every cluster can be found and, with that information, each area assigned
to their least distance cluster. Try it! If you get stuck, the answer is shown
d2  (1.36  0.68)2  (1.51  1.21)2  (1.51  1.21)2

Table 6.5 Three steps of an allocation-reallocation clustering procedure (K  3; N  11; m  3)
Step 1 AI  0.68; AII  0.94; AIII  0.03
BI  1.21; BII  0.15; BIII  0.55
CI  1.21; CII  0.16; CIII  0.55
Cluster
Area
A
(A  AI)2
(A  AII)2
(A  AIII)2
B
(B  BI)2
(B  BII)2
(B  BIII)2
C
(C  CI)2
(C  CII)2
(C  CIII)2
	sq-diffI
	sq-diffII
	sq-diffIII
To
I
a
1.36
0.47
5.27
1.92
1.51
0.09
2.76
4.26
1.51
0.09
2.77
4.26
0.65
10.79
10.43
I
I
b
0.09
0.34
1.05
0.01
1.21
0.00
1.85
3.11
1.21
0.00
1.86
3.11
0.34
4.76
6.23
I
I
c
0.58
0.01
2.30
0.37
0.90
0.09
1.10
2.11
0.91
0.09
1.13
2.14
0.19
4.53
4.62
I
Avg.
0.68
1.21
1.21
0.40
II
f
0.79
2.15
0.02
0.59
0.00
1.46
0.02
0.31
0.00
1.46
0.02
0.31
5.07
0.07
1.20
II
II
g
1.08
3.09
0.02
1.11
0.30
2.27
0.02
0.06
0.31
2.31
0.02
0.06
7.67
0.07
1.24
II
Avg.
0.94
0.15
0.16
0.07
III
d
0.97
0.09
3.63
0.99
0.60
0.37
0.56
1.33
0.60
0.37
0.57
1.33
0.83
4.76
3.65
I
III
e
1.16
0.23
4.39
1.40
0.30
0.82
0.20
0.73
0.30
0.83
0.21
0.73
1.88
4.80
2.86
I
III
h
1.18
3.45
0.06
1.33
0.60
3.26
0.20
0.00
0.61
3.31
0.21
0.00
10.02
0.47
1.34
III
III
i
0.89
2.45
0.00
0.75
0.90
4.44
0.56
0.12
0.91
4.49
0.57
0.13
11.39
1.13
1.00
III
III
j
0.98
2.74
0.00
0.91
1.21
5.84
1.12
0.43
1.22
5.90
1.13
0.44
14.49
2.26
1.79
III
III
k
0.77
0.01
2.91
0.63
1.51
7.38
1.85
0.92
1.48
7.24
1.76
0.86
14.63
6.51
2.41
III
Avg.
0.03
0.55
0.55
2.17
Step 2 AI  0.83; AII  0.94; AIII  0.57
BI  0.90; BII  0.15; BIII  1.06
CI  0.91; CII  0.16; CIII  1.06
Cluster
Area
A
(A  AI)2
(A  AII)2
(A  AIII)2
B
(B  BI)2
(B  BII)2
(B  BIII)2
C
(C  CI)2
(C  CII)2
(C  CIII)2
	sq-diffI
	sq-diffII
	sq-diffIII
To
I
a
1.36
0.28
5.27
3.72
1.51
0.37
2.76
6.58
1.51
0.36
2.77
6.58
1.01
10.79
16.88
I
I
b
0.09
0.55
1.05
0.44
1.21
0.09
1.85
5.13
1.21
0.09
1.86
5.13
0.74
4.76
10.70
I
I
c
0.58
0.06
2.30
1.32
0.90
0.00
1.10
3.82
0.91
0.00
1.13
3.86
0.06
4.53
9.01
I
I
d
0.97
0.02
3.63
2.37
0.60
0.09
0.56
2.74
0.60
0.09
0.57
2.74
0.21
4.76
7.85
I
I
e
1.16
0.11
4.39
2.99
0.30
0.36
0.20
1.84
0.30
0.37
0.21
1.84
0.84
4.80
6.66
I
Avg.
0.83
0.90
0.91
0.57

Table 6.5 (Continued)
II
f
0.79
2.63
0.02
0.05
0.00
0.82
0.02
1.11
0.00
0.82
0.02
1.11
4.27
0.07
2.27
II
II
g
1.08
3.66
0.02
0.26
0.30
1.45
0.02
0.57
0.31
1.48
0.02
0.56
6.58
0.07
1.39
II
Avg.
0.94
0.15
0.16
0.07
III
h
1.18
4.05
0.06
0.37
0.60
2.26
0.20
0.21
0.61
2.30
0.21
0.20
8.61
0.47
0.78
II
III
i
0.89
2.97
0.00
0.10
0.90
3.25
0.56
0.02
0.91
3.30
0.57
0.02
9.52
1.13
0.15
III
III
j
0.98
3.28
0.00
0.17
1.21
4.47
1.12
0.02
1.22
4.52
1.13
0.03
12.27
2.26
0.22
III
III
k
0.77
0.00
2.91
1.80
1.51
5.83
1.85
0.21
1.48
5.69
1.76
0.18
11.52
6.51
2.18
III
Avg.
0.57
1.06
1.06
0.83
Step 3 AI  0.83; AII  1.02; AIII  0.37
BI  0.90; BII  0.30; BIII  1.21
CI  0.91; CII  0.31; CIII  1.20
Cluster
Area
A
(A  AI)2
(A  AII)2
(A  AIII)2
B
(B  BI)2
(B  BII)2
(B  BIII)2
C
(C  CI)2
(C  CII)2
(C  CIII)2
	sq-diffI
	sq-diffII
	sq-diffIII
To
I
a
1.36
0.28
5.65
2.98
1.51
0.37
3.28
7.38
1.51
0.36
3.30
7.36
1.01
12.22
17.72
I
I
b
0.09
0.55
1.22
0.21
1.21
0.09
2.28
5.84
1.21
0.09
2.30
5.82
0.74
5.81
11.87
I
I
c
0.58
0.06
2.55
0.90
0.90
0.00
1.44
4.44
0.91
0.00
1.48
4.47
0.06
5.47
9.80
I
I
d
0.97
0.02
3.95
1.79
0.60
0.09
0.81
3.26
0.60
0.09
0.82
3.25
0.21
5.58
8.30
I
I
e
1.16
0.11
4.74
2.33
0.30
0.36
0.36
2.27
0.30
0.37
0.37
2.26
0.84
5.47
6.86
I
Avg.
0.83
0.90
0.91
0.57
II
f
0.79
2.63
0.05
0.18
0.00
0.82
0.09
1.46
0.00
0.82
0.09
1.45
4.27
0.24
3.08
II
II
g
1.08
3.66
0.00
0.51
0.30
1.45
0.00
0.82
0.31
1.48
0.00
0.80
6.58
0.00
2.13
II
II
h
1.18
4.05
0.03
0.66
0.60
2.26
0.09
0.37
0.61
2.30
0.09
0.35
8.61
0.21
1.38
II
Avg.
1.02
0.30
0.31
0.15
III
i
0.89
2.97
0.02
0.27
0.90
3.25
0.36
0.09
0.91
3.30
0.36
0.09
9.52
0.74
0.45
III
III
j
0.98
3.28
0.00
0.38
1.21
4.47
0.83
0.00
1.22
4.52
0.83
0.00
12.27
1.66
0.38
III
III
k
0.77
0.00
3.19
1.29
1.51
5.83
1.46
0.09
1.48
5.69
1.38
0.08
11.52
6.03
1.46
III
Avg.
0.37
1.21
1.20
0.76

How Geodemographic Classifications are Built
179
under step 1 in Table 6.5. Taking the square root of the answers gives the
‘actual’ distances between areas and clusters. However, there is no need to
do so, provided we are consistent in the way we compare distances to
clusters.
Unfortunately, the cluster allocations achieved at the end of step 1
(and shown in the final column of Table 6.5) are unlikely to be a good end
solution. The reason is that the cluster centres to which areas are allocated
strongly are influenced by the initial groupings of areas. We try and improve
upon the result by again calculating the average attribute values for each
cluster and relocating the cluster centres to those positions. Table 6.5 shows
that after the first step, the cluster average attribute values reposition the clus-
ters at (0.83, 0.90, 0.91), (0.94, 0.15, 0.16) and (0.57, 1.06, 1.06),
respectively. Each area is reallocated to the cluster that it is now closest to,
which may be different from before. For example, Table 6.5 shows that one
of the previous members of cluster III becomes a member of cluster II.
The process of allocation–reallocation continues until clusters
have a stable (or, sometimes in the case of larger datasets, approxi-
mately stable) membership. If you work through the process you should
find that this convergence occurs at step 3. The movement of the cluster
centres within the three-dimensional variable space and also the chang-
ing composition of the clusters during the classification process is illus-
trated by Figure 6.6. Remember that the result is dependent on the initial
seed selection and should not be considered final. Instead, the process
should be repeated with different selections to check for improved
solutions.
Assuming that Table 6.5 does represent an optimized result then it
is interesting to observe that the ‘best’overall solution is not necessarily the
best for any one particular cluster. In fact, cluster I has least variation within
it at step 1 (this can also be deduced from the average ‘∑sq-diff’ value for
the cluster at each step). Also, note that the clustering algorithm described
here only minimizes the distance from any one area to its cluster centre. An
alternative approach would be to try and maximize the distances between
cluster centres to better differentiate between neighbourhood types.
Of course, different ‘questions’ produce different answers. The
K-means procedure installed in a statistical package on one of our com-
puters produced the following result: area a was a cluster by itself; the
rest of the areas in our type I formed a second cluster; while the remain-
ing areas (which we described as types II and III) were not grouped sep-
arately but placed together into the final, third cluster. If you have access
to statistical software with a (multivariate) K-means function it may be
worthwhile exploring what exactly it does with the data contained in

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
180
Figure 6.6 The movement of cluster centres and the changing composition of the clusters
during the worked example of classification. (a) Step 1: The initial allocation of areas to
seeds. (b) Step 2. (c) Step 3: the converged solution
Centre I
Centre II
Centre III
I
II
III
Centre I
Centre II
Centre III
I
II
III
Centre I
Centre II
Centre III
I
II
III
C
C
C
A
1.5
1.0
0.5
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
B
–1
–1
0
0
1
1
B
–1
0
1
A
–1
0
1
B
–1
0
1
A
–1
0
1
(a)
(b)
(c)

How Geodemographic Classifications are Built
181
Table 6.4. However, be aware of the limits of our example – clustering
11 areas into three clusters is not equivalent to, for example, clustering
100,000 into 10!
Before leaving our worked example, it should be emphasized that
so far we have not checked to see if the variables A, B and C are duplicat-
ing underlying information. If you still have your spreadsheet open, check
the (Pearson) correlations between these variables – how independent are
they? If not very then try investigating the effects of assigning weights to
the variables. The process of classification remains the same except for
one alteration: when calculating the distance between a cluster’s attribute
and an area’s attribute, the result needs to be multiplied by the weight
given to that attribute. If attribute A is given a weight of 10, B a weight of
5 and C a weight of 2, then where before we calculated:
we would instead calculate:
(6.11)
You might also like to explore the effects of assigning weights to areas!
6.10 Conclusion
If the process of clustering is likened to an animal then it is a very peculiar
beast! It has the front legs of automation but the back legs of user inter-
vention; eyes for data-led classification but the ears of a priori expecta-
tion; it feeds on a variety of data sources but generally prefers a census;
displays a patchwork coat mixing the qualitative and the quantitative, the
objective and the subjective; and is born as a cross-breed between art and
science!
In this chapter, the process of forming a geodemographic classifi-
cation has been described by a seven-stage process: selecting potential
input data; bringing the data together in a database; evaluating the data;
weighting the data; clustering the data; arranging the clusters into a hier-
archy; and, finally, providing numerical, textual and visual summaries of
the clusters. At any one of these stages the classification builder has any
number of decisions or choices to make. Does this mean the process can-
not be viewed as in any way objective?
 2  (1.51 1.21)2
d2  10  (1.36  0.68)2  5  (1.51  1.21)2
d2  (1.36  0.68)2  (1.51  1.21)2  (1.51  1.21)2

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
182
One response to the question would be to quote Charlton,
Openshaw and Wymer (1985, p. 74) who state:
[T]he process may seem subjective, but in reality it is no more subjective than
the characteristics of other numerical methods. [I]t is objective in that the
results are reproducible.
We might also cite O’Sullivan and Unwin (2003, p. 353) who
suggest that things seeming a little arbitrary and not especially scientific is
perhaps inevitable when applying tools that attempt to deal routinely with
N-dimensional space.
However, our own ‘answer’ is less defensive of the subject’s role
within the build process and of the part the experienced developer plays
in the process. Instead we take the view that the opportunities for the
builder to interact with the data, try out various schemes and strategies,
and to learn from past experience, successes and failures are all an
important and intrinsic part of learning about the data, of ‘knowledge dis-
covery’ and of looking to get a good classification of the data that is well
suited to the users’ needs. Whether an art or a science, geodemographic
classification is an inherently creative process and is, we suggest, all the
better for being so!
Summary
●Because the sources of, access to and geographic detail of geo-
demographic data vary internationally, classifications are usually
built country by country.
●When selecting variables for clustering careful attention must be
given to scale, comparability, updatability, robustness and to
avoiding the duplication of existing information.
●Variable weightings can be devised using correlation analysis,
minimum spanning trees, principal components analysis and prior
experience.
●Two types of clustering – stepwise and K-means – are both
employed by Experian during the classification process.
●Classifications are collaborated by reference to further sources of
data that were not used as clustering variables.
●Cluster hierarchies are created by arranging cluster ‘types’ into
‘groups’.
●Clusters are represented by summary labels, portraits, indicative
photographs, descriptive prose, charts and maps that together

How Geodemographic Classifications are Built
183
aim to explore and explain the differences between clusters. The
use of labelling, in particular, has sometimes attracted critical
comment.
●Clustering is never a ‘one-shot’ process but is objective in the
sense that the developers draw on their experience, tools and avail-
able data to create a product that ‘best’fits the users’requirements.
Further reading
●
Everitt, B. and Dunn, G. (2001) Applied Multivariate Data Analysis,
Hodder Arnold, London.
●
Everitt, B., Landau, S., Leese, M., Ash, C. and Schober, J. (2001)
Cluster Analysis, Hodder, London.
●
Berry, M. and Linoff, G. (1997) Data Mining Techniques for Marketing,
Sales, and Customer Support, Wiley, New York.


185
7
Geodemographics
Around the World
Learning Objectives
In this chapter we will:
●
Look at the internationalization of geodemographics and how link-
ages have been established between the types of neighbourhood
that are found in different countries.
●
Relate this internationalization with the desire of some companies
to deploy common advertising, marketing and store location
techniques across all the markets in which they operate.
●
Show how census, as well as other data collection and dissem-
ination regimes, vary across the world and how these variations
mould geodemographic outputs.
●
Offer an overview of how geographies of neighbourhood
revealed by geodemographic classification compare and con-
trast across the world, suggesting structural, social and cultural
differences between places of which marketers needs to be
aware.
●
Present a case study by Peter Furness offering a comparison of
selected censuses from across the world.
Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
Richard Harris, Peter Sleight and Richard Webber
© 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
ISBNs: 0-470-86413-3 (HB); 0-470-86414-1 (PB)

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
186
Introduction
In Chapters 2 and 3 we discussed the evolution of geodemographic classi-
fication from public policy research into a commercial industry.
Geodemographic classifications were first developed for public policy
applications during the late 1970s but were quickly launched during
1978/9 as tools for target marketing in the USA and the UK. The US sys-
tem was developed by Claritas and branded PRIZM. The UK equivalent,
which was adapted by CACI from an earlier system, came to be branded
as ACORN. Since 1979 the methodological approaches used by PRIZM
and ACORN have been the model for developing further neighbourhood
classifications, not just in the USA and UK but for an ever increasing
number of counties across the world.
Indeed, by the turn of the millennium, Weiss (2000, p. 33) was
able to write:
Throughout the world, there’s remarkable similarity in the way businesses are
using the cluster technology – for analyzing trading areas, profiling customers,
and driving media strategies. The increasing globalization of culture is also
prompting multinational companies to look at clusters as a common marketing
language to reach customers across many borders.
Using this language of marketing, Weiss portrays not only
American lifestyles in terms of this ‘clustered world’ but also makes com-
parisons with Canada and many other parts of the world in a search for the
international clusters that characterize the ‘global village’.
Here our aims are more modest. We begin by looking at the
internationalization of geodemographics, noting some of the many
countries where classifications have now been produced, some differ-
ences in the data sources and geographical frameworks upon which
they are built, and paying particular attention to some of the similar-
ities and differences in census taking across the world and how these
impact on the geodemographic information provided. Having
done this we look at some visualization and multimedia tools from
classifications produced around the world to offer an overview of
a few of the common and differing geographies of neighbourhood
that are found worldwide. These especially are relevant to com-
panies that seek to standardize their use of geodemographics inter-
nationally, to develop consistent transnational marketing campaigns
for example.

Geodemographics Around the World
187
7.1 The internationalization of
geodemographics
Across Europe, neighbourhood classifications have been built by Claritas
in France, Germany, Netherlands, Spain and the UK, and by Experian in
Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands,
Norway, Spain, Sweden and the UK, either to support wholly owned sub-
sidiaries or as the basis for joint-venture or franchise operations. In France,
a further neighbourhood classification was built by Coref (a company
which was later acquired by Experian) and in Italy by Sarin, a division of
the Italian Yellow Pages (a telephone directory service).
Neighbourhood classifications have also been built and promoted
in Canada by Compusearch, a company recently acquired by MapInfo – a
GIS vendor. Peruvian and Brazilian systems have been developed with the
support of Experian. South African marketers have for many years had
access to a classification trading under a number of different brands,
including Mosaic. In the US, classifications include Mosaic, PRIZM
(Claritas) and PSYTE (Polk).
Neighbourhood classifications are used extensively by marketers
in Australia and New Zealand. Systems for Hong Kong and Japan have
been developed by Experian, initially to support the international expan-
sion of Marks and Spencer (a British-based retailer). More recently
Smartal Systems have built a system for Hong Kong and launched a sys-
tem covering the three most prosperous city regions in China – Shanghai,
Beijing and Guangzhou.
The principal motivation for developing these systems has been to
support commercial rather than public-sector research applications. In
most of these markets the business model broadly is similar as also is
the manner in which the classifications are built, documented, visualized
and positioned. Although, the results of these classifications are largely
unpublished the visualization tools and multimedia guides that accompany
geodemographic information systems can reveal interesting information
about the social structure and neighbourhood composition of different
countries, providing a useful basis for comparison.
Table 7.1 lists markets according to the availability of such visual-
ization tools and, where they are available, gives an example of a national
market research survey operation which supports the tabulation of consumer
behaviour data using a cluster-based approach. Although these systems
extensively are marketed in their ‘home’ countries, there is an increasing

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
188
Table 7.1 Examples of geodemographic tools from around the world
Country
Availability
Example of
Contents
of visualization
geodemographically
material
coded market
research survey
Australia
Available
Roy Morgan
Attitude and opinions, FMCG,
sporting interests, demographics,
household appliances, personal
products, automotive, holidays,
media
China
Not available
Target Group Index
Products, media, brands
Denmark
Not available
Gallup
Interests, attitudes, consumption
by category/product/band, media,
travel and transportation,
business to business, retail
Finland
Available
Taloustkimus
Ownership of consumer durables
and media consumption
France
Planned 2004
Secodip
Drugs/fragrances/hygiene and
textile – expenditure per
household for consumer goods
Germany
Available
GFK
FMCG
Greece
Not available
Target Group Index
Demographics, products owner-
ship/intention to buy, lifestyle
information, media, travel, car
ownership, financial services
Hong Kong
Not available
Nielsen
Consumer durables, FMCG
Japan
Not available
None
None
Netherlands
Available
NIPO
Media
New
Not available
Roy Morgan
Media, attitude and opinions,
Zealand
brand preferences, shopping
habits, activities and interests
Northern
Planned 2004
Target Group Index
Media, products, brands
Ireland
Norway
Not available
Gallup
Consumer products, media,
channels
Republic
Planned 2004
Ireland Life Survey
Financial services, telecomms,
of Ireland
technology, media, lifestyle,
activities and hobbies
Spain
Available
Estudio General de
Media, shopping, finance, cars
Medios
Sweden
Available
Orvesto Konsument
Consumer behaviour and
preferences – interests,
possession of durables, media
habits, spending
UK
Available
Target Group Index
Products, media, brands
USA
Available
Simmons
Services, products, media usage

Geodemographics Around the World
189
demand from large global businesses to deploy ‘overseas’ systems within
their international headquarters or regional marketing offices. For example,
there is a team at Marks and Spencer’s international headquarters, in
London, which applies overseas geodemographic systems for analysing its
non-UK markets.
Comparisons across national boundaries are also made possible by
the development of products such as Mosaic Global, an ambitious undertak-
ing that covers nearly 800 million of the world’s most affluent consumers,
across 17 countries, identifing 14 distinct types of residential neighbourhood,
each with its own set of values, motivations and consumer preferences
(www.business-strategies.co.uk). Such products (which also include
EuroDirect’s CAMEO International classification: www.eurodirect.co.uk)
reflect the desire of companies such as McDonald’s, Ford and Citibank to
deploy common advertising, marketing and store location techniques across
all the markets in which they operate and therefore to look to a single supplier
of geodemographic classification just as they would to a worldwide supplier
of merchandise, parts, advertising, accountancy or other business services. In
recent years companies including Marks and Spencer, McDonald’s, Ford and
Ikea have taken the decision to standardize, at an international level, the
manner in which they use geodemographic systems for applications such as
retail site location and strategic market segmentation. This is consistent with
the undertakings of major international brands to appoint global advertisers
to develop consistent transnational marketing campaigns.
Case study: a brief comparison of selected
censuses from across the world
Peter Furness, Peter Furness Limited
The text is a shortened version of a chapter published in Dugmore and
Moy (2004) and is here reproduced by permission of The Stationery Office Ltd.
From its foundation the United Nations (UN) has recommended national
governments hold population censuses at the end or beginning of each
decade. Most countries thus undertake population and housing censuses at
least once every 10 years. The UN Statistical Commission estimates that 165
countries have conducted a census in the course of the last decade. These
censuses have covered approximately 95% of the world’s population.
The methods used for census taking cover a wide spectrum, ran-
ging from the traditional questionnaire-based census through to those carried
out using administrative registers. In between are combinations of the two,

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
190
supplemented in some cases by various types of sample survey, either in
conjunction with the census (sample enumeration) or as separate activities
(household surveys).
The traditional census – typified by the UK and many other coun-
tries including major economies such as the USA, China and Japan –
involves the distribution of census questionnaires which are then collected
by enumerators or by a combination of enumerators and ‘post back’. Some
countries such as the USA, Switzerland and Spain are experimenting with
the internet as a data collection medium.
The traditional census has three main advantages. First, the national
statistical organization has control over the operation which means that it
can be managed to maximize the statistical potential of the data collected.
Secondly, the traditional census tends to have wide topic coverage. Third
the public awareness generated for official statistics in general engenders a
sense of national participation and highlights the importance of objective
and timely statistics for society at large.
The main disadvantages of the traditional census are costs, the
infrequency of enumeration and associated organizational headaches, and
the problems of accurately enumerating certain subgroups of the population
such as the young mobile, people living in ‘ghettos’ or ‘shanty towns’ and
some other marginalized sections of the community.
For the cost reason, many countries carry out a sample enumeration
in conjunction with the census to collect more detailed information on a
separate, longer questionnaire. This is often referred to as the ‘long form’,
as in the USA, Canada and China, and is distinct from the ‘short form’to be
completed by all residents and used to compile baseline demographics
including number of persons, households, gender, age and so forth.
Separate from decennial sample enumeration (the long form), some
countries employ sample household surveys as an integral part of their census
operations. Household surveys are the most flexible of the census data
sources. In principle, almost any subject can be investigated through this
method. France plans to replace its traditional census with a continuous,
rolling survey that will cover the whole country over a period of time rather
than on one particular day. This will be used in conjunction with small-area
modelling techniques to provide annual counts on a continuous basis.
Germany conducts a rolling ‘microcensus’ of 1% of households annually,
organized on a partial rotation basis so that every sampled household remains
in the sample for four years. In the UK the traditional census is under review:
The Census provides vital information for Government and business plan-
ning that is widely used in the public and private sectors, but robust evi-
dence to justify the expenditure involved in undertaking the Census was not

Geodemographics Around the World
191
available [to a Government committee]. We recommend that any future
Census should be justified in cost-benefit terms. Moreover, before such a
decision is taken, an evaluation should be undertaken of all alternatives to a
full Census, such as relying on administrative records, conducting a rolling
Census, reverting to a simple headcount, or doing without a Census altogether
(Treasury Committee, 2002).
The preceding quotation makes reference to the increasingly
used data contained in administrative registers. Many social statistics are
produced as a byproduct of administrative processes. Data from different
registers can be merged (provided they have a common georeference
such as postal address) thus reducing the burden on the respondent by
making use of whatever data is already in the system. Other benefits
include the avoidance of costly ‘in the field’ data collection and a greater
degree of control over the timing and frequency of statistical reporting.
However, there are also disadvantages of using administrative
registers. The content and detail may substantially be less than that available
from questionnaire-based surveys and there may be data quality and error
propagation problems, which make the merging of registers problematic.
There is also the significant challenge of convincing the public about the
confidentiality of the merging and reporting processes – issues of data
privacy and protection; or, ‘dataveillance’as Monmonier (2002) describes it.
Nevertheless, many developed countries, particularly in Europe,
have been developing such a capacity for a number of years. Nordic
countries – Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden – have
relied on register-based statistics for their data needs since the 1960s and
have used demographic information from central population registers
since the 1970 censuses. Other countries in Europe, like Austria,
Belgium, Luxembourg and Switzerland are in the process of transition
from traditional to register-based censuses. Countries such as France,
Germany and the Netherlands are developing a combination of various
types of register and sample surveys to produce census-type data.
Table 7.2 provides an overview of the current census methodologies
adopted by the world’s 10 largest economies. For further information
about censuses from across the world refer to Office for National Statistics
(2003) – which is available from www.statistics.gov.uk. In less wealthy
nations where the cost of providing a census or other types of data infra-
structure is prohibitively expensive, the use of remotely sensed imagery
has been suggested (Baudot, 2001).
As for the future, it is clear that the nature of the census and the
manner in which it is conducted is changing in many countries. There are
several factors involved. First is the impact of technology on the traditional

Table 7.2 Census summary for the world’s top 10 economies
Country
GDP (2002
Population
Most recent
Methodology
Website link
in $1012)
size (2001
population
in millions)
census
USA
10.40
285.9
April 2000
Traditional with
http://www.census.gov/
future methodology
under review
China
5.70
1285.0
November 2000
Traditional
http://www.stats.gov.cn/english/index.htm
Japan
3.55
127.3
October 2000
Traditional
http://www.stat.go.jp/english/index.htm
India
2.66
1025.1
March 2001
Traditional
http://www.censusindia.net/
Germany
2.18
82.0
N/A
Register based plus
http://www.statistik-bund.de/e_home.htm
sample surveys
France
1.54
59.5
March 1999
Traditional moving to
http://www.insee.fr/
register based plus
sample surveys
UK
1.52
59.5
April 2001
Traditional with
http://www.statistics.gov.uk/
methodology under 
review
Italy
1.44
57.5
October 2001
Traditional
http://www.istat.it/English/index.htm
Russia
1.35
144.7
October 2002
Traditional
http://www.gks.ru/eng/
Brazil
1.34
172.6
August 2000
Traditional
http://www.ibge.gov.br/english/default.php
Sources: GDP data from www.countryrankings.com; population sizes from the United Nations (Infonation).

Geodemographics Around the World
193
census. This is being felt in all aspects of the census process: from planning
and management; through data capture, processing and storage; to data
dissemination. It is fuelled by tools such as GIS, intelligent character
recognition (to make automatic the process of data collation), the internet
as a data collection and dissemination medium, and by new analysis and
reporting software.
Second is the improving range of data sources for a register-based
census. As we have seen, an increasing number of countries are adopting
the register-based approach to supplement or even replace the traditional
census. Pressures to implement population registers where these are not
currently available (for example, from increasing concerns about the need
to tighten control over citizenship and entitlement to services) together
with the availability of new and highly innovative data sources (such as
the Cooltown Project from Hewlett-Packard, www.cooltown.com), will
tend to fuel this trend.
Thirdly, in a world with accelerating population and socio-economic
change, the traditional decennial census is becoming less and less relevant
after the first few years following a census. With cost the major barrier to a
more frequent traditional census, there will be greater pressure for the use of
register-based data and frequent sample surveys to supplement or supersede
the census.
Against this, the general public is becoming increasingly concerned
about data privacy and the restrictions on civil liberties that population regis-
ters might engender (see Chapter 9). This may well impact on the scope of
administrative data sources that can be mobilized for census-related activ-
ities and the speed with which change can be effected.
7.2 Census data sources – some differences in
what is asked and where
Of the 21 countries and one regional city (Hong Kong) for which geo-
demographic classifications have been built, census statistics have been
used in all but the Netherlands and Germany. In all of the remaining countries,
other than France and Canada, geodemographic classifications have been
updated on a 10-year cycle according to the frequency with which census
statistics are released.
The census questions that are asked in the different national cen-
suses broadly are similar in scope, covering: age, ethnicity and household
characteristics; housing; and various measures of affluence and deprivation

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
194
including education, occupation, industry and car ownership. Despite
these broad similarities there are interesting and important differences in
each market, often reflecting differences in the level of economic develop-
ment. These differences often have a significant effect on the shape of the
eventual classification.
In Australia and the USA, for instance, the census provides
unusually detailed information on rents, house values and personal and
household incomes, making it correspondingly easier to differentiate
neighbourhoods characterized by high incomes and by high housing costs –
which predominantly occur in the larger cities – from less well-off neigh-
bourhoods in smaller towns and rural locations. The Australian census is
also unusual in that it covers access to the internet, a very useful proxy for
the ‘Urban Intelligence’ group of neighbourhoods (defined by Mosaic)
and a highly relevant measure of social inclusion. The Australian census is
also unique in that it asks the general subject in which degrees were taken.
From this information it has been possible to identify that the ‘Café
Society’ neighbourhoods of inner Sydney and Melbourne have dispropor-
tionate numbers of people who have graduated in arts rather than scientific
subjects.
The Brazilian, Peruvian and South African censuses are, by con-
trast, much more focused on topics relating to access to utilities such as
water and electricity that differentiate shanty towns from mainstream
developments. These censuses cover whether or not households have
access to running water, electricity or mains sewerage. In these countries,
as in China, the censuses also have quite detailed information on literacy.
The Brazilian census has particularly detailed information on the consan-
guineous relationships of the often extended households that live together.
Like nineteenth-century British censuses, it provides information on the
geographical distribution of domestic servants (the sort of information that
Charles Booth used to construct the first census-based classes of social
economic groups within the UK: see Chapter 2, Section 2.1).
A distinctive feature of the Japanese census is the coverage of the
amount of time it takes to get to work, whereas the British census provides
detail on the mode of travel of work. Information on these topics improves
the ability of the neighbourhood classification to differentiate neighbour-
hoods in metropolitan and regional centres from those in smaller towns.
The Chinese census features a number of distinctive topics. One
important table in the Chinese census is a resident’s ‘hukou’. In China
everyone is registered with a local community, entitling them to certain
rights. The distribution of the local population according to whether their
registration (hukou) is local and, if not, how long they have been resident

Geodemographics Around the World
195
at their address is a useful indicator of the presence in a neighbourhood of
students or of temporary workers from other regions of China. Another
distinctive feature of the Chinese census is whether the dwellings that
people live in are wholly or only partly residential. This makes it quite
easy to identify areas of shop-houses in the centres of busy commercial
districts. In China the proportion of households using wood as fuel for
heating and cooking can be seen from the statistical profiles to be a very
effective indicator of traditional rural areas.
Scandinavian and Spanish censuses provide detailed information
on the local concentration of second homes while the British census pro-
vides unique insights into whether homes are terraced, semi-detached or
detached. The British census has always provided detailed information on
housing disadvantage, including the proportions of households sharing
access to a bath or an inside toilet, or living with more than one person per
room. The UK census does not require its respondents to know the date of
construction of their homes, unlike the Chinese and Hong Kong censuses.
The Chinese census is unique in requiring people to specify the number of
square metres of their accommodation as well as the number of rooms.
In addition to differences in the information sought, different cen-
suses have different scales of data output. For instance, Finland, New
Zealand, Norway and the UK release data for relatively small geographical
units; Spain and Sweden for relatively large ones.
7.3 Differences in the availability of
non-census data sources
In many countries geodemographic systems exclusively are built using small-
area census statistics. However, where these are not available, as for instance
in Germany and the Netherlands whose citizens, since 1945, have resisted
proposals for the collection and dissemination of demographic data at small-
area level, neighbourhood classifications have been constructed using an
eclectic array of data from a variety of sources. Particularly important in
Germany has been a field evaluation of individual buildings and/or streets,
which provides information on their age, physical form and building condi-
tion. Telephone directories and car registration files also provide important
inputs to the German system.
In the Netherlands, information used to build neighbourhood
classification originates in part from the sales records of Wehkamp –
Holland’s leading mail order company – and from the accumulation of

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
196
many years of information from conventional market research interviews.
In both Germany and Holland the availability of data for very detailed
geographic units counterbalances the relatively narrow range of topics
otherwise included in the databases used to build the system.
In Spain, the high level of granularity (low resolution) of the cen-
sus output statistics makes it necessary to supplement them with a small set
of key variables obtained from the electoral register. This is not the case in
France, Italy, Ireland and Greece where census statistics are accessible at a
much more detailed geographic level and therefore do not need to be
supplemented by non-census data sources. An electoral register is less
critical for the success of New Zealand and Australian classifications but
has been used to increase the geographic level to a finer level. Indeed the
availability of cadastral data for individual building units in New Zealand
allows the classification to operate right down to the building level.
7.4 Variations in the detail of the postal
delivery system
A third critical consideration when commercializing classifications in
different markets is the granularity of the postal system. Where postal
units (such as unit postcodes or ZIP4) are very fine, as for instance in
the USA, the UK and the Netherlands, it is very easy for users to identify
the geodemographic code of customers or a client by using a look-up file
linking postcodes to classifications. However, in countries where post-
codes do not exist at all (such as Hong Kong) or where they can cover
very large areas (such as in Germany or Spain), it is necessary to develop
or apply address-matching software to customer or survey records in
order to append geodemographic codes. This step clearly adds a level of
complexity and cost to the analysis and targeting process, which in
the past has been a significant barrier to the adoption of neighbourhood
classifications in these countries.
7.5 Geographies of neighbourhood
worldwide
As we have seen, between countries in which geodemographic classifica-
tions have been built there is variation in the sources of local statistics that
are available, differences in the level of geographic detail at which these

Geodemographics Around the World
197
data are released, differences in the granularity of the mail delivery systems
used to identify geodemographic codings and, perhaps most critically, vari-
ations in the nature, emphasis and dissemination of census information.
Furthermore, important social, cultural and political differences between
nation mean that we would not expect to see any two countries having
exactly matching types of neighbourhoods. Population size also makes a
difference: in small and relatively homogeneous countries, such as Ireland,
Finland and Hong Kong, we might expect to find fewer distinguishable
types of neighbourhood than in very large and populous countries such as
the USA, Brazil and China that cover different climatic zones and which, in
the case of the USA and Brazil, contain substantial minority populations
with quite distinctive behavioural characteristics.
Despite these differences and variations, marketers have gone
some way to making connections across the various neighbourhood types,
which then permit international comparisons to be made. For example,
Weiss (2000) suggests that (at the time he was writing) the ‘Blue Blood
Estates’ of the US PRIZM classification, the ‘Suburban Executives’ of the
Canadian PSYTE classification and the ‘Clever Capitalists’ of the GB
Mosaic classification all fell, with some other neighbourhood types, under
the broader socio-economic banner of ‘Elite Suburbs’. Similarly, US ‘Urban
Gold Coast’, the ‘Canadian Establishment’ and UK ‘Studio Singles’ might
all be considered as ‘Upscale Urban Areas’.
The explanations Weiss gives for such connections are associated
with general notions of globalization and the export of American culture
overseas. Yet, there arises somewhat of a contradiction in that he is also
concerned to illuminate the fragmentation – not homogenization – of
American and other national lifestyles. The suggestion appears to be that
cultures are both homogenizing but also fragmenting in broadly similar
ways across the more affluent countries of the world, perhaps reflecting
the rise of consumer societies offering similar types of branded goods and
services across the globe, and perhaps reflecting notions of self-similarity,
of patterns repeating at various scales of analysis – a fractal perspective
that has been employed in analyses and writings of urban settlements
(Batty and Longley, 1994; Soja, 2000).
There are limits to the sorts of connections that can be made
between the neighbourhood classifications of differing nations and these
need to be understood and recognized. Most particularly (and notwith-
standing variations in data sources) the broad method of classification is
the same in each country. This offers standardization and comparability
but also tends to represent the world in terms of what matters to business
and commerce, not what may actually be of importance to the people of

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
198
those countries, their particular social contexts, values and aspirations. In
other words, attempting to portray 17 countries in terms of only 14 neigh-
bourhood types may reasonably lead to accusations of oversimplification,
of lacking cultural sensitivity and specificity.
On the other hand, important differences – in consumer behaviour
at least – can be revealed by the common analytical base provided by geo-
demographics. For example, Weiss (2000) cites the example of Bang and
Olufsen who found that consumer behaviours differ in Britain from coun-
tries like France and Spain. Specifically, the British were prepared to
travel further distances to a Bang and Olufsen store, meaning the catch-
ment models based on a British market did not export well. Often it is
these ‘exceptions that prove the rule’that are the most interesting. A virtue
of the geodemographic approach is that classifications can at times high-
light cluster types that simply do not match with ones for other countries –
that are genuinely unique. An example of this is the ‘Shack and Shanty’
type of South Africa, which comprises about half of the country. Its name
and prevalence is indicative of the sharp economic disparities that exist in
that nation.
It is quickly evident from even cursory inspection of the visualiza-
tion material supporting geodemographic products that there are a number
of interesting similarities and differences in the patterns and classes of
neighbourhood type revealed by the classifications produced for different
countries. These in part reflect the methods of classification yet also shed
light on some underlying structural, social and cultural differences
between places. This perspective is consistent with our long definition of
geodemographics (Chapter 1): the analysis of socio-economic and behav-
ioural data about people, to investigate the geographical patterns that
structure and are structured by the forms and functions of settlements.
To quote what we said in a previous context of measuring deprivation
(Chapter 2, Section 2.3), what geodemographic profiling comes to represent
exists at the interplay between the real world, and the set of methods and
meanings used to make sense of it.
The similarities and differences in neighbourhood structures,
which are revealed by geodemographic comparisons, are highly relevant
to large international agencies. They suggest how and where otherwise
uniform global branding campaigns need to be adapted to take into
account particular features of the demographics of individual markets.
With that in mind, we proceed to describe some of those differences,
mainly limiting our discussion to those between northern and
Mediterranean Europe, between Europe and the Americas, and between
developing and advanced industrial societies. We are aware that by some

Geodemographics Around the World
199
academic theorizations our descriptions are somewhat partial and oblique
but still, we hope, impart a flavour of how neighbourhood geographies
compare across national borders and are conceptualized in some aspects
of marketing.
7.5.1 Comparing neighbourhood groups of northern
and Mediterranean Europe
When the geodemographic profiles of northern European markets are
compared with those of Mediterranean Europe, we find that in the
former there is a much higher proportion of clusters characterized by
low-rise houses as opposed to high-rise flats. Whereas in northern
European classifications almost all high-status neighbourhood cate-
gories consist of low-rise houses (Mosaic UK’s ‘Global Connections’
type is an exception), higher proportions of the ‘better-off’ clusters and
population are to be found in inner city locations in Spain (‘Classic
Bourgeois’ neighbourhoods), Italy (‘Blue Ties’) and Greece. The
‘flight to the suburbs’ and the decentralization of cities that has, until
recently at least, generally characterized population movements within
the UK has not happened to the same extent elsewhere (the UK’s Urban
Task Force report frequently cites the higher population densities of
Mediterranean cities as the model for sustainable urban living: Urban
Task Force, 1999). These differences impact on leisure pursuits as
measured by lifestyle surveys – the popularity of gardening in the UK,
for example.
A second contrast emerging from northern European and
Mediterranean classifications is the scale at which spatial differences in
levels of prosperity occur. While in southern Europe the major differences
in levels of income and prosperity occur between clusters concentrated in
neighbourhoods in metropolitan and regional centres on the one hand, and
in clusters concentrated in neighbourhoods in small towns and rural areas
on the other, in northern Europe and particularly in Britain, the clusters
are much less regionalized. In these systems, high- and low-income clusters
tend to appear much more equally in cities of different size and there are
relatively fewer urban areas which contain exclusively high- or exclusively
low-income neighbourhoods.
Marketers, such as those in American Express or Vodafone, when
profiling the adopters of new products or of new channels of communi-
cation, consistently have found early adopters in southern Europe to be
much more strongly associated with metropolitan neighbourhood types.

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
200
By contrast in northern European markets it would appear that a much
higher proportion of early adopters live in suburban and semi-urban
locations and around second tier and provincial cities, as well as major
metropolitan centres. The perception of many brand marketers is that the
spatial obstacles to the diffusion of innovatory propositions is much
weaker in northern than in southern Europe where rural provinces are
perceived as being more traditional in their orientation. The contrast in
the textual vignette describing Italian ‘Soil and Sun’ and the UK’s
‘Greenbelt Guardians’ demonstrate very clearly differences in terms of
education, incomes, use of financial services and of different media
channels.
A third contrast between northern and southern Europe is the
influence of the family. Northern European classifications demonstrate
the concentration within provincial cities of large areas populated by
young single people who either live on their own or in shared accommo-
dation. Many of these types of neighbourhood (such as the Dutch ‘Young
Singles in Inner City Surroundings’) are located close to universities, to
which children go to, away from home. However, larger cities – London
in particular – have many areas dominated by childless households,
whether singles, sharers, co-habitees or recently married. By contrast, in
Spain, Italy and Greece (and elsewhere in southern Europe), few people
other than the military live in neighbourhoods characterized by young
singles. These are not cultures that spawn neighbourhoods (such as
‘Counter Cultural Mix’) of young singles sharing large, old Victorian
houses subdivided into bedsits or small flats of the sort featured in the
film Notting Hill. Such distinctions are useful to marketers for suggesting
the most appropriate manner of promoting products to young adults.
7.5.2 Comparing neighbourhood groups of Europe
and the Americas
The neighbourhood patterns revealed by classifications of the USA and
Canada generally are closer to those of northern Europe than to those
of southern Europe. In the USA and Canada, as in Scandinavia and
Germany, geodemographic profiling suggests that the most affluent
neighbourhoods tend to be close to the outer ring of most of the largest
cities – an enduring realization of the Burgess model of 1920s’ Chicago.
Conversely, inner urban areas, other than in New York and Boston, have
had difficulty retaining more affluent households, except in neighbour-
hoods dominated by households without children (such as US Mosaic’s

Geodemographics Around the World
201
‘Upper Bohemia’). However, unlike northern Europe and perhaps due to
the huge territorial size of the USA relative to European countries, there is
a greater tendency for the US clusters which contain the lowest income
neighbourhoods to be located in remote rural areas, particularly the south
(Mississippi and Arkansas, for example). As in southern Europe, there is a
tendency for the more affluent, family-oriented neighbourhoods particu-
larly to be concentrated in specific regions which are closely networked
into the global economy and whose high levels of education and innova-
tion have resulted in particularly high land and housing costs and a high
reliance on knowledge industries (such as US ‘Latino Norte’). In the US
classifications it is common for more than one neighbourhood cluster to
be associated almost exclusively with the state of California.
Comparing levels of income, unemployment and ethnicity in the
different clusters, it is evident that US neighbourhoods are significantly
more polarized than European ones in terms of both demographic and con-
sumption patterns. The corollary of this greater variability between types is
a lower level of diversity within types and, indeed, within statistical areas.
Geodemographic clusters are much more ethnically segregated in the USA
and there are a number where particular (‘non-white’) ethnic groups make
up a majority of the population. This contrasts with the situation in Europe
where no clusters are dominated by any particular ‘minority group’.
Accordingly, US classifications support more ethnically determined cat-
egories than European ones, with ethnic clusters that are specific to rural as
well as urban areas.
7.5.3 Neighbourhood geographies of Latin America
In both Brazil and Peru it is evident from maps of the various neighbour-
hood clusters that more affluent neighbourhoods remain particularly
focused on well-established near-central locations, often with an attractive
historic environment. Most peripheral locations are occupied by recent,
poor migrants from rural areas. Neither Brazil nor Peru have areas of
young singles or sharers: neither social mores nor the housing stock is
conducive to the emergence of these areas and most students continue to
live at home with their parents and to study at local universities. Problems
with security and the absence of public housing mean that the more affluent,
as a rule, favour neighbourhoods of apartments over neighbourhoods with
villas. These neighbourhoods, such as Miraflores in Lima, tend geograph-
ically to be more concentrated than is the case in Europe and they tend to
be located along a limited number of radial corridors. These neighbourhoods

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
202
have, over time, attracted the offices of international companies with the
result that many people from poor neighbourhoods commute from inner
city neighbourhoods along these radial corridors to gain employment in
the more wealthy suburbs.
Another pattern that is distinctive to Latin America is the ten-
dency for new neighbourhoods to improve their status over time. Whereas
in the USA there is a tendency for the highest income groups to live in the
newest neighbourhoods and for neighbourhoods to lose status the older
they get, in many Latin American ‘favellas’ it is common for the newest
rural migrants to live in the newest neighbourhoods and for these poor
neighbourhoods to improve their status as their new inhabitants succeed
in establishing themselves in the urban economy. The Peruvian geodemo-
graphic classification shows very clearly how the parts of cities newly
built by Andean migrants first become legally incorporated, then acquire
water and drainage, then are cabled for electricity. Roads become paved.
Shacks are reconstructed in more durable materials and their owners,
rather than move out and ‘up’ as would ethnic minorities in the larger
Texan or Californian cities, instead build a second upper storey with their
emerging wealth. Climate and soils likewise militate against the exodus
of the rich into commutable villages, as would be case in the UK,
Netherlands, Belgium and France. The leisure focus of the wealthy is
more on the country club than the country retreat. Neighbourhoods of second
or retirement homes appear wholly absent.
7.5.4 Neighbourhood geographies of ‘the east’
and ‘the west’
Australian classifications provide evidence of the similarity between
Australian neighbourhoods and those of the USA, the UK and northern
Europe with a high number of clusters characterized by footloose singles
and a much higher concentration of wealthy, globally connected and
well-educated (though not necessarily high income) residents living in
inner city neighbourhoods, particularly where there is outstanding archi-
tectural or environmental heritage (such as Australia’s ‘Champagne and
Chardonnay’ neighbourhoods). Australia and New Zealand, like Britain,
have retirement rather than vacation seaside clusters (such as New
Zealand’s ‘Sun Seeking Seniors’) but, like the USA and Scandinavia,
have no high-status rural commuter neighbourhoods. Australia’s neigh-
bourhoods of public housing, like Britain’s, have high concentrations of
poor, ‘non-white’ ethnic groups.

Geodemographics Around the World
203
In both China and Japan the neighbourhood classifications clearly
differentiate self-reliant populations who live in neighbourhoods (such as
Japan’s ‘Working Village Families’) characterized by old people and low
incomes yet at the same time living in spacious, mostly owner-occupied
accommodation (where there is very little unemployment), from neigh-
bourhoods in large cities that tend to contain younger populations that are
more likely to live in flats which they rent and who travel long distances to
work in service industries. In both China and Japan there are clear differ-
ences between the mix of neighbourhoods in Beijing, Shanghai and
Tokyo, on the one hand, and of second-tier cities where the population is
less well educated and much less likely to work in service industries. Late
marriage rates, low fertility and delayed childbirth are a distinctive feature
of the affluent neighbourhoods of the top-tier cities as they are in global
cities of Europe and the USA.
Despite national – even continental differences – a number of
common dimensions are apparent in all classifications. Even in Sweden,
where disparities in income after tax are relatively low, and in China,
where housing historically has not been allocated on the basis of market
forces, there is still a tendency for people of different levels of education
to find themselves as neighbours of others of similar status. This tendency
to ‘flock together’ remains apparent even in areas of housing which origin-
ally were developed for public renting – whether in the UK, Hong Kong
or China, these tend still to be differentiated on the basis of status.
In every market there are some clusters that are highly connected
to global networks, whether financial, academic or cultural, and which
attract people who are the most interested in new ideas, in international
trends and for whom diversity and complexity is an attraction rather than
a repellent. These neighbourhoods (such as UK ‘Counter Cultural Mix’
and ‘New Urban Colonists’, or Japan’s ‘City Flat Dwellers’) particularly
are associated with political capitals, banking centres and prestige univer-
sity cities. Residents in these neighbourhoods have a high thirst for media
and have more cosmopolitan worldviews. People who live in such areas
will often find themselves more at home in similar neighbourhoods in
other countries than they would in other sorts of neighbourhood in their
home country.
By contrast, the types of neighbourhood which are the most quint-
essential of a country, where tastes and traditions are most old fashioned
and traditional, are likely to be found not just in the countryside (such
as Norway’s ‘Mountain Farmers’) but also in clusters characterized by
older, often terraced and often privately rented housing for workers in old
established mining and heavy industrial areas. Such areas are particularly

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
204
conservative in their tastes for food, in their sporting preferences, in their
disregard of international brands and, sometimes, in their dislike of
‘incomers’ from other types of neighbourhood. Family and the commu-
nity provide an important source of support in these areas, where people
marry and have children when they are particularly young. The South
Wales valleys (such as UK ‘Industrial Grit’), Appalachia, the Belgian
coalfield (such as Belgian ‘Industrial Tradition’) and the Basque region
provide high concentrations of neighbourhoods of this sort.
In most countries there is an apparent divide between the neigh-
bourhoods in which the more cosmopolitan ‘Chattering Classes’ live and
those, often with a more scientific education, who work for large interna-
tional organizations with scientific and technical orientations. More often
located on the outer rim of major growth poles, these residents have a
much more consumerist lifestyle than their counterparts in inner cities and
are more likely to live in new housing, to be adept at the use of new tech-
nologies and to commute by car, to work in high tech businesses located
in office parks. Examples are UK ‘High Technologists’, Italy’s ‘Silicon
Heartland’, France’s ‘Rising Materialists’, Finland’s ‘Silicon Valley’ and
China’s ‘Upcoming Elites’, Helsinki (Finland), Stockholm (Sweden),
Reading (UK), Utrecht (The Netherlands) and Seattle (USA) all have high
concentrations of residents in this type of neighbourhood.
7.6 Conclusion
In this chapter we have shown that between the many countries in which
geodemographic products are available there are differences in the
sources, specification and geographic detail of the data used to build the
classifications. Despite these differences, connections have been made
between apparently similar types of neighbourhood in different countries.
Making such links can be useful to identify commonalities and differences
in neighbourhood patterns which, in turn, help to reveal underling struc-
tural, social and cultural trends. They also help to identify neighbour-
hoods that simply cannot be matched and, in this way, are unique to
particular nations.
Such comparisons and the conclusions drawn from them are partial
and somewhat superficial. However, for marketers there are benefits to be
gained by interpolating results from neighbourhood types in one market
to near-matching neighbourhood types in other markets. This interpol-
ation is likely to be more reliable at the product category level (i.e. for
purchase and ownership of cars), than at the brand level (i.e. the purchase

Geodemographics Around the World
205
of a particular brand of car, such as Ford or Honda). It is always important to
remember the cultural differences that will exist between residents living
in notionally similar areas but in different countries. And to remember that
especially (but not exclusively) in very large countries such as the USA,
China and Brazil, behaviours associated with a given type of neighbour-
hood may display considerable regional variety. A good example is the
consumption of food products which themselves are a reflection of differ-
ences in climate, soils and produce that historically could be easily grown
or raised. However, other (perhaps less obvious) attitudes, preferences and
behaviours are also often regionalized.
What this all adds up to is a sense of perspective and a realization
that geodemographic methods are one tool among many ways of con-
structing geographical knowledge. They make no pretence to explain fully
the world, only to help us understand it a little better, in a way that is use-
ful for private- and public-sector decision making. It will be useful to keep
this ‘sense of place’ in mind when we come to critique geodemographics
in the following chapter.
Summary
●Geodemographic methods increasingly are used throughout the
world for analysis, profiling and to inform marketing.
●Neighbourhood classifications have, for example, been built in
France, Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, the UK, Belgium,
Denmark, Finland, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Norway, Sweden, Canada,
the USA, Australia, New Zealand, China, Japan, Brazil and Peru.
●Methods and sources of data collection vary across the world.
●Most countries undertake a census every five or 10 years. Methods
of census include distributing the same questionnaire to all house-
holds, using survey techniques, fusing datasets and maintaining
rolling registers.
●Some similarities and differences in neighbourhood structures
can be revealed by comparing geodemographic outputs (profiles,
visualizations and multimedia tools) from across the world. Such
comparisons are useful to large international businesses and agen-
cies that wish to deploy common advertising, marketing and store
location techniques across all the markets in which they operate.
●Mosaic Global is an example of an international geodemographic
product, classifying 800 million consumers, across 17 countries
into 14 distinct types of residential neighbourhood.

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
206
Further Reading
●
Allen, D. (1968) British Tastes: an Enquiry into the Likes and Dislikes
of the Regional Consumer, Hutchinson, London.
●
Weiss, M. (1994) Latitudes and Attitudes: an Atlas of American Tastes,
Trends, Politics, and Passions, from Abilene, Texas to Zanesville, Ohio,
Little, Brown, New York.
●
Weiss, M. (2000) The Clustered World, Little, Brown, New York.

207
8
‘But Does It Work?’
Geodemographics
in the Dock
Learning Objectives
In this chapter we will:
●
Consider the representations of people and places given by
geodemographic systems.
●
Further consider how the twin issues of the ecological fallacy
and the modifiable areal unit problem affect the analysis of
geographic information.
●
Question whether apparent geodemographic differences
between neighbourhoods are as much a consequence of
the analytical methods used to find them as they are of any
real-world patterning.
●
Present case studies showing how, where and why geodemo-
graphics has been used with success.
●
Emphasize the relative simplicity, ease of understanding and
portability of geodemographics, and its role as a tool for organ-
izing and comparing geographic datasets.
●
Present a case study used to validate the geodemographic
approach, authored by Barry Leventhal of Teradata, a division of
NCR Corporation.
Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
Richard Harris, Peter Sleight and Richard Webber
© 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
ISBNs: 0-470-86413-3 (HB); 0-470-86414-1 (PB)

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
208
Introduction
At a recent launch event for the post-2001 Census update to its UK Mosaic
geodemographic classification, a representative of the Experian company
reported that more than 10,000 organizations in over 18 countries were
using the Mosaic brand as their preferred consumer segmentation system.
This is the sort of proof that geodemographics works to which Brown
(1991) alludes (see Chapter 1, Section 1.1).
Yet, despite (or, perhaps, because of) commercial success,
neighbourhood classification techniques have attracted criticism. It
is recognized, for example, that governmental attempts to ‘regenerate’
poor neighbourhoods are not necessarily based on area units containing
the neediest and most socially excluded members of society (Harris and
Johnston, 2003). The corollary is that commercial geodemographic
classifications may give misleading impressions of the sorts of lifestyles
and consumer behaviours that actually take place within neighbour-
hoods. The charge of misrepresenting people and places is the one for
which geodemographics will stand trial here.
In this chapter we begin with ‘the case for the prosecution’ –
reviewing some of the critiques of geodemographics and neighbourhood
analysis. We present what may seem like abstract theorizing and, in part,
it is. Nevertheless, we urge you not to ‘skip it’! By casting light on some
possible weaknesses of traditional geodemographic approaches we hope
not only to inform good practice (when geodemographics works well and
why) but also begin revealing why some newer approaches to consumer
segmentation might offer improved – or, at least, different – insights to the
geographies and consumption patterns of present-day societies. In this
way we set the scene for Chapter 9 where we consider some of the newer
sources of geographical data and the methods by which to analyse them.
The prosecution’s case primarily is built around the twin issues
of the ecological fallacy and the modifiable areal unit problem (MAUP)
that previously were encountered in Chapter 2, Section 2.1. It extends
the argument that conventional geodemographic approaches group
together members of the population not actually on the basis of their
own, individual characteristics but according to some general social
average for the area in which they live. The charge, ‘in a nutshell’, is
that apparent geodemographic differences between neighbourhoods
could be more a consequence of the analytical methods used to find
(create) difference then a true reflection of any real-world variations
between people and between the places in which they live.

‘But Does It Work?’ Geodemographics in the Dock
209
In response, the defence will call witnesses to geodemographics’
‘good character’. Specifically, a series of relevant case studies will be given
showing examples of how geodemographics has been used and why it has
been successful. Underlying the case for the defence is the contention that
despite any deficiencies (and any method must have some), the enduring
appeal of the neighbourhood approach is its simplicity and portability:
it is readily applied and comprehended, providing a ‘common currency’ for
organizing and comparing otherwise complex sources of georeferenced
data and information. As a tool, it usefully captures and reveals some of
the socio-economic, demographic, behavioural, attitudinal and consumer
geographies that should inform decision making and which might otherwise
remain hidden.
No final verdict is given, as that is for you, the juror, to decide! In
any case, we are aware that although the court metaphor provides a useful
framework for organizing the contents of this chapter, it also risks giving
an unhelpful impression of setting two ‘sides’ against each other with
the intent that one will triumph – crudely, academic theorizing versus
pragmatic commercial concerns. In keeping with the spirit and rubric of
this book, that is not our intent. Rather, there is much to be learned from
all aspects of debate around geodemographics and so, in practice, it would
be unfortunate if the ‘defence’ and the ‘prosecution’ really were as
diametrically opposed as they are seemingly presented here.
8.1 The case for the prosecution
8.1.1 Trouble in the neighbourhood
Throughout this text we have tended to use the terms ‘geodemographics’
and ‘neighbourhood analysis’interchangeably, mimicking the vernacular of
the geodemographic industry. Whether we are right to synonymize in this
way depends on what is meant by neighbourhood. Dictionary definitions
alternate from somewhat functional explanations such as ‘the immediate
surroundings’ or ‘an area where people live’, to more social perspectives
such as ‘a community distinct from others around it’. The trouble with the
first type is its sterility – when people speak of ‘their neighbourhood’ they
do so with a level of attachment that suggests the word cannot be divorced
from the social connections and interactions that give a neighbourhood
‘life’. However, the more social perspective is difficult to put into operation
because the way different but closely situated people conceive their neigh-
bourhood likely will vary at an individual level, with no necessary accord.

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
210
It is perhaps the knowledge that different individuals mentally map
their neighbourhoods in different ways that led the two authors cited in
Chapter 2, Section 2.2 to argue that ‘there is no single, generalisable inter-
pretation of their neighbourhood’ (Kearns and Parkinson, 2001, p. 2103).
Alternatively the statement might be verified by the number of competing
geodemographic systems for sale in the marketplace! Nonetheless, it does
not deny that in practice generalized, and partly standardized delimitations
of neighbourhood boundaries, are defined and used – census boundary files
or postal geographies are good examples.
The task of profiling neighbourhoods first involves assembling
data to describe the areal objects – the neighbourhoods – to be classified
(see Chapter 6). By design the boundaries of the objects may be no more
than almost arbitrary lines on maps, having no (initial) existence or intrin-
sic meaning independent of the actual population and physical landscape
that are contained within their borders. In this case it makes little sense
to talk of neighbourhoods in any reified way because they are merely
subjective and arbitrary population groupings. When such a ‘neighbour-
hood’ is profiled, what is actually being described and represented is the
population therein. Yet, the processes of grouping populations into dis-
tinct geographical units, of profiling those units and of making strategic
decisions based on those profiles will imbue the areal objects with a sense
of existence in their own right – they will be assigned some degree of
meaning and importance.
Repeated decision making made on the basis that two neighbour-
hoods are of a different kind and therefore requiring separate policy or
marketing initiatives eventually could lead to neighbourhood divisions
that initially were cartographic (and essentially imagined) becoming
tangible and concrete. However, geodemographics should not be about
constructing differences where previously none existed. Ideally, the initial
design of the neighbourhood units will have a close correspondence with
the existing patterning of socio-economic reality and so this knowledge of
actual differences between neighbourhoods can well be used to alleviate,
manage or market the differences in accordance with the geodemographic
user’s objectives.
The important question that needs to be addressed, then, is
whether the boundaries of these standard (or framework) geographies in
any way delimit ‘natural’ groupings of population? To unpack this a little,
it is helpful to make the distinction between natural areas (or approxima-
tions to) that are in some sense self-defining and imposed areas that have
boundaries defined independently of any (socio-economic) phenomena.
O’Sullivan and Unwin (2003, p. 169) write that:

‘But Does It Work?’ Geodemographics in the Dock
211
Imposed areas are common in GIS work that involves data about human
beings. The imposed areas are a type of sampling of social reality that often is
misleading in several ways. First, it may be that the imposed areas bear little
relationship to underlying patterns. [. . .] Second, imposed areas are arbitrary
or modifiable, and considerable ingenuity is required to demonstrate that any
analysis is not an artifact of the particular boundaries that were used. This is
the modifiable areal unit problem. Third, because data for area objects are
often aggregations of individual level information, the danger of ecological
fallacies, where we assume that a relationship apparent at a macrolevel of
aggregation also exists at the microlevel, is very real.
If neighbourhood geographies are designed without consideration
to any socio-economic or demographic phenomena, or to patterns of con-
sumer behaviour that may exist, then what reason is there to suppose that
classification and analysis of the neighbourhoods will reveal anything
truthful, accurate or meaningful about those (hidden) patterns?
It may seem unlikely that neighbourhood geographies would be
designed without giving consideration to their subsequent analytical uses.
However, the prime purpose of a census is to count the population and so the
main function of a census geography is to facilitate enumeration. Electoral
geographies ought to facilitate a fair reflection of the population’s voting
behaviour within a legislative chamber (admittedly this isn’t necessarily the
outcome in the ‘Mother of all Parliaments’ but we did say ought to!). Postal
geographies are intended for the efficient delivery of mail items. None of
these geographies are planned for neighbourhood analysis per se.
Openshaw (1984, p. 3) writes:
The definition of . . . geographical objects [areas or zones] is arbitrary and (in
theory) modifiable at choice; indeed, different researchers may well use differ-
ent sets of units. This process of defining or creating area units would be
acceptable if it were performed using a fixed set of rules, or so there is some
explicitly geographical basis for them. However, there are no rules for areal
aggregation, no standards, and no international convention to guide the spatial
aggregation process. Quite simply, the areal units (zonal objects) used in many
geographical studies are arbitrary, modifiable, and subject to the whims and
fancies of whoever is doing, or did, the aggregating.
Openshaw (1984, p. 4) also argues that,
[W]hereas census data are collected for essentially non-modifiable entities
(people, households) they are reported for arbitrary and modifiable areal units
(enumeration districts, wards, local authorities). The principal criteria used in
the definition of these units are the operational requirements of the census,
local political considerations, and government administration.

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
212
Martin (1998b, pp. 109–10) contends that while formal adminis-
trative geographies may be used for planning and policy making they do
not necessarily correspond to either informally or analytically identifiable
social entities. Although the possibility is left open that they do (and
whether they do is, as Openshaw implies, partly related to the spatial
extent of the entities and the scale of thier analysis) Martin cites Morphet
(1993) who demonstrates the extent to which even the lowest level 1991
UK Census enumeration district boundaries failed to fall along significant
divides in urban social geography. These findings led Martin to argue that:
[A]nalytically defined neighbourhoods can reflect many important aspects of
the urban social fabric, but are hindered by the incorporation of pre-existing
zone boundaries, and do not always correspond with commonly used informal
neighbourhoods. For many purposes an ideal neighbourhood classification
scheme would be one which could analytically reconstruct the entities recog-
nised in informal definitions, while retaining identifiable linkages with the
existing digital data which are generally available for formal geographies.
At the time the solution offered was to disaggregate census geog-
raphies using population surface-modelling techniques – a type of object-
to-field data transformation mentioned in Chapter 4, Section 4.1. In scale
terms, this is a top-down approach, hampered by the fact that it is extremely
difficult to reverse engineer a process of aggregation with only limited,
summary information of the original (non-aggregate) data still available. To
prove this point try and give the definitive answer to the following question:
the average of five numbers is 10 – what, then, are the five numbers? Give
up? Does it help much to know that those numbers each have a value
between zero and 20? Or, that the majority have a value between 5 and 15?
The additional information may indeed be helpful if it is used
to model the original distribution of the five values along a number line (e.g.
by estimating their variance) and that model is then used to predict the like-
lihood of certain values being those of the original data. However, when
analysing neighbourhood data (e.g. census area statistics) usually what is
available is only the sum total or the average of an atttribute value per area,
with no additional information about the variance or diversity contained
within (consequently, it is not obvious, for example, whether some parts of
the neighbourhood contain more of an attribute such as car ownership than
others). In any case, it is likely preferable (and easier) to adopt a bottom-up
approach – to build zones that at least are partly optimized to the phenomena
to be measured and so are in some sense self-defining. The ability to
optimize zone design has been described by Openshaw as presenting a
modifiable areal unit opportunity. Unfortunately, applications often (and

‘But Does It Work?’ Geodemographics in the Dock
213
necessarily) use pre-existing areal units such as census output areas as their
building blocks (Openshaw, 1996). In such cases it is clear that the optimal-
ity of the result is as much affected by the suitability of the neighbourhood
objects as the basis for analysis, as it is by the algorithm used to group them.
An important development in England and Wales has been the
redesign of the 2001 Census output areas (OAs), standardized against
explicitly geographical criteria. Advances in geographical information
science, including methods of zone design and vast improvements in the
data infrastructure have enabled the input and output geographies of the
census to be separated. There are, then, two geographies: one designed
for administration and enumeration – for data collection; the other, with
subsequent socio-economic and geodemographic considerations clearly
in mind – for data analysis.
The criteria for creating OAs include using the postal geography,
specifically unit postcodes that are grouped together on a like-with-like
basis, where similarity is defined by proximity and an analysis of the local
housing stock. The size of OAs are constrained ideally to meet a target
population of 125 households (no fewer than 40) and the aim is to delimit
discrete settlements wherever possible (Martin, 2000). There are 175,434
OAs in England and Wales, of which: 37.5% contain 120–9 households;
79.6% contain 110–39 households; 5% contain 40–99 households.
The zoning process to create OAs is different from the methods
(described in Chapter 6) used to cluster postcodes (or OAs) into geodemo-
graphic classes, in two ways. First, a more restricted range of census indica-
tors was used to define the likeness of postcodes as opposed to when
geodemographic types are created. Second, it would make little sense for an
OA to be made up of postcodes that were miles apart and separated by post-
codes belonging to different OAs, so a contiguity constraint is introduced
into the zone design (postcodes that are grouped together should share a
common border). Since thinking about contiguity means considering the
topological relationships of the postcodes units, the consequence is an
explicitly spatial technique for zone design – the location of the postcodes
in relationship to each other matters. A similar claim cannot be made of the
K-means method commercially used for geodemographic classification.
That is a non-spatial technique since the ‘distance’ between (or ‘closeness’)
of neighbourhood objects is calculated within an abstract numeric space
defined by the clustering variables, not by geography.
Given the pioneering nature of the OA design in England and
Wales it is undoubtedly churlish to suggest that the indicators used to
characterize postcodes are a little narrow in terms of defining ‘natural
areas’. What we can more fairly say is that the design of 2001 Census OAs

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
214
will likely decrease the population diversity within these neighbourhood
units but not eliminate it. The problem remains that neighbourhood popu-
lations are frequently not as uniform as aggregate data tend to imply.
Unfortunately, aggregate neighbourhood datasets, profiles and
classifications give little, if any indication of where such diversity exists and
whether or not it matters. Classifications that seek to profile at a subcensus
scale (e.g. by using additional sources of data available at a unit postcode
level) do not entirely sidestep this problem. Although it is reasonable to
suggest that unit postcodes, with about one-tenth of the population of OAs,
would also have less diversity, their small size and the variable amount of
data available at this scale mean that a robust classification of postal neigh-
bourhoods requires census data to be incorporated. If it is known that
20 persons within a given OA are unemployed and also that one-quarter of
all the population live in a particular postcode within the OA, then it can be
estimated that one-quarter of the unemployed people (i.e. five) will be living
in that postcode. However, such a method of reapportioning census data to
the postcode scale assumes unemployment (or the value being estimated) is
uniformly distributed across the census area – an assumption that is unlikely
to be true in all cases. Again, a better estimate of the actual distribution
might be obtained by population surface modelling or some other related
techniques (see above, Chapter 4, Section 4.1 and also Chapter 9).
Issues of population diversity are a concern at both the neighbour-
hood ‘building block’ and the cluster levels since even if neighbourhood
populations were perfectly uniform, it does not follow that all neighbour-
hoods assigned to a particular geodemographic cluster type are also all iden-
tical. Indeed, in a study of the problem, Voas and Williamson (2001, p. 74)
concluded that ‘the differences between classes [neighbourhood clusters] are
generally smaller than the differences within any particular class.’ If this
observation generally is true then clearly it raises the risk of ecological
fallacy – of assuming the apparent characteristics of a cluster type are also
those of the constituent population. They might be: it all depends on how
uniform the population is.
8.1.2 Is this the answer? Scale dependency and the
modifiable areal unit problem
Goss (1995, p. 134) contends that geodemographics is based on the
assumption that:
these artificial statistical constructs [the neighbourhood classifications] represent
individuals living in each area. In reality, of course, since the ideal of residential

‘But Does It Work?’ Geodemographics in the Dock
215
sorting on the basis of uniform social identity has only been partially achieved,
such analysis commits aggregation errors associated with the ecological fallacy
and ‘modifiable unit area problem’[sic].
A demonstration of the modifiable areal unit problem (MAUP) is
provided by Table 8.1. It gives summary measures of the relationship
between two 2001 Census variables for England and Wales, specifically:
percentage of all persons per census unit assigned to social class AB or
higher; versus the average number of cars or vans per household. Knowing
that higher social class tends positively to correlate with a higher level of
disposable income, it is expected that areas with a higher proportion of class
AB or higher population will be associated with higher rates of car or van
ownership. To put it more formally, our null hypothesis (H0) is that there
is no significant relationship between the proportion of the population
assigned to the highest social classes and levels of car or van ownership, for
census units in England and Wales. Our hope is statistically to disprove
(falsify) the null hypothesis with a particular level of confidence so we can
instead invoke the alternate hypothesis (H1) – that there is a relationship. We
expect that relationship to be positive: as levels of social class increase then
so too does car ownership.
The strength of association between the two census variables is
summarized in Table 8.1 by the simple but frequently used Pearson correl-
ation coefficient (r). Calculating r to measure the level of association
between social class and car/van ownership for each of the nine census
Table 8.1 Everything changes but you: the changing relationship between percentage of
people in social class AB or higher, and average number of cars or vans per household for
various scales of the census hierarchy in England and Wales
Census units
n (number
Pearson
p
of units 
correlation, r
(probability
for which
‘% people
that correlation
data 
social class
is due to a
available)
AB or higher’ vs
sampling
‘average number
error)
of cars or vans 
per household’
Region
9
0.30
0.84
0.22
Unitary
376
0.44
9.49
0.00
authorities
or districts
Wards
8850
0.61
72.4
0.00
t  r √(n  2)
√(1  r2)

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
216
regions in England and Wales gives a coefficient value of r  0.30. To
interpret this result it is helpful to know that a perfectly positive associ-
ation has r  1 (meaning that as levels of higher social class rise so
always do levels of car ownership by the same relative amount), whereas
a perfectly negative association has r  1 (as one variable increases so
the other always decreases by the same relative amount) and no associa-
tion has r  0 (the two variables rise and fall independently of each
other).
A t value also may be derived to check whether an r value
represents a real association or is more likely due to a chance sampling
error. Knowing that the ‘degrees of freedom’ is equal to (n  2), the
TDIST function in Microsoft Excel, or standard statistical tables, can be
used to quantify the likelihood that the apparent association is due to
chance. In this case, the likelihood (probability, p) of our r  0.30 being
due to chance is 0.22 (or 22%). This may sound low but it is greater than the
0.01, 0.05 or – being generous – 0.10 thresholds that commonly are used as
the upper limit for accepting the alternate hypothesis. Moreover (and not
unrelated) the strength of association between the two variables seems
itself surprisingly low, at r  0.30. On the evidence available we cannot
reject the null hypothesis at anything greater than a ‘78% confidence’
((1  0.22)  100). Our results do not give sufficient evidence to
support our expectation that levels of car ownership are related to social
class. Why?
A clue to the answer is found by considering what happens
when the Pearson correlations are recalculated at less coarse scales of
the census hierarchy: at the unitary authority/district scale; and at the
level of wards. As the area of the units decreases (and therefore their
number increases), so the r value increases: first to 0.44 for census
unitary authorities and districts; then to 0.61 for census wards. In both
cases it is near to certain that the association is real. It follows that the
value of r is scale dependent – the result depends on the (population)
size of the area unit used to obtain the result.
Paraphrasing the last sentence gives the statement ‘the value of
the result obtained depends on how the result was obtained’ and, if not a
tautology, it is certainly a truism – any experimental result is dependent
on the set of methods used to sample and analyse the data. Such issues
are not restricted to the geographical sciences. However, there is a prob-
lem of definition that is more peculiarly geographical. Think back to
Chapter 2 where boundary files were identified as a usual prerequisite for
mapping neighbourhood data. There it was shown how a series of vector
objects (points and lines) could be used to delimit – to form the outer

‘But Does It Work?’ Geodemographics in the Dock
217
edge of – a discrete, area object (in that case, the province of Labrador
and Newfoundland in Canada). The perimeter defined, with apparent
certainty, the location and geographical extent of the area object (the
province). Any location or population group falling within the perimeter
is said to belong to the province; any falling without does not.
We have already questioned how often socio-economic distribu-
tions and the geographies of consumer behaviour do exactly coincide with
governmental or administrative regions – with the geography of geodemo-
graphics. If the answer is ‘not often!’ then apparent differences between
people and places can be more an artefact of the area units used than an
accurate reflection of real-world population patterns and distributions.
While it is very easy to talk about geographical objects like neighbour-
hoods, cities, hills or forests as though their boundaries were crisp, absolute
and obvious to all, the reality of most situations is rather more muddled and
confused, leading to inherent subjectivity and issues of uncertainty regard-
ing how those objects are conceptualized, modelled and represented.
Worse, any real-world patterns actually can be obscured by inappro-
priate design of area units. Figure 8.1 illustrates a situation where parts of
$60,000
$100,000
$20,000
$40,000
$60,000
(a) Income clusters prior to zoning
(b) Income clusters bisected by and aggregated into zones
Figure 8.1 A demonstration of the zoning problem. Refer to text for explanation

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
218
three ‘natural’ community clusters – two relatively wealthy (with average
household incomes of $60,000 and $100,000, respectively), one less so – are
grouped together into two geodemographic zones. Calculating the average
incomes for these two new neighbourhood objects yields values of $40,000
and $60,000, respectively – values that are not especially representative
of either of the communities. It follows that there are two components to the
modifiable areal unit problem: the effects of scale and the effects of zoning.
Both components affect geodemographic types of analysis. Indeed, they
affect all types of spatial analysis (cf. Chapter 9, Section 9.2.2).
As it happens, the r values shown in Table 8.1 are unusual. It is
more common for the strength of association to increase with aggregation,
not decrease at the more coarse geographical scales. The reason for the
more common occurrence is that as populations are grouped into larger
and larger area objects so the process tends to smooth or average out the
more unusual variations or freak sampling errors found within a group.
But here the aggregation effects are more closely linked to a lack of sensi-
tivity to geographical context. Our use of the Pearson correlation coeffi-
cient assumes that any association between the two census variables can
be adequately summarized by a single, linear relationship: as one goes up,
so does the other; or, as one goes up, the other goes down. However, it is
entirely possible that the two variables do not have such a singular rela-
tionship. Consider, for example, Figure 8.2 where two lines are shown,
0
25
50
75
100
0
25
50
75
100
x
y
y1
y2
Neighbourhood type A 
r (y1 vs y2) = –1
All neighbourhoods 
r (y1 vs y2) = 0
Neighbourhood type B 
r (y1 vs y2) = +1
Figure 8.2 In this example the relationship between two hypothetical census variables is
very different for two types of neighbourhood and, when considered en masse, appears not
to exist at all

‘But Does It Work?’ Geodemographics in the Dock
219
the first defined by the equation 
, the second by equation
y2  x. The presence of x in both equations suggests that the two lines are
related. They are:
.
The detail of the equations is not especially important. What is at
issue is that despite their joint relationship, if the values of y1 and y2 are
calculated in the range 0  x  100 and a Pearson correlation fitted, then
the result will be a coefficient value of r  0, indicating an apparent
lack of association between the two lines (see Figure 8.2). However, if it
were known that threshold value x  50 is the breakpoint – an important
value differentiating two types of neighbourhood – then two coefficients
might be calculated: the first for values at or below 50 (characteristic of
neighbourhood type A in Figure 8.2); the second for values above 50
(characteristic of neighbourhood type B). It is now correctly found that
there is a relationship between y1 and y2 but the nature of that relationship
differs by neighbourhood. The Pearson correlation is actually r  1
for x  50 (type A neighbourhoods) and r  1 for x  50 (type B
neighbourhoods).
8.1.3 Considering the geo in geodemographics
What has all the number crunching of the preceding section got to do
with geodemographics and neighbourhood analysis? Are these statistical
notions really relevant in practice? The answer to the second question
is ‘yes!’ because an understanding of the importance of geographical
context is essential for the effective use of geodemographic approaches
to target accurately particular types of neighbourhood or particular
groups of people. This is true whether area classification is used to guide
neighbourhood regeneration spending or to help plan the location of
convenience stores. Had we thought carefully about regional differences
prior to calculating the Pearson correlations between the two census
variables then we might have realized that levels of higher social class
are a poor indicator of car ownership within London if it happens that
those described as being of the higher social classes are also those best
able to afford properties towards the centre of the city where journeying
by foot, ‘the tube’ or by bus is often easiest and so less private transport
is required.
Figure 8.3 highlights that the relationship between social class and
car ownership differs for London from other regions in England and Wales,
and it is that difference which is affecting the original set of Pearson correl-
ations shown in Table 8.1. Recalculating those correlations but this time
y1  √(y2  50)2
y1  √(x  50)2

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
220
excluding London reveals the strength of association between social class
and car ownership that originally we anticipated: r  0.72 at the ward
level; r  0.75 at the unitary authority/district level; and r  0.89 at
the regional level. The ‘London effect’ has been removed and the results
conform to the more usual situation of r increasing with aggregation.
‘But!’the defence may object, ‘in both name and application geode-
mographics recognizes that geography is important. Geodemographic classi-
fications are geographical because they attempt to differentiate different
types of people with respect to the places in which those people live.’
To some extent the defence is right. Geodemographics is geograph-
ical in the sense that it takes neighbourhood objects – usually mail delivery
or census zones – and groups them together on a like-with-like basis, based
on the demographic and socio-economic profile of those objects. It is also
geographical in that the geodemographic clusters, which emerge from the
grouping process, usually display a distinct (apparently neither random nor
uniform) pattern when displayed on a map. Finally, it is geographical in
the sense that a geodemographic classification can be used to sort other
geographical information – such as customer lists or the home address of
students applying to universities – into geodemographic groups based on
the georeference (e.g. ZIP+4 or postcode) attached to that information.
Nevertheless, there is a weak link in this otherwise geographical
chain. The data-mining methods used to group the objects – procedures like
R 2 (trendline, excludes London) = 0.80; r = 0.89
0.80
0.90
1.00
1.10
1.20
1.30
1.40
0.17
0.19
0.21
0.23
0.25
0.27
Proportion of persons social class AB or higher
Average number of cars or vans per household
2001 Census region
London
R 2 (trendline, all regions) = 0.09; r = 0.30
Figure 8.3 The importance of geographical context – in this example the relationship
between car/van ownership and social class is very different for London than it is the rest
of the country

‘But Does It Work?’ Geodemographics in the Dock
221
K-means or top-down, agglomerative methods (see Chapter 6, Section 6.5)
– are not themselves geographical. In fact, many of them are inherently non-
spatial. We spot a problem here. If, as a number of authors have claimed,
‘spatial is special’ then the sorts of methods used to handle geographical
information will need to consider the geography of the problem carefully.
That geographical context should not be ignored.
To appreciate the distinction between a spatial and a non-spatial
grouping of geographical objects, consider Table 8.2. Grouping into two
classes the nine hypothetical objects shown in the table using the closest
that can be reached to a like-with-like sorting, gives rise to the following
solution. Objects 1, 2, 3, 4 and 7 are grouped into one class containing a
mixture of white and light grey colours. The remaining objects, 5, 6, 8 and
9 are grouped to a class containing black and dark grey colours.
The problem with this solution is it discards much of the informa-
tion contained in Table 8.2. Specifically, the objects were grouped together
only according to their attribute values – their colours. Figure 8.4 gives
consideration as well to the locational information (the grid coordinates
x and y) and, by doing so, suggests an alternate solution. In reaching the
solution, each geographical object has been looked at with regards both to
its own attributes but also – and critically – in regards to the attributes of
the objects around it. With an eye on the bigger picture it has been decided
that the difference between dark grey and white (in the case of group A)
or between light grey and black (group B) is not always that great when
considered in geographical context.
The point to be made here is that it could be preferable to consider
the attributes of a particular neighbourhood not in isolation but with
respect to the neighbourhoods around it, constructing a geodemographic
Table 8.2 Showing the results of grouping the observations – non-geographical
(solution 1) and geographical (solution 2)
ID
x
y
Attribute
Solution 1
Solution 2
1
1
2
White
A
A
2
4.5
8
Light grey
A
B
3
1.5
1.8
White
A
A
4
2
2.8
White
A
A
5
1.5
2.5
Dark grey
B
A
6
4.5
8.8
Dark grey
B
B
7
2
2
Light grey
A
A
8
4.5
7.4
Black
B
B
9
4
8
Black
B
B

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
222
classification accordingly. Such an occasion is illustrated by Figures
8.5(a) and (b). In Figure 8.5(a) the neighbourhoods appear ‘of the same
colour’ and it seems sensible to attach to them the same deprivation score.
But, when looked at in relation to other neighbourhoods around them – in
context (Figure 8.5(b)) – then it is doubtful whether the effects of depriv-
ation or social exclusion will be the same in A, B and C. Should, therefore,
their neighbourhood profile actually be the same? The answer depends on
the ways neighbourhoods ‘interact’ with surrounding areas and at differ-
ent scales, and how those varying relationships contribute to the causes
and consequences of deprivation at particular localities. Consideration of
contextual effects may also be relevant to the analysis of consumer behav-
iour, and for aspects of business and service planning.
An explicitly geographic method of building a neighbourhood
profile would recognize that the ways differences between neighbour-
hoods are expressed and therefore how ‘alikeness’ is calculated is context
dependent and could vary from place to place. This way of thinking
acknowledges the situation shown in Figure 8.2 – that the relationships
between data variables used to build geodemographic models might vary
across geographical space. It is not without precedent. The concentric
rings method used by Experian (and described in Chapter 6, Section 6.1)
that aggregates census data at fixed distances out from a central zone, was
designed to highlight regional differences in zones that appear the same at
the areal unit level. And some geodemographic classifications are built by
clustering London neighbourhoods separately from others on the grounds
Figure 8.4 A geographical grouping of the data shown in Table 8.2
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
x
y
Group 1
Group 2

‘But Does It Work?’ Geodemographics in the Dock
223
that London is very different. The issue is whether regional and other con-
textual differences exist outside London and also need be considered.
More generally, many conventional, GIS-based approaches for
handling and aggregating geographical information give little direct con-
sideration to the importance of geographical context. However, in the field
of spatial statistics, more geographical approaches have been developed.
These include various methods of analysing spatial point patterns (Diggle,
2003), multilevel analysis (Goldstein, 2003) and geographically weighted
regression (Fotheringham, Brunsdon and Charlton, 2002) – see Chapter 9.
These approaches are often used to provide evidence of what can be
Figure 8.5 Considering context: will the effects of deprivation be the same in A, B and C?
Should their neighbourhood profile be the same?
(a)
(b)
(c)
‘Deprived’
‘Not Deprived’

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
224
described as a collective spatial effect – the idea that people ‘inhabiting’
the same spaces generate some sort of collective identity or function, to
the extent that the function exerts an effect upon the properties of the indi-
vidual (Macintyre, 1997, pp. 1–2). This process can be understood as being
due to local interaction effects and leads to second-order spatial variations,
which are differences between places that are due to the shared or group
effects of the population.
As the name suggests, second-order variations are different from
first-order ones, which are due to changes in the underlying properties of
the local ‘environment’or population. Imagine a functional relationship in
which the likelihood (pi) of a person buying a prestige car is proportional
to their wealth (zi). Further imagine a location (j) with an above-average
number of wealthy residents. The first-order (or compositional) effect is
summarized by the relationship pi  zi and from this we expect the estimated
total demand 
for the vehicle in area j to be proportional to the general
wealth of the inhabitants:
(8.1)
(nj denotes the number of residents in area j)
However, as the drivers talk proudly about their new cars and
their neighbours begin to covet a similar vehicle then a second-order,
collective effect emerges and – critically – may actually increase the
actual demand for the vehicle in neighbourhood j over and above that
originally expected:
(8.2)
The collective effect serves to raise the likelihood (pi) that any one indi-
vidual will buy the type of car. Conceptually:
pi  p1i  p2ij
(8.3)
where p1i is the first-order likelihood that an individual i will purchase
the car, regardless of what others around them are doing and p2ij is the
second-order effect on i of the collective behaviour in area j; it is a genuine
neighbourhood effect. Matters can be made more complex by arguing that
geographical context is also important. There may be regional differences
in both the individual likelihood of buying the car and the importance of
collective effects (e.g. some areas of a country can be more community
based than others). It is also interesting to observe that the value of p2ij is
Dj  ˆDj
ˆDj 
nj
i1
zij
( ˆDj)

‘But Does It Work?’ Geodemographics in the Dock
225
unlikely to be static – as more people buy the car it can become more likely
that those who have not yet done so, will (within limits). Yet, for all the
spatial complexity that could be introduced, a simple message will suffice –
geography matters! The importance of remembering this is true not only
for geodemographic methods but for all aspects of handling geographical
information.
The prosecution rests.
8.2 The case for the defence
8.2.1 Be pragmatic!
The prosecution has put an eloquent case. It is unarguable that there are
a number of questions that should be asked about geodemographics.
A number of theoretical doubts have been raised.
However, the defence has approached this case from a different
point of view – the commercial perspective. Put simply, it is this: geodemo-
graphics has been used in the business sector for 25 years now (confounding
early pundits, who predicted a five-year lifespan at most) and it is still here,
stronger than ever! Given the nature of business decisions, the cost of using
geodemographics would not be borne if the technique could not prove its
worth. Many major companies have used geodemographics, in its various
forms, for a very long time and continue to do so. ‘Something better’ has
still not arrived.
For examples of high-profile British and international firms that
have used geodemographics to target door-drops (that is, fliers, coupons
and product samples delivered door to door) see Table 8.3. This is merely
a selection of examples which have appeared lately in the UK trade press.
Further evidence of the ongoing usage of geodemographics in the
commercial sector has been solicited from members of the Demographics
User Group (DUG), an organization that comprises some 15 large organ-
izations in Britain and which was founded to represent to government the
needs of commercial users of its demographic statistics. Table 8.4 shows
how seven of the 15 members of DUG and three additional organizations
use geodemographics.
The defence adopts a pragmatic stance. It is not to say that business
users are totally disinterested in theory; rather that their acid test is ‘does it
work’(or, more precisely, ‘does it work for me?’). This pragmatism probably
can be seen in sharpest relief in the retail sector, where geodemographics has

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
226
found its most secure home. It is obvious why geodemographics and retail
make good bedfellows – retailers are wedded to geography. Catchment
areas, or trading areas, are crucial to store performance, because catchment
areas are those ‘chunks’ of geography from which a store’s business is
drawn. Geodemographics can quantify the potential for the store’s goods or
services within its catchment area (see Chapters 4 and 5).
The pragmatic approach taken by retail management is exempli-
fied by an article by Penny and Broom (1988) in which they argue that the
culture of retail decision making is especially receptive to answers and
advice but does not appreciate esoteric analytical problems, which invari-
able surface in any detailed research and modelling approach. Such senti-
ments do not only apply to retail management. Indeed, the pressures on
managers in any type of business are such these days that ‘esoteric analyt-
ical problems’ are probably less likely to occupy their thoughts in 2004
than they would have in 1988! They simply want to know that the solution
in question, whatever it may be, demonstrably works, can be understood
and is cost-effective.
Table 8.3 Companies using geodemographics to target ‘door-drops’ in the UK
Groups/affiliation
Brand
Product
Brighthouse
Brighthouse
Retailer
Camelot
Lotto
Lottery
Centura Foods
Bisto
Gravy mix
Centura Foods
Paxo
Stuffing mix
Colgate-Palmolive
Colgate
Toothpaste
Reckitt Benckiser
Calgon
Calcium eliminator
Jacobs Bakery Ltd
Jacobs Cream Crackers
Biscuits
Lever Fabergé
Arctic Breeze
Air freshener
Lever Fabergé
Persil
Washing detergent
Marks and Spencer
Marks and Spencer
Luggage
Nestlé
Branston Smooth
Pickle
Nestlé
Crosse and Blackwell Snackstop
Snack foods
Ocado Ltd
Ocado
Online shopping
Reckitt Benckiser
Airwick
Air freshener
Seasons Holidays PLC
Seasons Holiday
Holidays
TUI
Thomas Cook
Holidays
Tussauds Group
Thorpe Park and Chessington
Theme parks
World of Adventures
Unilever Bestfoods
Flora Proactiv
Spread
Unilever Bestfoods
Bertolli
Olive oil
Virgin Group
Virgin Holidays
Holidays
Warner
Warner Holidays
Holidays

Table 8.4 Applications of geodemographics by various organizations, including members of the Demographics User Group
Customer recruitment
Customer management
Retailing
Organization Prospect Door-to-door Mailings
Risk 
Pricing Promotional Channels of 
New 
Dealer/
Dealer/store
mailings
distribution
to existing
management
offers
communication
store 
branch
format/
customers
location evaluation merchandise
Argos
Y
Y
Y
Y
Barclays
Y
Y
Y
Y
Boots
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
M&S
Y
Y
Y
Y
M&S Money
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Saga
Y
Y
Y
Whitbread
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Honda
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Lloyds/TSB
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
csma
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
228
Another feature of business people is their search for competi-
tive advantage. The very nature of business means that if they find a
technique that works for them then they tend not to want their competi-
tors to find out about it! In the event that they cannot get exclusivity on
a technique (like geodemographics) then they will want to keep secret
the way that they have used it and the returns it has delivered. So, sadly,
one of the best ways of proving the worth of geodemographics to
doubters, an attributable case history quoting results, is most unlikely
to be available for publication (disproving the adage that history is
always written by the winners!). What evidence there is tends to be
anecdotal or descriptive. Four case histories follow but it is interesting
to note that they largely detail public-sector applications (even though
the providers of the case histories are commercial providers of geodemo-
graphic solutions). Many major companies use geodemographics (as
evidenced by Tables 8.4 and 8.5) but there is a dearth of published
information on the detailed results of such use. Perhaps we could view
these following case histories as ‘witnesses’ to the good character of
geodemographics?
‘Witness’ 1: Example of the Nottingham Youth
Justice Board
Edited from a report by Webber and Williamson (2004) and based on an analy-
sis for the Youth Justice Board of young offenders’ offences in the County of
Nottinghamshire.
The study sought to provide evidence of the extent to which the level and
pattern of youth offending varies between different types of neighbour-
hood. Studies from the past 30 years consistently have shown the extent
to which social disadvantage is disproportionately concentrated in a
limited number of areas with high levels of deprivation (Anderson et al.,
2001; Farrington, 2002), leading to the conclusion that area-based
programmes will complement programmes targeted at individuals and
households in raising the life opportunity of Britain’s most disadvan-
taged citizens.
It is only recently that studies have started to quantify the extent
to which high incidences of crime and social disorder are associated
with high levels of social disadvantage. Recent evidence suggests that
the variation in crime and disorder between affluent and disadvantaged
neighbourhoods is considerable, indeed even greater in degree than

‘But Does It Work?’ Geodemographics in the Dock
229
differences in the variations of unemployment, income, poor health and
educational attainment (Webber and Williamson, 2004).
Variations in the level of social disadvantage in different areas can
be measured in a number of different ways. One popular approach
involves the ranking of administrative wards on a composite index of
social disadvantage constructed from a number of individual indicators of
disadvantage. This method places each UK ward on a continuum from
least to most deprived. Many social programmes are targeted at wards in
the ‘worst’ 10% or 20% on this composite score. This study differed by
using a geodemographic approach – using the 61 Mosaic types and 11
groups as the basis for analysis. It proposed that socially disadvantaged
areas differ in terms of their pathology of social disadvantage, as well as
in terms of their level of disadvantage; that there exist qualitatively differ-
ent types of disadvantaged areas; that their different forms of social disad-
vantage originate from significantly different historical trajectories; and
that the different types of neighbourhood are often suited to quite different
types of priority area programme. The aim was to build a picture of the
relationships between neighbourhood and young offenders.
The database from which the analyses were undertaken contained
information on 33,905 offences, which were notified to the Nottinghamshire
constabulary during the period 1 January 1999 to 7 June 2003. Information
about these offences was linked to a separate file containing more detailed
information about the 12,879 offenders who were apprehended in relation
to these offences. ‘Data cleaning’ took place, removing records where the
postcode of the offender was either not recorded or recognized, where the
postcode of the offender was characterized by institutional rather than private
residential addresses and where the offenders were apprehended within
Nottinghamshire but resident outside the county. The home postcodes of the
remaining 12,310 offenders were then coded with the UK Mosaic neigh-
bourhood classification.
The distribution of offenders by Mosaic categories was compared
against a baseline distribution of the estimated number of households
within Nottinghamshire as of mid-2003. One Mosaic type, although pres-
ent in Nottinghamshire, had no offenders: ‘Global Connections’. The total
number of offences per neighbourhood type was expressed as a rate per
1000 Nottinghamshire households in the same type. For the county as a
whole, the ratio of offences per 1000 households stood at 74. This county
average concealed a variation from 288 offences per 1000 in the Mosaic
type ‘Families on Benefits’ to 2.2 offences per 1000 in the Mosaic type
‘Sepia Memories’. The offence rates were then indexed against a value
of 100 which represents county average offence rate. On this basis the

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
230
offence rate for ‘Families on Benefits’ is expressed as 390 (3.9 times the
county average of 100) and the offence rate for ‘Sepia Memories’ is
expressed as 3 (0.03 times the county average of 100).
For each of the Mosaic types, index values were also constructed
for each of 158 other ways of categorizing offences or offenders based on:
level of offending (total numbers of offences, offenders); single/repeat
offenders; gender; ethnicity; nature of offence; outcome; context (such as
whether school day or holiday); whether the offender accepted or denied
occurrence; and the offender’s age band at the time of the occurrence. By
this means it was possible to identify what particular types of offence
particularly were associated with a particular type of neighbourhood.
For example, the ‘Families on Benefit’ type was found to contain high
incidents of: incidents by offenders of mixed race (index value 656); inci-
dents involving arson (617); incidents where the offender was subject to a
permanent exclusion order from school (499); incidents involving repeat
offenders (406); and incidents involving male offenders (406).
The geodemographic approach showed that youth offending in
Nottinghamshire particularly is concentrated in a small number of neigh-
bourhood types, suggesting that an area-based approach to the problem is
likely to be more effective than one which is applied at an individual level but
not within specific geographic areas. The study draws attention once more to
the influence of the neighbourhood in youth offending and victimization,
and for the need for multi-agency working to achieve improvements in the
criminogenic nature of some neighbourhoods. It points to the importance of
family support for young offenders, especially after family break up and
transition into areas of higher risk. Therefore, attempts to increase the social
capital in areas of highest risk is vital to the success of neighbourhood
renewal. The analysis helps identify the neighbourhoods and offenders at
highest risk, and the types of offences that are likely to occur and could be
used for resource planning, performance management and for actions to
reduce the number of recidivist offenders within a particular neighbourhood.
‘Witness’ 2: Example of Shotton Paper
Company plc
Edited from source: CACI (UK). Reproduced with permission.
Part of the UPM Kymmene group, Shotton Paper Company is a leading
newsprint manufacturer. With an annual capacity of 460,000 tonnes, it pro-
duces over 20% of the UK’s newsprint requirements. The mill manufactures

‘But Does It Work?’ Geodemographics in the Dock
231
paper from a combination of renewable Sitka Spruce grown in the UK and
also relies on recovered paper from household collection systems.
Shotton Paper Company wanted to increase the amount of recov-
ered fibre from kerbside collections in Greater Manchester, Halton and
Warrington. It also needed to understand levels of newsprint consumption
so it could set collection targets for business planning. Shotton acknow-
ledged that the consumption of newsprint varies across consumers and
asked CACI to help it prioritize its kerbside collection resources.
Previous waste analysis had identified a strong correlation between
the volume and composition of household waste and ACORN type. For
Shotton, CACI took a different approach: instead of looking at what was in
the bins, it focused on the consumption patterns of different types of house-
hold. This approach is more cost-effective than traditional hand-sorting
waste analysis techniques and draws on more accessible consumer research.
CACI began by looking at the ACORN profiles of those con-
sumers reading one or more of the 211 newspaper and magazine titles that
have circulation figures published by the Audit Bureau of Circulation.
This enabled CACI to identify those households likely to read any of the
publications and allocate the circulation figures accordingly. CACI also
took account of the geographical area in which some titles, especially
local free newspapers, were distributed.
The next step was to focus on those local authorities with whom
Shotton were working with to improve their understanding of recyclable
material hotspots. The CACI data identified individual wards within the
authorities where consumption was high and as such, the amount of recyc-
lable material would also be increased. Working with David Davies and
Associates, a leading waste consultancy, CACI produced improved perform-
ance measures for each authority and equipped the authorities with tools
to improve their awareness and collection strategies. In the future, Shotton
will be able plan similar campaigns in new locations based on the improved
consumption data derived from the ACORN-led consumption analysis.
‘Witness’ 3: Example of The University of
Central Lancashire
Edited from source: CACI (UK). Reproduced with permission.
The University of Central Lancashire traces its roots back to the
Institution for the Diffusion of Knowledge, founded in Preston in 1828.
In terms of student numbers, it is currently one of the top 10 universities

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
232
in the UK. As part of its plans for growth the university needs to ensure
that it has a full understanding of the location and characteristics of poten-
tial students.
As with any university, the number of students enquiring about
degree courses is far in excess of those who apply, accept a place or actually
enrol on a course. This is sometimes known as the ‘recruitment funnel’ as
student numbers reduce steadily throughout the process. For example, out
of the 45,000 enquiries received by the university, typically 20,000 turn into
actual course applications.
The University of Central Lancashire felt it important to discover
why over half the enquiries are not taken any further. Could it be that the
wrong people are being targeted? Where do the past and present student
population come from? Why do those attending the university choose it?
It was hoped that an understanding of the socio-economic groupings of
students attracted to the university could be achieved by a geodemo-
graphic approach and this information used for proactive targeting.
The method of analysis combined the ACORN product with InSite –
CACI’s geodemographic market analysis tool that has helped over 200
businesses improve their understanding of their locations and customers.
Together they offered tools for spatial planning, student application analy-
sis, catchment planning and mapping.
The university was able to identify areas where targeted student
recruitment activities would have the greatest impact. The analysis was
also able to identify areas where no marketing activity had taken place but
where applications to the university were still popular. This allowed mar-
keting resources to be employed in the most effective manner. For example,
information on the cost of living and personal safety in Preston could
be targeted to areas where applications from women are most prevalent.
The combination of InSite and ACORN has meant that careers visits and
local advertising can be targeted precisely, participation can be widened,
knowledge of student needs can be enhanced and these needs can be
matched with marketing material. The return on investment (ROI) will be
measured by the increased applications to the university.
By understanding the market, the university will be able to have
advanced knowledge of what information potential students in each area
of the UK require in order to make their application. By providing these
students with relevant and targeted information more enquires can be con-
verted into applications and enrolment increased. The university already has
further plans for detailed analysis of the alumni population of the university
so that information can be gained about where graduates move to, what job
they decide to do and the resulting life trajectories they experience.

‘But Does It Work?’ Geodemographics in the Dock
233
‘Witness’ 4: Example of Camelot Group plc
Based on Sleight, Smith and Walker (2002).
Camelot Group plc won the first contract to operate the UK’s National
Lottery, back in 1994. The contract ran for a seven-year term, with a com-
petitive bidding process taking place for a new contract in the first half of
2000. Camelot’s Retail Services Division decided that GIS technology
had moved on since the initial selection of lottery outlets had taken place
in 1993. In 1998 they asked Target Market Consultancy (TMC) to review
and revalidate the retail network selection methodology. At the time,
Camelot operated some 35,000 terminals nationally.
The first stage of the project involved reviewing available data
sources. In-house data included terminal transaction history, all relevant
market research, and a database of actual and potential retail outlets where
terminals were currently sited, or could be sited. External data that might
be relevant to the project were also evaluated. These included shopping
flow data, workplace data from the census and information-locating retail
outlets relevant to Camelot – primarily supermarkets, post offices, multi-
ple and independent CTNs (confectionery/tobacconist/newsagents), and
convenience stores.
The problem of how to best configure the retail network was con-
ceptualized as a demand and supply issue. Consumer demand for lottery
purchases could be modelled using a geodemographic approach, relating
demand to types of geographical area. Useful to this purpose, Camelot ran
an ongoing advertising tracking study which interviewed 1000 consumers
each month, identified spend by demographics and asked ‘where bought’
questions. Respondents’home postcodes were also captured. The physical
placement of lottery terminals at specific locations represented supply
points. The objective was to match supply to demand in such a fashion
that supply of terminals was optimized. The simple expedient of putting
lottery terminals in all available outlets (maximizing supply) would not
make economic sense because of the high cost of online terminal supply
and maintenance.
The recommendations were that a spatial interaction (gravity)
model should be built and calibrated, taking account of flows from resi-
dential areas, workplace and shopping trips (cf. Chapter 4, Section 4.5).
A GIS should be developed, containing the ‘universe’ of relevant retail
outlets. Census of population data should form the basis of a consumer
potential model for lottery playing. The gravity model initially should be
developed in a relatively small geographical area, for instance the trading

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
234
area of a large shopping centre and then, if successful, be rolled out to
cover the country. As a part of the initial development work, candidate
datasets should be evaluated.
These recommendations were accepted and Business Geographics
Ltd (BGL) with GeoBusiness Solutions were chosen to develop and imple-
ment the model. The Travel-to-Work area of the town of Reading, England
was chosen as the study area for model development. As part of the devel-
opment process, an exit survey was designed and implemented to provide
information on trip behaviour of lottery ticket purchasers (different types of
trip were identified in town centre/suburban/rural locations). The process
also involved the creation of a ‘customized’ geography (Camelot Selection
Districts, CSDs, constructed from aggregations of census output zones), the
development of the consumer potential model and its subsequent imple-
mentation within a GIS. The consumer potential model was based on the
Camelot tracking study, which at the time of the study had nearly 24,000
respondent records available, each with a record of social grade. By model-
ling frequency and volume of spend by social grade and matching this infor-
mation to the socio-economic groups present in the 1991 Census, a model
of consumer expenditure on lottery purchase could be calculated for
Camelot Selection Districts and regional trends identified.
The resulting ‘Optimum’ model was implemented in Camelot’s
offices and it quickly became a vital part of Camelot’s retailer selection
process. The 150 field sales executives were provided with reports and
maps that indicated how many terminals could be supported in each CSD,
thus providing guidance for locating new or replacement terminals to sup-
plement the field sales executives’ local knowledge. Optimum continues to
be used today, and its capabilities and applications continue to be enhanced.
8.2.2 Back in the neighbourhood
Having considered some successful applications of geodemographics, let us
turn to the question of defining neighbourhoods raised by the prosecution.
What are ‘natural neighbourhoods?’At what scale do they exist – the level
of a unit postcode, perhaps, or maybe the level of a 2001 Census output area
in England and Wales? Or, perhaps, it is at some other level of area unit? Is,
in fact, everyone’s definition of their own neighbourhood perceptually dif-
ferent? Certainly this is interesting to ponder. Yet, again in a commercial
context, there’s a need for pragmatics: we use what we’ve got! In the early
days of geodemographic development in the UK, electoral wards were
used. Then, when the requirement for finer analysis came along and the data

‘But Does It Work?’ Geodemographics in the Dock
235
infrastructure was able to support it, census units were used. Subsequently,
data at unit postcode level became available and so Mosaic was produced at
that level too. Nowadays, with the new post-2001 Census classifications,
the majority operate at postcode level, although some have stuck to census
output areas. Geodemographic classification techniques can be applied at
any of these levels, though often smaller units of area are preferred because
demographic homogeneity is likely to be greater.
Notwithstanding our differences, we agree with the thrust of the
prosecution’s critique – that if the user misunderstands the technique,
there is a danger of her or him misapplying it. Certainly, this is an area
where it is incumbent on vendors of geodemographics to do their best to
educate their clients into the strengths and weaknesses of the method.
They should make users aware of issues such as the ecological fallacy
(whether they choose to call it by that name or not!). The presumption
appears to be they don’t already, yet in reality the awareness exists.
For example, the ACORN profiles that can be viewed at the website
www.upmystreet.com come with the following warning:
This description is intended to illustrate likely consumer preferences and
behaviour and does not describe a specific locality or its residents. Please note,
it may not always be entirely accurate for your postcode. You should not base
important decision making on the ACORN classification alone.
The prosecution is from an academic background and, as such,
perhaps does not fully understand the nature of business relationships.
In the private/commercial sector, vendors usually work directly with
end-users and there needs to be a high level of consultancy back-up and
service support from those suppliers. It is a very competitive market so
vendors need to fully satisfy the needs of their customers in order to
retain their business over time. Long-term vendor-to-customer relation-
ships are important to the profitability of the vendors. Ultimately, ven-
dors are only as good as the products they supply and the way they
supply them. Associated with this point, there have been many academic
criticisms of ‘commercial’ geodemographics in the past. There seems to
be a feeling that commercial authors of geodemographics have perhaps
‘not done it properly’. Our experience over many years suggests that
this is not at all the case – the developers give much thought to method-
ology, some have very extensive experience of developing classifica-
tions and, indeed, have developed sophisticated methods. The main
difference between these commercial developers and their academic
opposite numbers is that the former tend not to publish details of their
methodologies, whereas the latter do!

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
236
To sum up, whatever the virtues of the prosecution’s case, ulti-
mately it is rather akin to accusing an orange for tasting fruity! Their argu-
ment essentially criticizes the apparent simplicity of the geodemographic
approach, losing sight of the fact that it is that same simplicity which lies
at the heart of its widespread appeal and ease of use. It is also downplays
the merit of a classification that tries to ‘let the data do the talking’, to see
what important socio-economic and demographic patterns emerge and to
consider how they may be targeted.
It was a realization some years ago that there is little ‘hard evidence’
to prove geodemographics that led the Census and Geodemographics Group
(formerly the Census Interest Group) of the Market Research Society to
implement what became known as the Luton Case History. The study was
thorough and gave good evidence that geodemographics ‘worked’. To quote
the chairman of the group: ‘this study found that a geodemographic system
worked well in explaining actual differences in product consumption pat-
terns between neighbourhoods.’ The results of that study are summarized in
the following case study.
The defence rests.
Validating geodemographics – the Luton
case study
Barry Leventhal, Teradata, a division of NCR; and chairman of the Market
Research Society Census and Geodemographics Group.
Geodemographic classifications have been widely used in the UK for over
20 years, without any formal proof or evidence that they do actually pre-
dict how market consumption rates vary by geography.
In 1995, the Market Research Society’s Census Interest Group
(CIG) formed a working party to examine this issue. The team included
representatives from the Group Market Research department at Whitbread
plc who had been using geodemographics since the early days of the
industry. The team quickly grew to include representatives from BMRB
International, who operate the Target Group Index (TGI) (see Chapter 3)
and two leading census agencies: CACI and Experian.
The working party started by looking at geodemographic profiles of
product usage on the TGI, in order to see the how the discriminatory power
and patterns vary between products. For example, many products – such as
dishwasher ownership – show an ‘upmarket’ bias, while others – such as
cigarette smoking – show ‘downmarket’ skew. These profiles were all based

‘But Does It Work?’ Geodemographics in the Dock
237
on the Midlands BARB TV region, in order to reduce the likelihood that the
differences could be caused simply by regional factors. However, the fact
that the profiles showed apparent differences between different products and
places was no guarantee that these were also actual differences.
The group therefore wanted to test whether geodemographic pro-
files could really predict differences in consumption at a neighbourhood
level. The only way to achieve this was to survey actual consumption rates
for neighbourhoods within a town and compare the observed behaviour
with the geodemographic predictions.
The town selected was Luton – a local authority district containing
340 census enumeration districts (EDs) and a rich mix of geodemographic
types within a contained area. Luton was also the location of Whitbread’s
main offices and so was well known to their representatives on the working
party. This local knowledge was useful for ‘ground truthing’ the results.
The test was structured using ACORN, based on the 1991 Census.
Similar results could doubtless have been produced using other geodemo-
graphic classifications, and the survey results were post-analysed by both
ACORN and Mosaic. Three ACORN types were selected, corresponding
to ‘upmarket’, ‘middle-market’ and ‘downmarket’ demographics. These
ACORN types are summarized as: Type 11 – Affluent working couples
with mortgages, new homes; Type 31 – Home owners in older properties,
younger workers; and Type 44 – Multi-occupied terraces, multi-ethnic areas.
A sample of nine census wards was drawn containing the target
types and, within each ward, two target EDs were selected. This gave a
sample of 18 EDs in total, six for each ACORN type. A random sample
of addresses was then drawn for each ED, using Ordnance Survey’s
AddressPoint product (see Chapter 3) to ensure that all of the addresses
actually were located in the designated neighbourhoods.
The survey was undertaken by BMRB during September 1996
and was, in some ways, equivalent to a mini-TGI survey. BMRB inter-
viewers visited the selected addresses and conducted in-home interviews
to capture demographics and media consumption. The respondents also
completed a short questionnaire on product usage. By repeatedly revisit-
ing the addresses, interviews were achieved with 87% of all eligible
homes (excluding non-contacts) and a total of 870 interviews were
obtained – an average of 48 per ED. This was a sufficiently large sample
to analyse consumption rates at ED level and the high response rate
ensured that the results were representative of the population in each ED.
Initial analysis was undertaken to look at the patterns of con-
sumption rates by neighbourhood types, comparing the survey results
with TGI profiles for the Midlands. The extent of agreement was marked

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
238
and could not have been due to chance. With a collection of measurements
on each survey respondent in each ED, an approach was needed that took
account of the many relationships in the data. Therefore, multivariate
analysis seemed an appropriate next step. At this stage Robin Flowerdew,
then of the geography department at Lancaster University, joined the
working party.
An initial cluster analysis was conducted, using the product con-
sumption rates for the 18 EDs, in order to classify the neighbourhoods
into three groups based on their consumption patterns. If ACORN was a
good predictor of consumption, then the three consumption clusters
should correspond to the three ACORN types. The results of this test are
shown in Table 8.5. Each consumption cluster did correspond to a distinct
ACORN type and 15 out of the 18 EDs were in perfect agreement.
However, three EDs did not agree and the working party decided
that further analysis was needed in order to try to understand these out-
liers. An alternative ‘fuzzy’ approach to clustering was selected (and help
was enlisted from Zhiqiang Feng of the same geography department). The
fuzzy clustering approach is an extension of traditional ‘hard’ clustering,
in which each ED is assigned degrees of membership for belonging to dif-
ferent clusters. Therefore, rather than forcing each ED into one cluster, the
approach identifies EDs with similarities to several clusters. The ED is
allowed to belong to more than one neighbourhood type and its degree of
belonging to each can be calculated. A fuzzy classification of the ED con-
sumption data showed that the three clusters were fairly distinct and did
not explain the outliers which all had strong links to a single cluster, albeit
in ACORN terms, the wrong one.
The next step was to create a fuzzy geodemographic classification
using census data for the 18 Luton EDs, in order to see whether that would
explain the outliers. A set of 44 census variables were chosen, covering
mainly economic, demographic and social characteristics. Although this was
not the same list of variables as used in ACORN, the fuzzy classification was
Table 8.5 Distribution of Luton study census EDs across ACORN
and case-specific consumption clusters (* denotes residual case)
ACORN type
44
31
11
Consumption
1
5
1*
cluster
2
1*
4
3
1*
6

‘But Does It Work?’ Geodemographics in the Dock
239
not very different from ACORN. The main difference was that one of the
three outlier EDs turned out to have stronger links with the census cluster
equivalent to ACORN type 11 – matching its consumption cluster – rather
than type 31 as assigned by ACORN.
The remaining two outliers were explained in other ways. One was
found to have undergone substantial change in socio-economic character-
istics since the 1991 Census and the Luton Survey in 1996, due to changes
in its residential structure over the five-year period. The second was exam-
ined with a final test considering whether ACORN and its fuzzy version
were too general purpose for the products measured in the Luton survey. A
special-purpose fuzzy geodemographic classification was created, giving
higher weights to those census variables related to product consumption.
Using this classifier, the remaining outlier came out with high degrees of
membership in two clusters – one equivalent to its ACORN type and the
other matching its consumption pattern.
In conclusion, this study found that a geodemographic system
worked well in explaining actual differences in product consumption pat-
terns between neighbourhoods. The small number of exceptions could be
accounted for by either change since the census data underpinning the
commercial classification and by the application of a special-purpose dis-
criminator or by a fuzzy classification approach.
8.3 Conclusion
In this chapter we have sought to balance some theoretical weaknesses of
geodemographics with some practical advantages. This reflects our desire
to be candid about the merits and demerits of the method, and thereby
encourage good practice. The strengths and weaknesses of any analytical
approach need to be considered within the context of what the users hope
to achieve with it, why and with what additional resources available to
them. Some of the limits to geodemographics that we have outlined will be
more relevant to some analyses, the conclusions drawn from them and the
practical consequences of responding to those conclusions, than to others.
The onus is on the user, the vendor and the nature of their business–client
relationship to ensure that the analyses that take place and, most particu-
larly, the inferences drawn and acted upon are responsible, reasonable and
well founded. While it is tempting to suggest that geodemographics is
more the tool of commerce, to do so would be to miss both its origins and
recent deployments in areas of substantive public policy research.

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
240
One area of critique – criticism, really – that we have not looked
at in this chapter are studies of the ‘discourse’ of geodemographics. These
can be understood as looking at the language and nomenclature of geo-
demographics, and what they reveal about the underlying assumptions
and practices that are involved in its marketing and use. Such studies tend
to focus on the labelling of neighbourhood clusters and the ways they cari-
cature places but, more particularly, people – understandably so (see
Chapter 6, Section 6.8). They also question the extent to which the world
really can be ‘internalized’ within a computer model and then ‘manipu-
lated’ by an independent user (cf. Chapter 5, Section 5.2). Such discus-
sions are interesting and important and we have flagged them as further
reading to this chapter (they are also sometimes hard going and perhaps
overly focus on the theorized and not actual business environments
in which geodemographic vendors and users operate). A further area of
concern – issues of data privacy – is considered in the following chapter.
Summary
●Neighbourhood classification techniques have attracted criticism
from academic quarters. Some of these are more technically
driven, focusing on the clustering methods used. Others question
the way people and places are represented by geodemographic
systems.
●The formal, administrative geographies that are used for planning
and policy making may be ‘imposed’on populations – they do not
necessarily correspond to either informally or analytically identi-
fiable social entities.
●However, the design of the 2001 UK Census output areas has
used principles and methods of geographical information science
to standardize the zones against geographical criteria and in a way
that benefits subsequent geodemographic analysis.
●The modifiable area unit problem (MAUP) affects all analysis of
geographic information and has two components: the effects of
scale and the effects of zoning.
●Techniques such as K-means do not constrain the cluster outputs
to fit geographical assumptions such as Tobler’s first law of geog-
raphy but, as such, may ‘smooth out’ contextual differences in the
way clustering variables interrelate at regional or other sub-
national scales.

‘But Does It Work?’ Geodemographics in the Dock
241
●Nevertheless, geodemographics has been successfully used in the
business sector for many years and in a wide range of applications
that includes: prospect mailings; door-to-door distribution; mail-
ings to existing customers; risk management; pricing promotional
offers; channelling communications; planning new store loca-
tions; branch network evaluation; and store formatting and mer-
chandizing.
●Despite an unfortunate dearth of published, commercial evalua-
tions, a number of case histories and a validation exercise in Luton,
England suggest that geodemographics does indeed ‘work’ for its
users.
Further Reading
●
Curry, M. (1998) Digital Places: Living with Geographic Information
Technologies, Routledge, London.
●
Goss, J. (1995) Marketing the new marketing: the strategic discourse of
geodemographic information systems. In Ground Truth: the Social
Implications of Geographic Information Systems (ed., Pickles, J.), The
Guilford Press, New York, pp. 130–70.
●
Openshaw, S. and Wymer, C. (1995) Classifying and regionalizing census
data. In Census Users’ Handbook (ed, Openshaw, S.), GeoInformation
International, Cambridge, pp. 239–69.
●
Sleight, P. (2004) Targeting Customers: How to Use Geodemographic
and Lifestyle Data in Your Business, World Advertising Research
Center, Henley-on-Thames.


243
9
New Data, New
Approaches: from
Geodemographics to
Geolifestyles
Learning Objectives
In this chapter we will:
●
Change our focus from neighbourhood classifications to sources
of individual and household data.
●
Consider how such sources of lifestyle data are of use in
one-to-one and direct marketing and in building ‘geolifestyle’
classifications.
●
Revisit the opposite of the ecological fallacy – the atomistic fallacy.
●
Look at how some GIS-based and other techniques may be used
to avoid the atomistic fallacy, offering ‘bottom-up’ methods that
explore and help explain spatial patterns in lifestyle datasets.
●
Look at issues of data uncertainty and personal data protection
when using lifestyle datasets.
●
Present the last of our expert case studies, this one entitled
‘Lifestyles analysis and new approaches’, written by Gordon
Farquharson of Streetwise Analytics Limited.
Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
Richard Harris, Peter Sleight and Richard Webber
© 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
ISBNs: 0-470-86413-3 (HB); 0-470-86414-1 (PB)

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
244
Introduction
So far in this book the focus of our attention has been on neighbourhood
classifications, by which we mean the like-with-like sorting of variously
defined administrative zones into distinct types or groups. Although many
of these zones, such as postal or ZIP4 units, contain a small number of
the population they always have an area or geographical component. In
any case, governmental sources of geodemographic data usually are not
available for these more detailed geographical units – the dissemination of
most national census statistics is a case in point. In order to offer the level
of precision required by users of geodemographic systems, classification
builders often reapportion census data to smaller zonal divisions and sup-
plement them with sources of personal or household data. The nature and
availability of these sources were discussed in Chapter 7 and shown to
vary from country to country.
The existence of these non-aggregated data raises a question: if
datasets are available that are not area based, then why not use them to
classify persons or households directly using techniques analogous to
those described in Chapter 6? Such an approach would avoid the problems
associated with the ecological fallacy, since if the ‘type’ of any particular
person is already known then there is no need to try and infer that informa-
tion from the neighbourhood instead.
In fact, at least one company does offer such an approach. CACI’s
People*UK product is a mix of geodemographics, lifestyle and lifestage
data classifying every person on the UK electoral roll into one of 46
different types. These include: ‘Silver Spoons’, ‘Theme Park Families’,
‘Loan-Loaded Lifestyles’, ‘Staid At Home,’ ‘Beer and Bookies’, ‘Put the
Kettle On’ and ‘Church and Bingo’ (www.caci.co.uk). CACI also has
produced eTypes, a classification for understanding online consumer
behaviour, with seven main categories and 23 subcategories. Apparently,
‘Dot Com Dabblers’ tend to be found in Yorkshire, Lancashire and the
North East of the UK; ‘Virtual Virgins’ in Scotland (www.etypes.info).
Individual or household classifications, built from individual or
household data, are of obvious use for one-to-one and direct marketing. By
completing shopping surveys or extended product warrantee cards, or by
holding loyalty/affinity cards, the source data are often provided and updated
by the individuals/households themselves. Unless the respondents are given
to lie or change their life circumstances frequently, it is likely that the infor-
mation they provide will be representative of their actual living arrangements
and consumer lifestyles. For the subset of the populace that provides such

From Geodemographics to Geolifestyles
245
information it could be of more relevance to marketing and other applica-
tions than that obtained through more conventional, statistical sources.
A second question follows: how large is the subset? Acxiom
(Claritas UK) promotes its Lifestyle Universe product as having, at its
core, data received from three in four UK households, as including
380 pieces of detailed information on 44 million UK individuals and as
being updated quarterly (www.claritas.co.uk). It is easy to understand why
such products increasingly offer more appeal to marketers than decennial
census updates covering, by comparison, only a narrow range of geo-
demographic data. (Also why governments are considering using new
datasets to avoid what they often perceive to be a costly process of census
enumeration – see census case study, Chapter 7.)
Individual, household or small-area classifications based on lifestyle
data are sometimes known as geolifestyle classifications. The geo gives a
connection with more ‘traditional’ geodemographic approaches but, aside
from this, the use of the prefix might be questioned. It was observed in
Chapter 8 that while neighbourhood classifications are built using geo-
graphical data, aggregated into geographical units, the methods of clus-
tering rarely are geographical in themselves (the K-means method, for
example, is not). There are advantages in not imposing a priori geographical
assumptions upon the clustering routines but, instead, attempting to let
‘the data do the talking’. However, it is also somewhat tenuous to imply
that individual/household classifications are especially geographical if the
geography really only emerges once the results are plotted on a map.
Indeed, there is a risk of committing what is essentially the opposite of the
ecological fallacy: the atomistic fallacy, understood as a too myopic focus
on individuals or households at the expense of ignoring the larger social,
economic and cultural contexts in which those individuals and households
are situated (cf. Chapter 8, Section 8.1).
In this chapter, when we talk of geolifestyle classification we
mean to specifically consider the results of using explicitly spatial tech-
niques to draw out geographical attribute patterns from lifestyle types of
database. This conception is more aligned to developments in spatial data
mining, point pattern analysis and the repeat-testing methods of data
exploration from the field of geocomputation (Longley et al., 1998;
Miller, Han and Fraser, 2001; Openshaw and Abrahart, 2000); less
aligned to transferring conventional segmentation techniques to new
sources of data. We offer some ‘hows and wherefores’ of applying simple
and, initially, GIS-based techniques of spatial analysis to lifestyles data,
before going on to look at some potential pitfalls, including uncertainties
with the data and issues of personal privacy. We begin, though, with an

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
246
overview of using lifestyle data in marketing, in a case study that raises a
number of issues to be discussed further in the remainder of the chapter.
Case study: Lifestyles analysis and new
approaches
Gordon Farquharson, Streetwise Analytics Limited
Before we start exploring its applications, it is worth attempting to define
what the term ‘lifestyle data’ really means. Unfortunately there are few, if
any, authoritative references devoted to this type of information. In gen-
eral, lifestyle data is an umbrella term that covers information collected
about consumer choices and behaviours. By choices we mean product
ownership, interests, pastimes, shopping preferences and so on. Lifestyle
surveys might then question how a consumer has reacted to marketing
‘noise’. Behavioural questions, on the other hand, illustrate how a con-
sumer interacts with the market. For example, whether a consumer carries
a credit card could be regarded as a reaction or choice; whether they pay
their monthly credit card balance in full is an interaction or behaviour.
So, we are describing information obtained from a type of survey
that asks consumers how they live their life. Why is this so important
when market research companies have been doing surveys like this for
years? The real value behind lifestyle data and why they recently have
come to prominence in the marketing arena is the sheer volume of con-
sumers providing information. Through dedicated surveys, lifestyle data
companies collect millions of responses every year, making this type of
information a prime resource. Throw in millions of additional responses
per year from the collection of extended product registration cards for
brown and white goods and you can understand why the direct marketing
industry is a thriving marketplace.
Lifestyle questionnaires specifically ask consumers to consent to
receiving other marketing communications and so lifestyle data primarily
lend themselves to direct mailing applications. Being able to target con-
sumers who are known to be interested in golf rather than targeting neigh-
bourhoods with an ‘unusually’ high prevalence of golfers should result in
superior response to a direct marketing campaign among those targeted.
The traditional, neighbourhood approach may, however, be better for
reaching ‘new’ golfers – that is, people who play golf but for whom
lifestyle data are not available. Alternatively, the lifestyle database can be
extended by the modelling of lifestyles onto the portion of the population

From Geodemographics to Geolifestyles
247
where it has not been possible to collect information. This brings its appli-
cation into a wider universe, albeit with reduced expectations. In the direct
marketing sector this proposition is becoming common with Claritas (The
Lifestyle Universe), CACI (Lifestyles*UK) and most recently, Consodata
(OmniLifestyle, www.consodata.co.uk) promoting lifestyle databases with
full national coverage.
From the actual, non-modelled responses it is also possible to
identify geographic differences and preferences. For example, just by
plotting on a map the locations of households who shop at a particular
store, it is easy to identify how far the attraction to the store extends.
While this kind of catchment modelling still needs some development it
does present local insight that is difficult to measure through any other
data source. Extension of this application is relatively straightforward
through controlled weighting and modelling to generate more robust esti-
mates at a local level.
A further extension of this local data is in the development of
so-called ‘geolifestyle’ classifications. Similar to geodemographics, geo-
lifestyle segmentation focuses on using the survey responses as the
inputs into a cluster analysis model. The responses to each question can
be aggregated to provide percentage estimates for small-areas units. The
result is a segmentation solution that discriminates each unit based on
lifestyle choices and behaviours. Understandably, the effectiveness of
these solutions will vary considerably because they are very sensitive to
the amount and the age of data available.
This variability highlights a limitation when using lifestyle data.
Although response rates do vary across different socio-economic groups,
the underlying UK rate is approximately 6% for a typical postal survey.
And, even when we consider a composite file of responses accumulated
over a number of years, there is still likely to be a number of significant
‘holes’ in the database. We have already seen that models can be built from
the actual data to fill these holes. This can tempt us to believe that just
because it is possible to build a model at individual or household level it will
necessarily provide the best solution. It may be better and is generally easy
to aggregate to postcode or other geographies. However, such approaches
can yield poor and usually flat ‘solutions’. Both individual/household and
postcode classifications can dilute the potential benefits of the underlying
data. Even for true individual or household applications, many of the solu-
tions are built as national models that do not readily incorporate the local
effects and contexts that influence certain types of choices and behaviours.
The other main criticism of using model-based methods to extend
lifestyle databases is that the base surveys provide a biased view of consumer

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
248
worlds. It is certainly true that a typical response profile is not representative
of the populace as a whole. The data companies do not dispute this but point
out that the vast number of questionnaires involved should lead to the risk
caused by this bias to be minimal for many applications. What is important is
the level of care taken to model the rest of the data effectively, where it has an
important bearing on any inferences.
This leads us to query what can be done to utilize these rich
sources of (lifestyle) data in such a way that inferences made from them
are robust and actionable. For both geographical and individual based
applications the answer involves the optimal integration of geography into
our models. This does not mean simply adding a geographic variable into
our usual model and treating it in the same way as the others but instead
using techniques which assist in generating models to capture ‘neighbour-
hood effects’ detected in the attributes of the lifestyle data.
Two of the more prevalent of these techniques are multilevel
modelling and geographic fusion. The former includes geography as a
stratum and forms an integrated, hierarchical model with error terms and
measures of variance included for each level. By nesting, for example,
households within postal units, within census zones, within regions, the
model can quantify the significance and divergence of different types of
lifestyle at different geographical scales. Multilevel modelling is a power-
ful technique and realizes robust local models. Geographic fusion takes a
different approach and uses donor imputation techniques, the most com-
mon known as hotdecking (used in the development of OmniLifestyle), to
generate observations within a predetermined geography. Because hot-
decking techniques use some combination of neighbouring values to fill
missing ones, the models are sensitive to biased data but generally lead to
robust estimates with no loss of consistency across variables (i.e. the
covariance matrix is preserved).
Most current techniques are still straitjacketed by the geographies
within which they are applied. To advance the quality of estimates derived
from lifestyle data it is essential to maximize the utility and flexibility of
the data by developing an optimal geography for modelling. Key to this
step forward is to recognize boundaries where an acceptable statistical
difference exists. These boundaries can then form the reporting geog-
raphies, ensuring that the lifestyle data are represented with maximum
effect and more optimally incorporated within multilevel modelling or
geographic methods.
In summary, lifestyle data are viewed as an important ingredient into
many marketing plans. While the response rates are always challenging,
lifestyle companies are exploring new channels for collecting information.

From Geodemographics to Geolifestyles
249
Internet surveys are increasingly common and appeal to segments that were
traditionally resistant to volunteering lifestyle information. Other channels
are emerging as suitable media for collecting information, particularly the
telephone, where DataLocator (www.datalocator.com) has built a successful
programme. The continued success and evolution of lifestyle datasets will
depend on the quality of the data collected and, more importantly, the quality
of the inferences made from them. Appreciation of the benefits and statistical
limits remain central to effective consumer insight.
9.1 Using GIS to map lifestyle data
The preceding section identified that lifestyle data can be used to identify
and analyse local patterns and trends. A straightforward means of doing this
is to plot the data on a map. Each lifestyle record usually has an address
field and this residential location can be given a point grid coordinate using
products such as Ordnance Survey UK’s Address- and Code-Point products
(see Chapter 3, Section 3.1). Having done so, it is easily visualized using a
GIS. In this way, Figure 9.1 shows a subset of a lifestyle dataset, indicating
the locations of survey respondents who identified themselves to be ‘single’in
a particular town within southern England. Each point is at the population-
weighted centre of a unit postcode (the centroid) and the size of the symbol
is proportional to the number of ‘single’ respondents per postcode.
Given Figure 9.1, a question reasonably asked is whether ‘singles
households’ geographically are concentrated into certain parts of the
town. In previous chapters the way to answer this would be to link the
records to the neighbourhood types in which the households are located.
Although this would be a predominantly automated procedure in the sort
of geodemographic information systems described in Chapter 5, it was
also shown, in Chapter 4 (Figure 4.8), to be equivalent to overlaying a
neighbourhood objects layer upon the points layer in a GIS, undertaking a
point-in-polygon analysis and using this to group together the points
found to be located in each of the neighbourhood classes. As such, the
conventional geodemographic approach can be regarded as a ‘top-down’
method whereby the preconstructed neighbourhood classes would be
placed atop of and down on the lifestyle data for analysis. What we are
seeking here is a ‘bottom-up’ approach. By this we mean to draw patterns
out from the lifestyles data, defining the spatial extent of any patterning
on the basis of what we find, as opposed to fitting it to some a priori
classification of neighbourhood types.

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
250
Simply ‘eyeballing’ Figure 9.1 suggests locations where clusters
of singles households appear to be found. However, there is a need for
caution and not to jump to the conclusion that any apparent patterns are
necessarily significant. Their significance is unproven. You can probably
see patterns in Figure 9.2, too, but all we have done for this map is take the
same set of locations as Figure 9.1 and randomly reassign the original
attribute data to an alternative one of the locations. Any apparent patterns
in Figure 9.2 are due to the geography of the study region and the geog-
raphy of the survey response, not the actual residential choices made by
singles households.
9.1.1 Grid-based analysis
The issue of assigning significance to apparent clusters of a lifestyle
attribute is returned to in Section 9.2. A more immediate problem is that
when we look at each point on Figure 9.1, like is not actually compared
Figure 9.1 Distribution of lifestyle surveys respondents classifying themselves as ‘single’
for a settlement in southern England

From Geodemographics to Geolifestyles
251
with like. This is because the number of survey respondents in each post-
code varies (from 1 to 16; the mean average is 1.9, the median, 1). This
variation may reflect the fact that certain subsets of the population are
more likely to provide lifestyle information than others but is also due to
unit postcodes being of varied population size.
It is necessary, therefore, to standardize the local counts of singles
households with respect to the local count of survey respondents. The
proportion of the respondents that class themselves as single could then be
calculated for each unit postcode. However, with averages of only 1–1.9
respondents per postcode, small-number effects would emerge. The aver-
ages suggest the proportions would be constrained to a non-continuous
range of values and approximate to one of three discrete values: 0, 0.5 or 1.
In other words, the data do not support robust estimates of the actual (real-
world) proportions of singles households at the unit postcode scale.
The problem is that the postcodes are not of a large enough popu-
lation size to permit proportions robustly to be calculated from the
Figure 9.2 Map showing the random redistribution of the ‘singles’ attribute values to
alternative locations in the same study region as Figure 9.1

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
252
lifestyle sample available. An alternative approach is illustrated by Figure 9.3.
This adopts a quadrat-like approach and aggregates the point data into a
regular grid to calculate the proportion of ‘single’ respondents per grid
cell. Grids are easy to define (cf. Chapter 4, Section 4.1). The following
text specifies the grid shown in Figure 9.3:
NCOLS 20
number of columns
NROWS 20
number of rows
xllcorner 465212
lower left x coordinate of the grid
yllcorner 166713
lower left y coordinate of the grid
cellsize 700
cell length
nodata_value 9999
value for indicating an absence of data within a cell
1
2
3
4
5
6
. . .
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
. . .
29
30
. . .
attribute data: one item (in this case an ID) per cell
. . .
391
392
393
394
395
396
. . .
399
400
Having derived proportions per grid cell the information can be used to
fill missing values in the lifestyle database. For example, imagine no
information has been collected for a postcode located in the highlighted
grid cell found near the centre of Figure 9.3. An estimate of the proportion
of singles households to be found in that postcode is provided by the cell
value: p  0.55.
The obvious problem with the quadrat method is in fitting the
lifestyle data to a grid structure. That structure is arbitrary and encounters
the modifiable areal unit problem (Chapter 8). Changing either the zoning
(by shifting the grid origin or by rotation) or the scale (by changing the
cell length or shape) will produce different results. The estimates are also
based on differing sample sizes per grid cell – some cells contain more
points than others.
9.1.2 Thiessen polygons
Arguably, the geography of Figure 9.4 is less arbitrary than the grid-based
one. It shows what are known as Thiessen, Voronoi or proximity poly-
gons. These are constructed such that any location within the boundary of
a polygon is closer to the single sampled point also within the polygon
than it is to any other sampled point. For consistency, Figure 9.4 is shaded
in the same way and with the same class values as Figure 9.3. In practice,

From Geodemographics to Geolifestyles
253
the range of possible values is constrained, as discussed previously, due to
there being only one sample point per polygon from which to derive an
estimate of the proportion of singles households. Although the sample
size is now broadly consistent (insofar as n  1 postal unit in all cases) it
is also too small!
As it happens, Thiessen polygons are constructed by first
undertaking Delaunay or Dietrich triangulation that connects sampled
points to their nearest neighbours. The result is a tessellation of tri-
angles covering the study region and is often referred to as a TIN (tri-
angulated irregular network, see Chang, 2003, p. 281). An estimate of
the attribute value at a non-sampled location can therefore be made by
identifying the triangle containing the location and then using the three
sample points at the corners of the triangle to derive the estimate
within. The sample size is consistent and larger than previously but
remains small (n  3).
Figure 9.3 Grid aggregation of the lifestyle data, displaying the proportion of ‘singles
households’ per grid cell

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
254
9.1.3 A concentric circle approach
An alternative way of estimating the proportion of singles households in
and around the non-sampled location is to adopt one of the catchment-
defining methods outlined in Chapter 5, Section 5.2.5. Figure 9.5 adopts
the simplest method, drawing a circle around the estimation point and
calculating the proportion of singles households within that buffer zone.
In fact, Figure 9.5 shows the edges of a series of concentric circles, each
centred at the same point but with different radii: the first has 500 m; the
second 1000 m; and so forth, increasing at 500 m intervals to 2500 m. A
problem, as with the earlier grid-based approach, is that the estimated value
is modifiable, dependent in this example on the scale of analysis (the radius
length). A short radius of 500 m provides an estimate of p1 (500 m)  0.47.
Increasing the radius to 1000 m produces p2 (1000 m)  0.36 (a 23%
decrease); whereas a radius of 2500 m produces a result similar to the first,
at p3 (2500 m)  0.46.
Figure 9.4 Polygonal aggregation of the lifestyle data, displaying the proportion of
‘singles households’ per Thiessen polygon

From Geodemographics to Geolifestyles
255
9.1.4 Inverse distance weighting
Instead of calculating the buffers as five overlapping circles, they could
instead be generated as they seem to appear in Figure 9.5: as five separate
and sequential rings, the second ring starting at the outer edge of the first
‘ring’; the third ring starting at the outer edge of the second; and so forth.
The midpoint distances, dr, between the inner and outer edges of these
rings from the central point outwards are: 250 m; 750 m; 1250 m; 1750 m
and 2250 m. The corresponding estimates of the proportion, pr, of sin-
gles households within each ring are: 0.47; 0.33; 0.44; 0.45 and 0.51,
respectively.
It is possible to ‘pool’ the data for each ring and obtain an inverse
distance weighted estimate of the proportion of singles households around
the central point. In accordance with Tobler’s first law of geography
(Chapter 1, Section 1.5), the average will give increased weight to the ring
(r) at least distance, dr, from the centroid point and decreased weight to
Figure 9.5 Concentric ring aggregation of the lifestyle data, displaying the proportion of
‘singles households’ per buffer zone

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
256
the ring that is furthest away. Specifically, the weight we assign to each
ring will be defined as:
(9.1)
Equation (9.1) ensures that each ring contributes to the average but also
that the weight assigned decreases with distance from the estimation
point, reaching zero beyond the fifth ring (at d  2750 m). The rate of
decay is controlled by parameter c (c  0 for inverse distance weighting).
Setting c  2 specifies an inverse squared decay and produces the follow-
ing set of weights, from the centre outwards: 0.45; 0.29; 0.16; 0.07; 0.02.
Given that the five weights sum to one, the pooled and inverse distance
weighted average is calculated as:
 (0.45  0.47)  (0.29  0.33)  (0.16  0.44)
 (0.07  0.45)  (0.02  0.51)
(9.2)
 0.42
This weighted average better reflects the attributes of the inner ring than it
does each successive ring – by definition. Increasing the value of c places
further importance on the near rings relative to the far ones. When c  3
the weighted average equals 0.43 and when c  5 the weighted average is
0.44. As c is increased, the weighted average is becoming increasingly
like the average for the first ring alone (p1  0.47).
Inverse distance weighting (IDW) is often incorporated in methods
of spatial data manipulation such as population surface modelling
(Bracken and Martin, 1989; Martin and Higgs, 1997; Martin, Tate and
Langford, 2000) and in methods of spatial data analysis such as geo-
graphically weighted regression (Fotheringham, Brunsdon and Charlton,
2002). By doing so these methods recognize the existence of spatial auto-
correlation (see Chapter 1, Section 1.5) and, by allowing the weights to
decay to zero from a centre point outwards, avoid imposing a stark bound-
ary between points that are either fully in an analytical area or fully out of
it. Such boundaries are present in both the grid-based and Thiessen poly-
gon methods (Figures 9.3 and 9.4) where there are sharp discontinuities at
the edge of each area unit. However, IDW methods require consideration
be given to the shape of the weighting kernel which is modifiable both in
terms of the distance over which it operates and also, as we have seen, the
p  
5
r 1
wr pr
wr 
(2750  dr)c

r
1(2750  dr)c

From Geodemographics to Geolifestyles
257
importance given to near data points relative to those further away. In
practice, the distance decay parameter has less effect on the analytical
results than the maximum length/radius of the kernel – the effects of
which can be considerable (see, for example, Harris and Chen, 2004).
9.2 Looking for ‘hot spots’
For the purposes of this chapter, the phrase ‘hot-spot analysis’is treated as
shorthand for using spatial analytical techniques to look for and adjudge
the significance of geographically clustered patterns of spatial autocorre-
lation in attribute values taken from lifestyle datasets. We could also
describe this as point pattern analysis since we have been assigning point
coordinates to georeference and map the lifestyle data. However, unlike a
number of point pattern techniques that are only concerned with summar-
izing the pattern of the locations themselves (the geography of the sam-
ple), what we are interested in is the geographical patterns of the attribute
values assigned to those locations.
9.2.1 A concentric circle method
A simple framework for hot-spot analysis is suggested by the circular
method of interpolation considered in Section 9.1.3. But instead of generat-
ing a (single) circle of fixed radius around a non-sampled location, imagine
that a circle was produced around each and every sample point (one circle
around each point, not multiple circles as in Figure 9.5). Doing so would
permit summary statistics to be calculated for points falling within each of
these circles, for example the local proportion of singles household respond-
ents. The local statistics could then be compared against each other and
against ‘global’ values for the study region as a whole, permitting poten-
tially unusual and localized occurrences to be identified.
This is the general approach adopted by one of us (Harris, 2004)
to look for localized patterns of consumer behaviour present within the
City and Country of Bristol, England. A slight modification is that in
order to compensate for the geographically uneven distribution of survey
responses it was not the circle radii that were fixed but the target number
of survey respondents within each circle. This involves identifying the
ni nearest neighbours to any point (i) to give a total local sample of
m respondents around and inclusive of i, holding m constant from point
to point. Having identified the ni nearest neighbours they are grouped

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
258
together to form set I and a calculation made of the proportion of respond-
ents possessing a certain attribute within the set (e.g. the proportion of singles
household respondents).
Imagine that point j is one of those ni nearest neighbours –
a member of set I. In the same way that the closest points to i can be identi-
fied so too can the nj nearest neighbours to j. Call this second group set J.
Again, a calculation can be made of the proportion of ‘single’ respon-
dents, this time within set J. Repeating the process, equivalent measures
can be found for each of the ni points around i. The result is ni estimates of
the proportion of singles household respondents within the vicinity of
location i – one for each member of set I.
By comparing the estimates, measures of the local mean 
and
the local standard deviation (si) around that mean can be calculated. The
global proportion (m) of ‘single’ respondents across the entire study
region (or ‘universe’) can separately be calculated. Combining all this
information, a measure of the relative significance of the attribute’s
concentration – in this case ‘singleness’ – in and around i is derived as:
(9.3)
The index value, zi, is highest in localities that have a higher than
global average presence of singles household respondents and where that
concentration is not a ‘one off’ but generally characteristic of all the ni
neighbours of i. Based on this index, Figure 9.6 suggests hot spots within
the southern England town where singles households particularly are
located – predominantly on the periphery of the settlement.
Equation (9.3) deliberately mimics the formula commonly
employed to undertake a z test of the difference, along a normal distribu-
tion, between a sample mean 
and the hypothesized mean (m) for the
population from which the sample is drawn, i.e.
(9.4)
(cf. Rogerson, 2001, p. 44).
However, the results of Equation (9.3) must be interpreted differ-
ently from a standard z test because the normality assumptions do not
apply. This means we cannot use standard statistical tables to conclude
that a z value of magnitude greater than 2.0 has less than 5% likelihood
of occurring ‘by chance’. How, then, can we assign significance to the
z  x  
s√n
(x)
zi  ai  
si√ni
(ai)

From Geodemographics to Geolifestyles
259
zi values resulting from Equation (9.3)? At what threshold should we
become interested in the result?
Looking back at Figure 9.2 suggests the answer. Recall that this
map has the correct geography of the lifestyle sample but the attribute val-
ues at each location randomly were redistributed around the scene.
Running the hot-spot analysis on this quasi-random dataset it is found that
approximately 5% of the sample are given zi values less than or equal to
3, or greater than or equal to 7. These results imply that given the
geography of sampled locations and given the set of records recording the
number of singles households and the number of respondents, zi values
above 7 would occur, by chance, 2.5% of the time. In other words, we
can have 95% confidence that zi  3 or zi 	 7 are not ‘false posi-
tives’. For our sample of lifestyle data the 7 threshold might then be
treated as comparable to the 2 cut-off of the conventional z test.
However, the 7 threshold is case specific and, at this stage, not
reliable. Remember that it derives from a random redistribution of the
sample attributes and could, therefore, be freakish. We should repeat the
Figure 9.6 Results of ‘hot-spot analysis’detecting significant clusters of ‘singles households’

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
260
process of testing for random redistributions of the attribute data perhaps
100, 500 or 1000 times until a clear idea is formed of what threshold val-
ues genuinely are unusual. Such a process of repeat testing to determine
benchmark values is known as Monte Carlo simulation (see O’Sullivan
and Unwin, 2003, pp. 104–8).
As it turns out, a threshold of 7 is not unreasonable and there-
fore has been applied in Figure 9.6, above. Using the techniques described
in Chapter 5 to cross-reference the neighbourhood profiles of the postcode
sectors in which these significant clusters are found against the profiles
for all sectors returning a lifestyle respondent, singles households are
found to have a higher than expected presence in ‘Symbols of Success’
neighbourhoods (index value of 187), ‘Suburban Comfort’ (index of 135)
and ‘Grey Perspectives’ (111).
9.2.2 The geographical analysis machine (GAM)
A definition of spatial analysis is ‘a set of methods whose results change
when the location of the objects being analysed change’ (Longley et al.,
2001, p. 278). Another way of looking at this is in terms of the modifiable
areal unit problem – when the scale or zoning of the analysis changes so
too does the result. Accordingly, in the hot-spot analysis outlined above,
if the circular buffer drawn around each point were repositioned or resized
then different zi values would be obtained. A weakness of the method is
that there is only one circle drawn around any one point and its definition
is essentially arbitrary. A better method might try out differently sized cir-
cles, retaining those that are significant to the local context and rejecting
those that are not.
Such a process of repeat testing is at the heart of the ‘geographical
analysis machine’(GAM), an analytical procedure developed to test whether
incidences of childhood leukaemia were clustered around British Nuclear
Fuels’ Sellafield site. They were but a stronger cancer cluster was found in
Gateshead (Openshaw et al., 1987, 1988). The GAM algorithm is described
by Openshaw (1998, p. 97). It is paraphrased as follows:
●Read in (x, y) data for population at risk and an attribute of interest
from a GIS.
●Identify: the minimum enclosing rectangle (MER) containing the
data; the starting circle radius; and the degree to which neigh-
bouring circles will overlap.
●Generate a regular, raster grid across the MER with cell length
defined by the amount of overlap between circles.

From Geodemographics to Geolifestyles
261
●For each grid intersection (cell corner) generate a circle of radius r.
●Retrieve two counts for the circle: the local population at risk and
the local attribute count.
●Apply some ‘significance’ test procedure and keep the result if it
is significant.
●Repeat for all remaining grid intersections.
●Increase the cell radius, regenerate the grid and repeat until either
there are no further significant circles or a maximum search
radius is reached.
●Draw a smoothed density surface showing how the number of sig-
nificant circles varies across the study region.
Plate 4 maps the result of using GAM to search for unusual clusters of
the lifestyle survey respondents classifying themselves as ‘single’. Also
shown are the results of the previous, single circle per point method.
Reassuringly, there is much accord: the majority of localities assigned sig-
nificance in one test is also assigned significance in the other. There are
differences, too. These are not entirely unexpected since the methods do
not assign significance in the same way. The current incarnation of GAM
offers a variety of methods for detecting clusters in spatial and temporal
datasets. It can be downloaded from the Centre for Computational
Geography at the University of Leeds: www.ccg.leeds.ac.uk.
GAM is an example of a geographical data-mining tool used, like
neighbourhood classifications, for knowledge discovery or, more formally,
for inductive reasoning. Induction is to draw a general rule or conclusion from
particular facts or examples – in this case, a particular dataset. It contrasts with
deductive reasoning for which the general rule or conclusion is first decided
and then tested by appropriate means such as data collection and analysis, to
further a conclusion. In the context of geographical information science,
induction could be viewed as data-led, deduction as theory-led. However, as
the term ‘data-led’ is sometimes intended to be pejorative it may better be
avoided. In reality, within the ‘messy’ and subjective world of research and
analysis the division between induction and deduction is often blurred.
9.3 From revelation to explanation
As well as describing GAM, Openshaw (1998) also introduces a geo-
graphical explanations machine to automate the search for localized
spatial associations between detected clusters and predictor variables that
may help to explain why the clusters have formed. A caveat is important

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
262
here to avoid misunderstanding of this and other associative methods:
finding spatial associations can help to explain why particular phenomena
or events are found to have greater presence in some places than others but
does not, in itself, prove cause and effect. Sales of ice cream and sales of
barbeque fuel are correlated but it of course does not follow that eating a
vanilla cone causes a subsequent meal to be roasted outdoors!
A method of detecting localized spatial associations, which is
becoming more prevalent, is geographically weighted regression (GWR,
Fotheringham, Brunsdon and Charlton, 2000). This brings together the ideas
of moving search windows and inverse distance weighting to quantify how
the measured associations between variables vary spatially across a study
region. It avoids the ‘one size fits all’ modelling of traditional approaches to
allow important local relationships to be measured and mapped in a GIS. It is
an explicitly geographical technique in that it does not attempt to ‘average
away’spatial variations and because it does not make the false assumption of
much linear regression modelling of geographical datasets that any residual
error is random over space. To the contrary, patterns of geographical depend-
ence are expected to be present in the dataset and it is these the modelling
procedure aims to reveal and help explain. Software for GWR is available
via www.may.ie/ncg/gwr. An application of using GWR to model the spa-
tially varying correlates of urban deprivation is provided by Longley and
Tobon (2004).
Another, method for revealing geographical variations in the asso-
ciations of variables is multilevel modelling (Snijders and Bosker, 1999;
Hox, 2002; Goldstein, 2003). Although not exclusively a geographical
technique, many of the ‘units’for which geographical data are collected do
have a hierarchical structure – i.e. multiple levels – such as pupils within
schools within local authorities, or households within census output areas
within electoral wards within governmental regions, etc.
Multilevel modelling can be likened (but is not limited) to fitting
a regression line, y
  b0  b1x to a set of data but allowing the slope
(b1) and/or y-intercept (b0) coefficients of that line to vary from place to
place at the various levels of the hierarchy. This permits the significance
of the variance at each level to be determined and can be used to examine
Weiss’ (2000, p. 8) assertion that there is a ‘basic clustering concept, that
people in the same neighborhoods tend to behave (or at least consumer)
the same way.’ For example, a three-level model of household lifestyle
data linked to a classification of neighbourhood type and the region within
which the neighbourhood is located could examine the relative signifi-
cance of household, neighbourhood and regional variations with regards
to a particular consumer attribute. Alternatively, formulae for measuring

From Geodemographics to Geolifestyles
263
deprivation such as the breadline one of Chapter 2, Equation (2.2) could
be remodelled to take into account neighbourhood and regional differ-
ences in the correlates of deprivation.
A considerable advantage of multilevel modelling is that it is an
integrated methodology in that the various levels of the hierarchy are
coherently linked together. One benefit of this is parsimony in that the
variations in the parameter estimates obtained for the various parts of
the hierarchy are incorporated and thus comparable within a single model.
A second is of obtaining more robust parameter estimates both by pooling
data and by not ignoring the effects of spatial autocorrelation within the
units of analysis (effects which otherwise lead to the significance of the
parameter values to be overestimated). However, use of the method
assumes that a hierarchical structure (not necessarily geographical) is
present and that its units and levels can be defined. While pupils belong to
schools that have clearly defined boundaries, geographical units for
analysing consumer behaviour are more indeterminate. Multilevel model-
ling software is available from http://multilevel.ioe.ac.uk.
9.4 Data-handling issues
9.4.1 Data uncertainty
A potential problem with lifestyle datasets, mentioned in the case study and
also considered by Longley et al. (2001), is the ‘uncertainty’ of the data. As
those authors note, any digital representation of the real world is imperfect
and uncertainty is introduced through the ways in which the world is con-
ceptualized, measured, analysed and represented. Uncertainty is an umbrella
term covering issues of error, inaccuracy, ambiguity and vagueness.
With lifestyle datasets the focus is on uncertainty in the measure-
ment and representation of people and places. However, these notions of
uncertainty cannot be separated from the applications to which the data are
put. Provided that the survey returns are up to date and truthful we can have
a large degree of certainty that lifestyle data provide useful and accurate
information about the people who complete lifestyle surveys. Of course,
the information provides only a snapshot or caricature of the ‘complete
person’, but lifestyle surveys are often extensive and the information that is
gleaned from them especially is relevant to direct marketing.
Greater uncertainty arises when the data are extrapolated to
profile people and places that have not returned lifestyle information. This

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
264
is because the data provide only a sample of the broader populace and
caution is needed when remodelling the data in ways that assume they are
representative of a non-sampled group. As it happens, if we profile the
neighbourhood characteristics of the lifestyle sample analysed in the pre-
ceding sections against what we would expect to find within the local
authority concerned they are extremely consistent: the Pearson correlation
of the observed and expected distributions by neighbourhood group is
0.99 (99%). Admittedly, the most affluent neighbourhoods (Affluent
Achievers, Happy Families and Suburban Comfort) are relatively over-
sampled with index values of 112, 113 and 117, respectively, and the
Welfare Borderline group are the most undersampled with an index value
of 72. However, strict notions of a ‘digital divide’ are, in this case, not
entirely tenable: relatively, the most oversampled group turns out to be the
Municipal Dependency group, with an index of 123.
Nevertheless, the ‘representativeness’ of lifestyle data cannot
always be assumed, because of the way the data are collected. Lifestyle
samples are unusual in that those who are enumerated are partly self-
selecting in the sample design (some people opt out of receiving unsoli-
cited mailings), partly self-selecting as respondents (having received a
survey they are under no obligation to return it), in part selected by the
data company (few surveys attempt a blanket coverage of the population
but are targeted to particular households or attached to particular types of
purchases) and in part determined by the respondents’ life circumstances
(certain groups are more able or willing to return a survey than others;
some are more attracted to incentives to do so, such as shopping vouchers
or a prize draw; some are more likely to buy the products to which
extended warrantee questionnaires are attached). The sample therefore is
determined by a conflation of random and systematic events.
One way to ascertain how representative the data are is test them
against some suitable benchmark. Above and in Chapter 5, Sections 5.2.1
and 5.2.4, the benchmark was provided by comparing the observed and
expected mix of neighbourhoods. This is a useful and quick method of
analysis but, in its crudest form, will only ‘correct’ the data by assigning
the same weight to all respondents within a neighbourhood group, there-
fore discounting any measurable differences in the lifestyle attributes of
the group that may be important in determining response. A more sophis-
ticated method is outlined as follows.
Imagine that a recent national census had revealed the number of
households in zone A to be 1000. For the same area, a lifestyle survey had
enumerated 100 households. To tally the numbers, each survey responding
to household needs to count for 10 in the census (i.e. 10  100  1000).

From Geodemographics to Geolifestyles
265
Assume that of the 1000 households, 600 are recorded in the
census to be possessing at least one car. The lifestyle survey has 70
respondents owning a car, which is an overestimate relative to the census,
since 70  10  700 and 700  600. If we trim the weight assigned to
each car-owning household in the survey to 8.57 then the correct census
count is obtained: 8.57  70  600. However, the total number of
households now falls short: (car-owning households  no-car house-
holds)  (8.57  70  10  30)  900 and 900  1000. We cannot
change the weight assigned to the car-owning group if their weighted
total is to remain at 600, so the only option left is to raise the weight
assigned to no-car households, to 13.3. This gives the correct total:
(8.57  70  13.3  30)  1000. We now have two weights that we can
assign to lifestyle respondents in zone A: the first for those who own cars
(8.57); the second for those who do not (13.3).
Further assume that the census counts 400 households living in
terraced properties in area A. The lifestyle survey has 25 households in
terraced properties and, querying the database, it is found that 20 of the 25
own cars (five, therefore, do not). Based on the current weightings, the
lifestyle survey has a weighted total of (8.57  20)  (13.3  5)  238
households living in terraced properties – a shortfall of 162. Assigning
20/25ths of the shortfall to the car-owning, terraced households, and
5/25ths to the non-car-owning, terraced households produces weights of
15.1 and 19.8, respectively (15.1  20  19.8  5  400).
Unfortunately, the weighted count of car-owning households is no
longer correct. It is known that 20 of the 70 survey respondents who own a
car live in terraced properties and the weight assigned to this group is 15.1.
For the remaining 50 who do not live in terraced properties the only weight
we have available for them is the one first derived for the car-owning
group as a whole, i.e. 8.57. Putting these together gives a weighted count of
(15.1  20)  (8.57  50)  731 car-owning households, which is a surplus
of 31 over the corresponding census count. The weight assigned to car
owners living in terraced properties cannot be changed if the weighted
count of terraced households is to stay at 400; instead, the weight assigned
to car-owning households not living in terraced properties is lowered by
the required amount, to 7.95.
The weighted counts of all terraced and all car-owning households
are now consistent for the lifestyle sample and the census, in area A, but the
all household counts are not! That total is found as the weighted sum of:
car-owning, terraced households; non-car-owning, terraced households;
car-owning, non-terraced households; and non-car-owning, non-terraced
households. Of these four classes of household, weights have been

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
266
adjusted for all but the non-car, non-terraced group, for which the closest
match is the weight originally found for the non-car-owning group,
i.e. 13.3. The present weighted count of households from the lifestyle data is
(15.1  20)  (19.8  5)  (7.95  50)  (13.3  25)  1131. The only
weight that can be adjusted without affecting either the weighted count of
car-owning households or the weighted count of terraced households is that
assigned to the non-car-owning, non-terraced households group. Trimming
it from 13.3 to 8.06 gives the correct census count of 1000 households and
we now have four classes of adjusted weight that we can assign to different
types of lifestyle respondent in zone A.
Introducing a third comparative census variable, such as the
number of households in privately rented dwellings, will produce eight
weighting classes: car-owning, terraced households in rented dwelling;
non-car-owning, terraced households in rented dwelling; car-owning,
non-terraced households in rented dwelling; non-car-owning, non-
terraced households in rented dwelling; car-owning, terraced house-
holds, not in rented dwelling; non-car-owning, terraced households, not
in rented dwelling; car-owning, non-terraced households, not in rented
dwelling; and non-car-owning, non-terraced households, not in rented
dwelling. As previously, weights are assigned and adjusted for classes
sequentially.
First, the lifestyle database is queried to find the number of sample
households living in area A in rented dwellings and, of those, the numbers
living in each of the four classes for which weights previously have been
derived, i.e. the number living in a terraced property and owning car; the
number living in a terraced property but not owning a car; the number not
living in terraced property but owning a car, and the number neither living
in a terraced property nor owning a car. From this information the total
weighted count of households living in rented accommodation in area A
can be found, compared against the known census quantity and any surplus
or deficit in the lifestyle estimate corrected by trimming or increasing the
weights.
Next, the weighted count of terraced properties is recalculated
from the lifestyles data using: the new weights found for terraced house-
holds, car owning and renting, and for terraced households, not car own-
ing but renting; and, the existing weights for terraced households, car
owning but not renting, and terraced households, neither car owning nor
renting. Those latter two weights (only) can be adjusted to compensate for
any surplus or deficit against the census count of terraced properties with-
out also affecting the weighted count of rented properties.

From Geodemographics to Geolifestyles
267
Attention now turns to recalculating and comparing the
weighted count of car-owning households with the census value. The
count is determined from the lifestyle sample as the weighted sum of:
car-owning, terraced and renting households; car-owning, terraced but
not renting households; car-owning, not terraced but renting house-
holds; and, car-owning but neither terraced nor renting households.
Only the weight attached to the last of these categories can be adjusted
without affecting the weighted counts of either renting or terraced
households.
Finally, the weighted count of households is recalculated and
adjusted to fit the census value. The lifestyle count is obtained by the
weighted sum across all eight classes: car, terraced, rented; no car, ter-
raced, rented; car, not terraced, rented; no car, not terraced, rented; car,
terraced, not rented; no car, terraced, not rented; car, not terraced, not
rented; and, no car, not terraced, not rented. Only the weight assigned to
the last of these classes can be adjusted without altering the weighted
counts of all renting, all terraced and all car-owning households.
In principle the process of introducing new comparative values
and using them to refine the weighting of the lifestyle data could con-
tinue until there are no more variables left to compare. However, the
method described is dependent upon being able to make the adjustment
that aligns the weighted lifestyle count with the corresponding census
value which, in turn, requires that the ‘all not’ class (not car owning, not
terraced, not renting, etc.) is always populated. In practice the weighting
may need to offer a best but not perfect fit between the lifestyle and base-
line values.
Having obtained weights for the lifestyle sample in area A the
process is repeated for areas B, C, D and so forth. In this way, weights can
be fitted to the lifestyle sample that vary both spatially and with respect to
the attributes of the respondents. Whether the weights should be opera-
tionalized within an analytical context depends on how representative (or
otherwise) the raw data are of the baseline population and, more impor-
tantly, how representative the baseline data themselves are of the under-
lying population. At the time of writing it may be appropriate to fit the
results of a recent consumer survey to what is revealed by the national
census but as the time from the last census increases so our confidence in
it as a suitable baseline will diminish. Finally, it is important to remember
that the higher the weight assigned to a lifestyle respondent, the more
under-represented that particular class of person or household is in the
dataset. In other words, the higher the weight, the more unusual the

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
268
response, which leads to uncertainty about quite how typical of the class
that respondent’s information actually is.
9.4.2 Data privacy and protection
Related to issues of uncertainty are questions of personal data protection.
Personal data are information about individuals which is held on com-
puter or is on paper and sorted by reference to individuals. Within the
European Union (EU), the protection of individuals with regard to the
processing of personal data is determined by Parliament and Council
Directive 95/46/EC (dated 24 October 1995) and by Regulation Number
45/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council (dated 18
December 2001) (see www.europa.eu.int). The Directive and Regulation
together harmonize national laws across EU member states on the pro-
cessing of personal data, with the intention of protecting the rights and
freedoms of the persons concerned, in particular their right to privacy.
They apply to the processing of personal data wholly or partly by auto-
matic means and to the processing other than by automatic means of per-
sonal data which form part of a filing system or are intended to form part
of a filing system.
Within the UK, the Directive is enforced under the 1998 Data
Protection Act, making eight principles of handling personal data statutory.
They state that data must be:
●fairly and lawfully processed;
●processed for limited purposes;
●adequate, relevant and not excessive;
●accurate;
●not kept for longer than is necessary;
●processed in line with people’s rights;
●secure; and
●not transferred to countries without adequate protection.
Under the Data Protection Act, individuals are entitled to find out
from companies the information held about them. If necessary, the individual
may apply to a court for the rectification, blocking, erasure or destruction
of inaccurate personal data and any other personal data in respect of which
s/he is the data subject (see: www.informationcommissioner.gov.uk).
The EU’s Directive prohibits the transfer of personal data to non-EU
nations not meeting the standard set down for privacy protection. Initially
this included the USA which does not rely on comprehensive legislation to

From Geodemographics to Geolifestyles
269
ensure data protection but, instead, a mix of legislation, regulation and
self-regulation. In order to bridge between these different approaches,
the US Department of Commerce and the European Commission have
developed a ‘safe harbour’ framework, under which transborder dataflow is
permitted. Under the safe harbour scheme, organizations must adhere to
seven principles:
●Notice – organizations must notify individuals about: the purposes
for which they collect and use information about them; how they
can contact the organization with any enquiries or complaints;
the types of third parties to which information is disclosed; and the
choices and means the organization offers for limiting how the
information is used and disclosed.
●Opt out/opt in choices – organizations must give individuals the
opportunity to opt out of the disclosure of their personal informa-
tion to a third party or for a use incompatible with the purpose for
which the data originally were collected. For sensitive information,
an explicit opt in is required for information disclosure or transfer
to a third party.
●Onward transfer to third parties – in addition to the notice and
choice principles, if an organization wishes to transfer informa-
tion to a third party acting as an agent, it may do so if that third
party subscribes to the safe harbour principles, is subject to the
EU Directive or enters into a written agreement of providing at
least the same level of privacy protection as is required by the safe
harbour framework.
●Access – individuals must have access to the personal information
held about them and be able to correct, amend, or delete inaccurate
information, except where the burden or expense of providing
access would be disproportionate to the risks to the individual’s
privacy or where the rights of persons other than the individual
would be violated.
●Security – organizations must take reasonable precautions to pro-
tect personal information from loss, misuse and unauthorized
access, disclosure, alteration and destruction.
●Data integrity – personal information must be relevant to the pur-
poses for which it is used. Reasonable steps should be taken to
ensure data are reliable for the intended use, are accurate, complete
and current.
●Enforcement – to ensure compliance with the principles, there must
be methods of sanction, and available and affordable independent

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
270
mechanisms to: investigate individual complaints and disputes;
verify the adherence of organizations to the safe harbour frame-
work; and remedy problems arising out of a failure to comply.
(see: www.export.gov/safeharbor)
In the UK, one consequence of a rising interest in personal data
protection has been the withdrawal of the full electoral register as a means
to marketers of gathering information about the demographic composition
of households, and about the names and residential addresses of their
members. A consequence is that the full register is also no longer avail-
able for use as a sampling framework for lifestyle surveys or for model-
ling the characteristics of individuals and/or households for whom
lifestyle information is not otherwise available.
The withdrawal of the electoral register was brought about by the
‘Robertson case’ of November 2001. Prior to this case and its legal ruling,
electoral registration officers were required to disclose the full register to
anyone paying the appropriate fee. The register is a public document and
has been long available in local centres such as public libraries for mem-
bers of the public to examine and check. In principle, it was always possi-
ble for anyone to go from centre to centre and make a complete copy of
the entire paper documents. In reality, it was only with the ability to col-
late and store the entire roll digitally that it entered into widespread use in
many areas of marketing and surveying.
UK residents are required annually to supply personal information
to electoral registration officers on penalty of a criminal offence. However,
officers had no right to limit the disclosure of that information to third par-
ties. In 2001, Mr Robertson challenged the refusal of Wakefield Council to
not supply his personal information to commercial organizations. The
High Court ruled that the refusal was in breach of both the European Data
Protection Directive and the European Convention on Human Rights
(since a consequence of Mr Robertson not completing an electoral return
was that he would not be entitled to vote).
The aftermath of the court’s decision was that local authorities
stopped supplying the electoral register to commercial organizations.
Subsequently, ‘two’ electoral registers have been developed, permitting resi-
dents to opt out/opt in to supplying their details to commercial companies
(other than credit-referencing agencies or those involved in preventing fraud,
which have access to the full register). As we stated in Chapter 3, in
December 2002 the opt-out rate was just above 20% but has risen to 26%
from the December 2003 register. The rate varies geographically with differ-
ent authorities operating various opt-out/opt-in schemes. In part a response

From Geodemographics to Geolifestyles
271
to this situation, some companies have encouraged ‘data exchanges’to share
consumer records (see, for example, www.eurodirect.co.uk).
9.5 Conclusion
In this chapter our attention has been on lifestyle datasets. These are of
immediate use in direct marketing, targeting those consumers who supply
information about themselves. The focus here, however, has been broader,
looking into how the data might be used to produce what we have referred
to as geolifestyle classifications, employing bottom-up techniques of
analysis. Such techniques are drawn from the broad field of geographical
information science, including GIS, geocomputation and spatial analysis
to search for and, in the more sophisticated approaches, help explain spa-
tial patterns in the attributes of the lifestyle data. They include grid-based
aggregations, Thiessen polygons, buffering, inverse distance weighting,
methods of hot-spot detection and geographically weighted regression.
Multilevel modelling is not explicitly a geographical approach, although
geographical units of enquiry often form a hierarchy that can be modelled
using multilevel methods.
Issues of data uncertainty and of data protection are important to
consider when handling and analysing lifestyle datasets. Particular care is
required when extrapolating lifestyle information to model the characteris-
tics of those for whom no or little information is held. Within the EU, for
instance, personal data storage is required to be (among other stipulations)
adequate, relevant and accurate. Lifestyle surveys and databases offer exten-
sive but nonetheless partial coverage of populations and so any remodelling
and analysis of the data should proceed carefully. Notwithstanding this
important caveat, one of us has presented a number of case studies of the
potential utility of such datasets in helping to understand the scales and local-
ities of urban deprivation (Harris and Longley, 2004), complementing more
traditional geodemographic approaches (Longley and Harris, 1999).
Summary
●Lifestyle data is an umbrella term that covers information col-
lected about consumer choices and behaviours.
●Such data are of importance to one-to-one and direct marketing
but can also be modelled to create geolifestyle classifications.

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
272
●Techniques of spatial analysis can be used to look for spatial pat-
terns in the attributes of lifestyle datasets.
●Methods that employ inverse distance weighting reflect Tobler’s
first law of geography – everything is related to everything else
but near things are more related than far things.
●Determining the significance of detected ‘hot spots’ often requires
methods of simulation when the assumptions of standard statis-
tical tests are violated.
●The geographical analysis machine (GAM) is an exploratory and
geographical data-mining tool that detects spatial clusters in
datasets.
●Methods such as geographically weighted regression avoid the ‘one
size fits all’ modelling of traditional approaches to allow important
local relationships to be measured and mapped in a GIS.
●Modelling, analysing and extracting information from lifestyle
datasets require attention to issues of data uncertainty, data pro-
tection regulations and good practice.
Further Reading
●
Bailey, T. and Gatrell, A. (1995) Interactive Spatial Data Analysis,
Prentice-Hall, Harlow, Essex.
●
Longley, P., Goodchild, M., Maguire, D. and Rhind, D. (2001 and 2005)
Geographic Information Systems and Science, Wiley, Chichester.
●
Monmonier, M. (2002) Spying with Maps: Surveillance Technologies
and the Future of Privacy, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
●
O’Sullivan, D. and Unwin, D. (2003) Geographic Information Analysis,
Wiley, New York.

273
10
Postscript:There
are three Is in
geodemographics!
It may be a while since you read it (assuming you did!) but cast your mind
back to Chapter 2 and the origins of geodemographics. You may recall
that three factors contributed to the development and growth of the field.
First, an interest in understanding the social and spatial structure of cities
and their neighbourhoods. Second, the increased availability of census
statistics that could be used to characterize different types of locality. Third,
new methods of statistical analysis by which to make sense of the
new data. Together, these factors are the three Is of geodemographics –
inclination, information and innovation.
These three Is not only gave birth to a whole new industry but also
have nurtured its growth and evolution. What is more, they are mutually
reinforcing. As we have seen, renewed interested in neighbourhood regen-
eration within the UK has given rise to new ways of understanding and
quantifying area deprivation that have incorporated new sources of neigh-
bourhood data that, in turn, have been made available to other geodemo-
graphic users through a specially developed internet portal. This and other
portals are making the exchange and purchase of geodemographic data
faster and easier than ever before, and purchasers have more flexibility to
buy exactly what they need for their applications. Software such as GIS
and more marketing-focused geodemographic information systems make
analysis, understanding and presentation of such data easier, generating
new knowledge, ideas and perspectives. In the fields of spatial statistics
and mathematics more generally, new analytical approaches are being
Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
Richard Harris, Peter Sleight and Richard Webber
© 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
ISBNs: 0-470-86413-3 (HB); 0-470-86414-1 (PB)

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
274
developed to help explore and explain the patterns of spatial association
that are revealed in geographically and temporally precise sources of data.
Developments in geosimulation offer new insights into the dynamics of
urban systems.
We live in an information society and so new sources of data keep
on being generated, some of which are sector specific, while others have
more general application. Applying clustering techniques to the more
specific data allows ‘niche’ products to be developed, with an expectation
that they will necessarily perform better within that sector than the more
general classifications also available. There is evidence that in terms of
the more customized products that are appearing the geodemographic
market is fragmenting. However, a word of caution is appropriate here.
The suggestion that ‘for any commercial (or indeed non-commercial)
application, a general purpose [geodemographic] system is likely to be
inferior to one designed specifically for the purpose’(Flowerdew, 1991, p. 8)
is intuitive but are things actually so clearly cut?
A practical consideration is the role of the more general-purpose
classifications as the ‘lingua franca’that allows analyses to be compared –
the common currency argument raised in Chapter 8. The value of this (the
strength of the geodemographic pound, as it were) should not be under-
estimated; however, there is also a more ‘technical’ explanation why the
more customized products are not necessarily the better. It is because they
risk being overly calibrated on a (narrow) set of data that actually describe
past events. It may not be the more specific past events that better explain
future behaviour (the fact that the sun shone yesterday is no guarantee it
will shine today, as weather forecasters know well) but the more enduring
general factors – climate cycles in the case of weather, the broader socio-
economic and demographic landscape in the case of consumption.
The critical issue is one of generality versus specificity. Barnsley,
Moller-Jensen and Barr (2001) consider this in the context of urban remote
sensing – a field that is not so far removed from geodemographics as it may
seem, but actually employs some similar and transferable clustering tech-
niques (for example, to segment a remotely sensed image into identifiable
land-use classes). They see advantages of a generic model in the power of
constructing a relatively simple but understandable representation of a large
number of objects (e.g. neighbourhoods) and in the portability of that general
model from one location to another, permitting comparison between places.
The general model will not usually offer the same level of detail that might be
expected from a more focused study of a particular place at a particular time
but the problem with the more specific model is that, being attuned to a par-
ticular place and time, it is not well transferred to other times and settings.

Postscript:There are three Is in geodemographics!
275
It will be interesting to see whether the future is one where geo-
demographic vendors prefer to promote and develop the more general
classifications, or whether more specific classifications will emerge from
the consumer, financial, retail, education, b2b (business to business),
telecoms, e-commerce and other markets. We have already seen that
techniques such as K-means clustering are not limited to neighbourhood
data but can be used to classify individuals and households directly.
Products linking types of neighbourhood globally are also now available.
Which company will be the first to attempt a global classification of all
6.4 billion of the world’s population?!
It is tempting to conclude this book euphorically, envisioning a
future for geodemographics that is limited only by the creativity and
imaginations of classifications builders and the data available to them,
or by the users’ abilities to put the products and technologies to use in
their businesses and corporations. Such a future may become real but, as
portrayed, risks eschewing legitimate public concerns about the sorts of
data that are held about them, the ways they are represented by those data
and the control they can have over the way organizations use that infor-
mation to manage their customers’ relationships.
There is an uneasy tension of the era whereby consumers want
(or, perhaps, are assumed to want) to be treated in a more individual, per-
sonalized and less standardized manner by the suppliers of businesses and
services. Yet, they often also seem to be unhappy with the use, by large
organizations, of the types of data that would make this possible. A prob-
lem is that many organizations – most likely for logistical reasons – are
not especially open about the data they hold on people and are also not
flexible about letting the consumer change it. But, why not let them? After
all, it is the consumer’s digital persona that is constructed, so might they
be entitled to construct it in ways that they want? It makes sense from a
marketing perspective: since it is how people see themselves and not how
they are that usually is of prime interest to marketers (internet-based?)
systems that allow consumers to volunteer such information are likely to
become increasingly important and successful in the future (Hagel and
Singer, 1999).
Current frameworks for data protection vary internationally and
even within a single nation regulations are not especially consistent across
‘different’ types of data – the provisions made for census confidentiality
and other governmental surveys, for example, are usually more rigid than
for commercial surveying and data collection, and while there appears to
be no (nontechnological) limits to how much ‘snooping’ is permitted by
remote-sensing equipment, recent legislation is intended to leave email

Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
276
inboxes free from ‘spam’ (it does, however, remain available in the tinned
meat section of many UK and US supermarkets – see www.spam.com for
details).
Despite these inconsistencies, the general trend is one of ‘clamp-
ing down’ on the storage and transfer of personal data held on identifiable
individuals (as opposed to aggregate, public datasets), and of limiting the
types of inferences that may be made about individuals, especially without
their consent. While such restrictions may prove awkward to some market-
ing operations in the short term, they may prove more beneficial over the
longer run. First it may help to clarify which consumers want to receive
certain types of mailings and information, and what is their preferred
media to do so, thereby helping to avoid the resentment of consumers who
are targeted by junk mailings they really did not want to receive. Second, it
may have the unintended effect of reminding us that the world is not sim-
ply made up of bits of data that are waiting to be collected, stored and
analysed. Numeric methods can tell a little of the story but it will likely be
partial and incomplete. If we really want to understand consumers, neigh-
bourhoods, motivations and lifestyles we need to move out of the computer
world and experience the real one more deeply. Quantitative methods are
not an alternative to qualitative ones. The best research employs both.
From the perspective of this book an interesting consequence of
any restriction to the flow of lifestyle and other personal data will be to
further galvanize the use of neighbourhood-based inference to try and fill
‘holes’ in databases. Weiss (2000, p. 8) reveals that he ‘takes some com-
fort in the benign nature of the clusters, in the fact that they’re designed to
explain patterns of group behaviour without the need to delve into individual
households.’Again, there is need for caution. The clusters may be benign
but the applications may not be, as in the alleged but illegal incidences of
‘red-lining’ certain places from the provision of loans or insurance cover.
There is an interesting debate to be had on whether it is better to base
policy and decision making on precise and accurate data that can identify
actual individuals/households, or whether less precision and accuracy is
acceptable if it preserves anonymity, albeit at the risk of generalizing
(‘stereotyping’) the actual characteristics of individuals. Discussion of a
possible ‘digital divide’, about who data is collected about, why, how the
data are used to frame public- and private-sector decision making and
on how those decisions impact on the lives and well-being of both
those represented and those excluded from the datasets is also important
here. Also relevant are concerns about how initially separate datasets are
being joined together on the basis of common georeferences such as name
and residential address to create possibly far-reaching governmental and

Postscript:There are three Is in geodemographics!
277
commercial profiles of the populace, and the ways such profiles can be
linked to ‘tracking’ technologies such as GPS, Remote Sensing, CCTV or
RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) chips.
Finally, as we reflect on the contents of this book we are aware that
our abiding focus on geodemographics offers cohesion but may also have
raised an unintended and inaccurate impression that it is a ‘standalone’
tool, competing with others to guide decision making. This is rarely, if
ever, the case. Increasing integration of technologies and the increased ease
of interoperability are likely to bring various decision-making tools
together, especially where these have geography in common. Perhaps we
will see even closer links between GIS, geodemographics, the visualiza-
tion of geographic information and spatial analysis. Statistical packages
like S-Plus (www.insightful.com) offer integration with GIS, while an
open-source programming language such as R provides a wide variety of
statistical and graphical techniques (www.r-project.org).
Whatever the future, we are confident that the three Is of geodemo-
graphics will keep vendors, users and the contributors to this book
extremely busy for many years to come. And, what of us three? Do we envi-
sion our interest in geodemographics will endure? Our answers are obvious:
‘aye!’, ‘aye!’, ‘aye!’


279
References
Anderson, B., Beinart, S., Farrington, D., Longman, J., Sturgis, P. and Utting, D.
(2001) Risk and Protective Factors Associated with Youth Crime and Effective
Interventions to Prevent It (Youth Justice Board Research Note 5), Youth
Justice Board, London.
Baker, K., Bermingham, J. and McDonald, C. (1979) The utility to market
research of the classification of residential neighbourhoods, Proceedings of
the Market Research Society Conference, Brighton, pp. 253–71.
Barnsley, M., Moller-Jensen, L. and Barr, S. (2001) Inferring urban land use by
spatial and structural pattern recognition. In Remote Sensing and Urban
Analysis (eds, Donnay, J.-P., Barnsley, M. and Longley, P.), Taylor & Francis,
London, pp. 115–44.
Batey, P. and Brown, P. (1995) From human ecology to customer targeting: the
evolution of geodemographics. In GIS for Business and Service Planning
(eds, Longley, P. and Clarke, G.), GeoInformation International, Cambridge,
pp. 77–103.
Batty, M. (2003) Agent-based pedestrian modelling. In Advanced Spatial
Analysis: the CASA Book of GIS (eds, Longley, P. and Batty, M.), ESRI Press,
Redlands, CA, pp. 81–128.
Batty, M. and Longley, P. (1994) Fractal Cities, Academic Press, London.
Baudot, Y. (2001) Geographical analysis of the population of fast-growing cities
in the third world. In Remote Sensing and Urban Analysis (eds, Donnay, J.-P.,
Barnsley, M. and Longley, P.), Taylor & Francis, London, pp. 225–41.
Benenson, I. and Torrens, P. (2004) Geosimulation: Automata-based Modeling
of Urban Phenomena, John Wiley & Sons, Inc, New York.
Berry, B. and Horton, F. (1970) Geographical Perspectives on Urban Systems,
Prentice-Hall, New Jersey.
Berry, M. and Linoff, G. (1997) Data Mining Techniques for Marketing, Sales,
and Customer Support, John Wiley & Sons, Inc, New York.
Besussi, E. and Chin, N. (2003) Identifying and measuring urban sprawl. In
Advanced Spatial Analysis: the CASA Book of GIS (eds, Longley, P. and
Batty, M.), ESRI Press, New York, pp. 109–28.
Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
Richard Harris, Peter Sleight and Richard Webber
© 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
ISBNs: 0-470-86413-3 (HB); 0-470-86414-1 (PB)

References
280
Birkin,
M. (1995) Customer targeting,
geodemographics and lifestyle
approaches. In GIS for Business and Service Planning (eds, Longley, P. and
Clarke, G.), GeoInformation International, Cambridge, pp. 104–49.
Birkin, M., Clarke, G. and Clarke, M. (2002) Retail Geography and Intelligent
Network Planning, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester.
Birkin, M., Clarke, G., Clarke, M. and Wilson, A. (1996) Intelligent GIS: Location
Decisions and Strategic Planning, GeoInformation International, Cambridge.
Blake, M. and Openshaw, S. (1995) Selecting Variables for Small-Area
Classifications of 1991 UK Census Data, Working Paper 95/5, School of
Geography, University of Leeds, Leeds.
Booth, C. (1887) Condition and occupation of the people of East London,
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 50, 326–401.
Booth, C. (1888) Condition and occupation of the people of East London and
Hackney, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 51, 276–339.
Booth, C. (1902–3) Life and Labour of the People of London, Macmillan,
London.
Bracken, I. and Martin, D. (1989) The generation of spatial population distribu-
tions from census centroid data, Environment and Planning A, 21, 537–43.
Brown, P. (1991) Exploring geodemographics. In Handling Geographical
Information (eds, Masser, I. and Blakemore, M.) Longman, London, pp. 221–58.
Brown, P. and Batey, P. (1994) SuperProfile Technical Note 2: Characteristics of
SuperProfile Lifestyles and Target Markets: Index Tables, Pen Pictures and
Geographical Distributions, University of Liverpool, The Urban Research and
Policy Evaluation Regional Research Laboratory, Liverpool.
Burrough, P. and McDonnell, R. (1998) Principles of Geographical Information
Systems, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Bush, G. (2003) Executive Order 13286, Federal Register, 68, 10619–33.
Cameron, F. (2004) Techniques for Neighbourhood Classification, New
Representations: the use of geodemographic classifications in research and
public service delivery conference, Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis,
London. www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/lectures/ResearchMethods/downloads.html.
Carter, H. (1995) The Study of Urban Geography, Arnold, London.
Cathelat, B. (1990) Socio-Styles: the New Lifestyles Classification System for
Identifying and Targeting Consumers and Markets, Kogan Page, London.
Chang, K.-T. (2003) Introduction to Geographic Information Systems, McGraw-
Hill, New York.
Charlton, M., Openshaw, S. and Wymer, C. (1985) Some new classifications of
census enumeration districts in Britain: a poor man’s ACORN, Journal of
Economic and Social Measurement, 13, 69–96.
Cliff, A. and Ord, J. (1973) Spatial Autocorrelation, Pion, London.
Clinton, W. (1994) Executive Order 12906, Federal Register, 59, 17671–4.
Curry, D. (1993) The New Marketing Research Systems: How to Use Strategic
Database Information for Better Marketing Decisions, John Wiley & Sons,
Inc, New York.

References
281
Curry, M. (1998) Digital Places: Living with Geographic Information Technologies,
Routledge, London.
Database Marketing (2003) Monthly register rolls ahead, Database Marketing,
56, 5.
Department for the Environment Transport and the Regions (1998) Index of Local
Deprivation, DETR, London.
Department for the Environment Transport and the Regions (2000) Regeneration
Research Summary 31: Indices of Deprivation 2000, DETR, London.
Department of the Environment (1987) Handling Geographic Information:
Report of the Committee of Enquiry Chaired by Lord Chorley, HMSO Books,
London.
Department of the Environment (1994) A 1991 Index of Local Conditions, DoE,
London.
Diggle, P. (2003) Statistical Analysis of Spatial Point Patterns, Arnold, London.
Donnay, J.-P. and Unwin, D. (2001) Modelling geographical distributions in urban
areas. In Remote Sensing and Urban Analysis (eds, Donnay, J.-P., Barnsley, M.
and Longley, P.), Taylor & Francis, London, pp. 205–24.
Dugmore, K. and Moy, C. (eds) (2004) 2001 Census: Essential Information for
Gaining Business Advantage, The Stationery Office, London.
Farr, M. and Singleton, A. (2004) Applying Geodemographics to Education, New
Representations: the Use of Geodemographic Classifications in Research and
Public Service Delivery Conference, Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis,
London. www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/lectures/ResearchMethods/downloads.html.
Farrington, D. (2002) Developmental criminology and risk-focussed prevention.
In The Oxford Handbook of Criminology (eds, Maguire, M., Morgan, R. and
Reiner, R.), Oxford University Press, Oxford, Chapter 19.
Federal Geographic Data Committee (1997) A Strategy for the NSDI, FGDC,
Reston, VA.
Feng, Z. and Flowerdew, R. (1998) Fuzzy geodemographics: a contribution from
fuzzy clustering methods. In Innovations in GIS 5 (ed., Carver, S.), Taylor &
Francis, London, pp. 119–27.
Fischer, M. and Getis, A. (1999) New advances in spatial interaction theory,
Papers in Regional Science, 78, 117–18.
Flake, G. (1998) The Computational Beauty of Nature: Computer Explorations of
Fractals, Chaos, Complex Systems, and Adaption, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Flowerdew, R. (1991) Classified residential area profiles and beyond. Research
Report 18, Lancaster University, North West Regional Research Laboratory.
Flowerdew, R. and Leventhal, B. (1998) Under the microscope, New Perspectives,
18, 36–8.
Fotheringham, A., Brunsdon, C. and Charlton, M. (2000) Quantitative Geography:
Perspectives on Spatial Data Analysis, Sage, London.
Fotheringham, A., Brunsdon, C. and Charlton, M. (2002) Geographically
Weighted Regression: the Analysis of Spatially Varying Relationships, John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd, London.

References
282
Fotheringham, A. and O’Kelly, M. (1989) Spatial Interaction Models: Formulation
and Applications, Kluwer, Dordrecht.
Gittus, E. (1964) The structure of urban areas: a new approach, Town Planning
Review, 35, 5–20.
Goldstein, H. (2003) Multilevel Statistical Models, Hodder Arnold, London.
Gordon, D. and Forrest, R. (1995) People and Places 2: Social and Economic
Distinctions in England, University of Bristol, Bristol.
Gordon, D. and Pantazis, C. (1997a) Appendix I: technical appendix. In
Breadline Britain in the 1990s (eds, Gordon, D. and Pantazis, C.), Ashgate,
Aldershot, pp. 269–72.
Gordon, D. and Pantazis, C. (1997b) Measuring poverty: Breadline Britain in the
1990s. In Breadline Britain in the 1990s (eds, Gordon, D. and Pantazis, C.),
Ashgate, Aldershot, pp. 5–47.
Goss, J. (1995) Marketing the new marketing: the strategic discourse of geo-
demographic information systems. In Ground Truth: the Social Implications
of Geographic Information Systems (ed., Pickles, J.), The Guilford Press,
New York, pp. 130–70.
Hagel, J. and Singer, M. (1999) Net Worth: Shaping Markets when Customers
Make the Rules, Harvard Business Press, Cambridge, MA.
Haggett, P. (2001) Geography: a Global Synthesis, Prentice-Hall, Harlow.
Hall, P. and Pfeiffer, U. (2000) Urban Future 21, E & FN Spon, London.
Hammond, R. and McCullagh, P. (1978) Quantitative Techniques in Geography:
an Introduction, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Harley, J. (1992) Deconstructing the map. In Writing Worlds: Discourse, Text and
Metaphor in the Representation of Landscape (eds, Barnes, T. and Duncan, J.),
Routledge, London, pp. 231–47.
Harris, R. (1999) Geodemographics and geolifestyles: a comparative review,
Journal of Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for Marketing, 8, 164–78.
Harris, R. (2003) Population mapping by geodemographics and digital imagery.
In Remotely Sensed Cities (ed., Mesev, V.), Taylor & Francis, London, pp.
223–41.
Harris, R. (2003) An introduction to mapping the 2001 Census of England and
Wales, Society of Cartographers Bulletin, 37, 39–42.
Harris, R. (2004) Looking for (knitting) patterns: neighbourhood analysis and
behavioural geographies in Bristol, England, Applied Population and Policy, 1,
133–42.
Harris, R. and Chen, Z. (2004) Giving dimension to point locations: urban
density profiling using population surface models, Computers, Environment
and Urban Systems, in press.
Harris, R. and Johnston, R. (2003) Spatial scale and neighbourhood regeneration
in England: a case study of Avon, Environment and Planning C: Government
and Policy, 21, 651–62.
Harris, R. and Longley, P. A. (2002) Creating small area measures of urban
deprivation, Environment and Planning A, 34, 1073–93.

References
283
Harris, R. and Longley, P. (2004) Targeting clusters of deprivation within cities.
In Applied GIS and Spatial Analysis (eds, Stillwell, J. and Clarke, G.) John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, pp. 89–110.
HEFCE (1998) Consultation 98/39: Widening Participation in Higher Education:
Funding Proposals, Higher Education Funding Council for England, Bristol/
London.
HEFCE (1999) Report 99/24: Widening Participation in Higher Education:
Funding Decisions, Higher Education Funding Council for England,
Bristol/London.
Howard, N. (1969) Least squares classification and principal components analy-
sis: a comparison. In Quantitative Ecological Analysis in the Social Sciences
(eds, Dogan, M. and Rokkan, S.), MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 397–412.
Howick, R. (2004) Building Neighbourhood Classifications. New Representations:
the Use of Geodemographic Classifications in Research and Public Service
Delivery Conference,
Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis,
London.
www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/lectures/ResearchMethods/downloads.html.
Hox, J. (2002) Multilevel Analysis: Techniques and Applications, Lawrence
Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ.
Hudson-Smith, A. and Evans, S. (2003) Virtual cities: from CAD to 3-D GIS.
In Advanced Spatial Analysis: the CASA Book of GIS (eds, Longley, P. and
Batty, M.) ESRI Press, Redlands, CA, pp. 41–60.
Hyndman, H. (1911) The Record of an Adventurous Life, Macmillan, New York.
Iliffe, J. (1999) Datums and Map Projections for Remote Sensing GIS and
Surveying, Whittles Publishing, Caithness, Scotland.
Jackson, P. (1989) Maps of Meaning, Routledge, London.
Kearns, A. and Parkinson, M. (2001) The significance of neighbourhoods, Urban
Studies, 12, 2103–10.
Korner Committee, The (1984) Fourth Report of the Steering Committee on
Health Services Information, Department of Health and Social Security,
London.
Lawson, J. (2004) Think global – act local, Database Marketing, 61, 12–16.
Lee, P., Murie, A. and Gordon, D. (1995) Area Measures of Deprivation: A Study
of Current and Best Practice in the Identification of Poor Areas in Great
Britain, Centre for Urban and Regional Studies, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham.
Leventhal, B. (1993) Birds of a feather? Or, geodemographics – an endangered
species? Proceedings of the Market Research Society Conference, pp.
223–39.
Liverpool City Council (1969) Social Malaise in Liverpool: Interim Report on
Social Problems and their Distribution, Liverpool.
Lloyd, D., Webber, R. and Longley, P. (2004) Surnames as a quantitative evi-
dence resource for the social sciences. In Proceedings of Geographical
Information Systems Research UK Conference (eds, School of Environmental
Sciences), University of East Anglia, Norwich, pp. 254–6.

References
284
Longley, P. and Batty, M. (eds) (1996) Spatial Analysis: Modelling in a GIS
Environment, GeoInformation International, Cambridge.
Longley, P. and Batty, M. (eds) (2003) Advanced Spatial Analysis: the CASA
Book of GIS, ESRI Press, Redlands, CA.
Longley, P., Brooks, S., McDonnell, R. and Macmillan, B. (eds) (1998)
Geocomputation: a Primer, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester.
Longley, P., Goodchild, M., Maguire, D. and Rhind, D. (eds) (1999) Geographical
Information Systems: Principles, Techniques, Management, Applications, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc, New York.
Longley, P., Goodchild, M., Maguire, D. and Rhind, D. (2001) Geographic
Information Systems and Science, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester.
Longley, P., Goodchild, M., Maguire, D. and Rhind, D. (2005) Geographic
Information Systems and Science, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester.
Longley, P. and Harris, R. (1999) Towards a new digital data infrastructure for
urban analysis and modelling, Environment and Planning B: Planning and
Design, 26, 855–78.
Longley, P. and Tobon, C. (2004) Spatial Dependence and Heterogeneity in
Patterns of Hardship: An Intra-Urban Analysis, Annals of the Association of
American Geographers, 94, 503–19.
Macintyre, S. (1997) What are spatial effects and how can we measure them? In
Exploiting national survey and Census data: the role of locality and spatial
effects (CCSR Occasional Paper 12) (ed., Dale, A.), University of Manchester,
Manchester, pp. 1–17.
Martin, D. (1992) Postcodes and the 1991 Census of Population: issues, problems
and prospects, Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 17, 350–7.
Martin, D. (1998a) 2001 Census output areas: from concept to prototype,
Population Trends, 94, 19–24.
Martin, D. (1998b) Automatic neighbourhood identification from population
surfaces, Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 22, 107–20.
Martin, D. (2000) Towards the geographies of the 2001 UK Census of Population,
Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 25, 321–32.
Martin, D. and Higgs, G. (1997) Population georeferencing in England and Wales:
basic spatial units reconsidered, Environment and Planning A, 29, 333–47.
Martin, D. and Longley, P. (1995) Data sources and their geographical integration.
In GIS for Business and Service Planning (eds, Longley, P. and Clarke, G.),
GeoInformation International, Cambridge, pp. 15–32.
Martin, D., Tate, N. and Langford, M. (2000) Refining population surface models:
experiments with Northern Ireland Census data, Transactions in GIS, 4, 343–60.
Mayor of London (2002) London Divided: Income Inequality and Poverty in the
Capital, Greater London Authority, London.
McLuhan, R. (2003) Mapping customers, Database Marketing, 56, 21–4.
Miles, S., Anderson, A. and Meethan, K. (eds) (2001) The Changing Consumer:
Markets and Meanings (Studies in Consumption and Markets), Routledge,
London.

References
285
Miller, H., Han, J. and Fraser, S. (eds) (2001) Geographic Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery, Taylor & Francis, London.
Monmonier, M. (1996) How to Lie with Maps, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
Monmonier, M. (2002) Spying with Maps: Surveillance Technologies and the
Future of Privacy, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Morphet, C. (1993) The mapping of small area census data: a consideration of the
role of enumeration district boundaries, Environment and Planning A, 27, 267–78.
National Research Council (1993) Towards a Coordinated Spatial Data
Infrastructure for the Nation, National Academy Press, Washington.
National Research Council (1994) Promoting the National Spatial Data
Infrastructure Through Partnerships, National Academy Press, Washington.
National Research Council (1995) A Data Foundation for the National Spatial
Data Infrastructure, National Academy Press, Washington.
Norman, P. (1969) Third survey of London life and labour: a new typology of
London districts. In Quantitative Ecological Analysis in the Social
Sciences (eds, Dogan, M. and Rokken, S.), MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
pp. 371–96.
ODPM (2004) The English Indices of Deprivation 2004, Office of the Deputy
Prime Minister, London.
Office for National Statistics (2003) Census Strategic Development Review.
Alternatives to a Census: Review of International Approaches, ONS, London.
Openshaw, S. (1984) The Modifiable Areal Unit problem (CATMOG 38), Geo-
abstracts, Norwich.
Openshaw, S. (1989) Making geodemographics more sophisticated, Journal of
the Market Research Society, 31, 111–31.
Openshaw, S. (1996) Developing GIS-relevant zone-based spatial analysis methods.
In Spatial Analysis: Modelling in a GIS Environment (eds, Longley, P. and
Batty, M.), GeoInformation International, Cambridge, pp. 55–73.
Openshaw, S. (1997) The truth about ground truth, Transactions in GIS, 2, 7–24.
Openshaw, S. (1998) Building automated geographical analysis and explanation
machines. In Geocomputation: a Primer (eds, Longley, P., Brooks, S.,
McDonnell, R. and Macmillan, B.), John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester,
pp. 95–115.
Openshaw, S. and Abrahart, R. (eds) (2000) Geocomputation, Taylor & Francis,
London.
Openshaw, S., Blake, M. and Wymer, C. (1995) Using neurocomputing methods
to classify Britain’s residential areas. In Innovations in GIS 2 (ed., Fisher, P.),
Taylor & Francis, London, pp. 97–111.
Openshaw, S., Charlton, M., Craft,A. and Birth, J. (1988) Investigation of leukaemia
clusters by the use of a Geographical Analysis Machine, Lancet, I, 272–3.
Openshaw, S., Charlton, M., Wymer, C. and Craft, A. (1987) A mark I geographical
analysis machine for the automated analysis of point datasets, International
Journal of Geographical Information Systems, 1, 335–58.

References
286
Openshaw, S. and Taylor, P. (1979) A million or so correlation coefficients: three
experiments on the modifiable areal unit problem. In Statistical Methods in the
Spatial Sciences (ed., Wrigley, N.), Pion, London, pp. 127–44.
Openshaw, S. and Turton, I. (1996) A parallel Kohonen algorithm for the clas-
sification of large spatial data sets, Computers and Geosciences, 22,
1019–26.
Openshaw, S. and Wymer, C. (1995) Classifying and regionalizing census data. In
Census Users’ Handbook (ed., Openshaw, S.), GeoInformation International,
Cambridge, pp. 239–69.
Orford, S., Dorling, D., Mitchell, R., Shaw, M. and Davey Smith, G. (2002) Life
and death of the people of London: a historical GIS of Charles Booth’s
inquiry, Health and Place, 8, 25–35.
O’Sullivan, D. and Unwin, D. (2003) Geographic Information Analysis, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc, New York.
Park, R., Burgess, E. and McKenzie, R. (1925) The City: Suggestions for
Investigation of Human Behavior in the Urban Environment, University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Penny, N. and Broom, D. (1988) The Tesco approach to store location. In Store
Choice, Store Location and Market Analysis (ed., Wrigley, N.), Routledge,
London, pp. 106–20.
Pfautz, H. (1967) Sociologist of the city. In On the City: Physical Pattern and
Social Structure (Selected Writings of Charles Booth) (ed., Pfautz, H.),
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 3–170.
Pickles, J. (1992) Texts, hermeneutics and propaganda maps. In Writing Worlds:
Discourse, Text and Metaphor in the Representation of Landscape (eds,
Barnes, T. and Duncan, J.), Routledge, London, pp. 193–230.
Pile, S. and Thrift, N. (eds) (2000) City A-Z, Routledge, London.
Policy Action Team 18, The (2000) PAT 18: Better Information, The Stationery
Office, London.
Raper, J. (2000) Multidimensional Geographic Information Science, Taylor &
Francis, London.
Raper, J., Rhind, D. and Shepherd, J. (1992) Postcodes: the New Geography,
Longman, Harlow.
Ravilious, K. (2004) Destined for destruction/welcome to fractal city, New
Scientist, 2429, 42–5.
Robinson, G. (1998) Methods and Techniques in Human Geography, John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd, Chichester.
Robson, B. (1969) Urban Analysis: a Study of City Structure, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Rogerson, P. (2001) Statistical Methods for Geography, Sage, London.
Sen, A. and Smith, T. (1995) Gravity Models of Spatial Interaction, Springer,
Berlin.
Shevky, E. and Bell, W. (1955) Social Area Analysis: Theory, Illustrative Application
and Computational Procedure, Stanford University Press, Stanford.

References
287
Shevky, E. and Williams, M. (1949) The Social Areas of Los Angeles: Analysis
and Typology, University of Los Angeles Press, Los Angeles.
Simey , T. and Simey, M. (1960) Charles Booth. Social Scientist, Oxford University
Press, London.
Sleight, P. (1997) Targeting Customers: How to Use Geodemographic and
Lifestyle Data in Your Business, NTC Publications, Henley-on-Thames.
Sleight, P. (2004a) New to the Neighbourhood, Database Marketing, 57, 35–40.
Sleight, P. (2004b) Targeting Customers: How to Use Geodemographic and
Lifestyle Data in Your Business, World Advertising Research Center, Henley-
on-Thames.
Sleight, P., Smith, G. and Walker, J. (2002) Optimising retail networks; a case study
of locating Camelot’s lottery terminals, Journal of Targeting, Measurement and
Analysis for Marketing, 10, 353–65.
Snijders, T. and Bosker, R. (1999) Multilevel Analysis: an Introduction to Basic
and Advanced Multilevel Modeling, Sage, London.
Soja, E. (2000) Postmetropolis: Critical Studies of Cities and Regions, Blackwell,
Oxford.
Theodorsen, G. (ed.) (1961) Studies in Human Ecology, Harper & Row, New York.
Tobler, W. (1970) A computer movie, Economic Geography, 46, 234–40.
Treasury Committee (2002) The 2001 Census in England and Wales, House of
Commons, London.
Unwin, D. and Fisher, P. (eds) (2001) Virtual Reality in Geography, Taylor &
Francis, London.
Unwin, D. and Hearnshaw, H. (eds) (1994) Visualization in Geographical
Information Systems, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester.
Urban Task Force, The (1999) Towards an Urban Renaissance: Final Report of
the Urban Task Force, E & FN Spon, London.
Voas, D. and Williamson, P. (2001) The diversity of diversity: a critique of geo-
demographic classification. Area, 33, 63–76.
Webber, R. (1975) Liverpool Social Area Study, 1971 data: PRAG Technical
Paper 14, Centre for Environmental Studies, London.
Webber, R. (1977) Technical Paper 23: an Introduction to the National Classification
of Wards and Parishes, Centre for Environmental Studies, London.
Webber, R. (1978) Parliamentary Constituencies: a Socio-economic Classification:
OPCS Occasional Paper 13, OPCS, London.
Webber, R. (1985) The use of census-derived classifications in the marketing of
consumer products in the United Kingdom, Journal of Economic and Social
Measurement, 13, 113–24.
Webber, R. and Craig, J. (1978) Studies in Medical and Population Subjects, 35:
Socio-economic Classifications of Local Authority Areas, OPCS, London.
Webber, R. and Williamson, T. (2004) Analysis for Youth Justice Board of
Young Offenders’ Offences in the County of Nottinghamshire, available
from Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis, UCL. www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/
lectures/ResearchMethods/downloads.html.

References
288
Weiss, M. (2000) The Clustered World, Little, Brown, New York.
Whitehead, J. (1999) Editorial, Journal of Targeting, Measurement and Analysis
for Marketing, 8, 108–10.
Wilson, A. (1974) Models for Urban and Regional Planning, John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd, Chichester.
Wise, S. (2002) GIS Basics, Taylor & Francis, London.

289
ACORN, see Classifications ACORN
Acxiom, see Vendors & suppliers
Advertising
4–5, 66, 69, 189, 205, 232
Aggregation
49, 90–2, 106–7, 115,
145, 211–12, 215, 217–18, 222–3,
252–5, 271
Atlantic City
5, 8–10, 12, 31
Atomistic fallacy
16, 245
Attribute information
16, 79, 81–2, 85,
87, 89, 90, 92, 102, 106–7, 113, 115,
221, 248, 252, 257, 271–2
interpolating
70, 84, 112, 143, 204,
247–8, 251–8
Australia
72, 148–50, 172, 187–8, 194,
202, 205
Austria
191
Autocorrelation (spatial)
16–17,
256–7, 263
Belgium
187, 191, 202, 205
Booth, Charles
24, 30–7, 45–51, 194
Descriptive Map of London 
Poverty
30, 46
Bottom-up analysis
212, 249, 271
Brazil
149, 192, 197, 201, 205
Breadline Britain index
44
British Crime Survey
23, 141–2
Burgess model
37–8, 152, 200
Business models, practices & relationships
54, 74, 235
CACI, see Vendors & suppliers
CAMEO, see Classifications ACORN
Canada
3, 67, 79–81, 85–6, 95–7, 101,
113, 186–7, 190, 193, 200, 205
Catchment analysis
4, 10, 12, 19–22,
55, 57, 84–5, 110, 116–19,
133–8, 144–5, 198, 226,
232, 247
Census
Canadian
79–81, 85, 101
comparisons of
189–95, 205
data as input for geodemographic 
classification
3, 11, 17, 21,
26, 35, 40, 45, 49–50, 55,
59–61, 63–6, 73, 75, 90,
148–60, 214, 234–5, 239,
244–5, 273
geographies
56, 69, 210–13, 262
rolling
190–1
UK
12, 35, 85, 100–1, 190–1,
212–13, 240
US
12, 39, 67–9, 85, 100–1
Census and Geodemographics 
Group
27, 236
Census bureaus
Australian Bureau of Statistics
85
Statistics Canada
85
United Kingdom
23–4, 59–60, 62,
65–6, 72, 191
United States
61, 85
Central Postcode Directory
22, 56
Centre for Environmental Studies
22, 40,
55, 75
Centroid
56–7, 165
Chicago School
24, 37, 50–1
China
187–8, 190, 192, 194–5, 197, 203–5
Chorley Report
58–9
Choropleth maps
90, 95, 98, 133
Claritas, see Vendors & suppliers
Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting
Richard Harris, Peter Sleight and Richard Webber
© 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
ISBNs: 0-470-86413-3 (HB); 0-470-86414-1 (PB)
Index

Index
290
Classification methods
fuzzy
32, 50, 238–9
k-means
162–5, 173–82, 213, 221,
240, 245, 275
spatial
221–2
stepwise
160–2
Classifications ACORN
19–23, 40, 55–8,
60, 62–3, 67–9, 71, 75, 186, 231–2,
235, 237–9
CAMEO
60, 62, 64–5
Mosaic
14, 23, 57–8, 60, 62–5,
68–9, 116, 138–9, 141, 160,
167–8, 170, 187, 189, 194, 197,
199–200, 205, 208, 229–30,
235, 237
other
62, 65–6, 68, 89
SuperProfiles
57–8, 60, 66
Cluster hierarchies
12–13, 116, 148,
168–70, 181–2
Clustering, see Geodemographics, building
a classification
Collective effects
224
Compositional effects
224
Data protection & privacy
18, 25, 54,
113, 191, 193, 245, 268–72, 275
Data warehouses
4, 54, 111, 113
Deduction
15, 261
Delaunay triangulation
253
Demographics User Group
21, 225,
227
Denmark
187–8, 191, 205
Deprivation, poverty, social exclusion
defining
42–23
measuring
11, 22, 31–2, 35–6, 42–5,
55, 116, 222, 262, 271
official measures of
23, 37, 43–4
persistence of
47–8
targeting
10, 33, 46, 99, 228
Digital divide
120, 264, 276
Direct marketing
4–5, 26, 49, 57, 61,
113, 244, 246–7, 263, 271
Distance
Euclidean
105, 164
Manhattan
105
Diversity of populations
11, 25, 31,
35, 46, 51, 63, 123, 153, 163, 201,
212, 214
Ecological fallacy
25, 33–4, 50–1, 63,
102–3, 124–5, 132, 143, 145, 208,
214–15, 235, 244–5
Electoral register
57, 61, 63–4, 66, 113,
196, 270
Robertson case
270
Equifax, see Vendors & suppliers
EuroDirect, see Vendors & suppliers
Experian, see Vendors & suppliers
Factor analysis, see Multivariate analysis
Factorial ecology
39
Finland
187–8, 191, 195, 197, 204–5
Fractal dimension
86, 197
France
187–8, 190–3, 196, 198,
202, 204–5
Generalization
33–4, 37, 39, 83, 210,
274, 276
Geocomputation
245, 271
Geodemographic information systems
(GDIS)
109–45
definition of
110–11, 143–4
Geodemographics
applications of
4, 5, 10, 12, 13, 19, 21,
141, 189, 198, 226, 227, 228, 230,
231, 233, 236
building a classification
147–83,
193–6
critiques of
208–25, 240, 276
definition of
2, 14, 26
geodemographic profiling
19,
116–42, 145
and GIS
46, 49, 88–108, 110–16,
142–4, 260
history of
30, 37–42, 45, 49, 50,
54–67, 75
how it works
14, 109–45, 147–83
market for
3, 67, 74, 186–9
and market research
4, 70
and the public sector
21–4
Geographic Information Systems 
(GIS)
77–108, 249–57
compared with GDIS
109–45
definitions of
78, 110
and marketing
78, 99–103, 107,
110–11
software
59, 79, 86, 102, 107

Index
291
Geographical analysis machine 
(GAM)
260–1
Geographical information science 
(GISc)
3, 78, 111, 213, 240, 261, 271
Geographically weighted regression
(GWR)
223, 256, 262, 271–2
Geolifestyle classifications
243–72
Georeference, georeferencing
79, 81–2,
85, 90, 107, 113–14, 191, 209,
220, 257
Geosimulation
50, 274
Germany
149, 187–8, 190–3, 195–6,
200, 205
Gravity models, see Spatial, interaction
models
Greece
187–8, 196, 199–200, 205
Grids
86–8, 107, 250–4, 256, 260–1, 271
Higher Education Funding Council for
England (HEFCE)
13
Hong Kong
148, 168, 187–8, 193,
195–7, 203
Hot spot detection
135, 144, 257–61, 271
Human ecology
38, 50
Iceland
191
Index of Multiple Deprivation
23, 43–4
Index value (geodemographic)
71, 91,
93–4, 117–31, 136–8, 142, 150,
229–30, 236, 260, 264
India
192
Induction
15, 261
Inverse distance weighting (IDW),
see Weighting
Ireland
168, 187–8, 196–7, 205
Italy
187, 192, 196, 199–200, 204–5
Japan
187–8, 190, 192, 203, 205
Kendall’s correlation coefficient
132
K-means, see Classification methods
Korner committee
23
Lifestyles data
35, 65–6, 243–72
Liverpool
11, 22, 34, 40, 57
London
11, 22, 24, 29–32, 35, 37, 40–1,
43–4, 46–51, 55, 86, 189, 200,
219–20, 222–3
Luton case study
236–9
Luxembourg
191
Mailing Preference Service
57
Map classifications
equal interval classification
96, 137
natural breaks
97
nested averages
95, 97
quantiles
47, 96–7
Market research
4–5, 20, 42, 55–6, 70,
149, 154, 187–8, 196, 233, 236, 246
Media analysis
4–5, 26
Minimum spanning tree
155–6, 159
Modifiable areal unit problem 
(MAUP)
103, 208, 211, 214–15,
218, 240, 252, 260
MOSAIC, see Classifications ACORN
Multilevel modelling
223, 248, 262–3, 271
Multimedia
74, 139, 171–2, 186–7, 205
Multivariate analysis
35, 49, 238
factor analysis
39, 157
principal components analysis
40,
157–9, 182
Names
50, 72
National spatial data infrastructures
(NSDIs)
54, 59, 112
Neighbourhood
analysis
4, 10–14, 15, 18, 26, 30–42,
85, 88, 89–95, 99, 109–45
classification
3, 4, 8, 9, 12, 25–6, 32,
41–2, 55–67, 75, 89, 147–83, 186,
187–9, 205, 240
data sources
24, 61, 85, 100–1, 273, 275
definitions of
15, 17, 49, 83, 115,
209, 234
effects
16–17, 219–25, 248, 262
geographies of
186, 196–205, 211–12
natural
38–9, 49–50, 210, 213, 218, 234
objects
83–4, 110–11, 115, 213,
218, 274
profiling
3, 110, 116–42, 210, 228
renewal, regeneration
10, 24, 44,
219, 273
Netherlands
148–9, 154, 187–8, 191,
193, 195–6, 202, 204–5
New Zealand
12, 187, 195–6, 202, 205
Nielsen
120, 188

Index
292
Normal distribution
131, 152, 154, 258
Norway
187–8, 191, 195, 203, 205
Optimization
19, 148, 162, 166–8, 179,
212–13, 233, 248
Ordnance Survey (UK)
46, 100
Address-Point
59, 91, 249
Code-Point
57, 59, 91, 249
MasterMap
59
Overlay
89–90, 92, 98, 106–7, 144, 249
Pearson correlation
46, 132, 181,
215–16, 218–19, 264
Pen portraits and labelling
18, 32, 92,
139, 148, 171–3, 182, 240
Penetration index
71, 89, 117–21, 123,
125, 127–9
Peru
148, 168, 201, 205
Point in polygon analysis
91, 107, 116, 249
Point pattern analysis
245, 257
Population surface modelling
88, 212,
214, 256
Postal geographies
as georeference
57, 59, 114–15
data about
63–4, 66
hierarchies of
69
linking to census data
22, 24, 40, 56,
58, 70, 213–14, 249
variations in
196
Principal components analysis,
see Multivariate analysis
Profiling, see Geodemographics, building
a classification
Raster data model
86–8, 107, 111, 144, 260
Red-lining
276
Remote sensing
86, 111, 274–5
Representation
32–4, 42, 45, 83–5, 87–8,
90, 106–7, 115, 134, 168, 182, 197–8,
210, 214, 217, 240, 263, 274–6
Retail, retailing
4, 12, 26, 50, 57, 59, 84,
103, 106, 111, 144, 188–9, 225–6,
233, 275
Russia
192
Safe harbour
269–70
Segmentation
7, 11–12, 22, 25, 66–9, 92,
159, 189, 208, 245, 247, 249, 274
Skew
152, 154, 167, 236
South Africa
198
Spain
148, 187–8, 190, 195–6,
198–200, 205
Spatial
analysis
51, 218, 245, 260, 271–2, 277
autocorrelation
16–17, 256–7, 263
context
150, 218–24, 245, 247, 260
interaction models
103–6
Spearman’s rank coefficient
130–2
Standard deviation
123, 153–4, 175, 258
Stereotyping
171, 276
SuperProfiles, see Classifications ACORN
Surveillance
272, 276
Sweden
187–8, 191, 195, 203–5
Switzerland
190
Target Group Index (TGI)
22, 55, 70–1,
188, 236–7
Thiessen polygons
252–4, 256, 271
Tobler’s First Law of Geography
16–17,
26, 240, 255, 272
Travel times
134–8
Uncertainty
35, 43, 217, 245, 263–8, 271–2
Universities and Colleges Admissions
Service (UCAS)
14
Urban
deprivation
30–7, 42, 271
geography
4, 26, 49, 212
planning
4, 107
sociology
4, 24, 26, 37
spaces, structure, systems
15, 34,
37–8, 40, 50, 197, 212, 274
Task Force (UK)
199
Vector data model
83, 85–6, 88, 106–7,
110–11, 115–16, 134, 144, 216
Vendors & suppliers
62, 66, 68
Acxiom
61, 69, 245
CACI
40, 55–60, 62–3, 65, 67, 71, 73,
111, 113, 148, 186, 230–2, 236,
244, 247
Claritas
55, 60–2, 64–5, 67–8, 111,
148, 186–7, 245, 247
Equifax
59–60, 65
EuroDirect
60–2, 64–5, 111, 113,
148, 271

Index
293
Experian
57, 60, 62–3, 65, 68–9, 111,
134, 139–40, 147–50, 154, 157,
160, 162, 167, 170, 172–3, 182,
187, 208, 222, 236
Visualization and mapping
15, 30, 35,
42, 47–9, 59–60, 62, 74, 79, 85–6, 88,
95–9, 102, 106–8, 124, 137–40, 144,
167, 171–3, 183, 186–8, 205, 249–61
Volume profiling
124–6
Weighting
inverse distance weighting (IDW)
135,
255–7, 262, 271–2
variables & attributes
63, 124–9,
151–2, 154–7, 159–60,
162–4, 166–7, 239,
247, 264–7
Z-score
71, 153–4, 174, 176

Plate 1 GIS mapping of the SuperProfiles classification of 1991 Census enumeration districts in and around Bristol,
England

Plate 2 Within Brent, London an index of deprivation shows that changes in geodemograpic
condition crossover the administrative ward geography and that not all deprived areas are in
neighbourhoods that were receiving regeneration funding. Source: courtesy of Gillian Harper,
Birkbeck College

Plate 3 Point map showing the catchment of Bluewater shopping centre defined as postcodes
within a 45-minute drive time at (i) peak, weekday periods and (ii) off-peak at weekends

Plate 4 Targeting clusters of ‘singles’ – comparing GAM with the ‘hot-spot analysis’ shown
in Figure 9.6

