
Geographic information system 
for smart cities


Geographic information 
system for smart cities
TM Vinod Kumar
and
Associates
COPAL PUBLISHING GROUP
New Delhi

Published by Copal Publishing Group
E-143, Lajpat Nagar, Sahibabad, 
Distt. Ghaziabad, UP – 201005, India
www.copalpublishing.com
© Copal Publishing Group, 2014
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded 
sources. Reprinted material is quoted with permission. Reasonable efforts have 
been made to publish reliable data and information, but the authors and the 
publishers cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials. Neither 
the authors nor the publishers, nor anyone else associated with this publication, 
shall be liable for any loss, damage or liability directly or indirectly caused or 
alleged to be caused by this book.
Neither this book nor any part may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by 
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, microfilming and 
recording, or by any information storage or retrieval system, without permission 
in writing from Copal Publishing Group.  The consent of Copal Publishing Group 
does not extend to copying for general distribution, for promotion, for creating 
new works, or for resale. Specific permission must be obtained in writing from 
Copal Publishing Group for such copying.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered 
trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation, without intent 
to infringe.
ISBN: 978-81-924733-5-2 (hard back)
ISBN: 978-93-83419-03-6 (e-book)
Typeset by Bhumi Graphics, New Delhi
Printed and bound by Bhavish Graphics, Chennai

This is a collective effort of many authors from many countries who got 
themselves associated to research and documentation on Geographic 
Information System (GIS) for Smart Cities. We believe that smart cities are 
cities of tomorrow, which is a great contribution of urban science to future 
of civilization. The fact that smart cities have got a capability to transform 
nations brought these authors together to accomplish the task. This is the first 
book on smart cities from India. Again this is the first book, internationally, 
that establishes the relationship of GIS with smart cities. At present GIS 
usage in the professional practice of urban planning and management has 
not utilized the many state-of-the-art capabilities of GIS. By the very nature 
of smart cities, we require all capabilities of GIS for modeling planning, 
monitoring and management of smart cities. We feel that future development 
of GIS will be triggered by the challenges smart cities possess to GIS. 
	
Transformation of nation can only be brought about by its people. The 
quality of the people is related to the scope of national development one 
can envisage. Smart cities are built on the primary building block of smart 
people, then smart community they form and smart economy they operate. 
Smart people are those having highest possible Human Development Index, 
high Graduate Enrolment Ratio, adapt in the art and science of e-democracy 
and e-governance, and dedicated to continuous learning process and 
enjoying smart environment, smart mobility and, above all, smart living. 
Therefore the primary task of any nation is to convert their population to 
smart people with the attributes mentioned. Hence national development is 
human development and smart city development is human development.
	
I would like to thank all who are directly involved in funding and 
supporting this venture. We have not received or sought any grant for the 
publication of this book. There are no institutions other than publisher 
which directly supported the work of authors leading to the production 
of book, but research work has been done in many institutions, indirectly 
making it possible to publish this work. We thank all of them.
	
Finally I thank the spirit of BODHISATVA of MAHYANA 
BUDDHISM of all authors in making this work possible. 
TM Vinod Kumar
Preface


TM Vinod Kumar has more than 40 years of experience 
in urban and regional planning, focusing equally to 
teaching, research, and professional consultancy. He was 
Dean of Studies at School of Planning and Architecture, 
New Delhi, and was HOD of Urban Planning. Although 
an engineer and urban planner by profession, he has 
broadened his research horizon by working in various 
social sciences research institutions. 
M Ramachandran has a macro-level understanding of 
India’s urban sector as he has been Secretary, Ministry of 
Urban Development, Government of India, for about 4 
years and his urban tenure is well known for the various 
new initiatives including able stewardship of the mega 
urban initiative titled Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban 
Renewal Mission. His 38 years long career in the Indian 
Administrative Service (IAS) stand out for the variety 
of challenging assignments successfully handled. 
Mahavir is Professor and Head of the Department of 
Environmental Planning at the School of Planning 
and Architecture, New Delhi. He received his PhD 
jointly from ITC and the University of Utrecht, the 
Netherlands. The research revolved around the concept 
of ‘Continuously Built-up Areas’ with the case study of 
the NCR, Delhi. He has been in the teaching, research 
and practice of physical planning, remote sensing and 
GIS, for about 30 years.
Prabh Bedi is a geographer, regional planner and GIS 
expert. She has been practicing and teaching planning, 
GIS applications and project management for the last 
15 years. She is particularly interested in information 
systems for planning and sustainable settlements. She 
has worked on various projects in India, Vietnam and 
USA. Presently, she is working towards her PhD. 
Authors

Priya Mendiratta is working as an urban planner for the 
City and Industrial Development Corporation (CIDCO), 
a fully Maharashtra government-owned company. She 
is also involved in research at the Centre of Studies 
in Resources Engineering (CSRE), Indian Institute of 
Technology Bombay (IITB), Mumbai, India, on utility 
of satellite images to trace and project the spatio-
temporal urbanization trends of a metropolitan area.
Shirish Gedam is an Associate Professor with the Centre 
of Studies in Resources Engineering, IIT Bombay. He 
received his PhD from the Indian Institute of Technology 
(IIT) Bombay, Mumbai, India, preceded by Masters of 
Technology with specialization in Remote Sensing. 
Dr Gedam is a Life Member of the Indian Society of 
Remote Sensing and Indian Society of Geomatics. He is 
also actively working in the area of precision processing 
of GPS data and GPS meteorology.
Bernd Gundermann holds a Masters degree in 
Architecture from the School of Fine Arts in Hamburg, 
Germany. He is currently working as Principal of 
Stephenson & Turner NZ Architects and Engineers 
in Auckland, New Zeal. Bernd was appointed Guest 
Professor at the School of Fine Arts, Hamburg, and 
continues teaching as a Fellow of the University of 
Auckland’s School of Architecture and Planning. 
Bernd is alumnus of the German National Academic 
Foundation.
Ashmita Karmakar is employed with M/S Nakheel, 
Dubai as Urban Planner (Master planning and 
development control, GIS) for the existing and 
upcoming mega projects of Dubai. She has graduated 
in Architecture from LAD College, Nagpur, India in 
1998. She completed her Masters in Town and Regional 
Planning from Bengal Engineering College, Howrah, 
India, and PhD in Environmental Planning from School 
of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi, India in 2012.
viii	
Geographic information system for smart cities

P P Anilkumar is Associate Professor at the Department 
of Architecture of NIT Calicut and has been teaching for 
more than 20 years. He received his PhD in Sustainable 
Coastal Cities from Indian Institute of Technology 
Chennai, after his Masters in City Planning from Indian 
Institute of Technology Kharagpur. His active current 
research interests are in sustainable cities, land-use 
impacts and vernacular and green architecture.
Vijay Neekhra is an urban, regional and transport 
planner, working with an international organization. 
He received his PhD with ‘Best Dissertation Award’ in 
urban planning from The University of Tokyo, Japan 
and Master’s degree in planning from the School of 
Planning and Architecture, India. Dr Neekhra has 
extensive work experience in development & planning 
(including urban, regional & transport planning) 
involving research, policy advice & planning, analysis 
and forecasting. 
Bimal P holds a Masters degree in City Planning from 
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, and Bachelors’ 
degree in architecture from Kerala University. He had 
been working at JUSCO, Jamshedpur, before joining 
as Assistant Professor at Department of Architecture, 
NIT Calicut. He is currently pursuing PhD in urban 
modeling.
Naseer M A received his PhD in Transportation Planning 
from Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur India in 
the year 2005 after completing his Masters degree in 
City Planning. Presently, he is a faculty in Architecture 
at National Institute of Technology Calicut, India. In 
addition to transportation planning, his research interests 
include remote sensing and GIS in urban planning.
	
Authors	
ix

Joaquín Borrego-Díaz is an Associate Professor in the 
University of Seville’s Computer Science and Artificial 
Intelligence Department, and he is a Computational Logic 
Group (http://www.glc.us.es) member. His research 
focuses on computational logic and automated reasoning 
and their application to Knowledge Representation on 
the intersection of automated-reasoning systems and 
Semantic Web. 
Gonzalo A. Aranda-Corral works as an Assistant 
Professor at Universidad de Huelva, Department of 
Information Technologies, and he is a Computational 
Logic Group member at Universidad de Sevilla. 
Nowadays, his main research lines of CLG are 
validation of knowledge basis for Semantic Web, social 
networking, intelligent systems (mobile computing, 
urban informatics, etc.) and algorithms verification.
Manuel Gomar Acosta is Master in Software 
Engineering from the University of Seville. He 
developed his final year project with the University of 
Seville’s Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence 
Department, researching in the field of natural disasters 
simulation through multi-agent technology. Nowadays 
he works as game developer in a multiplatform game 
engine (Wave Engine).
Alejandro Blanco Escudero has completed Software 
Engineering from University of Seville. He developed 
his final year project with the University of Seville’s 
Computer 
Science 
and 
Artificial 
Intelligence 
Department, researching in the field of natural disasters 
simulation through multi-agent technology.
Antonio Caperna is an Architect, and President 
of the International Society of Biourbanism. He 
teaches Sustainable Urban Design at the Architecture 
Department of Roma Tre University (Italy). His actual 
research deals with scientific issues such as fractals, 
complexity theory, evolutionary biology, and artificial 
x	
Geographic information system for smart cities

intelligence, and their relation to a human-oriented 
architecture.
Stefano Serafini, a philosopher and psychologist, 
is Research Director and Secretary General of the 
International Society of Biourbanism. He is involved 
in researches about neuroergonomics, environmental 
psychology, and urban studies, especially focusing on 
the biological basis of the effect of space shaping on 
human beings.
Walter Barberis is co-founder and promoter of the 
international network “Smart Planning” and president 
of the homonymous association. He works as an 
independent researcher and professor in urban planning 
at the School of Architecture, University of “Roma Tre”, 
focusing on the themes of city form, urban fragmentation 
and new technologies applied to the city (Urbótica and 
smart city). 
Richard Sliuzas is Associate Professor of Urban 
Planning at the University of Twente’s Faculty of 
Geographic Information Science and Earth Observation. 
Much of his research has been focussed on monitoring 
and modelling informal development and urban growth 
in developing countries. His current major research 
interests are urban transformations and planning in 
China and Vietnam; urban growth and urban village 
formation.
Mark Zuidgeest is Assistant Professor of Urban 
Transport in the Faculty of Geo-Information Science 
and Earth Observation of the University of Twente in 
The Netherlands. He has 15 years’ experience in the 
transport sector, both as an academic and as a consultant. 
He is specialized in sustainable transport development, 
public transport and bicycle infrastructure. 
	
Authors	
xi

Shomik Mehndiratta is a Lead Transport Specialist 
working in the World Bank’s Latin America and 
Caribbean region based in Washington DC. He is 
working on transport and climate issues across countries 
in the region. He has been at the World Bank since 2002 
and in the period 2007–2010 he lived and worked in 
China. He is co-editor and author of an edited book on 
Low Carbon Urban Development in China. 
Andrew Salzberg joined the World Bank in 2009 after 
completing his Master’s in Urban Planning Degree at 
Harvard University. While at the Bank, Andrew has 
focused on supporting due diligence evaluations of 
urban transport and railway projects in Asia. Andrew’s 
work focuses on how the use of data (and geospatial data 
in particular) can make cities more liveable, efficient, 
and sustainable.
xii	
Geographic information system for smart cities

Preface	
	
v
Authors	
	
vii
	 1.	 Geographic information system for smart cities	
1
	
1.1	
Introduction	
1
	
1.2	
Smart urban communities	
8
	
1.3	
Smart city for social space	
10
	
1.4	
Smart city technological perspectives	
11
	
1.5	
Smart city and urban economic development	
12
	
1.6	
Concept of smart people in smart cities	
13
	
1.7	
Role of GIS for smart cities	
14
	
1.8	
GIS in building model of real world city	
17
	
1.9	
Conclusion
	 2.	 GIS for smart urbanisation	
26
	
2.1	
Introduction	
26
	
2.2	
Urbanisation	
27
	
2.3	
Urbanisation as defined in India	
28
	
2.4	
History of India’s urbanisation	
28
	
2.5	
Challenges as resultant of urbanisation in India	
29
	
2.6	
Urbanisation policy through national plans	
30
	
2.7	
Just smart cities or smart urbanisation	
32
	
2.8	
GIS-based smart urbanisation	
34
	
2.9	
Conclusion	
39
	 3.	 Satellite images for sustainable urbanisation	
42
	
3.1	
Background – role of satellite images towards 	
42
sustainable urbanisation 	
Contents

	
3.2	
Sustainable urbanisation – concept and indices	
46
	
3.3	
Satellite images and GIS – genesis and significance 	
49
to urban planning	
	
3.4	
Satellite image applications for sustainable development 	56
	
3.5	
Vision – the road ahead 	
70
	 4.	 Adaptive urbanism: Climate change, sea-level 	
73
rise and a new urban age	
	
4.1	
Climate change and the coastal habitat of mankind	
73
	
4.2	
Response strategies to sea-level rise	
77
	
4.3	
Available technology	
81
	
4.4	
Adaptive urbanism and the smart city	
83
	
4.5	
Conclusion 	
91
	 5.	 Assessment of land and land use for future development 	
94
using GIS in the community development of Dubai	
	
5.1	
Introduction	
94
	
5.2	
The study	
95
	
5.3	
Background	
97
	
5.4	
Master plan outcome	
104
	
5.5	
Use of GIS in the planning of services	
106
	
5.6	
Implementation of master plan at community level	
112
	
5.7	
Case studies	
113
	
5.8	
Implication of GIS for future development	
118
	
5.9	
Conclusion	
121
	 6.	 Environmentally sensitive land-use allocation for smart 	
124
coastal cities	
	
6.1	
Introduction	
124
	
6.2	
Coastal cities: why they are sensitive to urban 	
125 
development? 	
	
6.3	
Is sustainability and smartness related? Isn’t a 	
127
xiv	
Geographic information system for smart cities

sustainable model smart from the futuristic 
perspective?
	
6.4	
What is CHI?	
130
	
6.5	
Assessing land-use allocation implications on CHI: 	
137
the way forward for smart coastal cities	
	
6.6	
Broad context of application	
143
	
6.7	
Epilogue	
146
	 7.	 Application of GIS in categorizing and managing slum 	
149
growth in India	
	
7.1	
Introduction 	
149
	
7.2	
Slum population in India 	
151
	
7.3	
Program/policies towards slums improvement 	
153
	
7.4	
Bhopal city, slums, and slum categories 	
159
	
7.5	
Analysis of slums at ward level 	
160
	
7.6	
Categories of ward with reference to slums 	
170
	
7.7	
Categories of slums 	
174
	
7.8	
Comparison of slums in 4 cities 	
178
	
7.9	
Categories of slums in 4 cities 	
180
	
7.10	
Conclusion 	
181
	 8.	 Travel management with intraday trip generation model 	 186
in a smart city framework	
	
8.1	
Introduction	
186
	
8.2	
Activity scheduling	
187
	
8.3	
Random utility models	
188
	
8.4	
Multinomial Logit Models	
189
	
8.5	
Weighted average	
190
	
8.6	
Monte-Carlo method 	
190
	
8.7	
Proposed Model	
191
	
Contents	
xv

	
8.8	
Activity chains	
191
	
8.9	
Geography	
193
	
8.10	
The process	
193
	
8.11	
Implementation of the model	
197
	
8.12	
Study area	
197
	
8.13	
Results	
199
	
8.14	
Applications in smart city 	
202
	 9.	 Intelligent goods transportation	
205
	
9.1	
Introduction	
205
	
9.2	
Urban goods transportation	
206
	
9.3	
Intelligent goods transportation	
218
	
9.4	
Case study of Chennai Metropolitan area 	
220
	
9.5	
Conclusion	
225
	10.	 Exploiting digital information on the city to estimate	
226
resilience: A multi-agent approach	
	
10.1	
Introduction	
226
	
10.2	
Reconstruction versus resilience	
228
	
10.3	
Evaluation and validation	
230
	
10.4	
Artificial intelligence for resilience	
231
	
10.5	
Urban informational ecosystem	
232
	
10.6	
Multi-agent systems and digital information	
236
	
10.7	
A case study: Hurricane Katrina	
238
	
10.8	
Results	
243
	
10.9	
Closing remarks	
245
	11.	 Biourbanism as a new framework for smart cities studies	 250
	
11.1	
Smart city initiatives – technology, economy, classes	
250
	
11.2	
What do we mean when we say “smart city”?	
255
xvi	
Geographic information system for smart cities

	
11.3	
A critical analysis	
258
	
11.4	
Biourbanism to build wise cities	
263
	
11.5	
What a smart city should be	
265
	
11.6	
A case study: the Artena project to revive Italian 	
269
	
villages	
	
11.7	
A small afterword about megalopolises	
277
	
11.8	
Conclusion	
280
	12.	 SMART Planning as a new way of conceiving the 	
288
city/discipline	
	
12.1	
Introduction	
288
	
12.2	
What is the context to plan? What we see and what 	
290
we can know?	
	
12.3	
Guiding principles of SMART Planning approach	
293
	
12.4	
Final considerations 	
300
	13.	 Exploring smart city futures: Opportunities and barriers 	 305
to scenario-based urban planning support systems	
	
13.1	
Introduction	
305
	
13.2	
Accessibility for all	
307
	
13.3	
Defining accessibility 	
308
	
13.4	
Activity-based measures	
309
	
13.5	
Using GIS for modelling multi-modal accessibility 	
310
	
13.6	
No smart cities without good accessibility 	
311
	
13.7	
Dynamic land use and contour-based accessibility in 	 312 
Wuhan, China	
	
13.8	
Potential accessibility indicators for Ahmedabad, India	315
	
13.9	
Discussion and conclusions	
320
	
13.10	 Acknowledgements	
322
	
Contents	
xvii

	14.	 Towards smart cities in India	
325
	
14.1	
Introduction	
325
	
14.2	
Launch of flagship mission	
326
	
14.3	
Other technology programs covering urban sector	
329
	
14.4	
ICT initiatives in Indian cities	
333
	
14.5	
Smart city initiatives world wide	
334
	
14.6	
Are we ready for smart cities?	
339
	
14.7	
Way forward	
341
	
14.8	
Conclusion	
342
	15.	 Implementing smart cities in India	
345
	
15.1	
Indian experience of smart cities	
345
	
15.2	
Selection of settlements for smart cities development 	 347
in India	
	
15.3	
Smart city that is self-aware	
352
	
15.4	
Smart people for smart cities	
353
	
15.5	
Towards a calibrated model for urban economic 	
361 
development in smart cities	
	
15.6	
Metropolitan planning committee and Triple Helix 	
362 
institutional frame 	
	
15.7	
Innovating community interface for government 	
365
service provider in a smart city	
	
15.8	
Smart city technology modules 	
366
	
15.9	
Smart city and e-democracy	
369
	
15.10	 From e-democracy to e-governance for smart cities	
378
	
15.11	 Conclusion 	
385
Index		
	
393
xviii	
Geographic information system for smart cities

Abstract: City is spatial, cultural, social, economic, political, legal, democratic and ecological 
system. Spatial system can be studied from land use and urban networks and services, and 
so also other systems from their components. City has capabilities to uplift any nation, and 
converting cities to smart cities make smarter nations. The intervention on a city is executed 
by planning, management, governance and development systems. At present, planning 
system prepares master plans, zonal plans, urban land management schemes and site-
planning schemes/ urban design to achieve the goals of the spatial system which needs 
a careful relook for the creation of smart cities. Management and governing systems, now 
in operation, are legacy colonial with inefficient hierarchical system that is least responsive 
and in real time outmoded and cumbersome for the end users. Smart city is the city of 
tomorrow, which tries to identify a smarter option from legacy system for maximising the end-
user satisfaction and accelerating urban socio-cultural and economic development. Smart 
city is a knowledge-based city functioning on most latest and updated information and often 
on automated decision making and rapid action for individuals, whether they are consumers 
of urban network and services or providers of services or entrepreneurs.
	
State of the art of smart city is explored with a literature search and also the components 
of smart cities like smart community/district, smart building, smart network and services 
system. Replacement of colonial governance, management and development system is also 
discussed. State of the art of GIS is explored briefly within the context of smart cities. GIS is 
defined and all possible uses of GIS with increasing complexity are explained. The possibility 
of representing smart city with GIS is explored, and an operational model is also described.
Key words: geographic information system, smart city, state of the art, definition, GIS as 
related to smart city.
1.1	
Introduction
Most of us live in a city that has been planned for 40–60 years with two 
or three master plans, many zonal plans, building codes, urban land 
management schemes and development control regulation codes, which 
guide city development. Master plan is prepared taking into account 
spatial, ecological, cultural, social, economic, political, administrative and 
democratic system. There is a regularity of behaviour in these systems and is 
translated in to an urban land use, transportation and networks and services 
1
Geographic information system for smart cities
T.M. VINOD KUMAR

2	
Geographic information system for smart cities
plan. Then other social and physical infrastructures are located and planned 
using spatial standards. Hence, spatial plan consists of land uses and urban 
networks and services with multiple attributes. The intervention on a city is 
executed by planning, management, governance and development systems. 
For example, at present, constitutionally empowered planning authority 
prepares city master plans, zonal plans, urban land management schemes 
and site planning schemes/ urban design to achieve the specific goals and 
objectives of a city. Management and governing systems that exist today 
are legacy colonial systems with inefficient vertical hierarchical structure 
that is least responsive for real time intervention required for rapid urban 
management and development, and largely outmoded and cumbersome 
for the end users. India is now legislating in many federal states to reduce 
the response time of government servants, who are otherwise indifferent, 
and even punishment is awarded for delayed public services delivery to 
end users. In the past this legacy system has served British colonial India 
very well, helped the oppressive colonial masters for collecting revenue, 
retarding economic development, killing certain competitive industries to 
British, and maintaining law and order; but is not particularly useful for 
a modern day urban management and urban economic development. This 
book indicates how these changes can be made.
	
Geographic information systems (GIS) are also used for planning 
in most of the major cities in India and to a limited scale in urban 
management and governance. However, these urban planning, governance 
and management efforts have not resulted in drastic reduction in difficult 
urban living. These have not helped in reducing long commutation distance, 
unnecessary use of high energy and wastage of natural resources, difficult 
traffic bottlenecks and congestion, retarded employment generation during 
the time of economic down turns and pollution of air, water and land. Ill-
serviced slums still do exists. There is a need to study these issues with 
all the complexity in order to modify a city to a “smart city” that can 
overcome these emerging urban development issues in a “smarter way”. 
This book defines smart city as a knowledge-based city that develops extra 
ordinary capabilities to be self-aware; functions 24 hours and 7 days a 
week; communicates, selectively, knowledge in real time to citizen end-
users for satisfactory way of life with easy public delivery of services, 
comfortable mobility, conservation of energy, environment and other 
natural resources; and creates energetic face-to-face communities and a 
vibrant urban economy even at a time of national economic downturns. 

	
Geographic information system for smart cities	
3
Smart city components consist of smart economy, smart people, smart 
governance, smart mobility, smart environment and smart living. These 
combined systems try to increase the economic competitiveness, social 
and human capital, participation, transport and ICT, natural resources and 
quality of life. Figure 1.1 shows smart city components.
SMART ECONOMY
(Competitiveness)
	 Innovative spirit
	 Entrepreneurship
	 Productivity
	 Flexibility of labour market
	 International embeddendness
	 Ability to transform
SMART PEOPLE
(Social and Human Capital)
	 Level of qualification
	 Affinity to life long learning
	 Social and ethnic plurality
	 Flexibility
	 Creativity
	 Cosmopolitanism/open-mindeness
	 Sustaniable resource 
management
SMART Governance
(Participation)
	 Participation in decision-making
	 Public and social services
	 Transparent governance
	 Political strategies & perspectives
SMART MOBILITY
(Transport and ICT)
	 Local accessibility
	 (Inter-) national accessibility
	 Availability of ICT-infrastructure
	 Sustainable, innovative and safe 
transport systems
SMART ENVIRONMENT
(Natural resources)
	 Attractivity of natural conditions
	 Pollution
	 Environmental protection
	 Sustainable resource 
management
SMART LIVING
(Quality of life)
	 Cultural facilities
	 Health conditions
	 Individual safety
	 Housing quality
	 Education facilities
	 Touristic attractivity
	 Social cohesion
Figure 1.1  Smart city system
	
GIS has got a capacity to model the real world of the city in totality. It 
can incorporate millions of variables and has the capacity to geocode these 
variables and simulate for planning, management and development of a 
city. The hardware platform of computers is in the process of increasing 
its capacity for GIS computations almost every day. This book relates GIS 
with smart city urban economic development in India.
	
Urban development in India is assuming greater importance. In 
the census year 2011, although only 31.16 percent population of India 
lived in urban areas, they contributed 62% of GDP. When India aims for 
9–10% GDP growth rate, urban development needs to be strengthened 
further. Converting existing million-size and mega cities to smart cities 
can make India develop faster to reach the GDP growth rate target. This 
book investigates the role of smart cities and related development of GIS 
in achieving higher GDP growth rate. 
	
Urban population of India grew from 286 million in 2001 to 377 
million in 2011. This 91 million increase in urban population is larger 
than 90.5 million increase in rural population during 2001–2011. Table 
1.1 shows the urban content of selected states and union territories of 

4	
Geographic information system for smart cities
India. In addition to union territories given in Table 1.1, there is more than 
42 percent urban content in states like Gujarat, Maharashtra, Kerala and 
Tamil Nadu. These states have a higher potential of contribution to GDP 
in future if smart city policy is formulated and implemented there. Gujarat 
is taking some steps to have smart cities, and also smart new towns are 
planned along the Delhi–Mumbai High Speed Freight Corridor.
Table 1.1  States/UTs in India with higher than average urban content in 2011.
Selected states/UTs
Urban content (%)
NCT Delhi
97.49
Chandigarh
97.24
Lakshadweep
78.08
Daman & Diu
75.16
Puduchery
68.31
Goa
62.17
Mizoram
51.5
Tamil Nadu
48.44
Kerala
47.71
Maharashtra
45.24
Gujarat
42.6
Karnataka
38.57
Andhra Pradesh
33.50
Source: Census of India 2011
	
The scientific way of identifying smart cities is not there in many 
listing of smart cities. There are many websites enumerating 10 smart 
cities without giving in detail the criteria of determining the smart cities. 
Identification can only be done with a good amount of research based on a 
large data base of cities around the world. However there is an identification 
of smart cities for award for Smart21 Committee. They have identified five 
factors to consider a city as an intelligent community, which is synonymous 
with smart city. They are broadband connectivity, knowledge workforce, 
digital inclusion, innovation and marketing and advocacy. It is important 
to stress that city needs to be marketed like any other services, and a 
strong advocacy mechanism needs to be implemented. Table 1.2 describes 
the list of cities in alphabetical order awarded by Intelligent Community 
Organisation from 2007 to 2011.

	
Geographic information system for smart cities	
5
Table 1.2  List of smart cities during 2007–2011.
Region
Cities
Asia
Bangalore (India), Chongqing (China), Doha (Qatar), Gangnam District, 
Seoul (Korea), Hong Kong, Hwaseong-Dongtan (Korea), Hyderabad 
(India), Ichikawa (Japan), Jaipur Rajasthan (India), Jiading (China), 
Kabul (Afghanistan), Mitaka (Japan), Shanghai (China), Seoul (Korea), 
Singapore, Suwon (Korea), Taipei (Taiwan), Taoyuan County (Taiwan), Tel 
Aviv (Israel), Tianjin (China), Yokosuka (Japan)
Africa
Cape Town (South Africa), Nelson Mandela Bay (South Africa)
Europe
Besancon (France), Birmingham (UK), Dundee (Scotland: UK), Eindhoven 
(Netherlands), Glasgow, Scotland (UK), Hammarby Sjöstad (Sweden), 
Issy-les-Moulineaux (France), Kariskrona (Sweden), Malta (Malta), 
Manchester (UK), Reykjavik (Iceland), Scorpon (Hungary), Stockholm 
(Sweden), Tallinn (Estonia), Sunderland (UK), Trikala (Greece)
North 
America
US: Albany (New York), Ashland (Oregon), Arlington County (Virginia), 
Bettendorf (Iowa), Bristol (Virginia), Chattanooga (Tennessee), Cleveland 
(Ohio), Corpus Christi (Texas), Dakota County (Minnesota), Danville 
(Virginia), Dublin (Ohio), Florida High Tech Corridor, LaGrange (Georgia), 
Northeast  (Ohio), Loma Linda (California), Riverside (California), San 
Francisco, Spokane (Washington), Westchester County (New York), 
Winston-Salem (Carolina)
Canada: Burlington (Ontario), Calgary (Alberta), Edmonton (Alberta), 
Fredericton (New Brunswick), Kenora (Ontario), Moncton (New 
Brunswick), Ottawa (Ontario), Quebec City (Quebec), Stratford (Ontario), 
Toronto (Ontario), Vancouver (British Columbia), Waterloo (Ontario), 
Western Valley (Nova Scotia), Windsor-Essex (Ontario), Winnipeg 
(Manitoba)
Middle/South 
America
Braceloneta (Puerto Rico), Curitiba, Parana (Brazil), Pirai (Brazil), Porto 
Alegre (Brazil)
Oceania
Ballarat (Australia), Gold Coast City (Australia), Ipswich, Queensland 
(Australia), State of Victoria (Australia), Whittle sea, Victoria (Australia)
Source: http://www.intelligentcommunity.org/index.phpsubmenu+Award&src+gendocs&ref+
Smart21&Category=Events&link=Smart21
	
Bangalore, Hyderabad and Jaipur have been listed as smart cities in 
India. All of these appear in the list of top 10 largest or mega cities of 
India. Bangalore occupies the 5th position, Hyderabad 6th and Jaipur 10th 

6	
Geographic information system for smart cities
rank in the order of population. Bangalore and Hyderabad are well known 
for software exports, and most of the large international firms connected 
with knowledge economy have offices in Bangalore and Hyderabad. Most 
surprising part was Jaipur’s ascendancy to the third smart city of India. 
Population growth supports the fact that how fast it has developed during 
the last decades. The smart cities are good employment multipliers, which 
is one reason why the population of these cities are high. However it 
may be noted that in 2011, Andhra Pradesh has another million-plus city 
Vijayawada, and Rajasthan another million-plus city Jodhpur. Because 
of proximity to other knowledge industries, there has been concentrated 
investment in these three smart cities of India but lesser investment in 
other centres. Now there is a policy change to take knowledge economy 
investment to tier 2 and tier 3 cities, and in Kerala there is a policy even 
to have software industry in village setting which can be the least-cost 
option. So, Vijayawada and Jodhpur can get some advantage in future. 
Although population growth is a function of employment growth and 
inward migration, a detailed study of how smart city influenced its growth 
and what innovation it implemented is yet to be documented. However, 
few mega infrastructure projects like new airports and Metro rail projects 
in Bangalore and Hyderabad have been implemented. Research centres 
in these cities concentrate on e-governance, e-banking, e-commerce, 
computer software and hardware development and so on. With several 
well-known educational institutions and R&D centres located in these two 
cities, knowledge economy is likely to grow faster and would contribute in 
the accelerated economic development of India. Lack of systematic research 
makes it difficult to understand the dynamics of smart cities in India.
1.1.1	
Definition of smart cities
Smart cities were also called wired cities but the term ‘wired’ lost its 
meaning in an era of wireless communication technology. Other names are 
digital city, intelligent city, ubiquitous city, hybrid city and information city. 
The difficulty in explaining these terms created a situation that these terms 
became unpopular. People-oriented smart cities are called creative city, 
learning city, humane city and knowledge city. There are also community-
centred smart cities which are discussed subsequently. All these terms 
which may be considered as earlier concepts were subsequently replaced 
by smart city. 

	
Geographic information system for smart cities	
7
	
Urban planners consider “smart” as strategic development of a 
city emerging out of SWOT analysis. For technologists, smart implies 
automatic computing principles like self-configuration, self-healing, self-
protection and self-optimisation. Smart homes with several systems of 
automation, smart public buildings, smart airports, smart hospitals are 
also equipped with sensors and actuators. Smart ecosystem is an emerging 
concept which incorporates development in smart technology. There can 
also be smart individuals, smart community and smart society, all which 
extend this concept. 
	
Definitions of a smart city are listed below.
	
1.	 The use of smart computing technologies to make the critical 
infrastructure components and service of a city – which include city 
administration, education, health care, public safety, real estate, 
transportation, and utilities – more intelligent, interconnected and 
efficient [1].
	
2.	 A city well performing in a forward-looking way in economy, 
people governance, mobility, environment and living built on the 
smart combination of endowments and activities of self-decisive 
independent and aware citizens [2].
	
3.	 A city striving to make itself smarter (more efficient, sustainable, 
equitable and liveable) [3].
	
4.	 A city that monitors and integrates conditions of all of its critical 
infrastructures, including roads, bridges, tunnels, rails, subways, 
airports, seaports, communications, water, power, even major 
buildings, can better optimise its resources, plan its preventive 
maintenance activities, and monitor security aspects while 
maximising services to its citizens [4].
	
5.	 An instrumented, interconnected and intelligent city. Instrumentation 
enables the capture and integration of live real-world data through the 
use of sensors, kiosks, meters, personal devices, appliances, camera, 
smart phones, implanted medical devices, the web, and other similar 
data-acquisition systems, including social networks as networks of 
human sensors. Interconnection means the integration of those data 
into an enterprise computing platform and the communication of 
such information among the various city services. Intelligent refers 
to inclusion of complex analytics, modelling, optimisation, and 
visualisation in the operational business processes to make better 
operational decision [5].

8	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
6.	 A city that gives inspiration, shares culture, knowledge, and life; a 
city that motivates its inhabitant to create and flourish in their own 
lives [6].
	
7.	 A city where ICT strengthens the freedom of speech and the 
accessibility to public information and services [7].
	
8.	 A city that monitors and integrates conditions of all of its critical 
infrastructures [8].
	
9.	 A city connecting the physical infrastructure, the IT infrastructure, 
social infrastructure and the business infrastructure to leverage the 
collective intelligence of the city [9].
	
10.	  A city combining ICT and Web 2.0 technology with other 
organisational design and planning efforts to de materialise 
and speed up the bureaucratic process; and helps identify new 
innovative solutions to city management complexity in order to 
improve sustainability and liveability [10].
	
11.	 This book defines smart city as a knowledge-based city that 
develops extra ordinary capabilities to be self-aware; functions 24 
hours and 7 days a week; communicates, selectively, knowledge in 
real time to citizen end-users for a satisfactory way of life with easy 
public delivery of services, comfortable mobility, conservation 
of energy, environment and other natural resources; and creates 
energetic face-to-face communities and a vibrant urban economy 
even at a time of national economic downturns.
1.2	
Smart urban communities
City planners divide a city spatially into many communities. This concept 
of a face-to-face social system is generally implemented by traditional 
neighbourhood concept. Many a time urban planners and urban designers 
have to reinvent neighbourhood using appropriate urban design or urban 
land management adjustments spatially, since it is often lost in uncontrolled 
fringe area development, organic urban spread or sprawl that creates 
urban agglomerations. They use new urbanism principles to achieve this 
objective. 
	
The concept of ‘smart community’ was first used in 1993 in Silicon 
Valley, California, when it was under a bad spell of economic recession and 
down turn which was predicted to last long [11]. Silicon Valley business 
leaders, community members, government officials and educators decided 

	
Geographic information system for smart cities	
9
together to help jump start the region. Smart Communities Guidebook 
developed by California Institute for Smart Communities in 1997 at 
San Diego State University defines smart community as follows [11]: A 
community in which government, business and residents understand the 
potential of information technology and make a conscious decision to 
use that potential of technology to transform life and work in their region 
in significant and positive ways. The implementation guide developed 
by the same institute elaborates it further. A smart community is a 
community in which members of local government, business, education, 
healthcare institutions and the general public understand the potential of 
information technology, and form a successful alliance to work together 
to use technology to transform their community in significant and positive 
ways. Because of these unified efforts, the community is able to leverage 
resources and projects to develop and benefit from telecommunication 
infrastructure and services much earlier than it otherwise would. Instead 
of incremental changes, a transformation occurs that increases choice, 
convenience and control for people in the community as they live, 
work, travel, govern, shop and entertain themselves. Smart communities 
are economically competitive in the new global economy and attract 
and promote commerce as a result of an advanced telecommunications 
infrastructure. Smart Community International Network (SCIN) defines 
smart community as follows [12]: A smart community is a community 
with a vision of future that involves the application of information and 
communication technologies in a new and innovative way to empower 
its resident, institutions and regions as a whole. As such they make the 
most of the opportunities that new applications afford and broadband-
based services can deliver, such as better health care delivery, better 
education and training and new business opportunities. In a similar way, 
Australian smart community is defined. Australian smart communities are 
communities with a vision of future that involves harnessing the power 
of the Internet and other ICT technologies in new and innovative ways to 
empower their residents, institutions, and their citizens. Smart city concept 
had an international following in the developed world [13–18].
	
A smart community uses broadband networks to enable a series of 
applications that the community can leverage for innovative economic 
development and commerce, top-notch education, first-rate health care, 
cutting-edge government services, enhanced security and more efficient 
utility use [19]. Broadband facilitates greater interconnection for intra- 

10	
Geographic information system for smart cities
and inter-community resources. Moreover, broadband enables intelligent 
networks making communities smarter, more efficient and better able to 
prepare their citizens to participate in the global economy. Schools can 
engage in distance learning to offer courses that would be otherwise 
unavailable. University Grants Commission of India and All India Council 
for Technical Education give grant to have web-based classes on many 
topics. 
1.3	
Smart city for social space
A smart city for social space [20] can be considered as an attempt to 
build new secured public spaces and regain some characteristics of cities 
as places for communication, interactions, economic opportunities, and 
social and cultural activities; there by sharing knowledge, experiences, and 
mutual interest [21]. Smart cities evolve as community-based networks. 
They share information from local authorities, organise the horizontal 
exchange of information and electronic conversation among participants 
of the network, and try hard to overcome digital divides if they exist 
[22]. Often smart cities look like an opportunity for deploying various 
types of technologies, but technology is only to meet the information 
needs to support people interaction. In a smart city society, individuals 
are considered as the information processors. They have unique ability 
to use and develop information to make their own decisions and take 
actions, which may result in social and economic development of the city. 
They achieve this by using effectively available technology deployment 
in the city. Therefore technology infrastructure is seen as a supportive to 
social and economic change. Social aspect of smart city opens up many 
questions to be answered. How to defend each individual data rights of 
privacy and ownership? What are the implications concerning intellectual 
property rights? How to assure each individual’s inclusion in such a smart 
city? What infrastructure is required to avoid digital divide? What will be 
the activities that cease to exist? How to manage necessary learning that 
population may need to actually use such system? Who, when and how 
to provide informational skills to a large number of residents? How to 
measure system usages and success? What will be the relation between 
central and state government and state and local government? What will 
be the free and paying services? India is not having a full-fledged smart 
city, but attempts are there to place smart cities within a short span of time. 

	
Geographic information system for smart cities	
11
Most of the questions raised based on social aspects need to be solved 
before completing the construction of smart cities in India. Perhaps deeper 
evaluation studies may throw light on social system interventions in smart 
cities. 
1.4	
Smart city technological perspectives
Host of technologies required to design and run smart cities already 
exists. Internet, e-commerce, like successful models of Amazon and eBay, 
Flipkart, and e-government exist in many nations and states in India. 
Banking industry in India has taken great advancement in Internet-based 
money transactions, thereby minimising the movement of people to bank 
for transactions. This saves fuel in car, reduces or eliminates number of 
trips to banks and eliminates paper-based transaction totally, there by 
conserving our trees from paper making. There are many technologies used 
as pilot project or limited used projects like telemedicine. Technologies 
for smart cities need to be developed for meeting the specific needs of 
the smart city. Design of smart city technologies shall be based on social, 
economic and cultural factors of the city which may vary from city to city 
within a country. This book does not intend to describe and discuss all 
available smart city technologies. However, we discuss smart meters to 
give an idea of smart city technology and how it works.
	
One of the most important technologies for smart city is smart meters. 
A city uses water, natural gas, electricity and petroleum products, and 
smart meters measure the usage of these in space and time. Smart city 
requires smart meters. Smart meters measure consumption of these flows 
in intervals of say 30 minutes or an hour on a geographic space. They also 
measure time and type of use (say electricity in a house for different uses 
by time). These not only measure but also automatically transmit data to 
remote computers. Remote computers analyse the data and return it to 
the users with its suggestion for optimal use. Smart meters got automated 
meter reading system (AMR), and also advanced meter infrastructure 
(AMI). For example in a house, smart meter can measure electricity usage 
pattern of all equipments including bulbs within a time interval, say one 
hour, and can study for optimising the use and reducing the wastage by in-
built models of analytics. This can be passed over to households to manage 
their electric consumption and reduce cost to their household expenditure. 
This results in energy and money saving based on real household data. 

12	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
Advanced metering infrastructure are systems that measure, collect, and 
analyze usage, and communicate with metering devices such as electricity 
meters, gas meters, heat meters, and water meters, either on request or on 
a schedule. These systems include hardware, software, communications, 
consumed energy displays and controllers, customer-associated systems, 
Meter Data Management (MDM) software and supplier business systems. 
The network between measurement devices and business systems allows 
collection and distribution of information to customers, suppliers, utility 
companies and service providers. This enables these businesses to 
participate in demand-response services. Consumers can use information 
provided by the system to change their normal consumption patterns to 
take advantage of lower prices. Pricing can be used to curb growth of 
peak consumption. AMI differs from traditional automatic meter reading 
(AMR) in that it enables two-way communications with the meter. Systems 
only capable of meter readings do not qualify as AMI systems [23, 25–27].
1.5	
Smart city and urban economic development
Among the top ten mega cities in India’s on the basis of population 
size in 2011, not a single smart city appears in the list of first four mega 
cities. These cities are considered as engines of economic development 
in India, namely Greater Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata and Chennai. These 
cities especially Greater Mumbai undoubtedly contributed a larger share 
to the GDP of India and also poised for higher contribution in the future. 
Bangalore, Hyderabad and Jaipur are considered as smart cities based on 
a set of criteria discussed earlier. It is probable that converting these first 
four mega cities in India to smart cities may yield a higher contribution 
for the GDP from these cities than at present. Although hypothesis exists 
on how smart city generates wealth and welfare for nations, there is no 
substantial empirical study available in India on smart city and how they 
generate urban economic development. There is no policy debate on this 
subject both in the central government and state governments of India. 
No planning school in India came forward to study this phenomenon. 
However there are studies and documents emerging from Europe and 
United States about the intrinsic connection between smart city and urban 
economic development. Tim Campbell [28] states that the promise of 
competitiveness and economic growth in so-called smart cities is widely 
advertised in Europe and the United States. The promise is focused on global 

	
Geographic information system for smart cities	
13
talent and knowledge economies and not on learning and innovation. But 
to really achieve smart cities that is to create the conditions of continuous 
learning and innovation, his book Going Beyond Smart Cities argues that 
there is a need to understand what is below the surface and to examine 
the mechanisms that affect the way cities learn and then connect together. 
This book draws on quantitative and qualitative data with concrete case 
studies to show how networks already operating in cities are used to foster 
and strengthen connections in order to achieve breakthroughs in learning 
and innovation. His book title means understanding how cities construct, 
convert and manipulate relationships that grow in urban environments. 
Cities discussed in this book include Amman, Barcelona, Bilbao, Charlotte, 
Curitiba, Juarez, Portland, Seattle and Turin illuminate a blind spot in the 
literature. Each of these cities has achieved important transformations, 
and learning has played a key role, one that has been largely ignored in 
academic circles and practice concerning competitiveness and innovation. 
The concept of smart cities offers a revolutionary vision of urban design 
for sustainability. Utilizing the intelligent application of new technologies, 
smart cities also incorporate considerations of social and environmental 
capital in order to transform the life and work of cities. Hassan Al Wayer 
et al [29] brings together papers from leading international experts on the 
transition to smart cities. Drawing upon the experiences of cities in the 
United States, Canada and Europe, the authors describe the definitional 
components, critical insights and institutional means by which we can 
achieve truly smart cities. 
1.6	
Concept of smart people in smart cities
Manuel Da Costa Lobo [30] considers smart city as where smart people 
live. Smart people require an integrative perspective to consider a 
sustainable environment they have to plan for future. Smart people 
understand that associating people around objectives is the way to get 
stronger and get desired results. Sustainability is connected not only with 
ecosystem balance but also with balance among social components and 
between population and social infrastructure. Smart people will consider 
permanent monitoring of services, organizing planning teams at each level 
such as ward, town and region, developing team capacities for dialoguing 
and evaluating alternatives, and finding third solutions where conflicts 
appears. Planning can be annual, 5 years, and 20 years and very long term 

14	
Geographic information system for smart cities
for critical infrastructure of a smart city. Very long-term plan shall consider 
sustainability. Planners must not forget that citizens need both privacy and 
social integration. Participatory urban design of city spaces can find such 
places of interaction. Smart citizens need education in history, ecology, 
technological progress and cultural values. There is a need for continuing 
education and ability to interact with websites.
1.7	
Role of GIS for smart cities
GIS is a technology designed to capture, store, manipulate, analyze and 
visualize spatially referenced data. Most city data are spatially referenced. 
With increasing capability of computer chip, memory, hard disks and 
other hardware every year and innovations such as cloud computing, GIS 
has amassed more efficiency befitting the emerging smart cities. GIS is 
being increasingly used for performing spatial analysis and modelling. 
Traditionally city planners used GIS for mapping for master plans, zonal 
plans, urban land management schemes and urban infrastructure plans. This 
role of computer mapping is evolved into spatial database management 
that can be used by citizen through web-based GIS. Therefore it is possible 
to revisit utility network on the basis of age of parts used for replacement 
or parts maintained last. Given multiple criteria for locating a particular 
industry, it is possible to locate industry in any city with web-based GIS. 
This stage of evolution helped to reclassify variables, overlay maps, find 
object adjacent and many other spatial searches. Some GIS functions are 
built into the software, but many others can be coded and used in GIS.
	
Map data mining is another evolution of GIS in which maps can 
be compared statistically. One can identify coincidence and surface 
comparison. By statistical tests, percentage difference can be found out. 
Descriptive and predictive models can be designed using data mining. 
Result of such study can be transported to another geographical area 
and modelled out with different, say, economic, demographic and urban 
network data. This then can be calibrated for data of the new locations and 
find out error in prediction. 
	
Integrating GIS with intelligent system technologies can significantly 
extend possibilities of GIS. The use of intelligent technologies (knowledge-
based systems, artificial neural networks, fuzzy logic systems, etc.) 
appears in various GIS applications. Knowledge-based technology is used 
for constructing expert systems. Expert systems combine experience, 

	
Geographic information system for smart cities	
15
intuition and judgment to solve ill-structured problems where knowledge 
and data may be incomplete and/or imprecise. A city planner is usually 
faced with such situation. Expert systems can be used in many GIS 
application domains. A number of examples from different domains of 
natural resources and environmental management are presented [31]. 
Such systems combine models, GIS and expert systems in a number of 
customized implementations for specific decision-support problems. 
Expert systems are often used to help configure models and estimate 
parameters. A number of these “intelligent front end systems” or model 
advisors have been developed in the environmental domain [32]. The 
knowledge-based technology can also be useful in implementing spatial 
intelligent agents that would help to solve such problems as locating 
and retrieving spatial information in large networks (and specifically the 
Internet), facilitating the handling of a GIS user interface, implementing 
improved spatial tasks and creating interfaces between GIS and specific 
software packages [33]. 
	
Artificial neural networks (ANN) have been used in GIS for over 
decade. Applications include classifying remote-sensing data [34], 
vegetation and land cover mapping [35], and modelling spatial interaction 
[36, 37]. ANN have several advantages when used as classifiers of 
complex geographic and remotely sensed data. They normally require no 
assumptions on the data distribution and can be trained with relatively 
small sample sets.
	
Fuzzy logic has been widely used to handle imprecision and to reason 
about spatial concepts (e.g., near, high, etc.) in text-based queries [38]. All 
these technologies are useful to make GIS more intelligent and powerful. 
However an intelligent GIS is not only a powerful toolkit, according to 
Andrienko and Andrienko [39]. An intelligent GIS should assist the user in 
the analysis, and this presupposes the following capabilities: the capability 
to understand user’s information-seeking goals, the capability to select and 
visualize appropriate data in a way productive for achieving these goals, 
and the capability to support the user’s analytical activity by using of the 
generated presentations. None of the available GIS software possesses 
such features. In spite of a number of examples how to use intelligent 
system technologies in GIS, there is no general methodology on how to 
implement such systems. In this architecture, an intelligent agent monitors 
events, which occur in the GIS environment, and executes tasks depending 
on user’s actions. 

16	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
Designing a smart new urban centre or converting an existing town 
into a smart city is a very complex task, which can only be accomplished 
by very capable and well-trained professionals probably located in 
universities that cut across many disciplines. This ability on smart city 
creation is now demonstrated by a handful of firms like IBM, Hitachi, 
Toshiba and Mitsubishi and so on in few of their projects. While these 
companies showcase many technologies that help in creating smart cities, 
they never considered the prime importance of GIS in achieving the goal 
that I consider as missed opportunities by these companies. They all feel 
that it is their business of the future. While western world especially the 
European community seems to be keen on smart city, it is not known in 
many developing countries. In India a small minority talk about smart 
cities. There is no smart city policy in countries like India and many others.
	
Creation of a smart city can be accomplished if we have a GIS model of 
a city that truly represents the real world city, and one can study, research, 
experiment and simulate this model to achieve the objective of creating a 
smart city using few of the GIS capabilities discussed as above. It is said if 
you can measure you can plan, if you can plan you can manage and if you 
can manage you can develop a city or convert an existing city to a smart 
city. It means understand a city as much as it is required for smart city 
development, having done that rapid-response planning and management 
is a difficult task that needs to be designed from first principle. There are no 
colonial masters to design Indian civil or administrative service for smart 
cities. None exists. ICT requirement for such task is yet to be developed, 
but many exist in different parts of the world or in the PhD dissertations 
of students of Indian Institute of Technology, School of Planning and 
Architecture New Delhi, Indian Institute of Sciences Bangalore and so on 
in India. For research and development of smart cities, ICT calls for huge 
investment by government in research or purchase of results of research 
that are developed elsewhere for socio-cultural adaptation. Therefore there 
is a market for smart city research and also smart city industries which can 
run into several thousand billions of dollars in future in India which itself 
will push the GDP growth of India. 
	
Designing a smart city in an existing or new town or managing a smart 
city demand enormous spatially referenced database. Hence GIS assumes 
great importance. Development of models that can be used in conjunction 
with GIS can be time consuming. A GIS uses spatial referenced data (say 
with latitude, longitude and elevation) as well as non-spatial data (most 

	
Geographic information system for smart cities	
17
government-collected data such as population census, live stock census, 
forest surveys, hydro geological surveys, economic census, caste census, 
climate data, traffic volume count, water supply statistics and so on) 
and includes operations, which support preliminary spatial analysis in 
GIS with the common purpose of group strategic and tactical decision 
making, planning, managing for development of urban land, other 
natural resources, transportation, and other urban services and utilities 
systems. Simple and complex thematic search-based GIS analysis can be 
used for business locations. Entrepreneurs for potential business projects 
in a smart city can use complex data mining capacity of GIS. If such GIS 
is web based, a businessman can do all his analysis using web-based 
GIS from remote geographic locations thousands of miles away from the 
city. Government of India is in the process of developing a city mapping 
system using GIS over a span of many decades through its many Five 
Year Plans that they call National Urban Information System. With so 
many urban centres, which are now less than 10,000 to be covered by 
GIS, its progress cannot be as fast as we require. Government of India had 
designed GIS standards for making master plans, zonal plans and utility 
network plans with appropriate scale and details. National Informatics 
Centre of India had developed skills to map underground utility and had 
created complete utility mapping of large mega cities like Delhi and 
others with enormous expenditure and time. Government of India as part 
of United Nations’ effort had tried to experiment with global, national, 
state and city observatory to use GIS in conjunction with participatory 
strategic and tactical decision making by people with the collaboration 
of many learned institutions. These are all building blocks that lead us to 
smart city creation.
1.8	
GIS in building model of real world city
All that exists on the ground, below the ground and above the ground should 
be part of GIS for smart cities. Human beings that exist and move around 
in any city need to be portrayed in a city GIS spatially and temporally. 
Unique ID collected as part of Aadhaar Project and Population Registry of 
Government of India provides for this requirement of GIS for smart cities. 
Table 1.3 gives data collected by Aadhaar registrations in Kerala, India, 
and Table 1.4 gives the data collected by Population Register of Census 
2011 in India. This also includes biometric measures of an individual such 

18	
Geographic information system for smart cities
as photographs, iris mapping and ten finger prints. These two data base 
namely Aadhaar and population register can be combined with many other 
relational data base to conduct GIS analyses. 
Table 1.3  Aadhaar variables in Kerala
Collected for Central Government of India
1. Name
2. Gender
3. Date of birth
4. Mother/
Father/ 
Husband/
Guardian 
name
5. Residential 
address: House 
No., house 
name, landmark, 
village/city, 
district, state, pin 
code
6. Phone no / 
mobile no
7. Email Id
8. Introducer’s 
name
9. Linking 
bank name 
and branch, 
A/c no
10. For below 
5-year old, 
guardian’s name
Additional information for Government of Kerala
1. Marital status
2. Category: 
General/SC/
ST/OBC/
OEC
3. Higher 
qualifications: 
PhD/PG/
Graduate/
Diploma /12 
Grade/10 Grade/
Attend School/
Not Attend 
School
4. House 
status: Own/
Rented/ 
Other
5. Handicapped: 
Yes/No, 
Percentage
6. Occupation: 
Government 
Service/
Private Service/
Business/
Agriculture/Self 
Employed/Daily 
Wage Earners/
PSU/Others
7. PAN (Yes/
No) number
8. Election id 
card number
9. Driving 
licence type: 
Yes/No (two 
wheeler/four 
wheeler/both)
10. Driving 
licence number

	
Geographic information system for smart cities	
19
11. PAN Yes/No, 
Number
12. LPG gas 
connection: 
Yes/No, 
Number
13. Ration card: 
Yes/No, Number
14. 
Employment 
reg card Yes/
No, Number
15. NREGA 
Card: Yes/No, 
Number
16. Passport Yes/
No, Number
17. Chiak 
insurance: 
Yes/No, 
Number
Additional information
1. Eye and Iris 
photograph
2. Ten finger 
print
3. Date
4. Pre 
Enrolment 
No.
5. Photograph
Source: Aadhaar Enrolment Form by Akshaya Kerala 2011
Table 1.4  Population register of Census of India 2011
Items of information for National Population Register
1. Name
2. Relationship to head
3. Father’s Name
4. Mother’s name
5. Spouse’s name
6. Sex
7. Date of birth
8. Marital status
9. Place of Birth
10. Nationality as declared
11. Present address of 
usual residence
12. Duration of stay at 
present address
13. Permanent residential 
address
14. Occupation/Activity
15. Educational qualification
Above details to be collected from all usual residents
Photograph, finger print and iris to be collected for usual residents aged 15 years and 
above
Source: Census of Indian 2011
	
Remote sensing using satellites or aircrafts capture land data base on 
different scales used for different purposes. Underground water table can 
also be captured from remote sensing and mapped in GIS. Cadastral data 
records and attribute data of the land owned by people or institutions from 
land schedule are converted to property data base and are used to manage 
property tax collection as part of e-governance using GIS. Land schedule 
records all ownership details and address of the property which can be part 
of GIS. Transportation and utility networks and social infrastructure can 

20	
Geographic information system for smart cities
be captured by GIS with all its attributes and maintenance data with dates. 
	
Cell phone ownership provides a method to capture mobility 
pattern of individuals, subject to certain levels of accuracy. One of the 
smart applications centred on cell phone and remote sensing is directing 
automobiles to nearest available parking space in a city based on real-
time vacancy and real-time location of car in a road. This GIS application 
reduces the petrol consumption, environmental pollution and giving smart 
mobility of a car or bus. 
	
Wikipedia records that 5.6 billion people (i.e. 79.86%) out of 7.012 
billion people in the world in 2011 own a cell phone. In China the ownership 
is 75.32% in June 2012, India 76.32% in May 2012. Ownership is 103.9% 
in United States in June 2012, Indonesia 105.28% in May 2009 and so on. 
Aadhaar and Population Registry of Census 2011 India can be effectively 
used to study mobility of people on an average day. Attribute data on 
income in Aadhaar ascertained using bank records can be utilised to study 
in GIS, mobility by income group on an average day and their preferred 
modes of transport based on distance covered. This can be converted to 
smart mobility in a smart city design. 
	
Banks in India have a project to make 100% population inclusions 
in bank accounts, and they have achieved this target in many districts in 
India. Banks are expected to link with unique identity of Aadhaar of total 
population of India. Creditable achievements have been reached by banks 
in India in core banking and web-based money transaction at a very cheap 
fee under the direction, grant and support of Reserve Bank of India. A Rs 
70,000 million project is in active consideration of Government of India 
to make all Indians below poverty level be owners of cell phones and even 
pay Rs 100 monthly subscription by government subsidy. This will make 
100% ownership of cell phone in India. The objective is to make mobile-
based direct government payments of subsidy and pension to people for 
those working in many government-financed poverty alleviation schemes 
and for people below poverty line. With this, person below poverty line 
can have smart financial transaction in a smart city, and corruption can be 
totally avoided from government servants who disburse money. Let me 
illustrate implications of smart financial transaction in a city by illustrating 
a simple incident of purchase of an air ticket by me to visit my sons in 
Arizona, USA, for Rs 97,910 from Emirates Airlines from Kochi whose 
distance from Calicut is 250 km. I could have transferred money through 
online banking but Emirates Airlines insisted on a demand draft which 

	
Geographic information system for smart cities	
21
cost me Rs 292 as fee, while I could have spent only Rs 6 as a fee for 
transferring money to the bank Account of Emirates. With weekend in 
between, courier took 5 days to deliver demand draft, thereby losing interest 
for 5 days for Emirates and my loss of Rs 286 as a bank fee and a courier 
fee of Rs 25. In addition there was cost incurred on paper, envelope, bank 
officer’s work, and on travelling to visit bank and post office and above all 
spending energy of petroleum, paying parking fee, and contributing to the 
pollution and traffic load of the city as part of ticket purchase. Imagine 1 
million out of 1.2 billion Indians want a demand draft for certain purpose 
in an average day, and see how much money is wasted by the sender and 
recipient and how much it contributed to the pollution load and waste of 
fuel and overcrowding of streets. From this example, Government of India 
should limit the use or even abolish legacy cheque and draft payment, and 
if anybody insists on it in democratic India, a huge penalty amount should 
be imposed on those who insist, as in this case Emirates for using legacy 
methods as punishment; then only smart financial transaction can survive 
in a smart city. It throws up an important role for government to eliminate 
legacy systems from their own service delivery and also from the service 
delivery of all non-government agencies. Abolishing legacy system will 
considerably reduce administrative costs of state government in salary and 
pension and above all corruption of politicians and administrators in India. 
It will make service delivery cheap for the consumers without the burden 
of expenditure for legacy government administration. In Kerala and many 
other states, it accounts for about 80% and above of total revenue of 
government. 
1.9	
Conclusion
The application of GIS in smart cities can produce various benefits:
	
1.	 Smart cities can create smart communities to analyze and find 
issues for the local community and find solutions.
	
2.	 Smart cities produce citizens who are in continuing and life-long 
education.
	
3.	 During the time of economic down turns, smart urban economic 
development can be planned and executed to reverse trends.
	
4.	 Smart cities can identify appropriate representatives for multi-
level local governance as a part of self-organizing society.
	
5.	 Smart cities can reduce resource consumption, notably energy 

22	
Geographic information system for smart cities
and water, hence contributing to reduction in carbon compound 
emission.
	
6.	 Smart cities can improve the utilization of existing infrastructure 
capacity, hence improving quality of life and reducing the need for 
traditional construction projects [40].
	
7.	 Smart cities can make new services available to citizens and 
commuters, such as real-time guidance on how best to exploit 
multiple transportation modalities.
	
8.	 Smart cities can improve commercial enterprises through the 
publication of real-time data on the operation of city services [41].
	
9.	 Smart cities reveal how demands for energy, water and 
transportation peak at a city scale so that city managers can 
collaborate to smoothen these peaks and to improve resilience 
[42]. 
	
Progress in the following technologies can help towns to convert into 
smart cities:
	
1.	 The widespread use of digital sensors and digital control systems 
for the control and operation of urban infrastructure. These include 
traffic sensors, building management systems, digital utility 
meters, and so forth [43].
	
2.	 The growing penetration of fixed and wireless networks that allow 
such sensors and systems to be connected to distributed processing 
centres and for these centres in turn to exchange information 
among themselves.
	
3.	 The development of information management techniques, 
specifically standardized semantic models, which allow the low-
level information to be interpreted by the processing centres, and 
which allow these processing centres to interpret each other’s 
information [44].
	
4.	 Smart city helped the development of both computing power 
and new algorithms that allow these flows of information to 
be analyzed in near “real-time” in order to provide operational 
performance improvement and other insights.
1.10	
References
[1] Washburn, D., Sindhu, U., Balaouras, S., Dines, R. A., Hayes, N. M., 
and Nelson, L. E. (2010). Helping CIOs Understand “Smart City” Initiatives: 

	
Geographic information system for smart cities	
23
Defining the Smart City, Its Drivers, and the Role of the CIO. Cambridge, MA: 
Forrester Research, Inc. Available at http://public.dhe.ibm.com/partnerworld/pub/
smb/smarterplan et/forr_help_cios_und_smart_city_initiatives.pdf.
[2] Giffinger, R., Fertner, C., Kramar, H., Kalasek, R., Pichler-Milanovi, 
N., and Meijers, E. (2007). Smart Cities: Ranking of European Medium-Sized 
Cities. Vienna, Austria: Centre of Regional Science (SRF), Vienna University 
of Technology. Available at http://www.smart- cities.eu/download/smart_cities_
final_report.pdf.
[3] Glaeser, E. L., and Berry, C. R. (2006). Why are smart places getting 
smarter? Taubman Center Policy Briefs, PB-2006-2. Available at http://www.hks.
harvard.edu/rappaport/downloads/policybrief s/brief_divergence.pdf.
[4] Hall, R. E. (2000). The vision of a smart city. In Proceedings of the 
2nd International Life Extension Technology Workshop (Paris, France, Sep 
28). Available at http://www.osti.gov/bridge/servlets/purl/773961- oyxp82/
webviewable/773961.pdf.
[5] Harrison, C., Eckman, B., Hamilton, R., Hartswick, P., Kalagnanam, J., 
Paraszczak, J., and Williams, P. (2010). Foundations for Smarter Cities. IBM 
Journal of Research and Development, 54(4). DOI: 10.1147/JRD.2010.2048257.
 [6] Rios, P. (2008). Creating “the smart city”. Available at http://dspace.
udmercy.edu:8080/dspace/bitstream/10429/20/ 1/2008_rios_smart.pdf.
[7] Partridge, H. (2004). Developing a human perspective to the digital divide 
in the smart city. In Proceedings of the Biennial Conference of Australian Library 
and information Association (Queensland, Australia, Sep 21-24). Available at 
http://eprints.qut.edu.au/1299/1/partridge.h.2.paper.pdf.
[8] Hall, R. E. (2000). The vision of a smart city. In Proceedings of the 2nd 
International Life Extension Technology Workshop, Paris, France, September.
[9] Hartley, J. (2005). Innovation in governance and public services: Past and 
present. Public Money & Management, 25(1), pp. 27–34.
[10] Torres, L., Pina, V., and Royo, S. (2005). E-government and the 
transformation of public administrations in EU countries: Beyond NPM or just a 
second wave of reforms? Online Information Review, 29(5), pp. 531–553.
[11] International Centre for Communications, San Diego State University 
with direction from the California State Department of Transportation (1997). 
Smart Communities Guidebook. How California’s Communities can thrive in the 
Digital Age?
[12] Bryce, M. (2003). Innovation, Broadband and the Smart Community 
Technology Park Perth, 03 05 05 Keynote on the Innovation Festival.
[13] Government of Canada, Ministry of Industry (1999). Connecting 
Canadians, Smart Communities. 

24	
Geographic information system for smart cities
[14] Smart Community International Network (SCIN) www.scin.org 
[15] Smart Communities Guidebook, Pete Wilson, Governor of California, 
1997. 
[16] European Union, Telecities, www.telecities.org (2003). 
[17] European Union, Euro cities, www.eurocities.org (2003). 
[18] Smart Valley, Inc. (1998). Smart Valley. 
[19] Arup (2010). Smart Cities Transforming 21st century city via creative 
use of Technology, First edition published September 2010, London, Hong Kong, 
San Francisco, Sydney, www. Arup.com
[20] Graham, S. and Aurigi, A. (1997). Virtual cities, social polarisation, and 
the crisis in urban public space. Journal of Urban Technology, 4(1), pp. 19–52.
[21] Ishada, T. (ed) (2002). Digital City Koyato. Communications of ACM, 
45(7), pp. 76–78.
[22] Castells, M. (2001). Internet Galaxy. Reflections of the Internet, 
Business, and Society. New York: Oxford University Press.
[23] Glossary provided by U.S. Department of Energy  [10],  Glossary 
provided by US Department of Energy. 
[24] http://www.google.com/hostednews/ap/article/ALeqM5hOYp8N5wgi7
7dKQhKBG6tRmKABUg?docId=c3bb00c0a2a24e55999f138359c25d63
[25] Kelly, William J. (2011). Why Smart Meters Might Be a Dumb Idea, 
Consumers Digest.
[26] http://aaemonline.org/emf_rf_position.html
[27] http://www.bizjournals.com/pacific/news/2012/06/27/kauai-island-
utility-cooperative.html
[28] Campbell, T. (2012). Beyond Smart Cities: How Cities Network, Learn 
and Innovate, Taylor and Francis Group, p.236.
[29] Hassan Al Waer, and Mark Dealin (2012). EarthScan, p.98.
[30] Manuel Da Costa Lobo (2009). REAL CORP 2009 Proceedings/
Tagungsband Sitges, 22-25 April 2009 http://www.corp.at ISBN: 978-3-9502139-
6-6 (CD-ROM); ISBN: 978-3-9502139-7-3 (Print) Editors: Manfred SCHRENK, 
Vasily V. POPOVICH, Dirk ENGELKE, Pietro ELISEI.
[31] Fedra, K. (1995). Decision support for natural resources management: 
models, GIS and expert systems. AI Applications, 9(3), pp. 3–19.
[32] Fedra, K. (1993). Expert systems in water resources simulation and 
optimization. Stochastic hydrology and its use. In J.B. Marco et al. (Eds.) Water 
Resources Systems Simulation and Optimization. Kluwer Academic Applications, 
9(3), 3–19. Publishers, The Netherlands. pp. 397–412.

	
Geographic information system for smart cities	
25
[33] Rodrigues et al. (1995). Development of spatial intelligent agents. In 
Proceedings of the First International Conference on Spatial Multimedia and 
Virtual Reality. Museum of Water, Lisbon, Portugal, pp. 18–20.
[34] Miller, D.M., Kaminsky, E. J. and Rana, S. (1995). Neural network 
classification of remote-sensing data. Computers & Geosciences, 21(3), pp. 377–
386.
[35] Fitzgerald and Lees (1996). Temporal context in floristic classification. 
Computers and Geosciences, 22(9), pp. 981–994.
[36] Wu, X.P. and Zhou, Y.X. (1993). Reserve estimation using neural 
network techniques. Computers & Geosciences, 19(4), pp. 567–575.
[37] Openshaw, S., and Turton, I. (1994). Building New Spatial Interactive 
Models Using Genetic Programming. School of Geography, University of Leeds, 
Leeds, UK. 
[38] Wu, X.P., and Zhou, Y.X. (1993). Reserve estimation using neural 
network techniques. Computers & Geosciences, 19(4), pp. 567–575.
[39] Andrienko, G., and Andrienko, N. (1999). Making a GIS Intelligent: 
Common GIS Project View. AGILE’1999 Conference, Rome, pp. 19–24.
[40] Stockholm (2006). Stockholm forsoket, Facts and Results from the 
Stockholm Trial, see http://www.stockholmsforsoket.se/upload/Hushall_eng.pdf 
[41] Singapore (2011), Singapore Live Traffic, http://www.livetraffic.sg/
mobileapp.
[42] Peterborough 2011 http://www.eweekeurope.co.uk/news/peterborough-
aims-to-be-most-sustainable-uk-city-thanks-to-tech-5898, 
http://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=xCrYnLU_EK0
[43] Torres, L., Pina, V., and Royo, S. (2005). E-government and the 
transformation of public administrations in EU countries: Beyond NPM or just a 
second wave of reforms? Online Information Review, 29(5), pp. 531–53.
[44] Hollands, R. G. (2008). Will the real smart city please stand up? City, 
12(3), pp. 303–320.

Abstract: Planning of urban centres in India has been of concern since pre-historic times, 
evidences of which can be seen in the grid pattern of Indus valley civilization to the modern 
day planned city of Chandigarh. All through the period, planning for the poor has been widely 
neglected resulting in organic growth in close proximity to or within the planned areas. There 
is a need for the change in perception of India largely living in rural areas to contemporary 
India living in urban centres in sub-civic conditions. With majority of the population likely to 
reside in urban centres, the way planning has been done needs to change. 
	
The planning approach has been largely reactive. The adaptation of international urban 
philosophy, be it related to health crisis or social crisis or other hazards, has been rather 
delayed. There is a need for a radical shift in the approach from the existing piecemeal land 
development to holistic proactive planning based on technology, sensitivity to environment 
and efforts for it to be less bureaucratic. The need of the hour is to make smart plans for 
smart cities, which in turn requires the entire process of urbanisation to be smarter. Planning 
for the smart cities and smart urbanisation can be based on use of information technology 
and geographic information systems; a futuristic approach aiming to achieve affordable, 
sustainable living conditions not for a few elite but for the urban centres as a whole. Again, 
the target should not be a few megacities but smaller towns as well. To achieve this, National 
Urban Information Systems under the ambit of National Spatial Database Infrastructure and 
also National GIS should be readily adopted and used as a tool for implementation and 
management.
	
The basis for achieving above would be technology, which would not only facilitate 
churning out of plans at a faster pace but also help in providing liveable smart urban centres 
to posterity.
Key words: smart urbanisation, smart city, GIS, National GIS, NUIS, NSDI, five-year plans.
2.1	
Introduction
Urbanisation has been pivotal in the socio-cultural milieu of India since 
prehistoric times, though with some discontinuation. It continues to play a 
significant role in the emergence of India in the world. Since the emergence 
of western powers, India has been perceived as a country of villages; in 
reality, which is also a land of towns and cities. With more than 7000 
settlements categorised as urban by the Census of India in 2011 and more 
2
GIS for smart urbanisation
MAHAVIR and PRABH BEDI

	
GIS for smart urbanisation	
27
than 41 per cent of its population likely to be residing in urban centres by 
2030, India will be among the most urbanised nation in the world. Rapid and 
increasing urbanisation though has its shortcomings which is the cause of 
crumbling of the urban form and ever widening disparity in infrastructure, 
social, economic and environmental conditions. Intervention and action 
required on part of the governing agencies needs to be more rapid and 
proactive than the passive urbanisation. The need is to shift the focus 
from isolated development of high thrust areas to the regions in totality, 
from individual or a group of urban centres to the process of urbanisation. 
The non-technological dependent form of governance has further led to 
the plummeting urban conditions. The advancements in technology and 
efforts of the government like the National Urban Information System 
(NUIS) need to be adopted in the routine, with absolute political fervour. 
2.2	
Urbanisation
Urbanisation, derived from the Latin ‘Urbs’ – a term used by the Romans to 
a city, is the increase in the proportion of people living in towns and cities. 
Urbanisation occurs because people move from rural areas (countryside) 
to urban areas (towns and cities) or when existing rural areas get a 
status of ‘urban’. This usually occurs when a country is still developing. 
Urbanisation is the spatial manifestation of urban growth. Urban growth 
is the rate at which the urban population grows and is different from 
urbanisation. The term describes the increase of this proportion over time 
largely due to the migration of people from rural to urban areas in order to 
establish a better way of life. 
	
Urbanisation is not merely a modern phenomenon, but a rapid and 
historic transformation of human social roots on a global scale, whereby 
predominantly village culture is being rapidly replaced by predominantly 
urban culture. The last major change in settlement patterns was the 
accumulation of  hunter-gatherers  into villages many thousand years 
ago. Village culture is characterised by common bloodlines, intimate 
relationships and communal behaviour whereas urban culture is 
characterised by distant bloodlines, unfamiliar relations and competitive 
behaviour. This unprecedented movement of people is forecast to continue 
and intensify in the next few decades, mushrooming cities to sizes 
incomprehensible only a century ago. Thus, urbanisation is (primarily) 
the movement of population from rural to urban areas and the resulting 

28	
Geographic information system for smart cities
increasing proportion of a population that resides in urban rather than rural 
places.
2.3 
Urbanisation as defined in India
The National Commission on Urbanisation describes urbanisation as 
a process whereby the surplus population of workers from rural areas 
resettles in urban centres where non-agricultural job opportunities are 
available. Urbanisation is the physical growth of urban areas as a result of 
rural migration and even suburban concentration into cities. Urbanisation 
is closely linked to modernisation, industrialisation and the sociological 
process of rationalisation. Urbanisation can describe a specific condition 
at a set time that is the proportion of total population or area in cities or 
towns.
	
The perception of urbanisation varies from person to person and region 
to region; however, the true essence of urbanisation is the rapid growth of 
population in the urban areas and economic activities which bring about 
development of towns. Migration from rural to urban areas is an important 
factor for urbanisation. Usually, there are relatively better facilities for 
health, education, employment opportunities and access to services and 
higher standard of living in the urban areas in comparison with rural areas 
which is an impetus for migration.
2.4	
History of India’s urbanisation
India has a long tradition of urbanisation which started with Indus Valley 
civilisation dating back to 3000 BC. The post-Vedic period, Mauryan 
period and the Mughal period are considered as watermarks in urban 
growth. Although few urban centres such as hill stations, port cities, 
cantonment towns, etc., emerged during the British period, this period is 
considered as a period of urban stagnation due to exploitative economic 
policy of British rulers.
	
The post-independence period has been experiencing dynamic 
urbanisation. The period is notable for rapid urbanisation particularly of 
one lakh and million-plus cities. There has been about six times increase 
in India’s urban population from 62 million in 1951 to 377 million in 2011. 
The proportion of urban population to total population has increased from 
17.6 per cent in 1951 to 31.2 per cent in 2011 [1]. The number of cities 

	
GIS for smart urbanisation	
29
with a million-plus population has changed from just 4 to 53 in the same 
period causing changes in the urban scenario.
	
Major changes that have occurred in India’s urban scene in the post-
independence period are (a) influx of refugees and their settlements, 
primarily in urban areas in northern India, (b) building of new planned 
cities like Chandigarh, Bhubaneswar and Gandhinagar, (c) new industrial 
cities and townships near existing cities, (d) rapid growth of one lakh and 
million-plus cities, (e) stagnation and in some cases decline of small towns, 
(f) massive growth of squatter settlements and spread of slums in million-
plus cities, (g) emergence of rural–urban fringe and (h) introduction of city 
planning and the improvement of civic amenities [2]. 
	
If the main reason for migration to urban areas is that job opportunities 
are productive and lead to gainful employment, urbanisation becomes a 
catalyst for economic development. If, however, urbanisation is merely a 
process of transfer of rural poverty to an urban environment, it results in a 
concentration of misery. The quality of physical and social infrastructure 
of the urban areas perpetuates the prevalent condition.
2.5	
Challenges as resultant of urbanisation in India
With rapid urbanisation have come numerous problems, which need to 
be handled on a war footing. The most serious problem is that of urban 
poverty. Urban poor face the problems of housing, water, sanitation, 
health, education, etc. About 93 million people were living in urban slums 
in 2011 [3], which constitute 24.7 per cent of the total urban population 
of 377.1 million [4]. The challenges are faced in all urban centres but are 
more acute in the metros.
	
There are other looming problems like of shortage of safe drinking 
water, improper or non-existent sanitation, solid waste management, 
environmental pollution, transportation, steep land prices, deteriorating 
social structure, increasing crime, ever-widening gap between rich and 
poor and inadequate social amenities. Shortage of housing, congestion, 
haphazard growth, and uncontrolled sprawl on agricultural land are 
other problems faced in urban areas. These need to be addressed by the 
governing agencies through creation of appropriate plans and policies and 
stringent implementation.
	
As laid out in the Constitution of the country, ‘urban’ in India is a 
state subject. Resultant from this, the impetus given to urban planning 

30	
Geographic information system for smart cities
and development at the national level is reactive and piecemeal. The 
problems arising out of urbanisation have been acknowledged by the 
national planning organisations from time to time; however, enough 
mitigative measures have not been suggested. The national five-year 
plans, their programmes and policies do not demonstrate a comprehensive 
appreciation of the urban problems and neither do the plans provide a 
coherent framework for dealing with increasing metropolitanisation and 
stagnating small towns.
2.6	
Urbanisation policy through national plans
Since independence, large-scale migration from across the border resulted 
in the acute shortage of housing and resulted in haphazard development 
and increasing congestion particularly in large urban areas. The urban-
planning efforts by government were mainly centralised. The need for an 
integrated approach to rural and urban planning in a regional framework 
was felt in initial five-year plans. However, these realisations never 
translated into policies. 
	
The Third Five Year Plan (1961–1966) saw the diffusing of planning 
activities from centre to state. However due to financial constraints, 
the dependence on the central government continued during the Fourth 
Five Year Plan (1969–1974) with the setting up of Housing and Urban 
Development Corporation (HUDCO Ltd.) for financing the construction 
of houses.
	
The Fifth and Sixth Five Year Plans (1974–1979 and 1980–1985) 
had separate chapters and sub-chapters on urbanisation and urban affairs. 
While the initiatives were commendable, they lacked the understanding 
and need for holistic approach to urban problems. The objectives of the 
policy were self-contradictory. While small towns were to be encouraged, 
the metropolitan cities were also promoted which ultimately resulted in 
major share of the funds being allocated to the metropolitan cities.
	
The Seventh Five Year Plan (1985–1990) emphasised the need for 
integrated development of small and medium towns and need for slow 
growth of metropolitan towns. The plan also laid thrust on the strengthening 
of the municipal administration. The policy statements have been liberal 
on advice but deficient in terms of allocation of financial resources for 
urban development.

	
GIS for smart urbanisation	
31
	
The Eighth Five Year Plan (1992–1997) recognised the ever-widening 
gap between infrastructure provision and its demand. The plan again re-
iterated the need for regional spatial planning approach for integrated 
socio-economic and spatial development. The Plan saw the launch of 
Urban Mapping Scheme covering 50 towns from different states in two 
phases with the objective of generating large scale (1:2500) urban base 
maps from aerial photographs.
	
The Ninth Five Year Plan (1997–2002) recognised the role of the 
government as that of a facilitator. The Plan aimed at development of urban 
areas as economically efficient, socially equitable and environmentally 
sustainable entities. The Plan promoted private participation in the 
provision of public infrastructure. The guidelines for Urban Development 
Plan Formulation and Implementation (UDPFI Guidelines) were 
submitted by Institute of Town Planners, India (ITPI) in 1999. During this 
period, a sub-committee under the chairmanship of Chief Planner, The 
Town and Country Planning Organisation (TCPO) submitted its report, for 
consideration in the Tenth Five Year Plan, in September 2002 on NUIS to 
Planning Commission.
	
The Tenth Five Year Plan (2002–2007) saw the emphasis on 
infrastructure development in both rural and urban areas. In line with its 
policy, the Ministry of Urban Development launched Jawaharlal Nehru 
National Urban Renewal Mission (JnNURM) in 2005, so as to strengthen 
urban governance and augment urban infrastructure. A scheme started in 
1979 as Integrated Development of Small and Medium Towns (IDSMT) 
was subsumed into this new scheme. In the year 2006, the Ministry of 
Urban Development launched NUIS for the creation of urban spatial 
database and to make it the basis of planning and municipal administration.
	
The Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007–2012) reiterates the need for 
National Urbanisation Policy. The role of the government has been 
recognised as that of a facilitator. The Plan lays thrust on interlinking 
the planning framework comprising of national-level spatial strategies, 
regional-level strategy plans, metropolitan regional strategy plans 
and city- and ward-level land use and development plans. These plans 
should be interlinked at three levels, i.e. perspective plans (20–25 years), 
infrastructure development plans (5 years) and the national five-year plans. 
The Plan observed the slow progress made in the implementation of NUIS 
and has suggested that “all stakeholders of the scheme need to speed up 
the implementation…” [5].

32	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
Much of the confusion on urbanisation is a result of the centre–state 
relations. The Constitution of India has laid down that ‘urban’ is a state 
subject, in which only the state governments are empowered to enact 
legislations related to urban. All the existing laws as town planning acts, 
land acquisition acts, rent control acts and municipal acts have been framed 
by state governments and differ from state to state. The state governments 
are entitled to drawing up policy statements on urbanisation; however, 
most states experience an intellectual void in this aspect.
	
Following the changing international urban planning philosophy, the 
government is proposing the development of the smart cities. The Report 
of the Steering Committee on Urbanisation recommends that in the Twelfth 
Five Year Plan the foundation of urban-planning systems should be laid 
that are in consonance with the 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments 
[6] and reflect the five elements of the smart growth principle, namely 
(a) true and active citizen participation, (b) focus on mixed land use, 
(c) provision of mixed income housing integrated with transportation, (d) 
increased use of public transport including non-motorised transport and 
(e) integration of peri-urban and rural areas with cities and metropolitan 
areas. 
2.7	
Just smart cities or smart urbanisation
The concept of smart cities has emerged in order to mitigate the problems 
arising out of (unplanned) urbanisation. The intent of the smart cities is to 
make urbanisation more inclusive, bringing together formal and informal 
sectors, connecting urban cores with peripheries, delivering services for 
the rich and the poor alike, and integrating the migrants and the poor 
into the city. Creating smart cities is about rethinking cities as inclusive, 
integrated and liveable. 
	
The current trend in smart cities creation is twofold: one focused on 
the existing cities and adapting these to be ‘smart’ and the other set are 
those cities that are being created from scratch. In both cases information 
and communication technology (ICT) is used as a means of achieving the 
‘smartness’.
	
The concept of the smart city is coming together with the terms like 
digital city, intelligent city and smart growth. The focus of a digital and 
intelligent city is on ICT infrastructure. Smart growth concentrates growth 
in compact walkable urban centres to avoid sprawl. It also advocates 

	
GIS for smart urbanisation	
33
compact, transit-oriented, walkable, bicycle-friendly land use, including 
neighbourhood schools, complete streets, and mixed-use development with 
a range of housing choices [7]. The distinguishing characteristic of a smart 
city is its focus on sustainability [8], environment, socio-cultural, socio-
economic and governance and participation of the people in the making of 
the city extensively based on ICT.
	
A digital city is a connected community that combines broadband 
communication and service-oriented computing infrastructure based 
on open industry standards to meet the needs of government, citizens 
and business. The spatial extent of digital communities extends from a 
neighbourhood to a city to a multi-million metropolis.
	
An intelligent city is constructed as multi-dimensional agglomeration 
combining three main dimensions [9]. These dimensions relate to the 
intelligence and creativity of individuals living and working in the city, the 
collective intelligence of city’s population that is the capacity of the people 
and communities to evolve towards higher order complexity and harmony 
and lastly the artificial intelligence embedded in the physical environment 
like the communication infrastructure, digital spaces and online problem-
solving tools available to city’s population. All intelligent cities are digital 
cities but all digital cities may not be intelligent [10]. The difference lies 
in the problem-solving abilities of the intelligent cities. 
	
A smart city is based on smart mobility, smart living, smart people, 
smart economy, smart environment and smart governance, thus covering 
all aspects of sustainable growth, namely, transportation, social, citizens, 
fiscal, environment and governance interlinked therein being the land and 
its use. The emphasis of smart mobility is on mass transportation so as to 
reduce traffic congestion and air pollution, of smart living that is culturally 
vibrant, safe and healthy, of smart people is on aware community which 
participates and deliberates on the development required and taking 
place in their community, of smart economy that thinks globally and acts 
locally and is innovative and productive, of smart environment based 
on the concepts of green energy, green buildings, green infrastructure 
[11] and green urban planning and of smart governance that is based 
on ICT and eGovernance, is transparent and open and is an enabler and 
facilitator [12].
	
The digital city provides the ICT and digital space to the citizens, and 
the intelligent city in addition provides the problem-solving tools, whereas 
the smart city is perceived to be an embodiment of all the aspects that are 

34	
Geographic information system for smart cities
vital for building a healthy city thereby focusing on sustainable socio-
cultural, environmentally sensitive and economically advanced centres 
using ICT as a tool for transparent governance.
	
The backbone of a smart city is the ‘networked infrastructure’ and 
its utilisation to improve physical, socio-economic, socio-cultural and 
political efficiency to enable urban development. The term infrastructure 
here implies business services, housing, leisure and lifestyle services based 
on ICTs like mobile and fixed phones, satellite TVs, computer networks, 
e-commerce and Internet services thereby creating a wired city.
	
A city can be defined as ‘smart’ when investments in human and 
social capital and traditional (transport) and modern communication 
infrastructure fuel sustainable economic development and a high quality 
of life, with a wise management of natural resources, through participatory 
action and engagement. A smart city is not just the one which is based on 
ICT, but the one that is environmentally sustainable, socially progressive 
and economically beneficial to the stakeholders.
	
Being still at the experimental stage, the concept of smart city is to 
develop and promote smart development in one city at a time. If this 
concept is implemented with cities in isolation, it will lead to the emergence 
of smart pockets of urban centres with higher level and quality of facilities 
and infrastructure, like the earlier emergence of metropolitan centres, due 
to concentration of amenities and facilities in such centres. This approach 
is myopic in its deliverance. 
	
The need of the hour is to look at smart urbanisation, where in the 
focus should be on having a holistic view of the (urban) settlement pattern. 
Smart should be perceived as achieving sustainable development based 
on smart economy, mobility, environment, people and governance for the 
settlements in tandem with each other and not in isolation.
2.8	
GIS-based smart urbanisation
With the unprecedented growth being experienced in India, its manifestation 
in rapid urbanisation and resultant problems, coming of age of the existing 
policies or lack of same, the need is creation of a national urbanisation 
policy within the ambit of geo-spatial regional framework. The planning 
for urban settlements has to graduate from a cosmetic ‘GIS Mapping’ 
approach to a comprehensive geo-spatial analysis and solution approach 
[13]. The non ‘geo-spatial’ approach to planning for urban India, be it at 

	
GIS for smart urbanisation	
35
the national or at the lowest level of hierarchy [13], needs a complete shift 
to the use of spatial technology, geographic information systems (GIS) 
and related advancements as a routine process. 
	
GIS integrates hardware, software, procedures, data and people for 
capturing, managing, analyzing, and displaying all forms of geographically 
referenced information. GIS allows viewing, understanding, questioning, 
interpreting and visualizing data in many ways that reveal relationships, 
patterns and trends in the form of maps, reports and charts. It helps in 
delivering creation of multiple scenarios in time by looking at data in a 
way that is quickly understood and easily shared, thereby enabling timely 
decision making.
	
GIS and related technologies like remote sensing and GPS can be used 
for accurately mapping of existing settlement patterns at national, state 
and regional levels. This should include mapping of not only the cities and 
towns but also the Special Economic Zones (SEZs), new townships – both 
private and public sector – and the peripheral areas of urban centres which 
may be unauthorised and informal. 
	
Large portions of Indian landmass are devoid of urban activities. With 
41 per cent of India’s population likely to reside in urban centres by 2030 
[14], there is a likelihood of increase in the size of existing urban centres 
as well as an increase in the number of urban centres. For this reason, it 
is of utmost importance to map the non-urbanised and peripheral urban 
areas accurately; hence, mapping of whole of the country. In this regards, 
National Spatial Database Infrastructure (NSDI) can be a vital basis. The 
mapping of these areas would enable in identifying the potential areas 
of urbanisation. The accurate mapping will not only help in achieving 
and conserving the environmentally sensitive areas but will also help in 
containing the mushrooming of organic growth areas and controlling the 
skyrocketing land prices.
	
The National Commission on Urbanisation (NCU) had, way back in 
1980s, attempted to identify the Spatial Priority Urban Regions (SPURs) 
[15] in the country (Fig. 2.1). 
	
These 49 SPURs were based on a study of then-existing (urban) 
settlement patterns, areas rich in agricultural and other natural resources, 
water bodies, etc. On similar lines, the use of GIS with today’s access 
to remotely sensed data can help identifying large areas suitable for 
future urbanisation – both for expansion and for adding new areas, much 
more accurately and convincingly. This would enable the respective 

36	
Geographic information system for smart cities
state governments and the central government, in case of mega projects, 
to encourage urbanisation in otherwise backward areas by promoting 
concentration of population. This in turn can help the respective State 
Planning Commissions and the Central Planning Commission in locating 
economic decisions. Similarly, this could enable the planning decision 
makers to provide for disincentives in the areas identified to be over 
urbanised, i.e., beyond the ‘smart’ limits. 
Figure 2.1  Spatial Priority Urban Regions (SPURS) identified by the NCU (NCU, 1988)

	
GIS for smart urbanisation	
37
	
The concept of SPURs is to identify such areas that are not good for 
agriculture and are not environmentally sensitive, hence those areas where 
input of economic activities will lead to development. The adoption of 
the concept of SPURs which is based on GIS can help in identification of 
areas that are suitable for urbanisation. Smart urbanisation would imply 
where the settlement pattern is balanced, the region if demarcated is 
environmentally sustainable and economically viable. The periodicity of 
SPURs should be as the perspective plans (15–20 years), with a re-look 
and modification, if any, in every 10 years.
	
Locating the major transportation and investment corridors like the 
Delhi–Mumbai Industrial Corridor (DMIC) and consequential urbanisation 
all around could be manipulated towards achieving smart urbanisation. 
Use of visualising capabilities of GIS would enable generating multiple 
scenarios by changing the various parameters, be it spatial, social, 
economic and political. Use of GIS would make relevant the creation of 
and enable the functioning of State Commissions Urbanisation, on lines of 
one established by the state of Rajasthan.
	
The concept of smart urbanisation needs to be look at from a regional 
perspective. The ‘smart’-ness needs to be well spread out spatially 
rather than being concentrated in selected urban centres or selected 
localities within towns and cities.  In the case of DMIC, for example, 
24 investment regions and industrial areas have been identified on the basis 
of an equitable distribution among the six states involved [16]. Apart from 
the areas having investment attractions, this distribution also takes care of 
the areas where there is a need for development to address problems of 
poverty and under-development. Spatial variations between the industrial 
and general development among all (88) the districts of the DMIC were 
further divided into three zones (A, B and C), based on their high, medium 
and low status. It is easy to visualize such an analysis with the help of GIS 
and any resultant urbanisation would be ‘smart’.
	
The Government of India’s scheme, National Urban Information 
Systems, which is based on geo-spatial technology, can go a long way 
in building smart cities and contribute towards smart urbanisation. 
The scheme is about the creation of spatial information of all the 
urban centres of India, which would be used as an input for planning 
of the respective urban centres apart from being a vital source of 
information for the purpose of municipal administration. The scheme 
is now embarking on the second stage of creation of the spatial data for 

38	
Geographic information system for smart cities
4000 urban centres. The scheme comprises of two major components, 
namely, Urban Spatial Information System (USIS) and National Urban 
Data Bank and Indicators (NUDBI), thereby having a spatial as well as 
non-spatial component to it. 
	
For the creation of smart urbanisation, just NUIS may be limiting 
and would require integration of NUIS with other information systems 
like DISNIC (District Information System of NIC), state SDIs into 
National GIS and NSDI, with either playing a more pivotal role. NUIS 
will provide the database for the urban areas and to some extent the 
periphery as identified by the respective state nodal agencies. Whereas, 
for the identification of the SPURs, the non-urban areas also need to 
be mapped as these are the areas where potential will be identified, 
whether it is in the periphery of the existing urban areas or close to the 
mineral resources or backward areas identified for development for the 
upliftment of such a region.
	
The existing geo-spatial data of the urban centres and its demarcated 
periphery with timely updates need be the basis of smart cities. This 
database can be expanded to the non-urbanised areas and form the vital 
input to smart urbanisation. The urbanisation policy based on GIS data can 
lead to broad allocation of land for future urbanisation and also demarcation 
of such areas that are to be permanently prevented or discouraged from 
urbanisation.
	
GIS-fication of the non-urban areas and eventual integration with the 
urban areas’ data can be achieved through National GIS. National GIS 
would be a fundamental component of India’s planning and development 
infrastructure [17] to be adopted by all ministries and at all levels. National 
GIS is envisaged to promote local, state and national governance and 
create tremendous opportunities for improving decision making.
	
Smart urbanisation would include not only the smart cities, but 
would direct urbanisation towards alternative and preferred locations 
in case  when  a city reaches its saturation point. Under the smart 
urbanisation policy, it would be important to contain the size of the 
settlements rather than letting it grow into unmanageable centres 
bursting at seams. This can be done by governance focused on creating 
urban-like facilities and infrastructure in rural areas (PURA) [18]. 
GIS can in fact prove to be an excellent tool in picking up areas or 
large regions where PURA (Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural 
Areas) could be exploited in changing the migration pattern and in 

	
GIS for smart urbanisation	
39
turn, the urbanisation pattern. SPURs and the PURA must go hand in 
glove, as only then region would become sustainable. The cluster of 
villages that  experience  change (rural to urban) due to  provision  of 
urban amenities would thus be subjected to urbanisation that is ‘smart’. 
The GIS would help in the identification of not only the villages that 
form a cluster, but also the location of cluster itself in the context of 
an overall settlement pattern and the SPUR. Under smart urbanisation, 
smart cities should grow everywhere and not just in selected cities 
and towns like the earlier model where thrust has been on some cities 
resulting in the metropolitisation of a few.
	
Seemingly non-spatial schemes and programmes of the government 
like the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(MGNREGA) also shape the way people agglomerate and/or migrate to 
urban areas. GIS can help in big way visualising the spatial dimensions of 
the same at a regional scale and, in turn, help governments in proactively 
pushing (or otherwise) the scheme in preferred regions.
	
As described in the introductory parts of this chapter, migration still 
is the major contributor to urbanisation in India. It is totally unplanned, 
passive and in response to the various socio-economic, infrastructural, 
ethnic, political compulsions back home. As said earlier, GIS can help 
visualising the spatial impacts of these situations and migratory patterns 
and in turn help planning for urbanisation proactively. The national and 
regional spatio-economic policies could also be directed towards achieving 
this directed ‘smart’ urbanisation; if not, unplanned, unannounced, 
unvisualised flux of people with ‘non-smart’ abilities, desires, aspirations 
and requirements would continue to increase. The best of the smart cities, 
with best of the GIS supporting them, can lead to failure in the absence of 
the directed smart urbanisation.
2.9	
Conclusion
Urbanisation is coterminous with growth and development. Urbanisation 
has been happening primarily due to concentration of economic activities at 
some locations, leading to accumulation of population. This accumulation 
has largely resulted in organic growth of cities both vertical and horizontal, 
with some level of intervention by government authorities since the British 
period. The concentration of population has resulted in problems linked to 
congestion, socio-cultural, health and environment. The efforts to mitigate 

40	
Geographic information system for smart cities
these have been reactive rather than proactive with pre-emptive problems.
	
With the changing face of urban planning philosophy and the 
advancements in the technological arena, it is essential for the government 
to adapt and adopt these changes with focus on building the capacity of 
its human capital in such areas. It is essential to have a micro and a macro 
view of the problems that are arising due to urbanisation. It is further more 
important that the solution to these problems be not focused on some select 
settlements by building and developing some settlements as ‘smart’, but 
address the whole issue holistically, looking at the settlement pattern, both 
urban and rural, thereby addressing ‘smart urbanisation’. 
	
As smart cities are being technology driven with key focus on 
sustainability, likewise, for smart urbanisation GIS and related technologies 
should be used, which will be time saving and enhance quality decision 
making. Various existing urban and rural schemes should be used towards 
achieving this and should be further integrated within the National GIS 
program of the government to achieve smart urbanisation for sustainable 
living.
2.10	
References
[1] Dubey, R.N. (2010). Urbanisation and Urban Planning in India: Vision 
and Reality, Shree Natraj Prakashan, India.
[2] Ramachandran, R. (1998). Urbanisation and Urban Systems in India, 
Oxford University Press, London.
[3] Wikipedia.com (February 2013). Slums, Retrieved February 07, 2013 
from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slum
[4] Chandramauli, C. (2011). Rural Urban Distribution of Population, 
Government of India, New Delhi.
[5] Government of India (2008). Eleventh Five Year Plan.
[6] Government of India, Planning Commission (2012), Report of the 
Steering Committee on Urbanisation, Twelfth Five Year Plan.
[7] Wikipedia.com (2012). Smart Growth, Retrieved December 28, 2012 
from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smart_growth
[8] Hollands, R. G. (2008). ‘Will the real smart city please stand up?’, City: 
Analysis of Urban Trends, Culture, Theory, Policy, Action 12(3), pp. 303–320.
[9] Komninos, N. (2008). Intelligent Cities and Globalization of Innovation 
Networks, Routledge, London and New York.

	
GIS for smart urbanisation	
41
[10]Komninos, N. (2002). Intelligent Cities: Innovation, Knowledge Systems 
and Digital Spaces, Spon Press, London.
[11] Nathwani, J., and Blackstock, J. (2012). ‘A report on the outcomes of the 
Equinox Summit: Energy 2030’ University of Watreloo, Canada
[12] Cohen, B. (2012). What exactly is a smart city, Retrieved January 04, 
2013, from http://www.fastcoexist.com/1680538/what-exactly-is-a-smart-city
[13] Mahavir (2010). Geo-spatial vision or lack of it for urban India, SPACE, 
The SPA Journal of Planning & Architecture, 15(1), January–July, 2010.
[14] Vassigh, A. and Hove vom, T. (2012). Urban population growth between 
1950 and 2030, Retrieved January 06, 2013 from http://www.citymayors.com/
statistics/urban-population-intro.html
[15] National Commission on Urbanisation, Ministry of Urban Development 
(1988). Report of the National Commission on Urbanisation, vol. II, part I, 
Chapter 2, Map 6, August 1988, pp. 51–52.
[16] Singh, H. B. (2012). Delhi–Mumbai Industrial Corridor Region: Spatial 
Planning Strategy, in Spatio-economic Development Record, 19(5), September–
October, 2012, New Delhi.
[17] Government of India (2011). Establishment of National GIS under 
Indian National GIS Organisation, India.
[18] Government of India, Rural.nic.in (December 2009) PURA, http://rural.
nic.in/annualrep0405/chapter6.pdf accessed on December 24, 2009.

Abstract: Statistically, cities occupy only about 2% of the earth’s surface but consume about 
70% of the total energy produced and emit about 80% of the green house gases (GHG), 
and generate commensurate emissions and wastes. As per a study by the United Nation 
Development Programme (UNDP), the extent of urbanization in the developed nations has 
almost stabilized in the last four decades, while the developing world is set to witness high 
rates of urbanization in the next two decades. Considering that a larger share of the world’s 
population resides in the developing nations, the resulting increase in emissions and wastes 
is therefore likely to be formidable. 
	
Driven by economic compulsions, nevertheless cities are perceived to be the driving 
force behind any national economy. It is in mankind’s self-interest to utilize nature’s immense 
bounty (enough for everyone’s need, but not for everyone’s greed, in the oft-quoted words 
of Mahatma Gandhi) in a rational and sustainable manner. When development, an outcome 
of economic needs, occurs without an appropriate base map of the natural resources and 
local topography, with little regard to environmental constraints, it often leads to irreversible 
ecological damage. 
	
It is therefore necessary to have a fair assessment of the quantum of the required 
resources and their distribution in the vicinity in order to work out the capital investments for 
their development and recurring expenditure towards their regular maintenance. This is hence 
the right time to take stock of the environmental impact of the imminent urbanization in the 
developing countries and accordingly adopt suitable tools and techniques for urban planning 
such that its economic development is not lost in the process. The utility and contribution of 
satellite images and remotely sensed terrestrial data towards sustainable urban planning is 
therefore reviewed in this chapter, so that the ‘environment vs. development’ debate could be 
turned to a ‘development in the wake of environment’ dialogue.
Key words: geo-referencing, image interpretation, change detection, image analysis, GIS, 
urban planning.
3.1	
Background – role of satellite images towards 
sustainable urbanisation 
Cities have come to be accepted as the defining ecological phenomenon of 
the 21st century. It is held that ‘cities are formed because of the economics 
of opportunity, innovation and agglomeration efficiencies. However, 
while cities provide expanding economic opportunities in the new global 
3
Satellite images for sustainable urbanisation
PRIYA MENDIRATTA and SHIRISH GEDAM

	
Satellite images for sustainable urbanisation	
43
economy, they are also big contributors to environmental disruption, both 
within and beyond their boundaries’ [1].
	
Cities, composed of dense networks of artificial structures, are 
characterised by permanent expansion and growth. They are also the point 
source of the majority of the anthropogenic pollution. It is estimated that 
while only 1.2 per cent of the earth’s surface is presently urbanised, over 
50 per cent of the world’s population reside in these areas. Fuelled by several 
decades of agglomeration, the pace of migration to the cities is accelerating 
such that by the year 2025, 60 per cent of the world’s population may live 
in cities [2]. However, if current trends in population density continue and 
all areas with high probabilities of urban expansion undergo change, then 
by 2030 urban land cover will increase by 1.2 million km2, nearly tripling 
the global urban land area circa 2000. Understanding and monitoring what 
happens in this limited area of human activity therefore becomes critical 
in working towards sustainable development [3].
	
The city-region concept envisages the city as a part of a larger 
region which provided for the city’s needs in terms of food grains and 
energy as also to recycle its wastes. However, with global economies and 
indomitable supply chains, neither consumption patterns nor the effects of 
environmental disruption are localised or restrained by political boundaries. 
The regional boundaries need to be continuously revised to contain the 
expanding urban boundaries and ecological footprint. Eventually, the 
entire region is urbanised and acts as a source of pollution, with little area 
to act as sink. 
	
The environmental impacts of urbanisation in the developing world are 
manifest in deterioration of air quality, water quality and quantity, power 
supply, inadequate connectivity, fertile land and loss of global commons 
like biodiversity, forests, agriculture, fisheries. Further, as cities expand 
in land area, they consume important natural ecosystems and agricultural 
land on its periphery. Besides, although the environmental impact of power 
generation and water supply are not necessarily local but geographically 
widespread, yet they need to be accounted for as an outfall of urbanisation. 
It is also given to understand that although the physical expanse of the 
urban areas is less than 5% of the earth’s surface, it generates over 70% of 
the carbon emissions through industry, transport and energy consumption 
by accessories/paraphernalia attached specifically to the dovetailed, 
interdependent systems that have come to symbolise urban living. Hence, 
needless to say, a change in planning approach and mechanisms need to 

44	
Geographic information system for smart cities
be introduced, or specifically imposed if necessary, through appropriate 
policy support.
	
The horizontal expansion of cities also has unforeseen trade-offs in 
terms of irreversible dependencies in terms of investments in transport, 
both capital and recurring, daily commutation time and associated stress 
levels leading to total disruption in quality of life. However, a significant 
shift in trend favouring vertical expansion, instead of horizontal, has 
now been observed in the developing countries as well. The extension 
of service networks due to the low-density burgeoning urban expanse 
and the consequent land-use modifications are now considered not only 
uneconomical in terms of investment, but also inefficient by way of 
their higher energy consumption, especially in the absence of public 
transport. 
	
Although to begin with, sustainability was associated only with 
environmental concerns such as energy and global warming, today it 
is recognized that the concept of sustainability is applicable to all areas 
of human society, in terms of social/economic justice, or responsible 
business practice; thereby emerging as the next economic driver. In this 
scenario where the economic merits of urbanisation have been established, 
appropriate planning procedures to achieve sustainability, which accounts 
for need assessment of the future generations, need to be established. 
	
It is perhaps the right time to seek viable alternatives to this 
unsustainable and unquantified loss in terms of childhood, lack of personal 
touch in this mad rush to reach an undefined ‘somewhere’ and become 
‘somebody’ in life, as amidst the burgeoning masses each one of us 
loses own individuality with standardised impersonalised services in the 
developed world. It is therefore essential to pause and redefine, rediscover 
and conserve the existing ecological balance to achieve sustainability, 
using technology to conserve the existing and recover the lost habitats. It 
is essential for the human mind to understand and acknowledge that life on 
earth is a cyclical process wherein there are no shortcuts to achievement 
by cutting across linearly, and that no effort or means can enable the 
efficiency of any system delivery to exceed one. 
	
Urban planners need to re-assess their choices being fully aware of 
the available options before them as an external observer, and this fair 
assessment of ‘cause and effects’ is possible only through un-manipulated 
information as with time-series satellite images.

	
Satellite images for sustainable urbanisation	
45
3.1.1	
Chapter outline
This chapter illustrates a number of environmental effects of urbanisation, 
each of them a potential research area in itself. It emphasises the significance 
of time-series satellite images in assessing and measuring the various 
impacts of urbanisation, like conversion of surrounding agricultural lands 
to built-up areas; construction of dams for water supply to urban areas and 
their collective effect on the irrigation of surrounding agricultural lands; 
consequent increase in impervious surface cover leading to the heat island 
effect; causing ground water levels to fall as rainwater flows into drains 
and fails to recharge the existing aquifers. It emphasises the need to devise 
efficient mechanisms for generation, transmission and supply of power; 
water storage and supply; treatment and recycling of sewerage and storm 
water, disposal of solid waste; strengthening public transport networks to 
mitigate fuel emissions and solid particulate matter in urban atmosphere. 
	
The chapter then tries to connect each of these verticals horizontally 
and explores how most of these consequent phenomena are interlinked 
and require a comprehensive overview to address them collectively. 
Mainstreaming these issues in to policy and practice leads to a holistic 
rather than sectoral engagement in climate change and urban management, 
according to the World Bank Primer on Climate Resilient Cities [4, 5]. 
As raster data from satellite images overlaid with GIS in a vector format 
provides a comprehensive picture of the available sources to tap and 
sinks for disposal, in light of the imminent urbanisation in the developing 
world in the forthcoming decades, their role in the design of source-sink 
dynamics has become essential. 
	
Here it is important for each city to draw its individual plans with 
an eye on the resource availability and the geographic constraints and 
vulnerabilities of the region. For any urban area, these parameters define 
the framework within which each of the supply and disposal services need 
to operate/function. This chapter attempts to explain how periodic satellite 
images facilitate the observation of the urban expanse and provide an 
overview of the region and its ecological footprint so as to provide a base 
map for envisioning and planning a local urban/regional future. 
	
As by definition, sustainability includes social apart from economic 
and environmental agenda, it is also essential to encourage public 
participation and opinion while planning for sustainable urban areas and 
sources of revenue generation. This chapter simultaneously explores the 

46	
Geographic information system for smart cities
avenues enabled by other ICT advancements for better social interaction 
and policy options.
3.1.2	
Objective and scope 
This chapter aims to highlight the role of satellite images in recording 
the various environmental impacts of the spatio-temporal growth of an 
urban area in the region, although it restrains itself from the quantification 
of the growth impacts and measurement of the ecological footprint and 
sustainability of the region. It targets to provide guidelines for agencies 
working for urban development towards a more proactive and more 
environmentally conscious role using satellite images. This new approach 
facilitates an objective decision-making tool in regulating land-use 
planning.
3.2	
Sustainable urbanisation – concept and indices
The path to sustainability starts with long-term visions [5], envisaging 
that we will leave behind a better world for our future generations. The 
Brundtland Report provides the most popular notion of sustainable 
development as that which meets the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own 
needs [6]. Earlier, Allen [7] had defined development as sustainable when 
it is likely to achieve lasting satisfaction of human needs and improvement 
of the quality of life under the condition that ecosystems and/or species are 
utilized at levels and in ways that allow them to keep renewing themselves. 
It is therefore apparent that the concept of sustainability is far too open-
ended and that the different definitions of sustainability are generic in 
nature and do not clearly define the service areas that are encompassed 
therein.
	
The equation I = P × A × T, although phrased mathematically, is a 
simple conceptual expression of the factors that create environmental 
impact. Generally credited to ecologist Paul Ehrlich, it is an accounting 
identity stating that environmental impact (I) is the product of three terms: 
(1) population (P); (2) affluence (A) as a measure of consumption; and (3) 
technology (T) that readies the raw products finally for consumption [8]. 
However, as it is not easy to measure the latter two variables, alternative 
indices and metrics, like the ‘ecological footprint’ was formulated by 

	
Satellite images for sustainable urbanisation	
47
Rees and Wackernagel [9], to account for the deterioration and loss of 
the natural capital owing to development catalysed by agglomeration 
efficiencies.
	
As sustainable development became a priority policy issue over the 
past decade or so, many institutions and researchers have tried to develop 
ways to gauge successes and failures in reaching this goal. They have 
produced multiple efforts to measure sustainable development and their 
research has generated a large and growing fact base [10]. The purpose of 
sustainability assessment is to provide decision makers with an evaluation 
of global and local integrated nature–society systems in short- and long-
term perspectives in order to help them to judge which actions should or 
should not be taken in an attempt to make society sustainable. As urban 
areas are characterised by services with respect to power supply, drinking 
water, waste water disposal, storm water drainage, and transportation, apart 
from economic opportunities and quality of life, a sustainable urbanisation 
index is a function of all these parameters. 
	
Such an index should take into account the footprint of different 
urban areas in the past, and also measure the outcome of different efforts 
to incorporate methods and mechanisms to attain sustainability in the 
future. Yet, it is not only about formulating a mathematical equation, but 
historical data should also be available with respect to the parameters 
used in such an index. A few efforts in formulating an index to measure 
sustainability, using different parameters and weightages, individually for 
the environment and the impact of urbanisation, and termed accordingly, 
are observed in the recent years. The Urban Sustainability Index [10] was 
built to evaluate how cities in developing countries, particularly China with 
highest rate of urbanisation, are confronting the challenge of balancing 
environmental sustainability and growth. 
	
Besides, efforts by individual consultants, such as the Siemens 
European Green Cities Index [11], have mostly drawn from experiences of 
European and North American cities, with indices built to reflect sustainable 
development in those contexts. Others, such as the UN Sustainable 
Development Index or the OECD’s Environmental Performance Review, 
focus primarily on the national level. While each study offers a unique 
collection of sustainability indicators, they all draw generally from a 
common set of categories. For example, the Siemens Green Cities Index 
measures air pollution by carbon dioxide emission per capita, while the 
World Bank’s Global City Indicators uses particulate matter (PM10) to 

48	
Geographic information system for smart cities
measure environmental cleanliness and carbon dioxide and other critical 
emissions to measure atmospheric pollution [10]. Few of these indexing 
efforts are tabulated in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1  Multiple efforts to define sustainability to date (Source: The Urban Sustainability 
Index: A New Tool for Measuring China’s Cities)
Name
Definition
Data source
Bruntland report
Meeting the needs of the present 
generation without compromising the 
ability of future generations to meet their 
needs
World Development
Report 1984
Sustain Lane
Maintaining standards of living and 
structural preparedness to meet the 
environmental challenges of an uncertain 
future 
US 
Census 
Bureau; 
surveys & interviews
UN
Integrating 
economic, 
social 
and 
environmental issues in decision and 
policy making
National 
publicly 
available data
World Bank
No explicit definition, but implicitly defined 
by a selection of indicators used to 
measure sustainability
Self-reported 
data 
on website with city 
member enrolment
OECD
Competitive green growth as defined 
through considerations of urban form, 
lifestyle and energy sources 
Various 
development 
and 
multilateral 
agencies
Siemens
Acting responsibly on behalf of future 
generations 
to 
achieve 
economic, 
environmental and social progress 
National statistics, local 
city authorities, national 
environmental bureaus
Yale – Columbia
Society’s 
capacity 
to 
improve 
its 
environmental performance over time
WHO; Experts from Yale 
and Columbia
National Bureau 
of Economic 
Research
Greenness as defined by household 
carbon emissions 
Chinese 
statistical 
yearbooks
	
Similarly, in India, the Centre of Development Finance in Chennai 
has formulated an Environmental Sustainability Index [12] to assess the 
state-wise performance using the Driving Force – Pressure on ecosystem – 

	
Satellite images for sustainable urbanisation	
49
State of environment – Impact on health and ecosystem – policy Response 
(DPSIR) framework for nine indicators like air, water quality, land use, 
forests, solid waste, energy, impact on human health, population pressure 
and environment budget. The states are separately classified on the basis 
of their contribution to the country’s GDP and per capita income. The 
authors have then rated the 28 Indian states based on the above parameter, 
largely to measure and monitor sustainable development.
	
Although the Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC) 
of National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has formulated 
a single dataset for different indices for different years, like Environmental 
Vulnerability Index (EVI), Environmental Sustainability Index (ESI) 
and Environmental Performance Index (EPI), with specific reference to 
satellite images, not many studies have been carried out. In a study by Paul 
Sutton [5], an ESI is calculated for each nation of the world by dividing the 
amount of light energy emitted by that nation as measured by a night time 
satellite image into the total value of that nation’s ecosystem services as 
measured by a land-cover dataset and ecosystem service values estimated 
by another study [13]. 
	
Eventually, in the real world, it is a matter of conjecture whether 
development can take place without adversely affecting the environment. 
As urbanisation is all about development, not only in the economic sense 
but also spatially with respect to changes in land cover, their discharge, 
emission and solid waste levels, it is necessary to formulate an index for 
comparison that accounts for the footprint of different urban areas in the 
past and measures the outcome of different efforts to incorporate methods 
and mechanisms to attain sustainability in the future. Yet, it is not only 
about formulating a mathematical equation, but data with respect to the 
parameters used in such an index also need to have been gathered at least 
for the last couple of decades wherein the major surge in urbanisation was 
witnessed to arrive at comparable figures to measure the aggregate impact 
of human activity of the scale of urbanisation.
3.3	
Satellite images and GIS – genesis and 
significance to urban planning
As due to incessant urbanization, land covers in urban areas tend to change 
more drastically over a short period of time than elsewhere it lends itself 
well to remote sensing. Urban remote sensing entails the collection and 

50	
Geographic information system for smart cities
analysis of imagery of heavily populated areas. Digital remote sensing 
data available through aerial photographs and satellite images are 
converted into useful information such as land-cover maps using two 
conventional methods: manual interpretation and computer-assisted 
interpretation and processing. Irrespective of the procurement technique 
of remote sensing data, manual interpretation is tedious, time consuming, 
and the interpreted results highly subjective to the image analyst. By 
comparison, supervised classification is much faster and requires far less 
human intervention [14].
	
Conceptually, satellite images measure the electromagnetic radiation 
reflected by different objects on the earth’s surface. The objects are then 
identified through their unique reflectance characteristics measured as 
Digital Number (DN) values in multiple spectral bands. Here, the number 
of bands forms the ‘spectral resolution’ of the image. A raster image is 
hence an array of DN values whose range is determined by the ‘radiometric 
resolution’ of the image. The ‘spatial resolution’ of an image is based on 
the minimum pixel size and determines the smallest distance at which two 
objects can be distinguished. The distance of the satellite from the earth 
determines its revisit time and frequency of images, commonly known as 
its ‘temporal resolution’ [15]. Digital image processing techniques used 
to extract valuable information from the data comprising mathematical 
algorithms, continuously being updated to address improvements in the 
different resolutions of satellite images. 
	
As cited by Jensen [16], historically, aerial interpretation gained 
importance during the Second World War, and space observation began 
with the launch of the Sputnik by the erstwhile USSR in 1957, followed by 
launch of the Explorer I by the United States in 1958. Gradually, instruments 
other than cameras and sensors in regions of the electromagnetic spectrum 
beyond the visible and the near infrared regions came to be used for 
various observations other than optical, thereby originating a new science 
of remote sensing. Hence, although initially remote sensing originated 
with military reconnaissance applications, the resulting systems are now 
used for monitoring the earth’s natural resources and mapping the effects 
of anthropogenic interference on the earth’s environmental systems. 
	
Landsat Multispectral Scanner (MSS) images first obtained in 1972 
consist of four spectral bands with a spatial resolution of about 79 ms, too 
large to obtain good results without appropriate sub-pixel classification. 
Optical images initially provided only visual characteristics of the earth’s 

	
Satellite images for sustainable urbanisation	
51
surface. However, since the Landsat 4, after about a decade, data in the 
thermal band are also available to address issues pertaining to climate 
change and global warming. The Thematic Mapper (TM) images consist 
of seven spectral bands with a spatial resolution of 30 meters for Bands 1 
to 5 and 7. Spatial resolution for Band 6 (thermal infrared) is 120 meters, 
but is resampled to 30-meter pixels. Landsat Enhanced Thematic Mapper 
Plus (ETM+) images, available since 1999, consist of eight spectral bands 
with a spatial resolution of 30 meters for Bands 1 to 7. The resolution for 
Band 8 (panchromatic) is 15 meters. 
	
Today, sub-metre resolution images are available by Quickbird, 
WorldView and GeoEye images commercially provided by Digital Globe. 
Significant improvements in the spatial resolution of satellite images over 
time, as shown in Fig. 3.1, have enabled urban planning applications of 
remote sensing.
(a) 1972: Landsat 
Multispectral – 79 m
(b) 1992: Landsat Thematic 
Mapper – 30 m
(c) 2013: IKONOS – 1 m
Figure 3.1  Improvement in spatial resolution of satellite images of Mumbai (India) over time
	
Again, while initially electro-magnetic data were collected in three 
or four relatively wide wavelength bands, today multispectral scanners 
operating on the same principles of selective sensing record data in 
more bands in the electromagnetic spectrum as hyper-spectral images. 
This includes the UV (ultraviolet), visible, near IR (infrared), mid IR 
and thermal IR spectral regions. Data recorded in more bands allow for 
identification of a range of objects on the terrestrial surface owing to their 
unique spectral signatures.
	
The spectral signature of different objects varies over the day 
subject to sun angle and its luminance characteristics, besides tidal 
considerations affecting their water content in coastal areas. Apart from 

52	
Geographic information system for smart cities
the type of sensor, image interpretation and classification is therefore 
subject to variations in season and atmospheric conditions. Hence, 
images obtained from similar sensors over similar seasons are chosen in 
order to study urban dynamics. 
	
Further, optical images require cloud-free conditions, which is a 
limitation in coastal areas like Mumbai, where clouds obstruct optical 
observation by satellites for almost eight months of the year beginning 
in February itself. This becomes critical in bad weather conditions, 
especially when used for disaster management. In such scenario, 
observations in the microwave part of the electromagnetic spectrum 
provided by SAR (Synthetic Aperture Radar) in all weather conditions 
are used. Microwave remote sensing is possible both passively and 
actively, wherein quantitative data analysis is performed on the basis of 
back scattering intensity.
	
More than half a decade later today, various satellites orbiting the earth 
with different sensors provide varying combinations of spectral and spatial 
resolutions. For instance, MODIS (Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectro-
radiometer) measures 36 spectral bands between 0.405 and 14.385 µm, 
and it acquires data at three spatial resolutions: 250 m, 500 m, and 1,000 
m. It has a viewing swath width of 2,330 km and views the entire surface 
of the earth every one to two days. 
	
Most in-situ data collected in conjunction with global positioning 
system (GPS) can be geo-referenced for analysis and time-series 
comparison and change detection over a spatio-temporal framework, 
image interpretation and comparison of land use and land cover change 
(LULCC). Usually, overlay of collateral data like digital elevation 
models, soil and geology maps, political boundaries and block population 
statistics, separately residing in a GIS, are of great value in the analysis 
of remotely sensed data. Algorithms are continuously coded and updated 
to reduce bias owing to human discretion in image interpretation, thereby 
significantly reducing inconsistency and lack of transparency. Time-series 
satellite images therefore provide spatio-temporal changes in land cover 
that serve as decision-support systems for decision makers.
3.3.1	
Satellite image classification and change detection
Urban areas invariably find their origin in small human settlements having 
favourable topography and configuration of natural resources that can be 

	
Satellite images for sustainable urbanisation	
53
tapped for the existence and thriving of the habitat with optimum additional 
investment and effort. Hence, as the city expands, urban planning is based 
on a SWOT analysis to assess resource availability in the region to tap the 
opportunities and mitigate the threats for augmenting existing services. 
This resource assessment is based on a comprehensive regional map 
showing not only existing topography in the form of lowlands/wetlands, 
forests/agricultural lands, hills/ridges that need to be conserved; natural 
resources like ground water levels, water bodies and rivers on which dams 
may be constructed so that both irrigation and human habitat could co-
exist; but also man-made features like residential areas interspersed with 
supporting health, education and other social amenities and other essential 
infrastructure like employment and entertainment hubs, wholesale and 
retail avenues of commerce as also their efficient linkages through various 
transportation modes. 
	
As it is not possible to obtain all the above information through 
exhaustive ground surveys, time-series satellite images have proven 
to be a reliable source of spatial information. The relevant features are 
then digitised/stored in vector format with pertinent attribute data that 
are integrated in regular planning for augmentation and extension of 
infrastructure networks in potential growth directions. 
	
Image classification and interpretation using time-series images forms 
the basis for change detection. Primarily, individual images are geo-
referenced/registered using either (a) toposheets, (b) already registered 
images, or (c) fairly well-distributed, reliable (unlikely to change 
with passage of time) ground control points (GCPs) with the help of a 
global positioning system (GPS). In addition, having identified relevant 
images based on the parameters for studying a particular impact on the 
environment, the spatial resolution of the images at different points of time 
needs to be rescaled/resampled to obtain uniform pixel size of the two 
images so that the images used for change detection have the same spatial 
resolution. 
	
Often, the ‘region of interest’ (ROI) lies in more than one scene. 
Different scenes therefore need to be mosaic-ed to obtain a seamless 
picture to obtain a uniform histogram for classification. The raster data of 
the ROI is finally classified into a fixed number of classes by supervised 
or unsupervised classification methods. Again, the image classification 
can be either pixel based or rule set-based. Algorithms for pixel-based 
classification are available in commercial software packages like ERDAS 

54	
Geographic information system for smart cities
or ENVI, while image object analysis may be performed using eCognition. 
Alternatively, MATLAB, the technical computing language for algorithm 
development, or other open source algorithms may also be used for image 
interpretation/classification. The results of histogram matching of multiple 
scenes determine whether the scenes need to be mosaic-ed before or after 
the image classification.
	
It is observed that data in spectral bands alone do not serve the purpose 
of image classification, in which case, it helps to use band ratios and 
arithmetic to obtain comparable results. A number of such indices have 
been formulated for study of specific objects, of which NDVI (Natural 
Differential Vegetation Index) is a common example. Similar indices are 
widely used for other objects like water, built-up areas, and barrenness. 
New indices may also be formulated based on the spectral response of 
specific objects of interest.
	
Having classified raster data, classification results are validated by 
ground truthing. The classification results are then exported in vector 
format so that the respective classes of a number of images spread over 
significant length of time could be compared to detect the locations of land 
use and land cover change (LULCC). LULCC are generally represented 
through a change matrix which summarises the area change from one 
class to another, and forms an important aspect of urban planning. The 
following methodology (Fig. 3.2) has been adopted for deriving a change-
detection matrix using time series satellite images.
Time-series data
Image registration
Image mosaicing
Change detection 
matrix
Image 
classification 
Ground truthing 
Figure 3.2  Deriving change detection matrix
	
Digital image processing is perpetually a potential research area not 
only because it facilitates the primary analysis of large areas at the regional 
level, but also it eliminates the inevitable human bias. The credibility of 

	
Satellite images for sustainable urbanisation	
55
the interpreted image is thereby unchallenged and lends transparency to 
the entire decision-making system. However, some of the challenges in 
digital image processing are discussed below. 
3.3.2	
Limitations 
For study of LULCC over the past, today it appears that the spatial 
resolution of the early images at about 80 ms about four decades ago is too 
large to obtain good results even after the necessary re-sampling of data 
without appropriate sub-pixel classification. Even thereafter, the results 
thereof are not strictly comparable to the images with improved spatial 
resolution in more recent times.
	
Seasonal variations also cause data variations and require use of 
discretion. For instance, a post-monsoon image is understandably greener 
than peak summer, while salinity in coastal lands is highest during summer 
– thereby causing change in land cover. Similarly, even at the same time of 
the day of the same date as per solar calendar, changes in spectral signatures 
of wetlands or mudflats are noticed owing to their wetness conditions that 
vary with tide as per the lunar calendar.
	
Similarity in spectral signatures of two classes in image interpretation 
necessitates the use of pre-defined indices that are formed as ratios of 
the reflectance in different spectral bands. Some of the overlapping areas 
are dry wetlands and built-up areas, salt pans and exposed rock on hill 
tops. Visually, even water bodies and shadows appear to be similar. Such 
similarities in spectral signatures can only be distinguished by making 
observations in specific spectral bands.
	
Further, when tonal variance in the multiple scenes is far too 
pronounced, while performing histogram matching, it is likely that the 
objects whose DN values are near the ends of different classes tend to 
shift to neighbouring class. Hence, based on the accuracy assessment of 
the classified image, it is necessary to decide if image is to be mosaic-ed 
before or after performing classification.
3.3.3	
Satellite images for sustainability of smart cities 
Cities are conceptually perceived to be smart when every unit of urban 
service is metered and charged appropriately as per the ‘polluter pays’ 
principle. Hence, by overlay of a GIS vector framework is overlaid on 

56	
Geographic information system for smart cities
satellite images in raster form, it provides the base map for quantification 
of environmental impacts that offset sustainability and facilitate the 
identification of the polluters and the beneficiaries, both by their attributes 
and location.
	
Satellite images also facilitate the study of far flung environmental 
effects of urban areas, not particularly restrained by administrative 
boundaries. Hitherto intangibles like air pollution due to burning of fossil 
fuels for increased passenger miles travelled and electricity generation, 
diversion of water from cultivable fields, conversion of wetlands and 
agricultural lands and loss of biodiversity can now be quantified through 
satellite image interpretation.
	
Further, a smart city shall ideally have zero carbon footprint. This is 
difficult to monitor and achieve when the city is sparse and sprawling, 
with respect to land and atmospheric pollution. In order to keep a city 
dense, compact and smart, its growth directions and density need to be 
regulated horizontally with the help of satellite images, and vertically with 
the help of LIDAR and/or DEM data.
	
Besides, as satellite images provide data at regular time intervals in 
the last few decades, hence despite inadequacies in measuring indices and 
limitations in terms of data inconsistencies and technological limitations 
in image interpretation, they are useful to track and measure the ecological 
changes resulting from the perceived human conquest of depleting 
resources and unviable alternatives.
3.4	
Satellite image applications for sustainable 
development 
Smart cities find a number of applications where time-series satellite 
images could be instrumental in more than the preparation of the base map 
of an area. 
3.4.1	
Land-use planning using GIS overlay on satellite 
images 
Existing and proposed land-use plans are statutory requirements to city 
planning. An existing land-use plan comprises inputs from various data 
sources with pertinent information associated to each point, line or polygon 
feature. As land use continuously changes over time and data from different 

	
Satellite images for sustainable urbanisation	
57
sources are inconsistent, it is difficult to make an existing land-use plan. 
Considering that urban development has irreversible environmental impact, 
the current pace of urban growth, easy access to spatial information and 
magnitude of investment in infrastructure augmentation, an updated and 
dynamic base map is the key to regularly update the base map so that land-
use proposals may be revised more frequently. In such scenario, satellite 
images are a good data source that allows regular revision of base plan. 
	
A proposed land-use (PLU) plan depicts land-use zones wherein the 
permissible land uses with location-specific intensity in terms of Floor 
Space Index/ Floor Area Ratio are specified in the General Development 
Control Regulations (GDCRs). The existing database of an existing 
land-use (ELU) plan in GIS facilitates site suitability analysis to arrive at 
a PLU that is efficient with respect to land-use management and transport 
connectivity. Analysis performed with the help of a GIS as a decision-
support system helps to incorporate transparency in urban planning. The 
capabilities of a GIS to act as a decision-support system in monitoring 
changes in land use and its intensity over time in an urban area, particularly 
with the growing need to efficiently utilise and conserve natural resources 
including land and environment, are well established.
3.4.2	
Detection 
and 
assessment 
of 
unauthorised 
settlements
Urban areas experience unchecked immigration owing to their potential 
for prospective employment. It is estimated that every job in the formal 
sector generates three additional jobs in the informal sector. The prevailing 
urban planning process fails to provide affordable housing for these 
immigrants in the informal sector, leaving little choice but to seek shelter in 
unauthorised shanties on lands lying vacant due to inherent disadvantages, 
often with inappropriate water supply and sanitation services. This is a 
continuous and irreversible process whereby fresh immigrants add to 
the growth of this informal settlement (Fig. 3.3). Finally, the urban local 
bodies eventually strive to upgrade the level of service delivery to these 
so-called unauthorised settlements, due to growing unhygienic conditions. 
At times, the local bodies also try to provide security of tenure through 
redevelopment.

58	
Geographic information system for smart cities
(a) IKONOS 2001
(b) Quick Bird 2011
Figure 3.3  Assessing growth of unauthorised settlements around existing villages 
(Courtesy: Google Earth)
	
The emerging slums can be detected and tackled early through regular 
support from satellite images to observe the extent of encroachment and 
number of shanties to be rehabilitated. Finally, redevelopment measures 
can be facilitated through the digitisation of base map and attachment 
of associated information collected through household survey on a GIS 
platform. 
3.4.3	
Managing urban sprawl 
Urban sprawl, synonymous with inefficient land-use planning, is 
generally observed along transportation corridors, even in the absence 
of appropriate public transport options. It is a consequence of (a) 
underutilisation of valuable lands within the city; (b) speculation in 
property prices as an investment; and (c) lack of control beyond the area 
of jurisdiction. 
	
Lands locked in obsolete land uses, often in city centres, need to be 
identified for urban regeneration in order to contain the horizontal spread 
of the city. For instance, historically Mumbai came to be known due to 
its sea trade and textile mills. However, today huge tracts of lands under 
obsolete warehousing use are under the control of the port trust while the 
defunct mill lands in Mumbai are being redeveloped for commercial use 
like malls and multiplexes, as shown in Fig. 3.4, despite opposition due 
to the city’s unpreparedness and inadequate infrastructure support in the 
city to cope with higher densities. 

	
Satellite images for sustainable urbanisation	
59
(a) 2000
(b) 2013
Figure 3.4  Densification by conversion of mill lands to commercial use in Mumbai 
(Courtesy: Google Earth)
	
Further, speculation in property price and lack of control beyond 
the area of jurisdiction of the local authority results is manifest in land-
use conversions of surrounding lands on the urban periphery (Fig. 3.5) 
under forests and agriculture. In case of Mumbai, similar threat is also 
perceptible on the periphery of the national park within the city, resulting 
in conversion of forest lands.
Figure 3.5  Urban periphery – conversion of agricultural lands (Courtesy: Google Earth)

60	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
Conceptually, although varying Floor Space Index (FSI, also known as 
FAR – Floor Area Ratio; obtained by dividing the total built-in area by the 
total plot area) in the city terrain appears to be attainable, but practically, 
it is easier said than done as it requires mapping resource availability, 
both natural and man-made to support the proposed level of activity. It 
is also relatively difficult to monitor variable FSI over the city terrain as 
the boundaries of pockets of higher FSI visible on maps do not exist on 
ground. In such a scenario, it is prudent to obtain periodic satellite images 
to substantiate the need of selectively augmenting infrastructure, say in 
the vicinity of public transport junctions, and timely decision to redevelop 
decaying pockets. As cities move away from being sleepy human habitats 
capitalising on ‘economies of scale’ to dynamic metros having perceptible 
energy flows, and gaining recognition as living organisms themselves, it 
is essential to regulate them such that each pocket of different land uses is 
efficiently laid out on an array of efficient public networks. 
	
Time series satellite images have a major role to play in the 
identification of underutilised lands within the city for redevelopment and 
provide information about land-use conversions beyond an administrative 
jurisdiction. Such timely information, along with continuous policy 
support, can effectively monitor the horizontal spread of urban areas. Cities 
shall be more compact by integrating use of time-series satellite images in 
city planning for spatial aggregations and such use shall be instrumental in 
reducing the urban ecological footprint and mitigating their contribution 
to climate change. 
3.4.4	
Identification and prediction of growth directions
Every urban area exhibits a unique growth pattern which is a function 
of its topography and existing transportation network. A comprehensive 
overview of these from satellite images are vital inputs to planning for 
infrastructure augmentation in an existing megapolis to avoid prospective 
slum formations. Mumbai, as illustrated in Fig. 3.6, was once a mono-
nuclear city with a majority of the economic opportunities concentrated 
at the southern-most tip of the island city. However, over the years, apart 
from the emergence of the Bandra Kurla Complex, it turned into a multi-
nucleated hub with growth centres distributed along major public transport 
corridors in Thane, Kalyan and Navi Mumbai.

	
Satellite images for sustainable urbanisation	
61
Figure 3.6  Growth directions through land-use classification of time-series images of 
Mumbai metropolitan region
	
Often, speculative growth in real estate manifests itself through urban 
sprawl. However, in such instances, only minimal planning inputs can be 
provided retrospectively. Hence, when information from satellite images 
is utilised as a timely input or as time-series data at regular intervals, it 
allows a comprehensive view of the entire region and beyond, which can 
be used to simulate and quantify the impacts of specific policy inputs like 
development of an IT Park, SEZ, proposed transportation networks and 
the like.
	
Urban planning could do well with prediction models based on the 
comprehensive regional perspective that would simulate the growth 
directions of any urban area over time. The growth model eventually 
comprises a mathematical algorithm that accounts for all the variables 
based on the topography and transportation networks, with their due 
weightages. Although theoretically there are a number of growth models, 
in practice, no urban area follows a single growth model. Hence, it is 
essential to formulate a typical algorithm for every individual urban area 
considering the existing geographical features and transportation network 
from a satellite image. The strength of a prediction model lies in its ability 
to accurately foresee the forthcoming growth. Access to information 
beyond the urban boundaries and the jurisdiction of the local body gives it 
the opportunity to leverage the positives ahead of the drawbacks. 
	
Today as computing abilities have overcome human limitations, the 
capability of mathematical models to predict and simulate different flows 

62	
Geographic information system for smart cities
need to be tapped, wherein raster information in the form of satellite 
images can be selectively digitised to optimise different flows. Of these, 
traffic modelling is perhaps the most widely and successfully applied, yet 
more applications pertaining to environmental degradation, like tracking 
of pollutants, solid wastes, leachetes are emerging areas of research. 
3.4.5	
Envisaging regional growth
The impending massive urbanisation in the developing world requires 
planning efforts not only in the metropolises, Tier I and II cities that are 
fast approaching or have already surpassed their optimum ‘economies of 
scale’, but requires hierarchical planning at the regional level in every 
state, where each region/city/town could be individually promoted for a 
specific service. For instance, the Maharashtra Government considered 
the development of Mumbai, Pune and Nashik at about 150 km from one 
another vide triangular connectivity wherein Mumbai is poised to serve as 
the financial capital at the national level, Pune to emerge as the state level 
education and IT hub (along similar lines of Hyderabad and Bangalore in 
Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, respectively), and Nashik as the industrial 
area with automobile and manufacturing/assembly giants (Fig. 3.7). 
Figure 3.7  Regional growth trends through land-use classification of time-series images 
(Courtesy: Google Earth)

	
Satellite images for sustainable urbanisation	
63
	
In other states, twin cities with individual administrative and commercial 
identities have gradually emerged as an industrial corridor, as Lucknow–
Kanpur in Uttar Pradesh, Ludhiana–Jalandhar in Punjab, Bangalore–
Mysore in Karnataka and Trivandrum–Cochin in Kerala. Elsewhere too, 
twin cities continue to co-exist like Hyderabad–Secunderabad in Andhra 
Pradesh and Haridwar–Rishikesh in Uttarakhand. 
	
These agglomerations and many more on similar lines are likely to 
emerge in the near future. It is thereby essential to envisage such regional 
growth where land prices within the emerging metropolises are forbidding, 
so that adequate peripheral lands can be identified and earmarked for 
developing adequate physical and social infrastructure in due course of time. 
3.4.6	
Transportation planning
As the cost of providing transportation corridors post-development is 
prohibitive, it is generally considered prudent to earmark land for their 
future augmentation right at the beginning of development. In turn, doing 
so has the additional advantage of reaping revenues for project execution 
by way of escalation in land values along the earmarked corridors. 
Satellite images providing base map of existing transportation corridors in 
different modes of road, rail and waterways, if any, facilitate the alignment 
of additional linkages to accommodate future development.
	
The last decade witnessed phenomenal increase in personal vehicle 
ownership in the country owing to the burgeoning middle class with larger 
disposable incomes and/or failure of public transport to keep up with 
the demand. Consequently, urban areas have come to be known by their 
unique traffic snarls and associated problems at specific road junctions, 
necessitating extensive investment by the urban local bodies by way of 
flyovers/subways, foot-over bridges, whereby toll booths on major roads 
have become a common sight as most of these projects are financed 
by public–private partnerships (PPP) by Build-Own-Operate-Transfer 
(BOOT) mechanisms. There is concurrent demand for additional land to 
accommodate larger parking areas and prospective used-car markets.
	
As transportation in the urban sector is a major energy-consuming and 
environment-polluting component, especially when based on fossil fuels, 
prudent urban planning solicits a multi-thronged approach through different 
modalities to reduce the ecological footprint of an urban agglomeration be 
deployed in the transportation sector. Multi-modal transport integration by 

64	
Geographic information system for smart cities
way of inter-modal linkages at hubs and implementation/administration 
through smart cards gives citizens the distinct advantage of adapting to 
commutation by public transport.
	
Further, CCTV installed at identified road junctions having long peak-
hour traffic flows provide continuously streaming data being utilised by 
different mobile phone applications and/or through FM radio channels 
by public/private operators to facilitate smooth traffic flows and parking 
directions for the benefit of commuters at any given point of time. The 
time to adapt to similar applications in our country, where mobile device 
penetration is no less, is not far.
3.4.7	
Infrastructure networks
Utility corridors are another salient feature of urban areas. They include 
power and water supply from source to mains and further to the user; 
as well as sewer and storm water channels, besides points for collection 
of different forms of solid waste, from user to the mains for treatment 
before suitable disposal. It is essential that these services be accessible for 
emergency repairs and routine maintenance at all times, even when they 
may not be visually pleasing. 
	
So far, it was common practice to provide services and infrastructure 
networks in the right-of-way (ROW) of roads in smaller and medium-
sized cities. However, with expanding urban areas when medium cities 
are becoming metropolises themselves and considering the capital 
expenditure on implementing this change post development, it is now 
gaining acceptance that a separate service corridor is earmarked so that 
routine traffic flows are not interrupted. However, as developable lands 
become increasingly scarce, the vacant lands in corridor reservations 
become increasingly susceptible to encroachments.
	
Often, service corridors run parallel to ROW of major roads, but in case 
of mains extending water supply from dams, or pylons for power supply 
from electric substations, in order to optimise capital and maintenance 
costs it is essential to run the water mains through uncharted terrain when 
roads are long wound to cover more number of villages. Hence, satellite 
images provide useful information not only as decision support when 
such networks from the infrastructure mains in the countryside are being 
planned and survey details of intermediate areas are difficult to obtain, but 
also in the protection of the susceptible lands therein.

	
Satellite images for sustainable urbanisation	
65
3.4.8	
Urban environment 
Optical satellite imagery not only provides the spatial spread/morphology 
of urban areas and its surrounding resource availability, but also helps 
to interpret the characteristics and conditions of specific pollutants in air, 
water and land through spectral signatures. Together, this data can be used 
to assess the environmental impact of LULCC. Besides, data from the 
Advanced Space Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) on board 
the Terra Satellite and the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer 
(MODIS) sensors on board both the Terra and Aqua satellites at 1 km spatial 
resolution also helps to determine the influence of the urban landscape on 
the biogeophysical parameters [8].
	
For instance, in a study by Shemdoe [17], concentrations of heavy 
metals in soils and leachetes in the closed coastal dumpsite of Mtoni, 
Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, is determined using Atomic Absorption 
Spectrophotometer. The study reveals that while concentration of nickel 
was low, concentrations of arsenic and chromium in the soil samples 
were above the established contaminant limits of Tanzania Standard Soil 
Quality. Further, soil samples at 10 m from the edge of the dumpsite 
showed higher concentrations of cadmium and lead compared to the 
established contaminant limit. It therefore recommends awareness 
creation to farmers depending on the area for vegetable production on the 
need to relocate their activities to at least 200 m away from the edge of the 
dumpsite. Moreover, alternative income-generating activities for farmers 
should be considered by the communities and the municipal authorities in 
order to reduce health hazards that may affect urban smallholder farmers 
depending on the dumpsite areas for agricultural production.
	
Separately, in a study to shrink the carbon footprints of metropolitan 
America by Brown and Southworth [18], the authors identify that the four 
primary factors influencing city-to-city differences in carbon footprint are 
per capita income, population density and compactness, modes of transport 
and electricity supply. Their report finds that population density and 
availability of public transit are key to understanding carbon footprints, 
as also the carbon intensity of electricity generation, electricity prices and 
weather. It is pertinent here to mention that the above parameters can be 
determined through satellite images at different points of time.
	
Information from sources mentioned above, upon transfer to a 
GIS platform, generates multiple scenarios for the comparison and 

66	
Geographic information system for smart cities
assessment of different development alternatives. This array of viable 
options in turn helps to logically arrive at appropriate growth directions 
as well as suitable locations and technologies for developing/augmenting 
prospective infrastructure and transportation links, with minimal impact 
on the existing environment. It is evident that with the growing means to 
measure increasingly large number of environmental parameters today, 
technologies supporting sustainable development are the new drivers of 
any economy.
3.4.9	
Ecosystem assessment
Satellite images provide vital information pertaining to the surrounding 
quantity and quality of forests, mangroves, wetlands and agricultural 
lands, whereby these existing ecosystems and ecologically sensitive areas 
can be delineated for conservation, much before the urban sprawl destroys 
these valuable resources through paving and erection of concrete towers. 
For instance, as per a report by the Bombay Natural History Society 
(BNHS) and substantiated in time-series satellite images, as reproduced 
in Fig. 3.8, area under mangrove in Thane Creek has increased in the last 
couple of decades. However, as it limits the capacity of the Thane Creek 
to drain rainwater from the catchment area, an outcome of centuries of 
geographical transformation, whether it is a positive development, is a 
potential area of study. 
(a) 2002
(b) 2011
Figure 3.8  Classified image showing growth of mangrove in Thane Creek, India

	
Satellite images for sustainable urbanisation	
67
3.4.10	
Urban Heat Island effect
The thermal band information in the time-series Landsat images enabled 
the comparison of prevailing temperatures in urban areas to those in the 
countryside as also at different locations within the city. Different studies 
established that the air and surface temperatures in certain pockets in the 
urban areas are about 2–12 degrees Celsius higher than the surrounding 
rural areas thereby aggravating global warming. 
	
Known as the Urban Heat Island (UHI) effect, it is caused due 
to greenhouse gas emissions, gradual loss of urban forest cover, 
impermeability and thermal properties of materials, urban morphology 
and city size and anthropogenic heat. The UHI effect is likely to increase 
in the 21st century unless mitigation strategies are consciously deployed.
	
Urbanisation is accompanied by loss of green areas and soil cover 
due to intensification of land use. The vegetation cover plays an essential 
role in preventing the build-up of heat through the process of evapo-
transpiration and shading of the ground and buildings. It also contributes 
to effective storm water management and to better air quality in cities. 
Besides, the replacement of natural soils by impermeable building 
materials and asphalt that absorb more energy and less water modifies the 
natural path of storm water. In fact, as quoted by an USEPA (United States 
Environmental Protection Agency) study, the soil infiltration rate in cities 
is only 15% and the quantity of rainwater runoff is 55%, whereas in the 
natural environment, approximately 50% of rainwater infiltrates the soil 
and only10% runs off toward watercourses. 
	
Vehicular transport and use of fossil fuels for providing electricity in 
urban areas are the prime contributors to GHG emissions which trap urban 
heat. The component of emissions from the former is a direct function of 
land-use distribution in an urban area, as determined by urban planning. 
The latter component however is one that does not pollute locally at the 
site of its use, but at the point of its generation which may be far off, 
thereby causing a carbon footprint much further. Containing this footprint 
therefore requires development of alternate and renewable energy sources.
3.4.11	
Local/suitable building materials and indigenous 
technologies
Expanding urban areas have great demand for building materials and 
hence mobile concrete mixers on city roads and brick kilns on the 

68	
Geographic information system for smart cities
urban periphery are common sights. Often, these standard/inorganic 
building materials are unilaterally chosen for lack of information about 
locally available alternative/organic building materials and indigenous 
construction technologies. Further, even when locally available materials 
are being used, monitoring their extraction from permitted areas by 
application of appropriate extraction techniques is another area for use of 
satellite images by the urban local bodies (Fig. 3.9). In Mumbai, where 
low lying lands are restored for most new construction sites, quarries are 
a necessity. At the same time, it is essential to identify and monitor the 
quarry sites and rehabilitate them after their use so that abandoned quarries 
do not remain an eye sore on the urban horizon. This is an area that directly 
affects sustainability but is often neglected by the concerned authorities 
when increasing environmental awareness demands more attention.
(a) January 2013
(b) December 2003
Figure 3.9  Quarrying of local hills for building materials (Courtesy: Google Earth)
3.4.12	
Disaster management
Climate change resulting from the reasons elaborated above causes extreme 
climate events in urban areas. Flash flood is one such phenomenon caused 
by extremely heavy rainfall in a short span of time causing high run-off 
beyond the capacity of the storm water drainage system in urban areas. 
These can have devastating effects in coastal cities where coupled with high 
tide, the storm water cannot be effectively discharged into the neighbouring 
seas. These effects are compounded due to high population densities and 
location of vital infrastructure. For instance, the flash floods in Mumbai in 
July 2005 caused breakdown of power systems, communications, public 
transport and water and food supplies in the metropolis for over two days 

	
Satellite images for sustainable urbanisation	
69
causing extensive damage to life and property, leaving thousands stranded. 
Similar events have occurred in Bangkok, Korea, Japan and other locations 
the world over. Disruption of air traffic in Europe caused by poor visibility 
and heavy snowfall during winter is also becoming a regular phenomenon. 
With increasing urbanisation, the frequency of such events is likely to 
increase, leaving the population residing in these areas more vulnerable. 
Such events need not necessarily be caused by the vagaries of nature, but 
could also be caused due to human error – the tripping of national grid 
due to overload causing disruption of the metro services in the capital 
along with total blackout in many northern states in the country is a recent 
example. Fire in slums with dense habitats and narrow road widths not 
allowing passage of fire tenders is another common cause of loss to life 
and property in urban areas.
	
It is therefore essential for urban local bodies and other supporting 
providers of vital services to design appropriate spatial databases with 
respect to different infrastructure networks and their capacities that can 
be accessed during such emergencies. The key to disaster mitigation and 
management lies in quick access to relevant information. For instance, 
firemen with access to the as-built drawings of the buildings where they 
are providing services will be far better equipped to handle the emergency. 
GIS technologies are now increasingly deployed by service providers not 
only to improve their delivery efficiencies but also to improvise alternative 
grids by default when the main services are disrupted. For instance, 
Reliance Energy, one of the electricity providers in Mumbai, has mapped 
its services so that when a transformer trips, the affected areas can be 
immediately known and alternative grid can be activated by default. 
	
Similar applications are also used extensively, not necessarily in 
times of disaster, by various delivery chains like banks and their ATMs, 
food joints, automobile service centres to identify their location through 
mobile devices for the development and dissemination of databases, as 
an important source of revenue generation not only to the citizen but also 
assist different companies in identifying potential client locations.
	
Remote sensing data added to GIS have proved to be effective in 
case of the tsunami in December 2004 and more recently in handling the 
nuclear disaster in Japan. These systems have also been deployed for the 
coastal management along the cyclone-prone shores of the Bay of Bengal 
by the Indian Meteorological Department. 

70	
Geographic information system for smart cities
3.4.13	
Community participation
Social development is one of the three pillars of sustainability. It is often 
held that cities promote isolation and that they attract people because it lets 
them be a part of the crowd. On the other hand, urban areas are accepted 
as places where the most indigenous ideas are evolved as they provide a 
strongly competitive environment where only the fittest shall survive.
	
Planning at grass root level, as envisaged by the 73rd and 74th 
constitutional amendments about two decades ago, seeks community 
participation in all public decisions. This is further strengthened by the 
Public Interest Litigation (PIL) in consonance with the objects enshrined 
in Article 39A of the Constitution of India, and the Right to Information 
(RTI) Act in 2002. Availability of spatial information through satellite 
images enables the sharing of site conditions by and with the citizens as 
incorporated in the State Regional and Town Planning legislation at the 
time of inviting suggestions and objections to proposed modifications to 
the Development Plan and the General Development Control Regulations 
(GDCRs).
3.5	
Vision – the road ahead 
Increasing number of satellites with enhanced capabilities of new sensors 
is being launched by the developed and developing nations alike. The 
enhanced capabilities of the sensors lie in their ability to achieve higher 
spatial, spectral, radiometric and temporal resolutions. This continuous 
information on the status of the earth and its terrestrial, aquatic and 
atmospheric environment provides the essential inputs for a ‘cause-effect’ 
analysis. Coupled with GIS and other emerging technologies pertaining 
to image interpretation, periodic satellite images not only enable frequent 
base map revision, but also form the cornerstone of many ‘if-then’ 
scenarios, enabling regular plan revisions and greater transparency in 
decision making, respectively. Eventually, regular plan revision enables 
accounting for socio-economic and environmental changes which form 
the three pillars of sustainable development. 
	
Given the accelerated pace of urbanisation, it is the time that this vital 
resource be incorporated in prevailing planning procedures and academic 
curricula across the country.

	
Satellite images for sustainable urbanisation	
71
3.5.1	
Future directions 
Often, there is a perception that satellite images and the strengths of GIS 
are oversold, along with the counter argument that this is so only because 
it is still an emerging technology where standard practices have not been 
formulated so far.
	
Gathering data with higher resolutions is accompanied by the need 
to continuously develop and update algorithms for image interpretation. 
Novel techniques for image classification and interpretation will go a long 
way in eliminating the use of discretion, and thereby human bias. With 
spectral data being captured in more bands and with higher spectral and 
radiometric resolution, machine abilities surpass human limitations with 
respect to visual observation.
	
While continuous data are essential to perform any kind of analysis, 
lack of skills to assign utility and develop applications thereof leads to 
an information overload and is unable to justify the investment in the 
technology. As described earlier, sustainability is the new economic 
driver in the coming decades and remains mankind’s moral responsibility 
to leave behind for future generation at least in equal measure, if not 
more. Data availability for research is essential but its strength lies in 
finding widespread applications by the local bodies and the citizens in 
their day-to-day life. As greater human intervention in ecological balance 
leads to higher vulnerabilities and reduced resilience of the systems to 
recover from stresses caused by overload and hence, more disaster-
prone, technology enables the design and implementation of automated 
disaster-response mechanisms. Human potential would have achieved its 
zenith by developing capabilities to automatically balance the regeneration 
abilities of the earth with its own consumption levels.
3.6	
References
[1] Newman, P. and Jennings, I. (2008). Cities as Sustainable Ecosystems: 
Principles and Practices, Island Press.
[2] UNFP (1999). “The state of the World Population”.
[3] Seto, K.C., Güneralp, B. and Hutyra, L. R. (2012). Global forecasts of 
urban expansion to 2030 and direct impacts on biodiversity and carbon pools; 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
[4] World Bank (2008). Climate Resilient Cities: 2008 Primer. 

72	
Geographic information system for smart cities
[5] Costanza, R. (1997). “The value of the world’s ecosystem services and 
natural capital”, Nature, 387, pp. 253–260.
[6] UN World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED) 
(1987), “Our Common Future”.
[7] Allen, R. (1980), How to save the World, (New Jersey: Barnes and Noble).
[8] Netzband, M. and Stefanov, W.L. (2004). Urban Land Cover and Spatial 
Variation Observation using Aster and Modis Satellite Image Data; www.isprs.
org/proceedings/xxxv/congress/comm7/papers/253.pdf‎
[9] Rees, W.E. and Wackernagel, M. (1998). Our Ecological Footprint: 
Reducing Human Impact on the Earth; New Society Publishers, Canada.
[10] The Urban Sustainability Index: A New Tool for Measuring China’s Cities 
(2010). The Urban China Initiative, A joint initiative of Columbia University, 
Tsinghua University, and McKinsey & Company, November 2010.
[11] http://www.siemens.com/greencityindex
[12] Dash, R. et al., Environmental Sustainability Index for Indian States 
2011: Informing Environmental Action, Centre for Development Finance, 
Chennai, India.
[13] Sutton, P.C. (2003). “An empirical environmental sustainability index 
derived solely from night time satellite imagery and ecosystem service valuation”, 
Population and Environment, 24(4), Human Sciences Press, Inc.
[14] Zha, Y., Gao, J. and Ni, S. (2003). “Use of normalized difference built-
up index in automatically mapping urban areas from TM imagery”, International 
Journal of Remote Sensing, 24(3), pp. 583–594.
[15] Lillesand, T., Kiefer, R.W. and Chipman, J. (2009). Remote Sensing and 
Image Interpretation, Fifth Edition, Wiley India.
[16] Jensen J.R. (2011). Remote Sensing of the Environment: An Earth 
Resource Perspective, Pearson.
[17] Shemdoe, R.S. (2010). “Heavy metal concentrations in soils and 
leachetes of Mtoni dumpsite bordering the Indian Ocean in Dar es Salaam, 
Tanzania”, Scientific Research and Essays, 5(16), pp. 2143–2147.
[18] Brown, M. and Southworth, F. (2008). Shrinking the Carbon Footprints 
of Metropolitan America; Metropolitan Policy Program at Brookings, Georgia 
Institute of Technology.
[19] http://www.sustainablescale.org/ConceptualFramework/Understanding 
Scale/MeasuringScale/TheIPATEquation.aspx

Abstract: Cities need Geographic Information Systems (GIS) for long-term, smart adaptation 
and alignment with coastal environments of the future. Cities have been developed on 
coastlines heedless of the ever-changing nature of our planet’s surface, and it is expected 
that by 2025, 75% of the human population will live in coastal areas, which are particularly 
susceptible to erosion [1]. According to scientists, the emission of greenhouse gases over the 
past centuries has led to sea-level rise (SLR), which threatens the fragile human settlements 
and infrastructure along the coasts. It is expected that SLR will continue for the next several 
hundred years at least. This trend coincides with rapid urbanisation and population growth. 
Response options against SLR can be categorised into defence, retreat or resilience, and 
must be derived from the modelling of geo-spatial data. GIS is an excellent tool to predict 
coastal processes and consequences on urban design, allowing us to:
l	
Monitor maritime erosion
l	
Display multilayered models of future scenarios
l	
Provide guidance for strategies for increased resilience of existing and future urbanised 
areas
l 	 Demark areas of expected erosion/inundation for scheduled retreat of settlements from 
the coast to safe locations
l 	 Communicate and guide rescue strategies in case of a disaster
	
Even advanced technology such as GIS has its limitations. As a model, it operates in the 
Western scientific paradigm, one that relies on a particular model of evidence based on the 
scientific method. The model therefore restricts itself to what must be historical, quantifiable 
(hence simplified) data. This may be inadequate to account for the complex interactions of 
the natural environment.
	
We conclude that we need to search beyond the retrospective, proven, knowledge-
based algorithms of geo-spatial models and explore more of the wisdom of humankind that 
has been previously excluded from scientific thought.
4.1	
Climate change and the coastal habitat of 
mankind
4.1.1	
Humanity lives on the coasts
For the most part, mankind has established a coastal civilisation. Currently, 
most of the world’s population live along coastal strips that account for 
4
Adaptive urbanism: Climate change, sea-level 
rise and a new urban age
BERND GUNDERMANN

74	
Geographic information system for smart cities
only 10% of the planet’s surface area [2]. The most rapid population 
growth occurs in urban environments, which will increase from 52% of 
the current global population to 84% of the predicted 9.2 billion people 
in 2050. The accelerated urbanisation will contribute to the inhabitation 
of coastal areas as 75% of the mega-cities with more than 10 million 
inhabitants are located by the sea [3]. These vast agglomerations also 
house the majority of vital infrastructure and industry.
4.1.2	
Fragility of coastal land
The coastal strip, low-lying and of sedimentary or reclaimed nature, is 
vulnerable to both human activity and natural erosion. Additionally, the 
surface of the earth is subject to on going change as result of earthquakes, 
volcanic eruptions and tsunamis are visible indicators of this steady 
activity beneath us. We know from archaeological research that ever since 
the Stone Age the sea level has changed significantly.
Figure 4.1  The surface of our planet undergoes constant change. About 20,000 years ago, 
the sea level was 120 m lower than today, and consequently the land area of New Zealand 
was far greater.

	Adaptive urbanism: Climate change, sea-level rise and a new urban age	
75
	
Over the last decades, research has proved that the earth is warming 
at an unprecedented rate, which leads to a number of responses within the 
biosphere, such as the melting of glaciers, polar ice caps, permafrost soils, 
the thermal expansion of the sea water and a rise of frequencies of extreme 
weather-related events. 
4.1.3	
Sea-level rise as consequence of climate change
One of the consequences of climate change is sea-level rise (SLR). There 
are estimates based on modelling which indicate that the oceans may rise 
between 0.5 and 2 m by the end of this century. The variation between the 
estimates illustrates that scientific methodologies, the parameters of the 
models and the inclusion of the latest scientific findings have a significant 
influence on the results. Interestingly, the assumptions of the organization 
which is most closely connected to politics, the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC), have one of the lowest estimates. 
	
The non-binding Copenhagen Accord, an outcome of the otherwise 
failed 2009 conference of the UN Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC), reaffirmed the global target of reducing Global 
Warming below 2 °C, by the end of this century. 
	
Even with a 2 °C increase, there will be severe impacts on many nations 
and ecosystems. Most scenarios refuse to deal with an increase beyond 
2 °C by the end of the 21st century. A recent study however, published in 
Nature in May 2012, looks beyond the year 2100 and similarly concludes 
at a maximum of 2 °C temperature increase. This finding can be interpreted 
as a temperature stabilisation level or as a holding temperature but 
nonetheless “it would probably lead to many metres of SLR in the coming 
few centuries and would maintain rates of SLR higher than today for many 
centuries.” [4]
	
These studies lead us to ask what does SLR of 0.5–2.0 m mean in a 
modelled 4+ °C world. Depending on the level of coastal defence (differing 
from no protection to elaborated engineered systems such as in Holland), 
the consequences vary. If there was to be no protection, the area lost as a 
result of a half metre increase in sea level would lead to a total increase of 
870,000 sq km. This figure would increase to 1,789,000 sq km should the 
SLR reach 2.0. As a result the annual cost of enhancing and maintaining 
sea defences needed to keep up with SLR of 2.0 and could reach a sum of 
annually US$270 billion [5].

76	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
Additionally most of these investments have to be made in the 
developing countries, where they coincide with the peak of population 
growth (expected to be reached by mid century) and the highest demand 
for increase in food production and water supply. It is expected that 
countries most affected by SLR like Bangladesh and Vietnam will struggle 
financially due to the multiple efforts to be undertaken simultaneously [6]. 
	
It shall be noted though that all of those estimates refer to limited 
data. We also note that science steadily publishes new findings. Most 
of them reveal how little we know about the inherent complexity and 
connectivity within the biosphere of our planet. This lack of knowledge, 
however, doesn’t change human’s behaviour. The conference of the 
UNFCCC 2009 in Copenhagen failed; the Rio Summit 2012 wasn’t even 
attended by major politicians of the economies responsible for Greenhouse 
Gas (GHG) emissions, as they were busy discussing measures against the 
Global Financial Crisis, which may cause a further increase of global 
warming.
	
It has become apparent that positivistic science and politics relies 
on 100% certainty and the required evidence before even commencing 
lengthy political negotiations to establish a plan of action. Clearly, this 
process is more prolonged than the effects of SLR. Instead, this time 
should be used to initiate both counter-measures against further GHG 
emission and strategies to increase the resilience of human settlements 
and infrastructures on a local basis.
4.1.4	
Effects of sea-level rise on cities
Our cities, industries and infrastructure are built for permanence, with 
their intrinsic immobility being the driver of their success causing 
investment in buildings and infrastructures to reap long-term rewards. 
As soon as mankind established stability some 10,000 years ago, human 
development soared, thus causing urban stability to be the very foundation 
of civilisation. Climate change and SLR, however, challenge this basis, as 
the majority of cities are located on the coast and their immobility clashes 
with the dynamic of the natural forces. The level of destruction that these 
forces can have was demonstrated when the east coast of the United States, 
including New York City, was hit by hurricane Sandy in November 2012.
These effects include:

	Adaptive urbanism: Climate change, sea-level rise and a new urban age	
77
Inundation
Rising sea levels will inundate low-lying parts of coastal cities and 
affect their infrastructure, such as sewage, electrical and communication 
networks, traffic lines, road and underground tunnels, ports and airports.
Storm surges
Along open coasts, storm surges can force water onto the shoreline. The 
effects of storm surges can vary as a result of atmospheric pressure, winds 
and currents. As storm surges build up over long distances, the inherent 
wave energy is massive and difficult to absorb by manmade means (i.e. 
seawalls).
Erosion
The increase of maritime activity on raised sea-levels will further increase 
coastal erosion. The Bruun Rule can work as a rough rule of thumb stating 
that 10 mm of SLR will trigger 1 m of retreat from the coast. Many coastal 
cities are located at river mouths, which adds to the problem as the amount 
of river water will increase due to more rainfall-runoff through climate 
change as well. A recent study estimates that the Bruun effect may only 
represent 25–50% of the total coastal recession at inlets and mouth [7].
Extreme weather events
Research shows that due to climate change, the occurrence and severity of 
extreme weather events, such as floods and hurricanes will increase. This 
adds to the amount of erosion of coastal land. 
4.2	
Response strategies to sea-level rise
Since mankind has settled along the coasts for millennia, strategies to 
respond to changes in sea level have been developed. These include: 
defence, retreat and adapt. 
4.2.1	
Defence
The instinctive approach to any threat is defence. In ancient times cities 
were walled in order to secure their peace and independence. Dykes, 
sluices and sea walls, amongst other measures, have been optimised over 

78	
Geographic information system for smart cities
centuries to achieve the reclamation and protection of land. Holland, 
with large parts of the country lying below sea level, has created 
elaborated engineering works to keep the North Sea out. Unfortunately, 
these systems have resulted in serious, irreversible ecological damage. 
The disruption of the salt- and freshwater ecosystems led to increased 
erosion on the seaside and soil-salination on the landside, among other 
effects. Holland has moved away from this approach and now aims for 
a seamless transition between sea and land, retaining the bulwarks for 
disaster protection only. Many countries consider defence as the only 
option in order to “hold the line” and secure both human lives and 
works.
4.2.2	
Retreat
Looking closer at the extent of the threat that sea-level rise imposes on 
intensely utilised coasts, it becomes obvious that there may be a trade-off 
to intensify investment in hard engineered sea defence only in areas of high 
and indispensible central cities, whereas areas utilised to a lower degree 
will be abandoned in due course following a scheduled and managed 
retreat from the shores.
	
The abandoned land will then be re-converted into tidal salt-water 
marshes to absorb rising water levels. Researchers of the Duke University 
in the United States have found that a salt-water marsh can cope with rises 
of 1–10 mm/year, when they are undisturbed. This can be heightened by 
agitating 5% of the plants and reducing the supply of sediments causing 
substantial changes with a 10 mm/year increase of sea level [8]. Thus, 
if retreat is to occur it must be accompanied by a reverse-engineering of 
abandoned human structures to achieve both the decontamination of the 
environmental hazards accumulated within human structures over time 
and the function of the re-created salt-water marshes as a natural buffer 
against SLR.
	
Retreat is currently practiced in East Anglia, United Kingdom, due 
to insufficient funding to support existing sea defences. This will be an 
increasing occurrence over the next few decades as many villages and 
towns will not be able to support a defence system to SLR and will thus be 
sacrificed causing the population to relocate elsewhere. 

	Adaptive urbanism: Climate change, sea-level rise and a new urban age	
79
Figure 4.2  East Anglia, United Kingdom, will need to retreat from large portions of its coast. 
The black zones are expected to be flooded when the West Antarctica ice shelf melts.
4.2.3	
Resilience
For settlements in affected coastal areas that need to be retained for an 
extended period of time, a state of resilience can be created not only by 
hard engineering but also by arrays of local soft interventions, through 
interaction with the coastal environment, providing a greater resistance to 
flooding. 
	
In 2010 Princeton University presented a study on increasing the 
resilience of Palisade Bay [9], which is shared by New York and New 
Jersey. The proposed interventions include:

80	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
l	 Softened coastlines, converting hard quay walls into soft natural 
banks
	
l	 Breakwater towers, porous artificial structures the work as wave 
breakers yet allow for manoeuvring space for vessels on the water
	
l	 Artificial islands built up by the dredges spoil of deepened shipping 
routes to break the wave energy
	
My work with students at the University of Auckland, New Zealand, 
adapted those strategies to the context of Auckland. The suggested 
measures included quay walls converted to urban farming, floating 
communities, floating cruise terminals that work as breakwaters, retreat 
theme park and vertical retreat that created landscaped decks connecting 
high-rise buildings over the water in an inundated CBD [10].
Figure 4.3  Inundated central business districts can apply vertical retreat, creating a green 
city within the former high-rise city. This study demonstrates that visionary architectural 
solutions applied early can create new, resilient urban life style.
	
The benefit of this strategy compared to solid defence is its flexibility 
in both locality and time. Many coastal cities have begun to monitor their 
coastal environments, which helps to indicate appropriate locations for 
the mentioned counter-measures. Over time these interventions become 
optimised and when severe sea levels occur, resilient measures will have 

	Adaptive urbanism: Climate change, sea-level rise and a new urban age	
81
been implemented. Additionally, this interventional strategy improves the 
lifestyle of the urban environment, enriches coastal estuaries, and stretches 
financial investment over long periods of time.
	
Urbanism aims for liveable urban environments centred on the 
well being of its inhabitants even in the face of environmental crises. 
Resilience aims to overcome the status quo by instigating strategies of 
elastic response. Adaptive urbanism goes further as it enables cities to 
change, grow, shrink, relocate, densify or submerge. In an increasingly 
urbanised world, where individual retreat by motor vehicle may become 
restricted, the solid built body of the city will need to be penetrated by 
useful green space within walking distance. The coastal cities will activate 
the water in order to enable people to adopt a maritime lifestyle. Here the 
people-centeredness overlaps with measures of increasing resilience to 
SLR. 
4.3	
Available technology
4.3.1	
Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
The intense complexity of the urban grain, where activities overlap and 
occur in vertical layers instead of spreading out horizontally and where 
open spaces, buildings, infrastructure, ports and the open sea, are to be 
fully integrated into advanced methodologies of planning and managing 
cities. Geographic Information Systems (GIS) creates the foundation to 
understand, facilitate and manage adaptive cities and to communicate 
complex content in graphical and comprehendible ways. This chapter 
concentrates on how to adapt urbanism to rising sea-levels.
	
In urban planning the use of mapping is an ancient tradition. However, 
the concepts of planning have gained complexity and the amount of relative 
data has increased in the last decades due to the utilisation of data sets 
created by satellites since the 1970s, hence creating the need for GIS. It is 
important to note that GIS is a display system that allows the combination 
and superimposition of thematic maps for the communication of hugely 
complex information referring to location. It should also be clarified that 
GIS only provides static snapshots. Monitoring and modelling of dynamic 
processes is done in specific software and then compiled into GIS for both 
analysis and presentation.

82	
Geographic information system for smart cities
4.3.2	
GIS, LiDAR and GPS
To collect data to assess coastal environments, scientists commonly use 
Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) technology obtained by airplanes 
or satellite with additional information provided by NASA from its 
experimental advanced research. Combined with Geographical Positioning 
System (GPS), which refers the detected data to space and time, LiDAR is 
an excellent tool for geomorphologic surveys.
	
Laser-based LiDAR has the ability to detect subtle surface details 
even through vegetation. It distinguishes between natural and man-made 
structures. Repeated LiDAR surveys enable researchers to establish data 
sets for longitudinal analyses, which disclose changes in the natural 
environments, such as earthquakes or SLR, over time.
	
LiDAR data are displayed in survey maps, which provide the basis 
of GIS. In combination with land use maps, development plans, cadastral 
land registers, and sociologic data, GIS visualises a mapped representation 
of the complexity of urban settlements.
4.3.3	
Modelling
Cities are not a static phenomenon; instead they are constantly in a state 
of flux, as a result of population growth and migration. Growing number 
of inhabitants require more space to dwell, work and commute, which 
consumes an increasing amount of surrounding land. Occasionally, 
clusters of cities agglomerate into mega-cities with more than 10 million 
inhabitants. This level of rapid urbanisation is particularly common in 
developing countries such as India. It is expected that the 377 million city-
dwellers in India will double by the middle of the 21st century [11].
	
In order to manage growth of this magnitude, planning is supported 
by data modelling which aims to understand how populations may 
migrate, where they possibly will dwell, and what consequences this will 
have related to resources and infrastructure. Numeric models work with 
algorithms, which are related to measurable properties of the content 
researched. Models create scenarios, which differ by their parameters, 
such as recorded migration patterns or attractors. 
	
India, for instance, has developed one-model scenario which estimates 
that most of India’s west coast will form a mega-agglomeration with 
hundreds of millions of people. As a result, strategic planning that considers 

	Adaptive urbanism: Climate change, sea-level rise and a new urban age	
83
the risk of SLR is required to create an immense, coastal urbanised 
region, which will include a transport corridor from Gujarat to Kerala. In 
addition to the modelling of urban planning, modelling coastal regress and 
possible hazard areas are crucial to ensure both people and investments 
are safe. Coastal strips of land allocated for future development can be 
assessed against both potential erosion and inundation in order to create 
resilient seaside communities. The results of modelling are formatted 
as maps and comprise suites of environmental risk assessment layers 
within GIS.
4.4	
Adaptive urbanism and the smart city
Given both the ongoing reshaping of coasts and the pressure of human 
development, master plans can no longer be static. The representation 
of urban design concepts that are fixed at their time of creation, such as 
Chandigarh or Brasilia in the 20th century, will need to be active to follow 
evolutionary schemes over long-time frames. 
	
Whereas the Smart City has an emphasis on ICT to offer both better 
workability by e-governance and better quality of public services, Adaptive 
Urbanism aims for a greater flexibility of manmade structure retaining the 
ability to adapt to ever-changing natural and human environments. The 
concept of the Smart City can contribute to utilize its technology (GIS) 
as ‘sensors’ that would trigger adaptation. Adaptive Urbanism can be 
described as ‘fluid’, ‘dynamic’, ‘spontaneous’ or ‘parasitic’ in contrary 
to the classic urban paradigm that is enduring, rigid and monumental. 
Adaptive Urbanism is dependent on the participation of the people 
concerned, ensuring open communication between all stakeholders. GIS 
is a perfect tool to address those issues, as it can manage large amounts 
of information, allocate the content to regions, combine different layers 
of information to create a variety of conclusions, and GIS can, first and 
foremost, project estimated consequences of scenarios into the future.
	
Adaptation to future conditions is crucial when looking at SLR as 
our knowledge and insight into the complexity of the nature of coastal 
environments grows quickly. Urban development needs to ensure well-
considered changes to coastal developments in order to be resilient in the 
long term. 

84	
Geographic information system for smart cities
4.4.1	
Two case studies from New Zealand 
Figure 4.4  New Zealand and the locations of the two case studies
(a) Christchurch
A study was undertaken by the New Zealand’s University of Canterbury 
and presented at the Digital Earth Summit 2012 [12]. Christchurch was 
the second largest city of New Zealand (the population before the two 
earthquakes occurred in 2010 and 2011 was c 380,000). Beside the 
fatalities and the destruction of the city centre, the tectonic shift dislocated 
large areas of suburbs. The study refers back to the historic movement 
of the coastline over the last 10,000 years disclosing regressions and 
progradations ranging more than 10 km. This makes very clear that the 
current position of the shoreline is purely a temporary snapshot. 

	Adaptive urbanism: Climate change, sea-level rise and a new urban age	
85
Figure 4.5  We need to understand that the current maps are just snapshots given the ongoing 
geomorphologic activity. Here is shown how the Pacific transgressed over the current city of 
Christchurch (Source: [12]).
Figure 4.6  Even in historical time the shoreline moved c. 12 km across Christchurch; why 
should we assume this process would ever stop? (Source: [12])

86	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
The post-earthquake tectonic uplift of the coastal area including the 
river inlet of up to 0.5 m means, in terms of SLR represents, a time-lapse 
of several decades of the 21st century. 
Figure 4.7  Subsidence of parts of Christchurch up to 0.5 m is sea-level rise in time-lapse, an 
opportunity to test options for resilience, due in the second half of this century, now.
	
Thus the post-quake strategies to include future resilience to long-term 
SLR, which were suggested by the study, and the inertia of authorities in 
implementation due to the widespread resistance within the population 
can be experienced already. That might help to optimise policy making 
for the time after 2040, when the forecasts estimate similar sea levels to 
the remainder of the current 65% of New Zealand’s population that reside 
along its coasts.
	
The result is an extra 50 hectares exposed to mid-tide, which is an 
increase of 18% and a tidal prism reduction by 14%. Scientists modelled 
significant impacts on the likely changes of the coastal inlet of the river, 
emphasising on the change in sediment supply, which will have further 
impacts on the coastal resistance to erosion.
	
Separate to those findings, there were a series of inundation maps with 
up to a 3 m SLR modelled, which indicate land losses based upon the 
Bruun Rule. This set of model scenarios are superimposed by 
	
l	 Cadastral plans to see who might be affected and what the magnitude 
of possible financial compensation for land loss, loss of property 
and income might be. Infrastructure plans to realise impacts on 

	Adaptive urbanism: Climate change, sea-level rise and a new urban age	
87
sewerage and other service lines. The scientists suggested that 
certain damaged or endangered routs shouldn’t be replaced.
	
l	 Road plans to revise resilient road network that can be sustained in 
a changed urban future.
	
l	 Rate plan to be aware what income groups of the populations may 
impose resistance to retreat scenarios.
Figure 4.8  Inundation maps will become an important tool for urban planning, because both 
the people and the investment in urban infrastructure to be secured over a long period of 
time in new settlements. They help existing cities such as Christchurch to prepare for change 
(Source: [12])
(b) Whitianga
New Zealand’s National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research 
(NIWA) conducted a case study in 2011 investigating how to successfully 
engage with communities on coastal adaption to climate change [13]. 
It used Whitianga, a town located on the north-east of the Coromandel 
peninsular which is exposed to the Pacific Ocean.
	
When attempting to address the issues of SLR, authorities often face 
issues of resistance by the local residents who feel both unprotected by the 
government and sacrificed to the forces of nature. In New Zealand’s culture, 
ownership of land and house is elementary, and the statutory authorities are 
first and foremost to protect them. To make matters worse, those community 
members who own properties in the front line of the coast are usually the 

88	
Geographic information system for smart cities
best tax and ratepayers and the most wealthy and influential ones. The 
community is desperate to keep them happy and supportive. 
	
The study is a small scale demonstration of what will be required by 
large cities in the future to attain both support and successful participation 
of the retreat from the coast. Research found that the paramount issues were 
the effect on the community’s values and lifestyles as a result of SLR. They 
demonstrated GIS as a tool that assisted communication and simplified 
complex issues, making them easily comprehendible for laypersons. 
	
One central event “the Open Day” was initiated to engage with the 
community to find out what the locals value most within their community 
and how SLR might affect it. This event helped to get locals interested into 
the topic and to provide awareness and participation. 
	
The key tool that was used for this were GIS maps which illustrated:
	
l	 Inundation and drainage affected by SLR
	
l	 Regression of the coastline 
	
l	 Potential migration of estuary vegetation
Figure 4.9  Tables like this one informed the locals about the impact of sea-level rise on their 
community at the Open Day in Whitianga, where citizens and scientists started a meaningful 
dialogue

	Adaptive urbanism: Climate change, sea-level rise and a new urban age	
89
The Open Day was considered a success from both the community and 
the researchers involved. The community members appreciated the 
opportunity to ask scientists about climate change and SLR, and they felt 
valued by the scientists (thus indirectly the government) rather than being 
treated as subjects. The event has opened communication lines, which will 
become crucial for in the future when the increase of extreme weather 
frequencies and the rising sea level will become more obvious.
Learning
Seeing both studies combined, it becomes clear that the adaptive Smart 
City aims for self-awareness of its inhabitants who are reliant on GIS for 
communication and planning. Participation allows citizens to become 
active agents within an encompassing system: aware, engaged and 
supportive.
4.4.2	
GIS and smart adaptation
E-governance will be used to inform the population about the impact of 
SLR relative to specific locations allowing inhabitants to know about 
the impact on their property. It is proposed that councils make the latest 
modelled assumptions available online. Currently, there is hesitation in 
publicizing the data as properties that are predicted to have high property 
value losses will influence the real estate market. Thus, there have to 
be complimentary educational and participatory efforts implemented to 
provide additional context to the GIS data of SLR impact scenarios. 
	
Engineered measures to improve coastal resilience will need to obtain 
public participation aided by an online SLR application. This allows 
public discussion to become more informed and meaningful, providing a 
good understanding prior to those events. The accumulated data shall be 
delivered into a cloud computing system to increase accessibility. 
	
Council and citizens will be able (to a different degree) to control the 
renders individually. A person can access the website (SLR-app with GIS 
data), enter a location (via a GPS cell phone) and then render different 
scenarios, such as water level, tsunami, earthquake, wind, time, individually 
via sliders on the side of the display screen. The user will get a snapshot of 
the selected conditions for his/her location. Creating awareness amongst 
citizens may cause disturbance initially, but in the long term it will evoke 
bottom-up attentiveness, as demonstrated in the Whitianga case study, 

90	
Geographic information system for smart cities
which prepares the foundation of community involvement. Citizens that 
take ownership of the community will be needed when the environmental 
pressure due to climate change and SLR becomes tangible.
	
Given that lifestyle is becoming increasingly mobile, GIS data and the 
accompanying informational and educational tools shall be available as 
interactive online applications accessible primarily with mobile devices 
such as smart phones. In case of a flooding disaster, citizens can contribute 
valuable information via social networks to get an overview of its impact 
to feed it into regularly updated disaster maps. In reverse, the online 
connectivity will provide information on open traffic-corridors to save 
areas, hospital capacities, damaged infrastructure or additional hazards. 
The GIS model becomes an interactive communication tool, which in 
normal times will help to increase both awareness and preparation and 
give guidance for victims in case of disasters.
	
In a self-aware Smart City, people need to understand themselves as 
integral part of the natural environment, into which their city is embedded. 
An interconnected online interface, based on GIS modelled interactive 
data sets, will become an additional “sensory organ” that offers both 
information about and participation in the smart, knowledge-based 
urbanised future.
4.4.3	
Transcending the limits of science and technology 
On the night of the 26th of December 2004, the coasts of South-East Asia 
were devastated by the most destructive tsunami ever recorded. Surge 
waves up to 30 m high claimed an estimated death toll of 230,000 people. 
Modern buildings, erected according to research-based standards, were 
destroyed without trace whereas many traditional vernacular houses 
remained undamaged. This superior resilience of ancient culture was 
illustrated on the Andaman Islands, where most of the indigenous people 
living there were fortunate to survive. The secret behind this miraculous 
outcome is that the indigenous people believed in their myths and the 
wisdom taught by the land and passed on over many generations instead 
of trusting western scientific knowledge. The people are intrinsically 
connected to the place. Their survival was a result of responding to the 
silence of the usually loud cicadas and heading for the high lands escaping 
the tsunami. Materialist science is limited as it has a narrow understanding 
of the natural environment considering it as being dead matter only. Why 

	Adaptive urbanism: Climate change, sea-level rise and a new urban age	
91
should possibly quiet cicadas know about a tsunami, and why should 
intelligent humans pay attention to dead matter, silent or loud?
	
Developed societies have almost lost their connection to the deeper levels 
of inquiry long ago when materialist science was separated from insights 
that couldn’t be verified. Cartesian Dualism, which separated mind and 
matter, has led to man’s fallacy on his superiority to the natural environment, 
understanding mankind as “masters and possessors of nature” [14].
	
In our understanding as rulers of nature, we have used science and 
technology in a way that led to damage of the natural environment and now 
that consequences like climate changes are arising, we expect to be rescued 
from them. However, I consider there to be salvation by withdrawing 
from our notion of superiority, overcoming the Cartesian split and 
re-integrating ourselves as one part of an integrated environment, using 
our scientific and technologic achievements wisely, embedded into a post-
materialist philosophy. 
	
Hence I suggest a complimentary co-existence of both concepts. 
The weighting of which can be determined by society and its stage of 
development, finding a place for both technology and nature, smart phones 
and cicadas. 
	
After the 2004 tsunami, it was advised that the disaster had a greater 
impact due to the destruction of coral reefs and removal of mangrove 
forests, causing the natural sea defence to be weakened. Both the re-
introduction and strengthening of natural buffers to withstand the impact 
of storm surge are part of ‘Adaptive Urbanism’ as well as the retreat from 
the sea over time according to the rise of the sea level. In the light of 
accelerated urbanisation in developing countries, where coastal land is 
increasingly transformed into human settlements, the remainder of ancient 
wisdom about the land needs to be incorporated into responsible smart 
planning as well, as it shall be based upon awe of the wonder of creation, 
a concept embraced by all of human spirituality.
4.5	
Conclusion 
The increase of economic development in all parts of the world combined 
with human population growing has led to a rise in urbanisation. As people 
prefer to live by the sea, the coastal strips will attract even more settlement 
than ever before. Here the expansion of fragile urbanised structures clashes 
with the rise of sea levels and potential of severe natural disasters.

92	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
GIS already provides spatially related data progressed by algorithmic 
modelling in order to predict future trends of both manmade and natural 
development. The concept of Smart City, as a self-aware, knowledge-based 
urban society, provides an overarching instrumentarium to implement 
available (satellite-based) data about SLR in order to guide planning and 
governance as well as assistance for rescue and recovery in case of disaster.
	
Adaptive Urbanism extends the ICT-related service component of 
the Smart City into the physical behaviour of manmade structures. In an 
analogy to ever-changing organic adaptivity to varying environmental 
conditions, coastal settlements of the future need to be able to adapt to a 
rapidly changing world. New, more flexible ways to build and relocate are 
as important as cloud-based real-time information available everywhere.
	
However, the increasing frequency and severity of natural disasters 
and the lack of scientific knowledge about the interconnected nature of 
the environment demand a wider basis of inquiry beyond the intrinsic 
limitation of materialist science and technology. Successful societies will 
need to transcend these limits and open up to apply wisdom as well as 
knowledge.
	
Through the development of existing technologies and understanding 
of the intrinsic relationship with the natural environment, informed 
decision-making allows us to building adaptive environments which 
will not only revolutionize current urban design practices but provide an 
enduring solution for future development – a new urban age. 
4.6	
References
[1] Creel, L. (2003). Ripple Effects: Population and Coastal Regions, 
Population Reference Bureau, Washington DC, http://www.prb.org/pdf/
RippleEffects_Eng.pdf [Accessed 06 December 2012]
[2] Hinrichsen, D. (1999). The Coastal Population Explosion, National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Washington DC, http://oceanservice.
noaa.gov/websites/retiredsites/natdia_pdf/3hinrichsen.pdf 
[Accessed 
06 
December 2012]
[3] Visbeck, M. (2010). World Ocean Review 2010, Hamburg, Maribus, 
http://worldoceanreview.com/en/coasts/ [Accessed 06 December 2012]
[4] Schaeffer, M., Hare, W., Rahmstorf, S., and Vermeer, M. (2012). Long-
term sea-level rise implied by 1.5 °C and 2 °C warming levels, Nature Climate 
Change 2, 867–870, http://ssi.ucsd.edu/scc/images/Schaeffer%20SLR%20at%20
+1.5%20+2%20NatCC%2012.pdf [Accessed 06 December 2012]

	Adaptive urbanism: Climate change, sea-level rise and a new urban age	
93
[5] Nicholls, R. J., Marinova, N., Lowe, J. A., Brown, S., Vellinga, P., de 
Gusmao, D., Hinkel, J., and Tol, R. S. J. (2011). Sea-level rise and its possible 
impacts given a ‘beyond 4 °C world’ in the twenty-first century, Phil. Trans. R. 
Soc. A 369, 161–181. 
[6] New, M., Liverman, D., Schroeder, H. and Anderson, K. (2011). Four 
degrees and beyond: the potential for a global temperature increase of four degrees 
and its implications, Phil Trans R Soc A, 369, 1934 6–19.
[7] Ranasinghe, R., Duong, T. M., Uhlenbrook, S., Roelvink, R., and Stive, 
M. (2012). Climate-Change impact assessment for inlet-interrupted coastlines, 
Nature Climate Change.
[8] Basgal, M. (2007). Healthy coastal wetlands would adapt to rising oceans, 
Duke University, Durham, http://today.duke.edu/2007/03/marshmodel.html 
[Accessed 06 December 2012]
[9] Nordenson, G., Seavitt, C., and Yarinsky, A. (2010). On the water: 
Palisade Bay, The Museum of Modern Art, New York.
[10] Gundermann, B. (2012). Adaptive Urbanism, Stephenson & Turner, 
Auckland, http://stephensonturner.com/uploads/misc/AdaptiveUrbanismBooklet_
web.pdf [Accessed 06 December 2012]
[11] National Institute of Urban Affairs (2011). India’s urban 
demographic 
transition, 
New 
Delhi, 
http://indiagovernance.gov.in/files/
urbandemographictransition.pdf [Accessed 06 December 2012]
[12] Hughes, M., Swaffield, S., Hart, D., Kirk, B., and Cubrinowski, M. 
(2012). Sea-level rise in Christchurch, New Zealand: Envisioning synergistic 
climate-seismic risks and exploring alternative futures in dynamic coastal 
landscapes, Digital Earth Summit 2012, and Phone conversation with Matthew 
Hughes on 25 September 2012.
[13] Rouse, H., and Blackett, P. (2011). Engaging with communities on 
coastal adaptation to climate change: Whitianga experience, National Institute of 
Water and Atmospheric Research, Auckland.
[14] Descartes, R. (1637). Discourse on the method, University of Adelaide, 
http://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/d/descartes/rene/d44dm/index.html [Accessed 06 
December 2012]

Abstract: Dubai city has transformed itself from a vast desert to a super-modern, vibrant and 
dynamic city within two decades. In 1993, the developed area in Dubai constituted of 149.6 
sq km, which is expected to grow to 604.8 sq km by 2015. To keep pace with the rapid growth 
of the city, it became important to secure and maintain the quality of plan for future urban 
expansion. Hence the planners have to keep track of multiple urban and regional indicators 
to assess the future community needs and plan environment to create a qualitative healthy 
life for the present and future residents.
	
GIS forms an important tool to build the comprehensive urban fabric of Dubai city plan. 
It is used extensively by planners and decision makers in the field of development and setting 
up a strong network between the service providers and users for sharing of information.
	
The aim of this chapter is to highlight few examples where GIS is used as a convenient 
tool for the planners to judge the land parcels for most feasible future use. The examples also 
show how the various existing information obtained with the help of GIS database to help the 
planners decide and provide the plot development guidelines with maximum information at 
the time of selection of any planning area within the city.
Key words: land use, master plan, comprehensive plan, community, GIS database, smart 
city.
5.1	
Introduction
5.1.1	
Role of GIS in community planning and development
Large, dense cities can be highly productive, innovative and very green and 
hence desirable for our future. However the rapid influx of new citizens 
presents overwhelming challenges to their governments. Along with the 
positive benefits that accumulate from dense, diverse cities come in equal 
measure with the negative aspects such as informal development, traffic 
congestion, waste management, and limited access to resources and crime. 
Globalisation has connected the world with in terms of capital, resources, 
technology and creativity. Creation of a smart community leads to 
coordination between planning, design, finance, construction, governance, 
and operation of urban infrastructure and services. This coordination 
5
Assessment of land and land use for future 
development using GIS in the community 
development of Dubai
ASHMITA KARMAKAR

	
Assessment of land and land use for future development using GIS ...	
95
between communities within the Emirate makes any city, a ‘smart city’. 
In a smart city a collaborative system of international technology brings 
a mutual coordination between various fields of architecture, planning, 
engineering, transportation, utilities, information technology, operations 
research, social sciences, geography and environmental science, public 
finance and policy, and communications. It is the information technology 
which binds together all the elements of urban fabric to perform efficiently 
within a strong network [1]. 
	
This chapter describes how a model city unifies the perspectives of 
professions within the urban systems in a collaborative manner. It describes 
how information technology is responsible in shaping new norms of 
behaviour intended to facilitate the continuing growth of a community. 
It also describes the increased accessibility of information that enables 
the citizens, entrepreneurs, civic organisations and governments to see 
more deeply into how their communities work and grow further in order 
to accommodate future population and land uses within its delineated 
boundary.
	
An integrated GIS-based multicriteria approach to land suitability 
analysis and allocation offers significant advantages. The GIS environment 
also enables the spatial evaluation of the site suitability and the assignment 
of various measures to specific plots or geographic areas. The system allows 
area allocations and gives out usable details of specific spatial or geographic 
locations. Hence, the integrated GIS-based model combines the spatial 
capabilities of GIS, with the analytical power of multi-criteria analyses. In 
this way the GIS-based integrated model permits both analytical planning 
and optimisation of land-use decisions at different levels, namely: (1) site 
suitability assessments based on different factors for specific land uses; (2) 
generation of suitability indices based on combinations of different factors 
(i.e., composite index/measure of site suitability); and (3) generation of 
an optimal land-use plan that simultaneously considers the individual site 
suitability, and the optimal allocation to the most suitable land use (i.e., mix 
of land uses that yields the “highest” overall cumulative appropriateness).
5.2	
The study
5.2.1	
Aim of the study
The aim of the study is to develop a suitable mechanism for allocating 
sites for the particular level of land use. 

96	
Geographic information system for smart cities
5.2.2	
Scope of the study
l	
To study the land-use change/introduction of a new land use within the 
master plan site
l	
To study the existing land use of the master plan site with respect to 
the future market demand and population trend
l	
To identify the demand for the facilities required for the future target 
population
l	
To allocate a suitable location for the new plot and adjusting the 
affected plots within the master plan with the help of GIS
l	
To update the master plan information in GIS database
5.2.3	
The methodology
The methodology for the study will be divided into the following steps:
Classification and assignment of land uses as per the Master Plan 
l Identifying the polygons in project area 
l Analysing the situation for introduction of new land use/changing the 
existing land use within the master plan site
Literature and available maps study
Remote sensing satellite data
Primary visual interpretation
Ground truth collection
Geology and 
geomorphology
 As built 
infrastructure
Land use/  
land cover
Soil
Laboratory analysis
Finalization of maps
Geo-database  generation
Figure 5.1  Methodology showing GIS-based multicriteria approach to 
land suitability assessment

	
Assessment of land and land use for future development using GIS ...	
97
l Assessing area/level of the new plot with respect to its possible land 
use 
l Preparing different coverage viz. road network map, residential lands, 
infrastructure layout plan as per the existing situation
l Checking the feasibility for the new land-use type at the identified 
location in terms of catchment area, traffic network, infrastructure 
network, surrounding land uses and the actual land availability from 
GIS database for the new land use
l Allocating the space for the new plot/land use 
l Updating the GIS data base with respect to changes 
5.3	
Background
5.3.1	
Development of Dubai
In the year 1833, a group of 800 members of the Bani Yas tribe, led by the 
Maktoum Family, settled at the mouth of the creek. The creek was a natural 
harbour and Dubai soon became a centre for the fishing, pearling and sea 
trade to cater their livelihood. By the turn of the 20th century, Dubai grew 
with a successful port and souk (Arabic for market) on the side of the creek 
with 350 shops and a steady throng of visitors and businessmen. By the 
1930s Dubai’s population grew to 20,000, with expatriates contributing to 
almost a quarter. In the 1950s Dubai got established as a major trading and 
re-export hub. When oil was discovered in 1966, Sheikh Rashid utilised 
the oil revenues to spur infrastructure development in Dubai with schools, 
hospitals, roads, modern telecommunications network and the pace of 
development was frenetic. A new port and terminal building were built at 
1975
2005
Figure 5.2  Dubai Creek in the year 1975 and 2005 (Source: Dubai in the year 1975 and 
2005, Dubai Municipality, Year 1975, 2005)

98	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Dubai International Airport. A runway extension that could accommodate 
any type of aircraft was implemented. The largest man-made harbour in 
the world was constructed at Jebel Ali, and a free zone was created around 
the port. Gradually, various residential and mixed-use communities started 
developing at various locations under the network of strong road, water 
and metro connections.
	
Dubai Municipality developed the master plan with cooperation from 
Planning Consultant, which is accepted by Dubai Executive Council. 
According to the plan, the master plan is divided into 4 zones. Zone 1 of 
Dubai includes the coastal areas of Dubai up to 12 nautical miles out to sea 
which will be utilised mostly for the development of tourist resorts. Zone 
2 includes the city proper where urban development will take place while 
the remaining two, Zone 3 and Zone 4, comprises of the vast desert area 
outside the city [2].
	
Dubai is famous for its rapid urban development and in creating 
various themed communities. The planning of Dubai is an integration 
of various types of themed communities connected by a strong network 
of transportation corridors. Almost every community in Dubai has a 
special feature within itself that distinguishes the city from the rest 
of the world. The communities of Dubai are built around signature 
buildings and man-made features such as lakes, streams and sea side 
cornices altogether. Given below are few examples of few themed 
communities of Dubai [3].
Table 5.1  Community developments in Dubai, Dubai Municipality, Year 2000 (Source: Dubai 
Municipality, Dubai, UAE, Year 2000)
Name
View of the community
Description
Dubai Land
l	Attractions and experience world 
l	Sports and outdoor world
l	Themed leisure and vacation world
l	Eco-tourism world
l	Downtown

	
Assessment of land and land use for future development using GIS ...	
99
The Palm 
Islands
The Palm Jumeirah consists of three 
distinct precincts such as:
•	 The Trunk and Village Centrea
	 With world class hotel, retail and 
residential 
and 
exclusive 
retail 
precinct
•	 The Fronds and Spine
	 With a luxury residential precinct set 
on a series of peninsulas in the form 
of palm fronds and a medium-scale 
residential precinct on the Spine lying 
between the fronds
•	 The Crescent
	 With luxury 5- and 6-star resort 
hotel precinct and a unique coastal 
amusement park
International 
City
International 
City 
combines 
commercial, 
residential, 
retail 
and 
tourism interests in one project, with a 
range of mixed-use buildings, shopping 
areas and tourist attractions.
The World
The development is a collection of 
private and resort islands that are sold 
by invitation only to chosen individuals 
who will leave their legacy with this epic 
development.
The Burj 
Downtown
Burj Khalifa is the world’s tallest tower 
and the centrepiece of Burj downtown 
development.
The 
downtown 
development 
is 
dominated by a series of high rise 
towers majorly residential, commercial, 
hotel, 
entertainment, 
along 
with 
prominent facilities including lush green 
landscapes, water bodies and world’s 
largest shopping mall. The community 
is a combination of contemporary high 
rise towers and a traditional Old Town 
and lots of spill over commercial/retail 
spaces within it.

100	
Geographic information system for smart cities
5.3.2	
Use of GIS in the community planning of UAE
The use of a Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and its implementation 
in the UAE is for data storage/access system and also as a means to update 
and streamline the existing work flow of business processes. GIS can 
provide the means to track database, prioritize maintenance and streamline 
customer requests. It also enables the communication of the public with 
supporting engineering operations, associated private sectors and federal 
government offices as well. GIS helps to store the data of a community 
in different and unique mega parcel number that is used in the graphic 
environment as the link to the non-graphic data. Within the Emirates there 
are several sectors comprising of smaller areas known as communities. 
These areas have been further divided into blocks and plots of different 
hierarchy for the land parcels. Each parcel data are matched to an accurate 
land base, digitised within an acceptable coordinate system [4–6]. 
	
The UAE has a strategy to maintain cadastral data continuously. When 
the parcel mapping project is complete, on-going maintenance becomes a 
priority. Parcel mapping is a process that should evolve toward increasing 
reliability and accuracy. These maps are never complete and require 
constant updating to keep pace with cadastral transactions. Parcels show 
complex features. To determine the overall geometric relationships, the 
physical geography, and historical and legal objects must be considered 
together. Reliability, consistency, accuracy and precision are all important 
attributes of a parcel map [7, 8]. Given below are the various methods of 
obtaining information for GIS database:
Table 5.2  Community developments in Dubai
Geo Information solutions
Image type
No. of 
views from 
opposing 
directions
Front 
line 
(cm)
Back 
line 
(cm)
Front 
to back 
(cm)
Front line 
distance 
(m)
Back line 
distance 
(m)
Side 
distance 
(m)
Oblique 
image
4
8
12.8
21.6
550
770
700
Orthophoto 
camera
1
10
10
20
530
n/a
350

	
Assessment of land and land use for future development using GIS ...	
101
A Vision aircraft above Dubai
Height measurement tool
Figure 5.3  View of a community in Dubai as captured by vision aircraft (Source: Fact sheet 
pictometry, Vision geo information solutions, ESRI arc maps, Dubai, UAE)
5.3.3	
Application of GIS in planning
There are various applications developed and/or supported by the GIS 
section within the government and private authorities which help in the 
development of the overall city plans. Few such applications are the 
following:
	
1. Ports, Customs and Free Zone Corporation (PCFC) Map Central: 
This is a web portal through which access to Geographic Information 
Systems is made simple and straightforward. Users can access complex 
GIS data through a familiar web interface.
	
2. Lease Drawings: This is a user-friendly application that helps in 
preparing drawings that are part of the lease agreement between leasing 
authorities such as Jabel Ali Free Zone (JAFZA) and their clients. These 
drawings show boundaries of properties that are leased and relevant 
associated information.
	
3. E-Map (Internal): This Intranet application is designed keeping 
in mind the regular information requirements of the sales and marketing 
(S&M) personnel and can be used as a comprehensive tool for supporting 
their decision making. The designed Intranet application is an integration 
of GIS and Free Zone Information System (FZIS). In addition to the 
S&M personnel, authorised JAFZA and Ports and Customs and Free Zone 
Corporation (PCFC) users can also explore JAFZA e-map in an easy 
manner to use for their day-to-day information needs.
	
4. E-Map (External): This Internet application is an interactive query 
system designed for the JAFZA and Port prospective visitors who would 

102	
Geographic information system for smart cities
like to view the information on the companies operating in JAFZA; 
searching companies by name, activities or country of origin; locating 
facilities, landmarks and PCFC departments etc. on map; generating map-
based driving directions to reach a specific company or any other location 
in JAFZA and Port areas. In addition, general information on typical 
facilities offered by JAFZA is also provided on the site.
	
5. PCFC OrthoPhotos: This site showcases the historical and current 
aerial photographs of port and free zone areas available with the GIS 
Section of Civil Engineering Department. A casual visitor of the site can 
map the development growth visually over a period of years whereas 
the serious visitors for day-to-day engineering and planning related 
activities can use the current information. This application is designed 
and developed in-house by the GIS team in an effort to share the large 
amount of OrthoPhotos raster data in a simple-to-use interface among 
PCFC users [9].
	
In addition, the GIS section supports the eSite application by 
providing GIS data and by hosting the data created and maintained by 
this application: eSite is a hi-tech web-based system that incorporates a 
sophisticated work-flow engine along with database applications. The 
geo-spatial map data extracted from the GIS database and the schedule 
and inspection information are sent via GPRS to the latest PDA devices 
which are used by site inspectors [8].
5.3.4	
A community master plan model
Unlike most of the countries, the practice of community development 
of Dubai is theme and vision oriented rather than need oriented. The 
development of the communities in Dubai starts with a preconceived 
theme which decides the broad outline for the development pattern. The 
vision revolves around the identity of the development with respect to the 
strategic plan of Dubai and its place making ability in the world map. The 
master plan is based on pre-set design principles that guide the structure 
that forms the model for master plans [10].
A place of living
The master plan ensures the application of best planning practice and 
adherence urbanism planning principles with the creation of a community 
with high standard of amenity and lifestyle within a sustainable framework. 

	
Assessment of land and land use for future development using GIS ...	
103
Henceforth the residential, commercial and the mixed use developments 
are designed within the set framework.
Focal hearts – the public places
The commercial and residential districts have significant focal public 
spaces at various levels allowing pedestrian interaction. These are the 
places of gathering, interaction, entertainment, relaxing and shopping. 
Smaller neighbourhood centres also have similar spaces or discernible 
centres created around landscaped squares with fringe retail activities 
within a walkable distance from each residence.
Mixed use development
The mix of various land uses as defined in the zoning standards allows 
the creation of different interesting and dynamic community. Zoning also 
allows a variety of residential types of different sizes and their mix with 
commercial and retail activities. However the centre of the neighbourhood 
is reserved for predominant commercial, retail and community facilities.
Parks, open spaces and water bodies
Parks and open spaces provide relief and breathing spaces to the dense 
urban development. These are the spaces that allow the natural environment 
to dominate and take care of the health of the residents. The large open 
spaces are kept within the centralised locations and the linear open spaces 
are kept between two adjacent neighbourhoods providing a linkage, space 
for interaction which eventually merges with the big central community 
level open space.
Transportation corridors
A transportation corridor network is planned to make the inhabitants of the 
community access all the activity centres of the community and from one 
dwelling to another within the community. The network comprises several 
circuits of varying length for both transit/destinations and recreational 
centres. The corridors also take care of the physically disabled, service 
providers and emergency vehicles as well. All streets are made to provide 
generous seating, lighting, landscaping arrangements with dedicated 
routes for pedestrians and bicycle riders [10].

104	
Geographic information system for smart cities
5.4	
Master plan outcome
The final master plan shows the existing and proposed locations and 
intensity of land development for specific uses, such as residential, 
commercial, industrial, agricultural and educational uses. Sometimes 
there is a space reservation for the future for some future community land 
uses also, and hence it is crucial that the master plan be well thought out 
and carefully written with the needs of the community at the forefront. 
The master plan finally comes out with a set of following drawings and 
information on the followings:
	
l	 Land-use plan
	
l	 The circulation plan
	
l	 The historic preservation plan
	
l	 The community facilities plan
	
l	 The open space/community facility plan
	
l	 The housing plan
	
l	 The utility plan
	
The land-use element of the master plan considers multiple aspects 
including topography, soil conditions, water supply, drainage, floodplain 
areas, marshes and woodlands. It also shows the existing and proposed 
land-use areas with a description of associated population and development 
intensity. While strong land-use and conservation elements are helpful to 
natural resource protection, it is also important to ensure that virtually 
every master plan element incorporates an awareness of the municipality’s 
important environmental resources and directs growth and development 
accordingly [11].
	
A community is much more than a collection of streets, houses and 
buildings or subdivisions pieced together by one or more developers. 
Communities have a unique character that concerned local citizens 
have built over the years through responsible land-use planning. Newer 
communities can learn from this experience by exploring through a public 
process what their municipalities could look like over the next several 
decades. Developing a vision statement should be the first step when 
amending or writing a master plan because a well-crafted statement will 
tie the rest of the plan together [8].

	
Assessment of land and land use for future development using GIS ...	
105
Figure 5.4  Sample of land-use plan showing various land-use typologies 
(Source: GIS centre, Abu Dhabi and Dubai, UAE)
Figure 5.5  Sample of transportation network plan (Source: GIS centre, 
Abu Dhabi and Dubai, UAE)
Figure 5.6  Sample of infrastructure layout plan (Source: GIS centre, 
Abu Dhabi and Dubai, UAE)

106	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Figure 5.7  Sample map showing the environmentally sensitive areas 
(Source: GIS Center, Abu Dhabi and Dubai, UAE)
Figure 5.8  Sample showing a detailed master plan 
(Source: GIS Center, Abu Dhabi and Dubai, UAE)
5.5	
Use of GIS in the planning of services
GIS software has been extensively used in Dubai in the planning of 
services [12]. The application of information technology in Dubai city 
development and management has proved to be beneficial and took the 
city to the platform of smart cities by 
	
l	 Generating a detailed master plan with detailed information of the 
associated services.
	
l	 Processing of data sharing that has resulted in environmental 
awareness and will further help in reducing excess consumption 
of energy resources contributing to reductions in CO2 emissions. 
	
l	 Helping in improving the utilisation of existing infrastructure 
capacity and improving the quality of life 

	
Assessment of land and land use for future development using GIS ...	
107
	
l	 Making new services available to citizens and commuters to 
exploit multiple service modalities proving convenient for the 
users and the service providers
	
l	 Helping in improving commercial enterprises through the 
publication of real-time data on the operation of city services
	
It is estimated that almost 60% of existing Dubai GIS information is 
in Dubai Municipality, which has taken up the responsibility of providing 
spatial reference to Dubai government’s e-services. Dubai Electricity 
and Water Authority (DEWA), Etisalat, roads, police, surveyors and 
consultants are benefited from these data. However the Intranet projects 
are planned and meant for different users such as businesses, citizens and 
government. There are various authorities such as Dubai Electricity and 
Water Authority (DEWA), Road and Transport Authority (RTA), Dubai 
Telecom, etc. that work under Dubai Municipality. Most of the planning 
related data are made available and shared on Internet except some which 
have security related issues and the data which are not available due to 
physical constraints for accessing few areas within the region [13].
	
The contribution of the various authorities supporting the municipality 
GIS data centre is as mentioned below:
5.5.1	
Use of GIS in Dubai telecom system
In 1982 Etisalat was the first telecommunications operator in the UAE 
region to introduce mobile phones. Since then it has expanded its services 
across the UAE, offering fixed line and wireless networks. By 2005 
Etisalat served more than 4.5 million mobile subscribers and provided 
Internet services to about 50% of its UAE customers. In addition to this, 
company has introduced new services including 3G and MMS in 2003 and 
BlackBerry services in 2006. During the year 2007–2011, a mass market 
roll out was implemented as a part of deployment strategy and migration 
plan.
	
The field implementation in mass roll out is done in phases, which are 
described below:
	
Phase 1: High dense residential area in main cities with migrate to 
only telephone and high speed Internet.
	
Phase 2: Commercial buildings – Q4-2009 with the introduction of 
new package (e-Life double play Dec 2009).
	
Phase 3: Low dense residential, small cities and remote (E-Life Triple 

108	
Geographic information system for smart cities
play May 2010). 
	
Etisalat began to use GIS in 1989 and maintains a range of Fundamental 
Geographic Document Sets (FGDS) to support its primary business areas 
such as the planning, development, operation, and maintenance of its 
telecommunications networks. At present more than 1200 members of 
Etisalat’s staff use geospatial information to carry out a range of functions 
either directly or indirectly. These experts develop Etisalat’s ESRI-
based platform that incorporates a number of programs and applications, 
including Arc GIS 9.0, Arc SDE 9.0 on Oracle 9i, Network Engineer 
4.0 (from Telcordia Technologies, Inc.), and an Arc IMS-based eMap 
application. Etisalat also uses the network simulation modelling software 
known as OPNET, which it began integrating with its GIS system in 1995, 
for work orders. At present, the geographic information associated with 
a work order is automatically captured and fed into the company’s GIS 
business database, where it is used for project monitoring and eventually 
updated with data taken from as-built drawings. 
	
Etisalat uses a wide range of different types of geospatial data, some of 
which it generates itself and others which it obtains from other entities. Most 
of the data Etisalat generates are driven by its primary business functions. 
Geospatial information about the civil network is the largest FGDS 
generated and maintained by Etisalat. This network includes the ducts that 
carry Etisalat’s cables, fibres and lines, and the routes followed by its buried 
cables [14, 15]. The overall operation is explained in Fig. 5.9 below:
Figure 5.9  Showing the operation system and management of telecom sector, Etisalat, Dubai 
(Source: Mohamed Darwish, A., Fibre to Home Roll Out, Etisalat, Middle East Conference, 
Dubai)

	
Assessment of land and land use for future development using GIS ...	
109
5.5.2	
Use of GIS by Road and Transport Authority (RTA)
The GIS section is a part of IT department under the Corporate Technical 
Support Service sector. The GIS section in RTA was established in the 
year 2009 with a vision to create a cost-efficient, interoperable centralised 
spatial infrastructure data to enable different RTA users to easily access 
and manipulate GIS data regardless of type of CAD and GIS applications.
	
The RTA GIS operational system is comprised of two broad segments:
	
l	 The central including the GIS section, steering committee
	
l	 The outer rim including the various RTA agencies and GIS 
departments of government organisations
	
The authority follows an Independent Spatial Management 
(ISM) system which operates on a single-point enterprise GIS/Spatial 
administration. ISM also works as a hub to allow different CAD/GIS 
applications to directly read or write a common spatial data source [15].
	
The final dataset is prepared by using satellite imageries/Orthophoto, 
base map and community boundaries, Dubai road network, transportation 
network (marine, road, metro, etc.), intelligent traffic system data, land 
marks and planning data (right of ways, parcels, community facilities, 
etc.) in various input formats as shown below:
Figure 5.10  Various sources contributing to the central GIS system, RTA, UAE, Year 2010 
(Source: Kharsa, A., RTA Enterprise GIS Platform Project, GIS section, Government of 
Dubai, UAE, Year 2010)

110	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Figure 5.11  Detailed level information about Dubai Metro that can be accessed by the 
users, year 2010 (Source: Kharsa, A., RTA Enterprise GIS Platform Project, GIS section, 
Government of Dubai, UAE, Year 2010)
	
Integration of GIS with other systems has substantially developed 
the system in terms of detailed data access within the transportation 
portal, increase in the data availability and enhancement of the quality of 
geospatial data, improvement in the services as well as in efficiency and 
productivity [16, 17].
5.5.3	
GIS application – Dubai Water and Electricity 
Authority 
After about five decades, Dubai Water and Electricity Authority (DEWA) 
is an inspiring success story known for its efficiency and reliability in 
every facet of its operations. Constant planning and forecasting to meet 
the growing demands of the customer has always been DEWA’s well-
entrenched philosophy. Owing to this policy, the Authority has come a long 
way in serving the customers and thereby making its own contributions to 
the economic growth of Dubai. A report by an international consultant, 
Mckinsey in 2008, revealed that DEWA has achieved the first rank among 
the counter authorities in the advanced countries, in the field of accuracy 
of bills as it has been superior to Italy which has achieved the second rank, 
France the third rank and Portugal the fourth rank.

	
Assessment of land and land use for future development using GIS ...	
111
	
After the master plan is prepared, it is submitted for approval to 
the government-owned organisations/developers. The master plan is 
prepared by the consultants for different sectors within the development. 
After the master plan is approved by the developers, a copy of the plan 
showing the electricity and water layout and connection to individual 
parcels with several other details such as the location and capacities of 
the resources, cross sections of the layout pipes along with the surface 
details, infrastructure corridors, etc., are submitted to the authority for 
obtaining the No Objection Certificate (NOC). After obtaining the NOC 
from DEWA and RTA, the developer can start the field work for laying 
the infrastructure pipelines. The authority personnel do the metering for 
DEWA and the final connection.
	
The user is authorised to use the services after he submitted all the 
property and personal details to the authority which is fed to the central 
system. The user is then eligible to access all the details through e-services 
for accessing the database and for interacting with the authority. Billing 
for the users is done on slab basis with a fixed range for the consumption 
of the water and electricity resources by the users.
	
As a part of smart city development, a pilot project on the Intelligent 
Metering System – IMS was executed by DEWA from the year 2005. 
Through the pilot project, DEWA verified the possibility of metering 
automation with features such as remote reading, remote disconnection 
and reconnection, load profiling, etc. Various communication systems 
were tried such as Programmable Logic Controller (PLC), Global System 
for Mobile (GSM), Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN), Radio 
Frequency (RF), General Packet Radio Service (GPRS), etc. during the 
project execution.
	
The Intelligent Metering System (IMS) will read water and electricity 
meters of every consumer on a periodic basis and this data will be 
integrated with DEWA enterprise bus. The billing, connection restoration, 
disconnection, load monitoring, demands side management, energy 
efficiency, power quality monitoring are few of the applications, which 
will be implemented in phases. IMS will improve billing cycle efficiency, 
allow summary bills and drastically change the meters to cash cycle. It will 
also be a powerful tool to provide better customer service and will provide 
efficient means to monitor and manage electricity and water consumption. 
The system will enhance customer relationship management, outage 
management and will in future be integrated with Supervisory Control 

112	
Geographic information system for smart cities
and Data Acquisition (SCADA), Document Management System (DMS), 
GIS to give a powerful tool to implement energy and environment policies 
of Dubai. Various regional utilities are watching with great interest this 
pioneering initiative.
	
Consequently, DEWA Strategic Plan, which is a part of Dubai Strategy 
Plan 2015, assures the keen aspiration and desire of DEWA to strengthen 
its pioneer role in the field of electricity and water production, by using the 
most advanced technology methods, simple system, reliable, ease to work 
with, and compatible and expandable with different technologies [18].
5.6	
Implementation of master plan at community 
level
Urban planning in the developing countries has gained significant 
momentum in the last decade. About 30% more area is urbanised now. 
Improved quality of life calls for better physical and social infrastructure. 
The onus of providing these facilities rests upon the local and urban 
development authorities. Apart from involving the municipal officials 
(including environmental commission and planning board members), 
developers, engineers and professional planners in creating a vision for the 
community development, it is important to have a collaborative process 
among the citizens of the community.
	
Although development plans for urban areas are prepared according to 
stipulated norms, market forces determine locations for different land uses. 
Social facilities such as educational, health, socio-cultural or institutional 
are hence consigned to appropriate locations. The easiest way to initiate 
discussions is to hold a number of public meetings at the start of the master 
plan review process where citizens can share their ideas and opinions. 
An objective approach, therefore, needs to be adopted for detecting the 
suitability and adequacy of the land-use parcels. The process should take 
place from the beginning of the allocation of plots and continue with 
periodic monitoring task [19].
	
The approaches have become feasible as a result of recent progress in 
technology substantially by:
	
l	 The widespread use of digital sensors and digital control systems 
for the control and operation of urban infrastructure. These include 
traffic sensors, building management systems, digital utility 
meters, etc.

	
Assessment of land and land use for future development using GIS ...	
113
	
l	 The growing penetration of fixed and wireless networks that allow 
such sensors and systems to be connected to distributed processing 
centres and for these centres in turn to exchange information 
among themselves.
	
l	 The development of information management techniques, 
specifically standardised schematic models, that allow the low-
level information to be interpreted by the processing centres 
and that allow these processing centres to interpret each other’s 
information.
	
l	 The development of both computing power and new algorithms 
that allow these flows of information to be analysed in near “real-
time” in order to provide operational performance improvement 
and other insights.
5.7	
Case studies
Dubai has created themed-based communities and with a mix of 
developments for local citizens and expiates residing within the Emirate. 
Few communities are old and traditional, few are new, and few are high end. 
During the recent financial crisis, a substantial count of expat population 
has left the country and the rest preferred to move to economical style 
of living. As a result there was a great impact on the real estate industry 
which was known to create countless experimental projects and more 
themed communities within the city. 
	
Eventually the demand for the high-end housing communities 
reduced and the demand for economical housing communities increased. 
More population entering into the yet fully developed communities let 
the developers decide to further increase the housing capacity within the 
existing districts and simultaneously accommodate additional facilities 
within the available open spaces in the district. Few examples of similar 
practice have been described below for the allocation of a plot with new 
land use within a development with the help of few case studies.
	
This chapter helps the readers to know about the practice of introduction 
of a new land parcel within the master plan and the GIS information used 
as guidelines in the determination of the size and the type of the land use 
of the same. This is explained through various case studies of Dubai where 
GIS is used to obtain complete information about the plot/parcel within 
the master plan. 

114	
Geographic information system for smart cities
5.7.1	
Case study 1
The case is of a community within Dubai which became fully functional 
as the master plan was implemented. It was the time when the community 
started inviting residents to its affordable housing sectors, and eventually 
all sectors were found to be occupied. The influx of resident population 
within the community made the community facilities more vibrant in terms 
of the frequency of their usage. As the population increased with time, 
there was a pressure on the existing facilities and eventually the population 
pressure within the community started feeling the crisis, especially retail 
and religious facilities.
	
Hence the decision of incorporating additional facilities within the 
community was taken. Initially the master plan was studied carefully and 
an assessment of number of plots required for the facilities was made. 
Based on the requirement, certain locations were selected most of which 
were reserved as vacant or open space plots.
	
During the study of the master plan district, several locations were 
identified with the help of the master plan drawing and the corresponding 
satellite images. On referring the GIS database, a lot of the identified 
locations were found to have several infrastructure corridors underneath 
their surface. As a result few more previously identified open space 
plots were rejected and few were resized to obtain a plot free from any 
infrastructure. And thereafter the location and size of the facilities were 
selected. 
	
In this way the GIS database efficiently helped the planners to analyse 
the case and in deciding the land use, plot size and type of use for the 
selected plot. On the change of the land use, the master plan and the GIS 
database was revised and modified accordingly [10].
Figure 5.12  Land-use plan, Discovery Gardens, year 2012 (Source: Land-Use Plan, 
Discovery Gardens, Nakheel Community, Year 2012)

	
Assessment of land and land use for future development using GIS ...	
115
Figure 5.13  Detailed land-use plan showing the available open spaces/vacant land 
that can be used for the introduction of new land use, Discovery Gardens, year 2012 
(Source: Land-Use Plan, Discovery Gardens, Nakheel Community, Year 2012)
Figure 5.14  Identification of the plot within the open space/vacant land selected for the new 
land use, GIS database, Discovery Gardens, year 2012 (Source: Detailed Land-Use Plan, 
Discovery Gardens, Nakheel Community, Year 2012)

116	
Geographic information system for smart cities
5.7.2	
Case study 2
The case refers to a master plan with few vacant plots. The proposal was 
to identify the current land use of the plots and review them to check the 
current status of the same.
	
The plots which were undesignated in the master plan were identified 
and listed and then studied with the help of satellite imageries and GIS 
data base. The satellite images showed structures within the plots but 
details of the structures remained unknown. Hence the GIS database was 
consulted to find out the types of structures and their activity details. Based 
on this information, the planners could set the priority for the removal of 
structures from the identified plots in order to designate residential land 
use and subdivide the plot accordingly [10].
Figure 5.15  Identification of a vacant/undesignated plot A for designation of new land use, 
master plan and satellite image – Jumeirah Village Circle District, Dubai, UAE, year 2012 
(Source: Detailed Land-Use Plan, Jumeirah Village Circle District, Nakheel Community, Year 
2012)

	
Assessment of land and land use for future development using GIS ...	
117
Figure 5.16  Identification of a vacant/undesignated plot B for designation of new land 
use, master plan and satellite image – Jumeirah Village Circle District, Dubai, UAE, Year 
2012 (Source: Master plan and GIS database, Jumeirah Village Circle District, Nakheel 
Community, Dubai, UAE)
5.7.3	
Case study 3
This was a case for the delineation of residential plots with respect to 
infrastructure layout plan. After identification of the location for proposal 
of villa plots within the available large open spaces, the initial plan was 
revised due to the presence of soak pits under those large open space plots. 
Hence each location was reviewed carefully and revised so that the soak 
pits remain unaffected and do not overlap with residential plots. As a result 
few locations identified previously for residential land use were cancelled. 
The study was entirely based on the as-built record of the infrastructure 
layout available in the GIS database [10].

118	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Figure 5.17  Details of underground infrastructure obtained from GIS database, Village Circle 
District, Dubai, UAE, year 2012 (Source: Master plan and GIS database, Jumeirah Village 
Circle district, Nakheel Community, Dubai, UAE)
5.8	
Implication of GIS for future development
After the finalisation of the land use for the land parcels, the master plan 
layout is updated to incorporate all the land-use changes. The updation of 
the master plan also has implication on the infrastructure and road layout, 
respectively. Once the master plan is frozen, it is advised to update the 
database with respect to the latest master plan status.
	
GIS is also used as a collaborative platform which empowers both 
decision makers and the broader community. Exploitation of the Web as a 
platform to deliver geo services is often enabled by the cloud of computing 
capabilities and open data-sharing policies. In Dubai the Cadastral 
management system is formed to provide a common platform for all the 
government and non-government organisations to utilize the centralised 
GIS database management system in order to [20, 21]:
	
l	 Reduce the time taken for the land transactions between the 
organisations

	
Assessment of land and land use for future development using GIS ...	
119
	
l	 Maximize information sharing for various planning and decision 
making
	
l	 Avoid the data redundancy and maximize the data efficiency
	
l	 Integrate all the land transactions, land ownership and building 
permits
	
l	 Impose standards on land uses
Figure 5.18  Detailed information obtained from an advanced GIS system of Dubai 
communities, Dubai, UAE, year 2010 (Source: GIS Centre, Dubai Municipality, Dubai, UAE, 
Year 2010)
	
‘Attabu’ is an advanced system that would enable all concerned 
authorities of real-estate management and urban planning in Dubai to 
manage all land and property data through one interface on real-time basis. 
This would be done via same Cadastral data repository. Attabu provides a 
variety of user-friendly services through Internet or Intranet technologies 
keeping in mind that security is a key consideration. For example, while 
the Attabu Cadastral geospatial model is rich in content, users get access 
only to data that they are authorised to access. Another example, uploading 
field survey data, information inquiry and analysis, plotting maps and 

120	
Geographic information system for smart cities
plans in several sized (A0, A3…etc.) in Arabic and English [12, 22]. 
	
Along with the research in obtaining a strong database and sharing 
of information, Dubai city is strongly thinking of implementing renewal 
energy technologies through smart technologies to attain a sustainable 
development and make a place among the other similar nations for the 
same. 
	
For the transition to renewable energy, energy efficiency programs 
have become the current focus particularly in the utility industry. It 
is assumed that the future utility structure will probably be a hybrid of 
centralised power plants and massive distributed generation, combined 
with a much more efficient system of both generation and consumption. 
In the last 5 years, the renewable energy sector has grown strongly and 
steadily. Even in 2009, up against strong economic obstacles caused by 
the global recession and low oil prices, total investment has increased. 
Despite such impressive growth, however, the share of renewable energy 
in global primary energy supply remains small. Population growth in the 
GCC (Gulf Co-operation Council) Countries is forcing governments and 
companies into large scale projects to secure sufficient water and electricity 
infrastructure to provide for local inhabitants.
	
The introduction of national grids has helped to spread the power loads. 
However, the benefits are limited compared with the load sharing that 
would result from exploiting time zone differentials between neighbouring 
countries and the GCC grid. The ‘oil states’ consume, on average, ten 
times more electricity per capita than the region’s poorer, more populous 
states, because these states provide their citizens with cheap, subsidised 
electricity as well as desalinated water. Many of the poorer states have 
also a tendency to subsidize electricity. In the case of Egypt, the structural 
reduction in subsidies in the mid-1990s led to a significant lowering of 
consumption patterns and of the country’s future capacity requirements. 
However, installing ever-more capacity is not a solution. Flattening 
the peak load curve through ‘smart’ pricing – charging more for peak 
consumption – or offering incentives for off-peak consumption can greatly 
ease pressures on capacity. However, the GCC states have been reluctant 
to cede control of electricity pricing, viewed as a political prerogative, 
and are looking at other ways to make savings. An interconnection of 
more than one region was thought to be one of the feasible solutions in 
distributing the energy resource and achieving a balanced development 
over a broader region. 

	
Assessment of land and land use for future development using GIS ...	
121
	
The concept of GCC countries coming together to form a body called 
GCC Interconnection Authority (GCCIA) was established to enable 
interconnected states to exchange and trade energy through the electric 
interconnection lines. Thus in the event of any emergency or power 
generation shortcoming, the state supplying the energy is compensated in 
kind whereby the consumer state gives back the same amount of energy 
during the same period. Any state can buy energy from another state on 
the joint network after reaching an agreement on price and reserving the 
required capacity to be transported through the electric interconnection 
line [23].
5.9	
Conclusion
The advancement of GIS is also to make the detailed planning database 
available online by collaborating with the social media. As a result a frequent 
updation of the database should take place to reflect the changes made to 
the master plan. This is the phase where the social media helps in public 
participation. This combination enhances government transparency and 
accountability by creating a societal infrastructure for human interaction.
	
Thus although the smart cities approach begins as a pragmatic, 
engineering-based attempt to improve the operation of individual urban 
infrastructure and services, we can also see it as perturbing unconsciously 
the interactions of the many systems within a city [2, 24].
	
By the end of the 21st century, it is likely that the global population 
will peaked and stabilised, that the vast majority of those people will be 
living in cities, and that we will have ceased the present active construction 
and development of urban capacity. We have a unique opportunity in the 
coming decades to shape the future of global society through innovation 
in urban systems. How we perform that construction and development will 
differ from how we have pursued such works in the past, not least because 
of the growing presence of information technology in all aspects of our 
lives. 
5.10	
References
[1] Harrison, C. and Donnelly, I. A. (2011). A Theory of Smart Cities, IBM 
USA and UK, available at http://journals.isss.org/index.php/proceedings55th/
article/viewFile/1703/572&embedded=true

122	
Geographic information system for smart cities
[2] http:\\www.dm.gov.ae
[3] List of administrative communities in Dubai (2000), List of Dubai 
Municipality Administrative Community Areas and Regions, available at http://
www.dubaifaqs.com/communities-in-dubai.php
[4] Chavis, D. M. (1984). Empowering the Neighbourhood through the 
Development of Community: The Community Development Process, Paper 
presented at The American Psychological Association: Toronto, Canada, 
Publication: Peacock Publishers.
[5] Faludi, A. (1973). What is Planning Theory? A Reader in Planning Theory, 
Publication: Pergamon Press, pp. 1–10.
[6] Sadan, E. (2004). Empowerment and Community Planning, Community 
Planning, Chapter 4, page 177, Publication: HakibbutzHameuchad Publishers, 
Published 1997, available at http\\www.mpow.org
[7] Mohamed, El Mekawy (2010), Integrating BIM and GIS for 3D City 
Modelling, Publication: TRITA SoM 2010–11.
[8] Mustafa, A. A. (2009). The Role of GIS in Urban Planning Processes, 
Ajman University, Ajman, UAE, Publication: Department of Municipal Affairs, 
Abu Dhabi Municipality, available at http\\www.aupc.ae
[9] http\\:www.trakhees.ae
[10] Nakheel GIS database (2012), Dubai, UAE 
[11] http:\\www.adpcb.ae
[12] Aisha, S. (2007). Modelling Dubai – Aspects of Cadastral Management 
System in Dubai, Shaping the Urban Revolution in Dubai, GIS Centre, Dubai 
Municipality, Dubai, UAE, Available at http://gisdevelopment.net/proceedings/
mapmiddleeast/2007/technology/LI/mme07_Aisha.pdf
[13] Yagoub, M. M. (2004). Monitoring of urban growth of a desert city 
through remote sensing: Al-Ain, UAE, between 1976 and 2000, vol. 25, no. 6, 
pp. 1063–1076, Int. J. Remote Sensing, Published by Tailor and Francis Group.
[14] Darwish, A. M. (2011). Fiber to the Home Roll out Etisalat Implementation 
Case Study, BICSI Middle East Conference Dubai, Etisalat, Dubai, UAE.
[15] http:\\www.etisalat.ae
[16] Mohammad, N. H., Yaser, E. H., Ahmed, F., Munjed, M., and Md Bayzid, 
K. (2010). Journal of Public Transportation, vol. 13.  
[17] http:\\www.rta.ae
[18] http:\\www.dewa.gov.ae
[19] Brower, S. and Taylor, R. B. (1998). Neighbourhoods and the Extent of 
Community,  Intensive session at the I A P S Conference, Eindhoven, Publication 
The Netherlands, HakibbutzHameuchad Publishers [in Hebrew].

	
Assessment of land and land use for future development using GIS ...	
123
[20] Malik, A. (2005). Dubai the smart city, Dubai Municipality, Dubai 
Government, Dubai, UAE, Publication Dubai Municipality Portal, available at 
http\\www.cisco.com
[21] Al Rais, A., Al Suwaidi, A., and Ghedira, H. (2009). DUBAISAT-1: 
Mission overview, development status and future applications, Emirates Institution 
for Advanced Science & Technology (EIAST), Dubai, UAE, Publication: 
IGARSS.  
[22] Al Shared, A. (2008). Dubai Nationals Development Strategy – An 
Innovative Approach, Dubai, UAE, Mohammed Bin Rashid Program for 
Leadership Development – Creating Leaders for Tomorrow, available at http://
www.dsg.ae/Portals/0/GPPP/conference/Arab%20Women%20Leadership%20
Forum/Conference%20Materials/Presentations/PDF%20presentations/Adel_Al_
Shared%20presentation.pdf
[23] Sustainable energy Smart grid smart community, Volume 1 (September–
October 2010), published by Middle East economic survey 2010.
[24] http:\\www.dubai.gov.ae

Abstract: Smart cities as a matter of fact, when considered as sustainable city models, 
essentially have to be environmentally sensitive. This aspect gains crucial importance when 
we realize that a vast majority of emerging cities are on coastal areas, where developmental 
sensitivity is highest, and capturing/measuring this aspect is an ever elusive problem. This 
chapter discusses the issue of evolving a conceptual link between land-use planning and 
Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM) primarily as applicable to coastal cities aspiring 
to be smart. At its core, it aims and helps in evolving an environmentally sensitive land-use 
planning, allocation, and policy that befits a smart coastal city, where impacts of human 
intervention on critical environmental components are innately controlled and contained. To 
quantify the impact of land-use plan alternatives on coastal status, the chapter defines a 
metric for coastal zone health called CHI (Coastal zone Health Indicator) that would try to 
capture the health status of any coastal zone from a system sustainability angle. The metric 
helps in base line condition mapping, to predict impacts consequent to development action 
and there upon smart decision making on development. Using this metric a smart land-use 
allocation evaluation framework system aiming at supporting land-use planning/master plan 
preparation to be more environment/coast friendly and sustainable on a continuous basis for 
coastal cities/urban coastal zones is discussed further.
Key words: coastal cities, land-use allocation, CHI, sustainable development. 
6.1	
Introduction
Globally both in the developed and developing nations, a considerable 
amount of research work has been undertaken, primarily to help cities 
behave smart in the short or long term. Cities can be programmed to be 
smart by providing smart utilities and services, based on sustainability 
perspective. Smart cities when considered as sustainable city models 
essentially have to be environmentally sensitive. Vast majorities of 
emerging cities are on coastal areas, where developmental sensitivity is 
highest, and capturing/measuring this aspect is an ever-elusive problem. 
This chapter discusses the issue of evolving a conceptual link between 
land-use planning and Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM), 
primarily as applicable to coastal cities aspiring to be smart. At its core, 
6
Environmentally sensitive land-use allocation 
for smart coastal cities
P. P. ANILKUMAR

	
Environmentally sensitive land-use allocation for smart coastal cities	
125
it aims and helps in evolving an environmentally sensitive land-use 
planning, allocation and policy that befits a smart coastal city, where 
impacts of human intervention on critical environmental components 
are innately controlled and contained. To quantify the impact of land-use 
plan alternatives on coastal status, the chapter defines a metric for coastal 
zone health called CHI (Coastal zone Health Indicator) that would try to 
capture the health status of any coastal zone from a system-sustainability 
angle. The metric helps in base line condition mapping, to predict impacts 
consequent to development action and there upon smart decision making 
on development. Using this metric, a smart land-use allocation evaluation 
framework system aiming at supporting land-use planning/master plan 
preparation to be more environment/coast friendly and sustainable on a 
continuous basis for coastal cities/ urban coastal zones is discussed further.
6.2	
Coastal cities: why they are sensitive to urban 
development? 
Coastal zones have always attracted human development, and they were 
the most preferred sites for city development from time immemorial. They 
are place of high priority to residents, commerce, tourism, defense services 
and to a variety of other land uses [1]. In this century, the urbanization of 
coastlines has grown dramatically due to worldwide urbanization, driven 
by population explosion and migration, and a majority of this human 
population lives within 100 km of the coastline. Coasts are places where 
a great abundance of life is nurtured and must be conserved in the face 
of increasing developmental pressures. As part of city development, they 
attract dense populations and undergo great environmental modifications 
through land conversion, sea dredging, water pollution, and urban industrial 
and agricultural developments. Due to all these and being areas of resource 
concentration, they demand more effective management policies. There 
are number of natural forces constantly pounding coastal areas influencing 
coastal environments, and they include winds, ocean currents, tidal flows, 
waves, and fresh water inputs.
	
It is predicted that by 2025, the world’s population will be 8.5 billion 
and of this 75% will be living on coastal cities [2]. Of cities with populations 
above 8 million, also termed as megacities, 75% are coastal cities (Table 
6.1). Of the cities with populations ranging from 1 to 8 million also, 40% 
are coastal cities. In coastal cities, the high value placed on shoreline 

126	
Geographic information system for smart cities
location increases the economic incentives to develop there, causing 
coastal cities to grow and expand rapidly [3]. The trend of increased rate of 
growth of coastal cities is occurring specially in North America, Southeast 
Asia, India, and South America. 
Table 6.1  Worldwide distribution of coastal and non-coastal cities (Source: Jiang, 2001)
Number of cities
Number of cities
1 million to 10 million cities
10 million+ cities
Coastal
Non-
coastal
% of 
coastal 
cities
Coastal
Non-
coastal
% of 
coastal 
cities
World
108
159
40
6
2
75
Asia
59
88
40
5
1
83
Africa
13
14
48
0
0
–
America
19
22
46
1
1
50
Europe
12
35
26
0
0
–
Oceania
5
0
100
0
0
–
Asia %
55%
55%
–
83%
50%
–
	
The coastal zone is an environment where the water, land and air 
meet, and highly complex natural processes occur to form landscapes 
unlike those found anywhere else [4]. A number of exclusive features 
make coastal zones very sensitive to developmental activities of various 
forms as part of city building. The living resources that are very seriously 
and negatively affected include mangroves, sea grass beds, wetlands, and 
coral reefs. These losses are significant as they are some of the earth’s 
most productive ecosystems. The supply of sedimentary material to the 
coastal zone from land through river runoff is essential for the sedimentary 
balance in nature. It has been changed dramatically through damming and 
removal of sediments from coastal areas for building materials, and land 
reclamation that is practiced universally causes an exactly opposite impact 
on coastal systems. Due to reclamation, in-filling of shallow waters and 
in-filling of coastal low lying areas occur rampantly. The consequences 
of typical growth that are characteristic of cities confront with sensitive 
coastal systems resulting in several issues. The impact of urbanization is 
demonstrated in sewage, industrial pollution, dredge material, urban runoff, 
closure of beaches for recreational purposes, unsafe seafood, navigational 
hazards, loss of fisheries, and general decline in the population of birds, 

	
Environmentally sensitive land-use allocation for smart coastal cities	
127
marine mammals, and turtles. The human population and development or 
building concentration with extraction of groundwater and other materials 
for building purposes also lead to increased subsidence, land erosion, 
salt-water intrusions, larger risks of flooding and generally an increased 
sensitivity to natural hazards, such as hurricanes, storm surges, as well 
as epidemics. These impacts are gradually spreading from local to global 
through degradation of the coastal ecosystem, and by expansion as well 
and thereby burdening even rural coastal stretches to an extent. If there are 
means to help coastal cities to behave smart, even conceptually, it can be 
a major feat in recharting their development course in the sustainability 
route.
6.3	
Is sustainability and smartness related? Isn’t 
a sustainable model smart from the futuristic 
perspective?
Sustainable development is defined as development that “meets the needs 
of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to 
meet their own needs” [5]. Sustainable planning can be considered as 
planning or creation of enduring urban spaces which cater to the demands 
that generate its existence, and has the capacity to endure over time. It 
should be viewed as a process of change in planning/design approach 
in which the exploitation of resources, the direction of investments, the 
orientation of technological development, and institutional change are all 
in harmony and enhance both current and future potential to meet human 
needs and aspirations from a city [6]. The methodology proposed in the 
chapter aims to equip the planners/administrators to do land-use allocation 
keeping in view of the multifarious impacts that land uses (at various stages 
of its allocation and implementation) can unleash and their management 
options. Smart coastal cities that would plan for future growth keeping in 
view the innate sensitivity of its coastal systems integral/pivotal for the 
sustainable continuance of life on earth thus can become the true examples 
of integrating sustainability and smartness.
6.3.1	
Coastal cities from an urban planning perspective
Conventional urban planning practice is majorly centered on land-use 
allocation and its implementation. Land-use planning is an activity that 

128	
Geographic information system for smart cities
results in designated uses for different land areas (zones), and may include 
specific economic, social, engineering, and environmental interventions 
that are necessary for proper implementation of the plans. The way a city/
region (even irrespective of its coastal status) develops over time depends 
much on its land-use plans and their implementation. Consequently, the 
root cause of most anthropogenic impacts on the natural environment 
within the cityscape and outside are traceable to land-use plans, and 
corrections and initiatives for a sustainable city can also righteously begin 
there. Expansion of a city is planned and documented in the land-use plan 
proposal integral to master plans, and they represent the earliest levels 
of intervention for sustainable and smart development of coastal cities as 
well.
	
World over, there are many examples of disastrous impacts and 
implications on local populations, their environment and ecology, resulting 
from urbanization. Coastal urbanization has so far not received the attention 
it needs and deserves. The process cannot be examined in isolation, but 
it requires that the implications for society, the coastal environment, the 
hinterland and their resources be considered together. Both, in the developing 
and developed world, problems of coastal urbanization are noticeable (may 
be to varying extents). It is found that essentially expansion of coastal cities 
is leading to increased pressure on the coastal environment and its resources 
from increased domestic and industrial waste generation and engineering 
construction [7]. Industrial and residential land uses are associated with 
major detrimental consequences. As sustainability and smartness are 
synonymous for coastal cities to a large extent, evaluating land-use planning 
decisions to assess and thereby counterbalance their detrimental impacts can 
be a major step in making a city smart.
6.3.2	
Can a metric help?
However unfortunately, planners of coastal cities do not consider the innate 
development sensitivity of coastal zones while allocating land uses. The 
few isolated studies/reports in this regard are not from a comprehensive 
land-use planning perspective [8–10]. Chapter 17 of Agenda 21 [11] also 
elaborates on protection of seas and coastal areas. It states that through a 
set of well laid out objectives, coastal states are committed to provide for 
integrated management and sustainable development of coastal areas and 
marine environments under their jurisdiction. However, for these objectives 

	
Environmentally sensitive land-use allocation for smart coastal cities	
129
to be even minimally measurable, a metric with sufficient adaptability and 
versatility is needed to assess impacts of land-use decisions on coastal 
systems. As a composite metric, CHI, which has been developed on the 
basis of coastal system sustainability, attempts to gauge the health status 
of any coastal zone from a smart and sustainable planning perspective. It 
is formulated and modeled through an expert survey and pertains to the 
characteristic components (CCs) of coastal zones, their critical dimensions 
(CDs), and relevant attributes. Objectives of such a metric should achieve 
for smart planning of coastal cities and are identified as given below.
	
l	 To be able to capture the critical, multifaceted attributes of a 
coastal zone from a planning perspective.
	
l	 To incorporate those attributes which are directly or indirectly 
influenced by land use.
	
l	 To act as a robust indicator that can gauge the ‘health’ of the coast 
in relation to environmental, social, and economic activities.
	
l	 To allow for the management of the impacts on resources to 
minimize adverse effects.
	
l	 To be of use to continuously quantify, monitor, and communicate 
impacts of land-use allocation decisions on the coastal zone.
	
In total, the metric should increase our understanding of important 
coastal issues arising from land-use planning and thereby help smart 
decision making considering the views of various stakeholders.
	
With the coastal zone health gauged using the metric mentioned, there 
arise a row of new questions: Can we analyze land-use allocations for their 
future impacts? With the proposed metric, making a quantitative assessment 
of coastal system health status is possible to a reasonable level, then can 
we think of assessing the implications of potential land-use allocations on 
such a metric? Thus to quantitatively assess the impact of urban/land-use 
planning decisions, a methodological framework will be of great relevance. 
If found the impacts are evident and costly, the framework must help 
decision makers to weigh alternative proposals, to revise decisions, and to 
formulate policies. Also, it would help track the urban planning (land use) 
related activities for their ultimate impacts on the coastal zone, through the 
continuous monitoring of changes in the proposed metric. Such a system 
could mark the beginning of a comprehensive strategy to attain sustainable 
and smart coastal cities. The chapter elaborates the features of the metric 
named CHI and the methodological framework using CHI to assess land-
use inputs on coastal systems.

130	
Geographic information system for smart cities
6.4	
What is CHI?
The CHI is postulated as an integrated composite indicator to measure 
coastal health from a land-use planning perspective. It directly uses 
environmental, economic, resource related and social inputs as core 
attributes fewer than six CCs of a typical coastal zone (Table 6.2). The 
CHI can help monitor, evaluate, and review coastal system health status 
against set goals, and can also provide invaluable clues on the efficiency of 
the ICZM implementation system in place. It presents a numerical value in 
a simplified and useful manner to represent each of the nine CDs of coastal 
system health as captured under the six CCs mentioned earlier.
	
The basic assumptions in formulating CHIs and the questionnaire 
survey of experts (QSE), which elicited the core know-how to develop 
them, are listed below.
	
1.	 For coastal zones, generically there are six CCs (as shown in 
column 2 of Table 6.2).
	
2.	 There are nine CDs collectively pertaining to the six CCs (as 
shown in column 3 of Table 6.2).
	
3.	 A CHI is specified for each CD. Each CD-specific CHI captures 
the status of a set of influencing attributes (as shown in column 4 
of Table 6.2).
	
4.	 The individual CHIs can be aggregated into a composite CHI for 
gross-level conclusions.
	
Characteristic components are so chosen that they together capture 
typical characteristics of a coastal zone that has a set of core values that 
make it healthy from a planning point of view [12]. The weightings 
corresponding to the CCs, CDs, and attributes reflect their contextual 
importance and are derived from the questionnaire survey of experts 
in different domains and disciplines, as interdisciplinary inputs were 
required (Table 6.2). These are developed using the Analytic Hierarchy 
Process (AHP), a popular multi-criteria decision methodology [13, 14]. 
Specific CHI models are developed for each CD (nine CHIs corresponding 
to the nine CDs). A composite CHI is computed using the nine component 
CHIs that are suitably weighted. Finally, each CHI was validated for a set 
of coastal city contexts [15]. The CHI values have a coast-specific part, 
and they also model the generic aspects that may or may not be present 
in every coastal zone. For the CHIs, the important attributes concerned 
are incorporated in a normalized linear model, with absolute and relative 
halves.

	
Environmentally sensitive land-use allocation for smart coastal cities	
131
Table 6.2  Characteristic components (CCs), critical dimensions (CDs) and attributes and their respective weightings 
(Source: Anil Kumar et al. 2010).
No.
Characteristic Components 
(CCs)
Critical Dimensions(CDs)/Aspects
Attributes (Weightings)
1
Flora and Fauna, and other 
resources (0.178)
Bio diversity and resource abundance (0.5)
1. Mangrove wetlands (0.249)
2. Seagrass meadows (0.152)
3. Coral reef systems (0.249)
4. Lagoon and estuary systems (0.202)
5. Seafood resources (0.147)
Other resources exploited within sustainable 
limits (0.5)
1. Non-living resources (sand, rock etc.) (0.184)
2. Placers and other minerals (0.151)
3. Hydrocarbons (0.139)
4. Salt and Chemicals (0.158)
5. Freshwater (0.217)
6. Renewable energy resources (0.152)
2
Geomorphologic 
component 
(0.148)
Vulnerability for calamity/damage (1.0)
1. Geomorphologic vulnerability (0.620)
2. Beach slope (0.380)
3
Coastal process component 
(0.180)
Coastal process related impacts/calamities on 
the coast (1.0)
1. Coastal erosion (0.234)
2. Cyclones and storm surges (0.253)
3. Flooding (0.183)
4. Sea level rise (0.148)
5. Salinity intrusion (0.182)

132	
Geographic information system for smart cities
4
Socioeconomic component 
(0.178)
Sectors of socioeconomic activities and sector 
wise volume of transaction (1.0)
1. Industrial activities (0.081)
2. Tourism related activities (0.132)
3. Fishing (0.262)
4. Residential activities (0.133)
5. Aqua/agriculture activities (0.194)
6. Basic trade/port/harbor (0.194)
5
Aesthetic component (0.083)
Visual, noise and olfactory aspects (1.0)
1. Visual clutter, Litter, garbage and filth (0.390)
2. Noise, Sounds of interfering nature (0.407)
3. Stench, obnoxious smells (0.203)
6
Environmental Pollution 
(0.234)
Air pollution (0.330)
1. Suspended Particulate matter (SPM) (0.226)
2. Oxides of Nitrogen (NOx) (0.252)
3. Oxides of Sulphur (SOx) (0.284)
4. Oxides of Carbon (COx) (0.238)
Water pollution (0.330)
1. Pathogens (0.161)
2. Dissolved Oxygen (DO) (0.155)
3. Inorganic chemicals (0.127)
4. Organic chemicals (0.133)
5. Sediment contaminants (0.08)
6. Heavy metals and radio active substances (0.353)
No.
Characteristic Components 
(CCs)
Critical Dimensions(CDs)/Aspects
Attributes (Weightings)

	
Environmentally sensitive land-use allocation for smart coastal cities	
133
6.4.1	
Objectives of CHI
Coastal zone health is postulated as contributed by a set of generic 
characteristics that can be traced back to a set of critical parameter values 
corresponding to the core characteristic components. Though they are 
mutually influencing to varying extents, to make the model less complex, 
they are treated independent for modeling CHI. Six basic characteristic 
components of any coastal zone as shown in Table 6.1 are considered for 
postulating the metric.
	
The CHIs have been conceptualized and developed to measure coastal 
zone health. They are meant for use in a variety of direct and indirect 
coastal zone management contexts. They serve as:
	
1.	 state indicators for baseline condition mapping;
	
2.	 metrics to compare and monitor baseline and future coastal system 
status;
	
3.	 tools to measure efficacy and results of policies and actions;
	
4.	 process indicators reflecting management of coastal resources; 
and
	
5.	 indicators of efficiency of institutional arrangements for ICZM.
	
Typical input format for CHI (socioeconomic) calculation is shown in 
Fig. 6.1.
SE entity
Type
w
If
REa
REp
AEa
wIfREa
wIfREp
wIfAEa
wIf
Industrial
Posi/Neg
0.081
1
1.00
1.00
0.10
0.07
0.07
0.01
0.07
Residential
Posi/Neg
0.133
1
1.20
1.20
0.50
0.17
0.17
0.07
0.14
Tourism
Posi/Neg
0.136
1
1.10
1.10
0.30
0.14
0.14
0.04
0.12
Basic 
Trade/port/
harbour
Posi/Neg
0.194
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Aqua/
agriculture
Posi/Neg
0.194
0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Fishing
Posi/Neg
0.262
1
1.20
1.10
0.30
0.28
0.26
0.07
0.24
1.20
0.66
0.64
0.19
0.57
SE =
0.681
CHI-
SE =
6.81
The model is 0.5 (∑w.If.REa ∕ ∑w.If.REp) + 0.5 (∑w.If.AEa ∕ ∑w.If) when the attribute is positive, 
else the model is 0.5 (∑w.If. (2 − REa) ∕ ∑w.If. (2 − REp)) + 0.5 (∑w.If. (1 − AEa) ∕ ∑w.If)
Figure 6.1  CHI for socioeconomic component (CHI-SE)

134	
Geographic information system for smart cities
6.4.2	
Indicator (CHI) categories and the composite CHI
Corresponding to the CCs and their CDs, nine CHIs are used to indicate 
the coastal zone health status as detailed below.
1. Flora and fauna indicator – the CHI-FF
This indicator reflects the vigor, biodiversity and exuberance aspects of the 
coastal flora and fauna. It is based on the premise that the coast’s original, 
virgin profile with its biodiversity, extent and sensitivity is the ideal and 
best base model and deviations due to human interventions/activities alter 
and, in the worst case, deteriorate it. Thus, human encroachment at the 
cost of loss of bio-resources is considered undesirable. A higher value 
indicates exuberance, pristineness, and conserved biodiversity of flora and 
fauna and less of unsustainable land uses/activities in operation.
2. Other resources indicator – the CHI-OR
In addition to the living resources, there are a variety of coastal resources 
on which an urban conglomeration depends heavily at various stages of its 
development [16]. Such resources include sand, salt, chemicals, freshwater, 
coastal minerals, etc. A higher value of this indicator corresponds to an 
optimal level of extraction of resources. Their needs to be a well laid out 
plan for safe and sustainable extraction and equitable distribution of these 
resources for common good. To this level, resource extraction is treated 
positive and is a subjective decision. Beyond a sustainable level, extraction 
of such resources is treated as detrimental.
3. Geomorphologic indicator – the CHI-GEO
This indicates the geomorphologic and geologic vulnerability aspects of 
the coast that are significant for planning in terms of the length of time 
some of these aspects take to manifest changes. Mostly, morphological 
evolutions are a direct consequence of changes in sediment transport, both 
in space and time, and happen over geological time. This may not have 
much significance for planning and hence lies beyond the purview of this 
indicator. However, the short-term consequences of morphology changes 
and the extent of their influence over the vulnerability of the coastal 
zone are reflected by this indicator. A higher value indicates minimal 
vulnerability and presence of gentle beach slope.

	
Environmentally sensitive land-use allocation for smart coastal cities	
135
4. Coastal process indicator – the CHI-CP
This indicator captures the sensitivity of the coastal zone to various 
coastal processes such as waves, currents, tides, cyclones, etc., and allied 
calamities. This indicator also captures all secondary impacts of coastal 
processes such as erosion, accretion, and saline intrusion. Though complex, 
to the extent possible, this indicator should capture the mutual impacts of 
human activities and coastal processes on each other as well. A higher 
value indicates a potentially safe coastal zone with minimal interference of 
coastal physical processes on the landscape and human activities.
5. Socioeconomic indicator – the CHI-SE
This indicator reflects the coast’s support to its economy and the extent 
of the society/community’s dependence and belongingness to the coast. 
All direct and indirect breadwinning activities dominantly dependent on 
the sea/coast are included sector-wise in this indicator. A higher value 
indicates a coast having high socio-economic influence, where again 
sustainable practices are the guide map.
6. Coastal aesthetic pollution indicator – the CHI-AeP
This indicator reflects the coast’s health status through human sensory 
perceptions including visual, sonic, and olfactory aspects of the coastal 
zone. A higher value indicates a coast that affects one’s sensory perceptions 
less in a negative way. It is a subjective indicator. A higher value indicates 
the coast’s potential to accommodate tourism and allied recreation related 
land uses.
7. Environmental (air, water, and land) pollution indicators – the CHI-AP, 
WP, and LP
Under this category, there are three different CHIs representing air, 
water, and land pollution levels, respectively. These indirectly indicate 
the capacity of the coastal zone to absorb (or not to) more development. 
A higher value indicates a coast of pristine environmental quality where 
most pollutants are neither present or are within safe levels.
	
Although each CHI is computed as a value between 0 and 1, for 
convenience these are scaled and expressed as a value out of 10. There are 
relative and absolute parts for each CHI. These are separately computed 
and by assigning an appropriate weightage to each (in all the study 

136	
Geographic information system for smart cities
contexts, equal weightage is given to the relative and absolute parts of 
the CHI), a final CHI are computed. The composite CHI is expressed 
out of 100, by using a weighted sum of individual CD-wise CHIs and 
then scaling them. For the validation location of Calicut, the comparison 
between model computed (MC CHI) and the expert judged (EJ CHI) CHI 
values are shown in Table 6.3 for illustration. 
Table 6.3 Comparison between model computed (MC CHI) and the expert judged (EJ CHI) 
CHI values during Validation (Source: Anilkumar et al, 2010).
No.
CHI type
MC CHI value
EJ CHI value
Percentage 
variation
1
Flora fauna (FF)
6.94
7.6
6.6
2
Other resources (OR)
5.23
4.0
12.3
3
Geomorphologic 
vulnerability (GEO)
6.56
8.5
19.4
4
Coastal process (CP)
7.25
7.0
2.5
5
Air pollution (AP)
6.43
6.2
2.3
6
Water pollution (WP)
6.95
6.3
6.5
7
Land pollution (LP)
4.69
7.4
27.1
8
Aesthetic aspects (AeP)
7.33
7.4
0.7
9
Socioeconomic (SE)
9.61
8.3
13.1
10
Composite CHI
70.68
71.69
1.01
6.4.3	
CHI model formulation
Fundamentally, the CHI values are expected to be coast specific, as each 
coastal zone is different in its own way. Making the CHIs comprehensively 
capture the generic aspects of any coastal zone and recognizing that any 
specific aspect may or may not be present in a given coastal zone make 
the proposed model versatile. Thus, the CHIs are designed with two 
specific parts: the relative and the absolute. In the relative part, the extent 
of what is achieved with reference to what is planned is measured for a 
particular attribute during the previous plan period. In the absolute part, 
the absolute values of the particular attribute are considered. These are of 
significance in the rare case of inter coast comparisons. Also, the model 
accommodates absolute values to reduce any proneness to manipulation. 
By default, the model assigns equal weightings to the relative and absolute 

	
Environmentally sensitive land-use allocation for smart coastal cities	
137
parts of the indicator. However, users may modify the weightings to 
reflect weak or strong sustainability outlooks of the ICZM authority in 
any specific planning location. For positive and negative attributes, the 
models are slightly different, as a higher final CHI value will always mean 
better coastal health. The flowchart of developing CHI as explained is 
schematically shown in Fig. 6.2.
Figure 6.2  Flowchart for model development (Source: Anilkumar et al, 2010)
6.5	
Assessing land-use allocation implications on 
CHI: the way forward for smart coastal cities
This section deals with the holistic methodology for an evaluation 
framework to assess land-use impacts on coastal zones. The first logical 
step to deal development sensitivity of coastal zones when land uses are 
allocated is to analyze and assess the impact dimensions of land uses 
before important decisions are made. This may lead to encouraging, 
accepting unconditionally or conditionally, regulating/controlling, 
restricting/limiting, or even banning certain land uses based on their 

138	
Geographic information system for smart cities
expected impacts. Decision making on land-use allocations becomes 
complex in coastal cities, as their impacts matter to a much higher degree 
due to the presence of a number of sensitive coastal systems. It is here that 
the process of identifying critical land uses from a coastal city perspective 
gains importance. Hence, methodologically this is attempted first. A 
theoretical framework to address the issue of land-use impact assessment 
on the CHI-based coastal zone profile status is presented next. As part of 
the framework, quantification and consolidation of the interaction of CHIs 
and land uses is captured through a matrix called CHI land use interaction 
matrix (CLIM), and the integration of CLIM with CHI models to devise 
the system to predict land-use impacts in the form of change in CHIs (both 
positive and negative) is discussed briefly next.
6.5.1	
Identification of critical land uses
The critical land uses to be located in coastal zones can be identified using 
an AHP-based methodology using a QSE. The experts can make an AHP-
based pair-wise comparison of the given set of land-use options. Based 
on the mean weighting for each land use, its criticality can be assessed. 
Following can be the possible set of criteria that may be used by the 
experts to rate land-use criticality on coastal zones.
	
1.	 Resource depletion/utilization caused by the land use,
	
2.	 Waste production and disposal potential of the land use concerned.
	
3.	 Movement of goods and people, the land use would generate and
	
4.	 Activity/infrastructure/amenities/support services requirements of 
the land use to function.
	
The first three criteria are more dependent on the inherent land-
use-based processes, whereas the last criterion focuses on building 
infrastructure for the first three aspects.
6.5.2	
The framework to identify land-use impacts: 
Challenges
Next step in methodology consisted of evolving a theoretical framework 
for the assessment of impacts consequent to allocating critical land uses on 
a coastal zone and the influencing factors. For this, land-use impacts were 
considered under two categories: generic- and project-specific impacts. 
These are explained below.

	
Environmentally sensitive land-use allocation for smart coastal cities	
139
The generic impacts of land uses
Generic impacts are those which can be predicted even when land-
use allocation/zoning is made. For example, when an area is zoned for 
recreational land use, the predictable direct or indirect impacts include:
	
l	 A demand profile for resources such as water, power, etc., and
	
l	 Generation of waste/garbage and also sewage/sullage/effluents, 
etc.
	
l	 Presence of a floating population and the support activity/ancillary 
land-use requirements,
	
l	 Specific access/circulation requirements based on the period of the 
day (operational hours) and the traffic volume generated,
	
For most land uses, by structuring and prescribing the following 
parameters, our ability to predict such impacts can be enhanced further.
	
l	 Type, scale/capacity, intensity characteristics of the land use
	
l	 Coverage on land, floor area ratio (FAR), etc., and such planning 
related instruments in operation
	
l	 Fire proneness, resource usage based classifications (like power, 
water, etc.)
	
In brief, land-use impact prediction can be done effectively when 
it is coupled with appropriate specifications on the type of land use and 
matching development control instruments like zoning, density/height 
restrictions, etc.
Project-specific impacts
In general, land-use allocations are realized/implemented in the form of 
specific projects and ancillary facilities of definite details over a specific 
period of time (plan period). For example, a proposal for residential 
land use in an urban stretch will transform into the envisaged residential 
neighborhood only when residential projects such as apartments, 
independent houses, row houses, etc., as planned are constructed and 
commissioned as specific projects.
	
The project-specific impacts refer to the exact nature, quantum, and 
specifics of the generic impacts that follow implementation of the complete 
land use through projects. These can be estimated during the plan/project 
proposal submission phase when the sanctioning authority (such as a 
development authority/council or a city corporation as the case may be) 
grants approval for implementation. Broadly, project-specific impacts = 

140	
Geographic information system for smart cities
generic impacts ± δ. Project-specific impacts of land uses depend upon a 
large number of other parameters such as development policies in force, 
efficiency of implementation process and mechanisms, funding patterns, 
etc., and are hence more difficult to predict. The prediction may not be cost 
effective also. Hence, the smart coastal city framework as discussed does 
not address assessment of project-specific impacts in its overall scheme of 
things and methodology.
6.5.3	
Predicting the generic impacts of land uses
The term generic impacts imply the foreseeable limits of the impacts of 
land uses in the planning stage. For reasons cited in the previous section, 
CLIM are proposed to be developed solely based on the generic impacts 
of land uses. Major aspects that can be considered for effective prediction 
of the generic impacts are land-use type, geographical area of influence, 
environmental spheres of influence, documented baseline data, and 
development guidelines/instruments at disposal.
6.5.4	
CD-specific CLIMs based on experts’ inputs
As shown in Fig. 6.3, all the CHIs are defined over 1 sq km (1 km by 1 
km) cells forming a base zone contiguous to the high tide line (HTL) or 
coastal regulatory zone (CRZ) limit as the case may be and then the next 
two consecutive zones (zones 1 and 2 of the same 1 km width and cells 
of area 1 sq km) in the landward side away from the coastline (Fig. 6.3). 
Although it may be hard to obtain data in the base zone in many contexts, 
the zone being a critical one, as part of using the model, this data needs 
to be collected directly or indirectly. Normal land-use parcels in an urban 
context may be smaller than say 500 × 500 m, and as one moves to the 
fringes, the parcels may be bigger in size. Based on expert inputs, and for 
the proposed model, the land uses are represented in average parcel size of 
500 × 500 m for all zones. 
	
The direct impacts on the CHIs are assumed to be only due to the land 
uses allocated in the base zone. The first and second order indirect impacts 
are due to land uses allocated on zones 1 and 2 respectively, and it varies 
inversely proportional to distance. For simplicity, only the orthogonal 
impacts with respect to the coastline are considered.

	
Environmentally sensitive land-use allocation for smart coastal cities	
141
Figure 6.3  Premises for CHI land-use interaction (Source: PhD dissertation of P.P. 
Anilkumar, 2008)
	
CLIM is formulated based on the following assumptions as well:
	
l	 CLIM is expected to reflect only the direct and generic impacts 
caused by critical land-use subcategories.
	
l	 CLIM is based on the assumption that land-uses impact the 
CHIs only seaward and with reference to a maximum distance of 
influence.
	
l	 All cells are referred to using their geometric centre.
6.5.5	
The CHI land use interaction matrix (CLIM)
CLIM shows (Fig. 6.4) the influences/impacts of various critical land uses 
(row wise) on different CHI attributes (column-wise under specific CDs). 
These values are determined based on expert inputs obtained using an 
AHP methodology that is based on the aspects discussed in Section 6.5.3. 
The values as given in CLIM are for the direct generic impacts resulting 
from the land-use category concerned. Indirect impacts are computed 

142	
Geographic information system for smart cities
based on the rule that the gravity of an impact is inversely proportional to 
the distance, subject to the maximum limiting distance of influence, which 
is land-use specific. Figure 6.3 gives a clear picture of how CLIM values 
are construed.
Figure 6.4  The concept of CLIM
6.5.6	
Consolidated CLIM table and land-use impact 
computation
The consolidated CLIM table helps to simulate CHI changes due to land-
use changes. It consists all the nine CD-specific matrices corresponding 
to all land-use subcategories as considered. The CLIM page has also 
incorporated the limiting distance of influence specific to each land-
use type. Values as given in Table 6.4 are based on the survey outcome 

	
Environmentally sensitive land-use allocation for smart coastal cities	
143
and may vary based on coastal region and also in sensitive contexts. 
As and when land-use changes are suggested, the CLIM data can be 
accessed, where values corresponding to the interactions of all land-
use categories’ with all the CD-wise attributes are documented and 
used for changed CHI computations, accordingly. Using the combined 
system framework for a coastal city, firstly CHIs can be computed for 
all CDs and then when land-use allocations are considered, the CLIM-
based computation proposed can quantify the CHI change consequent 
to a given pattern of land-use allocation. For a decision maker, it helps 
greatly to weigh his alternatives and thereby to make smart allocation 
of land uses. 
6.6	
Broad context of application
CHI considers coast as composed of its six core characteristic components, 
and coastal zone health is conceived as holistically reflected by the value of 
critical parameters pertaining to these specific characteristic components. 
Primarily it is a metric to measure the health status for baseline condition 
mapping of the coast. It may also reflect state and process aspects of coastal 
systems and performance efficacy of coastal zone management system in 
place as well. Much of this is influenced by the land-use planning system 
in place and the way it factors in measures to protect the development 
sensitivity of urban coastal zones. With the baseline condition mapped and 
coastal zone health condition assessed, land-use alternatives make better 
sense, as the proneness aspects of the background coastal zone is better 
documented and can be better taken care of. By establishing benchmarks 
and prescribing limiting thresholds for specific CD-based CHIs, land-use 
planning process can be made impact analysis based, minimizing adverse 
impacts.
	
At the master plan level, the concept of CHI and a preliminary analysis 
of how the planned land uses (as per the master plan proposal/alternatives) 
are going to influence the existing set of CHIs can provide major clues on 
the impacts of master plan proposal implementation, for the coastal city, 
from sustainability perspective. The process can help in weighing down 
alternative land-use proposals and also to decide on alternate sites for the 
same land use, so that the impact on CHI (of prioritized environmental 
components) is minimized. At the more location-specific zonal or site 
plans levels, using the proposed framework it is possible to carry out a 

144	
Geographic information system for smart cities
sensitivity analysis of alternative land-use options and alternative sites for 
the same land uses. 
	
For example, by referring to the model-computed CHI values of a 
specific coastal zone area in Calicut, one can see that the socioeconomic 
CHI value is considerably high, and any land-use allocation in the base 
or zone 1 or 2 of this area (with respective magnitude of impacts), 
which would adversely affect this dependence of local people on the 
coastal zone, needs to be discouraged over a land-use choice with lesser 
socioeconomic impacts. For the same area, a land-use choice which has 
even marginal negative influence on say, air pollution, is acceptable here, 
as the air pollution CHI is reasonably safe. Or another instance from the 
same case is that between air and land pollution as land-use impacts, land 
uses causing air pollution may be preferred (subject to the condition that 
the pollutant load carrying capacity of the area is within safe limits), as the 
land pollution CHI is already low, reflecting presence of polluted land in 
the coastal zone premises. 
Figure 6.5  Broad context of application
	
As shown in Fig. 6.5, when a land-use plan is proposed for an urban 
coastal zone stretch, one can assess the impact the particular land-
use parcel has on the prevailing CHI and on comparing the crucially 

	
Environmentally sensitive land-use allocation for smart coastal cities	
145
changed CHI values with acceptable minimum/thresholds prescribed, 
and decision making/policy formulation is easier for smart land-use 
plan/master plan finalization. An appropriate framework can bundle 
these modules into a user-friendly graphical user interface (GUI, with 
or without a geographical interface) that can help in structuring decision 
making in the area of sensitized coastal zone planning, which is the 
overall aim of this system. An advantage of the component environment-
specific multiple CHI logic is that, based on the city’s preference, it can 
choose to be primarily ecology, economy, or environment sensitive and 
thereby smarter by one more level.
	
In India, the most recent CRZ notification (CRZ notification 2011) 
primarily aim at prohibiting certain activities like mining, reclamation, 
certain types of construction, etc., completely and regulating certain 
activities including construction in certain other areas based on the 
coastal zone’s existing development, urban/rural status and development 
sensitivity. It does not consider impacts as derived out of land-use 
allocations as a matter of policy and as a beginning to control coastal 
zone development, this policy is alright. Also the CRZ norms imposes 
restrictions on a reasonably narrow zone (around 200 maximum from 
the HTL) for most zones, and only for ecologically sensitive areas, it has 
wider regulatory zones (maximum 500 m). Coastal zone management 
plans for respective states are documents prepared to implement CRZ 
norms in a systematic way emphasizing hazard mapping (based on 
the type of coastal zone) as a primary objective. From this lookout, all 
the stated limitations of CRZ are also applicable to the coastal zone 
management plans also. The system discussed in the chapter looks at 
coastal cities from more holistic perspective. It considers land uses as the 
triggers of various impacts on coastal system. It also considers impacts 
sector (CD) based. Through the base zone, zones 1 and 2, it can consider 
land-use impacts over a much wider extent (say up to 3 km and more from 
HTL), and thereby makes it a comprehensive system from the coastal 
city angle. It would be ideal and a more environmentally responsible 
act, if we could generalize this methodology to more coastal cities in a 
phased manner. With the discussed framework implemented, most of the 
objectives aimed by CRZ and more will be achieved and thereby we will 
be utilizing scarce land resources for better and sustainable development 
of coastal zones.

146	
Geographic information system for smart cities
6.7	
Epilogue
The interdisciplinary nature of this framework necessitated data collection 
in the form of a QSE in different domains and disciplines. Both for the 
identification of critical land uses and to quantify their impacts on each 
CHI, the AHP-based analysis results of this survey were utilized. Although 
the coastal context under consideration may vary considerably across 
regions, the modeling methodology is adaptive enough to incorporate 
changes (the concept of CHI also has this flexibility), and thus the system 
can be employed in a wide range of coastal contexts.
	
The assumption that land-use impacts on the CHI are only seaward may 
be questionable in some contexts, where impacts need to be considered 
from cells side-wise as well. In such cases, the computation of indirect 
impacts should be modified with more realistic and complex algorithms 
that can consider impacts from land use on sides as well. This may be a 
considered as a limitation of the present version of the framework. This 
may demand that the land-use representation method itself be changed to 
a GIS-based system. With GIS-based land-use representations, variable 
grid sizes, computation of radial impacts, and use of better algorithms in 
assessing impacts, precision level of the impact prediction can be greatly 
improved. The “limiting distance of influence” corresponding to different 
land uses is also a parameter that can be fine-tuned for more realistic 
performance of the system. The AHP-based CLIM logic is extendable for 
more land-use cases as well as for more number of attributes of concern on 
the coastal zone. 
	
Another limitation of the present version of this framework can be that 
the present CLIM logic is conceived only for the normal land-use categories 
and that too with reference to the attributes of concern (as defined for CHIs). 
When land uses of special nature and coastal zones of specific sensitivity 
issues are modeled, modification in CLIM may be necessary for fine-tuning 
the generic impact prediction process/logic. There can be both land-use- and 
attribute-wise changes that need to be incorporated.
	
The methodology framework discussed is meant to be used for 
quantitatively assessing the impact of urban/land-use planning decisions 
for their ultimate impacts on the coastal zone, through tracking the 
changes in the proposed metric. If the impacts are evident and costly, the 
framework helps decision makers to weigh alternative proposals, revise 

	
Environmentally sensitive land-use allocation for smart coastal cities	
147
decisions, and formulate policies. Such a framework made mandatory 
with appropriate regional variations supported by necessary research 
and background studies can help us to attain the long-term goal of smart 
(through sustainable practices) coastal cities in a more structured and 
systematic manner.
6.8	
References
[1] Clark, J. A. (1998). Coastal zone management for the new century, Ocean 
and Coastal Management, 37(3), pp. 191–216.
[2] Olsen, S., Tobey, J., and Kerr, M. (1997). A common framework for 
learning from ICM experience, Ocean and Coastal Management, 37(2), pp. 155–
174.
[3] Kullenburg, G. (2001). Contributions of marine and coastal area research 
and observations towards sustainable development of large coastal cities, Ocean 
and Coastal Management, Special issue on mega cities, 44, pp. 283–291.
[4] Stephen, K. D. and David, G. R. (2001). Redefining the limits of the 
coastal zone: Bridging the gap between land and sea using remote sensing and 
GIS, Geo Coast, 2(1), pp. 1–15.
[5] Brundtland, G. H. (1987). Our Common Future, Report of the World 
Commission on Environment and Development, Oxford University Press.
[6] Hotten and Diprose (2009). Very Simple Sustainability (VSStm), 
A condensed version of the Sustainable Architecture Primer, an archive of 
information and “how to” guide to sustainable architecture.
[7] Jiang, Y., Kirkman, H., and Hua, A. (2001). Mega city development: 
Managing impacts on marine environments, Ocean and Coastal Zone 
Management, 44, pp. 293–318.
[8] Resource Assessment Commission (RAC, 1993). Coastal Zone Inquiry 
Final Report, AGPS, Canberra, 1993.
[9] Hansen, H. (2008). The Impact of Climate Change on Future Land Use in 
a Coastal Zone Planning Context, ICCSA 2008, edited by O. Gervasi et al., Part I, 
LNCS 5072, pp. 245–257, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
[10] Piorr, A., Ungaro, F., Ciancaglini, A., Happe, K., Sahrbacher, A., Sattler, 
C., Uthes, S. and Sander, P. (2009). Integrated assessment of future CAP policies: 
land use changes, spatial patterns and targeting, Environmental Science and 
Policy, 12, pp. 1122–1136.
[11] Agenda 21, Chapter 17 Protection of the oceans, all kinds of seas, 
including enclosed and semi-enclosed seas, and coastal areas and the protection, 

148	
Geographic information system for smart cities
rational use and development of their living resources. Available at http://www.
un.org/esa/sustdev/ 
documents/agenda21/english/agenda21 
chapter17.html 
[Accessed August 17, 2011]
[12] Angremond, K. (1995). Environmental Impact Assessment and Coastal 
Zone Management. Proceedings of the Inter Institutional Course on Coastal 
Engineering, Organized by IIT Madras and T.U. Delft, Oct, 260–271. 
[13] Forman, E. H. (2001). The Analytic hierarchy Process, An Exposition. 
OR Chronicle, 49(4), pp. 469–486.
[14] Saaty, T. L. (1980). The Analytic Hierarchy Process, McGraw Hill Book 
Company, New York, 1980.
[15] Anilkumar, P. P., Varghese, K. and Ganesh, L. S. (2010). Formulating a 
coastal zone health metric for landuse impact management in urban coastal zones, 
Journal of Environmental Management, 91, pp. 2172–2185.
[16] Coastal Regulation Zone Review (2005). M. S. Swaminathan Committee 
Report to Ministry of Environment and Forests, Govt. of India, New Delhi, pp. 
30–33.

Abstract: The chapter puts an emphasis on managing the rapid growth of slum in India 
and other developing nations through the categorization of slums and with the application of 
Geographic Information System (GIS). These categories of slums will provide a better target 
mechanism and will define major policies and strategies to manage slum growth or check 
further formation of slums in urban areas. 
	
The chapter analyses the available secondary and primary data on living conditions in 
380 slum settlements in Bhopal and then categorizes slums into 4 categories: best slums 
(no slums, typical LIG/MIG houses), transitional slums (good slums), intermediate slums 
(bad slums), and core slums (worse slums). It was found that approx. 22% of the total slum 
settlements (380) fall under best slum category with good living conditions, while only 9% 
were found in worst conditions. On analyzing spatially using GIS technique, it was concluded 
that inner area city slums were in much better conditions as compared to outer or central 
area slums. 
	
The chapter also compares the case of Bhopal (1.4 million) to other three similar cities, 
i.e. Indore (1.4 million), Jabalpur (0.99 million), and Gwalior (0.8 million population) and 
concludes that slum conditions varies in each city, approx. 22–26% (excluding Gwalior) of 
slums fall in category of best slums and only 4–15% are really in worst conditions which 
require immediate attention. Here too, spatially inner area city slums were in much better 
conditions as compared to outer or central area slums. 
	
The research has provided a ‘Target Mechanism’ that ensures the reaching of benefits 
to core poor (that are less than 15% of total in Indian cities) with better impact and results. 
This categorization with GIS application will provide a tool to manage the slum growth and 
target worst slums for improvement in India and other developing nations. 
Key words: slums, water, toilet, road, drain, settlements, inner & outer slums, category, 
settlements, GIS, Bhopal. 
7.1	
Introduction 
As the arrival of the new millennium turns a new page of history, it is 
becoming increasingly apparent that the world is returning to some of its 
fundamental, unresolved questions: the issues of equity, sustainability, 
poverty, and social justice, among others. Relatively poor knowledge of 
local and global forces shaping development and producing/reproducing 
7
Application of GIS in categorizing and 
managing slum growth in India
VIJAY NEEKHRA

150	
Geographic information system for smart cities
urban poverty, the complexity of the accompanying phenomena, and 
the uncertainty of urban decision-making processes, call for a better 
understanding of inter- and intra-city differentials in poverty and inequality. 
This basically means a need for better understanding of slum incidence 
and need to comprehend the available smart and innovative tools and 
technologies such as Geographic Information System (GIS) to manage the 
rapid growth of slums in this world. 
	
As per UN-Habitat report on global slums, globally, one billion 
people now live in urban slums. This number is expected to double within 
the next 30 years, if no action is taken. The number of people living in 
abysmal conditions in urban slums worldwide has reached the 1 billion 
mark, making up 32% of the global urban population. Globally, one in six 
people are now a slum dweller. 
	
As per UN-Habitat [1] in the nations like Ethiopia, Chad, Mozambique, 
Madagascar, Nepal, Central Africa Republic, and United Republic of 
Tanzania, it has been reported that more than 90% of the total urban 
population lives in slums; or in other words, the slum population dominates 
the country. It is quite natural and a known fact that in these countries, 
all the slums settlements won’t have same characteristics, amenities, and 
socioeconomic profile. They will definitely differ in some respect or the 
other. For example, the slums in developing or least-developed nations 
lack in basic amenities like water and sanitation apart from overcrowding 
and housing; however, the slums in developed nations do not lack in basic 
amenities rather the issue there is of durability/structure of housing and 
that particular deficiency puts them into the category of slums [2]. 
	
Considering the fact of having such a mass of slum population in the 
nations and varied definition of slums across the different part of world 
with an immense difference in the socioeconomic profile, construction 
material, houses, basic services, poverty level, infrastructure availability, 
land legality, environment, etc., among the slum settlements, is it really 
possible to draft the single policy so that it may be useful and effective to 
all kind of slums? Under these prevailing conditions where there is such 
a variety and typology of slums settlements exists in the cities/countries, 
it becomes vital to understand deeply and categorize such mass of slums. 
Such deep understanding will assist the decision makers in drafting the 
various policies and approaches toward the slum settlements and to 
manage the growth of slums. Though earlier researchers conducted some 
research and classified certain typologies of slums, but it was inconclusive 

	
Application of GIS in categorizing and managing slum growth in India	
151
in making any impact on real decision making and managing the growth 
of slums. Earlier typologies of slums were based on slum location 
with respect to cities (inner, middle, outer), economic status, access to 
services [3], and others. Researches that focused on India provided a 
description of slum dwellers based on location, demographic pattern, 
housing conditions, basic services, literacy levels, migration, etc., at city 
or slum level [4]; however, no real efforts have been made to classify the 
slums into various categories. Though some efforts can be traced from 
past researches [5, 6], but they were focused on much toward mobility 
pattern (Bridge Header and Consolidator Model, Turner) or requirement 
of dwellers as per the passage of time rather than real categorization. 
However, Stokes attempt was appreciable, as per “Slum Theory” (case of 
America) slums were classified in four categories based on psychological 
status and class structure in slum settlements. As it was in early 60s, when 
the slum situation was not so grave, to some extent it went un-noticed 
or no real efforts were made to utilize that theory in practical context. 
Currently, as per UN-Habitat the slum situation is at extreme as every 
third dweller in urban area is living in slums and need of categorization is 
again being noticed by researchers [7–10] in last few years. UN-Habitat 
[11] has also discussed certain typology and recognized slums based on 
services, housing structure, density, location, poverty and exclusion and 
tenure, and also recognized spatially based on origins and age, location 
and boundaries, site and scale, legality and vulnerability, and development 
stages. However, UN-Habitat didn’t stress too much on categorization of 
slums, which of course is required at today’s context. 
	
In the background of above scenario, the current chapter highlights the 
application of GIS in, firstly, deep understanding of the slum settlements 
socially, physically, and spatially and then, secondly, providing a “target 
mechanism” to manage the rapid growth of slums by categorizing slum 
settlements with a case study of an Indian city Bhopal into four categories. 
These categories will provide a way forward and a clear policy direction 
on how to manage the growth of slums in the developing nation like India. 
7.2	
Slum population in India 
With reference to India, with a population of some 1,210 million people 
(2011) [12], India is now the second country in the world. Currently, approx. 
31% of the total Indian population is urbanized. Despite of various programs 

152	
Geographic information system for smart cities
and policies for poor and slums, the slum population is on rise. In 1981, 
slum population in the country was estimated 27.9 million (TCPO, 1981), 
and in 2001 it was estimated 61.8 million (TCPO, 1981). However, as per 
Census of India (2001) that covered only 1743 cities (total 4378 cities in 
India, Census of India) accounted that slums are the home of more than 52.4 
million in India or 23.5 percent of population of cities/towns reporting slums. 
As per UN population report (by midyear 2011), urban slum population of 
India is estimated at 158.4 million. The Census of India estimated approx. 
93.1 million of slum population in 2011 and projected to 104.6 million 
in 2017. The largest slum population in cities with a population of more 
than one million is found in Mumbai and is reported more than 54% of 
the Mumbai population lives in slums (Census of India, 2001). Table 7.1 
gives an overview of the distribution of slum population in various sizes of 
cities. The large urban cities are centers of economic growth and contribute 
significantly to the GDP of the country. It has been reported that approx. 
17 million of the total slum population in India is living in cities with a 
population more than 1 million. Rapid and concentrated growth of these 
cities in the post-independence period resulted in regional inequalities that 
resulted in the poor to migrate to these centers from small urban centers and 
especially the rural areas in search of job and livelihood. This along with 
various other factors resulted in emergence and growth of slum and squatter 
settlements, characterized by overcrowding and lack of sanitation and basic 
infrastructure.
Table 7.1  City and slum population (Source: Slum Population, Census of India, 2001)
City population (in 
millions)
Slum  population 
(in millions)
 % share of slum 
population
Slum population 
per city (in 
millions)
4+
11.0 
26
2.20
2–4 
3.76 
8.80
0.47
1–2 
2.88 
6.80
0.21
0.5 –1 
5.81 
13.70
0.14
0.1–0.5 
13.9 
32.70
0.04
0.05–0.1 
5.1 
12.00
0.02
Total
42.6
100
0.07

	
Application of GIS in categorizing and managing slum growth in India	
153
7.3	
Program/policies towards slums improvement 
The policies of urban development and housing in India have come 
a long way since 1950s. However, it was the Seventh Five Year Plan 
(1985–1990) that explicitly recognized the problems of the urban poor 
for the first time, and an urban poverty alleviation scheme known as 
Urban Basic Services for the Poor (UBSP) was launched. As a follow-
up, the Global Shelter Strategy (GSS), National Housing Policy (NHP) 
was announced in 1988. The Eighth Five Year Plan (1992–1997) for the 
first time explicitly recognized the role and importance of urban sector 
for the national economy and launched urban poverty and alleviation 
program of Nehru Rozgar Yojana (NRY). The Ninth Five Year Plan 
(1997–2002), in particular, focused on the effective implementation and 
management of urban poverty alleviation programs (UPAPs). The Ninth 
Plan launched the Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) and 
phased out UBSP. In 2001, for the first time, Census of India collected 
the data related to slums, and the draft of National Slum Policy was 
brought out by the Ministry of Urban Development (Department of 
Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation). The main objectives of a 
slum policy are:
	
l	 To create awareness amongst the public and in government of the 
underlying principles that guide the process of slum development, 
the improvement and the options that are available for bringing 
about the integration of these settlements and the communities 
residing within them into urban area as a whole.
	
l	 To strengthen the legal and policy framework to facilitate the 
process of slum development and improvement on a sustainable 
basis; to ensure that the slum populations are extended to civic 
services, amenities and economic opportunities to enable them to 
rise above the degrading conditions in which they live;
	
l	 To arrive at a policy of affirming the legal and tenural rights of the 
slum dwellers.
	
l	 To establish a framework for involving all stakeholders for the 
efficient and smooth implementation of policy objectives.
	
The description and analysis of the major policies/programs that deal 
directly the slum dwellers in India (and in Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh) are 
as follows:

154	
Geographic information system for smart cities
7.3.1	
The National Slum Development Program 
The National Slum Development Program (NSDP) was launched in 1996. 
The objective of NSDP is to provide adequate and satisfactory water supply, 
sanitation, education facilities, health care, housing, and environmental 
improvement through the creation of sustainable support systems. The 
focus is on community infrastructure, provision of shelter, empowerment 
of urban poor women, training, skill upgradation, and advocacy. The 
beauty of the scheme is that it is “slum sensitive” and targets funds to 
those states with the most pressing slum clusters. 
	
One of the major drawbacks of NSDP is that it doesn’t target the 
illegal slums or say non-notified slums in the cities. The non-notified 
slum settlements as per National Sample Survey Organization (NSS) 58th 
Round Report 2002 [13] are 25,000 as compared to notified slums which 
are approx. 27,000 settlements. This means, in actual, NSDP program is 
targeting only 50% of the slum settlements. Under this program up till 
2004 approx. Rs. 24750 million has been released for the development 
of slums. The investment didn’t correspond to slum population and 
varies per year in the nation. The investment seems to be on ad-hoc basis 
that reflects the lack of systematic approach for any slum improvement 
(Fig. 7.1). Considering 42.6 million of slum population (in actual it 
may be more as these figures are from 640 cities in India), it comes 
to an investment of approx. Rs. 580 per slum dweller for development 
purpose. This amount has been disbursed in 8 years meaning Rs. 72 
per slum dweller per year has been invested for development purpose. 
The actual amount per slum dweller will be much lesser as it includes 
administrative and other expenditures also. With limited government 
financial resources, such a low level of investment will not be able to 
tackle the problems of huge number of slum population in the country. 
Actually whatever efforts are made by the government to reduce the 
slum population or to the development of the slums by their limited 
resources are nullified by the rapid growth of slum population in the 
country. As the program is highly subsidized, it raises a question on its 
sustainability and its replicability. It is therefore required to look for 
some other sustainable approach that may benefit all. 

	
Application of GIS in categorizing and managing slum growth in India	
155
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
96–97
97–98
98–99
99–00
00–01
01–02
02–03
03–04
04–05
In millions
Years
Investment (Budget) in million US$
Slum Population in Million
0
Figure 7.1  Investment and slum population growth in India
7.3.2	
Valmiki Ambedkar Awas Yojana (VAMBAY)
Valmiki Ambedkar Awas Yojana (VAMBAY), initiated in 2001 [14], was 
designed to address housing deficits for the urban poor. It provides about 
Rs. 3000 million of annual assistance to designated state agencies who 
then determine beneficiaries and monitor the implementation. The state 
government must provide the beneficiaries with a title and/or land as a 
pre-condition for the loan or subsidy. Its goal is to achieve “cities without 
slums” by providing or upgrading shelter for people living below the 
poverty line in urban slums including members of economically weaker 
sections (EWS) who do not possess adequate shelter. The scheme also 
addresses the lack of toilet facilities. Government of India (GOI) mandates 
state governments to use 20 percent of the total allocation under VAMBAY 
for the National Sanitation Project. The rest of the scheme funding provides 
matching subsidies and Housing and Urban Development Corporation 
(HUDCO) loans to title-holding beneficiaries to build or upgrade a house. 
Funds from VAMBAY can only be used in notified slums. In addition, 
GOI does not release the funds to the state government until they receive 
the states’ 50% matching fund. 
	
Though this program is based on the matching funds, but still it is 
highly subsidized as 50% is granted as a subsidy to the beneficiaries plus 
a land is also provided by the state government. With a limited financial 

156	
Geographic information system for smart cities
resource and such a high subsidy, it is nearly impossible to target 42 million 
slum population in the country. This scheme also targets notified slums 
only, thus neglecting a majority of slum dwellers living in non-notified 
slums. As per NSS 58th Report 2002, out of the total houses, approx. 4 
million houses in slums (notified and non-notified slums) are either semi-
pucca or kutcha in the nations, and they needs an immediate improvement. 
From 2001 till 2006 (in 5 years approx.), 0.44 million dwelling units were 
targeted under VAMBAY scheme, i.e. approx. 0.1 million targets per 
year (Table 7.2). With this target rate and assuming that there will not 
be any rise in the slum population, which is unlikely to happen, it will 
take another more than 35 years to improve the condition of the dwelling 
units. Thus, the need of the hour is to think smartly and act logically by 
utilizing the available technologies such as GIS in analyzing the slum 
settlement physically, socially, and spatially, and thereby developing a 
target mechanism to manage the available scare resources in the most 
productive and fruitful manner.
Table 7.2  Subsidies for housing (Source: http://mhupa.gov.in/programs/upa/nsdp/vambay.htm)
Year
GOI net subsidy released 
(Rs. in lakhs)
No. of DUs targeted for 
construction/ upgradation
01–02
6867.4
25280
02–03
19329.3
105444
03–04
23518.0
108172
04–05
26935.7
112143
05–06
16713.4
91330
Total
93363.7
442369
*1 Lakh = 100,000 and 1 US$ = Rs. 45 (approx)
7.3.3	
Rajiv Awas Yojana 
In 2011, Indian government launched Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY) for the 
slum dwellers and the urban poor, which envisages a ‘slum-free India’ 
through encouraging states/union territories to tackle the problem of slums 
in a definitive manner. It calls for a multi-pronged approach focusing on:
	
(i)	 Bringing existing slums within the formal system and enabling 
them to avail of the same level of basic amenities as the rest of the 
town;

	
Application of GIS in categorizing and managing slum growth in India	
157
	
(ii)	 Redressing the failures of the formal system that lie behind the 
creation of slums; and
	 (iii)	 Tackling the shortages of urban land and housing that keep shelter 
out of reach of the urban poor and force them to resort to extra-
legal solutions in a bid to retain their sources of livelihood and 
employment.
	
Rajiv Awas Yojana envisages that each state would prepare a state 
slum-free plan of action (POA). The preparation of legislation for 
assignment of property rights to slum dwellers would be the first step for 
state POA. The POA would need to be in two parts: Part-1 regarding the 
upgradation of existing slums and Part-2 regarding the action to prevent 
new slums. In Part-1 the state would need to survey and map all exiting 
slums in selected cities proposed by the state for coverage under RAY. 
In Part-2 the plan would need to assess the rate of growth of the city 
with a 20-year perspective, and based on the numbers specify the actions 
proposed to be taken to obtain commensurate lands or virtual lands and 
promote the construction of affordable EWS houses so as to stay abreast 
of the demand. This part would need also to make necessary legislative 
and administrative changes to enable urban land expansion, and in town 
planning regulations to legislate reservations for EWS/LIG housing in all 
new developments. RAY is a ‘whole city’ approach so that an integrated 
and holistic plan is prepared for the upgradation of all existing slums, 
notified or non-notified, in each identified city. Within a city, in each slum 
taken up for redevelopment, a holistic coverage would be required, with 
provision of all basic civic infrastructure and services as well as decent 
housing, with emphasis on planned layouts. In Phase-1, the scheme is 
expected to cover about 250 cities, mostly with population of more than 
0.1 million across the country by the end of 12th Plan (2017).
	
‘Slum-free city’ is a metaphor for poverty alleviation in urban India. 
Physical transformation of housing conditions of the poor is indeed 
one of the many means for the achievement of this objective. RAY is 
therefore a significant policy guideline for enabling slums redevelopment, 
rehabilitation, and promotion of affordable mass housing. Specific focus 
on these urban development aspects through RAY is indeed an important 
step. To prepare a plan of action or redevelopment/rehabilitation plans, it 
will require (a) survey of all slums – notified and non-notified; (b) database 
creation of slums using the geospatial technologies; (c) integration of 
spatial and socioeconomic data; and (d) identification of redevelopment 

158	
Geographic information system for smart cities
model proposed for each slum. It will also require policies and measure 
for the non-proliferation of growth of slums in the future. This means 
there will be a need of creating a spatial data base using GIS. However, 
considering the scope of this chapter, there are few important issues that 
need to be addressed while developing such plan of action for decision 
making and reaching slogan ‘slum-free city’: 
	
(i)	 Recognition and eligibility of the entire slum dwellers – the aspect 
of recognition of vast numbers of people living in slums and on 
pavements has to be explained better.
	
(ii)	 Planning-phased redevelopment of slums is necessary to deal with 
vast numbers of slums in our cities and our limited construction 
and financial capacity.
	 (iii)	 The integration of slums redevelopment projects with the cities 
development plans and programs is essential.
	 (iv)	 Mapping of all the settlements of the poor is a necessary condition 
for planning ‘slum-free cities’.
	
(v)	 Allocation of proportionate open land and the reservation of slum 
lands for affordable housing is a way forward.
	 (vi)	 Undertake revision of the development plans of our cities on 
priority for reserving land for mass affordable housing.
	 (vii)	 Ward- or area-based planning is important in order to minimize 
displacement and for integration with the neighborhood 
development.
	
In addition, RAY scheme consist of two parts: Part-1 regarding the 
upgradation of existing slums and Part-2 regarding the action to prevent 
new slums. To accomplish, both parts especially Part-2 i.e. to manage the 
slum growth, it is vital to first assess all the slum settlements socially, 
physically, and spatially and then categorize them into various categories so 
that decision makers can know which slum settlements need to be targeted 
first for improvement/development. Which slum settlements or categories 
of slum are meant to be merged with the city fabric? Which category of 
slum needs social as well as physical improvement? Which category of 
slum settlements needs only physical development? Which slums need 
social amenities and so on..? Furthermore, with the application of GIS 
and spatial analysis, one can also manage slum growth by dealing with 
land management and forecasting land requirement and land utilization 
and land use in a better way. Thus, considering limited resources, there 
is a need to develop such target mechanism (categorize slums) which can 

	
Application of GIS in categorizing and managing slum growth in India	
159
utilize the available scare recourse wisely, efficiently, and effectively. GIS 
is one of the tool that can assist in doing so. 
7.4	
Bhopal city, slums, and slum categories 
Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh’s capital city, with a population of 1.43 
million in an area of 284.9 sq km, has the highest urban poverty ratio 
of 48.4% (1993–1994) among all Indian states [15]. Multidimensional 
urban expansion, i.e. population growth, industrialization, infrastructure 
growth, etc., has put enormous stress on various resources, not the least 
of which are space, energy, water supply, and waste disposal facilities. 
Due to lack of planned settlement and shelter for the urban poor, Bhopal 
has witnessed mushrooming of informal settlements. As per current status, 
these settlements can broadly be divided into 2 categories – notified and 
non-notified slums especially in the last 20 years; many of which are 
still infrastructure deficient but few with development projects/policies 
have attained a good housing and living conditions. Notified slums are 
those that have been recognized by the authorities and are entitled for the 
development project under national program, whereas non-notified slums 
were not considered for such improvement project; however, development 
can take place in non-notified slums under other schemes such as initiative 
by state government or local bodies or under specific development funds 
assigned to politicians. Bhopal city has a total of 380 “slum settlements” 
with a slum population of approx. 0.64 million, i.e. approx. 38% of the 
total city population [16].
	
The following sections of the chapter try to answer the question 
whether all slums are same or not. If yes, then is it possible to categorize 
them into different categories? First, using spatial analysis with an 
application of GIS, it was found that the inner/old city slums are in a better 
condition as compared to slums in other part of the city. The findings and 
analysis as discussed in the following section conclude that slum within 
the cities varies and can be classified into four categories, i.e. best category, 
transitional slums, intermediate slums, and core (worst) slums. Later, the 
chapter also argues that the situation is not so different in other Indian 
cities too, and slums in other Indian cities can also be classified into various 
categories. The chapter discusses the case from other 3 Indian cities from 
Madhya Pradesh (state of India) i.e. Indore, Gwalior, and Jabalpur, and 
classifies the slums into 4 categories. Finally, the chapter after analyzing 

160	
Geographic information system for smart cities
and categorizing the slums concludes that approx. 10% of the slums are 
real slums or say core slums and need an immediate attention for further 
improvement.
7.5	
Analysis of slums at ward level 
The following section discusses specific features of slums at ward level in 
Bhopal city. Bhopal city is divided into 66 wards. On analyzing spatially, 
approx. 142 (37.4%) slums were found in old Bhopal/inner city, whereas 
rest 62.6% of the slum settlements were distributed in central and outer 
region of Bhopal city that includes New Bhopal, Bharat Heavy Electrical 
Limited (BHEL) area, and suburbs. Out of the total settlements in inner 
city, 63 slums based on median score (1300) may be considered as a 
small slums with a population less than 1300, and 79 are big slums with a 
population more than 1300 inhabitants living in it (Table 7.3).
Table 7.3  Distribution of slums in Bhopal city	
	
	
	
Region 
Small slums 
(population 
less than 1300) 
Big slums 
(population 
more than 1300)
Total no. 
of slum 
settlements
% to total 
slums in a city
Old Bhopal 
63
79
142
37.4
New Bhopal
35
35
70
18.4
BHEL
22
19
41
10.8
Others 
67
60
127
33.4
TOTAL
187
193
380
100.0
	
Of the total 380 slums, 142 (37.4%) slum settlements can be considered 
in inner city wards, and nearly double, i.e. 238, slum settlements that 
constitute 62.6% of the total settlements are distributed in central wards 
and suburbs of Bhopal city. These figures gives an idea that approx. 
35–40% of the slums would have originated quite a time long back and 
the same was also observed while visiting the slums in inner city area. 
Majority of them were more than 20 years old, somewhere even more than 
40 years old. The slums in BHEL and industrial areas mainly consist of 
laborers who have established themselves in hope of some work in BHEL/
other. 

	
Application of GIS in categorizing and managing slum growth in India	
161
7.5.1	
Slum settlements distribution in wards 
On analyzing the slum settlements in 66 wards of Bhopal city, it was found 
that the majority of slum settlements are located in the suburbs or the outer 
area of Bhopal city. One of the reasons may be the size of the ward, as outer 
wards comparatively have larger area as compared to inner city wards. In 
inner city wards, slum settlements ranges from 1 to 7 (Fig. 7.2). There 
were no slum settlements reported in wards number 7, 21, 33, and 50. No 
specific reason can be concluded for a non-existence of slums in these 
wards. However, the small ward size, location of prime administrative and 
govt offices and at central location, and non-availability of any vacant land 
may be considered as a prime reason for a non-existence of slums in these 
wards. The other wards that were reported with slum settlements range 
from 8 to 20 in nos. The suburbs (outer) wards 1, 53, 62, and 66 were 
found with maximum number of slum settlements and ranges from 14 to 
20 in no. The availability of lot of non-utilized land and vacant spaces may 
be considered as one of the major reasons for such a large number of slum 
settlements in these wards. The available spaces seem to be ideal place for 
the new poor migrants to settle down in a city.
Figure 7.2  Total number of slum settlements in wards

162	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Figure 7.3  Total slum population in various wards
	
On considering the slum population in 66 wards, the situation is not 
so different; the inner city wards are comparatively less slum populated as 
compared to outer wards or central wards. As predicted, the wards where 
maximum numbers of slum settlements were reported were found with 
maximum slum population (Fig. 7.3). However when analyzed to find out 
the distribution of slums within the Bhopal city, it was found that the slums 
population is not concentrated to one particular region/ward of Bhopal, 
indeed it is distributed throughout the city, depicting that slums can be 
found in all parts of city. The total slum population in the city is distributed 
almost evenly and ranges maximum to 5% in few wards and none to 
others (Fig. 7.4). 

	
Application of GIS in categorizing and managing slum growth in India	
163
Figure 7.4  Percentage of distribution of total slum population in various wards
7.5.2	
Distribution of poverty at slums in wards 
Poverty and slum population have a very close correlation. On analyzing 
the poverty level among the slum population in the various wards, it 
was found that the large percentage of slum population is below poverty 
line. However, the overall results were found to be little strange, as outer 
area wards (eastern wards) were reported comparatively less percentage 
of below-poverty-line slum population in respect to total ward slum 
population. This may be due to the non-updating of below-poverty-line 
list by the government, as during the visit to these slum settlements it was 
found they were comparatively newer slums and are still non-recognized 
formally by the authorities. The inner wards of the Bhopal city were 
comparatively found in better economic conditions as compared to other 
wards. In the inner wards, less than 25% of the slum populations were 
found below poverty line. This may be concluded as due to existence 
of inner ward slums from quite a long time, indeed most of the slums 
are more than 25 years old and are into a 2nd generation term. It seems 

164	
Geographic information system for smart cities
that with passage of time, the dwellers have consolidated their economic 
conditions as compared to outer area slums, which are comparatively 
newer (Fig. 7.5).
Figure 7.5  Percentage of BPL population of total ward slum population in various wards
7.5.3	
Toilet status at slums in wards
The good and improved toilet is one of the major components that lacks 
in majority of slums of India. The case is not so different in the slums of 
Bhopal too. On comparing the toilet situation among the slum settlements 
in respective wards, it was found that inner wards are better off (0–25%), 
where majority of dwellers are having a toilets at home, and outer/
central area slum dwellers are still defecating in open fields (75–100%). 
The availability of open spaces and lack of awareness are two major 
components that were found while discussing with dwellers of outer areas 
about the use of open fields for toilet purposes (Figs. 7.6 and 7.7). 

	
Application of GIS in categorizing and managing slum growth in India	
165
Figure 7.6  Toilets at home in slum settlements in various wards
Figure 7.7  Dependency on open toilets (fields) in slums in various wards

166	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
There are few slums in the wards that do have common toilets, but 
it is a pity that either these toilets are not maintained or overcrowded or 
not managed well, often results into low percentage of users. Figure 7.8 
also depicts the same. Only 3 wards were found where 33.8–45% of the 
dwellers are using common toilets. In other wards the situation is not so 
encouraging leading to a question that whether it is a management of toilet 
or its non-willingness of the dwellers that has been the major reason for 
such low level of common-toilet use among dwellers.
Figure 7.8  Percentage of dependent on common toilets in slums in various wards
7.5.4	
Water conditions at slum settlements
Though water conditions in the slum settlements in 66 wards is 
comparatively better than the availability of toilets but it is still far from 
a satisfactory level. Though authorities have provided the common water 
taps in majority of slum settlements, but still it is not adequate enough to 

	
Application of GIS in categorizing and managing slum growth in India	
167
feed the large number of dwellers living in slum settlements. In most of 
the slum settlements only 1 or 2 taps are available to meet the demand 
of whole settlement. Limited hours of water supply and non-existence of 
enough water taps often lead to queues and quarrel among the dwellers. 
One of the common features that have been observed during the visit to 
slum was the involvement of children in fetching water from common 
taps. Children’s waste their crucial prime morning time of more than 2 
hours in assisting their parents in fetching water. Indeed, the impact of 
this can be observed in the low rate of enrollment of children in schools. It 
has been observed that due to such conditions, women and children were 
major sufferers. 
Figure 7.9  Percentage of households with water taps at home in slums in various wards

168	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Figure 7.10  Percentage of households’ dependency on common 
water taps in various wards
	
On comparing the water situation among the slum settlements in 
various wards, the inner area wards are found comparatively in better 
condition as compared to other wards that are dependent on common 
taps. The majority of dwellers (75–100%) in inner wards have a water 
connection or water taps at home (Figs. 7.9 and 7.10). When comparing 
the water situation to the available water network in the city, it can be 
observed that it has some sort of relationship. The areas with good water 
network are in a better condition as compared to other part of the city 
where no network exists and inhabitants are dependent on ground water. 
7.5.5	
Roads at slum settlements in wards 
Most slums have reasonably good access to roads on the periphery, largely 
asphalt. In the internal areas of the slums, there are largely concrete, stone 
paved, Water Bound Macadam (WBM), and kutcha (non-concrete) roads. 
The older settlements, particularly those in and around the old city as well 
as those authorized, have better road coverage whereas the newer, rural, 
peripheral, and unauthorized slums have kutcha roads. Figures 7.11 and 
7.12 depict that slum settlements of inner area wards are better covered 
with concrete roads, where it ranges from 80% to 100% of coverage; 
whereas the outer wards comparatively are not in so good conditions and 
are mostly occupied by kutcha roads (0–38%). 

	
Application of GIS in categorizing and managing slum growth in India	
169
Figure 7.11  Percentage of pucca (concrete lanes) in slums in various wards
Figure 7.12  Percentage of non-concrete (kuccha) lanes in various slums in wards

170	
Geographic information system for smart cities
7.5.6	
Drains in slum settlements 
Drainage and toilets are clearly a problem in every slum. Typically, 
discharge from individual toilets is either into open drains or septic 
tanks/soak pits, all eventually draining into nallahs (uncovered and 
unlined waste drains). There is a network of small open drains, typically 
kutcha (non-lined) as the same can be concluded from Fig. 7.13, which 
carry wastewater into the main nallah in majority of slums. During 
the visits to slums, I had observed that discharge of drains often enters 
the houses especially during rainy season. The conditions of drainage 
is not so different as compared to other facilities, the inner area ward 
slums comparatively have better lined drainage system (80–100%) as 
compared to other parts of the city. 
Figure 7.13  Type of drains in slum settlements in various wards
7.6	
Categories of ward with reference to slums 
The above discussion gives a broad idea about the living conditions of 
slums in various wards (66) in Bhopal city. The above discussion clearly 

	
Application of GIS in categorizing and managing slum growth in India	
171
indicates that slums in the inner city are comparatively in better living 
conditions as compared to other wards slums in the city. The majority of 
inhabitants of inner area ward slums were found with water taps and toilets 
at home. The roads and drainage conditions were also found good in inner 
city wards slums. The socioeconomic conditions are also in better state as 
compared to other ward slums. One of the major reasons about their better 
living conditions may be concluded as from their existence in the city from 
a quite a long time (more than 30 years old slum). With the duration of 
time, dwellers own efforts along with government development projects 
assisted them in improving their living conditions and getting accustomed 
to city life and uplifting their socioeconomic conditions. 
	
Based on the above parameters and living conditions, the 66 wards 
can broadly be compared, and categories of wards with respect to slums 
conditions can be established.
	
Based on the correlation (Table 7.4) and principal component 
analysis, 7 factors were considered for classification and establishing 
categories. The selected 7 factors were total slum settlements in wards, 
percentage of below poverty population of total respective ward slum 
population, total slum population, percentage of HH with open defecation 
(toilets to field), percentage of household (HH) with water taps at home, 
percentage of non-concrete roads in ward slums and percentage of non-
lined drains in wards slums. Based on the accessibility of the services to 
the slums, the weightage score from 1 to 4 were awarded to each ward. 
Based on slum conditions and 7 parameters, ward can score a maximum 
of 28 (4 ×7) weightage score and minimum score of 7 (1 × 7). This range 
of scores was further divided into 4 categories and wards that received 
the maximum score 24–27 (20%) were 16 in numbers, whereas the score 
ranges from 21–23, 17–20, and 13–16 were awarded to 12 (20%), 25 
(43%) and 6 (10%) wards, respectively. These categories suggest that 
approx. 10% of wards are coping with bad slums, whereas approx. 20% 
of the wards are having slums that are comparatively in good conditions 
and majority of these wards falls in inner city area (Figs. 7.14 and 7.15, 
and Table 7.5).

172	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Table 7.4  Correlation matrix among the variables
Variables 
Total slum 
settle- 
ments
% BPL  
house-
holds  
Total slum 
population
% household 
individual 
toilets
%  
household 
open toilets
%  
household  
common 
toilets
% 
household  
individual 
water taps
% household 
dependent on 
common taps 
%kuccha 
road
%kuccha 
drain
Total slum 
settlements
1.00
%BPL 
household  
−0.16
1.00
Total slum pop.
0.57
0.04
1.00
%  household  
individual toilets
0.09
0.22
0.10
1.00
% household 
open toilets
0.04
0.20
0.08
0.92
1.00
% household 
common toilets
−0.15
0.26
−0.24
0.17
−0.02
1.00
% household 
individual water 
tap
0.10
0.46
0.15
0.35
0.30
−0.01
1.00
% household  
dependent on 
common taps/
others 
0.10
0.46
0.15
0.35
0.30
−0.01
1.00
1.00
% kuccha road
0.00
0.32
0.01
0.28
0.32
−0.11
0.33
0.33
1.00
% kuccha drain
0.01
0.17
0.03
−0.03
0.01
−0.02
−0.11
−0.11
0.51
1.00

	
Application of GIS in categorizing and managing slum growth in India	
173
Figure 7.14  Categories of slums based on weightage score
Worst (13–16) 
10%
Best (24–27) 
27%
Good (21–23) 
20%
Bad (17–20) 
43%
Figure 7.15  Distribution of categories of wards (slums)

174	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Table 7.5  Categories based on weighatge score to wards	
	
	
Weightage score
Wards
No. of wards
Ward no.
13–16
Worst
6
11, 27, 35, 40, 52, 53
17–20
Bad
25
1, 2, 4, 5, 14, 15, 26, 31, 34, 47–49, 
51, 54–61, 64–66
21–23
Good 
12
3, 12, 16–18, 30, 36, 37, 42, 45, 46, 
63
24–27
Best 
16
6, 8, 10, 13, 20, 24, 25, 28, 29, 32, 
38, 39, 41, 43, 44, 62
Wards with no slum
7
7, 19, 21, 22, 23, 33, 50
Total wards
66
7.7	
Categories of slums 
With above analysis and discussion, it is clear that living conditions 
vary within each slum settlements in a city. This section is an attempt 
to analyze the respective slum and try to categorize the 380 slums 
in a city in 4 categories. The methodology adopted for this is also 
same as discussed above while categorization of ward in respect to 
slums. First, on the basis of principal component analysis (PCA) and 
correlation, significant variables were extracted and than a weightage 
score ranging from 1 to 4 were awarded to each slum based on 
accessibility of services to slum dwellers and settlements. The selected 
variables were percentage of below poverty line (BPL) population in 
slum settlements, percentage of households (HH) dependent on open 
field for toilet purpose, percentage of households having water taps 
at home, percentage of non-bituminous/non-concrete road in slum 
and percentage of non-lined drains in slums. With an application of 
GIS, Figs. 7.16–7.20 compare the living conditions among the 380 
slum settlements in the city. The description and comparison of below 
poverty line population, access to water and toilets at home, coverage 
of roads and drains among the slum settlements denote that the majority 
of slum with good access to services and better economic conditions 
are in inner city area. 

	
Application of GIS in categorizing and managing slum growth in India	
175
Figure 7.16  Percentage of BPL population in slums
Figure 7.17  Dependency on type of toilets in slums

176	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Figure 7.18  Dependency on type of water sources in slums
Figure 7.19  Percentage of coverage by type of drains in slums

	
Application of GIS in categorizing and managing slum growth in India	
177
Figure 7.20  Percentage of coverage of type of roads in slums
	
On awarding a weightage score ranging from 1 to 4 based on level 
of access to services in each respective slums, categories of slums were 
established. Based on this score, 4 categories of slums i.e. worst (5–8), bad 
(9–12), good (13–16), and best (17–20) were established. As discussed 
earlier, while categorizing the wards based on slums conditions, 10% of 
the wards were found in worst category, the same is reflected here while 
categorizing the slums. Here too, 8.9% of the slums were found in worst 
category and 21.8% in best category (Table 7.6 and Fig. 7.21). 
Table 7.6  Categories of slums 	
	
	
Weightage score
Slum categories 
No. of slums
% of slums
5–8
Worst 
34
8.9
9–12
Bad
109
28.7
13–16
Good 
154
40.5
17–20
Best 
83
21.8
Grand Total
380
100.0

178	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Figure 7.21  Categories of slums based on weightage score
7.8	
Comparison of slums in 4 cities 
This section does comparison among the slums of 4 cities in Madhya 
Pradesh (state of India). In addition to Bhopal, the other 3 cities are Indore, 
Jabalpur, and Gwalior. All the 3 cities are either million-plus cities (in 
respect to urban population) or are nearing to be mega cities (Table 7.7). 
Based on the available secondary data from the Municipal Corporation of 
these cities, this section first categorizes the slums into 4 categories and 
then compares the categories of slums within the 4 cities. The methodology 
adopted is same as adopted for categorization of slums in Bhopal city. 
Table 7.7  Description of four cities (Source: Census of India and municipal corporations)
City 
Urban population (in millions)
No. of slum settlements
Jabalpur
0.999
324
Bhopal
1.437
380
Indore 
1.475
604
Gwalior 
0.827
229

	
Application of GIS in categorizing and managing slum growth in India	
179
7.8.1	
Living conditions in slums of 3 cities 
This section briefly discusses the overall living conditions in slums in 
terms of basic variables in the selected 3 cities. On comparing the no. 
of slum settlements in 4 cities, Indore is leading with 604 nos. of slum 
settlements in the city (Table 7.7), and Gwalior city is having minimum 
no. of slum settlements, i.e. 229. Bhopal seems to be suffering from 
an issue of poverty where approx. 47% of the total slum population is 
reported living below poverty line (BPL), and Jabalpur is comparatively 
better in terms of poverty where 24% of total slum population is living 
below poverty line mark. 
	
In terms of availability of basic amenities to the slum dwellers in these 
cities, it seems that Gwalior city is comparatively better where approx. 
63% of the slum settlements are covered with metallic roads and lined 
drains. Approx. 32% of dwellers are using fields for toilet purpose or 
in other words majority, i.e. 68%, of dwellers has an access to safe and 
improved toilets. 65% of the dwellers are connected to municipal water 
supply and are enjoying the services at home (see Table 7.8) [17].
Table 7.8  Overall living conditions in the slums of 4 cities 
(Source: Municipal corporations of Bhopal, Gwalior, Indore, and Jabalpur)
City
% of BPL  
family
% metallic 
road
% lined 
(pucca) drains
% open  
defecation 
(toilets)
% individual 
water supply/
taps at home
Jabalpur
  0.24
0.76
0.42
0.46
0.34
Bhopal
  0.47
0.73
0.11
0.43
0.29
Indore
  0.30
0.59
0.62
0.16
0.28
Gwalior
  0.32
0.63
0.63
0.32
0.65
	
In Indore, approx. 30% of the dwellers are leading a BPL life. Approx. 
59% and 62% of the slum settlements are covered with metallic roads 
and lined drains, respectively. The toilet conditions were reported best in 
Indore, where only 16% of the dwellers are defecting in open fields which 
is far better as compared to other 3 cities where more than 30% of the 
dwellers are defecating in open fields. However, the majority of Indore 
slum dwellers are dependent on common taps and only 28% of them are 
having a water connection at home [18].

180	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
In Jabalpur, approx. 24% of the slum population is reported as BPL 
population. The slums are comparatively in better state in terms of roads, 
where approx. 76% of the settlements are covered with metallic/concrete 
road. Lined drains were found 42% in slums. Approx. 46% of dwellers 
were found with no access to safe toilets, and 34% of dwellers are enjoying 
the water taps at home [19].
7.9	
Categories of slums in 4 cities 
Based on the methodology as adopted earlier, the categories of slums were 
established in 4 cities. The variables selected and assigned weightage score 
from 1 to 4 based on the accessibility to services to household in each 
slum settlement in respective cities. The variables selected for weightage 
score are: percentage of BPL population in slum settlements, percentage 
of households (HH) dependent on open field for toilet purpose, percentage 
of households having water taps at home, percentage of non-bituminous/
non-concrete road in slum, and percentage of non-lined drains in slums. 
	
Based on the received total score, each slum was placed in the 
respective categories: worst slums, bad slums, good slums, or best slums. 
It was found that slums of Gwalior city were comparatively better as 
compared to other 3 cities, as 48.5% of total slum settlements (highest 
percentage among 4 cities) were found in ‘best category slums.’ Similarly, 
a small percentage of slums, i.e. 10%, were found in ‘worst category’ 
depicting that Gwalior slums have comparatively better facilities and 
socioeconomic conditions as compared to other 3 cities. In the other 3 
cities, the proportion of slum in each 4 category is almost same. The ‘best 
category’ contains 22%, 25%, and 26% of total slums in Bhopal, Jabalpur, 
and Indore, respectively. Similar was the case with other 2 categories i.e. 
‘good slums’ and ‘bad slums’ category (Table 7.9; Fig. 7.22).
Table 7.9  Categories of slum based on weightage score 
Weightage score
Categories
Bhopal 
Jabalpur
Indore
Gwalior 
5–8
Worst
34
11
87
23
9–12
Bad
109
89
159
31
13–16
Good 
154
144
202
64
17–20
Best 
83
80
156
111
Grand total
380
324
604
229

	
Application of GIS in categorizing and managing slum growth in India	
181
Figure 7.22  Percentage of categories of slums in 4 cities
7.10	
Conclusion 
As per UN-Habitat nearly 1 billion people live in slums in the world, 
and this number is expected to double in the next 30 years. This means 
that these urban slums in cities will face more great challenges in terms 
of affordable housing, clean and available drinking water, (renewable) 
energy, food security, and job opportunities in the coming years. As cities 
offer economic opportunities, the pressure will be lot more on big and 
mega cities. Considering the immense population of slums in the world 
and the scare available resources, realistically and practically thinking, 
the slums can’t be eradicated in only few months time. As reviewed in the 
chapter, the urban planning, governance, and management efforts have 
not resulted in any reduction in slum population; in fact slum population 
has grown many times and living conditions were further worsened in 
slums. In real sense, the planning has failed or say not helped in improving 
housing situation, poor drainage system in slums, open defecation in 
slums, economic opportunities for slum dwellers, road networks, nearby 
and commutable workplaces for slum dwellers, poor garbage and 
sanitation, poor social facilities and amenities in the slums, and worsening 
of pollution of air, water, and land. There is a need to study these issues 
with all its complexity in order to modify a city to a “smart city” that can 
overcome these existing urban development issues in “smarter way.” It 
needs a long-term and phase-development approach with a ‘smart solution 
for slums,’ taking into account technological and social innovation, 

182	
Geographic information system for smart cities
sustainable financial structures, and well-organized public–private–social 
partnerships. 
	
GIS is one of the tools that can assist us in transforming our existing 
cities to ‘smart city’. As discussed, GIS mapping is a major tool for 
identifying, analyzing, and preparing comprehensive database slums in 
urban areas. It is a tool for fast tracking development. As elaborated GIS 
application is very useful in achieving physical, social, financial, and 
ecological sustainability for being a smart city. With the spatial and GIS 
analysis, social facilities, amenities, road network, and land use can be 
integrated in a phased manner with the slum settlements and informal 
sector, and this will assist the slum settlements in merging with the city 
fabric and city planning. The chapter highlighted the target mechanism 
which highlights the importance that needs to be given to lesser privileged 
or worst slums settlements in the city. These are vital; as without tackling 
these worst slums, one cannot hope for any ‘smart city.’ It is also 
unfortunate that there is no data or spatial mapping available for most of 
non-notified or unlisted slums, and developing such mapping and database 
will be the first step towards striving for ‘smart city.’ The GIS system also 
ensures good governance, public participation, and enforces transparency 
in public service delivery thereby transforming people into productive 
citizens.
	
As discussed, analyzed, and argued in this chapter that slums are not 
same and living condition in slums varies within the cities was found to 
be true. The slum living conditions not only varies in Bhopal city but also 
varies in all other Indian cities. In these cities especially with reference to 
Bhopal, it may be concluded that with the duration of time slum dwellers 
consolidate and establish themselves that enables them to improve their 
socioeconomic conditions. The GIS analysis concluded that the old slums 
which exist in the inner city area were in better state as compared to 
slums in other part of the city. The categories of slums based on selected 
variables were established in the 4 cities i.e. Bhopal, Gwalior, Indore, and 
Jabalpur. From the categories it may be concluded that approx. 10% of 
the slum settlements in each city were in the worst conditions and demand 
for an immediate improvement. However, another 20–30% of the slums 
in each city were found in good conditions (best slum category) with 
better facilities and socioeconomic conditions. Such type of slums along 
with passage of time and government-initiated aided projects have almost 
seems to be a part of a city fabric. Indeed some are as good as typical 

	
Application of GIS in categorizing and managing slum growth in India	
183
colony in any other part of the city. These slums may need a recheck and 
consideration is required to de-list some of them from a slum category list. 
	
As a discussion held during this chapter, it seems that comparatively 
smaller city like Gwalior where slum settlements are less and are also 
in better conditions reveals two conclusions. First, the city’s attraction 
capability in terms of job opportunities and size in case of developing 
nation like India where regional inequality is high attracts a lot of poorer 
people from other region of India in search of livelihood and survival. The 
largest city like Indore has high attraction capability and job opportunities, 
which have resulted in maximum number of slum settlements (604) in the 
city. Gwalior, comparatively a smaller city with low job opportunities, has 
less number of slum settlements (229). Secondly, the municipal corporation 
can provide better infrastructure if slum settlements are less and are 
manageable within the limited resources and administrative framework. 
As the settlements increase, it seems local bodies also fail to manage and 
provide the basic services to the dwellers, as the same has been observed 
in terms of percentage of slums in worst category. In Gwalior percentage 
of slums is lower as compared to slums in Indore. Similar inferences can 
be drawn from a best slum category, as in Gwalior the no. of best-category 
slums were highest (48.5%) as compared to other 3 cities (22%, 25%, and 
26% of total slums in Bhopal, Jabalpur, and Indore, respectively) stating 
that if slum settlements and their population is less, it is comparatively 
easier for local bodies to manage and provide basic amenities to slum 
dwellers. Indeed this may also be true from financial perspective, as local 
bodies don’t receive any financial return from the slum settlements; it 
is natural that in the absence of any extra income generation plus extra 
burden of managing slums, it becomes hard and infeasible for the local 
bodies to provide services to increasing no. of settlements within the city. 
	
Overall, the chapter revealed that with the application of GIS and 
categorization of slums, the rapid growth of slums in India and in other 
developing nations can be managed. These categories of slums will provide 
a better target mechanism and will define major policies and strategies to 
manage slum growth in urban areas. It was concluded that emphasis is on 
improving those 15% of worst category of slums that are mostly located in 
the outer area or suburbs of the city. The research thus provided a ‘target 
mechanism’ that ensures the reaching of benefits to core poor (that are less 
than 15% of total in Indian cities) with better impact and results. These 
categories with an application of GIS will provide a tool to manage the 

184	
Geographic information system for smart cities
slum growth and target worst slums for improvement in India and other 
developing nations. Accordingly, relevant policies can be formulated for 
slum management and improvement. 
	
With the application of GIS, the chapter suggested and developed 
a target mechanism for slum management and managing slum growth. 
With this, the city can strive for a ‘smart city’ which is more efficient, 
sustainable, equitable, and livable. The improved slums and managed slum 
growth will facilitate the cities in becoming and achieving smart economy, 
smart mobility, smart environment, smart people, smart living, and smart 
governance. 
7.11	
References 
[1] UN-Habitat (2003). ‘The Challenges of Slums – Global Report on Human 
Settlements’ Earthscan, London, UK. 
[2] UN-Habitat (2003). ‘United Nations Human Settlement Programme, 
Slums of the World: The face of Urban Poverty in the New Millennium?’, UN-
HABITAT.
[3] Daniere Amrita, G. and Takahashi Lois, M. (1999). ‘Poverty and Access: 
Differences and Commonalties across Slum Communities in Bangkok’, Habitat 
International, 23(2), pp. 271–88.
[4] D’Costa, W. and Bhabani, D. (2002). Amitabh Kundu and Darshini 
Mahadeva (eds.), ‘Poverty and Vulnerability in a Globalising Metropolis, 
Ahmedabad’ Manak Publications, Delhi.
[5] Stokes Charles, J. (1962). ‘A Theory of Slums’ Land Economics, 38(3), 
pp. 187–197.
[6] Turner, John F. C. (1968). ‘Housing Priorities, Settlement Patterns, and 
Urban Development in Modernizing Countries’. AIP Journal, pp. 354–363.
[7] Ha Seon (2004). ‘New Shantytowns and the urban marginalized in Seoul 
Metropolitan Region’ Habitat International, 28(1), pp. 140.
[8] Mukhija, V. (2001). ‘Upgrading Housing Settlements in Developing 
Countries’, Cities, 18(4), p. 220.
[9] Porio & Crisol (2004). ‘Property rights, security of tenure and the urban 
poor in Metro Manila’ Habitat International, 28, p. 219.
 [10] DFID (2003). Final Report “Scoping Study: Urban Land Issues” (2003) 
Prepared by DFID, SA for Urban Sector Networks (USN) and Development 
Works (p. 42) http://www.sarpn.org/documents/d0000645/index.php

	
Application of GIS in categorizing and managing slum growth in India	
185
[11] UN-HABITAT (2003). ‘United Nations Human Settlement Programme, 
Slums of the World: The face of Urban Poverty in the New Millennium?’, UN-
HABITAT.
[12] Census of India (2011). Provisional Population Report 2011, Government 
of India.
[13] National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO) (2002). NSS 58th Round, 
Report on Urban Slums, Govt of India.
[14] Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, Govt of India http://
mhupa.gov.in/programs/upa/nsdp/vambay.htm 
[15] Parikh, H. (2000). Bhopal Slum Networking Report, 2000.
[16] Bhopal Municipal Corporation (2006), Slum Population Report.
[17] Gwalior Municipal Corporation (2006), Slum Population Report.
[18] Indore Municipal Corporation (2006), Slum Population Report. 
[19] Jabalpur Municipal Corporation (2006), Slum Population Report. 

Abstract: Traditionally, urban traffic models used for planning road networks were based 
on aggregate measurements or quantities. Traffic management system in a smart city can 
have access to a large variety of real-time information, which can be dynamically used to 
predict the travel demands and hence optimize the utility of traffic infrastructure. This chapter 
discusses a travel-demand prediction model, which collects its required information from 
the activity pattern of the citizens and predicts their travel demand changes according to 
happenings in the city. Using the easily available census information, the model generates 
a population, and each simulated individual follows a daily activity chain according to their 
socioeconomic characteristics. The geographical extent of the city is modelled as a cellular 
space, and each of the cells has its traffic attraction/emission potential based on its land use 
and relative location within the city. Traffic network model simulates the actual process of 
traffic by collecting the generated traffic from the cells and delivering them to the destination 
cells after applying a suitable delay. By seeding the model with happenings in city, which can 
alter the attraction/emission potentials of the cells, and then observing the resulted trips in 
each segment of the road network, one can make useful conclusions to manage the traffic 
in such a situation. The model was calibrated using the observations and data from Calicut, 
which is a city in Kerala, India.
Key words: trip prediction, travel demand, smart city, intelligent transport, activity chains, 
traffic simulation, Calicut, Kerala.
8.1	
Introduction
Modelling of urban phenomenon has been an interesting topic. It is 
expected to help in finding solutions for many practical problems related 
to management and planning of urban areas [1]. It is also meant to help 
in decision making about a system by forecasting, back casting and 
generating probable scenarios [2, 3]. However, model is an imitation of a 
reality just representing the relation between factors under consideration 
and the phenomenon. ‘Model is an abstraction or simplification of real 
world’ [4].
	
Traditionally, urban traffic models used for planning road networks 
were based on aggregate measurements or quantities. Such models used 
to provide traffic volumes aggregated over large span of time like years, 
8
Travel management with intraday trip generation 
model in a smart city framework
BIMAL P.

	
Travel management with intraday trip generation model in a smart ...	
187
or the peak volume, which might happen on a given day or over a large 
period. Though these models served their intended purpose of estimating 
the design volumes of network, they were insensitive to short-term 
changes in the urban scenario and hence such models were not suitable for 
estimating short-term travel volume changes. In cities where the present 
network is loaded beyond their optimum capacity, changes in the traffic-
attraction potentials of its various geographical regions might congest 
some of its roads. Such congestions often spread to the remaining roads 
of the city. Management of traffic in such situations is often difficult and 
is based on the experience of people responsible for controlling of traffic. 
This chapter attempts to develop an intraday trip prediction model, based 
on simulated activities of individuals in the city [5].
	
Intraday trip generation models are used to estimate the number of 
trips generated from a given zone to another for various purposes. Intraday 
trip generation models are used to estimate the trips generated from a 
given zone to other zones. They operate with a shorter time interval and 
are sensitive to changes in the zonal characteristics with in the day. 
With the real time data availability in the robust information backbone of 
smart city, such a model will help to make the traffic management system 
intelligent enough to predict what the city wants at every moment, and 
hence configures and optimizes its transportation system.
8.2	
Activity scheduling
Intraday trip prediction models use various techniques to simulate the 
trip generation process. A set of models use observed probability of trip 
generated from a given land use or zone and use the same for predicting 
the trips generated at a given time. Such models have limited capability to 
respond to happenings in the city. Short-time travel-demand changes in a 
city are closely linked to their individuals’ behaviour, and are a response to 
various happenings in the city. To address this, an activity-based approach 
is adopted for the model. Household activity scheduling is generally 
regarded as the underlying mechanism through which people respond to 
emerging travel demand management policies [6]. 
	
There are two general methods used in activity scheduling: Random 
Utility Maximization and Computational Process Models [7–10]. Random 
Utility Maximization assumes that the individuals make a rational decision 
among all the possibilities so that his perceived utility will be maximum. 

188	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Computational Process Models work using artificial intelligence approach 
and heuristic or rule-based searches [7]. 
	
Activity scheduling received attraction of researchers in early part of 
the last decade. They were used extensively as a method to model user’s 
behaviour resulting in travel decisions. Buliung and Kanaroglou (2006) 
developed a prototype object-oriented model with GIS backing to support 
exploration of household-level activity/travel behaviour [11]. DASHA uses 
a detailed agent-based model which works by simultaneously generating 
each individual’s activity schedules and resolving conflicts through a 
household kernel agent [12].
	
Most of the activity-scheduling models use the observed activity 
pattern to generate a probability-based simulation to predict activity 
schedules of individuals [7]. The process of making activity choices 
are often not attempted due to the complex nature of decision making. 
Ouyang et al. (2011) demonstrates an attempt to generate daily activity 
travel patterns of individuals in their model [13]. The activity-scheduling 
pattern is generally obtained by a detailed household survey, targeting the 
travelling community [6, 14]. 
8.3	
Random utility models
Random utility model found its use in travel demand forecast in the early 
1970. Theoretical backing for the random-utility-based decision making is 
found in Fishburn’s (1970) work [15]. Gravity model was the mostly used 
method for travel demand forecast at that time [16]. Gravity models had 
many deficiencies including its inability to capture issues of mode split, 
trip generation, etc. [8]. Models developed in response to this were based 
on behavioural aspects of the population.
	
Random utility models are based on the idea that people make choices 
in such a way that it will maximize some utility. Random utility models 
proceed on a number of assumptions. Firstly, it assumes that each decision 
maker makes his or her choice from a discrete set of alternatives. Second 
assumption is that the decision maker will make the choice in such a way 
that the choice will provide the highest utility among all the available 
options. Third assumption that the model makes is that the choices are 
made on a probabilistic manner, so that the decision maker is more likely 
to make certain choices than other options [17]. Fourth assumption is that 
the utility expected from a choice can be divided into two components: 

	
Travel management with intraday trip generation model in a smart ...	
189
strict utility – measurable attributes of utility and a stochastic utility – an 
error or disturbance term that reflects the unobserved attributes of a given 
selection [17].
	
Pik = Pr[(Vik + Eik) > (Vij + Eij)]∀k ≠ j, j = 1, ...,n]	
(8.1)
	
Where Pik is the probability of a decision-maker i choosing alternative 
k, and Pr is a probabilistic expression. This assigns likelihood to various 
choices from a set of alternatives. Vik and Vij are the ‘strict utility’ 
components of an individual i’s choices of k and j respectively; and Eik 
and Eij are the stochastic elements of the utility calculation for choices k 
and j [18].
8.4	
Multinomial Logit Models
The most common derivative of the random utility model is the Multinomial 
Logit Model. Logit model expresses the decision choice as a function of 
the utility of choosing one alternative over another. The model is derived 
by making assumptions regarding the random component of utility, Eij.
	
A common assumption is that the distribution of Eij follows a Weibull 
distribution (also known as a double exponential or extreme value type 
I distribution) [19]. The assumption of a Weibull distribution affords the 
utility calculation a greater degree of mathematical tractability. Detailed 
derivation and methods of estimation of parameters can be found in 
the work of Bierens [20]. Applying the Weibull function to the random 
component of utility leads to McFadden’s Logit model [19, 21] in the 
form:
	
P
e
e
ik
v
(X ,S )
v
(X ,S )
j
n
ik
k
i
ij
j
i
=
∑
	
(8.2)
	
Where Xk and Xj are the choice-specific attributes of choices k and 
j, respectively (e.g., in terms of trip making, this could represent costs, 
time, etc.); and Si is the individual-specific attributes of choice k (e.g., 
the decision-makers income, level of auto ownership, etc.). A detailed 
discussion about the application, estimation and errors can be found in 
Walker’s (2001) work [22]. 

190	
Geographic information system for smart cities
8.5	
Weighted average
Weighted average (weighted mean) is a simple method to calculate the 
combined influence of a given set of parameters on a phenomenon. It 
is similar to arithmetic mean, except the fact that some data points may 
contribute more than others [23].
	
x =
1
 
(
)
w
w x
i
i
n
i
i
i
n
=
=
∑
∑
1
1
	
(8.3)
 	
Where w is weights and x is corresponding quantities. The weights 
should be non-negative and the total cannot be zero. The weights have 
convex combination and hence can be expressed as coefficients summing 
to unity as only the relative weights are relevant [23, 24].
	
x = 
w x
i
i
i
n
′
=∑
1
	
(8.4)
	
Where w’ is a weight after normalizing with the total weight.
	
w′
∑
i
i
j
j=1
 = 
w
(w )
	
(8.5)
8.6	
Monte-Carlo method 
Monte-Carlo method is a convenient way to generate samples from a 
probability distribution. This method has been used at various places 
to generate properties of simulated population [25]. From the given 
probability distribution, cumulative probabilities for each choice 
are made. Then a random number generator is used to generate a 
number between 0 and 1. This is further compared to the cumulative 
distribution, and the choice with immediate highest probability to the 
random number is selected as the final choice. The method is illustrated 
in Fig. 8.1. Examples of its application in urban planning can be found 
in references [26–28].

	
Travel management with intraday trip generation model in a smart ...	
191
Figure 8.1 Monte-Carlo method
8.7	
Proposed Model
The Proposed Model assumes that each individual in the city plans their 
daily activity at the beginning of the day according to their occupation, age, 
role in the family, economic class etc. Each individual will have a broad 
action plan every day. This plan will suggest what activities to be done at 
what time. These activities include rigid activities (work, education) and 
flexible activities (entertainments, markets), which means that individuals 
can choose whether to do that activity or not and what kind of activity to 
do. When a person makes an activity choice for a given time, that choice 
and his present location will determine whether he has to travel to perform 
that activity. The choice to make a trip is followed by further choices 
of the mode and route. Then the individual is moved from the present 
geographical location to the transport system, which will transfer him to 
the destination location [5].
8.8	
Activity chains
Activities are classified into two types: flexible and rigid. Flexible activity 
represents a choice among entertainment, market, other and next (here 
‘next’ represents the chance of individual avoiding this activity choice 
and proceeding to the next activity in the chain; Fig. 8.2). Rigid activities 
are compulsory activities that an individual has to perform on choosing 

192	
Geographic information system for smart cities
that particular activity chain. The chain choice is made according to the 
occupational category and gender. Most relevant activity chains and their 
corresponding probability for each socioeconomic category were found 
from household survey [5].
Activities
Rigid
Entertainment
Next
Other
Back home
Education
Market
Work
Flexible
Figure 8.2  Activity classification 
	
For each tick of time, individuals perform the activity in their chain, 
and if it is a flexible activity, further choice is made to select one. Choice 
of activities at the place of flexible activities is based on corresponding 
probability curves derived from the household survey. These curves give 
the probability of selecting each activity at any time. Alternatively, this 
being a flexible choice, the individual can also skip this and move to the 
next activity. This provision is included to accommodate the possibility of 
individuals skipping certain activity in case of travel delays, etc. [5]. An 
example of such an activity chain is shown in Fig. 8.3.
Work
Work
Flexible 
activity
Flexible 
activity
Back 
Home
Figure 8.3  Activity chain 

	
Travel management with intraday trip generation model in a smart ...	
193
8.9	
Geography
The geography is represented in the model as an array of cells. Each 
cell acts as a container, which can carry people, land use and activities. 
Presently, considering the computational limitations, a cell size of 100 m 
× 100 m is considered. Further, for the ease of implementation, two more 
layers are considered. They are TAZ (Traffic Analysis Zone) layer and a 
network layer [5].
	
Network layer stands for the actual road network system. It absorbs 
the trips generated by the cells and transfers them to their destination, 
with a delay appropriate to the distance between the locations and network 
conditions. 
	
Purpose of TAZ layer is to aggregate the trips produced/attracted by 
the cells into a manageable number of zones. Here it is placed in between 
the cellular layer and network layer so that the traffic can be managed with 
a simple network layer. Alternatively, it can be placed above the network 
layer, if the network layer can accept the trips generated/attracted by the 
cells separately. In this case the purpose of TAZ will be to aggregate the 
trips generated/attracted by the cells to help human understanding [5]. 
Figure 8.4 illustrates these two alternate configurations.
Figure 8.4  Model layers
8.10	
The process
The process starts with the initialization of the cellular layer with 
demographic data of the study area and network layer with network data of 

194	
Geographic information system for smart cities
the study area. A demographic simulation module generates ‘individuals’ 
using the ward-level census data and observes family organizations 
in household survey. This module uses the ratios obtained from census 
data and a Monte-Carlo [26–28] simulation to generate the population. 
This generated population is distributed in the cells, which are having 
‘residential’ land use in the ward. An individual is represented by four 
parameters [5]. They are given in Table 8.1.
Table 8.1  Parameters defining an individual
Parameters defining an individual
1
Age
4 categories
<6 Years, 6–20,21–60, and >60
2
Gender
2 categories
Male and female
3
Occupation
7 categories
Agriculture worker, student, industrial worker, 
professionals, service employees, and unemployed
4
Family status
2 categories
Earning member and dependent
	
Job locations and activity areas are also distributed according to the 
land-use pattern. Each activity/job location was assigned an optimum 
number of populations it can attract. This was derived using the employment 
information for small and medium industries, floor spaces for commercial 
centres, strengths of schools and institutions. 
8.10.1	
Runtime process at cells
The process happening at each cell is illustrated in Fig. 8.5. Each 
individual in every cell makes its activity chain and proceeds with the 
activities specified by it. The time is supplied a by a central clock routine. 
At every advance of the clock, each individual check their activity chain, 
and if there is a change of activity, they request the currently occupying 
cell to find a suitable location for the activity (job and home locations are 
permanently fixed for each individual at the time of initialization). The 
cell performs a search through the TAZ zones to find suitable destinations 
for these activities. This operation is implemented with the help of 
conditional search among the cells and a comparison of the results on the 
basis of travel distance to these destinations from the current cell. Further, 
a Monte-Carlo simulation is used to choose a destination among these 
possible destinations. Further, based on their socioeconomic status and 
destination, individuals make a choice of their mode of travel. The process 

	
Travel management with intraday trip generation model in a smart ...	
195
is repeated with each individual in the cell and his or her destinations are 
obtained. The cell aggregates these individuals and transfers them to the 
network layer [5].
	
Mode choice of an individual is determined according to two factors: 
distance they intended to travel, and the income group that belongs to 
them. A utility function is formed as a weighted average of these two 
factors.
	
U =  A ×f (Distance) + B×f (Income group)
A + B
d1
i1
1
	
(8.6)
	
Where U1 is the utility of the mode in question, fd1() is a function 
giving the preference for the mode, according to the distance to travel, and 
fd2() gives the preference according to the income group they belongs to. A 
and B are the model parameters to be determined from the analysis [5]. 
Figure 8.5  Runtime process at cell
8.10.2	
Runtime process at TAZ layer
The TAZ layer is placed between cellular layer and network layer. This 
layer aggregates the trips generated by the cellular layer and provides less 
number of entities to be dealt by the network layer above. This method 
reduces the computing requirements without compromising on the 

196	
Geographic information system for smart cities
clarity. It is also possible to modify the TAZs to get the aggregates at the 
required level of detail. The overlying network layer recognizes only the 
TAZs, and destination’s identification is also done at this level. The exact 
destination of cell locations of the incoming trips is determined by the 
corresponding TAZs. They distribute these incoming people according to 
their land use. This distribution is also implemented through a Monte-
Carlo method, using the attraction potentials of the cells matching the 
land-use requirement. Hence, the TAZ layer has two functions: firstly, to 
aggregate the trips generated by underlying cellular layer and secondly, to 
distribute trips reaching it to the cellular layer [5].
8.10.3	
Runtime process at network layer
The network layer accepts trips generated from the TAZs and finds the 
suitable routs to the destinations and also keeps a count of people travelling in 
every road segment using various modes. Therefore, examining any of these 
segments at any given time will provide the number of people travelling in that 
segment. The time required to reach the destination is calculated according 
to the possible speed of the road segments, and the corresponding exit times 
for each segment are calculated for every trip entering the network layer. For 
each advance of the model’s clock, each segment ejects its matured trips to 
the next segment and the final segment ejects the trips to the destination TAZ 
[5]. The process is illustrated in Fig. 8.6.
Figure 8.6  Runtime process in network layer

	
Travel management with intraday trip generation model in a smart ...	
197
8.11	
Implementation of the model
The model is more close to programmatic than analytical. Therefore, the 
core model was implemented using Microsoft Visual Basic, in Object 
Oriented Programming. Individuals and cells were programmed as 
separate objects, while Geography, Trips, and TAZs were programmed as 
container objects. Cells were initialized using inputs from a set of GIS 
maps from ArcGIS database, which were interfaced through ArcObjects. 
The road network was prepared in ArcGIS and was interfaced through 
ArcObjects to work as the source of data for the network layer. Shortest 
paths between zones were found using ArcObjects, and further processing 
was done thorough VB module. Various geographic data were prepared 
using AutoCAD Map, ERDAS, and ArcGIS. The household survey data 
were analyzed using Microsoft Excel and Microsoft Access [5]. 
8.12	
Study area
Calicut, locally known as Kozhikode, is a coastal city in the northern part 
of Kerala (latitude 11° 15’ N and longitude 75° 47’ E; Fig. 8.17). It had a 
population of 0.436 million in 2001. It is well connected by rail and road 
to all major cities in India. The Madras–Mangalore broad gauge railway 
line passes through the city. The major roads cutting across Calicut are the 
National Highway 17, connecting Trichur to Thane, and National Highway 
212 that connects Calicut to Bangalore. 
Figure 8.7  Location of Calicut

198	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
The city is developed as a trading centre around the port area; the 
introduction of railways and major roads attracted settlements close to these 
corridors. The organic growth in the absence of proper control measures 
resulted in a mixed land use and heavy commercial developments just along 
the corridors. Even after the enforcement of the interim development plan, 
this trend continues and poses difficulties in providing urban utilities and 
widening of the roads. Almost all the major commercial developments 
are along the major roads. The wholesale market at Valiyangadi and retail 
market at SM Street were the old CBD (central business district), which 
later developed along the Kallayi road in south, Wayanad road and Kannur 
road in the north. In recent past, land along Mavoor road has developed as 
an organized retail market, housing the major branded markets (Fig. 8.8) [5].
Figure 8.8  Road network

	
Travel management with intraday trip generation model in a smart ...	
199
8.13	
Results
The model was designed to provide two outputs: It provides number of 
personal care units (PCUs) in various network links at a given time, and 
travel demand distribution at a given time as a map. PCU count on various 
links is helpful to work out management solutions at real time. Travel 
demand distribution may help in assessing the travel requirements of 
different geographical locations within the city and hence optimising the 
bus trips [5]. 
Figure 8.9  Simulated traffic volume at 5:00–6:00 PM

200	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Figure 8.10  Simulated traffic volume at 6:00–7:00 PM
Figure 8.11  Simulated traffic volume at 7:00–8:00 PM

	
Travel management with intraday trip generation model in a smart ...	
201
	
Figures 8.9, 8.10 and 8.11 compare the simulated traffic load on 
various roads in the city in terms of PCU in three time slots in the peak 
period. At 5:00 PM, the traffic volume reaches its peak at the city centre, as 
the offices and other commercial establishments stop their daily activity at 
5:00 PM. This generates a large volume of vehicles to enter the roads at the 
city centre. These vehicles gradually move outside the city and dissipate 
themselves to the surrounding residential area. 
	
People from a large catchment area of around 30–40 km radius 
commute to the city for their regular activities; hence, traffic moves are 
mainly through the major roads and through the bypass road. 
Figure 8.12  Simulated travel demand at morning 8:00–9:00 AM

202	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
As discussed earlier, the city is represented by a matrix of cells, and 
these cells will contain individuals. Hence, by mapping the intended travel 
done by these individuals, the city’s demand can be mapped at any time. 
Figure 8.12 shows simulated travel demand just before the morning peak 
hour of a typical day. 
8.14	
Applications in smart city 
The current model uses data obtained from a sample household survey. 
In a smart city, such information will be available very easily. All the 
individuals will be having an ‘Aadhar’ number, which is an index to the 
complete database of an individual. In addition, each household will have 
its identification number, which will have the details of individuals and 
their vehicle ownership, etc. Further, their economical status, etc., can be 
estimated through their energy consumption. 
	
The actual travel activity performed by the citizen can be found through 
the vehicle presence on the road – which will be constantly monitored 
by various sensors, travel loggings by individuals (when they do a route 
search for destinations), taxi loggings, and smart bus payments.
	
All such information will be available through the information 
backbone, and the model can be calibrated on a regular basis. With the 
help of such real-time traffic demand forecasting, it will be possible to do 
route adjustments for buses to cater to the people who need them and hence 
optimise the infrastructure. Presently, the bus routes are decided based on 
observed peak volume of traffic. However, it is possible that during off-
peak hours, many buses will run empty while some other places of city 
may have heavy rush of passengers, especially if there are certain events 
happening in that part of city. This kind of optimizations can avoid such 
issues and as per the demand, routes can be adjusted. In addition, such 
arrangements can be communicated to the users through the information 
backbone itself.
	
A system like this can help largely in traffic management in case of 
unexpected events like accidents, agitations, terrorist attacks, etc., by 
providing alternate plans of action and the simulated results. Since the 
system can estimate the destinations of vehicles moving in roads, it can 
provide such alternate plans of action and its merits. The chosen plan can 
be implemented through management of traffic signals and re-routing in 
an automated manner. 

	
Travel management with intraday trip generation model in a smart ...	
203
8.15	
References
[1] Claramunt, C. and Jiang, B. (2001). “An integrated representation 
of spatial and temporal relationships between evolving regions,” Journal of 
Geographical Systems, 3(4), pp. 411–428.
[2] Veldkamp, A. and Verburg, P. H. (2004). “Modelling land use change 
and environmental impact,” Journal of Environmental Management, 72(1–2), pp. 
1–3.
[3] Veldkamp, A. and Lambin, E. (2001). “Predicting land-use change,” 
Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 85(1–3), pp. 1–6.
[4] Benders, R. M. J. (1996). “Interactive Simulation of Electricity Demand 
and Production,” University Groningen.
[5] Bimal, P. (2007). “A Behavioural Model for Passenger Trip Prediction in 
a Dynamic Urban Scenario,” IIT Kharagpur.
[6] Doherty, S. T. and Miller, E. J. (2000). “A computerized household 
activity scheduling survey,” Transportation, 27(1), pp. 75–97.
[7] Lee, M. and McNally, M. G. (2006). “An empirical investigation on the 
dynamic processes of activity scheduling and trip chaining,” Transportation, 
33(6), pp. 553–565.
[8] Mcfadden, D. (2000). “Disaggregate Behavioral Travel Demand ’ s RUM 
Side A 30-Year Retrospective,” vol. 2000 .
[9] Simon, H. A. (1990). “Invariants of human behavior,” Annual Review of 
Psychology, 41, pp. 1–19.
[10] Prelec, D. (1989). “Values and Principles: Some Limitations on 
Traditional Economic Analysis”. Division of Research, Harvard Business School.
[11] Buliung, R. N. and Kanaroglou, P. S. (2006). “A GIS toolkit for exploring 
geographies of household activity/travel behavior,” Journal of Transport 
Geography, 14(1), pp. 35–51.
[12] Mosa, A. I., Harata, N. and Ohmori, N. (2008). “A Prototype Activity 
Based Scheduling Model with a Household Kernel Agent DASHA: Cairo a Case 
Study,” Traffic and Transportation Studies, 322, pp. 208–221.
[13] Ouyang, L., Lam, W., Li, Z. and Huang, D. (2011). “Network User 
Equilibrium Model for Scheduling Daily Activity Travel Patterns in Congested 
Networks,” Transportation Research Record, 2254(1), pp. 131–139.
[14] Miller, E. J. and Roorda, M. J. (2003). “Prototype Model of Household 
Activity-Travel Scheduling,” Transportation Research Record, 1831(1), pp. 114–
121.
[15] Fishburn, P.C. (1970). Utility Theory for Decision Making.

204	
Geographic information system for smart cities
[16] Meyer, J. R. and Straszheim, M. R. (1997). “Transport Demand: The 
Basic Framework,” Transport Economics: Selected Readings.
[17] Barra, T. D. (1989). Integrated Land use and Transportation Modelling: 
Decision Chains and Hierarchies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[18] Paul, M. (2000). “How Land Use Transportation Models Work”.
[19] McFadden, D. (1977). Modeling the choice of residential location.pdf
[20] Bierens, H. J. (2008). “The Logit Model: Estimation , Testing and 
Interpretation,” pp. 1–12.
[21] McFadden, D. (1978). “Modelling the choice of residential location,” 
in Spatial Interaction Theory and Planning Models, 673(477), A. Karlqvist, L. 
Lundqvist, F. Snickars, and J. Weibull, (Eds.), North-Holland, pp. 75–96.
[22] Walker, J. L. (2001). “Extended Discrete Choice Models : Integrated 
Framework , Flexible Error Structures , and Latent Variables,” Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology.
[23] “Weighted mean” [Online]. Available: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Weighted_mean [Accessed: 22-Jan-2013].
[24] Wikipedia, “Convex combination” [Online]. Available: http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convex_combination [Accessed: 01-Mar-2013].
[25] Wikipedia, “Monte Carlo method” [Online]. Available: http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monte_Carlo_method [Accessed: 01-Mar-2013].
[26] Chen, J., Gong, P., He, C. and Luo, W. (2002). “Assessment of the urban 
development plan of Beijing by using a CA-based urban growth model,” PE & 
RS- …, 68(10), pp. 1063–1071.
[27] Raju, K. A., Sikdar, P. K. and Dhingra, S. L. (1998). “Micro-simulation 
of residential location choice and its variation,” Computers, Environment and 
Urban Systems, 22(3), pp. 203–218.
[28] Du, R. (2012). “Cell-space model of Xi-di spatial evolution,” Frontiers 
of Architectural Research.

Abstract: Transportation system is the backbone of any urban settlement. It is essential to 
move people as well as goods from places for various purposes. Although the movement of 
people and the movement of goods in urban areas have certain similarities, they also have 
some important differences. The urban centres continues to act as the hub of commercial 
activities and the urban area as a whole demand more quantities of commodities to be 
brought in to be distributed to the demand points. Acute problems like traffic impedance, 
pavement damage, increased traffic accidents, environmental pollution, etc., are resulted 
out of goods transportation. Urban goods transportation is a complex system involving a 
variety of commodities: several transport modes, a combination of local and intercity traffic 
and a whole spectrum of actors. In a smart city environment where information is available 
about the bulk of goods (supply and demand), the required/available mode of transport, the 
routing of vehicles for collection/distribution of goods depending on the distribution of the 
demand/supply points on the network and the network characteristics and the optimum time 
for supply/delivery, a smart network with all the actors involved on-board would be able to 
deal with urban goods movement economically, effectively and efficiently in order to achieve 
a sustainable development.
Key words: urban goods transportation, intelligent transportation system, smart city, 
sustainable development.
9.1	
Introduction
Transportation system is the backbone of any urban settlement. It is 
essential to move people as well as goods from places for various purposes. 
People move in search of opportunities, while goods are transported to 
places where they have demand. Although the movement of people and the 
movement of goods in urban areas have certain similarities, they also have 
some important differences in their economic and physical characteristics, 
transporting, loading and unloading requirements, origin and destinations, 
transportation and land-use relations, and the nature and location of 
terminals. Consequently, goods movement should receive explicit 
treatment in the urban transportation planning process. The urban centres 
are the hub of commercial activities. The urban core in most of the cities 
continues to have the business centres, where the commodities are brought 
9
Intelligent goods transportation
NASEER M.A.

206	
Geographic information system for smart cities
in bulk, stored and distributed within the urban area. The expansion of 
urban area has continued to demand more quantities of commodities to be 
brought to the congested commercial core, increasing the pressure over the 
existing infrastructure and thereby quite often throwing the urban centre 
out of gear. This has resulted in acute problems like traffic impedance, 
pavement damage, increased traffic accidents, environmental pollution 
and on top of all in increasing the cost of commodities due to delay.
	
Intelligent transportation system (ITS) refers to a system in which 
information and communication technologies are applied in the field of 
transportation including infrastructure, vehicles and users, and in traffic 
management and mobility management [1]. They are called ‘intelligent’ 
because their essential functions are based on attributes normally associated 
with intelligence – sensory capabilities, memory, communications, 
information processing and adaptive behaviour [2]. In a smart city, where 
advanced information and communication technologies are available, 
the goods transportation can be made highly efficient. Traffic and fleet 
management and facilitating a better tracking and tracing of goods across 
the transport networks is very easily possible with ITS technologies. 
The emerging concepts of ‘green freight corridors’ and ‘e-freight’ in the 
European countries have been developed based on ITS technologies [3]. 
9.2	
Urban goods transportation
Urban goods transportation is a complex system involving a variety 
of commodities, several transport modes, a combination of local and 
intercity traffic and a whole spectrum of actors. In a broader sense, urban 
goods movement includes all things moved within urban area by truck, 
rail, ship, pipelines or aircraft. Of these, ships, aircraft and rail tend to 
move bulk cargo in very large quantities over very long distances because 
they are specifically designed to handle these movements economically. 
Pipelines move bulk liquids over medium distances where the demand is 
fairly continuous. Trucks move smaller bulk of commodities from widely 
dispersed areas into the urban centres. Of all the modes, movement by 
road is the principal mode of goods transportation. And in the case of 
urban areas, the goods movement is characterized by smaller shipment of 
a very wide range of commodities. This could be accomplished with the 
help of trucks and other smaller goods vehicles only.

	
Intelligent goods transportation	
207
	
There are three different, though related, urban goods movements. 
First, the goods movements with one end (origin or destination) within 
the urban area (external movements) are called as ‘inter-city goods 
movements’. Secondly, the movements which are entirely within 
the urban area (internal movements) are termed as ‘intra-city goods 
movements’. And thirdly, those with neither end in the urban area are 
called ‘through movements’. The first two are closely related to the 
economic activities of the urban area, whereas the third normally does 
not have any significant role. The flow of goods into and out of an urban 
area is characterized by bulk shipments as mentioned earlier. Large 
capacity vehicles are used for this operation. The internal movements 
on the other hand are characterized by smaller shipments that are 
to be distributed to the demand points widely dispersed throughout 
the urban area. This is accomplished with the help of smaller goods 
vehicles. The bulk that is brought to the urban area is broken into 
smaller consignments before they are shipped to the destinations. 
Special loading and unloading facilities are required to receive and 
disaggregate the shipments. Traditionally, terminals are provided to 
facilitate these services. 
9.2.1	
Pattern of urban goods movement
The general pattern of urban goods movement is shown in Fig. 9.1 [4]. 
These movements are either external–internal movements or exclusive 
internal movements. The goods are brought to the urban area from outside 
(import movement) either as raw materials to the industries for processing, 
or as finished goods for consumption. The processed goods from industries 
are then exported to outside (export movement) or consumed within. The 
amount of goods brought into an urban area is generally more than the 
amount of goods exported from the urban area. The imbalance is accounted 
for the consumption within the urban area.
	
Generally, the goods to the industries are directly delivered. They 
are brought in bulk by trucks or other suitable modes. The goods for 
consumption on the other hand may go to the truck terminal, or to the 
warehouse, or to the wholesaler or to the retailer either directly (external–
internal movement) or through any one or more of them (internal 
movement). Finally, they are all delivered to the consumers. 

208	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Figure 9.1  General pattern of urban goods movement [4]
	
The type of flow depends not only on the kind of goods and its bulk 
but also on the agencies involved in moving them. The goods to the truck 
terminals are brought in bulk by heavy trucks. There they are stored 
temporarily and/or are broken to smaller consignments according to the 
demand (Note the overlap of the wholesaler in Fig. 9.1). These smaller 
consignments are then delivered by trucks or light commercial vehicles 
(LCVs) to the demand points within the urban area. The demand points 

	
Intelligent goods transportation	
209
include secondary wholesalers and retailers. Apart from this, secondary 
wholesaler and retailer may procure goods from a higher-order bulking 
agency (warehouse or primary wholesaler, respectively) as shown in the 
Fig. 9.1. In the end, the consumer will get his goods from a retailer (or a 
secondary wholesaler in some cases). Many a time, the goods are brought 
by the consumers themselves on their shopping trips either by walk or by 
their personalized mode or at the most by using a public transport mode. 
The retailer, the wholesaler, the warehouse and the truck terminal are higher 
order bulking agencies in the given sequence, and hence each one of them is 
able to supply goods (breaking of bulk) to their lower-order ones. 
	
There are two important components of urban goods movement process: 
consolidation and distribution. Consolidation refers to the accumulation 
and transfer of consignments into a successively larger load until some 
limiting consignment size (i.e., carrying unit) is reached. At this limit the 
load is transferred between the largest shipper and largest receiver without 
any reduction in the size of the shipment. The distribution, the reverse of 
consolidation, occurs with the large shipment undergoing repeated division 
within the distributive chain until it reaches the ultimate consumer [5].
	
Consolidation and distribution can be elaborated further by indicating 
the two main directions of the transaction as shown in Fig. 9.2 – from 
industry or producer to consolidating wholesaler (or forwarder) whose 
activities produce maximum consignment size (i.e., full unit load) and 
from this wholesaler to the final consumer in the distributive chain.
Figure 9.2  Urban goods movement process by Smith and Hay [5]

210	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
The external producers and collectors (mentioned earlier) are involved 
in the consolidation of goods. The goods are either produced in bulk or are 
collected (and consolidated) from various sources. The consolidated goods 
are then transferred to similar kind of agencies that have bulk demand. The 
industries, the truck terminals, the warehouses and the wholesalers within 
the urban area are examples for such bulking agencies. The distribution 
of goods within the urban area involves breaking of this bulk into smaller 
consignments according to the demand. Smaller goods vehicles play a 
major role in this activity.
	
In general it is possible to recognize four basic patterns of goods 
movement involving full load or part load by trucks or by smaller goods 
vehicles. They are:
	
1.	 Diffuse location to discrete location (multiple origins with single 
delivery) involving the consolidation of consignments into large 
bulk as exemplified by the progressive collection of goods for 
delivery to a truck terminal.
	
2.	 Discrete location to discrete location (single origin to destination 
with full load) involving movement of a consignment from one 
point to another as reflected in the transfer of goods between an 
industry and truck terminal or between a truck terminal and a 
wholesaler.
	
3.	 Discrete location to diffuse location (single origin with multiple 
deliveries) encompassing the distribution of goods from a single 
receiver to multiple receivers as exemplified by the delivery of 
goods from a truck terminal to warehouses or wholesalers.
	
4.	 Diffuse location to diffuse location (simultaneous pickup 
and delivery) covering a composite case involving both the 
consolidation of consignments and their distribution as exemplified 
by a beverage truck delivering full cases and picking up empties.
9.2.2	
Agencies involved in urban goods movement 
(UGM)
There are several agencies involved in the urban goods movement. 
Depending on the kind of operations they are involved in, the agencies 
can be broadly classified into the following six types. A clear demarcation 
among them is not always possible as there are cases where the same agency 
is involved in more than one type of operations. The primary objective of all 
these agencies is to maximize the return with minimum cost.

	
Intelligent goods transportation	
211
	
(a)	 The producer: The agricultural producers and industries constitute 
this group. The products are transported to urban areas for further 
processing (as raw materials) or for consumption (as finished 
goods). The prime objective is to distribute goods to the farthest 
areas possible with minimum cost of transportation. This is 
generally accomplished with bulk movement of goods. In those 
cases where an economic consolidation is not possible, the process 
of consolidation would be undertaken by the collectors.
	
(b)	 The collector (primary wholesaler): They collect the products 
from producers (farmers and industries), consolidate and then 
transport to the demand points with the help of the most viable 
mode of transportation (Fig. 9.1).
	
(c)	 The wholesaler (secondary wholesaler): The objective of the 
wholesaler is to collect goods in bulk and distribute the same to a 
large number of the demand points (retailers or consumers). The 
breaking of bulk occurs at this stage. An economic distribution of 
goods is achieved by using a variety of transport modes having 
different carrying capacity. The smaller goods vehicles are largely 
used at this stage. The wholesaler operate at various levels – at 
the terminal level to bring goods from outside or from industries 
within the urban area and to distribute to other wholesalers or 
retailers, or at a lower level to collect goods from wholesalers 
within the urban area and to distribute to retailers (Fig. 9.1).
	
(d)	 The retailer: They are the last link in the distribution chain, where 
the goods are delivered by goods vehicles and the one that has 
direct contact with the consumers. The goods are either collected 
from a wholesaler or from a producer directly but in smaller 
quantities. The objective is to collect goods with minimum cost.
	
(e)	 The consumer: He is the ultimate user of goods procured from a 
retailer or a wholesaler directly. The former is the most common 
function among them. The objective is to procure goods at 
minimum price.
	
(f)	 The transport operator: They operate among all other agencies as 
discussed earlier, providing suitable modes for feasible collection 
or distribution of goods. Their ultimate objective is to economize 
the operation. This often demand optimum vehicle load and hence 
consolidation of goods. 

212	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
(g)	 The booking agent: These agents work as middlemen between the 
transport operator and the rest of the agencies discussed above. 
They have dual functions of arranging suitable transport modes 
and consolidating goods for transportation. It is not possible for 
the transport operator to operate at optimum load without the 
function of consolidation. And it is often difficult for an agency to 
get the suitable mode of transport for moving his goods. It is here 
the booking agents find his role.
	
Table 9.1 gives the various objectives of these agencies, the constraints 
within which they operate, and the various options available to them [4]. 
Table 9.1  Agencies involved in UGM, their objectives, constraints and options [4].
Agencies
Objectives
Constraints
Options
1. Producer
Maximize distribution
Maximize profit
Market demand
Efficient system of 
distribution
Competitive market 
of collectors and 
booking agents
Quality products
2. Collector
Maximize volume
Minimize collection and 
distribution cost
Minimize loading and 
unloading cost
Minimize cost of delay 
and damage
Market demand 
Selection of suitable 
mode of transport
Type of commodity
Selection of 
transport service
Competitive 
market of transport 
operator
Consolidation
Type of service 
offered by transport 
operator and 
booking agents 
(competitive)
3. Wholesaler
Maximize volume
Minimize collection and 
distribution cost
Minimize loading and 
unloading cost
Minimize cost of delay 
and damage
Market demand
Type of commodity
Selection of suitable 
mode of transport
Selection of 
transport service
Terminal location
Competitive market 
of collectors
Consolidation
Type of service 
offered by transport 
operator and 
booking agents 
(competitive)
Terminal location

	
Intelligent goods transportation	
213
4. Retailer
Maximize sales
Minimize cost of 
transport (collection)
Minimize cost of 
distribution
Minimize cost of delay 
and damage
Nature of commodity
Market demand
Selection of suitable 
mode of transport
Selection of 
transport service
Competitive market 
of wholesalers
Terminal location
Type of service 
offered by transport 
operator and 
booking agents 
(competitive)
5. Consumers
(Individuals and 
society)
Minimize the cost of 
transport and hence the 
commodity price
Minimize social cost 
due to traffic disruption, 
damage to life and 
property, congestion 
and air and noise 
pollution
Maximize benefits 
with effective goods 
transport system
Type of commodity 
distribution system
Link capacity, traffic 
volume and induced 
congestion due to 
goods vehicles
Traffic regulations
Air and noise 
pollution standards
Safety requirements
Competitive market 
of retailers
Optimum location of 
truck terminals
Efficient collection 
and distribution of 
goods
Efficient goods 
transport network
6. Transport 
operator
Maximize vehicle 
earning
Maximize volume/load
Minimize cost of 
conveyance
Minimize cost of 
loading and unloading
Minimize cost of delay 
and damage
Opportunity of 
consolidation 
Spatial/temporal 
access regulations
Road traffic 
congestion
Vehicle use
Security
Type of loading and 
unloading 
Optimum location of 
truck terminals
Efficient goods 
transport network
Vehicle scheduling
Loading and 
unloading 
equipment
Operation at 
optimum load
Insurance on goods
Competitive market 
of booking agents
Agencies
Objectives
Constraints
Options

214	
Geographic information system for smart cities
7. Booking 
agents
Maximize returns
Maximize volume/load
Minimize cost of 
transportation
Minimize loading and 
unloading cost 
Minimize cost of delay 
and damage
Availability of 
suitable transport 
mode
Opportunity of 
consolidation
Type of commodity
Time for delivery
Competitive 
market of transport 
operator
Optimum location of 
truck terminals
Efficient goods 
transport network
Type of service 
offered by other 
agencies
9.2.3	
Classification of urban goods
The basic units of urban goods movement are commodities and a wide 
variety of them are moved in urban areas. The essential characteristics of 
the commodities are its physical state, volume, shape, value, perishability, 
time and date of dispatch and origin and destination [6].
	
The mode of transport and the nature of the goods movement depend 
on the characteristics of the commodity being transported. For example, 
tankers are needed for gases and liquids, refrigerated or insulated vans for 
perishables, custom-built equipment for fragile items, specially designed 
vehicles for high-density goods and armoured vehicles for high-value 
articles. In terms of operation, the perishable goods and express goods are 
serviced faster as compared to the rest. If the commodities with special 
characteristics are eliminated, there remains solid, non-perishable, durable, 
low/medium value, regular shaped, non-urgent, and low/medium density 
and low/medium mass goods. This is usually designated as ‘general 
cargo’. These types of goods are most suitable for consolidation within 
truck terminals.
	
A general classification of the urban goods is given below. The 
grouping is based on their common characteristics or origin.
	
1.	 Agricultural products: This includes non-perishable goods like 
grains, pulses, etc.
	
2.	 Fresh fruits and vegetables: These are perishables in general.
	
3.	 Fish and meat: These perishable goods require special vehicles 
for transportation.
Agencies
Objectives
Constraints
Options

	
Intelligent goods transportation	
215
	
4.	 Processed food and beverages: Bakery products and soft drinks 
are included in this.
	
5.	 Fabric/textile products: Yarns, thread, fabrics, apparel and other 
textile products are included.
	
6.	 Footwear and leather products
	
7.	 Drugs and cosmetics
	
8.	 Metal wares and glass wares
	
9.	 Electric and electronic equipment
	
10.	 Household appliances
	
11.	 Household furniture: This includes timber and metal furniture.
	
12.	 Recreation equipment and gift items: Toys, sporting goods, 
flowers, religious products, music items, etc.
	
13.	 Office and computational machines
	
14.	 Plastic, rubber and other synthetic products
	
15.	 Printed matter: News paper, books, magazines, etc.
	
16.	 Paper and stationeries
	
17.	 Chemicals, pesticides and fertilizers
	
18.	 Building materials: Bricks, stone, timber, tiles, steel, cement, 
paints and other hardware
	
19.	 Petroleum products: Petrol, diesel, kerosene, cooking gas, 
lubricants, etc.
	
20.	 Vehicles: Bicycles, two wheelers, four wheelers and other 
automobiles
9.2.4	
Modes of urban goods movement
A wide range of modes are used to move urban goods in the urban 
areas. While the use of pipelines is confined to the industrial supply 
and distribution, the airways, waterways and railways are used for 
bulk movement over large distances to the industries as well as to the 
business centres. A major share of urban goods movement is by road. 
This has been attributed to the inherent advantage of this mode over other 
modes [7]. It possesses greater distributive ability in terms of delivery 
and collection and is strategically more suitable for hilly and inaccessible 
areas than railways, waterways and airways. It acts as a feeder service 
to all other modes of transport and considered as most efficient for short 
and intermediate hauls. Features like customer-tailored schedule, easier 
availability and manoeuvrability of vehicles, smaller cargo acceptance, 

216	
Geographic information system for smart cities
flexibility in operation and organization and door-to-door service makes it 
indeed a personalized and superior service. 
9.2.5	
Present day problems of urban goods movement
Though the physical boundaries of urban areas change over time and move 
outward, the commercial centres continue to remain unaltered, making 
commutation to these areas almost impossible especially during business 
hours. Since the goods are normally brought to such business centres in 
bulk, are stored and then distributed to various demand points, there is a 
wide range of problems resulted out of their movement. The central areas 
are always choked due to congestion that leads to environmental pollution 
and traffic hazards. Movement of heavy vehicles, quite often overloaded, 
results in accidents and pavement deterioration. In many big cities, the 
entry of goods vehicles into the city during the day or during the peak hours 
is restricted. In the absence of alternate route, these vehicles are forced to 
idle with resultant loss of time and money and upsetting the schedule of 
delivery. This results in additional cost which also is ultimately transferred 
to the consumers.
	
The following are the major problems of goods movement within the 
urban area.
	
Traffic congestion: Goods vehicles being generally larger than 
passenger modes effectively reduce the capacity of streets to handle 
passenger traffic. They also impede the traffic flow because of lower 
acceleration rate and when stopped for loading and unloading on street.
	
Environmental pollution: Movement of heavy goods vehicles 
especially that of trucks and their on-street loading and unloading of goods 
results in air and noise pollution and vibrations.
	
Traffic accidents and pavement damage: The goods vehicles due to 
their lower acceleration rate, limited driver visibility of the side and rear, 
braking characteristics, and turning radii cause accidents often resulting in 
fatalities and major property damage. The pavements are usually designed 
for a projected traffic mix. If the actual volume of heavy goods vehicles is 
higher than the assumed design volume, the pavement would deteriorate 
faster than expected. Many times the vehicles are overloaded leading to 
faster wear and tear of pavements.
	
Additional costs: The time lost due to lack of loading or unloading 
spaces and the time spent waiting for entry to the urban area or to the 

	
Intelligent goods transportation	
217
central area due to entry restriction is not remunerative. The extra costs 
involved due to these are eventually passed on to the consumers.
	
Table 9.2 shows a compilation of various reasons and the resulting 
problems of urban goods movement.
Table 9.2  Various reasons and the resulting urban goods movement problems
Common reasons
for problems in UGM
Problems of urban goods movement 
Traffic
congestion
Environmental
pollution
Traffic
accidents
Energy 
loss
Higher cost 
passed on to 
consumer
1. Road network 
configuration
*
*
*
*
*
2. Vehicle characteristics
*
*
*
*
*
3. Entry restrictions and 
traffic control
*
4. Road capacity
*
*
*
*
*
5. Detention of vehicles for 
checking, tax payment, 
etc.
*
*
*
*
6. Overhead and ground 
obstacles to truck 
movements
*
*
*
*
*
7. Inadequate on-street 
loading/unloading 
facilities
*
*
*
*
*
8. Inadequate off-street 
loading/unloading 
facilities 
*
*
*
*
9. Lack of specialized 
equipment for 
goods handling and 
transportation
*
*
9.2.6	
Solutions for urban goods movement problems
Traditionally, urban goods movement problems are addressed with the 
help of short-term or long-term programs. Short-term programs of better 
management of goods transportation through temporal and spatial separation 
or those of facility improvements through consolidation etc. are generally 
easy to implement, and because of their shorter gestation period the effects 
could be seen quickly. The latter, on the other hand, has longer gestation 
period and involves greater uncertainties. All these solutions address mainly 
the shortcomings of the present system and are not really comprehensive.

218	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
Long-lasting and efficient solutions to all the above-mentioned 
problems can be achieved with the help of smart technology using 
intelligent goods transportation system.
9.3	
Intelligent goods transportation	
A complex system such as urban goods transportation, involving 
multitude of commodities, several transport modes, a combination of 
local and intercity traffic and a whole spectrum of actors, could be made 
highly efficient with the help of smart technologies. An integrated smart 
network involving all the actors of the system with a reliable database 
on all aspects related to the goods movement that is created, maintained 
and continuously updated on real time is the prime requirement of an 
intelligent goods transportation system. In a smart city environment where 
information is available about the bulk of goods (supply and demand), the 
required/available mode of transport, the routing of vehicles for collection/
distribution of goods depending on the distribution of the demand/supply 
points on the network and the network characteristics and the optimum 
time for supply/delivery, a smart network with all the actors involved on-
board will be able to deal with the problems [8].
9.3.1	
The smart network and its functions
As mentioned in the previous section, the intelligent goods transportation 
should essentially have a smart network well integrated with all the role 
players and their wide varied requirements. 
	
The network should therefore have a database with the following data:
	
1.	 Type of commodities
	
2.	 Demand and availability of commodities in terms of bulk/volume 
at various locations
	
3.	 Schedule of collection or distribution of goods at different 
locations
	
4.	 Requirement for and the availability of various kinds of transport 
modes and their pricing
	
5.	 Scope for breaking the bulk or for consolidation of commodities
	
6.	 Requirement of temporary storage – spatial as well as temporal
	
7.	 Available road/rail/air/water network and the real time condition 
of traffic on them

	
Intelligent goods transportation	
219
	
8.	 Prohibitions/restrictions on operations on the network that are 
permanent or temporary
	
9.	 Real time data on various modes in transit and their spatial location
	
Among the data, some may have a permanent nature (for e.g., transport 
network) while others will be updated on real time. The required data 
would be fed into the network by the actors involved in the system. The 
network analyses the data based on their inter-relationships, controlled and 
monitored by an algorithm. The result obtained from the algorithm would 
guide the actors on consolidation of goods, breaking the bulk, arranging 
for temporary storage of commodities (spatial and temporal), integrating 
among various modes, scheduling the fleet and routing the vehicles for all 
types of movement of goods.
	
Figure 9.3 represents a schematic diagram of the intelligent goods 
transportation system.
Figure 9.3  A schematic diagram of the intelligent goods transportation system
9.3.2	
How does it work?
Figure 9.4 gives an illustration of scheduling the supply of a particular 
commodity from a set of supply nodes to a set of demand nodes on the 

220	
Geographic information system for smart cities
network. It is assumed that the demand at all nodes is known – in terms of 
quantity and the time of delivery.
Supply nodes
Available bulk and time 
of availability are known
Bulk of demand and time 
for delivery are known
The routing and scheduling of goods 
vehicles depend on the kind of network, 
its condition, availability of suitable 
transport mode, its pricing, etc. 
Demand nodes
Intermediate storage/
terminal nodes
Figure 9.4  Illustration of smart networking for routing and scheduling of goods
	
The prime task in this case would be scheduling the supply of goods 
from supply nodes to demand nodes with least cost, where the cost 
include not only the (direct) transportation cost but (indirect) cost of delay, 
infrastructure maintenance, social cost due to environmental pollution, etc. 
In addition to this, the location and time schedule/duration of intermediate 
storage of goods at identified storage yards or transport terminals and 
their respective bulk allocation also is done. This makes the networking 
dynamic in nature. 
9.4	
Case study of Chennai Metropolitan area 
The task of location of terminal points from a set of candidate locations, 
their respective allocation in terms of bulk of storage, the connectivity of 
each of these terminals with the supply and demand points were attempted 
as a part of the dissertation work by the author all Chennai Metropolitan 
area (located on the south-eastern coast of India) with a static network 

	
Intelligent goods transportation	
221
and computer programming [4]. The following section briefly explains the 
essence of the study.
9.4.1	
Nodes on the network
The nodes on the road network were identified under four categories 
– supply nodes, demand nodes, terminal nodes and their suitable 
combinations. Table 9.3 followed by Fig. 9.5 gives the list of nodes and 
their locations in the urban area. The terminal nodes were considered to be 
the intermediate storage points.
Figure 9.5  Location of nodes at Chennai Metropolitan area [4]

222	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Table 9.3  Nodes, their description and demand for commodities for Chennai Metropolitan 
area [7].
Node 
no.
Name of node
Kind of node
Demand for 
food grains 
and pulses 
(tonnes/day)
Demand for 
fruits and 
vegetables 
(tonnes/day)
  1
George Town
Terminal with demand
115.5
70.4
  2
Royapuram
Demand node
219.8
138.1
  3
Tondiarpet
Demand node
141.7
88.4
  4
Vyasarpadi
Demand node
162.5
107.1
  5
Madhavaram (NH 5)
T & E pt. with demand
43.7
28.8
  6
Perambur
Demand node
210.6
147.4
  7
Villivakkam
Entry point with 
demand
94.8
63.8
  8
Ayanavaram
Demand node
172.5
112.3
  9
Otteri
Demand node
130.7
85.0
10
Purasaiwalkam
Demand node
41.1
24.5
11
Anna Nagar
Demand node
185.8
113.8
12
Koyambedu (NH 4)
T & E pt. with demand
44.6
25.2
13
Egmore
Demand node
47.8
28.7
14
Chetpet
Demand node
138.4
93.2
15
Nungambakkam
Demand node
171.8
110.0
16
T Nagar
Demand node
165.3
102.5
17
Saidapet
Demand node
234.2
150.3
18
Kodambakkam
Demand node
120.9
79.0
19
Nandambakkam
Demand node
13.4
5.4
20
Guindy
Demand node
27.1
17.0
21
Velachery
Demand node
49.7
34.1
22
Thiruvanmiyur
Entry point with 
demand
64.3
34.6
23
Adayar
Demand node
78.1
46.9
24
Mylapore
Demand node
144.2
76.8
25
Triplicane (East)
Demand node
48.1
30.2
26
Chepauk
Demand node
51.2
34.9
27
Nandanam
Demand node
79.6
46.8
28
Teynampet
Demand node
179.8
111.8
29
West Triplicane
Demand node
51.9
34.1
30
Chindaripet
Demand node
88.7
56.3

	
Intelligent goods transportation	
223
31
Alandur (NH 45)
Terminal at entry point
0
0
32
Manthaiveli
Junction node
0
0
33
Kulathur
Entry point
0
0
34
Virugambakkam
Entry point
0
0
9.4.2	
Terminal locations and routing of vehicles
Identification of suitable locations for the truck terminals and their 
individual allocation for bulk of goods were done based on an algorithm. 
The routing of vehicles for the supply of goods to the terminal locations 
and the routing of vehicles for the distribution of goods from the terminal 
nodes to the demand nodes were also done based on the algorithm, where 
in addition to the transportation cost, cost of congestion and cost of 
environmental pollution were also considered. Figure 9.6 gives the results 
of the algorithm in the form of routing of supply and distribution of goods. 
Table 9.4 gives the details on the solution set and the preferred routes.
Figure 9.6  Location of terminal nodes and the routing of vehicles 
at Chennai Metropolitan area [7]

224	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Table 9.4  Final results obtained for location of terminal points and routing of vehicles for 
Chennai Metropolitan area [7].
Commodities
Final 
solution 
set#
Preferred routes of 
supply from entry 
points to terminals 
Preferred routes of 
distribution from 
terminals to demand 
nodes
“Food grains and 
pulses” 
and
“fruits and 
vegetables”
5, 12 and 31
Terminal 5, 12 and 31 are 
located at Entry points.
Other routes:
7 to 5: 7 – 6 – 5
12 to 5: 12 – 14 –  8 –  6 – 5
22 to 5: 22 – 23 – 32 – 28 – 29 
– 13 – 9 – 4 – 5
31 to 5: 31 – 19 – 16 – 13 – 9
 	
	
                   –  4 – 5
33 to 5 (direct): 33 – 5
34 to 5: 34 – 12 – 14 – 8 – 6 
– 5
5 to 12: 5 – 6 – 8 – 14 – 12
7 to 12 (direct): 7 – 12
22 to 12: 22 – 23 – 32 – 28 – 
29 – 14 – 12
31 to 12: 31 – 19 – 18 – 12
33 to 12: 33 – 7 – 12
34 to 12 (direct): 34 – 12
5 to 31: 5 – 4 – 9 – 13 – 16 – 	
19 – 31
7 to 31: 7 – 12 – 18 – 19 – 31
12 to 31: 12 – 18 – 19 – 31
22 to 31: 22 – 21 – 31
33 to 31: 33 –7– 12– 18–19- 
31
34 to 31: 34 – 19 – 31
5 to 1 is: 5 – 4 – 1
5 to 2 is: 5 – 4 – 2
5 to 3 is: 5 – 4 – 3
5 to 4 is (direct): 5 – 4
5 to 6 is (direct): 5 – 6
5 to 8 is: 5 – 6 – 8
12 to 7 is (direct): 12 – 7
12 to 9 is: 12 – 14 – 10 – 9
12 to 10 is: 12 – 14 – 10
12 to 11 is (direct): 12 – 11
12 to 13 is: 12 – 14 – 13
12 to 14 is (direct): 12 – 14
12 to 15 is: 12 – 14 – 15
12 to 18 is (direct): 12 – 18
12 to 25 is: 12 – 14 – 29 – 25
12 to 26 is: 12 – 14 – 29 – 26
12 to 29 is: 12 – 14 – 29
12 to 30 is: 12 – 14 – 30
31 to 16 is: 31 – 19 – 16
31 to 17 is (direct): 31 – 17
31 to 19 is (direct): 31 – 19
31 to 20 is (direct): 31 – 20
31 to 21 is (direct): 31 – 21
31 to 22 is: 31 – 21 – 22
31 to 23 is: 31 – 20 – 23
31 to 24 is: 31 – 19 – 16 – 24
31 to 27 is: 31 – 17 – 27
31 to 28 is: 31 – 19 – 16 – 28

	
Intelligent goods transportation	
225
9.5	
Conclusion
Intelligent goods transportation system, with smart technologies as the 
backbone, can handle multiple inter-related issues that are otherwise 
highly complex. In a smart city environment where information is available 
online and where all the actors involved are on-board, a complex system 
like urban goods transportation can be made very economic, effective and 
sustainable [9].
9.6	
References
[1] DEPC (2010). Directive 2010/45/EU of the European Parliament and of 
the Council, L 207/1, Official Journal of the European Union.
[2] Ministry of Transportation, Ontario. Available from: http://www.mto.gov.
on.ca/english/ [Accessed in May 2013].
[3] E-Freight Project. Available from: http://www.efreightproject.eu/default.
aspx [Accessed in May 2013].
[4] Naseer, M.A. (2005). A Methodology for Location of Truck Terminals in 
Urban Areas, Unpublished PhD Thesis submitted to Indian Institute of Technology 
Kharagpur, India.
[5] Smith, R.H.T. and Hay, A.M. (1969). A theory of spatial structure of 
internal trade in underdeveloped countries, Geographical Analysis, No. 1, 121–
135.
[6] Mayburg, A.H. and Stopher, P.R. (1974). A framework for the analysis 
of demand for urban goods movement, Transportation Research Record, 496, 
68–79.
[7] Reddy, T.S. and Rao, S.B.S. (1993). Urban freight transport problems 
and planning prospects, Proceedings of the 1993 National Seminar on “Urban 
Transportation”, Indian National Academy of Engineering, New Delhi, II-60.
[8] Correia, L.M. (2011). Smart Cities Applications and Requirements, White 
Paper 2011-05-20, Net!Works European Technology Platform.
[9] Yanqiang Ma, Paul Ewing and Annika Oeing (2011). Sustainable logistics 
development in emerging markets City Logistics in China, Bonn Symposium, 
December 2011.

Abstract: One of the great challenges in smart planning is how to estimate urban resilience. 
It is particularly interesting to analyze the ability of cities to withstand challenges and extreme 
phenomena due to disasters. It is interesting to consider how it could be accomplished in the 
framework of smart cities. In this chapter we propose a solution through the management 
of digital information originating in the city by means of new technology provided by artificial 
intelligence (AI). Since current cities reside in a pre-smart cities era, a lot of digital information 
about the city flows but it is not integrated nor exploited, thus a critical analysis of its nature is 
mandatory. To show how to work within this framework, AI technologies are applied to a case 
study, to simulate the flooding of New Orleans caused by hurricane Katrina.
Keywords: multi-agent systems, resilience, geo-cyber infrastructure, simulation.
10.1	
Introduction
Considering cities in the 21st century as complex systems, it is interesting 
to investigate how they adapt to changes that have interrupted their 
stability. As it has been pointed out [1, 2], cities are self-organized systems. 
Their self-organization is emergent and the question arises whether we can 
influence their global behaviour. It is evident that it is possible in the stage 
of infrastructure building, but it is harder to achieve in other stages.
	
The development of sustainable and resilient infrastructure 
represents a challenge itself, particularly when development has to 
include social, economic and political features. Building resilience 
comes with the cost of action and its associated investment, as well 
as the indirect costs of opportunities lost by not using the resources in 
a different way. How should we measure the cost of our decisions in 
something as a system? [1, 2]
	
Natural disasters (e.g., the effects of Katrina on New Orleans or the 
Asian tsunami), or human-caused shocks (e.g., terrorist attacks in Madrid, 
New York or London; or the recent London riots) have highlighted the 
necessity of properly tackling unexpected shocks, by having certain 
predefined contingency plans. Efforts to research sustainability should be 
10
Exploiting digital information on the city to estimate 
resilience: A multi-agent approach
GONZALO A. ARANDA-CORRAL, ALEJANDRO BLANCO-ESCUDERO, 
JOAQUÍN BORREGO-DÍAZ, AND MANUEL GOMAR-ACOSTA

	
Exploiting digital information on the city to estimate resilience: A ...	
227
accompanied by others, analyzing the vulnerability of the city, in order to 
understand the factors that make them more or less vulnerable to different 
types of aggression (physical, social, etc.)1. It is important to note that 
in the nature of these studies a natural disaster is not synonymous with 
extinction or irretrievable breakdown of habitat or systems of production. 
It may even be considered a development opportunity (in the phases of 
prevention, mitigation and preparedness).
	
Any project in this area should consider two goals in the medium/
long term. The first is to understand the peculiarities of the urban aspect 
studied, in order to interpret the results. The second is that these results are 
useful for rethinking urban policies [3].
10.1.1	
Urban resilience
There are four urban systems, within the vision of the city as a complex 
adaptive system [4], which provide useful information for the elements 
that influence resilience (Fig. 1 from [5]):
Figure 10.1  Multi-level approach to urban resilience according to Burby et al. [11] (Source: 
Resilience Alliance Website, Urban Resilience, February 2007)
1 http://www.ctm.su.se/index.php?group_ID=1033

228	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
l	 Production/consumption (metabolic) ecosystem (both physical 
and digital)
	
l	 Governance networks (agents in a multi-level organization)
	
l	 Urban social dynamics
	
l	 Physical (virtual) infrastructures which define a mixed (physical, 
digital) urban landscape
	
As resilience has to be treated as a holistic feature, such systems 
must be combined to evaluate both the problem and the adequacy of 
provided solutions – especially, for the aim of this chapter, the information 
infrastructure of the city. A primary resource for the analysis – and 
especially in the case of natural disasters, due to their intimate relationship 
with physical places – are the sensorial systems deployed by the city. They 
are fundamental tools for both estimating and modelling the phenomenon. 
Increasingly, these sensors – provided signal interpretation via the Geo-
Cyber Infrastructure (GCI) [6] – are considered a new kind of perception 
for citizens and institutions.
	
By considering resilience as the capacity of the system to be self-
organized, a question arises: Are we thinking about the dimensions of the 
problem and the effects of our decisions in terms of the system’s capacity 
to absorb the changes that we propose? [1, 2] Without an analysis that 
allows us to understand all the dimensions of the problem, resilience 
becomes a fuzzy concept and poorly studied. One might wonder, however, 
if cities are resilient due to the fact that their recovery process follows a 
model that is identifiable (and measurable in some way), or because we 
understand resilience is somewhat flexible and therefore do not know how 
to estimate it [7].
10.2	
Reconstruction versus resilience
Perhaps one of the best comparative studies on this topic is Reconstruction 
Following Disaster, a project focused on natural disasters, which was 
sponsored by the US National Science Foundation in the mid-1970s 
[8]. Its team of researchers proposed and tested a “model of recovery 
activity” that classified the recovery process in four distinguishable (if 
overlapping) stages (Fig. 10.1). A conclusion of that study is that we 
could say that recovery is a known process, which follows a certain 
order, and is predictable, although the rate of recovery depends on the 
nature of the disaster as well as the ability of governments and urban 

	
Exploiting digital information on the city to estimate resilience: A ...	
229
trends before a disaster [8] (Fig. 10.2). That is why it is especially 
interesting to analyze the inertia of resilience investment, as well as to 
estimate its suitability.
Figure 10.2  Model of urban recovering after a disaster 
(Source: US National Science Foundation)
	
The recovery processes of improvement and reuse for the city do 
not only depend on the repair of physical infrastructure. It is crucial to 
emphasize the resilience of social networks (real or virtual) for the 
recovery of neighbourhoods, community centres, etc. [7]. It is here where 
smart planning can help accelerate these processes.
	
The goal is to show how AI (specifically the agent-based simulation) 
can help by answering the following questions [9]:
	
l	 How can we help the region to assess its vulnerability to shocks, 
as well as its ability to respond to them?
	
l	 How effectively, in absolute and relative terms, does the region 
respond to real shocks?
	
l	 And finally, how effectively does the region recover from the 
shock and understand the behaviours and lessons?

230	
Geographic information system for smart cities
10.3	
Evaluation and validation
Information technology helps to rebuild or maintain such infrastructure 
[10]. In the case of a simulation, it needs to collect and manage the 
available urban information. The collection, processing and use of data 
to design new applications, services and urban plans (including the 
analysis of social behaviour in cities) is an emergent R&D field. The 
open data of the emerging initiatives not only provide transparency 
about the decisions of city government, but also increase the quality 
of information for the research and development of mashups and 
applications. That quality facilitates a positive evaluation of the 
solution designed.
	
A major step in addressing the problem is a critical analysis of the 
availability and quality of information. Even disposing with such analysis, 
there are major limitations in addressing urban phenomena resistance. 
Fundamentally, there are two that are true challenges:
	
l	 The fragmented nature of the urban environment (where many 
factors converge, especially in the case of disaster)
	
l	 The lack of general methodologies for experimentation/modelling 
of unexpected phenomena
	
Given these difficulties, how should the quality of the results be 
evaluated? Despite these limitations, it is necessary to find measures 
in order to mitigate urban resilience, a priori, urban disaster [11], 
and especially with technologies available in smart cities. The overall 
result of these limitations is what leads us to build simulation models 
that will address some of the aspects in a relatively independent way, 
although the final system encompasses all of them. The models’ 
measures of goodness should be based on indicators. And these 
indicators must be estimated and improved upon if possible. How 
to create this measure is once again a challenge. Very few authors 
have developed the concept of urban resilience and none to our 
knowledge have done so in the specific case of disasters. Normandin 
et al. [5] analyze four vectors (identified by the Resilience Alliance 
in 2007), which are distinct and interdependent: urban metabolism 
(creation, flow and consume of digital information), social dynamics, 
and the environment and network governance. These are compared 
with the criteria used for sustainable development, commonly called 
sustainable development indices [5].

	
Exploiting digital information on the city to estimate resilience: A ...	
231
10.4 
Artificial intelligence for resilience
The idea we want to present in this chapter is that in smart cities the 
recovery period can be accelerated using AI technologies (in this case, 
Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) and Knowledge Engineering) – particularly, 
the informational ecosystems created in cities by means of simulation–
estimation of damages. What is interesting about this estimate is that 
experimental results can assist in urban planning policies not only to 
mitigate the effects, but also to speed recovery. The steps in the recovery 
period follow a fairly defined timetable: the time required for each period 
of activity (except the last) is approximately ten times longer than in 
previous weeks [7]. Therefore, to mitigate these effects, predicting them 
by means of MAS simulation can be useful to estimate (and to improve) 
the initial stage. Thus the influence of damage reduction is expected to 
display the complete accelerated process.
10.4.1	
Agent-based models
From the technological point of view, to simulate a city as a complex 
system we use a more natural approach. In MAS each module / system 
node is considered as an agent. This benefits the system modularity and 
scalability, with different actors, behaviours and interactions between them. 
It also facilitates a higher level of programming. Modelling is proposed, 
using MAS (i.e., with agent-based models (ABMS)), to estimate urban 
resilience, postulating its usefulness in urban technological environments 
such as the smart cities. The MAS allow modelling, simulation and 
drawing conclusions from an open model:
	
l	 It is easy to extend or modify, due to its intrinsic modularity.
	
l	 Executable (in its technological platform).
	
l	 It is an evaluable model which provides results to study.
	
From the methodological point of view, MAS enables us to establish 
a methodology for the systematic study of phenomena. For example, 
through simulation, ABMS would find places that need rethinking to be 
more resilient (a problem addressed, for example, in [12]). From this 
point of view, the benefits of the ABMS approach over other modelling 
techniques are [13]:
	
l	 It is flexible.
	
l	 It captures emergent phenomena.
	
l	 It provides a natural description of a system.

232	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
Therefore, ABMS is ideally suited to provide valuable insights into 
mechanisms and preconditions.
10.5 
Urban informational ecosystem
The analysis of crises – such as Love Parade [14] or the consequences 
of the earthquake in Haiti [15] – from digital information are examples 
of how to obtain valuable information from this type of shock. In case of 
earthquakes, there are proposals for holistic disaster management to make 
appropriate decisions at an early stage [16].
	
There are two ways to view information (digital) in the case of cities. 
On one hand, it is the view of the city as a data city, i.e., a place where data 
collection became the basis of the GCI. On the other hand, there exists the 
vision of the city as an interactive system, which considers social networks 
(real and virtual) and their local interactions (between users, included in 
specific environments). In both cases, it is essential to analyze the GCI, in 
which information of a different nature is processed. The metabolic nature 
of digital information in the city, due to the spectacular penetration of 
social networks, is considered essential in today’s cities.
	
The natural evolution of the GCI in the smart cities is directed toward a 
constellation of services for collection, access, display and analysis (which 
would allow the modelling and simulation of phenomena). However, 
at present, few cities offer such an opportunity, i.e., few cities have a 
GCI advanced and flexible enough to produce that kind of knowledge. 
Therefore, we should use classic data and web services (accessibility 
variable), and data collected from the WWW. Both options provide 
information of varying quality. Clearly, these limitations do not offer a 
perfect digital image of the city, but the available information allows us 
to analyze some aspects of urban behaviour. As mentioned, the image 
has been enhanced greatly by open data initiatives in cities, which allow 
hatching of R&D initiatives around them.
	
From the point of view of smart cities, the quality of the information 
available is not laid out in such a weak manner: in pre-smart cities the 
information is available for consumption, while in the smart cities 
this is available for use and production of new data (applications, user 
communities, etc.); but in general we should not assume such faculties.
	
There exist four types of information flows that need to be considered 
in order to analyse how digital information can be considered in simulation. 

	
Exploiting digital information on the city to estimate resilience: A ...	
233
2 http://docs.oasis-open.org/emergency/cap/v1.2/CAP-v1.2-os.html
3 Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards
4 http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2012/10/30/nyregion/hurricane-sandys-
aftermath.html?hp
Information flows could be classified into four types: U2U (users to users), 
I2U (institutions to users) and I2I (institutions to institutions). They 
represent, in the case of resilience, the basis for building of resilience-
focused private–public collaborative networks. As it has been pointed 
out in [17], these kinds of communities can be reused for other related 
challenges, such as social equity and inclusion, to achieve economically 
and environmentally sustainable cities, to build a vision that is shared by 
residents and institutions – public, nonprofit, and private – and to provide 
a sense of place and finally to unite people around values and purpose.
10.5.1	
Institutions to institutions (I2I)
The flow of information between institutions (e.g. cadastral changes, 
commercial tax collection areas, etc.) is often inaccessible to researchers 
and citizens, although open data flow initiatives make this flow visible and 
accessible for its study. An interesting feature of I2I is the need to solve 
the interoperability problem: How to (in a semantically sound manner) 
integrate several and heterogeneous structured data? Semantic technology 
can be applied in this case. For example, in the specific case of emergencies, 
Common Alerting Protocol2 is an OASIS3 standard vocabulary for 
exchanging all-hazard emergency alerts and public warnings over all 
kinds of networks.
10.5.2	
Institutions to users (citizens), I2U
This source is of vital importance when it comes to understanding certain 
processes that affect the livability, dynamics and evolution of urban 
environments. It provides historical analysis of urban phenomena that 
possess documentation. Moreover, it does not need to be solely formal 
institutions; social media also provide such information. For example, The 
New York Times provided valuable information on the effects of Hurricane 
Sandy on the city’s subway system4.

234	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
This flow was intensively exploited in the first ABMS prototype.
	
I2U in Katrina (case study): In the present case, actual terrain 
information has been made public through web services. For example, 
for the system terrain height data obtained from the USGS5 service (in 
the USA) or the IDEE (Spatial Data Infrastructure of Spain) service. The 
system has a SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) client to deal with 
these web services. For data on roads, buildings and other infrastructure, 
the system queries the OpenStreetMaps6 (OSM) service, which returns 
information in XML format.
	
The main geospatial sources used were the USGS – maintained 
databases on terrain height and SRTM that can reach – as in New Orleans 
– an accuracy of 1/9” of an arch (3 meters). It offers free public access 
to cities and public spaces with OSM, and an open access system. For 
visualization, OSM or Google Maps/Earth were used for viewing on the 
scope, survival rates by area, etc.
	
Other I2U information is abundant (although not presented as 
processable data) on human and material losses [18, 19], performance 
reports about security forces and emergency [20], evacuations [21], 
demographics [22], quests [23], etc.
10.5.3	
Users to institutions (U2I)
This type of flow is growing dramatically due to the adaptation of Web 
2.0 technologies and philosophy at the Urban Informatics [24]. Crowd-
sourcing and crowd-funding are novel philosophies which originate new 
forms both to collect information as well as help with urban features and 
dynamics. Currently, U2I flow cannot be soundly exploited, although to 
withstand and recover disasters it is essential that citizens and communities 
(and institutions) work together to anticipate threats, limit their effects, 
and rapidly restore functionality after a crisis [17]. Citizen groups in 
risk-prone areas, including informal settlements, local business and other 
groups should participate in risk assessments and the findings must be 
shared with them [25].
5 US Geological Survey, http://www.usgs.gov/
6 http://www.openstreetmap.org/

	
Exploiting digital information on the city to estimate resilience: A ...	
235
10.5.4	
Users to users (citizens), U2U
I2U is essentially different, owing to the heterogeneity of sources and 
interactions. It stresses the information generated by the mass use of 
mobile (devices) phones. They enable citizens to gather, as agents of the 
MAS, digital information and often leave fingerprints (digital footprints) 
on the Web 2.0. The quality of this information may even surpass I2U. In 
fact, P2P networks are promising urban information resources in smart 
cities, and their analysis can be helpful for smart planning activities. U2U 
flow can be used to add new behaviours to citizen-agents.
10.5.5	
Information flows for urban resilience elements
From a GCI context, metabolic information flows comprise several digital 
practices (see Fig. 10.3). When it considers production/consumption of 
data, the data are from both U2I and I2U. Social dynamics have to be 
considered as U2U networks. Lastly, institutions feed the system by means 
of I2U and I2I information, hopefully open data.
Metabolic Flows
Production, supply 
and
consumption 
chains
Governance
Networks
Institutional structures 
and organisations
Built 
Environment
Ecosystem services 
in urban 
landscapes
Social  
Dyanmics
Demographics, 
human capital and 
inequity
Urban
Resilience
Figure 10.3  Role of GCI in resilience (modified from Fig. 10.1)
10.5.6	
Limitations of the current ABMS approach
The informational limits of our ABMS were established with the aim of 
evaluating the quality, accessibility and usefulness of I2U:

236	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
l	 Only I2U is considered, accessible by WWW, or from Deep Internet 
(which is accessible via query requests). In some cases, it needs some 
data repair processes, due to the poor quality of data and access.
	
l	 The MAS-based simulation allows us to estimate each type of 
information for each module: I2U is essential for flood simulation, 
while the statistical results from surveys are useful for agents-
citizens.
	
l	 It is preferable to use data from global information systems (or the 
United States); more specific data could limit the reusability.
10.6 
Multi-agent systems and digital information
The aim of ABMS models for urban simulation must be based on own 
urban information. This need can be studied from two points of view.
	
From the point of view of the engineering of the system (Fig. 10.4), I2U 
and U2I provide useful information about how to build MAS architecture 
on several levels. The analysis of urban infrastructure provides information 
on features of telecommunication in the urban space. U2U and I2U provide 
social media channels with useful information for MAS execution.
Figure 10.4  Digital feeding of the MAS
	
From the point of view of the agents’ interactions within the MAS, 
the features of urban resilience also provide useful information (Fig. 10.5). 
Metabolic flows suggest the architecture of informational dimension of MAS, 
because this analysis helps to understand how information is consumed, 

	
Exploiting digital information on the city to estimate resilience: A ...	
237
produced and/or transformed. The analysis of social dynamics provides 
information for the high-level design of (citizens) agents in the system. The 
constructed environment provides information to be used in environment 
agents, and finally, information from governance allows the establishment of 
norms for behaviours of agents (included environment agent).
	
Finally, the complex behaviour of urban systems in disasters induces 
thinking on three levels. The evacuation behaviour during emergencies 
has distinct analytical dimensions. In the event of an evacuation, we 
should take into account multiple factors, such as environment settings 
(emergency situation, terrain or buildings, etc.), evacuation policies and 
rules, etc., in addition to the social psychological and social organizational 
characteristics impacting the response of people and collectives that 
participate in the evacuation [26]. All of these will greatly condition the 
system response. To program each of these agents, we use information 
that comes from cities, as discussed above, and to extract and combine 
appropriate behaviours for each agent.
	
Building a simulation of a heterogeneous system, such as a city, 
necessarily involves the problem of “agentification”, which mainly consists 
of dividing the world into small autonomous modules, called agents, and 
each has a different functionality (or behaviour). These agents have two 
main advantages: the first is that being independent modules, they can 
be programmed in isolation without considering almost any interrelation 
to other modules. The second is that once a module agent is created, the 
system can create as many entities of the same type as needed.
Metabolic  
Flows
Production, supply 
and consumption 
chains
Governance
Networks
Institutional 
structures and 
organisations
Built 
Environment
Ecosystem 
services 
in urban 
landscapes
Social  
Dyanmics
Demographics, 
human capital 
and inequity
Urban
Resilience
Figure 10.5  MAS interpretation of resilience elements

238	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
These entities, even with the same programming, will behave 
differently to suit the conditions of their environment.
	
One of the main tasks is to identify potential agents or different actors 
who will participate. This task is particular to each problem to be addressed 
because we are unable to reproduce a completely real world – we have to 
reduce all the factors involved in our problem. Another advantage of agent-
based programming is that it is possible, without a big additional effort, to 
create new types of agents or actors and to incorporate them into the simulation. 
Thus we can build an increasingly more complete picture of the problem. In 
some cases, it may even be necessary to establish a hierarchy of those agents 
to adequately solve the problem. This, within cities, can be stated as the levels 
of different organizations and the management of the city itself.
10.7	
A case study: Hurricane Katrina
A case study was chosen to simulate the disaster caused by Hurricane 
Katrina in 2005 in New Orleans. This was mainly motivated by two 
reasons. First, it was one of the most destructive hurricanes ever 
suffered by the United States and the extension of the damage supports 
a macroscopic analysis. Secondly, there is a great source of web data and 
services available because it took place in a developed country.
	
The developed MAS run a simulation of urban dynamics to estimate 
the behaviour of a city (including people) during a phenomenon that alters 
their dynamics, especially those that affect their resilience. The simulation 
extracts information from the GCI at various levels (Fig. 10.4) to simulate 
the complex system (city), and its performance will be limited by the 
quantity and quality of available information.
	
The I2U information available is rich in this case: information on 
human and material losses in the actions of security forces and emergency 
evacuations, demographic surveys, etc. [27]. This information is accessed 
and downloaded, processed and finally stored in a database for later and 
better use by simulation.
	
In our case, identified agents are, at first, four agents: the creator, 
the water, the city (environment) and citizens, and a complex behaviour 
(composition of simpler behaviours) for each of them. In Fig. 10.6 the 
main actors (arrowed) are depicted, as well as the behaviours (elliptical) 
associated with each of them. There are some extra agents, but these are 
only technical requirements and do not have significance.

	
Exploiting digital information on the city to estimate resilience: A ...	
239
	
From the point of view of functionality, the creator agent starts the 
simulation, adequately creating and configuring other agents. Once it has 
started, other agents act and interact with a no preset-type hierarchy.
Figure 10.6  MAS architecture
10.7.1	
The creator agent
As previously seen, the creator agent starts the simulation and is responsible 
for setting all parameters, loading the required data from the server – such 
as a simulated area, terrain, etc. – and creating other agents with specific 
behavioural instructions.
	
It is also responsible for finding information about any important 
aspect of simulation. As an example, the first time you try to simulate 
a city (or any complex system), it is responsible for connecting to GIS 
utilities and downloading and storing (in order to be able to repeat the 
simulation faster) the terrain with the map of elevation.
	
Once all the data are collected and the agents are created, it launches 
the order to start the simulation and is no longer involved.
10.7.2	
The environment agent
This is responsible for building the physical environment of the simulation, 
creating an altitude map of the terrain, with conversion WSG84 or UTM 

240	
Geographic information system for smart cities
coordinates, as well as then placing streets and buildings on the field. 
The information flow for construction of the entire environment or city is 
fundamentally I2U type.
	
Once the environment is built, it is discretized; this refers to land into 
individual units (as cells) that are small portions of land which behave 
together. If the target is very large for the simulation, in order to improve 
its performance one can create multiple instances of this environment 
agent, each one handling a specific sub-region and interacting with each 
other for proper simulation of the entire area.
	
The chosen area for simulation is shown in Fig. 10.7. The flood effect 
suggests, however, dividing it into three sub-regions (Fig. 10.8).
Figure 10.7  Simulation area (Source: Google Maps/Earth, 2010)
	
In the case of this agent, we have simplified geometry of the buildings, 
with no information from it, and we have assumed a rectangular base 
and one not permeable to water, which we know is not realistic, but it is 
impossible to access all the information particularized for each building, 
and also the result of the simulation is sufficiently adherent to reality. 

	
Exploiting digital information on the city to estimate resilience: A ...	
241
Figure 10.8  Division of the disaster area into three regions (Source: Bring New Orleans Back 
Infrastructure Committee – Levees and Flood Protection sub-committee, John E. Koerner III, 
Chairman, January 18, 2006)
10.7.3	
The water agent
For simulation of water, we should consider separating it from the 
environment. In this way, we can consider it moving independently and 
avoid excessive complication with the environment’s agents.
	
This agent behaviour is mainly reactive and obeys simple physical 
laws. Water will move towards the portions of land which have a lesser 
amount of water or depth and its speed will be proportional to the 
difference of these quantities. The complexity of this agent is not found 
in the implementation of behaviour, but in the number of cells that must 
‘move’ together to get the realistic effect of flooding.
	
Therefore, it is essential data provided by GIS systems (Fig. 10.9) 
that give us a map of relative heights, through which the water will 
circulate. Nevertheless, we have not considered the data about urban 
terrain absorption, and we considered it as being very low, and in practice 
a saturated terrain [28].
	
Specifically in urban areas, other elements affect the morphology of 
water: the river and the topology of buildings and streets. First the water’s 
initial state is considered, but important data, such as volume and the depth 
of the river, are not available on the WWW.

242	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Figure 10.9  Relative depth of flooding (Source: US Geological Survey, 2005)
10.7.4	
The citizen agent
There are a lot of studies on the behaviour of people in a crisis [29], which 
represent valuable information for design of citizen agents. We can also 
extract patterns of behaviour from surveys to survivors [28] and also refine 
and assess how to prevent risky situations, and even try to predict the 
damage associated with each survival strategy. The information collected 
on the worst moments of flood in affected areas and places with the highest 
concentration of people help us to design agent groups. In a multi-agent 
stage, we collect information on common escape routes [29] and group 
behaviour in panic situations [30].
	
For our simulation, we have decided that agents represent groups of 
people rather than individuals, due to the fact that on one hand, it is a 

	
Exploiting digital information on the city to estimate resilience: A ...	
243
lighter computation due to not involving millions of agents at a time. On 
the other hand, based on the data, we chose citizens that agents would 
move in groups of 4–5 people, very close to family size.
	
This agent is a module that could integrate more different behaviours; 
as a city we can find many patterns of individuals and might try to reflect 
a greater number of them. In any case, these agents make decisions at a 
microscopic level and we can see how they affect the macro level; in other 
words, the global behaviours emerging from individual decisions.
	
An important aspect that was not considered is the role of automobiles 
in the simulation. Dependence on automobiles is a key dimension to a 
number of resilient factors [31]. Nevertheless, in the case of flooding in 
the urban centre of New Orleans, it is not that relevant unless it poses an 
obstacle for citizens in the streets. Although we have implemented some 
experiments, technological infrastructure for communications was not 
considered in the main experiments. On the one hand, flooding in city 
centres is a merely near-physical threat whose impact on the behaviour 
of citizens is not influenced by conscious mobile phone communications. 
In general, the impact on the GCI in cities with some types of disasters 
translates to substantial damages [32].
10.8	
Results
A number of executions of our system were carried out. We do not need 
to change parameters because our system is, almost, non-deterministic. 
Results of the simulation can be collected and, therefore, can be used 
by analytical tools in order to extract consequences on the current urban 
situation with respect to resilience.
	
To visualize results, we selected 100 officers to be representative 
of the whole population. Agents are distributed in proportion to the 
population density, and have different attributes – speed, distance 
vision, etc… increasing the diversity of situations that the citizens may 
confront. Being a densely populated area, and with so many streets 
that were obstructed by flooding, evacuation is carried out slowly. In 
experiments there comes a point where the simulation stops, but there 
are still refugees who have not been evacuated. In the experiments 
large number of deaths was found in some areas, reflecting the fact that 
such zones were practically surrounded by other newly flooded zones, 
making it difficult to evacuate. The results were confronted with other 

244	
Geographic information system for smart cities
approaches (Fig. 10.11). A video7 shows a snapshot of a MAS simulation 
in the city of New Orleans (Figs. 10.10 and 10.11).
Figure 10.10  Visualizing results (Source: Left figure from Wikipedia) 
Source: Owned. (from Wikipedia(left))
10.8.1	
Visualizing results
As mentioned, the visualization module uses OSM or services like Google 
Maps/Earth. These tools also allow one to view results on the scope, 
survival rates by area, etc. 
	
The images and video produced by the system show the dynamics 
of flooding in diverse places. Water dynamics from levee breaks, which 
move the terrain, are also presented. Likewise, movements of citizen 
agents are also captured in the visualization module. Few comparisons of 
results with real data [19] are considered. It is important to note that there 
is not a complete and detailed report (for digitally exploitation) about all 
the damages produced in the city. Results obtained by the system only 
provide insights into the dynamics and effects of the flooding on the city 
and their citizens. Due to the modular character of MAS, every new piece 
of information can be adapted and incorporated in a proper way into the 
MAS architecture, in order to obtain a more faithful simulation.
7 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pTKhrpl9jZc

	
Exploiting digital information on the city to estimate resilience: A ...	
245
Figure 10.11  Monitoring citizen agents
10.9 
Closing remarks
This work was carried out as part of the project eCompleXcity8. One of 
its aims is to study the city as a complex system and how it can be shaped 
from data available on the Internet.
	
Of course Tsunami, earthquake and terrorist attacks cannot be 
predicted by known scientific methods. It is possible to design safer smart 
cities that can withstand such calamities based on the simulation for 
hypothetical intensity of most probable calamities in the city by adapting 
the methodology describe in this chapter. In the particular case of flooding, 
GIS systems provide valuable information to perform sound simulations. 
From their results, we are able to provide insights about vulnerable places 
and/or evacuation policies.
8 http://www.ecomplexcity.org

246	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
The introduced system in this chapter can be considered as a tool to 
advice in resilience to urban planners. Categorization of territories and 
areas according to few potential calamities in two facets are the physical 
(the categorization of the territory) and the human (the social impact of 
the planning, viewed from the point of view of evacuation and security 
strategies).
	
The use of ABMS applications for simulation of catastrophes in order 
to estimate resilience is an interesting approach to risk prevention. For this 
work, we use the cities’ “Geo-Cyber Infrastructure” [6] for simulation of 
their phenomena. The simulation is fed by digital information extracted 
from the Internet and the consequences deduced from experimentation. 
Therefore, an exhaustive analysis and documentation of all available 
digital information over the Internet about cities is indispensable before 
addressing any urban cloud-computing application. In our case study 
(pre-smart cities), there are obvious limitations to its GCI due to the 
inaccuracy of the information in cities with a weak GCI, as well as the 
fact that the information needed and used in the simulation could be 
difficult to obtain.
	
We have described how GCI is used to simulate phenomena simulation 
on cities; we have presented a proposal to reinforce the resilience of smart 
cities by means of analysis and application of distributed AI methods 
for modelling/simulating disasters. In the same way, the proposed MAS 
(Fig. 10.5) respond to the structure of described resilience in Fig. 10.2.
	
GCI evolution to transparent advanced systems, using cloud 
computing, will cause the MAS, as proposed here, to be closer to modelled 
phenomenon, which will provide results of higher quality. This, at the 
same time, leads to better prevention, accelerating the recovery phase (see 
Figure 10.12, left.).
	
The project was designed and built for two goals. The first was to 
interpret its results in the urban context. Secondly, these results will be 
useful for rethinking urban policies (similar to [33] but in a simulated 
environment). As it has been pointed in [2], adaptation and transformation 
are two complementary strategies for intervention: resilient systems can 
be good or bad depending on the circumstances, objectives and values of 
the operators in the system. This leads us to a key question: Should we 
focus on the impact of our actions, rather than framing the urban condition 
as a problem? [2]

	
Exploiting digital information on the city to estimate resilience: A ...	
247
10.10 
References
[1] MacKenzie, A. Cities as Self-Organizing Systems. Urban Times http://
urbantimes.co/2012/11/cities-as-self-organizing-systems/ 
[Accessed 
on 
November 21, 2012].
[2] Walker, B. and Salt, D. (2012). Resilience Practice: Building Capacity to 
Absorb Disturbance and Maintain Function, Island Press.
[3] Vaccari, A., Liu, L., Biderman, A., Pereira, F.C., Oliveirinha, J., Gerber, 
A., and Ratti, C. (2009). A holistic framework for the study of urban traces and the 
profiling of urban processes and dynamics. Proceedings of the 12th International 
IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC2009), IEEE Press, 
pp. 273–278.
[4] CSIRO, Australia; Arizona State University, USA; Stockholm University, 
Sweden: A Research Prospectus for Urban Resilience. http://www.resalliance.
org/index.php/urban_resilience
[5] Normandin, J. M., Therrien, M. C., and Tanguay, G. A. (2009). City 
Strength in Time of Turbulence: Strategic Resilience Indicators, Proc. Joint 
Conference on City Futures, Madrid, 4-6 June, 2009. http://www.cityfutures2009.
com/PDF/43_Therrien_Marie_Christine.pdf
[6] Yang, C., Raskin R., Goodchild, M., and Gahegan, M. (2010). Geospatial 
Cyber Infrastructure: Past, Present and Future. Computers, Environment and 
Urban Systems, 34, pp. 264–277.
[7] Vale, L. J. and Campanella, T. J. (eds.) (2005). The Resilient City: How 
Modern Cities Recover from Disaster. Oxford University Press.
[8] Eugene Haas, J. et al. (eds.) (1977). Reconstruction Following Disaster. 
MIT Press.
[9] Hague, C. (2011). Como hacer que las ciudades y regiones 
sean mas resilientes. Observatorio de la sostenibilidad en Espan˜a. 
http://www.sostenibilidad-es.org/es/printpdf/4377
[10] Millett, L. I., and Estrin, D. L. (eds.) (2012). Computing Research for 
Sustainability. National Academic Press.
[11] Burby, R. J. et al. (1999). Unleashing the power of planning to create 
disaster-resistant communities, Journal of the American Planning Association, 
65(3), pp. 247–258.
[12] Dias, L. (2011). Evaluation of resilience through urban policies in a 
context of climate change and extreme precipitation. Proceedings of the Resilient 
Cities 2011 Congress http://resilient-cities.iclei.org/resilient-cities-hub-site/
congress-publications/on-line-proceedings-2012/
[13] Bonabeau, E. (2002). Agent-based modeling: Methods and techniques 
for simulating human systems, PNAS 2002, 99(Suppl 3), pp. 7280–7287.

248	
Geographic information system for smart cities
[14] Helbing, D. and Mukerji, P. (2012). Crowd Disasters as Systemic Failures: 
Analysis of the Love Parade Disaster, EPJ Data Science 1(7). doi:10.1140/ep jds7
[15] Lua, X., Bengtssona, L., and Holmea, P. (2012). Predictability of 
population displacement after the 2010 Haiti earthquake, Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 2012 online first18-22 http://www.pnas.org/
content/early/2012/06/11/1203882109
[16] Carreño, M. L., Cardona, O.D. and Barbat, A. H. (2012). New 
methodology for urban seismic risk assessment from a holistic perspective, Bull. 
Earthquake Eng. 10, pp. 547–565.
[17] Committee on Private-Public Sector Collaboration to Enhance 
Community Disaster Resilience, Geographical Science Committee, National 
Research Council, Building Community Disaster Resilience through Private-
Public Collaboration, The National Academies Press, 2011 http://www.nap.edu/
openbook.php?record_id=13028
[18] Knabb, R., Rhome, J., and Brown, D. (2005). Tropical cyclone report: 
Hurricane Katrina. Tech. Rep., National Hurricane Center.
[19] Gabe, T., Falk, G., McCarty, M., and Mason, V. (2005). Hurricane 
Katrina: Social-demographic characteristics of impacted areas. Tech. rep., U.S. 
Congress.
[20] DeLozier, E. (2006). Hurricane Katrina timeline. The Brookings 
Institution, 
www.brookings.edu/fp/projects/homeland/katrinatimeline.pdf 
(February, 2011)
[21] Groen, J., and Polivka, A. (2008). Hurricane Katrina evacuees: Who 
they are, where they are, and how they are faring. Monthly Labor Review, 131, 
pp. 32–51.
[22] McCarthy, K., Peterson, D., Sastry, N., and Pollard, M. (2006). The 
repopulation of New Orleans after hurricane Katrina. Tech. rep., Rand Gulf States 
Policy Institute.
[23] The Washington Post, Kaiser Family Foundation and Harvard University 
(2005). Survey of hurricane Katrina evacuees.
[24] Foth, M. (ed.) (2009). Handbook of Research on Urban Informatics: The 
Practice and Promise of the Real-Time City. Information Science Reference, IGI 
Global, Hershey, Pa.
[25] P. Bittner (ed.). How to Make Cities More Resilient: A Handbook for 
Local Government Leaders, UNISDR, ONU http://www.unisdr.org/campaign/
resilientcities/toolkit/handbook
[26] Ren, C., Yang, C. and Jin, S. (2009). Agent-Based Modeling and 
Simulation on Emergency Evacuation, Complex Sciences Lecture Notes of the 
Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications 
Engineering, 5, pp. 1451–146. Springer-Verlag.

	
Exploiting digital information on the city to estimate resilience: A ...	
249
[27] Aranda-Corral, G.A., Blanco-Escudero, A., Borrego-D´ıaz, J., and 
Gomar-Acosta, M. (2011). Data-in-the-cloud City. Proc. 7th Virtual Cities and 
Territories. Lisboa.
[28] Correia, F., Fordham, M., Saraiva, M., and Bernardo, F. (1998). Flood 
hazard assessment and management: Interface with the public. Water Resources 
Management, 12, pp. 209–227.
[29] Lämmel, G., and Nagel, K. (2009). Multi-agent based large-scale 
evacuation simulation, Paper 09-2135, Transportation Research Board Annual 
Meeting, Washington, D.C.
[30] Chu, J., Li, J., Xu, M., and Zhao, L. (2005). Simulating escape panic 
based on the mechanism of asymmetric information distribution. Complex 
Systems Summer School Final Project Papers.
[31] Parapari, D. M. (2010). Automobile Dependency Improving Urban 
Resilience Through Urban Planning and Design. Master Thesis, Department 
of Urban Planning and Environment, Stockholm, Sweden, 2010 http://www.
academia.edu/254753/Automobile_Dependency_Improving_urban_resilience_
through_urban_planning_and_design
[32] Mitchell, W. J., and Townsend, A. M. Cyborg Agonistes: Disaster and 
Reconstruction in the Digital Electronic Era. Chapter 14 in [31].
[33] Vaccari, A., Liu, L., Biderman, A., Pereira, F.C., Oliveirinha, J., Gerber, 
A., and Ratti, C. (2009). A holistic framework for the study of urban traces and 
the profiling of urban processes and dynamics. Proc. 12th Int. IEEE Conf. on 
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC 2009), IEEE Press, pp. 273–278.
[34] Aranda-Corral, G. A., Blanco-Escudero, A., Borrego-Díaz, J., and 
Gomar-Acosta, M. (2011). Modeling Urban Dynamics as Complex Systems. 
Proc. European Conf. on Complex Systems 2011, p. 61.

Abstract: Even though there has been an increased focus on urban development policies in 
recent years, the concept of a “smart city” is still in search of a rigorous definition.
	
Hollands [1] stresses on the fact that despite the frequency of city smartness labeling, a 
definition of what this means is missing. Notions such as “digital city,” “intelligent city,” “high-
tech districts and neighborhoods,” “complex town,” etc., all fail to communicate what a “smart 
city” is or should be, and they turn out to be nothing much more than readily used variations 
generated by replacing the word “smart” with other adjectives. This shallow use of the term 
and the consequent lack of a critical grasp of it has relevant implications, both biopolitically 
and in other ways.
	
This chapter proposes an integrated conceptual framework based on the principles of 
biourbanism in order to assess the ambiguity which is currently found in literature and in the 
spread of this concept. It aims to guide future “smart city” studies so they can be inclusive of 
a sound awareness about biopolitical issues, as these represent the substance of the huge 
interface-based transformation of our urban environment.
	
Such a framework proposes an epistemological background to the term, which suggests 
directions and agendas for smart city research and outlines practical, human-centered 
implications for citizens, governments, and professionals. 
Key words: biourbanism, smart city, wise city, homological city, diaphorological city, 
interface, ICT, neo-functionalism, subsumption, peer-to-peer urbanism, scales, biopolitics, 
human-centered design, neuroergonomics.
“It is through smartness rather than through strength that the wood-cutter shows his worth. 
It is through smartness that the helmsman guides the speeding vessel over the wine-dark 
sea despite the wind. It is through smartness that the charioteer triumphs over his rival”
Homer, Iliad, XXIII (8th century BC)
11.1	
Smart city initiatives – technology, economy, 
classes
The concept of a smart city is quite fluid and lacks a commonly accepted, 
unique meaning. It’s still a pretty fuzzy label, and sometimes is not used in 
an consistent way. Whilst the list of self-claiming “smart” neighborhoods 
11
Biourbanism as a new framework for 
smart cities studies
ANTONIO CAPERNA and STEFANO SERAFINI

	
Biourbanism as a new framework for smart cities studies	
251
and cities is long, so is the amount of discussion of this topic which has 
emerged in recent years [1–6]. 
	
Almost every scholar refers to a smart city as some kind of positive 
new urban economic development based on ICT (information and 
communication technology) innovation. This implies the use of analogous 
terms such as telecommunication [7], informational [8], digital [9], or 
intelligent city [10]. Computer and city intertwinement is therefore the 
first point acknowledged by almost everybody in defining smartness. 
According to Toppeta [11], smartness means a combination of ICT and 
Web 2.0 technology along with other organizational design and planning 
efforts in order to dematerialize and speed up bureaucratic processes, 
help identify innovative solutions to city management complexity, and 
improve sustainability and livability. Hall [12] defines a smart city as one 
which is able to monitor and integrate the conditions of all of its physical 
infrastructures in order to optimize its resources, plan its preventive 
maintenance activities, and control security aspects while maximizing the 
services to its citizens.
	
Indeed, there are several examples that show the primary role played 
by ICT, both in terms of a new form of technological utopia and of the IT 
biz’s paradise – for instance, San Diego, which was imagined as a “City of 
the Future”; Singapore’s IT2000 plan, designed to create an IT “intelligent 
island” [13]; and Bangalore, where the Indian government planned India’s 
own Silicon Valley [14].
	
The economy is apparently the other big cue to a smart city. The 
creation of an environment for economic development is commonly 
seen as an essential smart factor [15]. The smart cities formula has in 
fact been adopted since the early 2000s by a number of primary ICT 
companies, such as Siemens (2004) [16], Cisco (2005) [17], and IBM 
(2010) [18], who envisioned a huge opportunity in the application of 
complex information systems to urban infrastructure and services such as 
buildings, transportation, electrical and water distribution, public safety, 
and the connection of cities to the buzzing global market through IT hubs 
and nodes devoted to financial transactions, e-trade, and strategic data 
processing. 
	
IBM’s Smarter Cities work began in late 2008 as part of the Smarter 
Planet initiative [18, 19]. Smarter Planet is a corporate initiative that seeks 
to highlight how forward-thinking leaders in business, government, and 
civil society around the world are capturing the potential of smarter systems 

252	
Geographic information system for smart cities
in order to achieve economic growth, near-term efficiency, sustainable 
development, and societal progress. Therefore IBM launched the “Decade 
of Smart,” consisting of dozens of initiatives in which leaders created 
smarter systems to solve the planet’s most pressing problems. In 2011, 
IBM announced a Smarter Computing Framework to support Smarter 
Planet. In the same fashion, Oracle has created Solutions for Smart Cities, 
such as government service, integrated multichannel services, and the 
modernization of the IT infrastructure.
	
The most exhaustive smart city vision is probably the one given by 
the Centre of Regional Science’s Research Group at Vienna University of 
Technology. It established that a smart city shall be identified and ranked 
along six main “smart” axes or dimensions: (i) economy, (ii) mobility, 
(iii) environment, (iv) people, (v) living, and (vi) governance. Such axes 
are based on theories of regional competitiveness, transport and ICT 
economics, natural resources, human and social capital, quality of life, 
and the participation of citizens in town governance, respectively [20].
	
According to the above approach, Caragliu et al. [5] consider 
a city to be smart “when investments in human and social capital and 
traditional (transport) and modern (ICT) communication infrastructure 
fuel sustainable economic growth and a high quality of life, with a wise 
management of natural resources, through participatory governance.”
Smart technology and smart services call for “smart” people who are 
supposed to be able to manage sophisticated devices and ask for products 
and services that in turn feed the ICT business in terms of urban life quality 
and administrative procedures.
	
If post-WWII Fordism generated a large middle class through 
industrial employment, which encouraged consumption, which in turn fed 
economic growth, post-modern economic value lies in knowledge instead 
as its geography corresponds to high-value job regions and cities, and 
its social core is the technocratic college-educated professionals, the so-
called creative class [21–23]. This high cultured and intellectual swarm 
demands a better quality of life, mainly meant as continuous technological 
“innovation.” For example, when dealing with environmental protection 
or crime prevention, proposed solutions are mostly related to new 
technologies and materials, data processing, etc.
	
As a result, there is an emphasis on business-led urban development [1], 
pushing many local governments to stipulate agreements with international 
firms. In fact, they support the idea of smart cities as neo-liberal, business-

	
Biourbanism as a new framework for smart cities studies	
253
friendly urban spaces, which are keen to attract investments and money, 
particularly from ICT firms; and they just secondarily also focus on such 
salable issues as crime prevention, environment protection, and even 
biophilia.1
	
The European Union (EU), the Organization for Economic Cooperation 
and Development (OECD), and Eurostat [24] are working for a wired ICT-
driven form of development. The EU in particular has devoted constant 
efforts to devising a strategy for achieving smart urban growth. 
	
Smart Cities and European Innovation Partnerships [25] promote the 
improvement by ICT, services in energy production, distribution and use, 
mobility and transport, and a cut in pollution and resources consumption. 
Such partnerships focus on industry-led innovation as a key to achieving 
economic and social change in urban areas, and they promote actions 
across innovation in different areas.
	
Therefore we can say that, according to the majority view, smartness 
has to do with the combination of the following:
	
(i)	 The rise of ICT and related infrastructure, including network, 
business, leisure, and lifestyle services (e.g., portable devices, 
Internet, and non-local services) [1, 5, 10];
	
(ii)	 Economical and financial globalization of the markets as a process 
based on trade and transactions, capital and investment movements, 
migration and movement of people, and the dissemination of 
(technical) knowledge [26];
	 (iii)	 Human capital, particularly referred to the so-called creative 
class, stemmed by digital native generations that have irreversibly 
transformed some traditional aspects of society organization and 
the work market economy;
	 (iv)	 Urban policies, often devoted to support and stipulate agreement 
with international firms in order to instantiate the idea of smart 
cities as a capital-friendly urban space.
	
In summary, most definitions of a smart city refer to how information 
and communications technologies might improve the performance of 
cities, in terms of both economical global competitiveness and enhancing 
efficiency so as to improve business, quality of life, and the environment, 
1 See for example Terrapin Bright Green, The Economics of Biophilia. Why 
Designing with Nature in Mind Makes Financial Sense, Terrapin Bright Green 
LLC, New York/Washington, 2012

254	
Geographic information system for smart cities
according to an evolution of earlier urban functionalism. As this latter, 
“smart functionalism” is strictly connected to capitalism in its financial, 
global, and electronic post-industrial version, and its social reference 
corresponds to the new bourgeoisie, i.e. the “creative class” (actually 
30% of the working class in the United States), strongly characterized by 
continuously updated ICT-oriented knowledge/needs, mobility, and non-
locality.
Table 11.1  Smart city’s definitions
Definitions
A city that monitors and integrates conditions of all of its critical infrastructures, including 
roads, bridges, tunnels, rails, subways, airports, seaports, communications, water, power, 
even major buildings, can better optimize its resources, plan its preventive maintenance 
activities, and monitor security aspects while maximizing services to its citizens. [12]
City is smart “when investments in human and social capital and traditional (transport) 
and modern (ICT) communication infrastructure fuel sustainable economic growth and 
a high quality of life, with a wise management of natural resources, through participatory 
governance”. [5]
An instrumented, interconnected, and intelligent city. Instrumentation enables the 
capture and integration of live real world data through the use of sensors, kiosks, meters, 
personal devices, appliances, cameras, smart phones, implanted medical devices, the 
web, and other similar data-acquisition systems, including social networks as networks 
of human sensors. Interconnected means the integration of those data into an enterprise 
computing platform and the communication of such information among the various city 
services. Intelligent refers to the inclusion of complex analytics, modelling, optimization, 
and visualization in the operational business processes to make better operational 
decisions. [97]
The use of smart computing technologies to make the critical infrastructure components 
and services of a city which include city administration, education, healthcare, public safety, 
real estate, transportation, and utilities, more intelligent, interconnected, and efficient. [98]
	
It’s easy to remark that the above-presented definitions and discussions 
(Table 11.1) always refer indirectly to a city as simply an effect and tool 
of the Capital. In other words, most of the definitions one can find in 
the literature imply a neo-liberal economical frame and refer to smart 
cities – so to speak – as “urban representation” of such a frame, a kind 
of functional machine aimed at nourishing the financial economy. This 
latter idea actually represents the unspoken focus of the matter. We all 

	
Biourbanism as a new framework for smart cities studies	
255
know that global finance has substituted the old industrial economy with 
an environment of information and transnational credit flows. Few of us, 
however, reflect on how this generates spatial consequences and how, in 
the last two decades, it has transformed many cities around the world into 
strategic nodes of such flows [27, 28].
	
Every definition so far fails to consider what a smart city should be 
like from a human-centered point of view – which is a worrisome thing 
when we’re talking about the daily environment of almost half of the 
population on Earth. This endorsement of urban neo-functionalism turns 
in accordance with an increasing socio-economic polarization, and this 
can be seen as the social face of the smart cities phenomenon. 
	
The idea of a neo-liberal urban space that puts a massive weight on 
economic value faces obvious problems. Firstly, the globalized business 
model is based on capital mobility, and it “often ‘writes its own deals’ to 
come to town, only to move on when it receives a better deal elsewhere” 
[1]. Secondly, it triggers gentrification and social polarization – phenomena 
that, for example, induced a strong transformation in the UK cities. The 
conversion of Leeds into a services-based city from a manufacturing 
one has resulted in a substantial growth of economic inequality, social 
exclusion, and differences in housing, neighborhood, city spaces, and 
entertainment provision [29]. 
	
More directly, Graham and Marvin [7] denounce the spread of ICT due 
to it causing “splintering urbanism,” i.e. the socio-economical fragmentation 
and polarization of entire urban regions. A host of examples is provided by 
Graham [14] – information technology services targeting “high end” wealthy 
customers, the creation of fortified high-tech enclaves in places like Sao 
Paulo, Kuala Lumpur, Bangalore, Singapore, and the development of smart 
house-workers in gentrified urban neighborhoods such as San Francisco. 
There is also the obvious digital divide, both in knowledge and access to 
services, and in needs’ settlement – a phenomenon which is much stronger in 
developing countries, where a few cutting-edge ITC installations face a huge 
and diffuse lack of basic infrastructure such as housing, roads, or sewers.
11.2	
What do we mean when we say “smart city”?
The (un)acknowledged acceptance of capitalism and functionalism as the 
undisputed roots from which cities of tomorrow will stem and be organized 
is the reason why the abundant and exponentially growing literature is 

256	
Geographic information system for smart cities
missing a rigorous definition of the expression “smart city” in our opinion, 
despite efforts made in such a direction by several authors.
	
From a semantic point of view, this substantial uncertainty about 
what “smart city” means is probably due to the intrinsic ambiguity of the 
very expression, as it refers to two different concepts, both of which have 
different meanings and a complex relationship with each other.
	
“City” is in the first instance about its human content, which is 
synonymous for “urban community.” In ancient Roman and Greek 
cultures, the words for city, civitas and polis, gave birth to the concepts of 
civilization and politics as instantiating the real essence of human being. 
According to the ancestors of modern Europeans, one could achieve his 
own human status only by acting and sharing in a society of peers [30].
	
But “city” is also the external “container” of such a community, 
the set of its physical shelters and buildings, the communication and 
economic infrastructures, the tools that come from – and make possible – 
people’s shared life (and this included slaves and strangers, plus women 
and children, considered to be not citizens, i.e. not really human, before 
the late vulgar era). In ancient Greek, this has been expressed with the 
word oikos, meaning house in a wide sense, which comprises sustaining 
activities – hence the words “economy” and “ecology.” 
	
As Liverani [31] puts it, it has taken a systemic complex of technological 
innovations to make possible the dawn of the cities age 6000 years ago in 
Mesopotamia – in fact, essentially a technological jump in dominating 
nature through agronomy and accumulation. Techne – industry, ability, 
instrument (hence our word “technology”) – is strictly connected to cities 
since the beginning. 
	
On the other hand, “smart” stands for a special form of tricky 
intelligence – something working well toward reaching a goal, but 
irrespective of the nature of such a goal and whether it is good or evil. 
	
Again, by looking at the root of Western civilization we find a special 
term for it – the ancient Greek word metis, meaning the main skill of 
helmsmen, charioteers, carpenters, and generally every artisan involved 
in an effort of constant and alive attention in order to achieve a goal by 
“going straight” to it through difficult constraints and influences which 
could deviate the agent’s run [32]. The dignity and essence of metis stands 
in the fact that it goes for a goal (telos, in ancient Greek). In particular, 
it gets triggered in situations of complexity or chaos, and this makes it a 
good translation for the term “smart” as applied to cities nowadays.

	
Biourbanism as a new framework for smart cities studies	
257
	
These resulting four elements – oikos, techne, metis, telos – are 
obviously related. City as infrastructure is technology. Technology is 
applied intelligence, which in turn stands for human value and content – if 
it addresses a human goal.
	
Moser [33], according to Weizenbaum, argues that smart technology 
originally referred to the study of artificial intelligence and man’s desire to 
“create a machine on the model of man, a robot that is to have its childhood, 
to learn language as a child does, to gain its knowledge of the world by 
sensing the world through its own organs, and ultimately to contemplate 
the whole domain of human thought” [34, p. 203].
	
Moser assumes that the rise of commercial application of intelligent-
acting products and services has shifted from tools imitating human 
intelligence toward pragmatic implementations of technology without 
intellectual pursuits [33]. Smartness loses its human drive and becomes an 
end in itself, like every market’s technological commodity.
	
“Smart city” is therefore an ambiguous expression, because it does not 
utter clearly whether it refers to community or infrastructures, nor states 
the purpose of its smartness, which turns mostly like a neutral quality of its 
technological equipment. It doesn’t state it, because it has in fact lost the 
goal that is organic to the real nature of the urban body. 
	
In this chapter we instead advocate a shift from “smart” to “wise” 
city, i.e. a city avowedly aimed at achieving human purposes, dignity, and 
meaningfulness, through (or despite) a “smart” use of technology. We 
would also consider the city in its wholeness, inclusive of both community 
and infrastructure – that is, we will use the biourbanism concept of 
urban organism as a hyper-complex system of interconnected, physical, 
geometrical, and intentional fields and forces [35]. This means that we 
do not consider technology, like every infrastructure and each city shape, 
to be neutral. Also, we do not consider smartness itself an innocent mere 
addition to city – while the media and so many scholars do.
	
Smartness is not only to be identified with a “neutral” infrastructure. 
This misconception would bring – and in fact does bring – into view an 
uncritical acceptance of human beings as being necessarily subsumed by 
Capital, and accordingly considers the city as a heteronomous technocratic 
apparatus – i.e. nothing more than a steady evolution of the old “functional 
city” dating back to 19th century.
	
Just like Haussmann’s redesign of Paris, where the boulevards and the 
large avenues resulted in a method of controlling the city with a fast deployment 

258	
Geographic information system for smart cities
of the army [36], and wireless cameras and smart phones deploy a substantial 
control function over crime and population today. The city of industries and 
commerce, together with its social and aesthetic ugliness, pointed out by 
Friedrich Engels as an expression of social-breaking capitalism in 1844 [37], 
changes its dress and external features by entering the era of e-business and 
the society of spectacle, but it stays essentially the same.
	
Such a top–down planned city turns out to be purpose-less in itself 
because its order stems from an external power (the Capital, ultimately). 
It is that power which decides the city’s tasks and replaces the community 
identity and self-reference with heteronomy, i.e. a function “for” something 
else. ICT just updates functionalism, firstly instantiated in industrial cities, 
and helps bring globalism to the fore. Whether mechanism, factory, market 
hub, or computer terminal, the city becomes dipped and absorbed into the 
mega-machine of non-local capitalism and loses its natural, original drive 
to forge real human connections [38].
	
It is important to stress that as an application of ICT, smartness first of 
all implies the dematerialization of the city. Thanks to ICT, administration, 
services, and consumerism occur more and more in a digital way – the city 
goes virtual, and its physical body tends to fade to a non-spatial interface. 
City experiences and city places come to be substituted by virtual 
interactions. Let’s just think about television and the Internet replacing 
community meetings in squares or theatres; a virtual social network taking 
the place of clubs; e-commerce and home delivery and their negative 
impact on local shops and urban freight [39] with the consequent drop of 
the quality of city experience. After the industrial invasion of cars, 21st 
century cities began to be invaded by fluxes of data – with non-locality 
chasing citizens away from the streets. 
11.3	
A critical analysis
Generally speaking, the transformation of a city into an interface results 
from the same urban trend outlined by Engels – social disconnection, 
and this is also true in a physical sense. If 19th and 20th centuries urban 
plans broke geometrical spaces in order to hinder social connections, 21st 
century cities go further and erases the space itself by substituting it with 
virtual reality. Therefore, a “smart city” turns out to be just a step ahead 
of building an autocratic device which subsumes the urban community 
– civitas – to the Capital through a technological deployment – techne. 

	
Biourbanism as a new framework for smart cities studies	
259
This technological deployment operates a top–down process of control 
and occupation over space, and therefore over bodies and imagery. It 
substitutes places with non-places [40], space with hyper-space [41], 
and connections and scales with information flows and mere degrees of 
interface – city with anti-city [42]. 
	
It’s noteworthy that such a process occurs through socio-geometry, 
technology, and aesthetics.
	
Gigantic buildings conceived to be seen from far away by a car’s 
window and big avenues attracting irresistible flows of traffic supersede 
small streets and squares where people could walk, meet, and talk. Big 
retail erases small local shops, thereby ripping out the local economy 
and network that once gradually connected each single citizen to wider 
distribution networks. Giant advertising images of beautiful products 
and models (as beautiful as unreal, in their desirability, frozen perfection, 
and eternal juvenility) dominate the senses and imagination in almost 
every urban environment. Everything seems to be designed to make real 
human beings, with their size, legs, senses, and flesh, feel unworthy, 
naked, disconnected, and needful of changes and products. Part of this 
process has been described by Jean Baudrillard as the transformation of 
reality into hyper-reality [41] – Capital becomes design and appropriates 
reality from within (Fig. 11.1). The billboard model becomes more real 
(hyper-real) than a real woman walking next to you on the street. In fact, 
real people strive in order to adapt their reality to the hyper-real models, 
e.g. by behaving like them or buying the same dresses or products they 
demonstrate. The prestigious image of the architect’s building is more 
relevant than the real building itself, and its function and context become 
annihilated by its wondrous presence [43].
Figure 11.1  The subsumption process and its results

260	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
To keep working, the device needs to constantly thwart the natural 
drift of city life toward connection and identity – an unnatural and energy-
consuming action of exclusion/substitution that hinders the laws of 
scales in space. Just like in the social and economic life, it dims direct 
bodily experiences and keeps planning fear, dissatisfaction, and even 
pain in order to induce the search for relief through consumerism. This 
is constantly shown by the deletion of social places in favor of huge and 
alienating buildings and non-places, the invasion of the global market and 
mass distribution retail stores, and the fragmentation and virtualization of 
people’s connections to self, surroundings, and others through architectural 
and urban anti-patterns affecting their neurophysiologic stability [42], 
the exclusion of diversity, obsessive visual ads, the induction of artificial 
needs, a useless and continuous information glut, and dazing excitements.
	
All of these destructive functions can be enhanced by smart technology, 
and even the inflated aesthetics of what the mass media call a “smart 
city” reinforces disconnection through architectural and urban elements 
like futuristic mega-towers, odd and huge buildings, unnatural greenery 
shapes, idolatry of change, etc.
	
This doesn’t mean that to be smart a city has to necessarily resemble 
the movie set of Ridley Scott’s Blade Runner, nor that somebody 
is consciously planning such a dystopia, but we are likely to face two 
possible and opposite urban realities (Table 11.2). We call the first one 
“homological” because it respects the homology between nature, human 
beings, and social and urban spaces, or “autonomous,” as it goes for its 
own goal; and we call the second one “diaphorological,” after the Greek 
root “diaphoros” (alien, destructive, hostile), as it breaks connections and 
proximity, or “heteronomous” because of its external drive. 
	
Another important point we dispute is the concept of the city as a 
container and the consequent evolution of it – the interface. We refer here 
to the very urban infrastructure that in our vision cannot be separated by 
its human content, human scales, and human purposes.
	
Beneath the mainstream vision, there exists an erroneous concept 
which is derived from a dualistic mind/body model [44] and sees the 
“physical body” of the city as a neutral machine, or an interface between 
its inhabitants and the environment. This latter is both the physical 
nature, to be consumed, and the Capital itself, to which citizens are to be 
functionally connected. Such a model refers to Descartes’ idea of living 
bodies as machines putting live intelligences (the souls) in connection with

	
Biourbanism as a new framework for smart cities studies	
261
Table 11.2  Two ideas of a (smart) city
Homological city
Diaphorological city
Reality
Replaced by
Hyper-reality
Space/place
”
Hyper-space/non-place
Body and immediate feelings
”
Virtual and intermediate life
Scales / scaling laws 
(physical, social, economic, 
informational)
”
Interface / degrees of interface
Natural and constructal 
patterns
”
Anti-patterns
Real nature needs
”
Induced artificial needs
Hope and search for pleasure/ 
wellbeing/happiness
”
Obsessive search for relief after 
dissatisfaction, fear, and pain
It enhances
Connection/communication/
proximity
”
Disconnection/data sharing/
distance
Sensuality
”
Abstraction
Community
”
Individualism
Cooperation
”
Competition
Belonging
”
Isolation
the extended physical reality [45]. The weak point of this idea is the status 
of the body itself, which doesn’t properly belong to either the identity of 
the soul or the realm of the physical reality that it is allowed to reach. In 
such a sense, the body of the city is nothing but a tool – neither a real part 
of an urban inhabitant’s identity, nor part of the environment – but instead 
a wiring system or a channel for fluxes, whose aim is reducing citizens to 
terminals of a consumerist/economic process.
	
Finally, we criticize the idea of knowledge as being intrinsically 
presented by the diaphorological model of a smart city. For this latter 
idea, knowledge is nothing but a flux of data, streaming from one or more 
sources to a terminal through an interface. It is this data flux which is used 
to “give a form” to terminals and determine them to take action (hence the 
word “information”). Knowledge is the equivalent of consciousness, and 

262	
Geographic information system for smart cities
is intended as a passive reception. Citizens receive “good” information 
from a “good” city infrastructure, just as consumerists receive “good” 
products from a “good” brand. This gives the illusion of choice to millions 
of people who swarm toward the feelings of relief designed for them by 
the market (Fig. 11.2 ). 
	
We think instead that knowledge has to do with life’s active grasping 
of critics, self-awareness, and feelings. It is an action. A city which 
doesn’t rouse action but only passive consumption is a machine which 
is transforming people in machines. We think a real smart city should 
awaken and enhance the self-awareness of people about what is really 
good, both personally and socially. A city should help the community 
and individuals to become wiser in order to achieve human pleasure, 
well-being, and happiness – something which is essentially different from 
the mere relief of needs and fun.
	
In a formula, a wise city (the authentic smart city) should contrast with 
subsumption or dehumanization and the destruction of nature, and enhance 
the voice of autonomy and the identity of reality (or humanization, and the 
unfolding of nature). Can this goal be achieved with the help of ICT?
Figure 11.2  The subsumption process and its results: a diaphorological city where several 
pathological characters occur.

	
Biourbanism as a new framework for smart cities studies	
263
11.4	
Biourbanism to build wise cities
Biourbanism teaches us to look to the city as a hyper-complex organism, 
a dynamic structure composed of several interconnected layers, all 
influencing each other in a non-linear manner. This is more than a metaphor 
because it refers to the latest scientific developments in biology, physics, 
and to more general and complex dynamical systems. Biourbanism 
supports a human-centered urban life and goes for structural sustainability 
– a sustainability that overcomes mere standard ecological claims, and 
takes into account all those dimensions that are required to make an 
environment really human friendly and enhance the environment’s own 
identity [46]. A wise city should therefore hopefully copy such a model.
	
In order to achieve such a goal, one should first contrast the subsumption 
process and re-center urban development on human values.
	
Subsumption is a term introduced by Karl Marx in the draft Chapter 
6 of his book, Capital [47], meaning the way the Capital completely 
subjects people to work. The term has been reinterpreted in a biopolitical 
sense by the Italian philosopher Massimo Bontempelli as a way of using 
the Capital to dominate life itself, e.g. through genetic engineering aimed 
at boosting animals’ meat or milk production [48]. We see it as the way the 
Capital transforms the city, citizens, and human political nature in terms of 
a wiring machine aimed at producing surplus value, at the cost of cultural 
deviation and a descent toward inauthenticity and unhappiness.
	
In fact, from an urban point of view, Capital imposes subsumption by 
changing a city from within. It operates by excluding and/or cutting away 
five fundamental human experiences: (i) body awareness as a criterion of 
what is good and what is bad in the environment (chased from consensus 
by social acceptance and virtual experiences created by the media); 
(ii) space as place (excluded by virtual space, and in fact substituted 
by non-place); (iii) scales (broken by gaps between one dimension and 
another – in architecture and urban geometry, in social and economic 
networks, etc.); (iv) natural patterns (substituted by anti-patterns or units 
of disconnection, like forms hurting our neurophysiological system); 
and (v) real needs, like the need for rest, for meaning, for physical and 
emotional connection (substituted or distorted by tension, stress, and 
artificial desires which are induced by the need for relief).
	
About point (i), we can observe a heteronomous ICT city as a wiring 
system which becomes a medium itself – the medium of the media. To 

264	
Geographic information system for smart cities
go further with the famous statement of McLuhan, “the medium is the 
message” [49], we could say that a heteronomous ICT city is the reality.
	
As a matter of fact, subsumption first acts by informing people’s 
minds, and this happens substantially through spectacle [50], which is 
based on propaganda (e.g., rhetoric about safety, democracy, sustainability, 
etc.). Spectacle includes the transformation and control of the urban 
environment, e.g. by substituting the relics of an urban past with fantastic 
architecture, invading space and silence with information (screens and 
billboards everywhere), and spreading hyper-technological devices of 
control such as cameras, face scanners, geo-localizers, etc.
	
Point (ii) has to do with the transformation of places into non-places 
[40]. Such an alienation of urban spaces brings about a function to 
overcome human needs and transforms physical spaces in fluxes of trade 
and traffic, which began with functional cities in the 19th century. An ICT 
city brings it to a further level by dematerializing the flux itself, so the city 
space becomes a virtual highway for data.
	
Scales (iii) are a substantial structure of every natural and human space 
[51]. By breaking natural scales, a diaphorological city creates gaps among 
social classes, different areas of the city, economies, local and global 
cultures, and the human body and environment. For example, a direct ICT 
connection between London and Dubai, without passing through a scale 
of knowledge and relationships, can bring to the fore a state of alienation 
about what really matters for humans. People can interact daily or go to 
work in Dubai without even speaking a word of Arabic or being interested 
in or touched by the local life and culture. London has areas like Elephant 
and Castle which shelters the poor who don’t have connection to the 
next City, and this latter is in turn dipped into a global, virtual reality and 
is closer to the island of Manhattan 5600 km away than it is to its own 
neighborhood. 
	
Disconnection also occurs in geometry. Decorations, tectonics scales, 
and proportions allow people to get in touch with their built environment. 
Such a harmony of scales, always present in human culture since the 
beginning of history and traced on the scales of the natural world, has been 
broken since modernism and the rise of the second industrial revolution in 
Western countries, which was then spread all over the world within a few 
decades [42]. Disconnections happen through definite anti-patterns (iv) 
substituting the constructal law of design [51, 52] and neuroergonomics 

	
Biourbanism as a new framework for smart cities studies	
265
patterns [53]. ICT city’s futuristic aesthetics have enhanced this change 
by reducing former tectonics and decorative forms into signs pointing 
out virtual reality. This brings stress and confusion and furthers the 
disconnection from one’s own body [51].
	
A modern capitalistic city has always generally worked as a medium 
to push people toward consumerism by making them feel inadequate 
about themselves and needful of improving their life through the latest 
products and services. This is most effective if the whole environment 
that people live in triggers the stress and pain to which products can give 
relief. Plato explained the difference between real human pleasure, which 
can be attained after a situation of equilibrium and safety when there are 
no needs or pain acting on our mind and body (e.g. enjoying beautiful 
forms, colors, sounds), and the relief of something like drinking water 
after being thirsty [54].
11.5	
What a smart city should be
As we have seen before, intelligence, technology, and cities are naturally 
linked realities. What makes the difference between a diaphorological and 
a homological smart city is the absence or presence of a fourth element – a 
human-centered vector of the urban organism (Fig. 11.3).
Figure 11.3  Wise city restores and reconnects human-centered items
	
What does this mean, and who can dare to say what is human or not in 
the cultural context of the urbanism debate? 

266	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
Cautious about any anthropological issue and ideological position, 
biourbanism so far proposes to take into consideration a very basic criterion: 
the human body – its psycho-endocrine-neuro-immunological system, 
and its reactions to the built (and, then, social) environment. As such, 
neuroergonomics becomes a way to establish an epistemological foundation 
of urban design which is aimed at exalting human well-being [53].
	
According to such a vision, a homological smart city should be built 
or ameliorated by the means of real and direct citizens’ participation (what 
has been called p2p urbanism) [55, 56], neuroergonomics and biophilic 
design, and biourban economics, all based on the human body epistemic 
(Fig. 11.4).
Figure 11.4  Homological or wise city, and its characters
	
These general principles and methodologies can ensure the reduction 
of ICT to the city goal, and not vice versa. In fact, they help by again 
putting human beings and their connection to reality at the centre of urban 
infrastructure planning and preventing the city substance from sinking 
into hyper-reality and heteronomy. 
	
Enhancing places and giving room to the use of the body is fundamental. 
The real presence of people in deciding the shape and qualities of their own 
local space is a task that cannot be demanded of any technician, whether 
professional or political [57]. The right to the body, and the recognition 

	
Biourbanism as a new framework for smart cities studies	
267
of the value of its actual presence, has a political equivalent in supporting 
the direct political engagement of people, which is real participation. An 
example is given by the Occupy Wall Street movement and its concern 
about avoiding the gaps of modern political representation [58].
	
The difficulty of such a task can be overcome by special interaction 
between urban planners and people, which is aimed at discovering what 
the real and vital needs are and the affordances of the people and place. 
The heuristic model is based on the ability and disposability to listen and 
interact, without pretending to know from the beginning what is good. The 
ancient philosopher Socrates called this methodology maieutics – a way 
of helping the latent truth that is already present in everybody to come to 
light by acting as an experienced obstetric [59]. The same concept has been 
substantially presented anew by Tim Brown and Barry Katz, who also stress 
the role of cooperation in the effort to find effective design solutions [60]. 
	
Biourbanism adds to these fundamental contributions by accepting the 
role of the human body as a system which is naturally wired to the laws 
of nature and homeostasis, and is keen to recognize them and bring them 
to light, as universally appreciated and beloved urbanism and architecture 
of ancient time in all the cultures has already abundantly shown. 
Neuroergonomics wants to revive the ancient natural ability and wisdom 
of making places, by studying how our body reacts to space organization, 
physical shapes, scales, and networks [43, 53, 61]. 
	
Biophilic design and evidence-based design are fundamental footsteps 
to neuroergonomics with their discoveries about the positive roles of 
natural patterns for human health [62].
	
From a very intuitive point of view, this means the true realization of 
human-centered spaces, eventually facing the functionalist dogma and car-
centered ideology with environments allowing people to feel relaxed and 
safe to walk through and physically enjoy the city as a due, fundamental 
social right (compact city, micro-economy, shops on the streets, mixité, 
enjoyable healthy architecture, children-sized neighborhood, car restraints, 
well-organized pedestrian and connections, and psycho-geography).
	
When ICT becomes part of the infrastructural body of a city though, 
this means that the city’s own identity is changing. This change is not a 
mere juxtaposition of one part to another part, but it resonates in the whole 
urban body, reshaping it and then becoming reshaped in turn. 
	
Like any addition, it can prevail over the organism and colonize it, or 
it can be metabolized and reoriented according to the intrinsic logic and 

268	
Geographic information system for smart cities
vector of the organism. In such a case, this can result in an enhancement of 
the identity and autonomy of the city’s life.
	
The first aspect to be held in mind when planning the implementation 
of ICT into an existing city is therefore proportion. The system must not 
be stronger than the community. This means that ICT shouldn’t work as an 
inclusive interface, substituting real exchanges and shares, but on the contrary 
it should facilitate real connections, e.g. by offering smart links and being 
able to serve real contacts and not substitute them. Its role is to bridge urban 
connections (both physical and social), through the fourth dimension of the 
virtual world, yet without allowing the virtual ideals to overwhelm reality.
	
By using a universal natural network pattern, ICT’s lattice of virtual 
connection interfaces should be incorporated into the lattice of real social 
and physical connections. It must be smaller than the network it joins in 
order to become recognizable as a virtual tool and avoids the deception that 
so often makes people believe the interface is the reality. In quantitative 
terms, the sum of the socio-physical plus virtual networks should ideally 
approximate a “small world” network, i.e. be characterized by a distance 
L between two randomly chosen nodes (irrespective of whether they are 
physical, social, or virtual ones), growing proportionally to the logarithm of 
the number of nodes N in the network (L >> log N) [63]. ICT could help reach 
the proportion where enough socio-geometrical links are missing (which is 
quite often in modern cities), but without overcoming the boundary of L >> 
log N. This law would enhance the richness in exchanges within the city and 
between different cities and cultures, while allowing the single identities to 
remain strong and independent – a model that has already been proposed for 
establishing multi-polar worldwide scientific networks [64].
	
Unfolding the autonomy and identity of a place is always to be 
instantiated through a bottom–up process. In ICT terms, this means that 
the city should be given the possibility of offering the world its own vision 
and goal instead of becoming a passive terminal of a global, abstract order. 
One possibility, for example, is putting common local wisdom online, 
as in the “Derevni Revival” project, which is aimed at recuperating and 
sharing the ingenious self-built technology, bottom–up organizations, and 
cultural heritage of small Russian villages, and thus helps to stimulate a 
self-enhancing local economy [65].
	
Another relevant aspect about the implementation of ICT in a wise city 
is the protection of a citizens’ body from biometrics – a principle of habeas 
data that is equivalent to the early habeas corpus [66]. Understanding and 

	
Biourbanism as a new framework for smart cities studies	
269
incorporating the social and human needs behind them should prevent 
violence and crime. Control and scrupulous measurements are only aimed 
at subsuming humanity to the technical power and market.
	
Biourbanism economics is the third element needed for implementing 
ICT in a homological way. Its principle is based on the respect of the 
locality and its scales, which means that it pursues a communitarian goal 
of a good life instead of a plutocratic one. An example is given down here 
from the experience of one of our projects, which is still on-going in the 
Italian village of Artena.
11.6	
A case study: the Artena project to revive Italian 
villages
11.6.1	
Introduction to area study
Artena is a small Italian town of about 15,000 inhabitants 35 km south 
of Rome. It had been an ancient military outpost, perched on a hill, and 
dominating a relevant route between Naples and Rome. It was later 
a rural shelter founded on agriculture, and it has passed through fierce 
decline during the industrialization of Italy, just like almost all of the other 
villages whose economy was based on agriculture. Inhabitants typically 
abandoned the ancient hilltop center, and got dipped into the car traffic 
fluxes of the modern suburbia that was rapidly built between the 50s and 
the 80s at the foot of the hill. Mechanization drove farm laborers away 
from the countryside and required them to eventually become industrial 
workers (e.g., in plants established nearby Colleferro, Pomezia, Rome) or 
employees in the tertiary sector, especially small trade. The urban impact 
of industrialization is strikingly visible today in the evident opposition 
between the beautiful, compact, and semi-abandoned historical center, 
with its biophilic character, and the modern downtown, higgledy-piggledy 
spreading through the valley and cheaply built in concrete, according to 
the modernistic style.
	
The agricultural and naturalistic vocation of the town shines through 
its beautiful appearance in the pre-Apennine landscape, which together 
with an important historical and architectural heritage and food and wine 
culture makes Artena a potential tourist destination. 
	
Small firms, shops, a few utility companies, and a small amount of 
tourism have arisen in the last 20 years; however, this couldn’t stop the 
general economic decline. 

270	
Geographic information system for smart cities
11.6.2	
Structure of the proposed framework
The proposed framework is based on a bottom–up process, of which p2p 
urbanism (Table 11.3) constitutes the core. It calls for reciprocal help and 
continuous confrontation between the community members, and enhances 
social stability by developing a “collective intelligence” that is built on 
awareness, pride, and their love for the place and the community itself 
[53, 67–69]. This collective intelligence among peers can develop into 
good analytical skills and allow them to beware of social manipulation 
such as that practiced by the mass media [68]. A p2p society keeps its 
components as individuals, whereas a consumerist society converts them 
into one unthinking mass [68].
Table 11.3  Peer-to-peer (p2p) urbanism 
Definition prepared by the “Peer-to-Peer Urbanism Task Force” consisting of Antonio 
Caperna, Michael Mehaffy, Geeta Mehta, Federico Mena-Quintero, Agatino Rizzo, Nikos 
A. Salingaros, Stefano Serafini, and Emanuele Strano.
P2P urbanism is an innovative way of conceiving, constructing, and repairing the city that 
rests upon five basic principles.
(1) P2P urbanism defends the fundamental human right to choose the built environment in 
which to live. Individual choice selects from amongst diverse possibilities that generate a 
sustainable compact city those that best meet our needs.
(2) All citizens must have access to information concerning their environment so that they 
can engage in the decision-making process. This is made possible and actively supported 
by ICT (information and communication technology).
(3) The users themselves should participate on all levels in co-designing and in some 
cases building their city. They should be stakeholders in any changes that are being 
contemplated in their environment by governments or developers.
(4) Practitioners of p2p urbanism are committed to generating and disseminating open-
source knowledge, theories, technologies, and implemented practices for human-scale 
urban fabric so that those are free for anyone to use and review.
(5) Users of the built environment have the right to implement evolutionary repositories 
of knowledge, skills, and practices, which give them increasingly sophisticated and well-
adapted urban tools.
(Source: http://p2pfoundation.net/Peer-to-Peer_Urbanism)
	
The framework consists of a cyclical action in three steps [70–72]: 
(i) community vision (how citizens imagine their site in the near future, 

	
Biourbanism as a new framework for smart cities studies	
271
approximately 15 years); (ii) analysis; and (iii) strategic choice (SC) 
approach [73], as an incremental strategic planning process (Fig. 11.5). 
	
It differs from the classic tool, where a city planner displays a unique 
action-plan that is as rational and systematic as possible. This results in a 
fixed image of the city, which is considered as a static body. Faludi [74], 
Friend [73], Salingaros [42, 75], Alexander [57], and other scholars showed 
how this planning model cannot produce a sustainable and coherent urban 
environment because the evolution of a city or territory along time is 
complex and made of several variables such as social, economical, and 
demographical issues; and this makes it impossible to fix life in a static 
blueprint.
Figure 11.5  The proposed framework consists of a cyclical process, structured in three 
phases: analysis, a shared vision of community, and a strategic choice approach
	
Let’s describe the three phases of the proposed process: vision, 
analysis, and strategic choice approach here.
	
Vision comes to light through a participatory process, where a 
community is explicit about how it can foresee itself in the future. People 
illustrate what has been done already in order to improve the quality of 
life, economy, social system, governance, architecture, etc.
	
Our research group organized several workshops in Artena with local 
stakeholders in order to write down a shared future scenario. The results 
are shown below shortly.
	
The community vision that emerged concerns several perspectives. 
Generally, it turned out that Arteneses are interested in saving the ancient 

272	
Geographic information system for smart cities
town from its decline because they want to live there. It is noteworthy 
that most of the children and young people (15–25 years old) living in 
the historical center would like to stay, yet apparently there are no jobs 
or social perspectives in Artena. People hope that it would be possible 
to ensure the viable, long-term economic stability of the village and 
revive the place without denaturalizing it, but as they lack the cultural 
instruments required to face the powerful changes that have transformed 
their small village into something of a ghost town, with 70% of the old 
houses uninhabited and abandoned, most of them feel powerless and 
without hope. 
	
The city centre is also lacking job opportunities because of transport. 
Communication is not easy, especially for elderly people, and the small city 
council cannot afford the cost of a frequent bus service up the hill. Walking 
through the village is difficult as the old stone paths are steep and do not 
allow cars to pass through. Mules are the only means of transportation 
inside the old town. The undeniable charm of the place has to compete 
with difficulties in providing fast medical assistance, slowness, and the 
high cost of transportation of building materials, and the discomfort with 
regards to mobility means that living there becomes almost impossible for 
disabled persons.
	
Another item that emerged was the quality of life, and living according 
to local values, such as the preservation of local traditions and heritage, 
family festivals, authentic human relationships, the quality of organic 
food, and environmental quality.
	
It is noteworthy that citizens consider economical growth to be critical. 
They are aware that it may even result in a detriment to their lifestyle. 
People considered that a big plant could offer work to the unemployed, but 
that it would also harm their health and the very essence of the old rural 
city. As a result, they preferred to explore the actual benefits of the place, 
including people’s desires, possibilities, and inclinations, and this then led 
to them launching a series of small-scale projects which were consistent 
with the local ecology and context. 
	
Young people in Artena appreciate activities such as beer making, 
growing organic food, and sustainable tourism. The idea of a small 
handcraft brewery was launched, together with a school for home 
brewers, and they both are just beginning now and are very likely to 
offer employment chances, especially if a proper system and strategy 

	
Biourbanism as a new framework for smart cities studies	
273
can be developed. Because of this, a small-sized hotel and a couple 
of B&B’s (bed and breakfast) have been opened, and small shops 
are due to open in the city centre. The first ISB Summer School in 
Neuroergonomics and Urban Design, which was held in Artena last 
summer 2012, became an international success, with the participation 
of highly motivated scholars from 11 different countries (see http://
summerschool-artena.tumblr.com/).
	
Another very important point underlined by most citizens concerns 
the necessity to renovate the ugly urban sprawl downhill from the center. 
It was proposed that they apply architectural and planning solutions 
inspired by the biophilic character of the historical village above in order 
to reinforce the common quality of life and reconnect the past and present 
sections of the city.
	
The analysis concerns the round-up and management of social, 
economical, and environmental data. Our interactive information system, 
the Community Data Set Analysis (CDsA) has been set up according to 
our theoretical model (anthropospheric system, Fig. 11.6). It processes the 
information about the environment into a set of interactive sub-systems. 
The anthropospheric system is based on other similar experiences [28, 
76, 77] and is structured according to a complex systems theory and 
biourbanism principles [78]. It describes the local environment and the 
activities of natural and human agents through seven sub-systems, as 
follows:
	
(i) human wellbeing, or the right of citizens to live in an environment 
that supports life in a structural sense (biophilic environment); (ii) social 
system, or the capability of increasing social cohesion, both in term of urban 
environment and of equitable economy, welfare, etc.; (iii) government, 
or the capability of the local administration to provide transparent and 
effectively participated (p2p) government; (iv) infrastructure and 
services, or the incidence of the infrastructural web on the territory, the 
availability of services, and the capability of the local government to 
promote structural sustainability; (v) economical system, or production 
and consumption, commerce, local market, job opportunities, and income, 
etc.; (vi) safeguarding of natural resources, environment, and cultural 
heritage; and finally (vii) built environment as a “living system,” to be 
exalted in its biophilic affordances [78, 79].

274	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Figure 11.6  The seven major sub-systems of the anthroposphere and their major connections. 
These seven sub-systems have been aggregated into three sets: human system, support 
system, and natural and built environmental system [28, 76].
	
The collection of the data set of significant indicators, both qualitative 
and quantitative, is then to be confronted with the community’s vision 
and processed via our information system based on open source GIS. It 
will support the local community in managing and monitoring the above 
anthropospheric system and will be available through a user-friendly 
interface. 
	
The next step is to translate the community vision and data in the 
strategic choice (SC) process (Table 11.4). 
	
As stated, SC is an incremental and dynamical process where a shared 
future scenario plays the main role. It can change over time, so the planning 
process may need to readdress its goals dynamically. This means that all 
of the choices will be consistent with the scenario’s dynamical evolution. 
This approach tries to combine several planning instruments and different 
decision makers in order to manage the pressure and uncertainty intrinsic 
to complex systems. The basic goal of Friend and his colleagues was to 
develop a practical methodology which is able to assist and facilitate the 
complex decision-making processes [73, 80].

	
Biourbanism as a new framework for smart cities studies	
275
Table 11.4  Strategic Choice Approach
The Strategic Choice Approach is used in face-to-face workshops of a decision-making 
group.
Strategic choice is viewed as an ongoing process in which the planned management of 
uncertainty plays a crucial role.
The Strategic Choice Approach:
• Focuses on decisions to be made in a particular planning situation, whatever their 
timescale and whatever their substance.
• Highlights the subtle judgments involved in agreeing how to handle the uncertainties which 
surround the decision to be addressed – whether these be technical, political or procedural.
• Is an incremental one, rather than one which looks towards an end product of a 
comprehensive strategy at some future point in time. This principle is expressed through 
a framework known as a ‘commitment package’. In this, an explicit balance is agreed 
between decisions to be made now and those to be left open until specified time horizons 
in the future.
• Is interactive, in the sense that it is designed not for use by experts in a backroom setting, 
but as a framework for communication and collaboration between people with different 
backgrounds and skills.
The essential framework: There are three key elements of analysis which are used in 
structuring problems and working towards decisions.
• The Decision Area
• The Comparison Area
• The Uncertainty Area divides into three 
broad categories:
  – Uncertainties to do with the working 
environment
  – Uncertainties to do with guiding values
  – Uncertainties to do with related choices
There are four modes of strategic choice:
• Shaping
• Designing
• Comparing
• Choosing
Source: University of Cambridge, Institute for manufacturing:
http://www2.ifm.eng.cam.ac.uk/dstools/choosing/strach.html [72, 99]

276	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
The SC takes into account a few fundamental items [81]: (i) information 
is obtained through the integration of data and social judgments and must 
be reduced to the minimum amount so as to avoid bias or availability 
problems; (ii) models and techniques should be characterized by 
simplicity and transparency. Community consensus must be considered as 
an objective to be pursued in the planning process, but not an automatic 
condition; (iii) the process actors – individuals and organizations – are 
to be considered as active subjects; (iv) uncertainties and conflicts are 
intrinsic elements of the process.
	
The authors see that the key problem in forming a strategy is to resolve 
uncertainty. “The most distinctive feature of this approach is the way it helps 
users in making incremental progress toward decisions by focusing their 
attention on alternative ways of managing uncertainty” [73]. 
	
Finally SC uses another type of software (STRAD – short for strategic 
adviser), and analyses the problems and how they are interlinked. All of 
these alternatives will be compared and evaluated in order to identify the 
best choice which should be referred at that time, and that variable is then 
analyzed. 
	
Ultimately, an interactive information communication system (see Fig. 
11.7) will be realized, and the website www.artenaconnect.com will be 
the local interface where people will be able to share the data online. This 
constitutes a fundamental tool that is able to support and reinforce the p2p 
process. This means we are able to encourage actions which are addressed 
at facilitating the public’s right of accessing the information and/or dataset, 
thereby reinforcing democracy and the social and economical services.
Figure 11.7  General structure of the proposed framework for the strategic planning of a 
smart city, according to a bottom–up process and p2p urbanism

	
Biourbanism as a new framework for smart cities studies	
277
11.7	
A small afterword about megalopolises
Our methodology presupposes the existence of a social urban core and 
human-scale paces in relating with it. Without a direct participation of 
community, such a system would result in nothing more than another 
technocratic mumbo-jumbo, officiated by “experts” without connection to 
reality – and this, despite its seemingly “bottom-up” approach, would turn 
out to be just fake rhetoric.
	
It is thus difficult to envision an as-is instantiation of strategic planning, 
in the context of a modern city of millions of inhabitants.
	
Ancient Greek civilization, which we have mentioned a few times 
already in this text, has been a major source for urban culture. As we are 
dealing with dimensions and proportions, it could be interesting to stress 
the ancient phenomenon of Greek (but Phoenician also) colonies, started 
around the 8th century BC. After a mother-city (metropolis) had reached 
a standard growth, part of the citizens moved to found another daughter-
city elsewhere. This rhizome-like model preserved the functionality 
of socio-political structure also in geometrical terms, averting forms 
of urban gigantism and disconnection. Oswald Spengler [82] pointed 
out this ancient equilibrium is in contrast with the modern urban trend 
toward gigantism, and claimed that the 21st century would be the time of 
megacities, characterized by inhuman environment and made up of dead 
infrastructures. 
	
In fact, huge megalopolises represent a typical contemporary 
phenomenon – the evolution of modern big industrial cities. Partly 
associated with the expanding population growth of the Planet [83], 
industrialization, technical evolution of mass buildings, transportation, 
logistics, etc., it nevertheless underpins something else.
	
If we look at the list of the top 10 biggest cities in the world, we would 
notice that, except Sao Paulo (Brazil) and Moscow (Russia), they are all 
located in Asia. If not considering urban agglomerations (megacities), 
where Tokyo (Japan) would lead the classification (34.6 million), China 
and India lead the group, with Shanghai (23 million), Beijing (20 million), 
Mumbai (14 million), and Delhi (13 million). Karachi (Pakistan) and 
Istanbul (Turkey) are other most populous cities (about 13 million each). 
Moscow and Sao Paulo total about 11.5 million people. 
	
What do these Asian cities have in common? Velocity. Out of the 
Mumbai area, which reached the goal first, Indian and Chinese megacities 

278	
Geographic information system for smart cities
have grown to over 10 million inhabitants in less than a decade following 
the 1990s. If transportation infrastructures represented a major growing 
factor [84], ICT and data-based services have been in fact the real urban 
growth booster [85].
	
Bettencourt and West could find some fundamental laws of form behind 
cities’ structures, by considering them as organisms. They envisioned the 
super-linear growth of cities as a positive and partly self-triggering factor 
[86], “As cities get bigger, everything starts accelerating. There is no 
equivalent for this in nature (…). Although urbanization has generated a 
seemingly impossible amount of economic growth, it has also inspired the 
innovations that allow the growth to continue” (as quoted by Lehrer [87]).
	
According to West and Bettencourt, cities are complex, uncontrollable 
from above, self-organizing systems – and this becomes more evident 
as dimensions get bigger and bigger. Nobody can manage a city, and the 
authors refer this to as the freedom that keeps cities alive [87]. 
	
Well, we think this is true and that the dream of control envisioned 
by ICT cannot but fail, also because of the reason given by West and 
Bettencourt. Yet, we would like to note another aspect of this phenomenon 
that is so evidently contrasting to the ancient, self-sizing rhizome model. 
We are talking of the role of financial capital and ICT in cities’ gigantism. 
We in fact think that urban super-growth has directly to do with the 
dematerialization of city, to which we have referred above.
	
We obviously cannot call “a city” a set of physical infrastructures 
only. What make city are its social connections – both physical and 
intentional, i.e. the urban community and the possibility for it to exist. A 
megacity is therefore not an urban unit in it, despite of its blatant physical 
infrastructures. This is not only because it is rather more like a region, 
maybe with organic societal units within its boundaries that are not easily 
connected, but because a process of obvious disconnection between 
physical bodies, space, and social links happens within it.
	
Megalopolises and megacities are in fact the side effect of the very fast, 
powerful, and accelerated movement of Capital toward Eastern markets, 
which has taken off since the end of 1980s. These enormous masses of 
shelters, infrastructures, slums, and poor represent a kind of “precipitation” 
of the huge and hugely accelerated process of dematerialization of reality, 
brought on by a post-industrial economy. Megacities, so to speak, are 
hyper-tunnels abruptly transferring an ocean of life from the old urban 
locality toward what we would call hyper-land – the global, post-urban, 

	
Biourbanism as a new framework for smart cities studies	
279
ICT interface mediated and dematerialized hyper-space of post-industrial 
capitalism.
	
Such a hyper-land, or anti-city without physical boundaries, brings 
about a compression of real space in enormous non-places, because it needs 
hardware hooking to what is kept of our humanity: bodies, blood, desires 
– to be wired through consumerism to the logic of Capital. Alongside 
the emergence of hyper-land, there persists the space of places, where 
bodies are rooted in biology, local life, and laws of physics. The hyper-
land – the global market – must deal with it [88], and just for this cannot 
take off completely as a geometrical, a-dimensional point in the domain 
of Flatland. The resulting new geography of centrality [89], the need for 
supporting leverage points, brought global megacities to existence, at the 
same time bringing to light the weakness of a system without resilience 
[90]. Or rather, the blackmail of Capital to the real world – in case of 
failure of one of these nodes, the lives of millions would be threatened at 
once due to their high dependence on interface.
	
Urban reality is connatural to human beings, as they are social. No 
matter if today’s real city is understood as a neighborhood, a circle, or 
even a partly delocalized community within the invisible boundaries of 
hyper-reality. Wherever there is the possibility of a social interaction in 
space, with bodies, places, wills, and culture, a city can occur. We could 
therefore instantiate strategic planning at every community level, starting 
with ameliorating, or even producing anew, its physical place. This process 
shall not overcome the dimension of a shareable vision, i.e. should always 
work without needing interface and representation. Nevertheless, one can 
think of a federation of human cities, where digital technology can support 
local communities in developing a wider spread of the model, through a 
small-world network. 
	
Despite the general observation by West and Bettencourt about the 
infrastructural advantages of bigger cities, but in line with their remark that 
cities are also self-organizing systems, “built-up area densities” have been 
dropping by roughly 2% a year since 1990 worldwide [91], thus showing 
a counter-tendency toward social equilibrium. If bigger is better, too big 
is not. McKinsey Global Institute has found that “contrary to common 
perception, megacities have not been driving global growth for the past 15 
years,” and has predicted that these cities will underperform economically 
and demographically [92].

280	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
OECD’s report on competitive cities notes increased socio-economic 
inequalities even in some of the most dynamic metropolitan regions, 
and it concludes that poverty and social exclusion lead to relevant costs, 
including high levels of criminality, and the risks of making megacities 
centers of deprivation and instability, with consequent negative effects on 
their economy [93].
	
A recent WHO and UN-Habitat report on urbanization trends describes 
cities as “the new locus of poverty,” and stresses that people living in slums 
will be affected by child mortality, acute respiratory illnesses, water-borne 
diseases, and vulnerability to natural disasters [94]. 
	
The World Bank estimates as well that while rural areas are currently 
home to a majority of the world’s poor, cities will become the predominant 
locations of poverty by 2035 [95]. 
	
On the contrary, medium-size cities in China and India, like Chennai, 
turned out to fit better industrial needs [96]. Capital itself must deal with 
its own materiality, laws of form, proportion, and life – or it will definitely 
destroy itself, together with the urban civilization and the resources of the 
Planet.
11.8	
Conclusion
Over the last 10 years, smart cities’ initiatives have grown all around the 
world. Our critical analysis warns about the dangers of transforming cities 
into mere interfaces and steps toward the subsumption of human beings 
for the sake of a purposeless economy.
	
Our proposal of a “homological city” is based on the theory of 
complexity, neuroergonomics, laws of forms, biophilia, and p2p urbanism 
– an integrated conceptual framework which is based on biourbanism’s 
principles. 
	
Such a framework gives a human goal back to smart cities and sets free 
the biopolitical issues – both theoretical and practical – that are hindered by 
an heteronomous vision of what a city should be. In particular, a wise city 
should enhance human-centered scales, places, real, and not-interfaced 
sociality and politics, i.e. self-awareness, freedom, and responsibility.
	
According to our analysis, megacities represent an impressive effect 
of an ICT-based economy of dematerialization and its rapid deployment. 
The homological city, however, can also be instantiated in such a striking 
diaphorological situation by individuating and helping the substance 

	
Biourbanism as a new framework for smart cities studies	
281
of human connections within the horizon of new forms of places and 
communities in the post-urban space.
11.9	
References
[1] Hollands, R. G. (2008). Will the real smart city please stand up? In City: 
Analysis of Urban Trends, Culture, Theory, Policy, Action, 12(3), pp. 303–320.
[2] Eger, J. (1997). Cyberspace and cyberplace: building the smart 
communities of tomorrow, San Diego Union-Tribune. Dec. 26th.
[3] Coe, A.,  Paquet, G., and Roy, J. (2001). E-governance and smart 
communities: a social learning challenge. Social Science Computer Review 19; 
80, pp. 80–93.
[4] Thorns, D. (2002). The Transformation of Cities: Urban Theory and 
Urban Life. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
[5] Caragliu, A., Del Bo, C., and Nijkamp, P. (2009). Smart cities in Europe. 
Serie Research Memoranda 0048 (VU University Amsterdam, Faculty of 
Economics, Business Administration and Econometrics).
[6] Batty, M., Axhausen, K., Fosca G., Pozdnoukhov, A., Bazzani, A., 
Wachowicz, M., Ouzounis, G., and Portugali, Y. (2012). Smart Cities of the 
Future, Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis University College London, Paper 
188.
[7] Graham, S., and Marvin, S. (2001). Telecommunications and the city: 
electronic spaces, urban place. London: Routledge.
[8] Castells, M. (1996). The Rise of the Network Society. Oxford: Blackwell.
[9] Ishido, T. (2002). Digital city Kyoto. Communications of the ACM, 45(7), 
pp. 78–81.
[10] Komninos, N. (2002). Intelligent Cities: Innovation, Knowledge Systems 
and Digital Spaces. London: Spon Press.
[11] Toppeta, D. (2010). The Smart City Vision: How Innovation and ICT 
Can Build Smart, “Livable”, Sustainable Cities. The Innovation Knowledge 
Foundation. Retrieved from http://www.thinkinnovation.org/file/research/23/en/
Toppeta_Report_005_2010.pdf
[12] Hall, R. E. (2000). The vision of a smart city. In: Proceedings of the 
2nd International Life Extension Technology Workshop (Paris, France, Sept. 
28). 
Retrieved 
fromhttp://www.osti.gov/bridge/servlets/purl/773961-oyxp82/
webviewable/773961.pdf
[13] Wei Choo, C. (1997). IT2000: Singapore’s vision of an intelligent island. 
In: P. Droege (ed.) Intelligent Environments: Spatial Aspects of the Information 
Revolution. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, pp. 48–65.

282	
Geographic information system for smart cities
[14] Graham, S. (2002). Bridging urban digital divides: urban polarization 
and information and communication technologies. Urban Studies 39(1), pp. 33–
56.
[15] Bronstein, Z. (2009). Industry and the smart city. Dissent, 56(3), pp. 27–
34. Retrieved from http://www.community-wealth.org/_pdfs/articlespublications/
cross-sectoral/article-bronstein.pdf
[16] Siemens, (2004). Stadt der Zukunft. Retrievedfrom http://www.siemens.
com/innovation/de/publikationen/zeitschriften_pictures_of_the_future/PoF_
Fruehjahr_2004/SmartCity.htm
[17] Cisco (2005), “Dubai: The Smart City”. Retrieved from http://www.cisco.
com/web/learning/le21/le34/downloads/689/nobel/2005/docs/Abdulhakim_
Malik.pdf
[18] IBM (2010). Smarter Thinking for a Smarter Planet. Available at http://
www.ibm.com/smarterplanet/global/files/us__en_us__loud__ibmlbn0041_
transtasman_book.pdf
[19] IBM (2009). Smarter Cities: New York 2009. Retrieved from http://
www.ibm.com/smarterplanet/us/en/smarter_cities/article/newyork2009.html
[20] Giffinger, R., Fertner, C., Kramar, H., Kalasek, R., Pichler-Milanovic, 
N., and Meijers, E. (2007). Smart cities – Ranking of European medium-sized 
cities. Vienna: Centre of Regional Science. Retrieved from http://www.smart-
cities.eu/.
[21] Florida, R. (2003). The Rise of the Creative Class. New York: Basic 
Books.
[22] Florida, R. (2005). The World Is Spiky. In The Atlantic Monthly, October, 
pp. 48–51.
[23] Florida, R. (2008).Who’s Your City? New York: Basic Books.
[24] Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 
EUROSTAT (2005). Oslo manual. Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation 
and Development – Statistical Office of the European Communities.
[25] European Commission (2012). Smart Cities and Communities. 
Communication from the Commission.
[26] International Monetary Fund (2000). Globalization: Threats or 
Opportunity. IMF Publications. April 12th, 2000.
[27] Sassen, S. (1991, 2001). The Global City: New York, London, Tokyo. 
New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
[28] Caperna, A. (2005). Information Communication Technology per un 
progetto urbano sostenibile, Tesionline: Milan.
[29] Chatterton, P. and Hollands, R. (2003) Urban Nightscapes: Youth 
Cultures, Pleasure Spaces and Corporate Power. London: Routledge.

	
Biourbanism as a new framework for smart cities studies	
283
[30] Harendt, A. (1954). The Human Condition, Chicago: The University of 
Chicago Press, chap. II.
[31] Liverani, M. (1998). Uruk, la prima città, Roma-Bari: Laterza, pp. 19–
26.
[32] Detienne, M. and Vernant, J. P. (1991). Cunning Intelligence in Greek 
Culture and Society. Engl. transl. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[33] Moser, A. M. (2001). What is Smart about the Smart Communities 
Movement? E-Journal, Volume 10/11 Number 1. Retrieved from http://www.
ucalgary.ca/ejournal/archive/v10-11/v10-11n1Moser-browse.html
[34] Weizenbaum, J. (1976). Computer Power and Human Reason: From 
Judgment to Calculation. New York: W.H. Freeman.
[35] Caperna, A., Cerqua, A., Giuliani, A., Salingaros, N., and Serafini, S. 
(2010). Biourbanism. Retrieved from http://www.biourbanism.org/definition-of-
biourbanism/
[36] Foucault, M. (2009). Security, Territory, Population. Lectures at the 
Collège de France, 1977–1978 (Graham Burchel, Trans.). New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
[37] Engels, F. (1943). The Condition of the Working-Class in England in 
1844. London: George Allen & Unwin, pp. 23–24.
[38] Latouche, S. (1995). La Mégamachine: Raison technoscientifique, 
raison économique et mythe du progress. Essais à la mémoire de Jacques Ellul. 
Paris: La Découvert.
[39] Visser, J., Nemoto, T., and Boerkamp, J. (2001). E-commerce and city 
logistics. In: Taniguchi, E., Thompson, R.G. (eds.), City logistics II, Kyoto: 
Institute of Systems Science Research, pp. 35–66.
[40] Augé, M. (1995). Non-places. Introduction to An Anthropology of 
Supermodernity. Engl. transl. London: Verso.
[41] Baudrillard, J. (1976). L’échange symbolique et la mort. Paris: Gallimard.
[42] Salingaros, N. A. (2008). Anti-Architecture and Deconstruction. 
Solingen: Umbau.
[43] Serafini, S. (2011). Sostenibilità strutturale. Sergio Los e Mario 
Cucinella: analisi biourbanistica. Bioarchitettura, 67, pp. 60–63.
[44] Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human 
Brain. New York: G.P. Putnam’s sons.
[45] Descartes, Passions of the Soul, 1649. Engl. transl. retrieved from http://
www.earlymoderntexts.com/pdfbits/despass1.pdf
[46] Serafini, S. (2011). Liberazione partecipata dello spazio dall’iperreale. 
L’Italia come esperimento biourbanistico. Abitare l’Italia. Territori, economie, 

284	
Geographic information system for smart cities
diseguaglianze. XIV Conferenza SIU, 24/25/26 marzo 2011, Planum, The journal 
of Urbanism.
[47] Marx, C. (1990). Results of Immediate Process of Production. Appendix 
in: Capital. Volume 1: A Critique of Political Economy. London: Penguin Classics, 
pp. 943–1084.
[48] Bontempelli, M. and Badiale, M. (2009). Civiltà occidentale. 
Un’apologia contro la barbarie che viene, Genova: Il Canneto. 
[49] McLuhan, M. (1964). Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. 
New York: Mentor.
[50] Debord, J. (1967). La Société du Spectacle, Paris: Buchet/Chastel. Engl. 
transl. retrieved from http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/debord/society.
htm
[51] Salingaros, N. A. (2010). Twelve Lectures on Architecture. Algorithmic 
Sustainable Design. Solingen: Umbau.
[52] Bejan, A. and Lorente, S. (2010). The Constructal Law of Design and 
Evolution in Nature. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 365, pp. 
1335–1347.
[53] Caperna, A. and Serafini, S. (2013). Biourbanistica come nuovo 
approccio epistemologico. In: Mortola, E. (ed.), Partecipazione e ICT, Rome: 
Gangemi Editore.
[54] Plato, Philebo, 43C–53C.
[55] Serafini, S. (2011). “P2P (peer to peer) Urbanism and Biourbanism”, 
In: МЕЖДУНАРОДНАЯНАУЧНАЯШКОЛА“Перспективные направления 
физико-химической биологии и биотехнологии” (тезисы докладов)», Tomsk: 
Tomsk State University, pp. 11–15.
[56] Caperna, A., Mehaffy, M., Mehta, G., Mena-Quintero, F., Rizzo, A., 
Salingaros, N. A., Serafini, S., and Strano, E., (2010). “A Definition of P2P (Peer-
To-Peer) Urbanism”, AboutUsWiki, the P2P Foundation, DorfWiki, Peer to Peer 
Urbanism. Presented by N. Salingaros at the International Commons Conference, 
Heinrich Böll Foundation, Berlin, November 1st 2010. Retrieved from http://
www.biourbanism.org/definition-of-biourbanism/
[57] Alexander, C. (2002–2004). The Nature of Order: An Essay on the Art of 
Building and the Nature of the Universe. Berkeley: The Center for Environmental 
Structure, 4 vol..
[58] Hardt, M. and Negri, A. (2011). The Fight for ‘Real Democracy’ at the 
Heart of Occupy Wall Street. The Encampment in Lower Manhattan Speaks to a 
Failure of Representation. Foreign Affairs, Oct. 11th.
[59] Plato, Theaetetus, 148B ss.

	
Biourbanism as a new framework for smart cities studies	
285
[60] Brown, T. and Katz, B. (2011). Change by Design. Journal of Product 
Innovation Management, vol. 28, issue 3, pp. 381–383, May.
[61] Salingaros, N. A. (2006). A Theory of Architecture. Solingen: Umbau.
[62] Kellert, S., Heerwagen, J., and Mador, M. (2008). Biophilic Design. The 
Theory, Science, and Practice of Bringing Buildings to Life. New Jersey: Wiley.
[63] Watts, D. J. and Strogatz, S. H. (1998). Collective dynamics of ‘small-
world’ networks. Nature 393(6684), pp. 440–442.
[64] Serafini, S. (2010). Эффективность связей ученых Европы и 
России, их устойчивая тенденция и прогресс в исследовании явлений 
природы и техники, биологии формы, лингвистики и урбанистики. In: 
Опыт международного соттрудничества в исучении динамики природных 
и антропогенных комплексов западной Сивири в контексте гловалъных 
климатических 
изменений: 
ландшафтно-экологические 
и 
медико-
виологические аспекты. Tomsk: Tomsk State University, pp. 150–152
[65] Kryazheva, Y. and Serafini, S. (2011). A p2p toolbox to revive your City. 
Creative commons cultural instructions and ideas tool kits to enhance urban life, 
make neighborhood more livable and pleasant, and strengthen the community. 
Project presented to the European Cultural Fund, http://p2ptoolbox.hoppakay.
com/home-.html
[66] Rodotà, S. (2006). Trasformazioni del corpo. Politica del diritto, pp. 
3–24
[67] Bauwens, M. (2006). The Political Economy of Peer Production. Peer to 
Peer Foundation, Retrieved form http://p2pfoundation.net
[68] Salingaros, N. A. (2010). Beyond Left and Right: Peer-to-Peer themes 
and urban priorities for the self-organizing society. University of Texas at San 
Antonio. Retrieved from http://p2pfoundation.net/Peer-to-Peer_Themes_and_
Urban_Priorities_for_the_Self-organizing_Society
[69] Caperna, A. and Serafini, S. (2013) Biourbanism and Neuroergonomics. 
Rome: ISB (in print).
[70] Giangrande, A. (2000). Partecipazione e progettazione strategica. 
Periferia, sviluppo sostenibile e metodi di progettazione condivisa. Roma: 
USPEL.
[71] Giangrande, A. and Mortola, E. (2005).  Neighborhood Renewal in 
Rome. Combining Strategic Choice with other design methods. In: Friend, J., 
Hickling, A., Planning under Pressure. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
[72] Giangrande, A. (2006). Integrazione delle pratiche di partecipazione 
nei processi di pianificazione e progettazione sostenibile. Retrieved from http://
www.progettazionepartecipata.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/11/Partecipazione-
e-planning.pdf

286	
Geographic information system for smart cities
[73] Friend, J. K. and Hickling, A. (1987). Planning Under Pressure: The 
Strategic Choice Approach, Oxford: Pergamon Press.
[74] Faludi, A. (1987). A Decision-Centred View of Environmental Planning. 
Oxford: Pergamon Press.
[75] Salingaros, N. A. (2005). Principles of Urban Structure. Amsterdam: 
Techne Press.
[76] Bossell, H. (1999). Indicators for Sustainable Development: Theory, 
Method, Applications. Winnipeg: International Institute for Sustainable 
Development.
[77] Caperna, A. (2010). Integrating ICT into Sustainable Local Policies. 
In: Nuñes Silva, C. (ed.) Handbook of Research on E-Planning: ICTs for Urban 
Development and Monitoring. IGI Global, pp. 340–364. 
[78] Caperna, A. (2011). Biourbanism Principles. Design for a human built 
environment. Rassegna di Biourbanistica, n. 4, pp. 20–31. Retrieved from www.
biourbanistica.org
[79] Caperna, A. and Tracada, E. (2012). “Biourbanism for a Healthy City. 
Biophilia and sustainable urban theories and practices”. International Convention 
cum Pre-Conference Workshop on Innovations in Engineering and Technology 
for Sustainable Development. Bannari Amman Institute of Technology (BIT), 
Sathyamangalam, India, 3/4/5 September 2012.
[80] Friend, J. and Jessop, W.N. (1969). Local Government and Strategic 
Choice, Oxford: Pergamon Press.
[81] Rosenhead, J. and Mingers, J. (eds.) (2001). Rational Analysis for a 
Problematic World: Problem Structuring Methods for Complexity, Uncertainty 
and Conflict. 2nd edition. Chichester: Wiley.
[82] Spengler, O. Der Untergang des Abendlandes. 1918 (Vol. I); 1922 (Vol. 
II). Engl. transl. The Decline of the West. (1991). New York: Oxford University 
Press.
[83] Sankhe, S. et al. (2010). India’s urban awakening: Building inclusive 
cities, sustaining economic growth. McKinsey Global Institute, April. Retrieved 
from 
http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/mgi/research/urbanization/urban_
awakening_in_india
[84] Kishiue, A., Amano, K., Cal, P. C., and Lidasan, H. S. (2005). The 
leading factors for the urban development in Asian context. Journal of the Eastern 
Asia Society for Transportation Studies, vol. 6, pp. 4300–4316.
[85] Narayana, M.R. ICT Sector, Globalization and Urban Economic Growth. 
Evidence from Bangalore (India), Working Paper No. 2010/80, UNU-WIDER.
[86] West, G. and Bettencourt, L. (2011). Bigger cities do more with less. 
Scientific American, Aug. 17.

	
Biourbanism as a new framework for smart cities studies	
287
[87] Lehrer, J. (2010). A physicist solves the city. The New York Times, Dec. 
17.
[88] Sassen, S. (2002). Global Networks, Linked Cities. London: Routledge 
Chapman & Hall.
[89] Sassen, S. (1996). Losing Control? Sovereignty in an Age of Globalization, 
Columbia University Press; 1st edition. 
[90] Castells, M. (1998). Why the megacities focus? Megacities in the 
new world disorder. Retrieved from, http://www.megacitiesproject.org/pdf/
publications_pdf_mcp018intro.pdf
[91] Shlomo, A., Parent, J., Civco, D. L., and Blei, A. M. (2012). Atlas of 
urban expansion. Cambridge, Mass.: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.
[92] McKinsey Global Institute (2013). Urban world: Mapping the economic 
power of cities. Retrieved from http://www.mckinsey.com/Insights/MGI/
Research/Urbanization/Urban_world
[93] The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD) 
(2006). 
OECD 
Territorial 
Reviews: 
Competitive 
Cities 
in 
the 
Global 
Economy, 
Directorate 
for 
Public 
Governance 
and 
Territorial 
Development. 
Retrieved 
from: 
http://www.oecd.org/gov/
oecdterritorialreviewscompetitivecitiesintheglobaleconomy.htm#part_1_
chapter_1
[94] World Health Organization, The WHO Centre for Health Development, 
Kobe, and United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT) 
(2010). Hidden cities: unmasking and overcoming health inequities in urban 
settings. Retrieved from: http://www.hiddencities.org/report.html
[95] World Bank (2012). World Bank Sees Progress Against Extreme Poverty, 
but Flags Vulnerabilities. February 29.
[96] Kotkin, J. (2011). The problem with megacities. Forbes. Retrieved 
from: 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/megacities/2011/04/04/the-problem-with-
megacities/
[97] Harrison, C., Eckman, B., Hamilton, R., Hartswick, P., Kalagnanam, 
J., Paraszczak, J., and Williams, P. (2010). Foundations for smarter cities. IBM 
Journal of Research and Development, 54(4). DOI: 10.1147/JRD.2010.2048257.
[98] Washburn, D., Sindhu, U., Balaouras, S., Dines, R. A., Hayes, N. M., 
and Nelson, L. E. (2010). Helping CIOs Understand “Smart City” Initiatives: 
Defining the Smart City, Its Drivers, and the Role of the CIO. Cambridge, MA: 
Forrester 
Research, 
Inc. 
http://public.dhe.ibm.com/partnerworld/pub/smb/
smarterplanet/forr_help_cios_und_smart_city_initiatives.pdf
[98] Friend, J. (1992). New directions in software for strategic choice. 
European Journal of Operational Research, 61, pp. 154–164.

Abstract: History of human kind has been mostly related to the way people settle and build 
their own community. Information, techniques and technologies as well as innovation were 
the key elements of evolution. The huge possibilities of managing, creating, exchanging 
and analysing information drive us to face the challenge of improving our cities and our 
natural environment at the same time, through collaboration in an uncertain and complex 
context. 
	
The chapter focuses on the evolution of urban culture through time and particularly on 
three significant moments of change: the three urban revolutions. These have defined the 
context we are living at the present, and from these many important issues can be learnt. 
From this point of view, the SMART Planning approach is introduced as a possible way of 
conceiving the city, the society and its evolution. The questions that inspired this work were: 
Why do contemporary models of urban planning have to be reviewed? Are the existing 
tools and techniques of planning suitable to drive the forthcoming urban development? 
How is the planning discipline considering the new changing space–time relation within the 
society?
Key words: planning approach, smart city, urbotic, technology, collaboration. 
“People who make wars change things. People who use control makes things happen in the 
world. This is not my interest at all. […] I am filled with a certain kind of doubt about my 
role in the world. But that does not stop me from participating in the world.”
May 4, 1982, Brussels Airport
By Keith Hearing
12.1	
Introduction
This chapter outlines some results of a collaborative research about the 
current model of urban planning and, particularly, its capability to improve 
existing urban context through technological implementation. This work 
aims to settle a conceptual framework exploitable to address and shape 
current planning discipline (urban and city planning, urban and policy 
design) toward a new horizon. 
12
SMART Planning as a new way of conceiving 
the city/discipline
WALTER BARBERIS

	
SMART Planning as a new way of conceiving the city/discipline	
289
	
It’s important to keep clear from the very beginning that SMART 
Planning is a conceptual approach and not a technique of planning. It’s more 
a challenge to the traditional urban planning model than a disagreement. 
However, this new approach could change the way of planning cities and 
regions, but it’s not our main objective. If it happens will be due to the 
development and outspread of share ideas and not because written in a 
book. It is more appropriate to consider SMART Planning approach as 
a progressive and direct implementation of technological, informational 
and sensorial devices that will allow a soft and unhurried adaptation of the 
current planning practice. On the other hand, the results of city planning 
as well as physical and intangible urban intervention cannot be measured 
nor assess with the same instruments than technological progress. Thus, 
SMART Planning approach can be somehow described as a middle-/long-
term planning process made of short and fast actions/interventions, where 
the sense of community is the mean to connect both sides. 
	
This study has been inspired by an international group of people who 
daily deals with unresolved issues in their city. This is an on-going research 
developed as a conceptual contribution for SMART Planning International 
Open Network for the Global South (http://smart-planning.org/).
	
Social differences, segregation, ghettoization and urban violence, 
poverty and pollution, economic crisis and unsustainable development, 
war, as well as, peace, social awareness and participation, democracy, 
mass collaboration and information accessibility are the main strengths 
and weaknesses for the construction of this new way of thinking urban 
life. These often coincide in the same place at the same time and there’s 
no other way to approach then but multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary, 
knowing and understanding its physical and social background, its 
religious and political beliefs, and its technological imprinting. 
	
An important feature of SMART Planning approach is the centrality 
of its holistic attitude toward urban issues. We look at the past to see the 
future and we observe the society to find the humane side of technology. 
	
Meanwhile, cities are moving forward. In previous years many 
things, some of them contradictory, have been said about what a smart 
city is or should be. Much less has been said about how cities should be 
planned (if they should) to become smarter and keeping that “feature” 
in time. This simple question assumes as true certain statements such as 
“to be or become smart is good overall”, “smartness cannot be developed 
without technological support” and also “urban and social complexity is 

290	
Geographic information system for smart cities
able to be handle with traditional tools and techniques”. These statements 
are partially true depending on how reality is being observed, and if it’s 
observed from the traditional urban planning point of view, they seem 
undoubtedly true. 
	
Most smart city’s literature emphasizes the “virtues” of technological 
urban scenarios, web-based services and e-government models, even 
though there’s still an important conceptual fragility around the term 
SMART related to urban contexts. In recent years, more and more cities 
claim to be on the road of smartness; only some of them have already 
implemented technological systems able to control, monitor and/or 
assess a few aspects of the urban complexity. In this sense, this book 
makes an important contribution to clarify the aforementioned concept 
(see Chapters 1 and 21).
12.2	
What is the context to plan? What we see and 
what we can know?
The fact that each city has its own characteristics and patterns of 
development is widely accepted. Its artistic expressions, religious beliefs, 
political organization model and economic status, but most of all by its 
historical development process can outline both the city and its community.
To understand present cities and contemporary society, we have to take a 
look far away in the past. Many of the current unsolved urban problems 
and also many answers can be traced in a period that began between 4,500 
and 10,000 years ago, when agriculture and farming foster the rise of first 
human settlements around the world [1].
	
At that time humans used to live in small nomad groups, subsisting 
on hunting animals and gathering wild plants. As Gordon Childe’s 
contribution on archaeological prehistory turn to light in 1936 and 1942 
[2, 3], the first Urban Revolution1 [4] took place in seven or eight parts of 
the world [5] when early hunting groups transformed its main subsistence 
mode into a process of domestication of plants and animals shaping a 
1 One of the most important and sophisticated legacy of Childe’s work is the 
difference in defining Neolithic Revolution and Urban Revolution. Whereas first 
definition refers to a combination of technological breakthroughs with social 
transformation, the concept of Urban Revolution denotes a leading transformation 
of social institutions and practices, including economic and political activities.

	
SMART Planning as a new way of conceiving the city/discipline	
291
farming way of life. This process was not identical everywhere. In the 
following few millennia, while many American natives were still hunters-
gatherers in most of Eurasia, Sub-Saharan Africa and a part of America 
arise the agriculture, the farming, the art of metals, social organization, 
and some groups even primitive forms of writing [6].
	
Differences among these evolving societies’ growth in time are helped 
by the surrounding environment, its flora and fauna, its geographical 
position and weather. Some groups, mostly in Eurasia, reach big amount 
of population and complex forms of social and legal organization. Ancient 
crowded settlements have had an enormous influence on the developing 
of its society, conditioning them till present. In these “crowded” societies, 
the main causes of death were epidemic infectious diseases (like small 
pox) and not war dead. Those who survive the epidemic would probably 
have transmitted their genes to the offspring. Other groups, like in New 
Guinea, lived in sparsely populated societies where epidemic were not 
often, but it was the war death, homicides and starving. These societies 
didn’t developed their immune system (antibodies); and even being more 
aggressive and more skilled to fight a war, they were not ready to survive 
to Eurasian biological weapons when expansion arrives.
	
The transition from nomadism to sedentism carried out a vast 
worldwide population growth and a faster technological development. 
Over time this farming society model expand into new territories through 
a combinations of migration and trade evolving in more complex social 
systems characterized by land-use organization, setting of hierarchies 
(launching the era of inequalities) and different labour division. From this 
period on, we can consider human settlements as cities, and also the birth 
of the first forms of states and kingdoms. Simultaneously first organized 
religions begin to emerge. These organizational models, as well as sacred 
and spiritual beliefs systems, shaped and strengthen the differences 
between societies most of them still existing.
	
By the end of 17th century, the second important transition took place, 
the so-called Industrial Revolution (1771). From that moment on, there 
were at least other four important transitions that have addressed the socio-
economic and urban changes. According to Kondratiev’s theory [7], those 
technological cycles can be classified into four ages (Fig. 12.1): the age of 
steam and railways (1829), the age of steel and heavy engineering (1875), 
the age of oil, electricity, the automobile and mass production (1908) and 
the age of information and telecommunications (1971).

292	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Figure 12.1  Kondratiev’s theory and the urban evolution
	
In less than two centuries, the society, the physical city, its organizational 
mode, beliefs and behaviours have drastically changed. Population, means 
of transports, distances and speeds, the dimensions of human settlements 
have exponentially grown. 
	
The relevance of the last transition, the so-called Third Urban 
Revolution [8], is the fact that it is still ongoing. And though it affects not 
only the present time but even more the future. According to Ascher [8], in 
the last 30 years, the form and dimensions of cities has deeply changed. The 
way people interact to others evolved from a few, strong and long-lasting 
relations to several, changing, and fragmented and fragile social relations. 
These changes have influenced the places and modalities of socialisation 
(the activity humans do for most of their lifetime), emphasizing in real 
time and virtual spaces. The formal framework of social and institutional 
relations has shifted from an alveolar model to a network one. Hence, in a 
few decades, the perception of the real and virtual world and its decoding 
in a frame of stability and known-hierarchy structure has been replaced 
with new ideas, such as those derived from the study of complex systems 
[9], flexibility and self-regulation in governing processes, in a nut shell, in 
a context of uncertainty.
	
Third urban revolution was possible, thanks to a more reactive, 
reflective and knowledge-oriented society. This is undoubtedly the main 
resource humanity has to develop a more sustainable urban future.

	
SMART Planning as a new way of conceiving the city/discipline	
293
	
In a few centuries human beings were able to change dangerously 
its surroundings and the global environment. Cities are one of the most 
magnificent human creations, but for many reasons they are becoming 
an undesirable trap. Having a global look at urban settlements, we can 
observe as many differences (or more) in their quality and development 
stage as there were 4,000 years ago.
	
This is a good reason to attempt conceiving the city in a new way and 
to develop an urban planning approach able to tackle these differences and 
to improve the quality of urban life in general.
12.3	
Guiding principles of SMART Planning approach
Conceiving the city in a new way means also to review the traditional 
planning process that has guided the development of its settlements and 
communities. As mentioned above, SMART Planning is not a set of tools 
or techniques able to transform any city in an efficient, sustainable and 
“smart” place. Though this work could provide interesting insights for 
decision makers, planners and scholars that aim to implement successfully 
a smart city or understand more about the “smartness” in the field of urban 
planning.
	
The SMART planning thinking goes much beyond the mere physical, 
technological and/or organizational aspects of the city. The term “smart” 
must be considered as a “met concept” concerning many aspects of the 
changing knowledge society, its needs, fears and hopes including several 
ways of physical and virtual, individual and collective interactions. It 
must not be mistaken with intelligence or brainpower, which is one of its 
components.
	
The massive use of technology, such as intelligent devices, MEMS 
(Micro Electro-Mechanical Systems), environmental sensing, and so forth, 
is also an important part of today cities [10–13]. Yet its effectiveness is 
strongly conditioned by other non-technological components, for instance 
information accessibility (databases openness), citizen active participation 
and social awareness, community capacity for collaborating, peering and 
sharing among others.
	
Trying to find a comprehensive definition of SMART Planning 
approach is inconsistent to the concept itself, but it’s possible to outline 
some important features. SMART Planning paradigm builds upon:

294	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
l	 Knowledge-based attitude (research, information accessibility, 
openness, connectivity, real time, ubiquitous computing, 
augmented reality, open data, data mining);
	
l	 Fully connected communities and network society building 
(mixed organization model, hierarchical reorganization, peering, 
cloud power, urban complexity, institutional cooperation);
	
l	 Strengthening citizenship and sense of belonging (social awareness, 
community belonging, citizen participation, mass collaboration);
	
l	 Smart urban policy (acting locally thinking globally, continuing 
process of planning, simultaneously short-, middle- and long-term 
planning).
	
The achievement of implementing a planning process based on 
smart principles depends much on the community engagement with the 
environment, on its political, economic and cultural historical development 
process. Hereinafter, the main features of the SMART Planning thinking 
will be treated in order to encourage its implementation through specific 
action plans. 
12.3.1	
Knowledge-based attitude
Knowledge society is the last of four significant steps in mankind 
evolution. Each transition has bequeathed very important experiences 
and knowledge in order to become the present society. The transition 
from agriculture society (preindustrial age) to industrial age have taken 
thousands of years leaving behind a strong urbanization trend and new and 
fast means of transportation. The shift from industrial to post-industrial age 
has taken less than two centuries, this time, substituting craft manufacture 
with serial production of standardized products and lately with a growing 
tertiary sector (services sector) [14]. It was a capital and energy intensive 
production that required large goods consumption to operate and also set 
the bases for the last step: the knowledge society. 
	
This latest stage is characterized by the transition from information 
society [15] to knowledge society. This important shift was possible 
thanks to the expansion of information and communication technology 
(ICT), together with scientific and technological integration (see at micro, 
nano and biotechnology) and cognitive science improvements [16]. The 
combinations of these three achievements have radically changed the way 
of looking and understanding the surrounding world. 

	
SMART Planning as a new way of conceiving the city/discipline	
295
	
In recent years, most influent knowledge-based developments related 
with city and societies are:
	
I.	 Localization or positioning that integrates hardware, software and 
technique for determining one’s position accurately on the surface 
of earth. Some specific branches are geographic information 
system (GIS) [17, 18], global position system (GPS) [19], and 
remote sensing, all oriented to capture, manage, analyse and 
display all forms of geographically referenced information;
	
II.	 Ambient intelligence refers to sensitive and responsive electronic 
environments aiming to support people in carrying out their 
everyday life activities using information and intelligence that 
is hidden in a network of connecting devices. As devices get 
smaller (micro-technology and nanotechnology), more connected 
and integrated into our environment, the technology becomes 
less noticeable remaining visible only to users interface when 
required. Important contribution comes from Internet of things, 
pervasive and ubiquitous computing, profiling practices and 
context awareness [20–22].
	
III.	 Communication and connectivity. If knowledge (and soon 
network) society is the end, communication and connectivity 
are for sure the mean. The switching from information to 
knowledge to network is directly related with communication 
development and connectivity expanding. The Achilles’ heel of 
communication is the trustworthiness of the information since it 
impacts directly on the self-confidence of the receiver. Moreover 
in the case of connectivity, its weakness is the discontinuity and 
fragmentation. From the SMART Planning point of view, the more 
the communication and connectivity work as a flow that betters 
their performance. The increasingly possibility of getting real-
time information from and to urban environment and citizens, for 
the first time, provides the conditions to think of a real-time fact-
oriented planning [23, 24].
	
There are still many unresolved questions related to these “technologic 
improvements” mainly on privacy law, juridical responsibility (especially 
in case of devices’ autonomy), openness and information transparency 
and capacity to manage, update and analyse (in real time) big amounts of 
changing data.

296	
Geographic information system for smart cities
12.3.2	
Toward network society
The inspired idea of a massive network connecting all human races – to a 
central control unit – has been first advanced as a science fiction depicting 
of the future. Though, the stunning increase, both in computing power 
and extension, of Internet is turning the sci-fi scenario into very real. 
The questions that naturally arise are why do we have to be worldwide 
connected? And why societies and cities follow sci-fi models instead of 
thinking over actual needs?
	
Same authors named that scenario network society. The point is that 
being connected makes sense if it contributes positively to the evolution of 
“real society”. In the field of planning, it’s more suitable referring to “real 
local community” and “neighbourhoods”.
	
While first steps of Internet growth were focused on web sites, clicks 
and interconnection of computers and the main objective was to exchange 
information, latest network is about communities, participation and mass 
collaboration, sharing, peering and multidirectional interconnection of 
people and devices (ambient intelligence). 
	
Network community is not just a complex connection system of 
everything with everybody, it’s also and primarily about shifting from 
a hierarchical organization mode to a new one. As history has proved, 
since slave empires, dynasties, feudal kingdoms and more recently 
multinational corporations, hierarchies of one or another form have 
been prerequisite for institutional organization (e.g., military, religions, 
governments, communities) by placing people into layers of superiors 
and subordinates [25]. Such pattern of organization has been, and still 
is, widespread used to fulfil public and private, formal and informal 
organizations objectives.
	
Full lack of hierarchies on network community is unlikely. Though, 
other forms of organization are emerging to unfold the hierarchical leading 
model into an adaptive hybrid enabling multiple forms of organizing within 
the same system. Non-hierarchical organization models are taking place in 
several industrial and economic sectors. It’s a vibrant social phenomenon 
related to a participation will and powerful human capital.
	
Shifting the organizational hierarchies implies harshly rethinking 
the way of planning our cities, in order to be closer to community 
priorities and actual needs adapting prevailing managing, assessing 
and intervention practices, fitting tools and methodologies, designing 

	
SMART Planning as a new way of conceiving the city/discipline	
297
consistent policies and, last but not least, fostering institutional 
cooperation and openness [26]. 
	
Institutional cooperation seems to be inversely proportional to physical 
distance. For years the idea of competitiveness was dominant constraining 
any form of cooperation with closer institutions considered as hazardous 
competitors. This trend, which originally was steady into private sector, is 
largely present even in the public. 
12.3.3	
Citizenship and sense of community
On a community-oriented planning approach, such as SMART Planning, 
the notion of citizenship and sense of community are of primary 
importance. Is not the purpose of this paragraph to cover these complex 
concepts comprehensively, but to introduce the fundamentals to agree 
about the “cycle of community engagement” into participatory planning 
practice? Mostly, city dwellers do not take part of peaceful collective (and 
communitarian) actions unless they feel the sense of community and live 
a recognized citizenship.
	
On the one hand, citizenship is essentially an abstract and 
multidimensional concept, which has so many different definitions and 
interpretations that it’s almost elusive. It retrieves a large amount of other 
concepts and dynamics strictly related to the city, such as rights and duties 
of individual and groups (city dwellers, communities), equality–diversity, 
inclusion–exclusion, 
integration–segregation, 
nationality, 
ethnicity, 
hierarchies, and so forth [27].
	
On the other hand, sense of community is a prerequisite and a goal 
when implementing any kind of participatory activity, including city 
planning (Fig. 12.2). One of the most influential definitions of this concept 
provided by McMillan and Chavis [28] says: “Sense of community is a 
feeling that members have of belonging, a feeling that members matter to 
one another and to the group, and a shared faith that members’ needs will 
be met through their commitment to be together” [29].
	
In early participatory approaches, communities were invited to see and 
comment on accomplished plan, programme, or city design, prepared by 
technicians and “agreed” with decision makers. More recent methodologies 
attempt to focus exclusively on the community at all stages of the planning 
process – from goals definition to implementation processes. In the first 
case, participation was more a matter of form than substance, a way to 

298	
Geographic information system for smart cities
keep up with the times communicating with the electorate. The second was 
driven by a skewed interpretation of the ability of citizens (non-technical 
people) to take technical and overview decisions. This method has proved, 
after several meetings held on behalf of the participatory planning, to be 
less efficient and more time consuming [30, 31].
Figure 12.2  Psychological sense of community
	
SMART Planning approach takes the best of each and moves between 
both methods. It focuses on: listening communities (interests, fears, wishes, 
ideas) using different means of communication, not only presence meetings, 
to reach all layers of community; sharing clear and exhaustive information 
about the progress of the planning process, the decisions taken, and so forth 
in order to stimulate the sense of community and, at the same time, empower 
the role of professionals (technicians) as coordinators and moderators.
	
Involving a community into a participatory process is a very hard 
work as well as opening professionals to a new field of work, where non-

	
SMART Planning as a new way of conceiving the city/discipline	
299
technical matters gain relevance and negotiation with common people 
become frequent. There’s a shift in the organization mode that combine 
the role of authorities, institutional hierarchies and responsibilities in a 
new different way. 
12.3.4	
Smart urban policy
According to scholars, we are currently undergoing a social and urban 
revolution. In this vibrant situation the geopolitical system is shifting 
toward a new framework of relations and priorities. Cities are the overriding 
meeting point of a new global, regional, national and local order [32]. 
	
In the field of planning, there are noteworthy differences in the political 
approach from country to country, and even more, among sub-national 
authorities with territorial jurisdiction. This assumption makes extremely 
difficult to refer to policies in general terms; though, some important 
concerns can be done in order to outline the SMART Planning political 
approach. 
	
National, sub-national and local decisions affect, directly or indirectly, 
life in cities; and at the same time, city dwellers and communities 
influencing local governments, conditioning elections through movements 
and campaigns, in return, affect the full range of policy decision making 
[33]. Therefore, SMART Planning approach ponders this dynamism as the 
basis for a never-ending cycle of planning. 
	
Cycling processes generally produce stratified structures. From 
political point of view, cities can be defined as a stratification of historical 
series of urban development models (triggered through urban policies). 
These models reflect social and urban transformation strategies or, in 
other words, the public sector priorities in term of growth. Urban policies 
carry also contradictions, resistances and most of the time, partial possible 
solutions to city problems [34, 35].
	
In the current urban – developing and developed – context, characterized 
by rapid and profound social and technological changes, where space–time 
relation has deeply changed, the idea of any “reductionist” non-systemic 
leading political model is strongly being questioned. It highlights the 
imperative need of a multidisciplinary approach in the definition of urban 
policies as shown in the guiding principles of US urban policy agenda: “… 
[National] government must break from the siloes approach to urban policy 
development – where each facet of policy operates independently from all 

300	
Geographic information system for smart cities
others – and replace it with an interdisciplinary approach that appreciates 
the interdependent nature of issues affecting urban communities.” [36] 
	
Politics and sectoral policies in the last decades have evolved gradually 
and linearly from one step to another following the prevailing development 
model. Thereby, some cities have undergone in the 1960 the Fordism model 
(mainly in the North), while others the National Independence model (in the 
South). In the 1980 succeeded the global neoliberal model and, at present, 
even over a structural crisis a new model has not been still imposed [37].
	
Many cities, e.g. Copenhagen, Curitiba or Bilbao, have demonstrated 
to improve their quality of life by implementing a holistic, long-term vision, 
but achieved through specific multiple short-term actions. This does not 
mean that these cities have developed “the successful policy model”; they 
have only found their right policy model for their right moment. It is worth 
remembering, a long-term vision must include an accountability process 
to ensure that required actions are carried out in such a way that, over time, 
the vision will become reality [38].
12.4	
Final considerations 
This article aims to open a discussion and reflection about SMART 
Planning approach and so it’s not an easy task to conclude it. However, it 
is worth remembering that the more the cities become connected, fast and 
virtual, the more planning as a discipline needs to be comprehensive and 
open to a multiple dimension of the reality. 
	
City planning has traditionally followed social changes and at the 
same time addresses them. As mentioned before, each urban revolution 
was characterized by a planning approach letting significant imprinting 
to the experience of future urban living [39]. Both traditional planning 
and urban revolutions have deeply shaped the contemporary city on its 
physical, symbolic and organizational structure. For example, during 
the Industrial Revolution there was a rapid development of urbanized –
planned – settlement near the railway stations, seaports and along main 
roads. In recent times, public policies were welfare- and central-state 
oriented strongly affecting the whole public and private urban decisions, 
from public spaces and services to private property and individual rights 
and duties. The question that naturally arises is what will be the SMART 
Planning approach legacy? How this approach will influence the city 
development in a middle and long term?

	
SMART Planning as a new way of conceiving the city/discipline	
301
	
In the last two decades, advances in science and technological 
innovation jointly to a social progress have strongly changed the way of 
observing, analysing and decoding real world and the relations among 
its parts. We have, as never before, a wide set of technological tools 
as well as logical and cognitive instruments to explore and understand 
the real (material and immaterial) world and at the same time to design 
and reproduce the virtual reality. Society can be witnessed and censored 
in detail; its relations and displacements can be traced in real time 
everywhere.
	
Cities are being re-engineered, and from a technological point of 
view the challenge for the coming years will be the integration of ITC, 
informatics and electro-mechanics with advanced control systems. 
This scenario defines a reticular – and capillary – system enclosing city 
dwellers, decision makers, investors, public and private sector in a mesh 
of relations where information is accessible to all, updated in real time 
and open to community participation. People have just started interacting 
with objects (devices), the potential still not unfolded is enormous and 
technology producers won’t waste it.
	
As a consequence of this, the urban scenarios that are emerging from 
both technological integration and social awareness need an approach 
able to deal with the growing complexity of cities, understanding new 
equilibrium among places, dynamics and society.
	
SMART Planning approach is strongly knowledge-oriented but not 
exclusively. There’s also a significant amount of uncertainty, as result of the 
fast information flows, rapid changes and openness in the organizational 
modes. Uncertainty must be welcome as richness and as a precondition 
to define flexible and malleable policies, to identify middle- and long-
term objectives and to design successful urban development strategies. 
Combining middle- and long-term visions in an uncertain context is not an 
easy task, but looking backward is exactly what has been happening during 
the previous decades. Most policies defined in the 1980 and 1990 are far 
away from reaching their 2010/2020 fixed objectives. In the previous 
years, European Commission has been empowering drastic changes 
in middle- and long-term urban development strategies and policies in 
order to better fit public investments to the social needs. In a short time, 
European economic and social development policies have turned from 
vast territories (regional approach) to smaller and better-defined targets 
(cities, SMEs and communities). 

302	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
Through out the text, the word complexity has been mentioned many 
times. What does urban complexity mean is a question that probably has 
no a single answer but many, according to who and where the question is 
made. Nevertheless, before implementing any action or strategy that aims 
to turn a city smarter, it is worthwhile to make that question, and even 
more, how is “our” urban complex system? How does it work? And last, 
but not least: do we have the right tools to take the road of smartness?
12.5	
References
[1] Cavalla-Sforza, L. & F. (2006). “Supremazia di un continente”, in 
Introduction to J Diamond, Guns, Germs, and Steel. The Fates of Human Society, 
Einaudi, Torino.
[2] Gordon Childe, V. (1936). Man Makes Himself, New Thinker’s Library, 
London.
[3] Gordon Childe, V. (1942).What Happened in History? Penguin Books.
[4] Smith, M. E. (2009). V. Gordon Childe and the Urban Revolution: a 
historical perspective on a revolution in Urban Studies, Town and Planning 
Review – Centenary paper, vol. 80 n. 1, Liverpool University Press.
[5] Bellwood, P. (2005). First Farmers: the Origins of Agricultural Societies, 
Oxford, Blackwell.
[6] Diamond, J. (2006). Guns, Germs, and Steel. The Fates of Human Society, 
Einaudi, Torino.
[7] Korotayev, A. and Sergey, V. (2010). A Spectral Analysis of World GDP 
Dynamics: Kondratiev Waves, Kuznets Swings, Juglar and Kitchin Cycles in 
Global Economic Development, and the 2008–2009, Economic Crisis. Structure 
and Dynamics, vol. 4 (1), pp. 3–57. Available athttp://escholarship.org/uc/
item/9jv108xp
[8] Ascher, F. (2007). Los nuevos principios del urbanismo: el fin de las 
ciudades no está a la orden del día, Alianza, Madrid. 
[9] Newman, M. E. J. (2011). Complex System: A Survey, American Journal 
of Physics, vol. 79(8), pp. 800–810, American Institute of Physics.
[10] Ratti, C. (2010). Can a City Act as a Formula One Racing Car? In 
Oxigen: Sustainable Cities, n. 10 Science for everyone, Enel, Milan. 
[11] Osservatorio ANCI-SMAU sulle Smart cities (2011). Smart City: la vita 
italiana alla città intelligente, Digitalic n.1, Milan. 
[12] Scientific American (2011). Cities: Smarter, Greener, Better, Special 
Issue, vol. 305, n.3, Scientific American, New York. 

	
SMART Planning as a new way of conceiving the city/discipline	
303
[13] Glave, J. and Russel, T. (2010). “Città intelligente: Spazzatura senza 
bidoni”, in Wired n. 21, Conte Ed., Milan.
[14] European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working 
Conditions 
(2009). 
Available 
at: 
http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/emire/
GREECE/TERTIARIZATION-GR.htm
[15] Beniger, J. R. (1986). The Control Revolution: Technological and 
Economic Origins of the Information Society. Cambridge, Harvard University 
Press.
[16] Roco, M. C. and Bainbridge, W. S. (2003). Converging Technologies 
for Improving Human Performance nanotechnology, biotechnology, information 
technology and cognitive science, Kluwer Academic Publishers (currently 
Springer), Dordrecht.
[17] Foote, K. E. and Lynch, M. (2000). Geographic Information Systems as 
an Integrating Technology: Context, Concepts, and Definitions, The Geographer’s 
Craft Project, Department of Geography, The University of Colorado at Boulder. 
Available at: http://www.colorado.edu/geography/gcraft/notes/intro/intro.html
[19] Goodchild, M. F. (2010). “Twenty years of progress: GIScience in 2010” 
in Journal of Spatial Information Science, n.1. Available at: http://josis.org/index.
php/josis/article/view/32
[20] Ducatel, K., Bogdanowicz, M., Scapolo, F., Leijten, J. and Burgelman, 
J. C. (2001). Scenarios for Ambient Intelligence in 2010, Information Society 
Technology Advisory Group - ISTAG, Seville. Available at: ftp://ftp.cordis.
europa.eu/pub/ist/docs/istagscenarios2010.pdf
[21] Commission of the European Communities (2009). Internet of Things – 
An action plan for Europe. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/
policy/rfid/documents/commiot2009.pdf
[22] Casaleggio Associati (2011). The Evolution of Internet of Things. 
Available at: http://www.casaleggio.it/pubblicazioni/Focus_internet_of_things_
v1.81%20-%20eng.pdf
[23] Meggiato, R. (2009). “Software that makes difference” in Wired n. 2, 
Conte Ed., Milan.
[24] Campbell, T. (2012). Beyond Smart Cities: How Cities Network, Learn 
and Innovate, Earthscan, Glasgow.
[25] Tapscott, D. and Williams, A. (2010). Wikinomics: How Mass 
Collaboration Changes Everything, Portfolio Penguin, London.
[26] Ascher, F. (2003). Multi-mobility, multispeed cities: a challenge for 
architects, town planners and politicians, lecture held during the 1st International 
Architecture Biennial Rotterdam in 2003. The theme of the Biennial was Mobility. 

304	
Geographic information system for smart cities
[27] Kabeer, N. (ed.) (2005). Inclusive Citizenship: meanings and expressions, 
Zed Books, London.
[28] McMillan, D. and Chavis, G. (1986). Sense of Community: A 
Definition and Theory, Journal of Community Psychology, vol. 14. Available 
at: 
http://communities.autodesk.com/india/sites/default/files/secure/docs/
McMillanChavis---psychological-Sense-of-community.pdf
[29] Wright, S. (2004). Literature review chapter from “Exploring 
psychological sense of Community in living-learning programs and in the 
university as a whole”, doctoral dissertation at Faculty of the Graduate School 
of the University of Maryland. Available at: http://www.wright-house.com/
psychology/Stephen_Wright_dissertation.pdf
[30] Raino, M. (2010). The Possible City: participatory Planning and Active 
Citizenship, in Oxigen: Sustainable Cities, n. 10 Science for everyone, Enel, 
Milan.
[31] Burch, W. R. and Grove, J. M. (1993). People, Trees and Participation 
on the Urban Frontier.
[32] Massiah, G. (2012). Urban Policies in the Crisis of Globalization, in 
Housing in Europe: Time to Evict the Crisis, Passerelle n. 7, Ritimo & Association 
Internationale des Techniciens, Experts et Chercheurs.
[33] Savage, M., Warde, A. and Ward, K. (2003). “Urban Politics” in Urban 
Sociology, Capitalism and Modernity, Palgrave MacMillan, New York.
[34] Pagani, R. (2010). The Smart City Concept Behind the Future of the 
City, in proceedings of the International City Future 2009 Conference, Italian 
Association of Architectural Technology, Hoelphi, Milan. 
[35] Pelton, J. N. and Singh, I. B. (2009). Future Cities, Designing Better, 
Smarte, More sustainable and Secure Cities, Intelligent Community Forum, New 
York. More information at: www.intelligentcommunity.org
[36] White House (n/d). Urban Policy. Available at: http://www.whitehouse.
gov/issues/urban-policy
[37] Massiah, G. (2012). op. cit.
[38] Montreal Urban ecology centre (n/d). Available at: http://www.
urbanecology.net/long-term-liveability-vision%20
[39] Bosselman, K. (2008). The Principle of Sustainability: Transforming 
Law and Governance, Ashgate, Hampshire.

Abstract: The chapter examines how GIS-based scenario tools for integrated land use 
and transport analysis can contribute to planning and decision-making processes that are 
more responsive to changing urban environments. The scale, speed and complexity of 
contemporary urbanisms, from the most-developed to the least-developed regions of the 
world, are such that the shortcomings of relatively static planning forms such as master plans 
are readily exposed. Strategic plans, which are increasingly promoted, require a different 
type of planning support incorporating scenario modelling tools in the policy and planning 
processes. A scenario-based approach is used to explore the interaction between land use 
and transport under a variety of possible future contexts, providing critical information on 
accessibility to planners and policy makers on possible futures and insight into the effects 
of alternative responses. Two cases illustrate the scope for such scenario planning tools 
but also some of the dilemmas, not the least of which are theoretical understanding, data 
availability, and knowledge development. In Wuhan, China, a dynamic land-use model was 
developed that was used to explore transport policy options using contour-based accessibility 
indicators. In Ahmedabad, India, we use potential job accessibility measures to show the 
effects of a Bus Rapid Transport system on the urban poor. The cases provide some insights 
into the potential of scenario analysis for smart city planning as well as indicating some of 
the possible barriers that tend to reinforce the status quo, not the least of which are the need 
for an information strategy and strong leadership for the adoption of innovative methods and 
tools.
Key words: accessibility, integrated land-use transport models, planning support systems, 
scenarios, indicators.
13.1	
Introduction
Smart cities facilitate connections between people and organisations that 
are of paramount importance for their long-term sustainability. In the 
words of Webster and Lai [1, p.14], “Cities are the spatial manifestations 
of co-operative acts. They indicate the universal compelling advantage of 
spatial concentration, spatial differentiation and economic specialisation. 
They are systematic concentrations of individuals, each of whom 
possessing distinct capabilities and who are densely bound together by 
webs of institutions (informal and formal rules and sanctions).” 
13
Exploring smart city futures: Opportunities and 
barriers to scenario-based urban planning 
support systems
R. SLIUZAS, M. ZUIDGEEST, S. MEHNDIRATTA, and A. SALZBERG

306	
Geographic information system for smart cities
 
To be able to realise the potential benefits of spatial concentration, 
city planners and decision makers should ideally be equipped with 
information systems and planning support tools that provide insights 
into their city’s performance in facilitating the complex daily 
interactions between urban actors, i.e. their ability to connect to one 
another at low cost. In other words, insights into the current- and future-
level accessibility under possible development scenarios are required. 
Such information can facilitate more objective planning and decision 
making [2]. Knowledge on accessibility to facilities and services is 
even more important in a smart city setting, with cities having a high 
ICT (information and communications technology) endowment and the 
possibility of substitution of communication with transport and vice 
versa, and where ICT can enhance levels of accessibility to opportunities 
albeit physical or through communication. Hence, accessibility matters 
in smart cities. In traditional city planning, accessibility-based modelling 
is a relatively common undertaking. GIS is increasingly used in such 
accessibility studies. 
	
This chapter provides a brief summary of two accessibility 
studies recently conducted by the authors in the Asian countries 
– India and China. Many cities in these countries are hampered by 
poor accessibility of key service locations and facilities. This spatial 
mismatch is particularly pertinent for the low-income residents who 
often rely on low-service-level public transport and non-motorized 
transport modes. The aim of these projects was therefore to demonstrate 
the use of accessibility metrics in quantifying the possible effects of 
investments in urban development in general and public transport in 
particular. Given the crucial role that access to economic opportunity 
plays in economic development and for improving the lives of city 
dwellers (poor or rich), the presented methodology which combines 
GIS-based spatial analysis and supporting metrics helps to highlight 
critical investment or policy-reform needs in cities. Moreover the 
methodologies and approach promotes the adoption of ex-ante scenario 
analysis as a means to improve the quality of policy creation and 
decision making.

	
Exploring smart city futures: Opportunities and barriers to ...	
307
13.2	
Accessibility for all
Transport plays an integral role in the levels of mobility and socio-
economic participation in any given society. Yet, traditional urban transport 
planning has neglected this important role and has limited its focus on 
the efficiency of the transport network itself, thereby overlooking the 
more difficult to measure socio-economic implications. Recent research 
in sustainable transport recognizes that the prevalent transport system 
and policies crucially impact on levels of social exclusion. This social 
exclusion results from both a lack of opportunities as well as a lack of 
access to those opportunities, which are largely determined by inadequate 
access to transport infrastructure and systems [3].
	
With the fast-growing urban population in developing countries and 
associated issues of urban planning and transport, such as rapid urban 
sprawl and increasing pressures on existing transport infrastructure, the 
levels of transport-related social exclusion as experienced by the different 
segments of the urban population are expected to increase further. 
	
Better integration between urban development and transport may 
provide a way of preventing excluded groups being locked out of the 
activities that are essential to support a good quality of life [4]. Accessibility 
metrics can quantify the level of integration as they measure the end benefit 
of the integrated land use and transport system by answering questions like 
“how many destinations (generally jobs, but could also be shops, schools, 
entertainment and recreation facilities) can be accessed in a given time 
using a given mode of transport?”, “where to provide new public transport 
infrastructure capacity to improve levels of accessibility”, or “where to 
provide low-income housing to ensure their access to jobs”? Increasing 
accessibility – bringing people and job opportunities within easy reach 
of each other, for example – through urban planning and design concepts 
such as compact cities, mixed use or pedestrianization as such provides an 
important step in addressing social exclusion in transport. Accessibility 
is influenced by the qualities of the transport system (reflecting the travel 
time or costs of reaching a destination) on the one hand and by the qualities 
of the land-use system (reflecting the qualities of potential destinations 
such as the mix of functions, density of space use) on the other hand [5]. 
Accessibility is therefore inherently spatial, urging the use of GIS in its 
modelling and analysis.

308	
Geographic information system for smart cities
13.3 
Defining accessibility 
Accessibility is typically defined as the ability and ease of people 
to overcome the friction of distance in order to utilize services and 
opportunities at fixed points in space. Any accessibility matrix is therefore 
concerned with the (1) locations of people (their origins), (2) the 
locations of opportunities (services, facilities, job locations, etc.) and 
(3) the networks (transport and/or communication) that connect them. 
This is where accessibility is fundamentally different from the more 
traditional mobility indicators that are primarily concerned with the 
service level of the infrastructure itself. Such mobility or sometimes 
called infrastructure-based accessibility indicators have generally 
been used in most analyses, as they are easy to understand, measure 
and communicate [6]. Examples of such indicators are the level 
of congestion, travel time, or travel cost, all of which have strong 
methodological disadvantages if they were used to explain accessibility 
[7]. The more advanced accessibility metrics presented in this chapter 
overcome these disadvantages to a large extent. Furthermore, there are 
three important reasons why planners should move away from merely 
focusing on such infrastructure-based indicators [6]:
 
1. From the perspective of households and firms, the transport system 
itself is not important – its importance is that it provides them 
with access to spatially and temporally dispersed opportunities. 
Therefore, it may be easier to discuss the quality of access to 
education services and markets than it is to discuss the inefficiencies 
of the transport system.
 
2. Accessibility defined in terms of access to opportunities allows 
planners to assess the effects that change in the transport and 
land-use system have on the potential for interaction [8].
 
3. The use of accessibility metrics opens the floor to a more normative 
approach of transport planning involving different actors (from 
transport, urban development, etc.). It is therefore a stimulus 
for more integrated urban-planning approaches than either the 
traditional transport or urban land-use planning support. A whole 
range of improved accessibility measures have been proposed in 
scientific literature. However, the more complex indicators also 
require more analytical skills from users [9] and place higher 

	
Exploring smart city futures: Opportunities and barriers to ...	
309
demands on available data and the GIS environments used for the 
analysis and visualization.
13.4	
Activity-based measures
Activity-based measures provide an important class of such complex 
measures as they analyze the accessibility of locations, typically on a 
macro-level such as Traffic Analysis Zones (TAZ). Typical measures are the 
cumulative opportunities or contour measures that, for example, measure 
the number of jobs within 30 minutes by car from the origin location, and the 
potential measure (or gravity measure) that discounts these opportunities 
over time (or distance) using a distance-decay function. This considers 
a closer opportunity as more important than a distant opportunity. Even 
more complex location-based measures explicitly incorporate capacity 
restrictions of supplied activity characteristics to include competition 
effects [10], also incorporating intervening opportunities. This type of 
measure is, for example, used in Tel Aviv for assessing the difference 
between potential accessibility by car and public transport [11], in Boston, 
Los Angeles and Tokyo to compare potential accessibility to jobs versus 
different urban form [12], and in Finland to study the relation between 
potential accessibility by road and railway to population change [13]. 
	
Activity-based accessibility measures count the number of activities 
(e.g. jobs) that can be reached from a certain location within a certain 
time. Various measures can be used to operationalize these measures, i.e. 
a contour-based measure or a potential measure. 
	
The contour-based measure does not distinguish between nearby and 
far away opportunities within the contour band, i.e. it does not discount 
opportunities over space. An increase in contour-based accessibility can 
be due to transport improvement (higher speeds or cheaper service) or 
because of a land-use change (a new opportunity in the vicinity), for 
example. 
	
The potential accessibility measure, on the other hand, distinguishes 
between locations of opportunity as it discounts the value of the opportunity 
by distance (or time or generalized costs). It calculates the potential of 
opportunities for interaction using the following formula [10]:
	
A
W f c
W
c
i
j
ij
j
j
ij
j
=
=
−
∑
∑
(
)
exp(
)
β
 	
(13.1)

310	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
With cij the generalized cost (GC) from origin i to destination j and 
f(cij) the distance decay function with decay parameter β, which may look 
like the one in Fig. 13.1.
Figure 13.1  Distance decay function with β = 0.03838
	
Given that in a multi-modal transport system the generalized cost 
of travel depends largely on the (combination of) modes chosen, it is 
sometimes replaced by log sum cost:
	
c
c
ij
ijm
m
= −
−
∑
1
β
β
ln
exp(
) 	
(13.2)
	
With cijm the generalized cost (GC) from origin i to destination j by 
mode or multi-modal combination m.
13.5 
Using GIS for modelling multi-modal 
accessibility 
Every public transport trip is a multimodal trip, usually a combination of 
a walking or cycling trip (non-motorized transport – NMT) and a public 
transport (PT) trip. The trip is a sequence of events that takes place in 
time and in geographic space. In modelling terms these events need to be 
represented physically and with their respective attributes. Key events are: 

	
Exploring smart city futures: Opportunities and barriers to ...	
311
the access trip, its route and its characteristics such as mode, duration, etc.; 
the transfer process, its location and its characteristics such as waiting time 
and comfort; the public transport process with its route and its characteristics 
such as mode(s), travel time, comfort, transfers, etc.; and the egress trip 
with its route and its characteristics such mode and travel time.
	
Typically the integrated NMT–PT trip takes place over a combination 
of transport networks, the road network and/or the bicycle and pedestrian 
network(s) and the different public transport networks, each consisting of a 
set of routes. These different networks are modelled as layers in Euclidian 
space with different connectivity connecting the different route elements.
	
GIS provides a spatial database structure that is capable of storing, 
analysing and visualizing spatial data. Typically these spatial data are 
representing some real life phenomena in the form of either a point, line 
or a polygon or using a tessellation (raster). GIS allows for the storing of 
particular characteristics of these objects in attribute tables that are directly 
linked to graphical objects. The origins and destinations (opportunities) 
and their attributes can be mapped at any spatial resolution and linked to 
the available network. The transport systems themselves are represented 
as networks. A network consists of nodes and links that are encoded. Links 
can represent bi-directional movements and can also carry attributes. 
Beside the links–nodes combination, a system is defined to represent the 
connectivity. Recently, most GIS software also allow for fully integrated 
multi-modal transport networks to be implemented using a single geo-
database. Typical network analytical approaches derived from the network 
such as optimal path analysis, service area analysis, optimal service 
location and the analysis of spatial interaction through a network can be 
performed through a multi-modal network database.
13.6 
No smart cities without good accessibility 
Smart cities as introduced in Chapter 1 cannot exist without having well-
functioning, interconnected and efficient infrastructure systems (both in 
terms of physical and communication infrastructure) and that are well 
integrated with urban forms and functions (in terms of the spatially 
dispersed activity locations). However, this integration between land 
development, land use and transport may be different for the different 
groups in society, either because they are living in different locations and/
or using different urban services and facilities, or because of difference 

312	
Geographic information system for smart cities
in preferences, affordability or access to transportation services. This 
shows that accessibility serves as an indicator for the effectiveness of 
the transport system, while at the same time it is an indicator for the 
availability of urban services and facilities. The first being the domain of 
urban transport planners, the latter for urban planners. Hence, the use of 
accessibility indicators requires the integrated attention of both types of 
planners. This is one of the key characteristics of planning in smart cities. 
GIS technology is a multi-user, multi-domain platform with the capability 
to link both worlds. In the next two sections, examples of using GIS to 
calculate and map accessibility are shown for the cities of Wuhan in China 
and Ahmedabad in India. Both are large, fast-growing cities where city 
authorities are struggling to keep pace with the scale of change as a result 
of a complex of driving forces: rapid economic growth, socio-political 
change and associated changes in lifestyle and behaviour. In each case 
different concerns underlay the analysis. In Wuhan, the main purpose was 
to explore the potential for development of new types of indicators that 
better measure accessibility dynamics in response to rapid changes in land 
use, population and job distribution and the provision of public and private 
transportation services. The Ahmedabad case explores how accessibility 
indicators can be used to provide information and insights into the impact 
of a new Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) system on job accessibility for the urban 
poor, ostensibly its main beneficiaries. 
13.7	
Dynamic 
land 
use 
and 
contour-based 
accessibility in Wuhan, China
The city of Wuhan, capital city of Hubei Province, as many other Chinese 
cities has been undergoing very rapid urbanization with urban expansion, 
urban redevelopment and urban renewal, which is radically transforming 
the built environment, the supporting transport infrastructure and therefore 
also the distribution of population, of jobs and their accessibility. The 
interaction between urban development and transport is highly important 
for liveable cities but also complex and dynamic. Any land-use change has 
transport implications and vice versa. Urban development generates travel, 
and travel behaviour generates opportunities for new facilities, which in 
turn affects accessibility and may attract further development[14]. 
	
To explore sound land use and transportation planning strategies, a 
study was conducted for Wuhan to simulate scenarios of land-use change 

	
Exploring smart city futures: Opportunities and barriers to ...	
313
(using GIS-based Cellular Automata simulation in Metronamica software 
[14]) coupled with GIS-based accessibility indicators. The results from 
these scenarios showcase the causal relationships between planning, land 
developments and accessibility (Fig. 13.2) and demonstrate the utility of 
the approach and methods.
Figure 13.2  Urban change due to metro-focused infrastructure investment (purple areas) as 
compared to business-as-usual (red area). Urban change affected by the metro system and 
allocated along the metro lines [14].
	
The combination of changing land uses and infrastructure investment 
(as compared to the situation of ‘business-as-usual’) affects the level of 
accessibility for different transport modes. Figure 13.3 shows the results 
for two years and two modes. In 2020 clearly, car and bus accessibility in 
the central zones are almost equally good in the range of 15–30 minutes 
travel time to reach one of the commercial business district (CBD) points. 
However, toward the outskirts of the study area, car users have greater 
accessibility than users of other modes. This is partly due to lack of bus 
services in these peripheral areas, but may also be caused by a lack of 
data on (informal) public transport services in these areas. Travel time by 
car is improving significantly over time from 1998 to 2020, mainly due 
to the introduction of the third ring road and express ways in the city. As 

314	
Geographic information system for smart cities
congestion effects, which can be significant in Chinese cities, have not 
been taken into account, the improvement might be too optimistic. 
a1. AC 2/BAU – Car 1998
a2. AC 2/BAU – Bus and walk 1998
City centers
Lengend
buslines
roads
waterbody
traveltime (min)
15
30
45
60
90
b1. AC 2/BAU – Car 2020
b2. AC 2/BAU – Bus and walk 2020
Figure 13.3  Contour measures for car versus bus with walking access for 1998 and 2020
	
Figure 13.4, accordingly, compares the impact of a typical smart city 
scenario (compact development) with low-density urban development 
(urban sprawl) and business-as-usual (BAU) on the cumulative percentage 
of population within certain travel time contours for public transport with 
walking access in 2020. Interestingly, only a small percentage of the 

	
Exploring smart city futures: Opportunities and barriers to ...	
315
population can reach one of the city centres within 15 minutes travel time. 
This percentage is much increased when accessing public transport by 
bicycle. With respect to car-based accessibility, the differences are only 
marginal. Even though marginal, a compact urban development scenario 
increases public transport access more than the BAU and urban sprawl 
scenarios, particularly for travel times up to 30 minutes, as the compact 
development scenario improves people’s accessibility as compared to 
BAU. For the urban sprawl scenario, this is the opposite.
Figure 13.4  Impact of urban development scenarios on cumulative percentage of 
population within travel time contours for public transport (PT) with walking access
	
This study showed how a contour-based accessibility metric can be 
combined with a dynamic land-use simulation model, and how this coupled 
model can calculate and visualize population numbers with certain levels 
of accessibility, important for the study of smart cities as well. 
13.8	
Potential accessibility indicators for 
Ahmedabad, India
Ahmedabad is the largest city and former capital of the Indian state of 
Gujarat located on the bank of Sabarmati River in the western part of India. 

316	
Geographic information system for smart cities
The river divides the city into East Ahmedabad and West Ahmedabad. 
With more than 5.5 million inhabitants (Fig. 13.5), Ahmedabad is the 
fifth largest city and seventh largest metropolitan area in India, and is 
one of the important trade and commerce centres in India. Its formerly 
flourishing textile industry collapsed in the late 1980s, but the present city 
still accounts for 19% of the total urban workers in the state and hosts 
several key textile, chemical, engineering and pharmaceutical industries. 
Figure 13.5  Population dynamics of the city of Ahmedabad
	
Ahmedabad’s population density ranges from 2,293 persons per 
hectare in parts of the walled city area to densities of 150–370 persons per 
hectare in the western part of the city. Ahmedabad still has a substantial 
urban poor population; about 25% of the total population live in slums and 
an additional 14% live in tenement houses, or chawls [15, 16], spread over 
the city. 
	
In terms of transport, present mean trip lengths in Ahmedabad are low 
as compared to, for example, Bengaluru, Hyderabad and Pune [17], but 
the fast sprawling city and rapid rise in motorized vehicle ownership and 
use are matters of concern. There are two mass transit modes currently 
in operation in the city, i.e. the Ahmedabad Municipal Transport Service 
(AMTS) with around 540 buses and routes oriented mostly to serve the 
central portions of the city, and a new BRTS, which now runs successfully 
on the connecting radials (Fig. 13.6). In addition, Ahmedabad has advanced 
plans for the construction of a metro system (MRT) linking Ahmedabad 
and neighbouring Gandhinagar. 

	
Exploring smart city futures: Opportunities and barriers to ...	
317
 
The BRTS project was implemented under the Jawaharlal Nehru 
National Urban Renewal Mission (JnNURM) that also supports several 
slum improvement programs, such as the Basic Services to Urban Poor 
(BSUP), which includes the Socially and Economically Weaker Section 
Housing (SEWSH) project considered in this study. The key question in 
this study is “what are the anticipated impacts of investing in sustainable 
transport initiatives such as BRTS and MRT to the accessibility of the 
urban poor in Ahmedabad?” The study demonstrates how readily available 
network and GIS analysis tools can quantify and graphically illustrate 
the effects of different public transport improvements in addressing the 
mobility needs of the urban poor. 
 
Specifically the impacts on accessibility of the urban poor to 
employment locations through public transport (AMTS, BRTS, MRT) in 
combination with non-motorized access modes (cycling, walking) from 
their housing locations (general or specifically BSUP) are addressed.
Figure 13.6  Networks of ordinary busses (AMTS), BRT (BRTS) and metro (MRTS) 
modelled in the GIS environment

318	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
The development of a GIS data model that is able to deal with the 
movement of public transport is complex. Several approaches have been 
developed to model multi-modal networks in GIS [18]. The problem to 
be tackled relates to the modelling of a multitude of routes on a single 
network link, a common phenomenon in public transportation systems. 
This has traditionally not been possible in planar 2D GIS systems; however, 
recent advances in spatial databases have allowed for the development of 
a 3D data model concept that is able to handle multi-modality. With this 
concept, topologies are established in 3 dimensions on the basis of multi-
layer transportation networks, e.g. a bus and a rail network. Such a model 
has been applied in Ahmedabad. 
	
In the Ahmedabad NMT-PT model, a ‘virtual 3D model’ is implemented 
for modelling the underlying road network with the different bus stops 
and bus routes (and metro stops and routes) in 3 virtual dimensions. Each 
bus route is assigned an elevation (equal to the bus route ID number) and 
is therefore disconnected physically from the road network. Switching 
from one route to the next is done through so-called connectors that are 
carrying the impedances that are associated with the transfers, particularly 
the waiting time for that transfer.
	
Figure 13.7 shows a 3-dimensional representation of the modelled 
networks in Ahmedabad, whereby the 3-dimensional representation offers 
clear benefits in visualizing the number of bus routes on a given link.
Figure 13.7  Three-dimensional representation of the modelled networks

	
Exploring smart city futures: Opportunities and barriers to ...	
319
	
The mentioned connectors enable switching between routes and 
the road network in the 3D implementation and also allow for attaching 
impedances (in this case waiting/transfer times). The connectors do not 
represent a real physical phenomenon and are therefore called ‘false’ 
connectors; connecting bus stops (road level) to the ‘false’ bus stops (bus 
route level).
	
The potential accessibility measure explicitly combines job 
opportunities of the poor and the difficulty of travel. Job opportunities are 
discounted with increasing travel time using a decay function; a distant 
job is valued less than one close by. A negative exponential function with 
a (non-calibrated) decay factor −0.03838 is used (Eq. 13.1), which implies 
that a job 60 minutes away is 10 times less attractive than a similar job in the 
immediate location. The differences in this potential accessibility value can 
be substantial across modes. Figure 13.8 visualizes the potential number of 
jobs by the least-poor worker class accessing salaried jobs in Ahmedabad 
comparing walking only with that of the currently implemented public 
transport system (AMTS + BRTS phase 1). The 3D visualization shows 
Figure 13.8  Job-based potential accessibility for the least-poor worker class, comparing 
walking only with current public transport options (AMTS and BRTS); also showing the 
density of salaried job opportunities (in red) in the base layer.

320	
Geographic information system for smart cities
job concentrations in the base layer and depicts potential job accessibility 
per grid cell by walking only in the purple bars (colour intensities and height 
indicate the level of potential accessibility), while the green squares show 
the added level of job accessibility offered by the current AMTS and BRTS 
phase 1 systems. Clearly, the contribution of the AMTS and BRTS phase 1 
systems to potential job accessibility is highest in the areas surrounding the 
centre locations with high job density. More jobs can be reached in a shorter 
travel time, and these are valued higher because of the decreased travel time 
to reach them. The average overall contribution of the AMTS and BRTS 
phase 1 to the level of potential job accessibility for the urban poor class 
compared to walking alone is estimated at 138%.
	
Next, Fig. 13.9 shows the gain in potential accessibility levels for all 
urban poor classes combined from the situation with walking and AMTS 
only to the situation where the BRTS and MRT have been implemented 
fully. The maps at top in Fig. 13.9 show the potential jobs for the two 
different mode combinations, while in the bottom map both scores are 
divided. Clearly, the BRTS and MRT corridors are visible in the resultant 
map. This indicates that the effect of the BRTS and MRT systems on 
potential job accessibility is substantial in these areas. The average overall 
contribution of the BRTS and MRT systems to the level of potential job 
accessibility (for the whole city), compared to the walking and AMTS 
combination only, is estimated at 8%. 
13.9	
Discussion and conclusions
The two cases well illustrate how innovative and useful information can 
be generated through GIS-based scenario analyses. Each of the examples 
goes far beyond simple map overlays that are often sold as being the 
“power of urban GIS”. While the map overlays and other basic GIS 
functions certainly do have value, the complex reality is such that the truly 
strategic decisions require far more sophisticated models and methods 
than overlays and 2D visualizations alone can provide. The methods and 
approaches showcased here have seemingly great potential for providing 
improved insights into the likely impacts of investments which are long 
lasting. Urban infrastructures are not only expensive, they also almost 
certainly will generate path dependency effects that are potentially both 
good and bad [19]. A thorough ex-ante assessment of these potential 
effects that also considers a range of possible development scenarios is 

	
Exploring smart city futures: Opportunities and barriers to ...	
321
therefore under such circumstances warranted [2], and even more so in 
situations when resources are severely constrained.
Figure 13.9  Ratio of job-based potential accessibility for all urban poor workers comparing 
all public transport options with walking and AMTS only

322	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
While both studies do all illustrate considerable potential of such 
tools, there are also underlying problems to consider related to data 
and institutional readiness. Despite many years of rhetoric about the 
value of urban GIS [20,21], it is still difficult for researchers to obtain 
access to the required data from multiple municipal departments for 
analysis of the current situation, let alone historic data that enable the 
creation of quantitative dynamic spatial models for future scenarios. Such 
sophisticated models for strategic decision support depend on the ability 
to utilise data from multiple departments in an integrated manner, i.e. the 
ability to integrate data across platforms and across domains over time. To 
create and maintain such an urban information infrastructure requires an 
organizational wide information strategy and strong leadership [22,23] but 
these are often sorely lacking. 
	
Knowledge on accessibility to facilities and services can help cities 
with a high ICT endowment to study the effects of ICT on levels of 
accessibility and ultimately the possibility of substitution of communication 
with transport and vice versa. Further research should show how ICT can 
enhance levels of accessibility to opportunities albeit physical or through 
communication. Hence, accessibility matters for smart cities. 
13.10 
Acknowledgements
Both case studies were conducted with support of the World Bank. The 
findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in this work do not 
necessarily reflect the views of the World Bank, its Board of Executive 
Directors, or the governments they represent. The authors acknowledge 
Anand Patel of Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) for his inputs 
and permission to use data in the Ahmedabad case study, Mr. Nguyen 
Ngoc Quang and Frans van den Bosch in the geo-database and model 
development in both studies. The Wuhan study reported in Shi et al. 
(2012) was conducted together with the Research Institute for Knowledge 
Systems (RIKS) in The Netherlands, Wuhan Municipality and Wuhan 
University. 
13.11	
References
[1] Webster, C. J., and Lai, W. L. C. (2003). Property rights, planning and 
markets: Managing spontaneous cities. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.

	
Exploring smart city futures: Opportunities and barriers to ...	
323
[2] Hopkins, L. D., and Zapata, M. A. (eds.) (2007). Engaging the future: 
forecasts, scenarios, plans and projects. Cambridge etc.: Lincoln Institute of Land 
Policy.
[3] Wati, K. (2009). Transport related social exclusion in Ahmedabad. M.Sc. 
Thesis, University of Twente/ITC.
[4] Lucas, K. (ed.) (2004). Running on empty; Transport, social exclusion 
and environmental justice. The Policy Press, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
[5] Handy, S., and Niemeier, D.A. (1997). Measuring accessibility: An 
exploration of issues and alternatives. Environment and Planning A, vol. 29, 
1997, pp. 175–194.
[6] Straatemeier, T. (2008). How to plan for regional accessibility? Transport 
Policy, vol. 15(2), 2008, pp. 127–137.
[7] Geurs, K. T., and Van Wee, B. (2004). Accessibility evaluation of land-
use and transport strategies: review and research directions, Journal of Transport 
Geography, vol. 12, 2004, pp. 127–140.
[8] Groenendijk, J. M., IeCercq, F., and Bertolini, L. (2003). Bereikbaarheidals 
planning skadervoorinterventies in verkeer en vervoer. Report, Amersfoort, 
Amsterdam, 2003, [in Dutch]
[9] Handy, S.L., and Clifton, K.L. (2001). Evaluating neighbourhood 
accessibility: possibilities and practicalities, Journal of Transportation and 
Statistics, vol. 4(2/3),pp. 67–78. 
[10] Geurs, K.T., and Ritsema van Eck, J.R. (2003). Accessibility evaluation 
of land-use scenarios: the impact of job competition, land-use and infrastructure 
developments for the Netherlands. Environment and Planning B, vol. 30(1),pp. 
69–87.
[11] Benenson, I., Martens, K., Rofe, Y., and Kwartler, A. (2010). Public 
transport versus private car GIS-based estimation of accessibility applied to the 
Tel Aviv metropolitan area, Annals of Regional Science, DOI 10. I 007/s00 168-0 
10-0392-6.
[12] Kawabata, M., and Shen, Q. (2006). Job accessibility as an indicator 
of auto-oriented urban structure: a comparison of Boston and Los Angeles with 
Tokyo. Environment and Planning B, vol. 33,pp. 115–130.
[13] Kotavaara, O., Antikainen, H., and Rusanen, J. (2011). Population 
change and accessibility by road and rail networks: GIS and statistical approach 
to Finland 1970–2007. Journal of Transport Geography, 19(4), pp. 926–935.
[14] Shi, Y., Zuidgeest, M.H.P., Salzberg, A., Sliuzas, R.V., Huang, Z., Zhang, 
Q., Quang, N.N., Hurkens, J., Peng, M., Chen, G., van Maarseveen, M.F.A.M., 
and van Delden, H. (2012). Simulating urban development scenarios for Wuhan. 
In: Proceedings of 6th International Association for China Planning Conference 

324	
Geographic information system for smart cities
(IACP), 17–19 June 2012, Wuhan, China. Washington: IEEE, 2012. ISBN: 978-
1-4673-4907-9, p.13.
[15] Mahadevia, D. (2001). Informalization of employment and poverty 
in Ahmedabad. Informal sector in India: perspectives and policies. Institute for 
Human Development, New Delhi, pp. 142–159.
[16] MoHUPA and Government of India (eds.) (2010). Rajiv Awas Yojna, 
Towards a Slum Free India: Guidelines. Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation, New Delhi.
[17] Pai, M. (2008). India: Sustainable Transport Indicators. Centre for 
Sustainable Transport, India. Embarq.
[18] Miller, H.J., and Shaw, S-L. (2001). Geographic Information Systems 
for Transportation: Principles and Applications, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 
UK.
[19] Hopkins, L. D. (2001). Urban development. The logic of making plans. 
New York: Island Press.
[20] Huxhold, W. E. (1991). An introduction to urban geographic information 
systems. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[21] Huxhold, W. E. (2003). Establishing urban spatial data infrastructures, 
Enschede: ITC, pp. 17–36.
[22] Masser, I. (2003). Future research agendas for urban and regional 
planning and geo-information management, Enschede: ITC, pp. 1–16.
[23] Masser, I., and Campbell, H. (1989). Conditions for the effective use 
of computers in urban planning in developing countries. Paper presented at the 
Computers in Urban Planning and Urban Management, Hong Kong.

Abstract: India, while being the largest democracy in the world, is also the second largest 
urban system. Our urban governance system leaves much to be desired and the 7-year 
Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JnNURM) was meant to bring about 
substantial changes in our cities infrastructure as well as e-governance systems. There are 
other technology initiatives as well at the government level to take advantage of technology 
but most of them have not resulted in the ultimate change aimed at. To be fair, there are 
some urban local bodies which have taken the lead in leveraging technology and the results 
are there to be seen. A review of some world city examples show how advanced they are 
with regard to taking advantage of technology in day-to-day governance issues and the 
substantial progress made in becoming smarter cities. How ready are we to become smart 
cities and what proactive measures are required to make our cities smart, have also been 
reviewed.
Key words: cities and towns, e-governance, GIS, government, ICT, JnNURM, Ministry of 
Urban Development, smart city, SLB (service-level benchmark), sustainable, ULB, urban
14.1	
Introduction
Like in many other cases, urban India also is different in many respects 
from the overall global scenario. While more than 50 per cent of the world 
population live in urban areas, in India it is at 32 per cent only. This has to be 
seen in the context of urbanisation levels of other developing countries like 
China at 45 per cent, Indonesia at 54 per cent, Mexico at 78 per cent and Brazil 
at 87 per cent. We have as many as 7935 cities and towns but a sizeable chunk 
of this – as many as 3894 towns are called census towns, meaning they are 
not notified urban bodies though they have substantial urban characteristics 
like larger number of male workers depending on non-agricultural pursuits, 
density of at least 400 person per sq km and population not less than five 
thousand. This adds an entirely different dimension to our urban planning 
and the way we handle our urban development since these continue to be 
termed ‘rural’ areas. Size of Indian cities expand mostly through a process 
of peripheral expansion, the trend being smaller municipalities and large 
14
Towards smart cities in India
M. RAMACHANDRAN

326	
Geographic information system for smart cities
villages surrounding the core city becoming part of the larger metropolitan 
area. Also our cities have been growing population wise as is evident from 
the figure of only five cities with million-plus population in 1951 going up 
to 53 in 2011. Whereas cities play an important role in the overall economic 
development of the country, accounting for 62–63 per cent of overall GDP 
in 2009–2010, projected to grow to 70 per cent by 2030, generating 80–85 
per cent of India’s tax revenue and to account for 70 per cent of all new 
jobs created in India in the next 20 years, our annual capital spending in 
urban infrastructure works out to US$ 17 per capita [5] (source: McKinsey 
Report). Our investment in urban infrastructure is just 0.7 per cent of GDP 
as of 2011–2012, whereas Brazil spends 4.5% and South Africa invests 6% 
of their GDP in urban areas.
	
Even though it is known that India is set to urbanise at an unprecedented 
pace and scale and it is accepted that urbanisation is an inevitable part of 
a nation’s development process, we have not paid adequate attention to 
over all urban development as is evident from the multitude of problems 
our cities face, prominent being insufficiency of delivery of urban 
infrastructure and basic services to provide citizens with a decent quality 
of life. If we look at some of the basics, it becomes an eye opener as 
to how challenging the tasks are: only 90% of urban households have 
water connection, 64% have individual water connections, duration of 
daily water supply in cities and towns is only 1–6 hours on an average, 
94% of cities do not have even a partial sewerage network, 18% of Indian 
households are without any form of latrine facility, only 50% of our urban 
waste gets collected, more than one-fourth of the urban population lives in 
slums, housing shortage amounts to 18.78 million of which 56% belong 
to the economically weaker sections, 26% of urban dwellers are below 
poverty level, just 55% of the city residents have electricity connection 
in their houses and public transport in India accounts for only 22% of the 
modal share [3, 6].
14.2 
Launch of flagship mission
It is in the background of all these inadequacies in urban India that the 
Government of India decided to make a major intervention to bring 
about improvements in the urban scenario by launching in 2005 the 
reforms driven, fast, planned development of cities through JnNURM 
with a huge grant provision of a little over Rs 660 billion [7]. The main 

	
Towards smart cities in India	
327
thrust of the strategy of urban renewal was to ensure improvement in 
urban governance. State governments, urban local bodies (ULBs) and 
parastatal agencies together were required to agree to time-bound 
implementation of an agenda of 23 key reforms and also chip in their 
share of finances equal to the central grant for projects taken up. One 
such reform was introduction of system of e-governance using IT 
applications like GIS and MIS for various services provided by urban 
bodies/parastatals like development authorities and water boards [4]. 
There is a national e-governance plan of the Government of India which 
aims at making all government services accessible to the common man 
in his locality through common service delivery outlets; and out of 28 
such Mission Mode Projects formulated for this purpose, e-governance 
in municipalities is one such project. Eight basic services namely 
registration and issue of birth/death certificates, payment of property 
tax, utility bills and management of utilities, grievances and suggestions, 
building approvals, procurement and monitoring of projects, health 
programs including licenses, solid waste management, accounting 
system and personnel information system were identified as part of 
the first phase. By implementing this reform, ULBs were to exploit the 
advantages of ICT (Information and Communications Technology) to 
transform the quality and cost effectiveness of their services, to align and 
integrate them with those of other public bodies and to collect and manage 
data in ways that make it possible to provide information and services 
in an integrated manner [4]. Among the key outcomes of the reform, 
from citizens’ point of view, were easy access to municipal services, 
hassle-free payment of taxes and user charges and quick redressal of 
grievances. For decision makers, it was to mean improved information 
for planning and decision making.
	
All these could be seen as the first but a major step towards smart 
city. But what is the status of implementation of the reforms agenda on 
completion of the 7-year mission period in year 2012? Just 33 out of the 
total 65 mission cities, where the focus of implementation was, could 
complete this reform measure of e-governance by implementing all the 
eight modules [1]. A total of another 545 small towns, where also the 
mission projects were taken up and hence were committed to implement 
this reform as well, claim to have implemented the reform in a similar 
manner. But is this reported status of implementation really a first step 
towards steadily extending the use of technology to various other areas? 

328	
Geographic information system for smart cities
The reform primer issued for the states as a guiding document by the 
central Ministry of Urban Development lists the rationale for the reform 
and its components including broad principles to be kept in view such as 
adopting a state-wide approach for designing the system, focus should 
not just be on procurement of hardware or software but primarily on a 
critical study of the existing system and process for delivery of services 
to citizens and also to have flexibility in the system to meet future needs 
of ULBs. Reform implementation particularly those complex ones which 
required the state government to take the lead and the local bodies to be 
proactive did not get the priority, as comes out from the only appraisal 
report of the Mission published in March 2011 [2], when it states that 
23 reforms to be implemented within a span of 5–7 years seem to be a 
considerable challenge for the states/ local bodies. Since no fund was 
earmarked for implementation of these reforms, many local bodies have 
been struggling to fund the implementation; for example, the accounting 
reforms as well as GIS-based property taxation. It has also been 
recommended that certain ULB-level reforms like e-governance and 
double entry accounting system need the state’s stewardship for efficient 
and comparable results across the ULBs of the state. Yet another key 
document, which gives an overview of the status of implementation of 
various development programs in the country, the Mid-Term Appraisal 
of the Eleventh Plan recognises that as the first national flagship program 
for urbanisation, JnNURM has been effective in renewing focus on 
the urban sector across the country and has helped create a facilitative 
environment for critical reforms in many states [8]. It also says that 
JnNURM has helped initiate a comprehensive process of urban reforms 
within states and local bodies. However the report also emphasises on 
the point that the pace and depth of reforms need to pick up.
	
What would further dictate the thrust and focus of our urban agenda is 
the Twelfth Five Year Plan for the period 2012 to 2017 and the proposed 
second phase of the urban mission generally referred to as JnNURM 
II. So many are the aspects of urban development to be touched upon 
in the document that the Approach to the Twelfth Plan could not make 
any specific mention about technology and the further expansion required 
of the e-governance program. The one relevant reference one can find 
in this document is in the statement that the emphasis on administration 
and technical management of urban development must become more 
professional and technology must be deployed to improve service delivery 

	
Towards smart cities in India	
329
and governance. One can only hope that when the expected next phase 
of the JnNURM is announced or when its implementation is taken up, 
capacity building for ULBs as outlined by one of the working groups 
that went into capacity issues in the sector will get priority and, the 
process of strengthening municipal cadres will include having technology 
professionals positioned at the city level so that in coordination with state-
level strategisation, a steady effort in taking better advantage of technology 
will happen at the city level.
14.3 
Other technology programs covering urban 
sector
The National Mission Mode Program on e-governance is yet another 
Indian-government-supported initiative which helps mission cities to 
move forward with this agenda. The national e-governance plan of the 
Government of India, consisting of 27 mission mode projects, aims at 
making all government services accessible to the common man in his 
locality through common service delivery outlets [9]. It was in line with 
this additional program that the mission cities could take up specific 
projects for technology enhancement. One project was approved for the 
city of Vijayawada in 2008–2009 at a cost of Rs 40.2 million of which 50 
percent was provided by the Government of India. Nagpur city also got a 
project approved in the same year at a cost of Rs 134.5 million. Another 
five cities got their projects approved in 2009–2010, three in 2010–2011 
and sixteen cities in 2011–2012. Total cost of all these 26 projects work 
out to Rs 2.64 billion.
	
The National Urban Information System (NUIS) is yet another scheme 
launched by the central government during the Tenth Five Year plan in 
March 2006 to develop GIS databases for 152 towns in the country in the 
two scales of 1:1000 and 1:2000. In addition, utility mapping on 1:1000 
scale was also initiated for 22 towns. The objectives were impressive such 
as developing spatial and attribute data base, using modern data sources, 
developing standards, developing urban indices and building capacity 
at state and local body level. Mapping had to be assigned to Survey of 
India who have procured satellite images for all 152 towns for 1:10,000 
scale mapping. Aerial photography is reported to have been completed 
for 133 towns for mapping at 1:2000 scale. Two utilities namely water 
supply and sewerage are to be mapped at 1:1000 scale using ground-

330	
Geographic information system for smart cities
penetrating radar (GPR) technology. Application development is another 
important component of the scheme and the ULBs are expected to use 
the data received to formulate master plans, development plans, slum-
free city plans, property tax collection, transport plans environmental 
management and infrastructure plans. The scheme has not been able to 
make the required progress due to a variety of factors such as outsourcing 
of utility mapping resulting in disputes, aerial flying not being feasible for 
some towns close to the international border, delay in vetting of maps by 
the concerned towns and low priority attached to the work resulting in not 
all participating states setting up the state and city cells in time. Also data 
collection has been slow as far as national urban data bank indicators are 
concerned.
	
Handbook on Service Level Benchmark for Services through 
e-Governance, issued by the central Ministry of Urban Development, 
takes into account all the measurable outputs/ key performance indicators 
identified by the JnNURM and further includes additional indicators for 
providing more wider and in-depth analysis of the service-level benchmarks 
(SLBs). An assessment was made to analyse the growth of e-governance 
initiatives for the eight basic services across 35 mission cities for the year 
2006 and 2009 and it was found that overall e-governance readiness in 
ULBs in 2006 was 31% which rose to 42% in 2009. It was noticed that 
ULBs are trying to adopt a few of the service-level key performance 
indicators available or are modifying the available indicators as per their 
suitability and convenience to deliver a service. The reason for this limited 
effort was the difference existing in vision, need, underlying process, 
technology capacity and legal requirements. This makes service levels for 
delivering a service different from municipality to municipality. It was 
in this background that a common set of service-level key performance 
indicators for e-governance services were formulated at the national level 
to have the following benefits [10]:
	
l	 Noting that some ULBs already have software applications for 
almost all the services identified under the JnNURM while some 
others are greenfield projects, SLBs are expected to provide 
uniform platform for defining, data collection, measuring and 
reporting the service-level key performance indicators.
	
l	 It is possible to link implementation with the expected outcome.
	
l	 This will help local bodies define where they are as against the 
benchmarks defined.

	
Towards smart cities in India	
331
	
l	 This will provide a common vision and framework for what needs 
to be achieved.
	
l	 Performance report cards will help collect data in a uniform 
manner across urban bodies.
	
l	 Relative positions of local bodies, their e-governance readiness 
and common themes can be analysed.
	
l	 Strategic or policy-level interventions can be possible, and realistic 
plans for achieving next level of targets can be made.
	
l	 Citizens can avail same level of service across the nation.
	
l	 Transparency and accountability can be better facilitated since 
achievements/failures can be provided online.
	
A summary of the list of eight services covered, their category and 
classification is given in Table 14.1:
Table 14.1  List of eight services covered, categories and classification
S. 
no.
Service
Classification
Category
1
Birth/death registration
Citizen centric service
G2C
2
Payment of property tax/utilities bills
Citizen centric/Organization 
specific
G2C, G2B
3
Grievances and suggestions
Citizen centric
G2C, G2B
4
Building approvals
Citizen centric
G2C, G2B
5
Procurement
Citizen centric
Organization specific
G2G, G2B
6
l Health programs
l Licenses
l Solid waste management
Citizen centric
Organization specific
G2C, G2B
G2B
7
Accounting system
Organization specific
G2G
8
Personnel information system
Organization specific
G2E
G – government
B – business            
C – consumer/Citizen         
E – employee
	
While identifying and listing various service-level key performance 
indicators, role of GIS has been highlighted in the following manner:

332	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
l	 In case of property tax, immediate updating of property on GIS 
map on approval
	
l	 In case of building approvals, coverage on GIS/MIS platform
	
Though such an effective tool is available to provide convenience to 
citizens, it remains a fact that only a small number of municipal bodies 
have been able to reach anywhere near what is expected. That the journey 
left even to have uniform coverage for all these eight basic services across 
the country in all cities and towns itself is a long one.
	
In October 2012 when the Bangalore-based not-for-profit Janaagraha 
Centre for Citizenship and Democracy awarded city bodies at the 
national level on the basis of evaluation and scoring of websites of 
municipal corporations through the lens of citizens, one significant point 
which emerged was that compared to global cities parameters, our big 
cities still have to travel a lot in terms of performance. In this first of its 
kind venture to award cities based on detailed perusal and browsing of 
websites, Coimbatore emerged as the G2C 2012 champion whereas the 
G2C leader in transparency and accountability is Surat, in online services 
it is Mumbai, in citizen voice it is Pune, in user experience it is Kolkata, 
in website outcomes it is Coimbatore whereas Indore and Bhubaneswar 
emerged as most-promising cites. 
	
The ICT revolution has substantially changed how services are 
organised, planned and delivered. Though there are isolated initiatives, 
India’s urban sector is yet to make effective use of ICT to further 
advance service delivery. How effective it can be in better deployment 
of resources for information retrieval, decision making, ongoing 
management, service delivery and outreach is beyond doubt and so 
particularly in the context of large scale investments in infrastructure 
happening in our cities, it is important to ensure that the potential gains 
from ICT do not bypass our cities and towns in the endeavour to provide 
quality services and responsive governance. How have Indian cities used 
ICT so far to bring about changes? Few city-specific examples could 
be looked into. Maharashtra Jeevan Pradhikaran went in for GIS and 
hydraulic modelling for a pilot 24×7 water-supply initiative in the city of 
Amaravati. Nagpur Municipal Corporation installed a centralised web-
based monitoring system to improve water supply efficiency. Hyderabad 
went in for GPS and GPRS technologies through cell phone images 
to improve solid waste management, maintenance of parks and street 
lights. ICT application in the form of field instrumentation with central 

	
Towards smart cities in India	
333
systems for real time monitoring of various process parameters using 
WLAN, broadband and GPRS communication for data transmission 
helps Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal Corporation to monitor, control, plan 
corrective action in case of deviations from set benchmarks for water 
quality, efficiency and distribution. While Coimbatore opted for auto 
OCR software application for building permit and management system 
thereby simplifying the building approval process, Kanpur relies on 
linking of properties database to a GIS to improve municipal revenues. 
Bangalore went in for multipurpose GIS-based property database with 
customised software as a result of which the city collects more property 
tax than any other Indian city with revenue going up from Rs 4.3 billion 
in 2007–2008 to Rs 15 billion in 2011–2012. 
14.4 
ICT initiatives in Indian cities
More examples of changes brought about as a result of consciously 
opting for ICT can be listed to prove the point that there have been 
sound beginnings, but where our cities lag behind is in taking it forward 
as an overall integrated city-wide strategy to be ‘smart’. Chennai’s 
Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board migrated to an ERP 
platform to integrate discrete modules and enable MIS and citizen service 
complaints, billing and collection and procurement leading to efficiency 
and transparency of operations. Directorate of Municipal Administration 
of Karnataka discussed and developed an online application software 
titled ‘Tulana’ to objectively assess the service-level benchmarking 
performance of ULBs across the state. Web server, application server 
and database server as well as software applications are relied on. 
Provision of municipal services in Hyderabad through e-sewa, relying 
on 3-tier architecture of clients at first tier, central server at second tier 
and departmental server at third tier have brought about substantial 
change in service delivery. Andhra Pradesh’s Meesewa, which is a single 
entry portal for all services, renders 45 types of services through over 
5500 counters in the state and the number of transactions has crossed 
six million. Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai has put in place 
comprehensive ICT-enabled strategy for delivering citizen services 
through a web-enabled system operated through the corporation’s portal 
and linked to SAP, which allows for real time data and operations. This 
probably is the most complex and wide range of system application, 

334	
Geographic information system for smart cities
given the size of operation of the Mumbai Municipal Corporation with 
more than 260 services covering a population of over twelve million. To 
manage the rapid increase in the number of vehicles and the consequent 
traffic confusion, the Bangalore Police have initiated the B-TRAC, an 
intelligent real time information system on traffic and safety using various 
technology-based initiatives such as use of BlackBerry services to check 
traffic rule violations, installation of GPS on buses and centralised traffic 
signal management.
14.5 
Smart city initiatives world wide
It will be both interesting and informative to look at how the smart city 
concept is gaining ground in some of the world cities. Songdo International 
Business District [11] is a free trade and international business hub spread 
over 1500 acres of reclaimed land near Incheon International airport. 
This is a US$ 35 billion new city well positioned to become a major 
economic hub with 35 million sq ft of residential, 40 million sq ft office 
space, 10 million sq ft retail space and 10 million sq ft public space. 
Forty percent of the area is set aside as open space including a hundred-
acre central park. Created as a ‘ubiquitous city’, all major information 
systems such as business, residential, health care are all to share data 
across an integrated network. It is so designed that inspirational living 
and working environments are created where technology enables personal 
lifestyle choices and corporate innovation. The aggressive strategy to 
develop one of the most sustainable cities in the world has the six main 
considerations of huge open and green space, efficient transportation 
with subway, bicycle lanes, earmarked parking facility particularly for 
fuel-efficient and low-emitting vehicles, infrastructure for electrical 
vehicle charging stations and parking primarily at underground level, 
well-managed water consumption/storage and reuse, carbon emission 
and energy use aimed at energy-efficient buildings/traffic lights/pumps 
and motors, recycling of waste, and well planned and sustainable city 
operations integrated into the overall operation structure of the city. 
Designed to be one of the world’s greenest cities, setting new standards 
for sustainable design and construction practices, all Songdo projects are 
to have LEED certification. A striking feature of the city development 
is that working with strategic alliance partners such as Microsoft, 
CISCO, United Technologies, 3M, KT, LGCNS and others, this business 

	
Towards smart cities in India	
335
district is integrating the latest technology right from ground level up, 
to enable increased levels of convenience, personal productivity, system 
efficiencies and enhanced safety for all the residents.
	
Singapore [11] is a city where the government sees the use of 
technology as a strategic avenue that can lead to ways of overcoming the 
challenges. Through an initiative known as i-Gov 2010, the aim is to be 
an integrated government that delights customers and connects citizens 
through ICT. Key thrusts of i-Gov 2010 are the following:
	
l	 Provide customers with quality government e-services which are 
convenient and accessible
	
l	 Provide citizens with high quality government information and the 
opportunity to be active stakeholders
	
l	 Enhance the capacities of government and public offices through 
innovative use
	
l	 Increase nation’s economic competitiveness by fostering a 
pro-business environment and partnering the private sector in 
innovative i-Gov 2010 projects
	
In continuation, vision for Singapore in 2015 was structured aiming to 
achieve.
	
l	 To be first in the world in harnessing ICT to add value to the 
economy and society
	
l	 Two-fold increase to add value, of ICT industry, to the tune of 
Singapore dollars 26 billion
	
l	 Three-fold increase in ICT export revenues to Singapore dollars 
60 billion
	
l	 Creation of eighty thousand additional jobs
	
l	 90% of homes using broadband
	
l	 100% computer ownership in homes with school-going children
	
They aim at a next-generation infrastructure which opens up a whole 
new world of economic and social possibilities, and also encourages new 
applications and services to be delivered by the new infrastructure. So the 
twin objectives are boosting economic competitiveness and at the same 
time enriching the lives of every individual hold priority. Individuals are to 
be provided with speeds of gigabits per second in every home, school and 
business. Imagine visiting the doctor means staying at home; learning can 
take place beyond the classroom at each individual’s own pace, place and 
time; imagine a business environment where working overtime does not 
mean working late; becoming a location chosen by global ICT business 

336	
Geographic information system for smart cities
due to unparalleled quality of business environment; ICT infrastructure 
and manpower – that is Singapore visualised for 2015.
	
As cities grow, the vehicle population also goes up leading to 
congestion and more emission. Hence the importance of making public 
transport more convenient, accessible, predictable and comfortable. 
ICT can be effectively employed to achieve this. This was recognised 
by Singapore when the Land Transport Authority worked with IBM 
to create a national system aimed at simplifying and streamlining fare 
payment for riders, giving them a choice of cards which can be used 
for other purposes also. By making heavy investment in its public 
transportation infrastructure and bringing in tough measures like levy 
of congestion charges probably for the first time in any city, Singapore 
has been able to create one of the most modern, affordable and heavily 
used public transport networks with a daily ridership of nearly 3 million 
in buses and 1.6 million by train. The created seamless national transport 
fare clearinghouse enables the city residents to use a single card of their 
choice to pay for all modes of travel such as bus/rail/taxis as well as 
vehicle congestion charges and for car parking. While simplifying and 
streamlining fare payment for users, the system also helps in generating 
information from the 20-million-trip-related transactions of each day 
about where, when and how riders are travelling thereby helping translate 
the information into a more convenient, affordable travel experience by 
optimising routes, schedules and fares.
	
New York city [12] is considered one of the world’s leading digital 
metropolises. The city government engages over 25 million people a year 
through more than 200 digital channels. Going beyond just presenting 
information to the city residents, they have developed over 100 original 
public applications that streamline municipal processes which would 
otherwise be cumbersome. When in June 2009, New York became the 
first city in the world to launch a 311 iphone application, it enabled New 
Yorkers to submit service requests using Apple iphone with the option to 
add location tagging via GPS and photos to requests. The city, a pioneer in 
digital government, engages over 4 million people every month through 
the combined online reach of different sources including Facebook and 
Twitter thereby helping citizens access channels which are relevant to 
their daily lives. With 98% broad band connectivity in residences, the 
city is one of the most connected cities in the world. Moving further, 
the franchise agreements worked out will facilitate Internet access in 

	
Towards smart cities in India	
337
selected public spaces such as parks as well. The Metropolitan Transport 
Authority plans to develop infrastructure to provide wireless Internet and 
corridor neutral cellular service in six underground subway stations, later 
to be extended to all 277 underground stations. And this is at no cost to the 
taxpayers. The importance attached to the concept of becoming a smart 
city can be understood from the fact that NYC Digital was established 
by Mayor Bloomberg in July 2010 within the Mayor’s office with the 
objective of creating a healthier civil society and stronger democracy 
through the use of technology that engages, serves and connects New 
Yorkers.
	
The term ‘smart city’ is increasingly becoming part of the language 
of urbanisation policy world over. What is implied in this is the clever 
use of IT to improve productivity of a city’s essential infrastructure 
and services and to take the city governments as close to the people 
as possible. Cities across the world are experimenting with various 
ideas in this regard. In Dublin, sensors are being deployed in the city 
to gather data on traffic movement with a view to finding a solution 
to the traffic congestion. In Mannheim in Germany, every household 
in the city stands connected to a city smart energy network to ensure 
efficiency in energy supply. The government digital strategy report in 
the United Kingdom states that most people in the country rarely use 
online government services. The coverage cost to a citizen of an hour 
of government interaction is placed at GBP 14.70 and by saving half 
an hour by digitising every transaction currently done offline, the total 
saving to the economy is estimated around GBP 1.8 billion. While 
millions of people in the United Kingdom opt for carrying out tasks 
such as shopping and banking online, relatively few use the web for 
tasks involving the government. In Malta where energy is expensive, 
a system of smart meters connected to both the energy and water 
supplies is planned so that consumers get a clear idea about their usage 
and boost conservation. A 2006 pilot study of the road charging system 
for rush hours revealed that traffic was down by nearly 25%, resulting 
in improved traffic flow across the city, use of public transportation 
increased and pollution levels dropped by 14%. Masdar city in Abu 
Dhabi, which has a total population of 90,000, is built at a cost of 
US$ 16 billion and is a zero carbon, zero waste city. This new city 
focuses on sustainability with the desire to be powered entirely by 
renewable energy. The city is to host the headquarters of the International 

338	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Renewable Energy Agency and is to have 1500 businesses all focusing 
on low carbon and sustainable technologies.
	
Rio de Janeiro is using smart city technologies to coordinate 
various activities from emergency response to traffic control. In April 
2010, when the city had to face one of the worst torrential rainstorms 
causing death of 110 people, it was recognised that the city needs to 
prepare itself better by having world class capabilities for the integrated 
and coordinated management of disasters and emergencies. The Joint 
Emergency Operations Centre which came into existence is responsible 
for facilitating rapid responses to natural disasters and other emergencies. 
Its command centre coordinates more than 40 first responder agencies 
from the city, county and surrounding counties. The city which is 
mired in perpetual traffic jams found a solution in technology, and this 
command centre now also sees to it that commuters receive traffic alerts 
and re-routed directions via social media before congestion becomes 
problematic. Cidade Inteligente Buzios is a planned ‘smart city’ 
initiative in Rio de Janeiro, proposed as one of a few pilot programs to 
take advantage of new and sustainable energy resources. The objective 
here is to improve the environmental impact of cities through sustainable 
reduction of energy consumption and carbon dioxide emissions. The 
initiative involves development of urban photovoltaic solar and micro 
wind farms, installation of smart meters, installation of LED lamps for 
street lighting, increased energy efficiency measures in public sector 
buildings and photovoltaic panels installed on rooftops. Optimising use 
of energy, reducing energy losses, incentives for greener transportation 
including bicycle rental and intelligent vehicles, all form part of the total 
effort. Dubuque, Iowa, USA, a city of 60,000 people proclaim itself as 
the first smart city of the country and with the completion of a 3-year 
pilot project to install smart electricity and water meters, reported a 6.6% 
drop in water usage. In its effort to develop eco-friendly infrastructure, 
the city is working on a comprehensive plan for green buildings and 
community design, healthy local food and protecting native plants and 
animals. Data collection techniques and analytics are also being used to 
create insights and take informed decisions. 
	
Going by these practices across the globe of becoming smart 
cities, while making existing Indian cities smarter would involve huge 
determination and sustained efforts, there are some isolated examples 
of new cities aiming to become smart right from the beginning. Work 

	
Towards smart cities in India	
339
on the Rs 780 billion high tech financial centre next to Ahmedabad in 
Gujarat known as GIFT city (Gujarat International Finance Tech city) 
has begun and by the time the first phase is completed, it would have 
implemented smart technologies at least on a small scale. GIFT will 
have smart technology features such as a central command centre to 
monitor the city-wide IT network and be able to respond quickly during 
emergencies, energy efficient district cooling systems instead of air 
conditioning, and high tech waste collection systems. Cars will remain 
outside the special economic zone and everyone will have to use moving 
walkways to get to the city centre. Three hours away from Mumbai, the 
new township of Lavasa will provide digital experiences like touch 
panel automation, occupancy-based lighting, door sensors, motion 
sensors, beam detectors and on-call transport services. The smart cities 
proposed along the Delhi–Mumbai Industrial corridor are to provide 
24-hour power supply and water, mass rapid transportation, digitally 
managed top-end infrastructure in a sustainable and eco-friendly 
manner. These smart cities will have new generation technology to 
stop wastage of water and energy and smart grids to efficiently manage 
the power situation, reduce waste and pollution and help in bringing 
down carbon dioxide emission. In recent times, Chennai corporation 
decided to seek IT help in tackling key civic issues such as solid waste 
management, river reclamation, water management during monsoon, 
and emergency response services during natural calamities. IBM is 
reported to have agreed to provide a grant of US$ 50 million as Smarter 
Cities Challenge grant for 2013 which will mean IT experts working 
with the corporation to ensure smart use of technology in transforming 
the city’s core systems.
14.6 
Are we ready for smart cities?
It may not be an exaggeration when it is said that India quite often 
appears to be a system with contradictions and this is equally well 
reflected in leveraging technology for the benefit of our urban residents. 
Huge amounts are being spent by the central and state governments 
on e-governance. India is considered to be a leader in software and 
technology services but the web sites of just our city corporations, not 
to speak of the total of 4000-plus ULBs spread out in the country, offer 
very limited information and services. At the city level the e-governance 

340	
Geographic information system for smart cities
efforts have generally remained limited to half-baked automation of 
back-end processes, building of web sites and provision of limited on 
line services. Web sites tend to be a one-way communication channel 
from governments to citizens. They have not transformed into a digital 
governance strategy, fully harnessing the benefits of scale, cost and 
citizen engagement. In a country where more than 900 million mobile 
phone connections are there, meaning more or less each household 
having the benefit of a digital gadget, to what extent have we been 
able to take advantage of this to provide better citizen services in our 
cities. The number of Internet users in the country is expected to reach 
350 million in another 3 years and 75% of the new Internet users are 
likely to access the net through wireless with 65% being urban. In 
one of the most ambitious programs taken up by the government to 
provide information connectivity to the villages, the newly formed 
Bharat Broadcast Network Limited is in the process of laying national 
optical fibre network to the panchayat level taking it up to the village 
council building to provide 100 mbps broadband line to all of India’s 
250,000 panchayats. What about our urban areas? If properly planned 
and executed, technology can bring about substantial change in the way 
we live and work in our cities and towns. Public transport can be made 
more convenient, predictable and comfortable by combining real time data 
from bus, metro and GPS-fitted taxis since these solutions provide traffic 
advisory and best possible mode of travel by public transportation system. 
The National Urban Transportation Policy of 2006 comprehensively refers 
to the various steps to be taken on these lines but neither the states nor the 
cities have been able to make much headway primarily because the cities 
do not have the mandate to be in full command of city transport. Even if 
they have the powers, resources and technical leadership would be a big 
issue. A feeble attempt was made to incorporate technology provisions 
such as having GPS, digital display about bus movement at bus stops, etc., 
when the JnNURM funded procurement of 15,000 new, modern buses 
for the 65 mission cities. Even a single mobility card covering different 
modes of public transport such as bus, suburban train, metro, taxis, etc., 
has not become a reality even in major cities. There are other critical 
areas like efficient water management, solid waste management, energy 
consumption, having green buildings, various essential municipal services 
which can be better handled and better citizen satisfaction can be ensured 
if appropriate technology solutions are adopted.

	
Towards smart cities in India	
341
	
Connected and sustainable buildings, sustainable energy, sustainable 
security and sustainable work places are the key concepts which need to 
be planned and taken up at the city levels irrespective of their size and 
population. Building management covers an array of activities like heating, 
ventilation, air conditioning, lighting, water and waste water control, 
physical services, fire and safety, lift, parking and so on. Networked 
buildings can be linked together, increased energy efficiency can be worked 
out and a host of other advantages can accrue when ICT-based solutions are 
introduced. In the area of sustainable energy, ICT-based smart grid works 
on the principles of improving supply-side efficiency, demand management 
and distributed energy generation. The National Mission on Sustainable 
Habitat launched in 2010 [9] is a limited initiative to address the energy-
saving potential of the urban residential sector to the extent of 20 per cent 
and of the commercial buildings to the extent of 30 per cent. In the area 
of sustainable security, ICT today enables inter-operable communications 
across voice, video and data applications creating an intelligent information 
network that allows public safety and security agencies to meet the major 
challenges they face. Connected and sustainable work places are facilitated 
by ICT bringing information to the people in a variety of ways apart 
from making tools available which allow such workers to collaborate and 
work from home which also helps reduce burden on the already stretched 
public transport. Even after remote sensing technology and GIS becoming 
important solutions for inclusive and sustainable development, our urban 
planning process itself has not been able to take full advantage of this and 
turn the cities into more organised, land-use efficient places. Today we have 
statutory master plans for only about one-fifth of the total 7935 cities and 
towns we have. It is one thing to have statutory master plans in the first 
place but the requirement today is to have a holistic blue print for ‘intelligent 
urbanisation’ which can help cities use the network as a next generation 
utility for integrated city planning and management, for promoting quality 
of life of the urban residents.
14.7	
Way forward
Urban expansion is taking place in India at a pace never witnessed 
before. Today city populations are increasing, city areas are expanding 
geographically and the number of cities and towns is going up. All this poses 
unprecedented challenges in our urban governance system in terms of having 

342	
Geographic information system for smart cities
to meet the basic infrastructure requirements of all the residents, finding the 
resources needed for investments, building world class infrastructure and 
also making sure that growth is sustainable and futuristic. The various city 
examples cited bring out the point that smart use of technology can really 
help in transforming a city’s core systems. Many are the possibilities of 
change which would make a critical difference for today’s harassed citizens 
of cities due to system deficiencies and resultant hassles. An efficient 
transport management system becomes possible, healthcare facilities can 
be improved, a robust communication network to connect all businesses, 
people and systems can be developed and most important, smart systems 
can also provide an efficient mechanism to control and manage use of the 
fast depleting resources such as land, water and energy.
	
It is the time when our governance systems at all levels should 
recognise the importance of becoming smarter. For that both the central and 
state governments will have to draw up clear policies, work out strategies 
and commit to move forward in a time-bound manner. Cities would need 
support to leverage technology as there are many areas where considerable 
synergies and convergence have to be worked out. Apart from stating 
what is the country’s smart city policy and finding resources to implement 
it, local bodies would need to be supported by creating capacities to 
undertake such a challenging task. Major players in the field could come 
in actively by studying city-specific requirements and contributing to the 
process of structuring what is best and most desirable for a particular city. 
In our societal requirements, making the whole process inclusive would 
be a critical requirement. It is time the mobile and Internet penetration is 
converted into a big advantage as far as our large number of cities and 
towns are concerned.
14.8	
Conclusion
India is unique in many ways and this equally well applies to the urban 
sector also in terms of the large number of cities and towns we have and 
the wide variety of problems which the residents of these urban areas 
have to confront every day. While on the one hand, the urban areas are 
struggling to provide the basics to all, cities dominate the country’s growth 
scene because they make major contributions to the GDP, revenue and 
employment. All the more reason that the overwhelming advantages of 
technology in the form of information and communication technology 

	
Towards smart cities in India	
343
should be leveraged for making urban living better. One of the major 
interventions of the government to bring about changes was the launch 
of the path-breaking JnNURM as part of which among other reforms, the 
e-governance reform also was expected to herald a big change. While 
this has not happened even after completion of the 7-year phase of the 
Mission, various other technology initiatives of the government have only 
been able to make a marginal impact. That leaves one with the question 
as to whether it is the limited scale and size of these programs which lead 
to a situation where the required impact does not become visible or is it 
some lacuna in implementation. The concept of SLBs, if seriously taken 
up by all our local bodies, can really make a big difference as far as citizen 
facilitation is concerned. ICT can be converted into a big opportunity if 
the type of initiatives taken by few selected local bodies in the country 
can be replicated in many other cities. Smart city examples cited from 
different parts of the world throw considerable light on the immense 
possibilities and the potential which exists to bring about improvement if 
the city body so desires. The question which remains unanswered is that 
why is India, which is known for the leadership role it plays in technology, 
has not been able to convert it into a big advantage for the 377 million-
plus city dwellers. What India needs is a clearly stated policy for making 
our cities smarter and the determination backed by resources and support 
of technology majors to convert the policy into action in a time-bound 
manner.
14.9	
References
[1] Appraisal of Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban renewal Mission, 
Ministry of Urban development, Final report, Volume I, March 2011.
[2] Faster, Sustainable and More Inclusive Growth, An Approach to the 
Twelfth Five Year Plan, Government of India, Planning Commission, October 
2011.
[3] Hand Book on Service Level Benchmarks for e-Governance in 
Municipalities, Ministry of Urban development, Govt. of India.
[4] ICT for Effective Urban Governance & Service Delivery: Towards Smart 
& Connected Hyderabad- Resource Pack, Administrative Staff College of India 
CISCO.
[5] India’s Urban Awakening : Building Inclusive Cities, Sustaining Economic 
Growth, McKinsey Global Institute, April 2010.

344	
Geographic information system for smart cities
[6] Infrastructure 100: World Cities Edition, KPMG.
[7] Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission-Guidelines for Sub 
Mission on Urban Infrastructure and Governance, Government of India, Ministry 
of Urban Development.
[8] Mid Term Appraisal- Eleventh Five Year Plan, 2007-2012, Government 
of India, Planning Commission.
[9] National Mission on Sustainable Habitat, Government of India, Ministry 
of Urban Development.
[10] Report on Indian Urban Infrastructure and Services, The High Powered 
Expert Committee on Urban Infrastructure And Governance, Govt. of India, 
Ministry of Urban Development.
[11] From ASCI-CISCO Resource Pack
[12] Road Map for the Digital City-Achieving New York City Digital Future, 
the City of New York 2011.

Abstract: This chapter starts with the summary of experience of India in executing smart 
city projects and argues that considerable returns are there if selected towns are converted 
to smart cities. Further it outlines changes required in many areas to make smart city 
project in India more successful. On the basis of data, the chapter identifies candidate 
cities which can be upgraded to smart cities. These proposed smart cities can be made 
self-aware with technology and participation of many institutions. Smart people are the 
foundation of smart cities and the Indian status is surveyed. Next to smart people is the 
economy of smart city which is important and there is a need to evolve strategies of smart 
city economic development and design appropriate institution to help reach this objective. 
Smart community affords smart city for India – a useful interface for maintenance of urban 
infrastructure. Appropriate smart city technologies are enumerated and further actions for 
the development in India are outlined. Smart city requires e-democracy, and e-democracy 
requires appropriate e-governance. Models of e-democracy are presented; its usefulness is 
postulated. State of the art of e-governance for smart cities is presented with its limitations 
and advantages. Citizen participation and relationship of e-democracy with e-governance 
are presented. Finally, human rights issues in information-based smart city are indicated. 
Key words: smart city experience in India and prospects, potential candidate smart cities 
in India, smart people, smart city economic development issues and strategies, smart city 
institutional frame and triple helix model, smart community actions for smart city maintenance, 
e-democracy and e-governance model for smart cities, smart city and human rights.
15.1	
Indian experience of smart cities
Key features of smart cities are compact, vertical development, an efficient 
urban mobility with stress on public transportation system, the use of 
digital technology to create smart grids for better management of civic 
infrastructure, recycling of sewage water for industrial use, green spaces, 
cycle tracks and easy accessibility to goods, services and activities designed 
to foster a sense of community. Hence it combines modern ecosystem-
based urban community planning with best of urban design and use of 
resource conserving urban technologies [1, 2]. Such smart cities ideally 
function on e-democracy and e-governance institutional environment. 
Indian experience in implementing smart cities is nil or very limited but 
15
Implementing smart cities in India
T.M. VINOD KUMAR

346	
Geographic information system for smart cities
is ongoing. It is mainly project-oriented experience but not yet ready for 
evaluation. Not much of planning or technical inputs have been sourced 
from India, and it is mostly outsourced. There was no policy debate at 
national or state level on smart cities [3]. India has realised that for certain 
types of huge infrastructure investments, like Delhi–Mumbai (high speed 
freight) Industrial Corridor (DMIC), call for establishing seven new smart 
cities. Since it is being constructed by soft loans from Japan, Japanese 
multi-nationals had been hired for such projects [3]. In private sector, in 
Lavasa, a new smart city with half-a-million population is planned and 
constructed in Maharashtra. It is nested on a hilly area, along Pune–
Mumbai Highway. IT city called smart city of Kochi is being designed as 
a special economic zone (SEZ) with technical and financial inputs from 
Dubai but is still on its drawing board. Here goods and services are totally 
exported. Kochi smart city is based on smart city experience of Dubai and 
Malta jointly promoted by Dubai-based entrepreneurs and Government of 
Kerala.
	
Plans are also in place to integrate these DMIC cities through new 
airports, new rail links and arteries of ten-lane highways. The creation of 
a new urban vision was not conceived initially but an afterthought. The 
DMIC was an economic and commercial initiative of the government, 
intended to boost manufacturing through the development of industrial 
centres along the western leg of the Mumbai–Delhi–Kolkata dedicated 
railway freight corridor. It was then felt that there was also need to create 
new generation cities in which people can live, work and play. India needed 
cities with outstanding infrastructure and quality of life. The pilot project 
to develop these ‘smart communities’ is underway and is expected to be 
completed over the next 12 months or as usual more. Japanese corporations, 
such as Hitachi, Mitsubishi, JVC and Toshiba, among others, will design 
and build these eco-friendly towns along the Dedicated Freight Corridor 
(DFC). The DFC between Delhi and Mumbai will pass through six states – 
Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat and Maharashtra – and 
will have regional impacts. Unlike Chandigarh, Gandhinagar and many 
other new towns of India built in the past, these cities would show-case 
modern resources conserving urban technologies and high mobility. These 
ecofriendly cities would provide world-class facilities with 24-hour assured 
power supply and drinking water, mass rapid urban transportation, with 
bicycle and walking tracks, complete waste and water recycling, energy 
and water supply systems for smart grids – digitally managed systems to 

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
347
control energy/water consumption – and smart metering which I consider 
as minimal performance standards of smart cities.
	
Existing Indian cities are very much different and very poor cousins 
of DMIC-planned smart cities. Smart cities as new towns are a lesser 
technical and planning challenge in India than converting existing towns 
into smart cities which are already engines of economic growth with all 
deficiencies in urban infrastructure [4]. There are attempts to conduct 
feasibility studies for Manesar in Haryana for smart city projects by 
Japanese firm and also in few new towns in Gujarat. The first of these 
projects would come up in Dholera investment region in Gujarat, 110 
km from Ahmedabad. The master plan for the city is ready and talks are 
on with farmers for the acquisition of land. These cities are expected to 
draw young people because of their employment potential and would 
therefore come up not just as manufacturing hubs but also as integrated 
residential areas and related business and commercial districts. Smart 
cities have higher effect on income multiplier and economic development 
than existing towns, and perhaps million-plus cities have much higher 
economic development potential than new smart towns in India. Therefore 
the greatest opportunity is to convert million-plus cities to smart cities. 
	
No serious policy or strategy-making effort has gone into the smart 
city projects either at national level or state level [5]. The effort is on 
way by Government of India to bring in academic thinking on smart 
city policies and strategies with almost no progress. Today, smart new 
towns look like a place characterized by more deployment of smart city 
technologies largely imported, but smart cities are different by definition. 
This chapter considers smart city in a different way and postulates the art 
of transforming existing cities into smart cities, since smart city has power 
to transform nations.
15.2	
Selection of settlements for smart cities 
development in India
As per 2011 census, there are 7925 towns in India and 31.16 per cent 
of total population in India is urban [6]. However, state-level patterns of 
urbanisation are diverse [7–12]. States like Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, 
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, and Kerala (mostly in South India and Western 
Coast) showed higher level of urbanisation in India. Union territories like 
Delhi and Chandigarh showed very high urban content [9]. 

348	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
Smart city planning and development is not mere mindless deployment 
of a portfolio of smart urban technologies. Smart cities also call for three 
additional most important prerequisites which are integral part of smart 
cities: they are smart people, smart community and smart economy as 
discussed in Chapter 1, and one needs to identify related variables in urban 
settlements. Without these components, smart technology will not yield 
returns to investment and income multiplier and has to be written off as 
wasteful expenditure of public funds. Smart people and smart community 
are potential inputs for smart city generation. Smart people are represented 
by Human Development Index (HDI) and smart economy is represented 
by relatively higher percentage of urban population in the region, district 
or state. Hence these two aspects are considered in selection of urban 
centres that need to be converted to smart cities in India. 
Table 15.1  Comparison of rankings of selected countries/Indian states/UTs in descending 
order, on the basis of Human Development Index (HDI).
Rank
Country/state/UT
HDI
Rank
Country/state/UT
HDI
1
Norway
0.938
IX
Pondicherry (India)
0.748
2
Australia
0.937
65
Russian Federation
0.719
I
Kerala (India)
0.921
X
Manipur (India)
0.707
3
New Zealand
0.907
XI
Maharashtra (India)
0.689
4
United States of America
0.902
XII
Sikkim (India)
0.684
II
Chandigarh (India)
0.892
91
Sri Lanka
0.658
8
Canada
0.888
92
Thailand
0.654
9
Sweden
0.885
XIII
Himachal Pradesh (India)
0.652
10
Germany
0.884
WORLD
0.624
11
Japan
0.884
XIV
Goa (India)
0.617
26
United Kingdom
0.849
XV
Punjab (India)
0.605
III
Lakshadweep (India)
0.796
XVI
Tamil Nadu (India)
0.605
IV
Mizoram (India) 
0.790
119
India
0.519
V
Nagaland (India)
0.770
125
Pakistan
0.490
VI
Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands (India)
0.766
129
Bangladesh
0.469
VII
Daman and Diu (India) 
0.754
132
Myanmar
0.451
VIII
Delhi (India)  
0.750
138
Nepal
0.428

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
349
Source:	 (a)	 Human Development Report 2010, UNDP
	
(b)	 National Council of Applied Economic Research, Planning Commission 
Government of India, 2012, India Human Development Report 2011 Towards 
Social Inclusion
Note: 	
Ranking 1, 2, 3, 4... refers to UNDP global ranking of HDI 2010
	
Ranking I, II, III, IV... refers to ranking of HDI of Indian states and union territories
	
Table 15.1 shows the HDI and its ranking in descending order in Indian 
states and union territories along with prominent high ranking countries of 
the world [13, 14]. The country ranking is shown as 1, 2, 3, 4, and Indian 
state and union territories (UT) ranking as I, II, III, IV ... Highest ranking 
countries are Norway (0.938) and Australia (0.937), followed by highest 
ranking for Kerala (0.921) in India. Chandīgarh (0.892) appears below 
United States (0.902) and above Canada (0.888). There are many Indian 
states below United Kingdom (0.849) and above Russian Federation 
(0.719). It can also been seen that industrially advanced Maharashtra 
(0.689) has XI rank, while industrially advanced Tamil Nadu (0.605) has 
XVI rank in India where more effort is needed to bring up HDI. However 
all these states have higher HDI than average India, World and all 
SAARC countries. In states where there is no mega city with higher urban 
percentage, HDI is of higher level; while states with one mega city and 
less number of million-plus cities have lower HDI. It seems geographic 
spread of million-plus cities is instrumental in raising HDI. In states like 
Kerala, where there is no mega city but as much as seven million-plus 
cities, HDI is very high and comparable to the third in international rank. 
	
Table 15.2 shows higher first sixteen ranks of HDI of Indian states 
and union territories in descending order. It also shows per cent of urban 
population and also mega cities and million cities as on 2011. 
Table 15.2  Human Development Index 2011; percentage of urban, mega cities and million-
plus agglomeration in 2011.
S. 
no.
State/Union 
Territories
HDI 
2011
Urban 
(%) in  
2011
Mega 
cities 
2011
Million-plus urban 
agglomeration 2011 
(descending order of 
population per state and 
union territories)
I
Kerala 
0.921
47.72
None
Kochi, Kozhikode, 
Thrissur, Malppuram, 
Thiruvananthapuram, 
Kannur, Kollam
II
Chandigarh 
0.892
97.25
None
Chandigarh
Cont...

350	
Geographic information system for smart cities
III
Lakshadweep 
0.796
78.08
None
None
IV
Mizoram 
0.790
51.51
None
None
V
Nagaland 
0.770
28.97
None
None
VI
Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands 
0.766
35.67
None
None
VII
Daman and Diu 
0.754
75.16
None
None
VIII
Delhi  
0.750
97.50
Delhi
None
IX
Pondicherry 
0.748
68.31
None
Puducherry
X
Manipur 
0.707
30.21
None
None
XI
Maharashtra 
0.689
45.23
Greater 
Mumbai
Pune, Nagpur, Nashik,Vasai 
Vihar City, Aurangabad
XII
Sikkim 
0.684
24.97
None
None
XIII
Himachal Pradesh 
0.652
10.04
None
None
XIV
Goa 
0.617
62.17
None
None
XV
Punjab 
0.605
37.49
None
Ludhiyana, Amristar, 
XVI
Tamil Nadu 
0.605
48.45
Chennai
Coimbatore, Madurai, 
Thiruchirapalli
Source:	 Table x.1, Census of 2011
Note:	
1. Mega cities are five million and above
          	
2. HDI – Human Development Index
	
It can be seen that barring hilly states like Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim 
and Manipur, there is a relationship between higher HDI and higher per 
cent urban such that where ever higher urban content is available, there is 
higher HDI. Where ever a mega city with more than 5 million population 
exists in a state, the HDI goes down and also the spread of million cities. 
Therefore, Delhi has VIII rank, Maharashtra XI rank and Chennai XVI 
rank among states in India. 
	
Smart people is smart community and can be equated to higher level of 
HDI. Higher the urban per cent , smart economy starts operating. Therefore 
mega cities Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and following one million plus 
agglomerations can be ideal candidates for smart cities projects [15–17]. 
They are Kochi, Kozhikode, Thrissur, Malappuram, Thiruvananthapuram, 
Kannur and Kollam in Kerala; Chandigarh in Haryana; Pondicherry; Pune, 
Nagpur, Nasik, Vasai Vihar City and Aurangabad in Maharashtra; Ludhiana 
and Amritsar in Punjab; and Coimbatore, Madurai and Tiruchirapalli in 
Tamil Nadu (Fig. 15.1). Perhaps giving priorities to million-plus cities 
against mega cities can reap higher spread effect of HDI.

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
351
Figure 15.1  Potential million-plus cities identified for smart cities upgradation

352	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
Since mega cities and large metropolitan agglomerations are considered 
as engines of economic growth, converting these to smart cities can trigger 
faster economic development for India, than new towns. There are number 
of small states that appear in the list. Lakshadweep with almost totally 
unexploited vast sea resources under its legal command can develop faster 
as engines of economic growth if it is converted to smart city or smart 
group of islands. Many northeastern states are also appearing in the list. 
With Asian highway coming which connects North East to South East 
Asia, there is a scope for fast economic development and hence smart 
small city development. 
15.3	
Smart city that is self-aware
A smart city is self-aware of all cultural and ecological processes that is 
happening to it 24 × 7, and this is captured by geographic information system 
(GIS), which is effectively used for urban management, governance and of 
course planning of the city. Such urban management and governance in 
smart cities are much more effective than that is practised now. This concept 
makes the current practice of planning, managing and governance out dated 
since it is not based on most up-to-date and constantly renewing geographic 
information base. It is not based on the concept of a smart city that is 
self-aware. Government, urban and regional planners, administrators and 
managers normally decide, plan and manage under imperfect and incomplete 
information. There is even a set of theory which justifies such actions and 
which believes perfect or near perfect knowledge base is impossible or even 
confusing. The planning and management system is imperfect if it is based 
on partial or no information base. Variables related to various systems are 
geocoded to the GIS in order to create the self-awareness. There is a long 
list of possible contributors of information that make the city self-aware, 
which includes practically all variables that are of interest to institutions 
which are existing in the geographic area and also dedicated institutions 
of state and central government established to collect specific information 
in specific interval of time such as census, National Sample Survey (NSS), 
etc. End users can selectively draw the Web-based knowledge base they 
require to make decision and act. In any complex city, ecological system 
and cultural system largely determine the majority of issues confronted with 
the city as far as spatial planning and management are concerned. Once 
issues are known, finding alternative solutions are easy to execute. Often 
issues are known only when problems reach a stage where solution is very 

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
353
costly or impossible under the regime of imperfect information base. For 
example, a dumping site of garbage which is either not treated or partially 
treated may pollute wells in the surrounding areas, thereby denying the 
human right of drinking water and also creating many diseases. If the 
progress of underground pollution is known earlier, it would have been 
possible to reduce or even eliminate the adverse impact on ground water 
pollution before it reaches a stage of surpassing the carrying capacity of the 
environment. If spread of underground pollution is determined in temporal 
and spatial dimension, remedial measures can be found. Otherwise it only 
adds to the misery and disease to the local inhabitants with no or very costly 
solution that is feasible to clean up underground water. This is happening 
in many cities in India where well water is main source of drinking water.
	
Now, all information required for making city self-aware is not collected 
by different agencies. Use of sensors and wireless communication of 
gathering data automatically can be utilised for collection of data. Levels of 
water pollution need to be assessed by laboratory test. Garbage generation 
by different land uses by type of establishment and households by income 
can be measured by sample surveys. Ground-water-level fluctuation can be 
measured by school students every month by the survey of open wells. Traffic 
flow can be easily assessed by sensors on the roads. Temperature ambiance 
of locality can be measured regularly and even automatically. In many cases 
where information collection is difficult, temporal changes of such variables 
can be calibrated by use of models which can be integrated with GIS. These 
models can be deterministic or stochastic as per the nature of variables. 
This indicates greater role of universities, technical institution, specialised 
government agencies and other lower level educational establishments 
in information gathering and processing. Hence city that is self-aware is 
a product of mass mobilisation of knowledge resources available in the 
metropolitan region by able leadership [18].
15.4	
Smart people for smart cities
In 2008, about 53.7 per cent of GDP of India was from services sector, 
29.1 per cent from industry and 17.2 per cent from agriculture. It is 
estimated that half of GDP from service sector is based on knowledge 
sector. Innovation based on new knowledge base can have an impact on 
industrial sector. Since value addition to GDP by knowledge economy 
can be much higher than from other sectors, it is likely that the share of 
knowledge economy for urban economic development is likely to go up 

354	
Geographic information system for smart cities
in the coming decades if India can create more smart cities by converting 
some of the feasible 53 million cities or by urban agglomeration to smart 
cities enumerated in previous paragraph. 
	
The NSS of 2004–2005 had estimated that 126 million youngsters 
in the age group 18–23 years attended higher education. This makes the 
gross enrolment ratio (GER) 12.6 percent (10.8% for graduate and 1.8% 
diploma). This is a dismal figure. In 2000, GER was 80% for United 
States, 54% for United Kingdom, and 49% for Japan. Several developing 
countries also recorded higher GER (31% Philippines, 27% Malaysia 
and so on). In India, Nagaland recorded the highest GER in India while 
Arunachal Pradesh the lowest in India both located in the North East. It 
is no wonder that in Table 15.2 Nagaland appears as probable candidate 
for smart city, with high HDI. GER is higher than 12.8% in Kerala, Tamil 
Nadu, Maharashtra, Manipur, Nagaland, Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal 
Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana and Uttarakhand. Most of these states appear 
in Table 15.2 which selected the smart cities. This list excludes union 
territories where GER is much higher than 12.8% and many appear in 
Table 15.2.
Table 15.3  All India growth of higher education institutions 1947–2011.
Year 
Universities
Colleges
Total
1947–1948
20
496
516
1950–1951
28
578
606
1960–1961
45
1819
1864
1970–1971
193
3227
3320
1980–1981 
123
4738
4861
1990–1991 
184 
5748 
5932
2000–2001 
266 
11146 
11412
2004–2005 
348 
17625 
17973
2005–2006 
355 
18064 
18419
2006–2007 
367 
19000 
19367
2007–2008 
416 
20677 
21093
2008–2009 
480 
22000
22480
2009–2010 
504 
25951 
26455
2010–2011
544
31324
31868
Source: UGC and Higher Education in India, Annual Reports (Universities include central, 
state, private, deemed and also institution of national importance established both by the 
central and state legislatures) [6, 7].

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
355
	
Table 15.3 gives the time series growth of universities and colleges in 
India since Independence (1947) to 2011. Table 15.4 gives break up of these 
institutions into many categories of higher educational institutions in 2011. 
Although there has been progress in higher education, the growth is far 
from satisfactory from GER point of view. This in fact is a great constraint 
for India to have many smart cities. University Grants Commission in its 
annual report 2008 [19] observes that higher the urbanisation rate higher is 
the GER. In urban area GER is three times as high as the rural area. Men 
have higher enrolment rate than women in India. However GER for women 
in developed countries like United States is significantly higher than male 
GER. Economically and socially backward, scheduled caste, schedule tribe 
and other backward castes in India showed considerably lower GER as per 
NSS. NSS shows that poor population have less or almost nil access to higher 
education. This group cannot afford higher education. These statistics shows 
the required policy thrust of Government of India and state governments in 
higher education that result in smart city development. 
Table 15.4  Number and types of institution (2011).
Type of institution 
Number (total 544)
State universities 
334
State private universities 
53
Central universities 
42
Deemed universities 
130
Institution of national importance 
33
Institution established by state legislature
05
Source: MHRD, Annual Report 2010–2011.
Note:	 (a)	 Central universities: The Government of India, by Act of Parliament, establishes a 
central university in India.
	
(b)	 State universities: The state government, by state legislature, establishes a state 
university in India.
	
(c)	 Deemed universities: Institutions that have been accorded the status of a university 
with authority to award their own degrees through central government notification.
	
(d)	 Open universities: Open university can be a central or state university imparting 
education exclusively through distance mode in any branch or branches of 
knowledge.
	
(e)	 Institutes of national importance: Few of the higher education institutions are 
awarded the said status of institutes of national importance by the Act of Parliament.
	
(f)	 Other institutions: Include the institutions established by State Legislative Act and 
colleges affiliated to the university, both government-aided and -unaided.

356	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
Table 15.3 showed an impressive growth of institutions during the 
last decade, but with considerably lower GER. To measure the quality of 
higher education in India, National Assessment and Accreditation Council 
(NAAC) was constituted in 1994. NAAC has identified seven criteria for 
assessment which include curricula, teaching and infrastructure. Institutions 
are graded as A for higher level accomplishment, B above minimal level 
accomplishment, C satisfactory minimal level and D unsatisfactory and 
not accredited. By 2008 NAAC has accredited 140 universities and 3492 
colleges. The majority are in B grade. There is a policy to make NAAC 
accreditation compulsory. The National Knowledge Commission of India 
has called for increase in GER to at least 15% by 2015, and this means 
creation of 1500 universities from 500 plus by 2015 partly by restructuring 
the existing ones. 
	
Seventy per cent of the universities listed above can be considered 
as only teaching universities. About 30% of these universities conduct 
research along with teaching. This can be through PhD students or through 
contracted research from government and industries. Many institutions 
such as Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), National Institute of 
Technology (NIT) and Indian Institute of Sciences (IISC) procure patents 
and so also several public research institutions. Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research or Council for Social Science Research also 
conducts research leading to PhD in collaboration with universities or 
other research institutions. Notable higher education centres such as IITs 
are not intending to transform themselves totally to a research university 
by shedding their famous undergraduate teaching or even minimising 
undergraduate teaching, stressing more on post graduate, doctoral and 
post-doctoral work. This recommended effort coupled with efforts to 
maximise research and to obtain more patents and research publications 
can transform these institutions as more meaningful to help smart cities. 
Perhaps these innovations may lead to more number of patents and more 
number of Nobel Prize winners in India. 
	
Surveying the past trend in the development of higher education in 
India, there were three distinct phases of development of higher education 
in India.
	
l	 1950 onwards quality teaching. Jawaharlal Nehru, India‘s first 
Prime Minister, had a great role in establishing higher education 
institutions that provide scientists and technologists of the highest 
calibre who would engage in research, design and development 

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
357
to help build the nation towards self-reliance in her technological 
needs. This dream was realised in two additional steps.
	
l	 1970 onwards creation of intellectual capital and knowledge. This 
was the motto of many Indian Institutes of Technology that came 
up and continue to be built even in 2012. 
	
l	 1990 onwards creation of wealth from knowledge through 
commercialisation through public–private partnership. This phase 
was inaugurated by Director General of Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research (CSIR) R.A. Mashalkar and many centres of 
higher education like Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs), Indian 
Institute of Science, Atomic Energy Establishment, National Space 
Research Institutes and many others followed up. Various models 
such as intellectual property management, technology transfer 
and licensing, incubators, start up, venture capital, spin-offs, 
consultancy, and sponsored research emerged which are spreading 
to many other institutions of higher studies in India.
	
Universities in India by and large act as producer of human capital, 
in other words smart individuals for smart cities. Smart city also requires 
entrepreneurial capability for metropolitan regional development by 
universities which is yet to emerge in a large way [20, 21]. There are very 
successful examples, MIT [22], University of Leuven in Belgium [23] 
and Stanford University and many others, for India to emulate [22]. The 
transfer of university from teaching to research and then as entrepreneurial 
institution is vital for smart cities. China has embarked on an ambitious 
program of smart cities with government pulled Triple Helix Model for 
regional innovation [24]. Entrepreneurial university is emerging in a very 
feeble way in India that has limited potential for creation of smart cities 
with a policy vacuum in India. However, even in such experience, there is 
ample evidence to show that Triple Helix Model of development also works 
in India. Government must help to support this new development through 
changes in institutional space, regulatory environment, tax incentives and 
provision of public venture capital. In Triple Helix Model, industry also 
gets transformed and takes the role of university in developing training 
and research capabilities, often at the same higher level as universities. 
	
If this development of human capital formation in India is analysed 
spatially with respect to metropolitan regional development, an interesting 
scenario emerges. Table 15.5 shows that there is a clustering of higher 
education centres in leading mega cities of India which behave like smart 
cities. These centres are well known for their research and entrepreneurship.

358	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Table 15.5  Triple Helix and Metropolitan Regional Cluster Innovation.
Metropolitan 
region
Sectors
Higher education/ 
public research 
system (PRS)
Firms/government
Bangalore
l ICT software
l Biopharma
l Aerospace and 
space industry
l 8 Universities
l 50 colleges
l 20 PRS labs
l Public–Private 
partnership
l Software technology 
park
l Infrastructure incentives
l High speed data 
connectivity, etc.
Hyderabad
l ICT software
l Biotechnology
l Biopharma
l Pharma
l 9 universities
l 45 colleges
l 25 PRS labs
–do–
Delhi
l ICT software
l Biotechnology
l Biopharma
l Pharma
l 9 universities
l 110 colleges
l 18 PRS labs
–do–
Chennai
l ICT software
l Biotechnology
l Biopharma
l Pharma
l 8 universities
l 55 colleges
l 20 PRS labs
–do–
Pune
l ICT software
l Biotechnology
l Biopharma
l Pharma
l 7 universities
l 35 colleges
l 15 PRS labs
–do–
Source: V.V. Krishna, Universities and Emerging National Innovation Systems – Indian 
Experience: presentation at Triple Helix Conference Singapore, 2007
	
These mega cities are also developers of knowledge economy such as 
ICT software, biopharma, biotechnology, aerospace and space industries. 
These centres also had demonstrated strong functional relationship 
with government and firms that lead towards metropolitan economic 
development through Triple Helix Model. 

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
359
Table 15.6  Metropolitan cluster of top 675 ICT software Indian companies (2003).
Metropolitan regions
Number of firms
Share of exports (%)
Bangalore
182
21.8
Delhi
182
18.5
Hyderabad
78
10.6
Chennai
92
9.1
Mumbai
142
21.8
Source: V.V. Krishna, Universities and Emerging National Innovation Systems – Indian 
Experience: presentation at Triple Helix Conference Singapore, 2007.
	
Table 15.6 shows top ICT software companies and their share of 
exports in mega cities. Such phenomenon of Smart Metropolitan Regional 
Economic Development through knowledge economy comes under Triple 
Helix Model [25, 26]. The Triple Helix concept comprises three basic 
elements: (1) a more prominent role for the university in innovation, on 
par with industry and government in a knowledge-based society [27–
29]; (2) a movement toward collaborative relationships among the three 
major institutional spheres, in which innovation policy is increasingly an 
outcome of interaction rather than a prescription from government [30]; 
(3) in addition to fulfilling their traditional functions, each institutional 
sphere also “takes the role of the other” performing new roles as well 
as their traditional function. Institutions taking non-traditional roles are 
viewed as a major potential source of innovation [31–35].
	
Initially, industry operates as per the Triple Helix as the focus of 
production; government as the source of contractual relations that 
guarantee stable interactions and exchange; the university as a source of 
new knowledge and technology, the generative principle of knowledge-
based economies [36, 37]. The increased importance of knowledge and the 
role of the university in incubation of technology-based firms have given 
it a more prominent place in the institutional firmament. Universities, 
primarily seen as a source of human resources and knowledge, are now 
looked for technology as well. Many universities have developed the 
internal organizational capabilities to formally transfer technologies 
rather than relying solely on informal ties. Universities are also 
extending their teaching capabilities from educating individuals to 
shaping organizations in entrepreneurial education and incubation 
programs. Rather than only serving as a source of new ideas for 

360	
Geographic information system for smart cities
existing firms, universities are combining their research and teaching 
capabilities in new formats to become a source of new firm formation, 
especially in advanced areas of science and technology. Universities are 
increasingly becoming the source of regional economic development, 
and academic institutions are re-oriented or founded for this purpose. 
New organizational mechanisms, such as incubators, science parks and 
networks among them, become a source of economic activity, community 
formation and international exchange. New modes of interdisciplinary 
knowledge production, involving Triple Helix partners, inspire research 
collaboration and firm-formation projects [38, 39].
	
The entrepreneurial university takes a pro-active stance in putting 
knowledge to use and in broadening the input into the creation of academic 
knowledge. Thus it operates according to an interactive rather than a linear 
model of innovation. As firms raise their technological level, they engage in 
higher levels of training and in sharing of knowledge [40–42]. Government 
acts as a public entrepreneur and venture capitalist, in addition to its 
traditional regulatory role in setting the rules of the game. The interaction 
between linear and reverse linear dynamics results in the emergence of 
an interactive model of innovation. Globalization becomes decentralized 
and takes place through regional networks among universities as well as 
through multi-national corporations and international organization. As 
universities develop links, they can combine discrete pieces of intellectual 
property and jointly exploit them. In current international competitive 
circumstances, innovation is too important to be left to the individual 
firm, or even a group of firms, the individual researcher or even a cross-
national collaboration of researchers. Innovation has expanded from an 
internal process within and even among firms to an activity that involves 
institutions not traditionally thought of as having a direct role in innovation 
such as universities.
	
The output of Triple Helix Model applied to MIT in Boston has been 
computed. Bank Boston in 1997 [42] reported that if companies founded 
by MIT graduates and faculty have formed an independent nation, the 
revenues produced by the companies would make that nation the 24th 
largest economy in the world. The 4000 MIT related companies employ 
about 1.1 million people and have annual world sales of US$232 billion. 
That is roughly equal to a GDP of US$116 billion, which is little less than 
the GDP of South Africa and more than GDP of Thailand. In addition 
to MIT, there are similar examples in Stanford University, Catholic 

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
361
University of Leuven in Belgium and many more. There is no reason why 
Indian metropolises cannot emulate experience of regional metropolitan 
development of Boston, Stanford, University of Leuven or many others. 
15.5	
Towards a calibrated model for urban economic 
development in smart cities
15.5.1	
Patterns of spatial economic development in smart 
cities and appropriate institutional framework
It has been observed in time series of national statistics that contribution 
of GDP by urban centres in India and many countries is progressively 
increasing at a rapid rate and also people living in urban centres because 
of high generation of income and employment in cities. Share of GDP 
creation of rural centres is fast diminishing in comparison to urban centres. 
It is also being documented in very limited scale that GDP creation of 
smart cities outpaces several times than of non-smart cities in many 
countries. This statistics is yet to be known to many. The theory of smart 
city economic development is not known today. However, it is observed 
that the dynamics of smart city GDP creation takes “different path” which 
needs empirical study, hypothesis testing and mathematical modelling to 
understand the urban dynamics of smart city economic development. It is 
important to do empirical quantitative research on some of the 100 or so 
emerging smart cities tabulated in Chapter 1 on this phenomenon. This 
will give a blue print for economic development policy and strategy of 
smart cities based on SWOT analysis and a strategic intervention. 
15.5.2	
Smart city economic development and Triple Helix 
Model
Smart city economic development has taken place in different countries 
under differing institutional frameworks. It is important to have 
comparative study of such institutional set up and enrich and reform the 
existing institutional set up (for example,metropolitan planning committee 
in India) that plan, manage and develop a smart cities. Triple Helix Model 
is evolving in many smart cities. Is it possible to transform existing 
institutional set up with Triple Helix Model?

362	
Geographic information system for smart cities
15.6	
Metropolitan planning committee and Triple 
Helix institutional frame 
The collective and symbiotic leadership of three actors in Triple Helix 
Model is of prime importance for metropolitan regional development. 
The 74th constitutional amendment legislation of India had given 
constitutional status for metropolitan planning committee (MPC) for 
one-million-plus agglomeration. Without Triple Helix Model built into it, 
many state governments have difficulty in understanding its true worth.
The constitutional provision is given below. 
	
“243ZE. Committee for Metropolitan Planning”
	
(1)	 There shall be constituted in every metropolitan area, a metropolitan 
planning committee to prepare a draft development plan for the 
metropolitan area as a whole. 
	
(2)	 The Legislature of a State may, by law, make with respect to
	
	 (a)	 The composition of metropolitan planning committees; 
	
	 (b)	 The manner in which the seats in such committees shall be 
filled: 
	
	 		
Provided that not less than two-third of the members of 
such committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the 
elected members of the municipalities and chairpersons of 
the panchayats in the metropolitan area in proportion to the 
ratio between the population of the municipalities and of the 
panchayats in that area; 
	
	 (c)	 The representation in such committees of the Government of 
India and the government of state and of such organization 
and institutions as may be deemed necessary for carrying out 
the functions assigned to such committees; 
	
	 (d)	 The functions relating to planning and coordination for the 
metropolitan area, which may be assigned to such committees; 
	
	 (e)	 The manner in which the chairpersons of such committees 
shall be chosen. 
	
(3)	 Every metropolitan planning committee shall, in preparing the 
draft development plan,
	
	 (a)	 have regarded to
	
	 		
(i)	 The plans prepared by the municipalities and the 
panchayats in the metropolitan area; 

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
363
	
	 		
(ii)	 Matters of common interest between the municipalities 
and the panchayats, including coordinated spatial 
planning of the area, sharing of water and other physical 
and natural resources, the integrated development of 
infrastructure and environmental conservation; 
	
	 		
(iii)	 The overall objectives and priorities set by the 
Government of India and the government of state; 
	
	 		
(iv)	 The extent and nature of investments likely to be made 
in the metropolitan area by agencies of the Government 
of India and of the government of the state and other 
available resources whether financial or otherwise; 
	
	 (b)	 consult such institutions and organizations as the Governor 
may, by order, specify. 
	
(4)	 The chairperson of every metropolitan planning committee 
shall forward the development plan, as recommended by such 
committee, to the government of the state.
	
After many years of enacting this constitutional amendment, only 
West Bengal and Maharashtra have constituted the metropolitan planning 
committees in Kolkata and Mumbai, respectively, while two states namely 
Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat have enacted enabling legislation to constitute 
MPCs. Other states having metropolitan cities are yet to take any action in 
this regard.
	
Functions of MPCs are as follows:
	
As per the 74th Constitution Amendment Act, legislature of the state 
may, by law, make provisions regarding functions relating to planning and 
coordination for the metropolitan area that may be assigned to MPC.
	
Accordingly, it is suggested that the following functions may be 
assigned to MPCs:
	
(i)	 Preparation of draft development plan for metropolitan area
	
(ii)	 Coordination of plans prepared by the municipalities and 
panchayats in the metro area including coordinated spatial 
planning of the area
	 (iii)	 Co-ordination and sorting out of common issues involving 
panchayats and municipalities in the metro area including sharing 
of water and other physical and natural resources
	 (iv)	 Allocation of resources made available by the state and central 
government to local-level institutions

364	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
(v)	 Phasing and prioritization of development works or works 
involving number of panchayats or urban area
	 (vi)	 Advice and assistance to local bodies in preparation of development 
plans
	 (vii)	 Serving as a link to disseminate development objectives, policies 
and priorities of central and state governments among various local 
bodies by formulating operational guidelines so that the same may 
be considered while preparing plans of the respective local bodies
	 (viii)	 For resolution of conflicts and to avoid areas of overlap between 
different agencies operating in the metropolitan area
	
Generally, as in Kolkata Metropolitan Planning Committee, the Chief 
Minister is the Chairperson of the Metropolitan Planning Committee. 
Prime Minister and/or Chief Minister are also involved in appointing vice 
chancellors of university, directors of higher educational establishments 
and public research institutions and laboratories. Generally in a million-
plus city, there should be higher education institutional cluster and 
industrial cluster. The first task is to institute the metropolitan planning 
committee which should give leadership in implementing Triple Helix 
Model for accelerated economic development of the smart city or smart 
urban agglomeration. Metropolitan planning committee should have 
members drawn from the highest level of academia, industries and 
government, not necessarily from local institutions. In addition mayors 
and presidents of panchayats and municipalities shall be members of 
the metropolitan planning committee. There should be an implementing 
agency for metropolitan planning committee. It should manage the data of 
the metropolitan GIS centre. Implementing agencies should have planning 
wing with well-trained and experienced professionals, engineering wing 
capable for large scale construction and finance wing capable of mobilising 
large scale funding for metropolitan development from India or abroad. 
Director or vice chancellor of university or public research institution 
in an urban agglomeration can be a proven industrialist to bridge the 
relationship between industry and university and make the Triple Helix 
evolve. Government can implement regional development policies and 
give special incentives to accelerate Triple Helix functioning for fast 
economic development. Industries shall be encouraged to undertake 
undergraduate technical education with the collaboration of universities. 
There is a recent attempt of Mercedes Benz Industries, Germany, to start 
School of Mechatronics in Trivandrum. Oracle Corporation is also setting 

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
365
up a training centre in a village software start-up in Kerala to train college 
students around. There are evidences of emerging Triple Helix working 
in Kerala. Government should also start training institutes similar to 
Kerala Institute of Local Administration or Institute of Management in 
Government. They can be an enabler of Triple Helix Model at the state 
level. The first step of smart city planning is to make city self-aware by 
encouraging students and research workers to collect ecological-economic 
and cultural data to be fed into smart city GIS for making city self-aware 
continuously. Incentives and funds may be provided to universities, 
polytechnic or schools to collect and update information and by the use 
of models if it is required by metropolitan planning committee. The 
information generated by smart city GIS shall be used by all constituents 
of Triple Helix Model to frame their policies, plans and strategies. Finally 
it is the metropolitan planning committee which should prepare policy and 
strategy for smart city.
15.7	
Innovating community interface for government 
service provider in a smart city
In the past, British Colonial administration in India, for the reason best 
known to them and convenient to them, had established an administrative 
norm that there should be complaint from individuals and not group. Such 
group application is not administratively acceptable since it seems to 
threaten colonial masters whose number in India was around one hundred 
thousand to administer a huge Indian population then. This is followed 
even today. So if 10,000 people of a community have same complaint, it 
is necessary to file 10,000 complaints to fix up the government-provided 
utilities and services, which is considered administratively correct. This 
makes people reluctant to complain. Political response of strikes and 
“bands” is acceptable which is worse than one person one complaint. 
Smart community knows these useless efforts and inefficiency that can 
be there for reviewing 10,000 application and attempts to device an 
innovating method. The local community learn from other communities’ 
innovation and adopt it. 
	
FixMyStreet website [43] used in London by one community is one 
such innovation. It was launched in 2007. It helps people to report, view 
or discuss local problem. One can even locate the problem in the web 
map and report it to relevant authorities. This was built by My Society a 

366	
Geographic information system for smart cities
non-profit organisation in conjunction with the Young Foundation. Similar 
systems include City Sourced in the United States which uses iPhone app 
as the primary interface. 
	
Here a GIS web is hosted by a residential association. Here what to 
fix it, for example pot holes in road, street lamps to be replaced, houses 
having no power supply, drainage that is clogged, garbage deposited on 
road, etc. are marked with date stamp of entry of data. The government 
service provider opens his dedicated layer of information and repairs it and 
put the date stamp of repair. Supervisor of service providers periodically 
review the performance of their staff by number of hours and days he has 
taken to repair it and permissible days for such repair and take necessary 
administrative action against the public servant including fines or salary 
cut as per the legislation of Right to Public Service. All these activities 
can be performed in the web site. Here paper work is totally avoided, and 
many phone calls and visit to concerned offices are totally eliminated and 
also innumerable application of complaints.
	
Communities in smart city may use e-governance portal accessible 
from home for paying house and land tax, renewing driving licence, 
change address in election cards, ration cards, and obtain birth and death 
certificate and many other services based on Aadhaar number.
	
Communities in smart city update their knowledge base using 
e-training facilities on variety of topics. They also use tele-medicine 
facilities for getting best services for their health needs. 
15.8	
Smart city technology modules 
This section summarises smart city technological solutions [44, 45] existing 
for energy, water, health, waste management, ICT and transportation in a 
smart city. Technology required need to be purchased or developed.
15.8.1	
Energy
Smart grid – Sensors and instrumentation to improve distribution network 
efficiency, in conjunction with smart metering, help match energy demand 
and supply.
	
Building energy management system – Occupants can automate the 
energy-consuming systems in buildings. Building sensors and controls 
allow for better use of buildings or prediction of faults.

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
367
	
Smart energy metering – Automated meter reading enables utility and 
occupants to access information digitally.
	
Outdoor lighting smart controls – Dimming and other controls enable 
greater energy efficiency.
	
Power quality monitoring
	
Renewable energy sources in smart grid 
	
Energy conservation monitoring
15.8.2	
Transport
Smart transport cards – Ideally smart cards link multiple forms of 
transport and make it more convenient to use and for transport authorities 
to understand mobility patterns.
	
Car clubs – Users can hire or share vehicles easily and will ideally not 
buy a car but instead simply use one when it is convenient.
	
Cycle hire programs / sharing programs – Users can hire bicycles 
instead of driving.
	
Electric buses – Buses that are more efficient and ideally run on 
renewable power.
	
Electric trains – Trains that are more efficient and ideally run on 
renewable power.
	
Electric vehicles – Vehicles that can become mobile storage for energy, 
helping to balance peak demand.
	
Real time information for logistics – Telematics and communications 
with drivers to optimise routes.
	
Real time transport information – This provides the basis for mobile 
applications for journey planning.
	
Real time transport displays – These provide visibility to users and 
encourage uptake of public transportation.
	
Consolidated parking management technology
15.8.3	
Water 
Smart water metering – Monitors and helps water managers to reduce 
waste in the system.

368	
Geographic information system for smart cities
15.8.4	
Health
Mobile health monitoring – This is remote monitoring of health care. 
Citizen avoids travel and has regular contact with doctors.
Home health monitoring – This is home monitoring of health care. Citizen 
avoids travel and has regular contact with doctor.
15.8.5	
Waste
Smart waste management – Waste process optimisation and pick up. City 
benefits from more efficient use of vehicles for waste pick up and resource 
saving.
	
Mobile Web 2.0 for waste – Social networking tools to allow sharing 
of goods and more optimal recycling and re-use. Citizen and city benefit 
with option for citizen to recycle.
15.8.6	
ICT
Cloud computing – Scalable computing using Internet technologies. 
Changing user/vendor relationships and enable further services.
	
Smart governance operating framework – An administration 
that applies and integrates information, communication, operational 
technologies to planning, management and operations to generate 
sustainable public value. Integration of operations of new services leads to 
faster responses to citizens.
	
Broad band development
	
Home automation
	
Internet access in public libraries
	
ICT support and ICT training
15.8.7	
Smart city technologies, their global inventory and 
standardisation, potential of commercialisation by 
typology of countries and emerging international 
markets
In general, smart city technology, as discussed above, is characterised 
by an addition of ICT automata module to the existing technologies 
of delivery of public services. Smart metering (water, energy, etc.) of 
delivered services is an example of smart city technology. Intelligence 

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
369
is gathered at the individual consumer level and also uses pattern of 
different appliances in a house hold to derive intelligence output to 
advice household to minimise their household cost of service delivery. 
The same intelligence is also directed to the entire supply system to 
minimise total system cost of delivery of service in real time. This makes 
some of the existing public service infrastructure obsolete. Alternatively, 
there are possibilities of converting existing infrastructure to a smart city 
infrastructure. It is important to make an inventory of all available smart 
city technologies globally and test feasibility for a particular country 
based on several characteristics of the country. Performance standards, 
cost-benefits analysis and user-acceptance studies need to be conducted 
at an international scale. There are several determinants of smart city 
technologies which are location specific and culturally constrained. Smart 
city technologies have a relationship with the size of the city which needs 
to be studied where economy of scale is obtained. There is a need for 
standardisation of smart city technologies for a specific country. There is a 
need to charter how the existing technology can be upgraded at least cost. 
There is a need for inventory, research and development, standardisation, 
and strategy for commercialisation. Strategy for commercialisation and 
establishing smart city international markets through policy directives 
need to be worked out for countries.
15.9	
Smart city and e-democracy
We have models of democratic tradition in many countries, for example 
Ancient Greece and India. India had democracy even when Gautama 
Buddha was alive some 2600 years ago. Gautama Buddha had mentioned 
in several of his sacred utterances the democratic working of Licchavi in the 
State of Bihar. Participatory democracy in a smart city is nothing else but 
a virtual face-to-face democracy practiced in ancient Licchavi or Athens. 
This is possible in a smart city with broadband and ICT infrastructure 
even if the city population size is in several million unlike ancient Athens 
or Licchavi. E-democracy is the technological adaptation of ancient face-
to-face democratic tradition in an ICT-enriched smart city. It is the use of 
information and communication technologies and strategies by ‘democratic 
sectors’ within the political processes of local communities, states/regions, 
nations and also on the global stage. Democratic actors and sectors in 
this context include, in order of importance, citizens/voters, political 

370	
Geographic information system for smart cities
organizations, the media, elected officials and governments. E-democracy, 
like democracy in its proactive form, is a direct democracy which is the 
primary requirement of smart cities. In other words, e-democracy often 
refers to technological adjuncts to a smart city republic, i.e. the use of 
information and communication technologies and strategies in political 
and governance processes. In few cases, the word ‘e-democracy’ is used 
to refer to anything political that involves the Internet. E-democracy is 
concerned with the use of information and communication technologies 
to engage citizens support the democratic decision-making processes and 
strengthen representative democracy. E-democracy is said to aim for more 
active citizen participation by using the Internet, mobile communications, 
and other technologies in today’s representative democracy, as well 
as through more participatory or direct forms of citizen involvement in 
addressing public challenges.
15.9.1	
Models of e-democracy for smart cities
Historically, the city-state of Athens was the first well-recorded and widely 
known democratic state that engaged in direct democracy. Licchavi is also 
a good example in ancient India. In nearly 200 years that democracy thrived 
in Athens and it changed through several evolutions. At the height of their 
practices of democracy, 6,000 to 8,000 citizens of Athens would gather 
almost weekly to form a consensus on legislative issues which looks like 
an ideal democracy. In fact, this was not a modern inclusive democracy 
as we understand it today, as vast numbers of Athenians were excluded. 
Those not participating were the slaves as well as members of families 
who were considered immigrants (an immigrant family could be one that 
arrived in Athens as much as four or more generations earlier). Women 
were also excluded, thus eliminating over half the population from the 
process. However, the democratic practice in ancient Athens is an early, 
though flawed because non-inclusive, example of the practice of direct 
democracy through the reaching of consensus amongst the participants. 
Ancient Indonesian village community decide on the basis of discussion 
and consensus. This is a model for smart city e-democracy which requires 
full potential of democracy to bring out the best in smart cities. In fact there 
are about ten models of democracy for smart city to choose from which are 
briefly outlined below. Held’s [46] ideal forms of democracy contain four 
historical models: Classical Athenian, Republicanism, Liberal, and Direct 

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
371
Marxism and four contemporary models: Completive Elitist, Pluralism, 
Legal, and Participatory. Liberal democracy as we practice in India, in 
terms of its structural characteristics, is as follows: 
	
1.	 Pluralistic competition among parties and individuals for all 
positions of government power; 
	
2.	 Participation among equal citizens in the selection of parties and 
representatives through free, fair and periodic elections; and civil 
and political liberties to speak, publish, assemble and organize, 
as necessary conditions to ensure effective competition and 
participation.
	
Ten models of democracy with few subtle variations are given below.
	
1. The participatory democracy model emphasizes the importance of 
participation. Equal rights can only be obtained in a participatory society 
which encourages a sense of political efficacy [46, 47]. Related models 
are the deliberative model [48, 49] and the strong model [50]. This model 
emphasizes the role of public discussions, the importance of citizen 
participation, and the existence of a well-functioning public sphere.
	
2. In accordance with the direct democracy model, network-based 
groups and individuals take over the role of traditional institutions 
[51, 52]. The quick democracy model allows that the majority should 
directly influence decision making, although the representative model of 
decision making can be seen as necessary in certain situations. The direct 
democracy model represents a radical alternative to the representative 
models of democracy which is technically feasible in large ICT-enriched 
smart cities. The idea of citizens participating directly in political decision 
making originates from the classical Athenian ideas of democracy and 
participation in the polis-state, focusing on equal rights to rule and be 
ruled in turn by the collective of free male citizens. In smart cities, ICT 
plays a critical role in implementations where the Internet no longer 
represents a supplement to traditional communication channels, but 
instead a crucial precondition for democracy [51]. A direct e-democracy 
initiative requires communication technology to support coordination 
among a great number of decision makers, i.e. citizens, possibly 
geographically scattered, with diverse interests and backgrounds. The 
direct democracy model emphasizes the importance of bringing power to 
the general public. Decisions are justified by consensus (communism) or 
by frequent elections giving mandates to elected members of government 
(socialism). 

372	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
3. The liberal democracy model is characterized by a representative 
government. Citizens are involved as voters as well as elected 
representatives at the multi-level such as ward, municipality, district, state 
and nation level, and as participators in the public debate. 
	
4. Competitive elitism is represented in Held’s model [46] on modern 
democracy. Experts represent (or claim to represent) different interests in 
society and act in policy networks. Political experts are heavily involved 
in the formation of policies and the definition of public services. 
	
5. According to the pluralism democracy model, a competitive 
electoral system, consisting of a minimum of two parties or two major 
coalitions, which may include regional parties, secures the government 
through electoral majority and political liberty. In a multi-party system 
like that practiced in India, two parties get transformed into two coalitions. 
This political system divides power through checks and balances into 
three branches of government: the legislative, the executive, and the 
judicial, in addition to the operational administration. In the legalist 
democracy model, the majority principle protects individuals from 
random governance. Effective political leadership is underpinned by 
liberal principles, characterized by minimal state intervention with civil 
society and the general public’s private life. The participatory democracy 
model emphasizes that equal rights are achieved through a participatory 
process where skilled members of society are profoundly involved in the 
governing process. 
	
6. Partisan democracy initiatives are characterized by citizen-
initiated participation and implicit citizen intervention in the decision-
making process. Active citizens participate in the political debate, but 
not through traditional channels or solely through representatives. 
Information technology seeks to obtain visibility for alternative political 
expressions and criticism without interruptions from the political elite 
[52–62]. Unrestricted discussions set the agenda. Examples include 
use of independent online communities discussing politics [62], chat 
room discussions [53], Usenet discussions [63], and blogging [64]. 
The opportunity to be heard and to meet an audience can be considered 
important, even when the audience is scarce or absent. New voices in the 
political arena and empowered citizens expressing alternative ideologies 
might fortify the importance of partisan democracy solutions, even when 
the connection to the prevailing decision-making processes remains 
implicit or absent. The review showed a gap between the reported cases 

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
373
and the theoretical discussions on various democracy models. Under the 
partisan e-democracy model, the main challenge is to create a movement 
which would involve the audience and facilitate evolution of emerging 
arguments. Partisan e-democracy implementations have the greatest 
influence in situations where alternative arenas for expressing political 
view points are absent or difficult to access. Citizen participation can be 
increased both by addressing a common objective and also by addressing 
the existence of contradictory views in the political debate and cultivating 
such contradictions to crystallize the standpoints of the participants. 
Any implementation of partisan e-democracy should facilitate free and 
independent debate. 
	
7.  The government-based agenda for decision making and implicit 
citizen participation in the decision-making process outside elections 
characterizes liberal democracy. This category includes several previously 
defined democracy models and concepts. Liberal democracy in general 
is characterized by a representative government, where citizens form the 
electorate, giving mandates to representatives at the local level but also 
participating in the public debate. The purpose of politics is to reconcile 
conflicting interests, and politicians are responsible for mediating these 
conflicts as they occur, through negotiation [48]. In liberal democracy, 
the majority rule protects individuals from random government. Effective 
political leadership is underpinned by liberal principles such as minimum 
state intervention in civil society and respect for individual privacy [65, 66].
	
8. The ideal of deliberative democracy connects citizens more 
explicitly and directly to decision-making processes [47] and emphasizes 
the role of open discussions in a well-functioning public sphere [46]. 
Politicians and citizens share an interest in dialogue and discourse 
leading to the formation of political opinion. Still, as it is a form of 
representative democracy, the input and cooperation between citizens and 
politicians constitute the legalization of display of power. In relation to 
deliberative democracy, several ideas and concepts have been suggested. 
The concepts of participative, protective, and developmental democracies 
emphasize the achievement of equal rights and a balance of power that 
can only be accomplished in a participatory society. The importance 
of citizen participation and involvement are emphasized further in 
the concepts of neo-republican and plebiscitary democracy [65]. In 
smart cities,information technologies are developed with the purpose 
of increasing citizen participation and involvement in political decision 

374	
Geographic information system for smart cities
making beyond casting their vote in elections or participating in electoral 
campaigns.
	
9. The consumer model of democracy focuses on the role of citizens as 
consumers of public services, while accepting well-established features of 
democracy such as parliamentary institutions, elections and parties. The main 
democratic value is the legal right to services, and the model seeks to re-focus 
democracy around the effective provision of these services: value for money. 
Right to service being legislated in India is an expression of consumer model 
of democracy. Elitist democracy also accepts traditional institutional features 
as the basis for democracy. The general public’s main personal interests 
are assumed to lie outside ‘high’ politics, rather on services and economic 
prosperity. This lack of interest leads to the fact that political decision making 
is the responsibility of an elite of specialists and experts, whose task is to 
be mediators in conflicting interests and claims. Experts representing (or 
claiming to represent) differing interests in society act in extended policy 
networks, forming the elite which is effectively involved in the formation of 
consensus, the articulation of policy and the defining of services.
	
10. Neo-republican democracy focuses on the quality of citizen’s 
participation and involvement. Citizens are expected to be active, especially 
at the micro- and local level, their citizenship contributing both to the 
emancipation of the political sphere and to their own moral, social, and 
intellectual development. The model is rooted in radical assumptions of 
common social rights and responsibilities, where the revitalizing of civic 
spirit is a central objective. The cyber-democratic model represents the most 
radical change to traditional democratic institutions and features. Here, 
traditional institutions lose power and influence in favour of network-based 
groups forging identities with alienated individuals defying barriers caused 
by society, and the nation states, cultural background and class. This virtual 
society of networks is dependent on the use of the self-organizing Internet 
communities. In this post-modern vision of extended pluralism escaping 
the bounds of cultural hegemony, yet struggling to retain social cohesion 
and collective political will, ICT is no longer a supplement to traditional 
communication channels, but a condition for e-democracy in smart cities. 
15.9.2	
Smart city e-democracy framework 
The concept of e-democracy refers to the use of information and 
communication technology (ICT) in political debates and decision-

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
375
making processes, complementing or contrasting traditional means of 
communication, such as face-to-face interaction or one-way mass media. 
Initiatives for e-democracy from the local municipality level [66] to 
international programs [67], for instance e-Europe 2005, are addressing a 
belief that the new ICT may increase democratization. Held’s framework 
forms the background for a body of theoretical work which relates ICT 
to forms of political organizations, suggesting models of e-democracy. 
Van Dijk [65] abandons the obviously less relevant historical models, 
and analyses the role of ICT in relation to Held’s four modern democracy 
models: pluralist, participatory, legalist and competitive democracy. He 
considers the models to be primarily characterized by:
	
1.	 Whether the main goal of democracy is opinion forming or 
decision making, and
	
2.	 Whether the primary means of democracy is the use of elected 
representatives, or direct voting by the people.
	
A related but simpler framework of four e-democracy models is 
introduced by Bellamy [65]. Whereas Van Dijk discusses the role of ICT 
as a supplement to traditional communication mechanisms, Bellamy adds 
a post-Internet democracy model (Cyber democracy), where the Internet 
no longer represents a supplement to traditional communication channels, 
but emerges as a crucial pre-condition for democracy. Bellamy claims 
that her four models (consumer, demo-elitist, neo-republican, and cyber 
democratic) serve as logically coherent constructs abstracted from specific 
social settings or from competing political values, seeking to ‘ground 
electronic democracy’ in a set of rival discourses connecting democratic 
values to technological change.
15.9.3	
Practical point of view
From the practical viewpoint, ten models of democracy indicates that 
e-democracy implementations need to be holistically considered from the 
viewpoint of the political and decision-making context as a part of the 
larger issue of democratization in society, not as a target for development 
in itself. Unless new communication practices are made official, let alone 
recognized, by the key stakeholders such as politicians and citizens, the 
development may have little impact. Traditional communication channels 
and e-democracy will continue to exist side by side. So far, an incredibly 
high number of e-democracy applications have been left without explicit 

376	
Geographic information system for smart cities
connection to the traditional democratic communication and decision-
making processes. 
	
Practitioners should be also aware that the different stakeholders of 
e-democracy may actually have different ideas and ideals of democracy, 
which may affect the use of certain e-democracy applications. In light 
of the framework, these differences could be taken into account by 
the practitioners who may want to choose to promote a certain kind of 
e-democracy. Based on the suggested framework, any implementation of 
e-democracy can be specific about the actual democracy model pursued in 
a particular initiative.
	
Full implementation of ICT provides for more effective participatory 
e-democracy than that exists today anywhere globally. There are many 
examples of e-democracy emerging in different countries. It generally 
triggers community action in urban space based on mass mobilisation. 
There is organisation in few countries promoting e-democracy. There are 
attempts to spread open source e-democracy software. In Kerala (India), this 
participatory democratic mobilisation was utilised to achieve eradication 
of illiteracy and achieving implementation of low population growth rate 
without using any coercive policy measures or punitive administrative 
interventions which are the traditional tools of legacy democracy. This 
was also done without e-democracy with great effort, expenditure and 
mass mobilisation. These were by and large based on people’s movement 
which is logically an integral part of smart city democracy. Now Kerala is 
about to reach zero population growth rates by 2031 without using policy 
measures China has adopted. If e-democracy is practiced it could have been 
accomplished with far lesser effort and money and result would have been 
much faster. Now there is well tested, since 1990s, a participatory annual 
planning system in Kerala also called as people’s planning movement 
(Janakiya Asuthranam) yielding results for participatory democracy. No 
doubt there are policy changes in participatory planning when government 
changes which often dilutes decentralisation. Community action for spatial 
development of locality can be achieved by better ICT implementation. 
Spatially, urban compaction and urban design of public realm can be 
executed as part of annual planning through participatory e-democracy. 
	
Imagine how easy citizens’ life will be if democratically elected ward 
committee member using ICT can be the only community focal point or as 
an interface of central, state and municipal government, acting as a local 
representative for all public service issues of government. Citizen need not 

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
377
meet officers in many departments whose service tradition is deplorably 
very bad although citizen pays for their salaries by taxes. If e-democracy 
is practiced, this could have been accomplished with far lesser effort and 
money.
	
Indian democracy has been strengthened with 73rd and 74th 
constitutional amendment and has empowered panchayat and municipal 
system of democracy as the third tier after State Assembly and National 
Parliament. Unlike state legislative assembly and National Parliament, 
panchayat and municipality are more progressive in working out 
participatory democracy in India. They have mandatory 50% female 
representative as elected persons unlike the national and state assemblies/ 
parliaments. Participatory democracy and governance is what this 
constitutional amendment has introduced and it is working but can be 
strengthened considerably with e-democracy by opening it up to virtual 
face-to-face community in a million-plus city. 
	
Governance system thus formed needs considerable refinement. 
Like cities, governance system evolves out of accumulated experiences 
as a goal-seeking automatic system. They have to evolve in the direction 
of e-democracy. Today city is for the people and by the people but has 
grown into very complex large entity like urban agglomeration, unlike 
ancient Mohenjo-daro cities, Licchavi cities or Greek cities where 
strong democratic tradition is known to be of existence and were small 
settlements. When our cities get transformed to smart cities as the next 
phase of development, e- democracy is the logical extension of the present 
democracy. In e-democracy the size of settlement does not matter with the 
application of broad band, Internet and ICT.
	
Today in Indian democracy, 500 or so members of Parliament in India 
frame legislations on a variety of topics related to urban and rural living 
without really consulting the opinion of 1.2 billion people at the grass 
roots who are expected to benefit or suffer out of this legislation. Can 
this 500 person have all the wisdom of 1.2 billion people? Do they have 
qualification of all knowledgeable and expert representative of 1.2 billion 
population? E-democracy facilitates answers to this question and effect 
such consultation and participation at least cost. 
	
Although city is largely a high density living, city dwellers by and 
large exist as isolated atomised individual entities in an urban society 
characterised by urban anonymity. In participatory democracy, they have 
to come together, articulate their thinking and shape the future of our cities. 

378	
Geographic information system for smart cities
It is only possible through e-democracy. This can be more successful in 
smart cities, hopefully to make urban living more enjoyable.
15.10	
From e-democracy to e-governance for smart 
cities
Electronic governance means governments online to deliver their services 
and programs, to provide government information, and to interact with 
the citizen. E-governance differs from e-government. E-government 
constitutes the way government institutions use ICT to apply public 
administration principles and conduct the business of government, using 
new tools to enhance the delivery of existing services [68]. E-governance 
includes the vision, strategies, planning, leadership and resources 
needed to carry this out. Included within the concept of e-governance is 
e-democracy, which deals with how the citizen interacts with government 
or influences the legislative process. It seeks to engage the citizen with 
governments and legislatures through the use of the ICT. 
	
There are two main avenues of citizen participation in e-governance: 
online voting and online consultation. However, there are other forms of 
participatory democracy, such as input into policy decisions, town meetings, 
online public hearings, and organization of like-minded individuals and 
groups through global networking and the building of online communities. 
	
The United Nations’ Public Economics and Public Administration 
division and the American Society for Public Administration conducted a 
global survey, [69] which broadly defined e-government as: Including the 
use of all information and communications technologies from out dated 
fax machines to yester years wireless palm pilots or modern mobile smart 
phones to facilitate the daily administration of government. However, 
like e-commerce, the popular interpretation of e-government is one that 
defines it exclusively as an Internet-driven activity that improves citizen 
access to government information, services and expertise to ensure citizen 
participation in, and satisfaction with the governing process. Although it 
speaks of e-government, the UN definition captures the essential role of 
e-governance and the evolving, new relationship of government with the 
citizen. E-governance results in the formation of new relationships with 
non-governmental organizations, citizens groups, unions, associations, 
volunteer groups, business, along with citizens and other levels of 
government. One aspect of the changing nature of this relationship is the 

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
379
capacity that citizens now have to access a wide range of services and 
information from all manner of organizations.
	
One of the most important developments to occur with the emergence 
of the Internet and other new ICTs are networks of online communities. 
The networked world allows the flow of knowledge and ideas in ways not 
known before. The characteristics of networked interaction, of which the 
Internet is a prime example, are as follows: 
	
l 	 Distributed intelligence in place of monopolies of information 
	
l 	 Flatter structure, as there is less need for layers of knowledge 
keepers and cultivators; 
	
l 	 Simultaneous action 
	
l 	 An exponential increase in actors and participants 
	
l 	 A structure organized around flexible nodes of information and 
exchange replacing the conventional hierarchies 
	
l 	 Three-dimensional structure in the sense that a network as a whole 
consists of an almost infinite number of “layers” of other networks 
	
l 	 Non-differentiation in potential influence between organizations 
and individuals 
	
l 	 Interactivity, as information flows in all directions and is constantly 
exchanged, not simply channelled.
	
The UN’s five guiding principles on e-government objectives are [69]:
	
1.	 Building services around citizens’ choices 
	
2.	 Making government and its services more accessible 
	
3.	 Social inclusion 
	
4.	 Providing information responsibly 
	
5.	 Using IT and human resources effectively and efficiently 
	
The UN’s eight issues on the content of current e-government are as 
follows:
	
1.	 Are governments doing enough to maximize the use of online 
services? 
	
2.	 Coordination of e-government initiatives among the country’s 
different levels of government 
	
3.	 Implementing technology options, i.e. leapfrogging with wireless 
communications
	
4.	 Legislative and policy-making environments 
	
5.	 Policy initiatives that governments are taking 
	
6.	 Greater citizen participation in the policy-making environment 
(e-democracy) 

380	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
7.	 Addressing the digital divide 
	
8.	 E-government participation: users and non-users of e-government; 
measuring e-government performance
	
The OECD’s (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development) ten guiding principles on e-government are [70]:
	
1.	 Commitment: proclaim feasible goals and provide financial 
support 
	
2.	 Rights: assure access, privacy and confidentiality to all users 
	
3.	 Clarity: adopt measurement standards for electronic service 
delivery 
	
4.	 Time: provide long-term time frames; avoid artificial deadlines 
	
5.	 Objectivity: set criteria for network performance and user 
satisfaction 
	
6.	 Resources: hire skilled personnel to design, implement and operate 
facilities 
	
7.	 Co-ordination: use common look and feel, and document content 
control 
	
8.	 Accountability: be accountable for electronic service quality and 
quantity 
	
9.	 Evaluation: conduct annual e-government audits and performance 
reviews 
	
10.	 Active citizenship: encourage active use; incorporate suggested 
improvements
	
The approaches to delivering local e-government fell into three broad 
categories: 
	
1.	 E-services – securing and providing government services by 
electronic means
	
2.	 E-governance – linking up citizens, stakeholders and elected 
representatives to participate in the governance of communities 
by electronic means (including e-democracy) 
	
3.	 E-knowledge – developing the skills and the ICT infrastructure to 
exploit knowledge for competitive advantage: 
	
In 2001 the US National Electronic Commerce Coordinating Council 
(NECCC) put forward definitions for e-government portals based on five 
levels, i.e. the five ways in which the web will develop [71]:
	
The first-level portal provides information or services easily, hiding 
organizational complexity and showing government as the citizen wants 
to see it. 

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
381
	
The second-level portal offers online transactions such as vehicle 
registration, business licensing, tax filing and bill payment. 
	
The third-level portal lets people jump from one service to the next 
without having to authenticate themselves again. 
	
The fourth-level portal draws out data needed for a transaction from 
all available government sources. 
	
The fifth – and highest – level portal adds value and allows people to 
interact with government on their own terms, providing aggregated and 
customized information and services in subject areas corresponding to the 
citizen’s own particular circumstance. 
	
Singapore’s e-Citizen portal is considered by many to be closest to 
the level-5 portal. Their government web site can integrate information, 
determine the speed of a person’s connection when a request comes in, 
identify who the person is making the request and then do an automatic 
search which profiles the person. Students can come online to register for 
university, someone else can see a birth certificate, another be directed 
to make an appointment with a doctor or request a health service. People 
can apply for a TV license, change their address, or receive information 
on a variety of government services, such as renting or buying flats (the 
government owns 80% of all flats in Singapore) [69].
15.10.1	
Citizen participation in smart city
All of these past experiences clearly demonstrate that simple ICT 
applications can have widespread impacts when the appropriate needs of 
the community in which they are to be applied are addressed. Doing this for 
jurisdictions with large national populations is a more difficult challenge 
unlike in smart city scale. However, what is clear from a review of many 
surveys and studies conducted is that the majority of the e-government 
applications, as well as discussion of their successes and failures, revolve 
around the effectiveness of ICTs in reducing costs and increasing efficiency 
of government service delivery programs. Even where there is recognition 
of the need for greater citizen participation if all aspects of e-governance 
are to be achieved, there is a noticeable lack of direction or programs for 
implementation of this dimension. 
	
It is also evident that the movement towards citizen participation is 
limited in larger jurisdictions, though there may be more engagement of 
citizens in local jurisdictions that are closer to the public like in smart 

382	
Geographic information system for smart cities
city. Nevertheless the danger in the tendency to merge e-governance 
and e-government and to use the terms interchangeably has the effect 
of discounting e-democracy – and true citizen e-participation – from the 
e-governance equation, where it then may be given an even lower priority 
by government.
	
Electronic democracy suggests that the rise of ICTs offers some hope 
in that they may be used to facilitate a greater participation of the citizen 
by providing: 
	
1.	 Access to more government information and interactivity through 
use of online government services, thereby contributing to the 
creation of a more informed citizenry. 
	
2.	 A forum for the free exchange of ideas and the ability to share 
informed debate on issues of the day.
	
3.	 Input by citizens, through online consultations, into the decision-
making process of government on those issues that directly affect 
them.
15.10.2	
Relationship of e-democracy with e-governance
Clift [72–74] describes e-democracy as referring to “how the Internet 
can be used to enhance our democratic processes and provide increased 
opportunities for individuals and communities to interact with government 
and for the government to seek input from the community.” Characteristics 
of the Internet which he claims facilitate e-democracy are those which 
provide opportunity to participate in debates as they happen. This 
e-participation is less limited by geography, disability or community 
networks, and facilitates the access to information and provision of input 
by individuals and groups who previously had not been included in these 
debates.
	
One of the proponents of e-government in Canada, the Centre for 
Collaborative Government, has dispensed with the term ‘e-governance’. 
It uses e-government to encompass all such electronic activities and 
programs, with e-democracy included as a ‘growing’ part of e-government. 
Terms such as ‘digital government’ and ‘digital voice’ have also come 
into use. E-democracy is treated more as a result of e-government rather 
than an equal part of the equation. The Centre’s emphasis on the use of 
ICTs by government and elected officials often overshadows the real 
difficulties involved in online citizen engagement, which is presented as 

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
383
if it were merely an extension of more traditional consultation methods. 
E-government presents a real transformation in democratic governance, 
including design, decision-making and service-delivery capabilities. 
E-governance refers to new processes of coordination made possible 
or even necessary by the advent of technology – and the spreading of 
online activities in particular. As a result, e-government refers to an IT-
led reconfiguration of governance. Key elements found to enhance the 
democratic experience are: 
	
1.	 Multiple channels for dialogue and interaction; 
	
2.	 Partnership between government and a civil society group; and 
how knowledge, power and purpose are redistributed in light of 
new technological realities; 
	
3.	 Terms of engagement made clear at the start – government 
takes higher risk but can also engage in activities not normally 
undertaken within the constitutional framework. If the process is 
to be credible, it must be reciprocal;
	
4.	 Even though not every suggested solution could be implemented, 
active listening is important, giving citizens the feeling their 
opinions are valuable; 
	
5.	 Fostering of civic literacy, with abundant information and 
background materials provided, and time for deliberation; 
	
6.	 Transparent dialogue where answers of others could be accessed 
(if permission to publish was given); and 
	
7.	 Active moderation by the research group according to civil rules 
(which were published on the site) so that the discussion could not 
be hijacked nor turn into a free-for-all. 
	
The two main thrusts of their democratic reform agenda are 
e-participation and e-voting.
	
E-voting is the use of ICT to facilitate participation in elections or 
other ballots under statutory control. This comprises e-voting in: 
	
l 	 elections;
	
l 	 referendums and 
	
l 	 private ballots under statutory control 
	
This track also includes online registration of voters and online 
application to be an absentee voter. 
	
E-participation – the use of ICT to open new channels for participation 
in the democratic process between elections. This comprises e-participation 
of citizens in: 

384	
Geographic information system for smart cities
	
l 	 government’s policy process; 
	
l 	 the processes of policy-making, law-making and scrutiny by 
elected representatives; 
	
l 	 the processes of policy formulation in political parties and other 
civil society organisations.
	
While there have been several e-consultations, as well as an 
experiment with e-voting in few countries, the Office of the e-Envoy has 
been disappointed with the utilization of these electronic methods both by 
government departments and by the citizens. British MP Edward Leigh, 
Chairman of the House of Commons Public Accounts Committee, reported 
that “Where take-up figures are available they often tell a depressing 
tale of low usage” (BBC News, December 13, 2002). With the aim of 
intensifying the engagement of its citizens, the city council of Kalix in 
Sweden conducted an experiment in online deliberation. It enabled the 
citizens to have online discussions with local politicians and each other 
and to give their opinions on the renovation of the town centre. Over a 
two-week period citizens could participate through the Internet, as well as 
through traditional means of communication such as the telephone, post 
and fax. Most (86%) of those participating chose to use the Internet. The 
citizens were also able to vote on the issue online. To ensure that only 
those entitled to do so could vote and that they voted only once, the council 
set up a password-protected website and issued a password to registered 
voters. For citizens without computer access, the council arranged for PCs 
to be made available at schools and libraries. Approximately 1,200 of the 
15,000 inhabitants participated, 72% of whom reported the experience as 
a valuable democratic initiative. 
15.10.3	
Smart city and human rights
Smart city has a human right dimension. Increasing use of ICT component 
of smart cities demands more and more information about citizens of smart 
cities for the delivery of public services. Is it desirable to have personal 
information easily accessible? Is there sanctity of such information such as 
medical statistics of an individual being known to all? Can this be misused? 
Smart city is an information society where in considerable details based 
on unique identity of individuals (for example Aadhaar card number in 
India) will be known. It is important to manage such information without 
threatening the human rights. This aspect need to be studied on the basis 

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
385
of constitutional human rights provision of each countries or United 
Nations’ view on human rights. This sensitivity shall form an integral part 
of smart city governance. There are several security issues in using such 
information.
15.11	
Conclusion 
Although, it is desirable to convert as many cities in India to smart cities, 
it is not simply possible. There should be potential for smart cities in states 
and union territories. Smart people and smart communities are primary 
requirements to trigger development of smart cities. They work within 
the framework of e-democracy, e-governance and e-government. They 
are there wherever there is high HDI. It is only smart people who can 
create smart communities and smart cities. Evidence of emerging smart 
economy is indicated by high urban content of the states. Large impact 
of smart economy can be there only in million-plus urban agglomeration. 
When one combine all these requirements not all 53 million-plus cities 
in India that appeared in 2011 census in India can be potential candidates 
for smart cities. Even if few of these million-plus agglomeration or cities 
are short listed as candidates, they can never be smart cities unless they 
are having an appropriate institutional framework which can shape them 
to smart cities such as e-democracy, e-government and e-governance. 
Seventy fourth constitutional amendments provide for the metropolitan 
planning committees which need to be legislated by the respective states. 
Triple Helix Model is the only dynamic frame work that can shape 
smart cities. It presupposes that members of this constitutional body, 
metropolitan committee shall have representatives of democratically 
elected representatives such as mayor, chairman/president municipality, 
and panchayat in the metropolitan region. Members should be there 
from industrial sector or its representative bodies such as chamber of 
commerce and industries. There shall be academicians such as vice 
chancellors, directors of higher educational institutions, directors of public 
research institutions, and eminent professors in metropolitan committee. 
This committee shall have an implementing authority with senior 
administrator heading implementing body whose main function is to 
implement the decisions of the metropolitan committee. The administrator 
shall be assisted by three wings namely metropolitan planning wing 
with highest level of capability for metropolitan regional development 

386	
Geographic information system for smart cities
planning and capability to manage the modern centre for metropolitan 
geographic information system using e-democracy for e-government and 
e-governance; an engineering wing with senior engineer managing it and a 
finance wing whose main capability shall be the mobilisation of large scale 
finances from national and international sources for implementing large-
scale infrastructure and other development tasks in addition to traditional 
account keeping. All these wings shall have provision to employ highest 
level of expert consultants to accomplish tasks which normally they cannot 
perform at market rate.
	
A global alliance of smart cities shall be formed where Indian smart 
cities shall be members to exchange experience and share software 
development. Metropolitan planning committee shall have 20-year 
spatial and infrastructure development plan, 5-year metropolitan social 
and economic development plans in tune with state and national five 
year plans and annual plans for implementation of plan as per annual 
budget. A share of annual budget shall come from state government, 
and another central government and metropolitan planning committee 
shall have their own financial resources from entering into commercial 
developments such as land development and leasing of land for industries, 
development of infrastructure to potential entrepreneurs or running major 
transport networks. Institute of Town Planners India can have positive role 
in formulating model metropolitan planning committee legislation and 
model organisation framework for smart city metropolitan committee and 
its implementing authority. This will considerably help state government 
to formulate legislations for creation of metropolitan planning committee. 
India’s experience in the direction of metropolitan planning committee is 
very meagre or one can say almost non-existent. 
	
There are specialised hardware and software required for the 
functioning of smart cities and smart communities. Few of them are listed 
in this chapter. Many of these technologies are not implemented in Indian 
cities. Most of them aim at resource conserving metropolitan functioning 
of smart cities whether it is on energy or water use or on transportation. 
Outright purchase of technology, and licence for local manufacture and 
commercial production is one approach for large scale deployment of 
these technologies in emerging Indian smart cities. Another approach is 
collaborative research and joint production. Still another approach is to 
develop appropriate smart city technologies in Indian research centres 
based on specific needs. There is a need to appraise globally available 

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
387
smart city technologies and formulate appropriate Indian standards. 
Indian Standard Institution is competent to develop such standards, and 
Ministry of Science and Technology can conduct a global smart city urban 
technologies assessment.
	
There are no smart city policies for India or states of India. There is 
a need to conduct basic research leading towards formulation of policies. 
This policy formulation can be from the study of other countries such 
as for example European community who is taking many steps in this 
direction. Another approach is to evaluate the existing smart cities to learn 
the experience and transfer it to Indian condition. 
	
There are few experiences such as e-governance and e-commerce 
available in India. There are also resources conserving technologies being 
developed in India which can be used in smart cities. These need to be 
studied and expanded in scope. 
	
Smart cities open up to an information or knowledge society. It is likely 
that information society may trespasses in the privacy of citizen. These need 
to be studied and appropriate norms need to be applied to smart cities. 
15.12	
References
[1] Report on India’s Urban Awakening (2010). Building inclusive cities, 
sustaining economic growth, McKinsey Global Institute, p.48.
[2] Rai, N., and Singh, A. (2010). New Dimensions of Urban Management in 
India, Serials Publication, New Delhi, p.2.
[3] Ahluwalia, M. (2011). “Prospects and Policy Challenges in the Twelfth 
Plan”, Economic & Political Weekly, 46(21), pp. 88–105. 
[4] Report on India’s Urban Awakening (2010). Building inclusive cities, 
sustaining economic growth, Mckinsey Global Institute, p.55.
[5] Kundu, A. (2011). “Politics and Economics of Urban Growth”, Economic 
& Political Weekly, 46(20),pp. 10–12. 
[6] Bhagat, R. B. (2011). “Emerging Pattern of Urbanisation in India”, 
Economic and Political Weekly, 56(34), pp. 10–12.
[7] Government of Kerala (2012). State Urbanisation Report Kerala, A study 
of scattered human settlement pattern of Kerala and its development issues, 
Department of Town and Country Planning.
[8] Kundu, A. (2007). “Migration and Exclusionary Urban Growth in 
India”, Sixth Dr C Chandrasekaran Memorial Lecture, International Institute for 
Population Sciences, Mumbai.

388	
Geographic information system for smart cities
[9] Registrar General and Census Commissioner (2006). “Population 
Projections for India and States 2001–2026, Report of the Technical Group on 
Popula­tion Projections Constituted by National Popula­tion Commission”, Office 
of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner, New Delhi. 
[10] Bhagat, R. B. (2005). “Rural-urban Classification and Municipal 
Governance in India”, Singapore Jour­nal of Tropical Geography, 26(1),pp. 61–74.
[11] Planning Commission (2008). Eleventh Five-Year Plan, Volume III: 
Agriculture, Rural Development, Industry, Services and Physical Infrastructure, 
New Delhi: Oxford University Press. 
[12] United Nations (2009). “The World Urbanisation Prospects: The 2009 
Revision”, Department of Economic and Social Affairs Population Division, New 
York.
[13] National Council of Applied Economic Research, Planning Commission 
Government of India(2012). India Human Development Report 2011 Towards 
Social Inclusion.
[14] Human Development Report (2010). UNDP.
[15] Naik, N. T., and Rahman, M. (2007). Urbanisation of India, Serial 
Publications, New Delhi, pp. 39–40.
[16] Allen, G. N., and Dutt, A. K. (1977). Indian Urbanization and Planning-
Vehicles of Modernization, New Delhi: Tata McGraw Hill, p.66.
[17] Dholakia, J. R. (2008). Urbanisation Issues and Perspectives, Hyderabad: 
ICFAI University Press, p.42.
[18] Giddens, A. (1998). The Third Way, the Renewal of Social Democracy, 
Cambridge UK: Blackwell Publishers, p.30.
[19] Government of India, University Grants Commission (2008). “Annual 
Report 2008”, New Delhi.
[20] Etzkowitz, H. (2006). “The new visible hand: An assisted linear model 
of science and innovation policy”, Science and Public Policy, 33(5), pp. 310–320.
[21] Polanyi, K. (1957). The Great Transformation. Boston: Beacon Press.
[22] Etzkowitz, H. (2002). MIT and the Rise of Entrepreneurial Science. 
London and New York: Routledge.
[23] Debackere, K. (2000). “Managing academic R&D as a business at K. U. 
Leuven: Context, structure and process”, R&D Management, 30(4), pp. 323–328.
[24] Zhou, C. (2006). “Government- pulled triple helix model for regional 
innovation in China,” Conference on The Triple Helix Paradigm for Development, 
17–19 Sep. Bristol, UK. http://www.uwe. ac.uk/ bbs/ 3helixconference/index.
html
[25] Debackere, K. and Veugelers, R. (2005). “The role of academic 

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
389
technology transfer organizations in improving industry science links”, Research 
Policy, 34(3), pp. 321–342.
[26] BankBoston (1997). ‘MIT: The impact of innovation.’ Boston, Mass: 
BankBoston.
[27] Saragossi, S., and B. Van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie (2003). “What 
patent data reveals about universities. The case of Belgium”, Journal of Technology 
Transfer, 28(1), pp. 47–51.
[28] Surlemont, B., Wacquier, H., and Pirnay, F. (2001). “Les spin-offs 
universitairesbelges en l’an 2000: Une analyse économique”, Centre de Recherche 
PME etd’Entrepreneuriat, Université de Liège, http:// www.ulg.ac.be/crdocpme.
[29] Capron, H., Cincera, M., Meeusen, W., Dumont, M., and Vandewalle, 
K. (1998). “National innovation systems: Pilot study of the Belgian innovation 
system”, Report for the Belgian Federal Office for Scientific, Technical and 
Cultural Affairs (OSTC) and OECD, June 1998.
[30] Pavitt, K. (2000a). “Public policies to support basic research: What can 
the rest of the world learn from US theory and practice? (And what they should 
not learn)”, Paper no. 53 of SPRU Electronic Working Papers Series, SPRU, 
Sussex University, UK.
[31] Peterman, F., Branko, D. H., and Girard, R. (2001). “Creating economic 
activity: University of Saskatchewan example.” Saskatoon: University of 
Saskatchewan Technologies Inc.
[32] Niosi, J. (2000). Canada’s National System of Innovation. Montreal: 
McGill Queen’s University Press.
[33] Langford, Cooper H., Martha W. Langford, and Douglas R. Burch 
(1997). “The ‘well stirred reactor’:Evolution of industry-government university 
relations in Canada.” Science and Public Policy, 24, pp. 21–27.
[34] Evolution of industry-government university relations in Canada, 
Science and Public Policy, 24, pp. 21–27.
[35] Drucker, P. (1995). The Post-Capitalist Society. Oxford: Butterworth- 
Heinemann.
[36] Porter, E. M. (1990). The Competitive Advantage of Nations. New York: 
Free Press.
[37] Meyer, M. (2006). Academic inventiveness and entrepreneurship: On 
importance of start-up companies in commercializing academic patents. Journal 
of Technology Transfer, 31, pp. 501– 510. Vaccine and Infectious Disease 
Organization-VIDO. ND. “The VIDO Story” Retrieved 24th October, 2006 from 
http://www.vido.org/.
[38] Dzisah, J. (2006). Scientific research and economic activity: The 

390	
Geographic information system for smart cities
perceptions of academic and industrial scientists of the production and capitalization 
of knowledge. PhD Dissertation. Saskatoon: University of Saskatchewan.
[39] CPC Central Committee, State Council Decision on Developing China’s 
Independent Capacity for Innovation, (2006).1, http://www.walterhutchens.net/
blog/2006/02/ 
10/state-council-decision-on-developing 
chinas-independent-
capacity- for-innovation 2/.
[40] Pu, R., Diao, X. and Wang, X. (2006). “Liaoning as Traditional Industrial 
Base has been pushed towards the “Crossroad” of Indigenous Innovation” Liaoning 
Daily.2.21, http://chinaneast.xinhuanet.com/2006- 02/01/content6282143.htm.
[41] Heller, A. (1999). A Theory of Modernity. London: Blackwell.
[42] BankBoston (1997). ‘MIT: The impact of innovation.’ Boston, Mass: 
BankBoston.
[43] Arup (2011). Smart Solution for Cities: www.arup.com
[44] Arup (2010). Smart Cities, Transforming the 21stCentuary City via the 
Creative use of Technology: www.arup.com
[45] Arup, Accenture, Horizon, (2011). The Information Market Place the 
New Economics of Cities” www.arup.com
[46] Held, D. (1996). Models of Democracy, Oxford: Blackwell. 
[47] Pateman, C. (1970). Participation and Democratic Theory, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
[48] Eriksen, E. O. and Weigård, J. (1999). Kommunikativ handling og 
deliberative democratic: Jürgen Habermas’ teoriompolitikkogsamfunn, Bergen: 
Fagbokforlaget.
[49] Gimmler, A. (2001). “Deliberative democracy, the public sphere and the 
internet”, Philosophy Social Criticism, 27(4), pp. 21–39.
[50] Barber, B. R. (1984). Strong Democracy: Participatory Politics for a 
New Age. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
[51] Bellamy, C. (2000). “Modelling electronic democracy, Towards 
democratic discourses for an information age” in Hoff, J., I. Horrocks, and P. Tops 
(eds.) Democratic governance and new technology, technologically mediated 
innovations in political practice in Western Europe, London: Routledge, pp. 33–
54. 
[52] Lynne, E. (2004). Direktedemokrati. Oslo: Pax.
[53] Fung, A. (2002). “One city, two systems: Democracy in an electronic 
chat room in Hong Kong”, Javnost -the Public, 9(2), pp. 77–93. 
[54] Hurwitz, R. (1999). “Who needs politics? Who needs people? The 
ironies of Democracy in Cyberspace”, Contemporary Sociology, 28, pp. 655–661.

	
Implementing smart cities in India	
391
[55] Moon, J. Y., and Yang, S. (2003). “The Internet as an Agent of Political 
Change: The case of “Rohsamo” in the South Korean Presidential Campaign of 
2002”. Twenty-Fourth International Conference on Information Systems. 
[56] Olsson, T., Sandstrom, H., and Dahlgren, P. (2003). “An Information 
Society for Everyone?”, Gazette: The International Journal for Communication 
Studies, 65(4–5), pp. 347–363. 
[57] Paolillo, J. C. and Heald, D. (2002). “Democratic participation in the 
discursive management of Usenet”, Proceedings of the 35th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, 35, pp. 1040–1049. 
[58] Papacharissi, Z. (2004). “Democracy online: civility, politeness, and the 
democratic potential of online political discussion groups”, New Media Society, 
6(2), pp. 259–283. 
[59] Rodan, G. (1998). “The Internet and political control in Singapore”, 
Political Science Quarterly, 113(1), pp. 63–89. 
[60] Schneider, S. M. (1996). “Creating a democratic public sphere through 
political discussion - A case study of abortion conversation on the Internet”, Social 
Science Computer Review, 14(4), pp. 373–393. 
[61] Stromer-Galley, J. (2002). “New voices in the public sphere: A 
comparative analysis of interpersonal and online political talk”, Javnost-the 
Public, 9(2), pp. 23–41. 
[62] Tsaliki, L. (2002). “Online forums and the enlargement of public space: 
Research findings from a European project”, Javnost-the Public, 9(2), pp. 95–112. 
[63] Hill, K. A. and Hughes, J. E. (1998). Cyber Politics: Citizen Activism in 
the Age of the Internet. Lanham, Md: Rowman & Littlefield.
[64] Griffiths, M. (2004). “e-Citizens: Blogging as Democratic Practice”, 
European Journal of E-Government, 2(3), pp. 155–166.
[65] Van Dijk, J. (2000). “Models of democracy and concepts of 
communication” In: K. L. Hacker, and J. Van Dijk (eds.) Digital Democracy, 
Issues of Theory and Practice, London: Sage. 
[66] Grönlund, Å. (2003). “Emerging electronic infrastructures - Exploring 
democratic components”, Social Science Computer Review 21(1), pp. 55–72.
[67] Commission, E. (2002). “eEurope 2005: An information society for all,” 
http://europa.eu.int/information_society/eeurope/2002/news_library/documents/
eeurope2 005/eeurope2005_en.pdf (current June 10, 2004).
[68] Okot-Uma, Rogers W’O (2000). Electronic Governance: Re-inventing 
Good Governance. London: Commonwealth Secretariat.
[69] United Nations, “A Global Survey of E-Government 2002 <htttp://www.
nuasurveys.org> online newsletter, June 24, 2002: 2

392	
Geographic information system for smart cities
[70] OECD,’ Citizen as Partners’ Paris 2002 (March 12, 2002) <www.oecd.
org/puma/citizen/Nov02>
[71] Holmes, D. (2001). E-gov: E-business Strategies for Government, 
London: Nicholas Brealey Publishing.
[72] Clift, S. (2001). “E-Governance to E-Democracy: Progress in Australia 
and New Zealand”, online: <http://www.electronicgov.net>
[73] Clift, S. (2001). “E-Governance to E-Democracy: Progress in Australia 
and New Zealand”, online: <http://www.electronicgov.net>
[74] Clift, S. (2002). “The Future of E-Democracy”, Democracy Online 
Newswire: http://www.e-democracy.org

73rd and 74th constitutional 
amendments, 32, 70, 362, 377
A
Aadhaar Project, 17–20, 366, 384
Accessibility, 3, 8, 95, 171, 174, 
180, 308
Activity chains, 191, 192
Activity scheduling, 187, 188
Activity-based measures, 309
Actuators, 7
Adaptive behaviour, 206
Adaptive urbanism, 81, 83, 91, 92
Advanced metering infrastructure, 
12
Advocacy mechanism, 4
Aerial photographs, 31, 50, 102
Agent-based models, 231
Agentification, 237
Agglomeration efficiencies, 42, 47
Agricultural land, 29, 43, 45, 53, 
56, 66
Ahmedabad Municipal Transport 
Service (AMTS), 316
Ambient intelligence, 295, 296
Anthropogenic impacts, 128
Anthropogenic pollution, 43
Anthropospheric system, 273, 274
Index
Artificial intelligence, 33, 188, 
226, 231, 257
Artificial islands, 80
Artificial neural networks (ANN), 
14, 15
Artificial structures, 43, 80
Attabu, 119
Australian smart community, 9
Automated meter reading system 
(AMR), 11
Automatic computing principles, 7
B
Below poverty line (BPL), 20, 163, 
174, 179
Bicycle riders, 104
Biogeophysical parameters, 65
Biometrics, 268
Biophilic affordances, 273
Biophilic design, 266, 267
Biourban economics, 266, 269
Biourbanism, 250, 257, 263, 266, 
269
Body awareness, 263
Booking agent, 212–214
Breakwater towers, 80
British colonial India, 2

394	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Broadband connectivity, 4
Building codes, 1
Building management systems, 22, 
112
Building materials, 67, 68, 126, 
215, 272
Build-Own-Operate-Transfer 
(BOOT) mechanisms, 63
Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) system, 
312
Business-as-usual (BAU), 313, 314
C
Cadastral data repository, 119
Cadastral data, 100
Cadastral management system, 
118, 122
Carbon footprints, 65
Cartesian Dualism, 91
Cell phone ownership, 20
Census of India, 26, 152, 153
Census towns, 325
Central Planning Commission, 36
Change-detection matrix, 54
Characteristic components, 
129–133, 143
CHI land use interaction matrix 
(CLIM), 138, 141
CHI values, 130, 136, 144, 145
Citizen participation, 32, 294, 345, 
370, 371, 373, 378, 381
Citizenship, 294, 297, 374, 380
City planners, 8, 14, 306
Civic amenities, 29
Civil network, 108
Class structure, 151
Climate change, 45, 51, 60, 68, 
73–77, 87, 89, 90 
Cloud computing, 14, 246, 368
Coastal erosion, 77, 131
Coastal process indicator, 135
Coastal regulatory zone (CRZ), 
140
Coastal urbanization, 128
Coastal zone Health Indicator 
(CHI), 124, 125
Coastal zone health, 129, 133, 134, 
143
Coastal zones, 125–129, 133, 137, 
138, 143, 145 
Cognitive science, 294
Collective intelligence, 8, 33, 270
Collector, 210–212
Colonial governance, 1
Colonial masters, 2, 16, 365
Comfortable mobility, 2, 8
Commercial business district 
(CBD), 313
Common Alerting Protocol, 233
Common toilets, 166, 172
Communications, 7, 12, 68, 95, 
206
Communitarian goal, 269
Community consensus, 276
Community Data Set Analysis 
(CDsA), 273
Community participation, 70, 301

	
	
Index	
395
Community-oriented planning, 297
Competitive elitism, 372
Computational Process Models, 
187, 188
Computer-assisted interpretation, 
50
Computing abilities, 61
Connectors, 318, 319
Consciousness, 261
Consolidation, 138, 209–214, 217, 
219
Consumer model of democracy, 
374
Consumerism, 258, 260, 265, 279
Contour-based measure, 309
Core (worst) slums, 159
Core banking, 20
Cost-benefits analysis, 369 
Critical dimensions (CDs), 129, 
131
Crowd-sourcing, 234
Customer-associated systems, 12
Cyber-democratic model, 374
D
Data mining, 14, 17, 294
Decision-support problems, 15
Decision-support system, 52, 57
Dehumanization, 262
Delhi–Mumbai High Speed Freight 
Corridor, 4
Demand nodes, 219–224
Demand-response services, 12
Development sensitivity, 128, 137, 
143, 145
Development system, 1, 2
Developmental sensitivity, 124
Digital city, 6, 32, 33, 250
Digital communities, 33
Digital control systems, 22, 112
Digital divide, 10, 255, 380
Digital image processing 
techniques, 50
Digital image processing, 50, 54, 
55
Digital information, 226, 230, 232, 
235, 236, 246 
Digital Number (DN), 50
Digital remote sensing data, 50
Digital sensors, 22, 112
Digital utility meters, 22, 112
Direct democracy, 370, 371
Disconnection, 264, 265, 277, 278
DN values, 50, 55
Drainage, 68, 88, 104, 170, 171, 
181, 366
Dubai Electricity and Water 
Authority (DEWA), 107
E
e-Banking, 6
eCognition, 54
Ecological footprint, 43, 45, 46, 
60, 63 
e-Commerce, 6, 11, 34, 258, 378, 
387
eCompleXcity, 245

396	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Economic down turns, 2, 8, 21
Economically weaker sections 
(EWS), 155, 317, 326
e-democracy, 345, 369–376
Educational institutions, 6, 355, 
385
e-Freight, 206
e-Governance, 6, 19, 83, 89, 
325–331, 339, 345, 366, 378, 
381, 382 
Electricity usage, 11
Electro-magnetic data, 51
Electromagnetic spectrum, 50–52
Electronic democracy, 375, 382
Elitist democracy, 374
Employment generation, 2
Employment multipliers, 6
Encroachment, 58, 64, 134
Energy displays, 12
Environmental effects, 45, 56
Environmental Performance Index 
(EPI), 49
Environmental pollution, 20, 29, 
132, 216, 220, 223
Environmental Sustainability 
Index, 48, 49
Environmental Vulnerability Index 
(EVI), 49
e-Participation, 382, 383
e-Services, 107, 111, 335, 380
eSite application, 102
Etisalat, 107, 108
e-Voting, 383, 384, 
Existing land use (ELU) plan, 56, 
57
Expert systems, 14, 15
F
Face-to-face social system, 8
Federal states, 2
Five-year plans, 26, 30, 31
Flash flood, 68
Flexible activity, 191, 192
Floating communities, 80
Floating cruise terminals, 80
Floor area ratio (FAR), 57, 139
Focal public spaces, 103
Functional cities, 264
Fundamental Geographic 
Document Sets (FGDS), 108
Fuzzy logic systems, 14
Fuzzy logic, 14, 15
G
Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) 
countries, 120
GCC grid, 120
GCC Interconnection Authority 
(GCCIA), 121
General Development Control 
Regulations (GDCRs), 57, 70
Generic impacts, 139–141
Geo-Cyber Infrastructure (GCI), 
226, 228, 246
Geographic information systems 
(GIS), 2, 26, 35, 73, 81, 101, 

	
	
Index	
397
149, 150, 295, 352, 386
Geomorphologic indicator, 134
Geopolitical system, 299
Geo-spatial analysis, 34
Geo-spatial data, 38, 73
Ghettoization, 289 
GIS application, 14, 15, 20, 109, 
110, 149, 180
GIS computations, 3
GIS database, 94, 96, 97, 100, 102, 
114, 116, 117, 329 
GIS mapping, 34, 182
GIS standards, 17
GIS user interface, 15
GIS vector framework, 55
Global economy, 9, 10
Global positioning system (GPS), 
52, 53
Global Shelter Strategy (GSS), 153
Globalisation, 94
Good governance, 182
Goods movement, 205–210, 
214–218
Governance networks, 228
Governance systems, 325, 342
Government servants, 2, 20
Government-collected data, 17
Gravity model, 188
Green freight corridors, 206
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emission, 
67, 76
Gross enrolment ratio (GER), 354
Ground control points (GCPs), 53
Ground surveys, 53
Ground-penetrating radar (GPR) 
technology
H
Habeas data, 268
Heteronomy, 258, 266
Hierarchical structure, 2
Histogram matching, 54, 55
Holistic disaster management, 232
Home health monitoring, 368
Homological city, 250, 260, 280
Housing and Urban Development 
Corporation (HUDCO), 30, 155
Human Development Index (HDI), 
348–350
Human encroachment, 134
Human interventions, 134
Human limitations, 61, 71
Human rights, 345, 384, 385
Human sensory perceptions, 135
Human spirituality, 91
Human-centered spaces, 267
Human-centered vector, 265
Hunters-gatherers, 291
Hyper-complex organism, 263
Hyper-land, 278, 279
Hyper-technological devices, 264
I
I2I (institutions to institutions), 
233, 235
I2U (institutions to users), 233–
240

398	
Geographic information system for smart cities
ICT infrastructure, 32, 336, 369, 
380
ICT technologies, 9
Ill-structured problems, 15
Immigration, 57
Independent Spatial Management 
(ISM) system, 109
Indus Valley civilisation, 28
Industrial Revolution, 264, 291, 
300
Industrialisation, 28
Information accessibility, 289, 293, 
294
Information and communication 
technology (ICT), 32, 251, 
270, 294, 342, 374
Information flows, 232, 233, 235, 
259, 301, 379 
Information processing, 206
Information processors, 10
Information technology, 9, 26, 95, 
106, 121, 230, 255
Informational ecosystems, 231
Informational skills, 10
Infrastructure systems, 311
Institutional cooperation, 294, 297
Integrated Coastal Zone 
Management (ICZM), 124
Integrated Development of Small 
and Medium Towns (IDSMT), 
30, 31
Integrated land use, 305, 307
Intellectual property rights, 10
Intelligent Community 
Organisation, 4
Intelligent Metering System, 111
Intelligent system technologies, 
14, 15
Intelligent transportation system 
(ITS), 205, 206
Inter-community resources, 10
Intermediate slums, 149, 159
Internet, 9, 11, 15, 34, 101, 107, 
119, 236, 245, 253, 258, 295, 
298, 336, 337, 340, 368, 370, 
371, 374, 375, 377, 379
Intraday trip prediction model, 187
Inundation, 73, 77, 83, 86, 88
J
Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban 
Renewal Mission (JnNURM), 
31, 317, 325
K
Knowledge economies, 6, 13
Knowledge engineering, 231
Knowledge society, 293, 294, 387
Knowledge-based attitude, 294
Knowledge-based city, 1, 2, 8
Knowledge-based technology, 14, 15
Knowledge-oriented society, 292
Kondratiev’s theory, 291, 292
L
Land acquisition acts, 32
Land parcel, 94, 100, 113, 118

	
	
Index	
399
Landsat Multispectral Scanner 
(MSS) images, 50
Land-use allocations, 129, 138, 
139, 143, 145
Land-use parcels, 112, 140
Land-use plan, 56, 57, 95, 104, 
124–128, 145, 146, 308
Land-use zones, 57
Legal and policy framework, 153
Liberal democracy, 371–373
Light Detection and Ranging 
(LiDAR) technology, 82
Local authorities, 10
Local government, 9, 10, 252, 273, 
299
Local traditions, 272
Locations of land use and land 
cover change (LULCC), 54
M
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act 
(MGNREGA), 39
Maieutics, 267
Manual interpretation, 50
Map data mining, 14
Master plans, 1, 2, 14, 17, 83, 102, 
128, 305, 330, 341
Mathematical algorithms, 50
McFadden’s Logit model, 189
Mechanization, 269
Mega cities, 3, 5, 12, 17, 74, 82, 
147, 178, 181, 349, 350, 352, 
357, 358, 359
Mega infrastructure projects, 6
Memory, 14, 206
Metabolic flows, 236
Meter Data Management (MDM) 
software, 12
Metering devices, 12
Methodological framework, 129
Metro system (MRT), 313, 316
Metropolitan planning committee 
(MPC), 361–365, 385, 386
Metropolitanisation, 30
Microwave remote sensing, 52
Migration pattern, 38, 82
Million-plus cities, 6, 28, 29, 178, 
347, 349–351, 385 
Mixed-use communities, 98
Mobile health monitoring, 368
Modernisation, 28
MODIS (Moderate Resolution 
Imaging Spectro-radiometer), 
52, 65
Money transactions, 11
Monte-Carlo method, 190, 191, 
196
Multi-Agent Systems (MAS), 226, 
231, 236
Multinomial Logit Model, 189
Multispectral scanners, 51
Municipal Acts, 32
Municipal administration, 30, 31, 
37, 333
Municipal services, 327, 333, 340

400	
Geographic information system for smart cities
N
National Commission on 
Urbanisation (NCU), 28, 35
National Housing Policy (NHP), 
153
National Slum Development 
Program (NSDP), 154
National Spatial Database 
Infrastructure (NSDI), 26, 35
National Urban Data Bank and 
Indicators (NUDBI), 38
National Urban Information 
System (NUIS), 17, 26, 27, 37, 
329
National Urbanisation Policy, 31, 
34
Natural disasters, 91, 92, 226, 228, 
280, 338
Natural ecosystems, 43
Natural patterns, 263, 267
Natural resources, 2, 8, 15, 17, 34, 
35, 42, 50, 52, 53, 57, 252, 
257, 273, 363
Natural Differential Vegetation 
Index (NDVI), 54
Nehru Rozgar Yojana (NRY), 153
Neo-liberal urban space, 255
Neo-republican democracy, 374
Network governance, 230
Networked infrastructure, 34
Neuroergonomics, 250, 264, 266, 
267, 273, 280
Neurophysiologic stability, 260
Nomadism, 291
Non-local capitalism, 258
Non-motorized transport, 306, 310
Non-notified slums, 154, 156, 159
Non-perishable goods, 214
Non-utilized land, 161
Notified slums, 154–156, 159
Numeric models, 82
O
OASIS, 233
Online communities, 372, 378, 379 
Optical images, 50, 52
Optical satellite imagery, 65
Organizational hierarchies, 296
Orthogonal impacts, 140
OrthoPhotos, 102
P
P2P networks, 235
p2p urbanism, 266, 270, 276, 280
Participatory democracy, 369, 371, 
372, 376–378
Participatory planning, 297, 298, 376
Participatory urban design, 14
Partisan democracy, 372
Pavement damage, 205, 206, 216
Pedestrian network(s), 311
Pedestrians, 103
Performance standards, 347, 369
Perishable goods, 214
Personal care units (PCUs), 199
Physical (virtual) infrastructures, 2, 
228, 251, 278

	
	
Index	
401
Planning system, 1, 32, 143, 376
Pluralism democracy, 372
Polluter pays principle, 55
Population growth, 6, 73, 74, 76, 82, 
120, 155, 159, 277, 291, 376
Principal component analysis 
(PCA), 171, 174
Private–public collaborative 
networks, 233
Probability-based simulation, 188
Processing centres, 22, 113
Production/consumption 
(metabolic) ecosystem, 228
Project-specific impacts, 138–140
Proposed land use (PLU) plan, 56, 
57, 104
Proposed Model, 136, 140, 191
Provision of Urban Amenities in 
Rural Areas (PURA), 38
Psycho-endocrine-neuro-
immunological system, 266
Psychological status, 151 
Public participation, 45, 89, 121, 
182
Public services delivery, 2
Public spaces, 10, 103, 234, 300, 
337 
Public transport, 32, 44, 45, 58, 60, 
63, 64, 68, 209, 306–311, 315, 
318, 326, 336, 337, 340, 341, 
367
Q
Quick democracy, 371
R
Radiometric resolution, 50, 71
Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY), 156, 
157
Random Utility Maximization, 187
Random utility model, 188, 189
Real local community, 296
Real society, 296
Real time intervention, 2
Real-time data, 22, 107
Real-world data, 7
Reconstruction Following Disaster, 
228
Region of interest (ROI), 53
Regulation codes, 1
Remote sensing, 19, 20, 35, 49, 50, 
51, 52, 295, 341
Rent Control Acts, 32
Residential land, 97, 116, 117, 139, 
194
Resilience, 22, 71, 73, 76–81, 86, 
89, 90, 226 
Retailer, 207, 209, 211, 213
Rigid activities, 191
S
Salt-water marshes, 78
Sanitation, 29, 57, 150, 152, 154, 
155, 181
Satellite images, 42–71, 114, 116, 
329
Scales, 19, 250, 259–264, 269, 
280, 329

402	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Sea-level rise (SLR), 73, 75–82, 86
Seasonal variations, 55
Sedentism, 291
Segregation, 289, 297
Self-awareness, 89, 262, 280, 352
Self-organized systems, 226
Self-organizing society, 21
Sense of community, 289, 297, 
298, 345
Sensorial systems, 228
Sensors, 7, 22, 50, 52, 65, 70, 83, 
112, 113, 202, 228, 254, 337, 
339, 353, 366
Sensory capabilities, 206
Service-level benchmarks (SLBS), 
330
Settlement patterns, 27, 35
Simulated traffic load, 201
Site-planning schemes, 1
SLR applications, 89
Slum improvement, 154, 317
Slum population, 150–159, 162–
164, 171, 179–181 
Slum sensitive, 154
Slum settlements, 149–151, 154, 
158–183 
Slum-free city, 157, 158 
Slum-free India, 156
Smart building, 1
Smart communities, 1, 7–9, 21, 94, 
346, 385, 386
Smart Community International 
Network (SCIN), 9
Smart economy, 3, 33, 34, 184, 
348, 350, 385
Smart environment, 3, 33, 184 
Smart financial transaction, 20, 21
Smart functionalism, 254
Smart governance, 3, 33, 184, 368
Smart grid, 339, 341, 345, 346, 
366, 367
Smart living, 3, 33, 184 
Smart meters, 11, 337, 338 
Smart mobility, 3, 20, 33, 184
Smart network, 1, 205, 218, 220 
Smart people, 3, 13, 33, 184, 252, 
345, 348, 350, 353, 385
SMART Planning approach, 288, 
289, 293, 298, 299, 300, 301
Smart transport cards, 367
Smart urbanisation, 26, 32, 34, 
37–40
Smart waste management, 368
Smart21 Committee, 4
Smarter Computing Framework, 
252
Smarter Planet, 251, 252 
Social awareness, 289, 293, 294, 
301
Social development, 70, 301
Social differences, 289
Social dynamics, 228, 230, 235, 
237
Social networks, 7, 90, 229, 232, 
254
Social space, 10

	
	
Index	
403
Social system interventions, 11
Socio-cultural adaptation, 16
Socioeconomic indicator, 135
Softened coastlines, 80
Software exports, 6
Software industry, 6
Solid waste management, 29, 327, 
331, 332, 339, 340
Spatial concentration, 305, 306
Spatial consequences, 255
Spatial databases, 69, 318
Spatial planning, 2, 31, 352, 363
Spatial Priority Urban Regions 
(SPURs), 35, 36
Spatial referenced data, 16
Spatial resolution, 50, 53, 55, 65, 
311
Spatial standards, 2
Spatial system, 1
Spatio-economic policies, 39
Special Economic Zones (SEZs), 
35, 339, 346 
Spectral resolution, 50
Splintering urbanism, 255
Squatter settlements, 29, 152
State government, 10, 12, 21, 32, 
36, 155, 159, 327, 328, 339, 
342, 355, 362, 364, 382, 386
State Planning Commissions, 36
Storm surges, 77, 127, 131 
Structural sustainability, 263, 273
Sub-metre resolution images, 51
Subsumption, 250, 259, 262–264, 
280
Supervised classification, 50, 53
Sustainability indicators, 47
Sustainability, 8, 13, 14, 33, 40, 
44–49, 55, 56, 68, 70, 71, 
124–129, 137, 143, 149, 154, 
182, 226, 251, 263, 264, 273, 
305, 337
Sustainable development indices, 
230
Sustainable development, 34, 43, 
46, 47, 49, 56, 66, 70, 120, 
124, 127, 128, 145, 205, 230, 
252, 341
Sustainable support systems, 154
Sustainable urbanisation index, 47
Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar 
Yojana (SJSRY), 153
SWOT analysis, 7, 53, 361 
T
Technology infrastructure, 10
Telemedicine, 11
Temporal resolution, 50, 70
Terminal nodes, 220–223
Thematic Mapper (TM) images, 51
Themed-based Communities, 113
Third Urban Revolution, 292
Time-series satellite images, 45, 
52, 53, 56, 60, 66
Toilet status, 164
Topography, 42, 52, 53, 60, 61, 
104
Toposheets, 53

404	
Geographic information system for smart cities
Town planning acts, 32
Traditional neighbourhood, 8
Traffic accidents, 205, 206, 216, 
217
Traffic Analysis Zones (TAZ), 
193–197, 309
Traffic and fleet management, 206
Traffic bottlenecks, 2
Traffic congestion, 33, 94, 213, 
216, 337
Traffic sensors, 22, 112
Transitional slums, 149, 159
Transport operator, 211–214
Transportation corridor network, 
103
Transportation corridors, 58, 63, 
98, 103 
Transportation infrastructures, 278
Transportation system, 187, 205, 
206, 218, 219, 225, 318, 340, 
345
Triple Helix Model, 345, 357–365, 
385
U
U2U (users to users), 233, 235, 
236
Unauthorised settlements, 57, 58
Uncontrolled sprawl, 29
Underground water table, 19
UN-Habitat, 150, 151, 181, 184, 
280
Union territories, 3, 4, 156, 347, 
349, 354, 385
Unsustainable development, 289
Urban agglomeration, 8, 63, 277, 
349, 354, 364, 377, 385
Urban Basic Services for the Poor 
(UBSP), 153
Urban centres, 17, 26–29, 32, 34, 
35, 37, 38, 205, 206, 348, 361
Urban cloud-computing 
application, 246
Urban community, 256, 258, 278, 
345
Urban complexity, 290, 294, 302
Urban conglomeration, 134
Urban design, 1, 2, 8, 13, 14, 73, 
83, 92, 266, 273, 345, 376
Urban designers, 8
Urban Development Plan 
Formulation and 
Implementation (UDPFI) 
guidelines, 31
Urban development, 2, 3, 30, 34, 
46, 57, 83, 98, 103, 125, 153, 
157, 181, 263, 306, 307, 325, 
328
Urban expansion, 43, 94, 159, 312, 
341
Urban fabric, 94, 95, 270
Urban farming, 80
Urban goods transportation, 205, 
206, 218, 225
Urban Heat Island (UHI) effect, 67
Urban Informatics, 234
Urban informational ecosystem, 
232

	
	
Index	
405
Urban land use, 1, 129, 146, 308
Urban local bodies (ULBS), 57, 
63, 68, 69, 325, 327
Urban Mapping Scheme, 31
Urban metabolism, 230
Urban morphology, 67
Urban neo-functionalism, 255
Urban network, 1, 2, 14
Urban periphery, 59, 68
Urban planners, 7, 8, 44, 246, 267, 
312
Urban poor, 29, 153–159, 305, 
312, 317, 320
Urban poverty alleviation 
programs (UPAPS), 153
Urban regeneration, 58
Urban remote sensing, 49
Urban representation, 254
Urban resilience, 226, 227, 230, 
231, 235, 236
Urban revolution, 288, 290, 292, 
299, 300
Urban settlements, 34, 82, 293, 
348
Urban slums, 29, 150, 155, 181
Urban social dynamics, 228
Urban Spatial Information System 
(USIS), 38
Urban stagnation, 28
Urban systems, 95, 121, 227, 237 
Urban traffic models, 186
Urban trends, 228
Urban violence, 289
Urbanism principles, 8, 273, 
User-acceptance studies, 369
Utility corridors, 64
V
Valmiki Ambedkar Awas Yojana 
(VAMBAY), 155
Vegetation cover, 67
Village culture, 27
Visualization module, 244
W
Water conditions, 166
Web 2.0 technology, 8, 251
Weibull distribution, 189
Weighted average, 190, 195
Wholesaler, 207–213
Wired cities, 6
Wireless networks, 22, 107, 113
World Bank, 280, 322
Z
Zero carbon footprint, 56
Zonal plans, 1, 2, 14, 17 

