
CBMS-NSF REGIONAL CONFERENCE SERIES
IN APPLIED MATHEMATICS
A series of lectures on topics of current research interest in applied mathematics under the direction of
the Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences, supported by the National Science Foundation and
published by SLAM.
GARRETT BIRKHOFF, The Numerical Solution of Elliptic Equations
D. V. LINDLEY, Bayesian Statistics, A Review
R. S. VARGA, Functional Analysis and Approximation Theory in Numerical Analysis
R. R. BAHADUR, Some Limit Theorems in Statistics
PATRICK BILLINGSLEY, Weak Convergence of Measures: Applications in Probability
J. L. LIONS, Some Aspects of the Optimal Control of Distributed Parameter Systems
ROGER PENROSE, Techniques of Differential Topology in Relativity
HERMAN CHERNOFF, Sequential Analysis and Optimal Design
J. DURBIN, Distribution Theory for Tests Based on the Sample Distribution Function
SOL I. RUBINOW, Mathematical Problems in the Biological Sciences
P. D. LAX, Hyperbolic Systems of Conservation Laws and the Mathematical Theory of Shock
Waves
I. J. ScHOENBERG, Cardinal Spline Interpolation
IVAN SINGER, The Theory of Best Approximation and Functional Analysis
WERNER C. RHEINBOLDT, Methods of Solving Systems of Nonlinear Equations
HANS F. WEINBERGER, Variational Methods for Eigenvalue Approximation
R. TYRRELL ROCKAFELLAR, Conjugate Duality and Optimization
SIR JAMES LIGHTHILL, Mathematical Biofluiddynamics
GERARD S ALTON, Theory of Indexing
CATHLEEN S. MORAWETZ, Notes on Time Decay and Scattering for Some Hyperbolic Problems
F. HOWENSTEADT, Mathematical Theories of Populations: Demographics, Genetics and Epidemics
RICHARD ASKEY, Orthogonal Polynomials and Special Functions
L. E. PAYNE, Improperly Posed Problems in Partial Differential Equations
S. ROSEN, Lectures on the Measurement and Evaluation of the Performance of Computing Systems
HERBERT B. KELLER, Numerical Solution of Two Point Boundary Value Problems
J. P. LASALLE, The Stability of Dynamical Systems - Z. ARTSTEIN, Appendix A: Limiting Equations
and Stability ofNonautonomous Ordinary Differential Equations
D. GOTTLIEB AND S. A. ORSZAG, Numerical Analysis of Spectral Methods: Theory and Applications
PETER J. HUBER, Robust Statistical Procedures
HERBERT SOLOMON, Geometric Probability
FRED S. ROBERTS, Graph Theory and Its Applications to Problems of Society
JURIS HARTMANIS, Feasible Computations and Provable Complexity Properties
ZOHAR MANNA, Lectures on the Logic of Computer Programming
ELLIS L. JOHNSON, Integer Programming: Facets, Subadditivity, and Duality for Group and Semi-
Group Problems
SHMUEL WINOGRAD, Arithmetic Complexity of Computations
J. F. C. KINGMAN, Mathematics of Genetic Diversity
MORTON E. GURTIN, Topics in Finite Elasticity
THOMAS G. KURTZ, Approximation of Population Processes
(continued on inside back cover)

Herbert Solomon
Stanford University
Stanford, California
Geometric
Probability
siajiu
SOCIETY FOR INDUSTRIAL AND APPLIED MATHEMATICS
PHILADELPHIA

This page intentionally left blank 

Geometric
Probability

Copyright ©1978 by the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this book may be
reproduced, stored, or transmitted in any manner without the written permission of the
publisher. For information, write to the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics,
3600 University City Science Center, Philadelphia, PA 19104-2688.
ISBN 0-89871-025-1
w
SloJTL. is a registered trademark.

Contents
Preface 
vii
Chapter 1
BUFFON NEEDLE PROBLEM, EXTENSIONS, AND ESTIMA-
TION OF 77
The Buffon needle problem 
2
Laplace extension of Buffon problem 
3
Statistical estimation procedures 
6
Buffon's problem with a long needle 
10
General extension of Buffon problem 
13
Buffon problem in three dimensions and an application 
18
Chapter 2
DENSITY 
AND 
MEASURE 
FOR 
RANDOM 
GEOMETRIC
ELEMENTS
Straight lines in the plane 
28
Pairs of points in the plane 
32
Chapter 3
RANDOM LINES IN THE PLANE AND APPLICATIONS
Poisson field for random lines in the plane 
44
Higher order moments for random polygonal areas 
48
Anisotropic lines in the plane: An application 
55
Additional results for anisotropic random lines 
61
Chapter 4
COVERING A CIRCLE CIRCUMFERENCE AND A SPHERE
SURFACE
Random arcs on the circumference of a circle 
76
Moments of coverage 
82
Distribution of coverage 
84
Random caps on a sphere 
85
Application of method of moments . .. 89
Chapter 5
CROFTON'S THEOREM AND SYLVESTER'S PROBLEM IN
TWO AND THREE DIMENSIONS
Crofton's theorem on mean values 
97
Sylvester's four point problem 
101
Sylvester's problem in three dimensions 
117
V
899

vi 
CONTENTS
Chapter 6
RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE
Random chords in the circle 
133
More results on random chords 
151
Random chords of a sphere 
161
References 
173

Preface
I was invited by the Mathematics Department of the University of Nevada,
Las Vegas to give ten lectures on geometrical probability during the week June
9-13, 1975. Those invited to attend the lectures were given an extensive set of
notes to go along with the presentations. This monograph is a version of the
content of those lectures and the lecture notes.
Geometrical probability has enjoyed a resurgence of interest in recent years.
The lectures and subsequently this monograph in no way cover all topics that
could fall legitimately under such a heading. The material here is on topics I have
presented in several classes in geometrical probability at Stanford University.
Several students who attended these classes have written papers and doctoral
dissertations on the subject and in this way have helped me prepare this exposi-
tion. In particular I would like to single out David Berengut, Peter Cooke, Stuart
Dufour and Andrew F. Siegel whose efforts have made possible several sections
of the monograph. My thanks are offered to my colleague, Persi Diaconis, for
editing and reviewing the early portions of the manuscript.
I am very grateful to Dr. Aaron Goldman of the University of Nevada for
initiating and directing the Conference. Participants at the Conference exhibited
a lively interest in the subject and I am grateful to them for this stimulation. My
thanks go also to the Office of Naval Research and the Army Research Office for
their support over the years that led to the preparation of the notes that were
made available to the participants at the Conference.
vii

This page intentionally left blank 

CHAPTER 1
Buffon Needle Problem, Extensions, and
Estimation of n
The Buffon needle problem which many of us encountered in our college or
even high school days has now been with us for two hundred years. One major
aspect of its appeal is that its solution has been tied to the value of tr which can
then be estimated by physical simulation of the model as was done by a number
of investigators in the late 19th and early 20th centuries—and by computer
simulation today. Shortly we go into some detail on enlarging the experimental
design of the model. Then we discuss a number of ways in which modern
statistical procedures can yield estimates of TT from these experimental designs
with much better precision than the original Buffon procedure employed by
many for the estimation of TT. In this sense we will be featuring the statistician in
geometrical probability and this will continue, where possible, for other topics
we discuss in this exposition.
It is interesting that in the original development, Buffon (1777) extols
geometry as a companion tool to the calculus in establishing a science of
probability and suggests that chance is amenable to the methods of geometry as
well as those of the calculus. Buffon indicates that the human mind, because of
prior mathematics, preferred numbers to measures of area but that the invention
of games revolving around area and ratios of areas could rectify this. To high-
light this point he investigated a game already in practice in the 18th century
known as "clean tile".
In a room tiled or paved with equal tiles, of any shape, a coin is thrown
upwards; one of the players bets that after its fall the coin will rest cleanly, i.e.,
on one tile only; the second bets that the coin will rest on two tiles, i.e., that it
will cover one of the cracks which separate them; a third player bets the coin will
rest over 3, 4, or 6 cracks: it is required to find the chances for each of these
players.
Buffon investigates this game for square tiles, tiles shaped as equilateral
triangles, hexagonal tiles, and diamond shaped tiles; in each case he is interested
in the ratios of the diameter of the coin to the equal sides of the particular
shaped tile that provides a fair game for each player. In effect, the thrust of his
work on geometrical probability is the development of fair games.
As a special case, Buffon in his own words states, "I assume that in a room, the
floor of which is merely divided by parallel lines, a stick is thrown upwards and
one of the players bets the stick will not interesect any of the parallels on the
floor, whereas on the contrary the other one bets the stick will intersect some
l

2 
CHAPTER 1
one of these lines; it is required to find the chances of the two players. It is
possible to play this game with a sewing needle or a headless pin."
He then demonstrates that for a fair game between two players, the ratio of
the length of the needle, /, to the distance between the parallel lines, d, (d>l)
must equal -rr/4 for this provides the probability of an intersection equal to \.
This can be seen easily from the Buffon needle result as we now know it, namely
the probability of an intersection, p - 2l/(Trd}.
In the Buffon model a needle (line segment) is dropped "at random" on the
grid of equidistant parallel lines in the plane. The notion that random elements
are geometric objects such as line segments, lines in the plane, circles, rectangles,
triangles, etc. requires that a measure be defined for such elements before
probabilistic assertions can be made. The Bertrand paradox at the turn of the
century suggested a situation wherein future developments could be stymied
because of a lack of a natural choice of measure. In that paradox, the probability
that a random chord in a circle exceeds the side of an inscribed equilateral
triangle can be shown to be \, 3, or 2 for each of three different models by which
the chord is drawn at random. Integral geometry becomes helpful here in
establishing appropriate models.
Randomness models will play an important role throughout. As a second
example, the question of whether pairs of chromosomes are randomly dis-
tributed in the nucleus of a cell during mitosis is translated into a geometrical
probability problem regarding the expected number of intersections of n pairs of
chords in a circle. Naturally, the expected number depends on the randomization
model for obtaining chords in a circle and we develop six models yielding six
solutions.
The Bertrand paradox led to proposals by Poincare and others that probability
statements for geometric situations be tied to densities that would be invariant
under appropriate transformations. For our purposes, the group of rigid
motions, that is, transformations that provide invariance under translation and
rotation will serve our interest. For the Bertrand paradox, the appropriate
density under the group of rigid motions leads to the solution that the probability
is I- The other two solutions induce densities that are not invariant under the
group of rigid motions.
One of the prime developers of integral geometry and its consequences for
geometrical probability is L. A. Santalo. We will call on his developments and
results for questions of invariance of measure and density where appropriate.
Santalo has a prolific and prodigious output that is referenced in his most recent
book (1976). That volume is must reading for any student of the subject for its
exposition of results to date and the extensive bibliography it contains.
The Buffon needle problem. A needle (line segment) of length / is dropped "at
random" on a set of equidistant parallel lines in the plane that are d units apart,
l^d.
Uspensky (1937) provides a proof that the probability of an intersection is
p = 2l/(ird). He develops this by considering a finite number of possible posi-

BUFFON NEEDLE PROBLEM, EXTENSIONS AND ESTIMATION OF TT 
3
tions for the needle as equally likely outcomes and then treats the limiting case
as a representation of the problem. This includes a definition of randomness for
the distance x of the needle's midpoint to the nearest line and the acute angle if
formed by the needle and a perpendicular from the midpoint to the line. The
solution is obtained by computing the ratio of favorable outcomes to the total set
of outcomes and passing to the limit.
A simple way of obtaining the answer is to employ a density that seems
intuitively satisfactory and which turns out to be the invariant density under the
group of rigid motions. This approach follows. The measure of the set of total
outcomes is
From Fig. 1.1 we evaluate the measure of the set of favorable cases (inter-
sections) as
therefore
FIG. 1.1
Laplace extension of Buffon problem. Consider two sets of parallel lines over
the plane where one set is orthogonal to the other. We now wish to find the
probability that the needle dropped at random intersects a line of the grid.
Assume the needle is shorter than the smaller sides of the congruent rectangles
formed over the plane. This is the Laplace extension. First we find the proba-
bility that the needle is contained in one of the rectangles of the set.
Let a, b be the sides of the rectangle that contains the midpoint of the needle
whose length is / (l<a,l<b). The position of the needle is determined by the
coordinates x, y of its midpoint and, as before, the angle <p formed by the needle
with the x-axis. Our randomness model suggests we consider x, y, <p as three

4 
CHAPTER 1
independent variables each with uniform distribution of probability over their
ranges O^x^a; O^y^b; and -7r/2g(p ^Tr/2, Thus the domain is a paral-
lelepiped for a uniform distribution of the point x, y, <p.
The volume of the domain representing positions of the needle entirely within
the rectangle is
where
and the volume of the total domain V = nab. This is developed in Uspensky
(1937, p. 255).
Therefore
and of course, the probability for the needle to intersect the perimeter of one of
the rectangles is
If a = b = l,
This provides another approach for estimating ir where / < a, I <b.
In an interesting article Schuster (1974) develops the orthogonal lines grid a
bit further from the point of view of experimental design. He raises a question
about the bright student who drops a needle of length L on a grid of orthogonal
lines separated by distance 2L and repeats it until 100 observations are made of
intersections with, say, lines parallel to the A:-axis and these same drops are
employed to count intersections with, say, lines parallel to the y-axis. How does
the estimate of TT from this experiment differ from that obtained by the average
student who drops the needle 200 times on a grid of parallel lines separated by
distance 2L. If the x intersections and y intersections are independent, the bright
student has accomplished the same purpose with half the drops.
Let A be the event-intersection with the x axis and let
Similarly for B and the y axis and let

BUFFON NEEDLE PROBLEM, EXTENSIONS AND ESTIMATION OF TT 
5
have P(A) = P(B)=l/Tr. We can deduce P(AB) from the Laplace result as
follows:
and we have shown
Thus
Now
In 
fact, 
then 
P(AB') = P(A'B)= 3/(4ir). 
However, 
we 
now 
have
P(AB)^ P(A)P(B) and so there is no independence.
Yet we are still interested in the efficiency of
Let us find Var (*, + y,): We have
From the previous result, P(XI = 1, y; = 1)= l/(47r),
We now examine P (AB)and P(A).P(B).fom the originsal buffon resuklt We

6 
CHAPTER 1
Now for the simple Buffon problem, we have
Equate Var p and Var p and we get
Thus 100 independent observations with respect to both grids contain the
same amount of information about P as 222 observations with respect to one set
of grid lines.
Schuster raises another query: Is there an angle of intersection of the grid lines
such that independence is achieved, i.e. an angle a such that
He demonstrates that
and that P(AB; a)= l/-ir2 when a s= 0.76605 radians (43.89°). Let us find when
P(AB) is minimized. Differentiating we find that a = ir/2 minimizes /(a). Thus
l/(47r) is the minimum value for P(AB) and it occurs when the grid lines are
orthogonal.
Statistical estimation procedures for rs in the Buffon model. Perlman and
Wichura (1975) investigate a number of statistical estimation procedures for 77
for the single grid and the double grid and place Schuster's results and some
earlier results by Mantel (1953) within the framework of their development.
From Buffon we have
where O = \/TT and r = l/d. It is more appropriate to estimate 6 for we avoid
some pitfalls in treating asymptotic variances of our estimates in this way, yet
testimating I/IT or ir gives us the same information. The restriction OSipSlimposes 0^6 g l/(2r). If n independent throws of the needle, l,QSl^d resul
estimathing
gives us the same information. The restriction

BUFFON NEEDLE PROBLEM, EXTENSIONS AND ESTIMATION OF IT 
1
in N crossings in the single grid then N is binomially distributed with parameters
«, p and
is an estimate for 6, and £"(#i)= #• Since N is a complete sufficient statistic for 0,
the Rao-Blackwell-Lehmann-Scheffe theorems imply 6\ is a uniformly mini-
mum variance unbiased estimator (UMVUE) of 0. Furthermore 9\ is a maxi-
mum likelihood estimator (MLE) of 0 and has 100% asymptotic efficiency in this
experiment. Now
We can minimize Var (6\) by taking p as close to 1 as possible, regardless of 0,
i.e. choose needle length / = d for the best precision in estimating 6. In this case,
p = 28.
An application of the 8 -method shows that Button's estimator
is an asymptotically unbiased 100% efficient estimator with asymptotic variance
This result was derived previously by Mantel (1953).
For the double grid in Laplace's experiment (l<d) suppose we have NA
crossings of the A lines, NB crossings of the B lines and therefore 6A =
NA/(2rn), 0B = NB/(2m) have the same distributions as 8\. Schuster proposed
the estimator
If NA and NB are independent then the efficiency of 02 is twice that of 6\;
however the efficiency is more than doubled because NA. and NB are negatively
correlated (antithetic variables). Laplace long ago obtained the crossing proba-
bilities
and these have already been discussed. We have

8 
CHAPTER 1
and we know PA-PB = 2rO, so
and
Introduce the indicator
and similarly define /,(B). Then NA = £*! It(A), NB = l" , '.(B),
The n pairs [/,(A), /,(#)] are independent but /,(A) and /,(B) are dependent and
so
Once again 02 has the greatest efficiency when r = \ (l = d). When /•=!,
PAS = 1-30 or OS0§3 or TTS3. The latter inequality for IT arises without any
experimentation. A little later on we get sharper bounds on TT without any
experimentation. When r = 1, we have
and so
By doubling the grid we obtain an estimator fr2, that is, 5.63/1.76 = 3.20 times
as efficient as TT\. One throw of the needle / = d on the double grid contains at
least 3.20 times the statistical information about values of IT as one throw onto
the single grid.
Perlman and Wichura now ask whether one can do better. The answer is yes
for we shall see that a complete and sufficient statistic exists for this experiment
but #2 is not a function of this statistic.
Full information obtained from n throws of the needle onto the double grid
can be summarized by the vector statistic

BUFFON NEEDLE PROBLEM. EXTENSIONS AND ESTIMATION OF n 
9
Clearly N has the multinomial distribution with probabilities
Now
The probability distribution of N is given by (N and n are vector-valued)
Since
the factorization implies NAB + A'.AB + NAB is a sufficient statistic for 0.
If we define A' to be the number of times in n throws that the needle crosses
exactly / lines (/ = (), 1,2). with NQ = NAB, NI = NAB+NAB, N2 = NAB and
X A', = n, then the sufficient statistic can be expressed as NI + A/2, the number of
times in n throws that the needle crosses at least one line.
Now
(since pAg = 1 ~ l ( 4 r - r ~ ) 0 ] ) so jV|+iV; is a complete as well as a sufficient
statistic for 8. By the Rao-Blackwell-Lehmann-Scheffe theorems
and being the MLE of 6 it has 100% asymptotic efficiency in the double grid
experiment.
Its variance is Var (0$}= ( O j n ) ( \ / i n -6) which is minimized by l = d (n is
maximized by I = d).
In this case m =3, p* = 30. n Var #, = 0:[l/(3<9)- 1] and

10 
CHAPTER 1
Thus, the fully efficient estimator £3 is 1.76/.466 = 3.77 times as efficient as
Schuster's estimator 7r2, reflecting the fact that 02 is based on
which is not a function of the sufficient statistic Ni + Ni.
We see that antithetic variates are fine for minimizing variance but sufficient
statistics when they can be found are better. In the development here we learn
that a throw of the needle (l = d) on the double grid contains not 5.63/1.76 =
3.20 times the statistical information as in the Schuster situation but actually
5.63/.466 = 12.08 times the statistical information about the value of TT when
the sufficient statistic is employed.
Button's problem with a long needle. To this point our Buffon models have
included only those situations where the needle was not larger than the shortest
distance between grid lines. When l>d, there can be multiple intersections.
Problems connected with the probability of a specific number of crossings or
moments of the distribution of a number of crossings arise.
First we will review this situation within the context of the prior section on
statistical estimation of the value of TT. Mantel (1953) developed a statistical
estimator in the following way. We now view the expected number of inter-
sections for a double grid system (equally unit-spaced) which Mantel writes as
No basis for this statement is given by Mantel and we shortly present a more
general development by Morton (1966) from which the expectation statement
can be derived. Assuming n throws of the needle we can get say c,- intersections
at the /th fall; / = 1, 2, • • • , n and write
as an estimation of
where c is the average number of intersections per fall. By the delta method we
can get

BUFFON NEEDLE PROBLEM, EXTENSIONS AND ESTIMATION OF TT 
11
where crc
2 is the variance of the number of intersections obtained at the fall of the
needle.
Theoretical evaluation of crc for large / is of interest. Let / » 1 so that certain
marginal effects can be disregarded. These marginal effects arise from the actual
location of the end of the line within the squares in which it falls and they would
slightly increase the value of <jc over what is now developed here but would have
no effect on E(c).
For any given angle 6 at which the line of length / falls there would be / sin 6
intersections with vertical lines and / cos 0 intersections with horizontal lines.
Thus the expected number of intersections is given by
The expected square of the number of intersections is
Thus
Here
Previously for / = d and in the single grid, o> = V.5708/M. Thus the precision in
estimating TT from the double grid with a long needle is about 60 times as good as
the former precision, or equivalently the information in one fall of the long
needle here is about the same as in 60 falls of the needle in the original Buffon
needle problem when the length of the needle is equal to the distance between
the parallel lines.
In the Cartesian grid development we obtain
This suggests that an estimate of IT can be made from the variation in number of
intersections from fall to fall. Let

12 
CHAPTER 1
where ac is the sample standard deviation of intersections per fall. Then an
estimate of IT can be obtained from the solution to
namely
Let us now examine the sampling variation of TT. For any sample, V must be
between 0 (all N falls give the same number of intersections) and the value of V
obtained when half the lines have the minimum number of intersections and the
other half the maximum number of intersections. The latter will occur when half
the falls are parallel or perpendicular to the Cartesian grid system and the other
half fall at an angle tr/4 or 3?r/4 to the fixed grid. In this case, half of the times
we will get / intersections and the other half of the times we will get 2//V2
intersections (each 45° line will have //v2 intersections with the horizontal line
and //vz intersections with the vertical lines). Thus we have
Thus for V = 0, ir = 3.1231, and for V = (3-2V2)/4, £ = 3.1752.
This demonstrates that TT must be between 3.1231 and 3.1752 without any
experimentation and suggests that an actual simulation will give very satisfactory
estimates. Mantel proceeds after these developments to give the results of a
simulation to estimate TT by each of the three methods. Each estimate is based on
101 falls and 90% confidence interval limits are given:
Estimate
Buffon needle case, / = 1 
2.75-3.53
Double grid system
Mean number of intersections 
3.09-3.19
Variation in number of intersections 
3.138-3.146
It would be interesting to see a development which combined the ideas of
Mantel with those of Perlman and Wichura.
In a very recent paper, Diaconis (1976) has investigated several aspects of the
single grid Buffon problem with a long needle. He derives the distribution of the

BUFFON NEEDLE PROBLEM. EXTENSIONS AND ESTIMATION OF n 
13
number of intersections and approximate moments for large /. The distribution is
shown to converge weakly to an arc sin law as l/d -» oo,
When l>d, the probability p ( i ) of exactly ;' intersections is given as follows
where the range of the number of intersections is 0 to [a]+ 1, a = l/d and [x]
denotes the greatest integer less than or equal to x. Also let the angles ft
(Og ft S 77/2) be determined by cos ft = i/a and let <5, = (la sin 
ft/7r)-(2ift/ir).
Then for [a]g2
For [a] = 1, the results for p(0) and p(M) above hold, and
We can also write the distribution function in simple form as follows
p(number of crossings 
Diaconis shows also that as 
where
As a -»oo, the moments of I/a converge to Ck where / is the random variable
describing the number of crossings of the needle. However the arc sin dis-
tribution has moments ck and since the range of all concerned distributions is the
unit interval, (//a) converges in distribution to
elsewhere.
Kendall and Moran (1963, pp. 73-74) list some values of p ( i ) and Feller (1971,
p. 527) refers to the arc sin density for this problem.
General extension of Button problem. A rather general extension of the
Buffon problem is provided by Morton (1966). Morton proves an important and
remarkable result on the expected number of intersections and distribution of
angles of intersections for a random set of rectifiable curves in the plane.
Let ^ be a set of rectifiable curves d, • • • , Cm and 3) a set of rectifiable
curves D\, • • • , Z)\- of total length /« and 
I® respectively. The curves fall

14 
CHAPTER 1
"randomly" over the area A and we assume only that (i) the arrangement of the
two groups of curves on the area A must be independent of each other although
the individual curves of a group may have a systematic arrangement relative to
each other, (ii) the arrangement of at least one of the groups on A must be
random with the random mechanism operating such that the probability of a
specified point on a curve falling into a subarea of A is proportional to its area
and the segment may assume any angle relative to some base line with equal
probability.
Then the expected number of intersections of the two groups is
Furthermore, the density of the intersection angle between the tangents of any
two of the d, Dj is
We now sketch Morton's proof. Partition each Ca with points do,' • • , dTa
so that for /= 1, 2, • • • , y0, Cai can be jointed to di-i by a line segment of
length SI. Similarly partition D$. (81 is small enough so that end effects can be
ignored. See Fig. 1.2.)
Label the line segments Eai etc., F0\ etc. Let
(1.61) 
6$] be the angle between Eai, Fm or their extensions.
In order that Eai and F& intersect, the midpoint of Fei must lie within a
rhombus with sides parallel to Eai and F0i and of length 81 (see Fig. 1.3) and such
that Eai joins the midpoints of the sides parallel to Fej. This is under the
assumption that 0$ is given.
The area of the rhombus is its altitude times the length of a side, that is,
Therefore via assumption (ii)
Let

BUFFON NEEDLE PROBLEM, EXTENSIONS AND ESTIMATION OF 
TT
15
Then the left hand side is P[I(a,, ft) = 116%]. Thus via Bayes rule,
From (ii) we have P(B^) is uniform on [0, TT]. Therefore,
i
If in the limit as 81 -»0, £Q, and Fe/ do in fact intersect, then 8%-* 8, the angle
between the tangents of <<? and 3s measured at the point of intersection of the
segment Ca,,--i, Ca-, with the segment D^-\, Dej and thus the limting density
element is
This result was developed somewhat earlier by Wolfowitz (1949) who addressed
his paper only to intersection angles.
Furthermore, the probability,

16 
CHAPTER 1
Thus finally the expected number of intersections is
and
The relationship between the expected number of intersections of a fixed
group of line segments of total length LI with a group of line segments of total
length L2 that fall randomly over an area A that encompases the fixed group of
line segments has been demonstrated to be
This relationship was developed for segments which are not necessarily linear.
Let us review the conditions and consider only linear segments:
(i) the arrangement of the two groups of line segments on the area A must be
independent of each other, but the individual line segments of a group may have
a systematic arrangement relative to each other;
(ii) the arrangement of at least one of the two groups of line segments on the
area A must be at random, and the randomness must be such that the probability
of a specified point on a line segment falling into a subarea of A is proportional
to its area and the segment may assume any angle relative to some base line with
equal probability.
In the Buffon needle problem, the expected number of intersections is
equivalent to the probability that the needle of length / ^ 1 (the distance
between the parallel lines is taken as unity without loss of generality) intersects
the parallel lines since an intersection, if it occurs, can be with only one parallel
line. Thus we have from the result on expected number of intersections,
since the total length of the parallel lines, namely L2, is A. (Border effects can be
made trivial by taking areas with dimensions which are longer relative to the
distance between parallel lines).

BUFFON NEEDLE PROBLEM, EXTENSIONS AND ESTIMATION OF 77 
17
If we now consider the double grid equally unit-spaced model and /Si, then
and this is the assertion used by Mantel in his long needle experimental design.
It is difficult to leave the Buffon model and its generalizations and ramifica-
tions. For example, it can be shown that if a region bounded by a convex curve
whose dimensions are such that the region cannot intersect two of the lines of the
grid simultaneously is thrown "randomly" on the grid, the probability that the
convex curve will intersect a line is given by
where L is the length of the convex curve. If we view a straight line as a
degenerate convex curve, that is, approximated by a rectangle with infinitesimal
width and length / and thus with perimeter 21 we obtain Buffon's result p =
2l/(ird). However, it is interesting that a proof of the more general statement
can be obtained from Buffon's result as follows.
Suppose we can prove the result for any convex polygon of diameter size less
than d. As the number of sides increases we can approximate any convex curve
and hence the result will follow.
Therefore, consider an n-sided polygon with sides ai, • • • , an and diameter
less than d. See Fig. 1.4. Now if there is an intersection with a line of the grid two
sides must cross the line (the measure of the set of outcomes with a corner of the
polygon touching the line of the grid is zero).
FIG. 1.4a

18 
CHAPTER 1
FIG. 1.4b
Let
p(a,-) = probability side a, intersects the grid,
p(a,a,-) = probability sides a, and a/ intersect the grid.
Employing the above observation along with the fact that at most one inter-
section with the grid is possible, due to the size of the polygon, we have
(1.70) 
P(intersection) = £ p(a,a,).
><•>
But
Therefore
2P(intersection) = 2 £ ?(«.«/)
i<;
Each side of the polygon can be treated as the needle in the Buffon problem.
Picking a side determines the location of the polygon and with sides picked
equiprobably we get:
Thus
where L is the perimeter of the polygon.
Buffon problem in three dimensions and an application. The three dimen-
sional situation motivating the forthcoming discussion is the estimation of the
volume-surface ratio of cells or nuclei. This was explored and presented in two
interesting papers by Chalkley, Cornfield, and Park (1949) and Cornfield and

BUFFON NEEDLE PROBLEM, EXTENSIONS AND ESTIMATION OF IT 
19
Chalkley (1951). This index might serve to delineate some pathology, for
example, cancerous versus noncancerous cells. The method proposed in the
papers takes as its point of departure a remarkable result by Crofton that we
discuss later which shows that if a line is repeatedly placed at random over a
plane containing a closed figure, the average length of the chord intersected by
the figure will be
no matter what the shape of the figure, as long as its boundary is a convex curve.
Before this result can be employed for estimating volume-surface area ratios it
requires modifications:
a) it must be made applicable to line segments,
b) a simple procedure for measuring chord length must be found,
c) it must be extended to cover reentrant figures,
d) it must be extended to provide an estimate not only of the area-perimeter
ratio in the focal plane under observation but of the volume-surface ratio
in the three dimensions of which the observed focal plane is a two-
dimensional representation.
The first three of these modifications are accomplished by a single device.
Consider a line of finite length, say r, and count the number of times each of the
two end points fall in the interior of a plane figure and denote this by h for hits.
Denote the number of times the line intersects the perimeter of the figure by c
for cuts. Then in a very large number of throws we shall find
for all closed figures including reentrant ones.
The fourth and important modification is provided by a mathematical result.
When a line of length r is placed at random in three dimensional space contain-
ing a closed figure, for a very large number of throws we may write
This result will satisfy condition d) since placing a line at random in three
dimensions can be shown to be formally equivalent to placing a plane at random
in three dimensions and placing the line at random on the resulting two-
dimensional plane section.
If the space contains a series of figures of different volumes and surfaces, then
As in two dimensions, this result applies whatever the shape of the figure, and
covers reentrant as well as convex figures.

20 
CHAPTER 1
Basic to the mathematical result is a particular definition of randomness and
this is where we hark back to the Buffon needle problem development. Other
definitions are possible and these lead to different results. Therefore a test of the
method is necessary even though it was verified empirically in the Buffon
problem. This is discussed in the papers by Chalkley et al. (1949) and Cornfield
and Chalkley (1951).
Assume that in throwing a line of length r at random
a) the probability that one end point, P, will take on any position in the space
is uniformly distributed over the space,
b) the probability that the other end point, P', will take any position on the
surface of the sphere with center at P and radius r is uniformly distributed
over the surface.
This is a generalization of the assumptions usually made in geometrical prob-
ability in two dimensions, for example, in Buffon's needle problem. In the first of
the two papers we have mentioned, evidence was presented that this appears to
provide a satisfactory description of the physical process of throwing a line
segment at random.
First we show that
where X is the volume of the space in which the line segment falls, n is the
number of throws, and V is the volume in which a hit occurs.
Let us begin with the two-dimensional problem (see Fig. 1.5).
The endpoint, P, of the line segment will occupy with uniform probability all
positions in the square of side X112. Since the angle that the line segment makes
with the X axis, 6, varies from 0 to IT, the point P' will occupy all but some
corner positions in the square of side Xl/2 + 2r.
If we consider fixed values of y and 0, the probability that the point P will fall
inside the figure is
where w ( y ) is the width of the figure at ordinate y. Similarly the probability that
for fixed values of y and 6 the point P' will fall inside the figure is
If we now let y vary from 0 to X1/2 but hold 9 fixed, we have

BUFFON NEEDLE PROBLEM, EXTENSIONS AND ESTIMATION OF n
21
FIG. 1.5
Each integral obviously is an expression for the area of the figure, A, and is
consequently independent of 8. In n throws, therefore, the expected number of
hits by either the point P or the point P' is n • (A/X). The expected number of
hits counting both endpoints is
A similar proof in three dimensions, with a similar diagram, will yield with X
the volume of the cube of side Xin,
(where Pr stands for probability). Therefore

22
and
CHAPTER 1
and so again in n throws the expected number of hits
Let us now calculate E(c). Assume without loss of generality that F is
composed of m quadrilaterals of area Si, S2, • • • , Sm, i.e., S = surface of F =
Y.T=i $<• K
 c< = number of cuts on rth quadrilateral
In calculating E(ci) we note that since a straight line and a quadrilateral can
either intersect at only one point or not intersect, see Fig. 1.6, E(d) = probability
of an intersection multiplied by the number of throws.
FIG. 1.6
If we consider the rth quadrilateral with surface area S,-, the probability that a
random line of length r will intersect it is the probability that the endpoint P falls
within the above parallelepiped. Since the volume of the parallelepiped is
S,r cos 6 this probability is

BUFFON NEEDLE PROBLEM, EXTENSIONS AND ESTIMATION OF TT
23
and thus the unconditional probability is given by
We will show that /(#) = sin 6. Assume for the moment that this is so; then
Thus
Thus
Now let us consider the probability distribution of 6. We seek the probability
distribution of the angle 6 formed by a random line with a fixed line under our
assumption of randomness. To see that the density element is sin 0d6 let the
fixed line be the radius of the sphere with center at P and radius r. (See Fig. 1.7.)
FIG. 1.7

24 
CHAPTER 1
The probability that the line with endpoints P and P' forms an angle 0 with the
radius of the sphere is the probability that the endpoint P' falls in the indicated
circumferential belt or
surface area of circumferential belt
Probability = — 
— 
—— 
,
surface area of sphere with radius r
but 5 = rd implies
and thus the desired density element

CHAPTER 2
Density and Measure for Random Geometric
Elements
In our Buffon discussion we have referred to the random positioning of a line
segment in the plane and in a brief way to the similar situation for a line in the
plane. For the solutions we have developed for probabilities or expectations of
events, we have employed dp dQ as the appropriate density and \A dp d.6 as the
measure over some region A where p and 6 are the coordinates of the line in
normal form. The density dpd6 and measure based on it for events regarding
lines in the plane will lead to probability and expectation statements that are
invariant under the group of rigid motions in the plane, that is, translation and
rotation. For some subsequent problems on lines and line segments it will be
found that invariance under rotation is too demanding and we will relax this
condition.
For the present we turn our attention to the more general question of density
and measure for random geometric elements that leave probability and expec-
tation statements invariant under translation and rotation. To do this we borrow
heavily from Santalo (1953), (1976). Remarkable results due to Crofton (1885)
fall out of the analysis as the principal applications for this chapter.
When a point in the plane is described by its Cartesian coordinates x, y from
an arbitrary origin, the appropriate measure for the set of points in a region A is
given by JA dx dy and this measure is invariant under translation and rotation.
The appropriate density is dx dy except for a constant factor and this can always
be treated as unity. All this is accomplished by transforming the point x', y' to
x, y by the group of rigid motions and noting that the Jacobian of the trans-
formation is unity.
If we wish to transform the point (x, y) to (u, v) where x = x(u, v) and y =
y(u, v) and then get dx dy in terms of du dv we have to be somewhat formal and
employ the exterior multiplication of differential forms or wedge product
notions to accomplish this; see for example Flanders (1963). We will employ
square brackets to indicate this operation, for example, dP = [dxdy] and the
rules are:
1) The product is equal to zero if any two factors are equal.
2) The product is unchanged by an even permutation of the factors and is
multiplied by (-1) for an odd permutation of factors.
Now we return to our example where
25

26
Then
CHAPTER 2
and
+two terms equal to zero,
That is, we get the usual Jacobian.
Let us look into an application of these ideas. Consider a convex plane curve
K with a tangent at every point. Let O be a point inside K. (See Fig. 2.1.)
FIG. 2.1
From each point P exterior to K there can be drawn two tangents to K, say
PAi and PA2. To each of these tangents corresponds an angle <pi and <p2 formed
by the perpendiculars OH\ and OH2 with the fixed direction Ox. Conversely,
the two angles <pi, <p2 determine the point P(x, y). We wish now to express the
density dP in terms of the coordinates <pi, <p2.
Let EI, rji be the coordinates of the point of tangency A\ and x,y the
coordinates of P. The equation of the straight line PA\ is
Likewise, the equation of the second tangent PA2 is

DENSITY AND MEASUREMENT FOR RANDOM GEOMETRIC ELEMENTS 
27
By differentiation we get
Since PA\ is tangent to A" at A\, dr\ijde\ is equal to the slope of the line PA\,
namely tan (TT/2 + <p i) = —cot <p i, or cos tpi de i + sin ip i dr\ i = 0. Equivalently we
get cos <p2 de2 + sin <p2 d-q2 ~ 0.
Now recall that ( x — e i ) cos <p j + (y -17 j) sin <jp i = 0 and square both sides of the
equation. We get
Note that
Thus
and similarly
By substitution we get
But by exterior multiplication we obtain
Furthermore, <?2-<pi = ir-u> where a> is the angle A\PA2 formed by the tan-
gents from P. Thus we have
Integrate both sides of this equality over all possible different values of the
variables—P can vary over all points exterior \.oK;<p\,q>i can vary from 0 to 2ir.
However, if in each position we permute <p\ and <p2 we get the same point P.

28 
CHAPTER 2
Consequently, to count each point P only once we must divide by two. There-
fore,
This integral formula is due to Crofton. Note that the right hand member does
not depend upon the convex curve K.
If K has a continuous radius of curvature pi we can set pid<pi=dsi,
p2 d(p2 = ds2 where ds\, ds2 are arc lengths of K at A\, A2. Then we may write
since pip2 d<pi d<p2 = dsi ds2 and [dtpi dtp2] = (sin w/(?if2)) dP.
Now integrate both sides over all possible values of the variables
where L is the length of K.
It can also be shown (Santalo (1953)) that
Straight lines in the plane. Represent any line G in the plane by its normal
coordinates (p, 6), where p is the distance of the normal to the line from an
origin and 0 ^ 9 ^ IT is the angle formed by the normal to the line and the A:-axis.
The equation for G can be written as
The group of transformations with respect to which we seek an invariant
measure is the same as for points in the plane, namely the group of rigid motions.
From Santalo (1953), we get dp dd as the invariant density and thus the measure
M(A) of a set A of straight lines, G(p, 0)e A, in the plane is defined by
Up to a constant factor, this measure is the only one which is invariant under the
group of motions in the plane. The differential form under the integral is called
the density for straight lines and is represented by
If we take for coordinates of G the coefficients u, v in its equation ux + vy +
1 = 0, it can be shown that

DENSITY AND MEASUREMENT FOR RANDOM GEOMETRIC ELEMENTS 
29
This can be seen by noting that
Suppose we represent G by its intercepts a, /3 on the coordinate axes. Then
and in similar fashion it can be shown
In the Bertrand paradox, the probability that a random chord is larger than
the side of an inscribed equilateral triangle is 2 when the density is dp d6. This
suggests that the other solutions of ] and 4 are generated by random mechanisms
that do not provide invariant measure under the group of rigid motions. Spe-
cifically we illustrate this as follows. Let the length of the chord depend on the
distance from the center of a circle and not on the direction. Suppose that it has a
fixed direction perpendicular to a given diameter of the circle and that its point
of intersection with this diameter has a uniform distribution. For the chord to
have a length greater than V3, the distance of the points of intersection from the
center of the circle must be less than 2- Thus the probability is i Moreover, we
can write in this case
f(p 6) is uniformly distributed on the interval (0, 1),
/(#) is uniformly distributed on the interval (0, 2-rr).
Therefore
and so the density is dp d6 up to a constant factor.
Measure and density for straight lines that intersect a curve provide interesting
and remarkable results. Let C be a fixed curve composed of a finite number of
connected arcs with a tangent at every point. Let C have length L and define C
by x = x(s), y = y ( s ) where the parameter s is arc length.
In Fig. 2.2, G intersects C at (x, y) and forms an angle w with the tangent at
this point; r is the angle the tangent makes with the jc-axis. The length s
corresponding to x and y along with the angle <a determine G uniquely for C
and fixed origin O. Let us find dG in terms of 5 and at, rather than p and 6 as
listed in the figure.
Clearly
thus

30
CHAPTER 2
FIG. 2.2
Since x, y e G
Therefore,
I
but dx/ds = cos T, dy/ds = sin r yield
so dp = cos (6 -r)ds- (x sin 6 - y cos 0) dO.
Since T is clearly a function of 5 alone dd = du + r'(s)ds is implied by
0 = W+T-77-/2.
Then exterior multiplication yields
Through integration we have
where n(p, 0) is the number of intersections of the line (p, 6) with C. That is we
must take into account the fact that every time a line G intersects C it counts
into the left hand side. If G does not intersect C, n(p, 0) = 0. Thus
|«(/?, 0) dG = J0 |^ sin a) db> ds — 2L. Furthermore if C is convex then
and thus

DENSITY AND MEASUREMENT FOR RANDOM GEOMETRIC ELEMENTS 
31
or
In other words the measure of the set of straight lines that intersect a convex
curve is its length.
Suppose a curve C of length L is contained in a convex curve C\ of length L\.
Consider all straight lines that intersect C\. The expected number of inter-
sections of such lines with C is given by n,
We may remark that dGI\ dG is the probability that a line (p, 6) belongs to a
small piece dG and n(p, 6) is its number of intersections with C. This shows that
if a curve of length L can be contained inside a curve of length L\, there exist
straight lines which cut it in 2Z./L] points at least.
Suppose again Ci is a convex curve of length L\ and let C be a chord of C\ of
length L. Construct a rectangle C' to approximate C with approximate peri-
meter 2L. (See Fig. 2.3.) Then the expected number of intersections with C' and
hence with C, of lines that intersect C\ is given by
Therefore we can calculate the probability of two lines intersecting within C\
and this is given by
that is 2L(p, 0}IL\ is the probability of a line intersecting a fixed line (p, 0) with

32 
CHAPTER 2
length L(p, 6) and dp d6/(\ dp dO) is the probability of line (p, 9) e a small piece
dG. Thus the probability that the two lines intersect is
where A is the area of C\, j L(p) dp = A for fixed 8. Finally the expected length
of a chord intersecting C\ is given by
This is one of the ingenious results due to Crofton that we have mentioned
previously in discussing the estimation of the ratio of the volume to the surface
area of a convex body.
We now comment briefly on measure and density for straight lines in three
dimensions. Represent a line in 3 dimensions by four parameters a, b, p, q, that
is,
and the intersection of two planes determines a line or
This representation omits the set of all lines parallel to the plane z = 0 but these
lines will have measure zero and hence offer no difficulty. Now set
and we want m(A) as usual invariant under translations and rotations. In this
case we find in Kendall and Moran (1963, pp. 18-19) that
and hence the density for straight lines in three dimensions is
and is unique up to a constant multiple.
Pairs of points in the plane. Now we discuss density and measure for pairs of
points in the plane. Given a pair of points PI, Pi we can determine them
uniquely by four coordinates (X\, Y\,X2, ¥2)- Then it can be shown that the
invariant measure over some region A is

DENSITY AND MEASUREMENT FOR RANDOM GEOMETRIC ELEMENTS 
33
FIG. 2.4
Consider Fig. 2.4 where p, 6 are the parameters for the line through the points
Pi, P*.
We wish to write dPi dP2 in terms of p, 6, t\, t2. Care should be taken in the
interpretation of the directions of /i, t2. Now,
and
Figure 2.4 verifies that
via exterior multiplication. Thus
and the measure for pairs of points is a function of the distance between them in
terms of the new coordinates.
Thus
and
and

34 
CHAPTER 2
Now let A" be a convex curve of length L and regional area A. Denote by
a-(p, 0) the length of the chords determined by the straight line of (p, 0) on K.
(See Figs. 2.5 and 2.6.) Define /„ = J a" dG where n is a positive integer and the
integral is taken over all straight lines G which cut K. From before we have
If r(Pi, P2) is the distance between PI, P2 for any pair of points PI, P2e K then
define
Thus we write
Fixing p, we see that 6 determines a chord of length say a = b — a as in Fig.
2.6. Fix t\ and integrate [2 over [a, 6] and we have
This produces the relations
Then we have the following
This last result valid for any convex curve is another remarkable result due to
Crofton.

DENSITY AND MEASUREMENT FOR RANDOM GEOMETRIC ELEMENTS 
35
FIG. 2.6
Let f be the mean distance between a pair of points belonging to K. Then
or
There are relationships between the /„ and /„. For example
or
the classical "isoperimetric inequality". The equality holds only when AT is a
circle. Other inequalities due to Blaschke and Carleman respectively are
In both cases equality holds only for the circle.

36 
CHAPTER 2
Suppose we consider circles only and let K be a circle of radius R. Then
Hence for any pair of points belonging to the circle,
The last two expectations arise in statistics from time to time and have been
developed in different ways.
We now offer a brief presentation of measure and density for planes in three
dimensions (Santalo (1953)). A plane is specified by three parameters, p, 6, <p
(the usual spherical coordinates), where p is the distance from the origin to the
plane, 6 is the angle the projection of p on the xy-plane makes with the x -axis, <p
is the angle between p and the z-axis. The ranges are
The equation of a plane with this representation is given by
If we again seek an invariant measure under translations and rotations we will
obtain the density
and if A is a subset of the parameter space,
is an invariant measure for planes in three dimensions. If the equation of the
plane is written as
we can express the density in terms of u, v, w since

DENSITY AND MEASUREMENT FOR RANDOM GEOMETRIC ELEMENTS 
37
By exterior multiplication we obtain
This representation will be helpful when we look at the Sylvester problem in
three dimensions.

This page intentionally left blank 

CHAPTER 3
Random Lines in the Plane and Applications
In a previous chapter, we provided a proof by Morton (1966) that for a set of
rectifiable curves contained in a plane and separate set of rectifiable curves
constrained to be at random on a particular region of the plane, the expected
number of intersections between the two sets of curves is given by
where LC is the total length of the rectifiable curves C,, / = 1, 2, • • • , «,-, con-
tained in the plane, LD is the total length of the rectifiable curves Dh j =
1, 2, • • • ,rij, placed at random in the plane, A is the area of the region of the
plane which is as denned previously; that is, it is the set of points of distance h
from any arbitrary point of D, ri^h^rG, where rc is the radius of the circle
centered so that it circumscribes C and r/ is the shortest distance from the center
to C. This condition dictates intersections. Also the angles, 6, between the two
sets at their points of intersection are distributed as | sin 6.
This is a fascinating statement and now we examine the number of inter-
sections of random lines in the plane and their angles of intersection. There are
some earlier results for what we term the isotropic case, to be defined soon,
by Miles (1964) who derived the expected number of intersections and by
Wolfwitz (1949) who we previously mentioned derived the distribution of the
intersecton angles.
Questions of the variance, higher moments, and the distribution of the num-
ber of intersections are of much interest. Directly related to this are the dis-
tributions of the magnitude of areas of polygons and number of sides of polygons
formed by random lines in the plane. We now turn to this topic.
An initial contributor to this subject is Goudsmit (1945) who was motivated
by some problems in physics—originally the positioning of tracks in cloud-
chamber experiments and subsequently some other topics. To avoid difficulties
with the notion of infinite lines in the plane, Goudsmit considered the analogous
problem on the sphere. In that case the straight lines are replaced by great circles
on the sphere. These great circles will intersect an arbitrarily chosen equator and
because of symmetry we need only consider a hemisphere. Then we can study
the distribution of the areas of the regions on the surface of a hemisphere that
are formed by a large number of "great circles", i.e., circles formed by the
intersections with planes through the center of the sphere. Each of these circles
can be defined by the coordinates of one of its poles on the surface of the sphere
39

40 
CHAPTER 3
and we can then assume that each of these poles is uniformly distributed over the
surface of the sphere. This provides the random mechanism by which N great
circles emerge. By letting N go to infinity we obtain the analogue to an infinite
number of line segments in the plane. Then by letting the radius of the sphere
increase without bound we obtain the lines in the plane.
First Goudsmit presented a simplified version of the problem which can be
solved completely without resorting to the Sphere. Assume a plane is then cut
into rectangular fragments. The lines in each set are distributed at random in the
following way. Let the density of the lines be such that the x-axis is intersected
by one line per unit length on the average and similarly for the y-axis. That is,
the number of points of intersection is given by a Poisson random variable with
parameter A = 1. The problem is now reduced to that of two independent
distributions for a number of random points on a line, one for the x-axis and one
for the y-axis. Consider one rectangular fragment. The probability that its
horizontal dimension is between TJ and fj+drj 
and its vertical dimension
between £ and £ -rdi; is given by
since each length is given by the exponential distribution.
We are, however, only interested in the area cr = £17. Let
Note that /z2s4cr. Thus the probability that the area of a rectangular frag-
ment is or is given by
The expectations of powers of cr are easily obtained.
Thus E(a)= 1. This value arises because the assumption of one line per unit
length on the average has standardized these expectations in this way.
Now we return to the general problem and consider the distribution on a
sphere. Assume that there are N halves of great circles distributed at random on
a half sphere, not counting the "equator". (See Fig. 3.1.)
We can derive the following properties. The N lines divide the half sphere into
fjNX/V+ !)+!] fragments; and on the average each fragment has four sides
when N increases indefinitely. The first statement can be proved by induction—
the Mh line intersects all ( N — l ) previous lines and in doing so cuts each of N

RANDOM LINES IN THE PLANE AND APPLICATIONS 
41
FIG. 3.1
fragments into two, thus adding just N fragments to the total. We started with
one fragment, the whole half sphere; thus the number of fragments is given by
Now for the second statement. As we have already said, each of the N great
circle halves is cut by the others into N segments. Each one of these segments
serves as side to two adjacent fragments. In addition the "equator" is cut up into
2N segments bordering one fragment each. The total number of sides to the
fragments is therefore
The average number of sides per fragment is
and this approaches 4 as N -»oo.
The total surface area of the half sphere is 2-rrR~ or ITT since R = 1, and since
there are 2(N2 + N)+ I fragments, the average area of a fragment is
or asymptotically it is
The total perimeter of the 2(N2 + N)+ 1 fragments is twice the total length of
all the great circles in the half-sphere, i.e., 2-n-N, plus the circumference of the
equator; thus the average perimeter of the fragment is

42 
CHAPTER 3
or asymptotically it is
and the average length of each side is asymptotically
We can now suppose that N becomes very large and consider the distribution
of regions in a small circle of radius r on the surface of the sphere. The number
of great circles which intersect this small circle will be asymptotically equal to rN
(recall 0<r< 1) i.e., essentially the proportion of the small radius r to the unit
radius multiplied by N the number of great circles. Proceeding to the limit and
considering the region inside this small circle as approximately a plane circle, we
find that the average area of the regions in a plane formed by random lines
requires rescaling. This is developed now for Goudsmit's development. In the
following sections on Poisson fields we will return to this point again.
Let us examine this in more detail going over to the plane case from the circle
on the sphere and letting N and the radius of the sphere become infinite. We
must watch the rescaling or standardization quite carefully. Suppose we wish to
adjust the rescaling so that the average area of the fragments is unity; then the
area of the half sphere has to be N2/2 for large N (recall that there are
$(N2 + N)+ 1] fragments, therefore
The radius of the half sphere is then |N/>/7r, (i.e., 2Tr^N/^Tr)2 = N2/2) and the
length of the great circle half is (^N/'Jir)ir = 2^Vv'^_The mean length of the
segments into which the great circles are cut is thus Vir/2 and not unity as it was
in the simplified rectangular case.
New let us look at the mean square area of the fragments in the general case.
Consider two arbitrarily chosen points and ask for the probability that they
happen to be in the same fragment. This probability can be expressed in terms of
the mean square area of the fragments. Next consider the line which is deter-
mined by the two points and ask for the probability that the two points fall both
in one of the segments into which the line is divided by all the other lines. This
latter probability can be computed and thus the mean square area obtained.
The probability that the first arbitrarily chosen point lies in a fragment of size
between cr and cr + dcr is given by the fraction of the total area which is covered
by such fragments, namely
where G(cr) dcr is the density for area, S is the number of fragments in the total
area.

RANDOM LINES IN THE PLANE AND APPLICATIONS
43
The probability P2 that the two points lie in the same fragment irrespective of
its size is equal to the product of these two expressions integrated over all sizes
We next consider the probability that the second point lies at a distance / to
/ + dl from the first. This is given by the area of a ring divided by the total area
(see Fig. 3.2)
Through the two points we pass a line which will be cut into segments by all
the lines already present. The chance that no intersection will occur between the
two chosen points is exp [-//(^VTT-)]. The factor vrr/2 arises from the rescaling
discussed above; the mean distance between intersections is \\TT.
The probability that regardless of their distance the two points are not
separated by one of the lines is thus given by
Recall that 5 • E(cr) = total area, but by the rescaling we have made E(cr) = 1,
and so
Now compare with P2 = E((r)2/(S • [E(a)\2) and we get
Note that this differs from the rectangular fragments case which gave the value 4
for this ratio.
To this point, Goudsmit is attempting to provide a random mechanism to
produce lines in the plane and to develop some of the manifestations of this
randomness such as the ratio of the second moment to the square of the first

44 
CHAPTER 3
moment. This knowledge can provide some check on the tenability of a ran-
domness conjecture for the positioning of tracks in cloud-chamber experiments.
Obviously knowledge of higher moments would provide more information and
shortly we will present a derivation of the third moment employing Goudsmit's
method of obtaining the second moment. The fourth moment and higher
moments are not yet known.
First, however, we characterize a class of random lines in the plane that is
unaffected by choice of origin or coordinate axes. It will turn out that Goudsmit's
randomness mechanism is essentially leading to this class of random lines which
is termed the Poisson field of random lines in the plane. Another name we shall
employ is isotropic lines to distinguish it from some extensions when sub-
sequently we view highway traffic flow models from some anisotropic line
models.
Poisson field for random lines in the plane. Any line in the (.v, y) plane can be
represented as
where p is the signed length of the perpendicular to the line from an arbitrary
origin, O, and 8 is the angle this perpendicular makes with the x-axis. Note that
if the intersection of the perpendicular with the line is in the third or fourth
quadrant, p is taken to be negative. A set of lines {(p*, ft):; =0, ±1, ±2, • • •} are
a Poisson field under the following conditions.
1. The distances • • • Sp-2 = P-i = Po = Pi = p2 = • • • of the lines from an arbi-
trary origin, O, constitute the coordinates of the events of a Poisson process with
constant intensity, say T. Thus, the number of p, in an interval of length L has a
Poisson distribution with mean rL.
2. The orientations ft of each line with a fixed but arbitrary axis in the plane
are independent and have a uniform distribution in the interval (0, tr).
This is a reasonable representation of random lines in the plane and we label it
the Poisson field. Note that for a fixed line segment, the intersections are
uniformly distributed over a range equal to the length of the line segment and
thus have density proportional to dp leading to a joint density proportional to
dp dO. This definition of randomness for lines in the plane is natural because the
randomness is unaffected by the choice of origin or x-axis since dpdO is the
invariant density under rotations and translations.
One basic feature of randomness of lines generated by a Poisson field is the
following result. The number of random lines intersecting any arbitrary line
segment of length x is Poisson distributed with mean ITX/TT. To prove this result
we note that the randomness of the lines in the plane is not affected by rigid
motion transformations and thus we can choose the origin and the axis orien-
tation so that the line segment corresponds to the horizontal axis from —x/2 to
x/2. Let Nx denote the number of lines intersecting the *-axis from -x/2 to x/2.
Then we wish to show

RANDOM LINES IN THE PLANE AND APPLICATIONS 
45
Let Np denote the number of random lines whose signed distance, p, to the
origin is between —x/2 and x/2. Then
Clearly no line can intersect the x-axis between -x/2 and x/2 unless its mini-
mum distance to the origin is between —x/2 and x/2. Thus Np must exceed Nx;
that is,
and therefore
Let /j. = P[Nt = 1 |jVp = 1]. Then since the random lines are independent
By the Poisson field notion with intensity r for random lines in the plane, we may
write
Thus
since
Now we evaluate /u, the probability that a line whose minimum (signed)
distance to the origin is between — x/2 and x/2 will intersect the A:-axis between
—x/2 and x/2. Let T? denote the ^-intercept of the line in Fig. 3.3. Then
Tj = p sec 6 and

46
CHAPTER 3
where the last expression takes into account the symmetry about the origin of
the density dp/x of p given that |p|g x/2. The density of 0 is dO/tr. Let y = sec 6.
Then dy = tan 0sec 6d6 = y^y2- 1 d# and the density of y is dy/(yVy 2- i).
Thus
FIG. 3.3
The number of random lines intersecting disjoint sections of a line are clearly
independent. Thus the points of intersection of the random lines with any
arbitrary line constitute a Poisson process of intensity IT/TT. This result without
the development appears in Miles (1964).
Previously we derived some of the statistical properties of the polygons into
which the random lines divide the plane. When the number of random lines is
finite or the area of the plane under consideration is finite, difficulties arise with

RANDOM LINES IN THE PLANE AND APPLICATIONS 
47
edge effects and infinities. These problems can be avoided by considering a half
sphere on whose surface are random great circle arcs whose poles are uniformly
distributed over the surface of the half sphere. As the radius of the half sphere is
increased toward infinity the random great circles become random straight lines
in a Poisson field. By considering random great circles and the fragments into
which they divide the surface of the half sphere and letting the radius of the
sphere increase to infinity, we have obtained properties of random lines in the
plane, namely the mean area, mean perimeter, and mean number of sides of the
polygons into which the plane is divided.
As we let n increase toward infinity we must also increase the radius of the
sphere in such a way that the limiting density of lines in the plane is T. Since the
points of intersection on any line in the Poisson field of lines in the plane
constitute a Poisson process of density 2rf-ir, the mean separation between
intersections is 7r/(2r). If R is the radius of the sphere, the mean separation
between intersections on a great circle is -n-R/n. Thus we should choose R to be
2«/r so that the limiting density (as n -»oo and R -> oo) of the lines in the plane is
T. Then the results we obtained before (from Goudsmit) can now be written in
the following way: The surface area of the half sphere then becomes 2trR2 =
2Trn2/r2. Thus as n -»oc the fragments on the surface of the half sphere become
polygons in the plane and the average area of the polygons is -rr/r2.
The average perimeter of a fragment can be obtained in a similar way and it is
which as n -»oo becomes 2 77/7. Consequently the average length of a side of a
polygon, i.e., the average length of the segments into which the random lines are
cut, is ITT IT.
Henceforth we shall adopt the letters N, L, and A to denote the number of
sides, the perimeter, and the area, respectively, of a polygon. Using the fact that
as n -»oo the average values of N, L and A approach the mean values, we have
obtained:
If one wanted to test whether a given set of lines in the plane were, in fact, a
Poisson field, it would be desirable to have second moments as well as these
mean values. The value of £[A2] was first derived by Goudsmit. His approach
consists of using two different methods to evaluate the probability that two
random points r\ and r2 lie in the same polygon. One method results in an
expression involving £[A2] and the other method results in an expression which
can be explicitly evaluated. The first method is as follows:
Let h(a) be the probability density of the random variable A i.e., \°* h(a) da,
P[(T\ <A< <j2], the fraction of all the polygons which have areas between <n and
cr2. For small dcr the fraction of the number of polygons which have areas
between a and cr + da is h((j)da. Let M be the total number of polygons in

48 
CHAPTER 3
some large area D. Then for large M, Mh(a) da is approximately the number of
polygons with areas between cr and a + da, and aMh (a) da is approximately the
total area of such polygons. Then the probability that r\ lies in a polygon with
area between a and a + da is (asymptotically as M-»oo and D-»oo)
aMh(a)da/D.
The probability of the second point, r2, lying in the same polygon is cr/D. Thus
the probability of both points lying in the same polygon irrespective of its size is
the product of the above expressions integrated over all sizes:
The second method of evaluating the same probability is as follows. The
probability that the second point lies at a distance x to x +dx from the first is the
area of the ring of width dx divided by the total area, or
The probability that no line will divide the two points is the probability of no
intersection on the line segment joining the two points, namely e"2"/7r. The
probability that irrespective of their distance apart the two points are not
separated by one of the random lines is
Hence, equating the two expressions for the probability that two random points
lie in the same polygon, we get
As D and the number of lines approach infinity
Higher order moments. A variation of this basic method can be used to obtain
moments involving A3. Consider three points, n, r2, and r3, which are randomly
placed in some large domain D. Let the random variable P be the perimeter of
the triangle formed by the three points; i.e.
We shall average an arbitrary function g(p) over all triples n, '2, and r3 that lie
within a common polygon. First we derive the probability density function f(p)
of p.

RANDOM LINES IN THE PLANE AND APPLICATIONS 
49
(Here we use Pr for probability to avoid confusion with perimeter P.) Given that
\\fi - r2\\ is x, the locus of points r3 such that P is exactly p is an ellipse with major
and minor axes
Thus, given that ||ri - r2\\ is x, the probability that r3 (randomly placed on the area
D) will result in a value of P between p and p + Ap is the difference (divided
by D) between the area of the ellipses with axes a(p + Ap, x) and &(p + Ap, x)
and with axes a(p, x) and ft(p, x); i.e.,
Substituting this expression for Pr [p<P^p + hp\\\ri — r2\\ = x] in our equation
for /(p) Ap we can write
J
As Ap approaches zero, the last integrand on the right hand side approaches
zero. Thus we get
The probability that the three points lie in the same polygon is the probability
that no random line intersects the triangle with vertices r\, r2, and r^. We have
shown that this probability is e~rp/7r. Thus the mean of g(p) over all r\, r2, and r3
in a common polygon is
Proceeding in the same way as with two points we get

50 
CHAPTER 3
so that
Choosing g(p) = 1, we get £1^43] = 77T7/r6. Letting g(p)= p we get
Since J|J ||r, - r,|| An da2 rfo-3 = #A3 for i */, we get E[KA3] = 2V/(21r7).
A third variation of this method yields some of the moments involving L. We
randomly place two points n and r2 in a large domain of area D and average an
arbitrary function g(||n - r2||) over all pairs (n, ^2) such that the points fall inside a
common polygon and each point lies within a small distance, w, of its boundary.
We shall consider four disjoint sets of random lines:
S: separating lines, that pass between r\ and r2;
C: common lines, within a distance w of r\ and /-2 but not between them;
E\ and EI: end lines, within w of one point but not within w of the other point
and not between them.
The lines in S are exactly the lines intersecting the line segment of length x
between ri and r2. We have already shown that the number of lines in S is
Poisson distributed with mean Ms = 2rx/iT.
The lines in the union of the four sets are exactly the lines that pass within a
distance w of the line segment between r\ and r2. Thus they are exactly the lines
intersecting the convex region shown in Fig. 3.4. Since the mean number of
random lines intersecting a convex figure of perimeter p is 177/77 and the region
in the diagram has perimeter 2x +2-rrw, we have
(ME denotes ME, which equals ME^ by symmetry).
Similarly the lines in the union of S, C and E, are exactly the lines that
intersect the convex region shown in Fig. 3.5 which has perimeter [trw +
2w sin"1 (w/x) + 2(x2-w2)1'2}. Thus we have
Expanding the sin"1 term in a series and solving the last three equations, we get

RANDOM LINES IN THE PLANE AND APPLICATIONS
51
FIG. 3.4
FIG. 3.5
Now we are able to calculate the probability that two points with separation x
lie inside a common polygon, each point being at distance w or less from the
boundary. This probability is the sum of the probabilities of the two mutually
exclusive events:
This is the probability that r\ and r2 with separation x lie inside a common
Thus
dnd

52 
CHAPTER 3
polygon, each point less than w from the boundary. As before, the density of x is
2-rrxdx/D. Thus the mean of g(x) over all r\ and r2 in the same polygon and
within w of its boundary is
Let Aw denote the area of the strip of width w inside the boundary of the
polygon. Then by the same arguments as in previous cases a second expression
can be obtained for the mean of g(|ki — r2||) over all ri and r2 in the same polygon
and near the boundary; namely,
For small w, da-t = w dst where ds denotes differential length along the boundary
of the polygon. Equating our two expressions we get
Letting w go to 0 and M and D tend to infinity so that D/M-*E(A)= -rr/T2, we
get
Choosing g(x)= 1 we arrive at the result
On the other hand, choosing g(x) = x2 we get
Let rL be the center of gravity of the perimeter of the polygon. Then
where a 12 is the angle at rL between lines to ri and r2. By symmetry
and

RANDOM LINES IN THE PLANE AND APPLICATIONS 
53
Thus
i.e.,
where IL is the moment of inertia of the perimeter about its own center of gravity
(i.e., IL = j \\r - rL\\2 ds where r is on the perimeter).
Some additional features of random lines in the plane have been presented by
R. E. Miles (1964) and are repeated here without proof.
1) For random lines obeying a Poisson field with intensity T there are on the
average T2/n intersections per unit area. The associated angles of intersection
are mutually independent with common probability density jsin<I> (OS<J>S=7r).
Thus random lines can be expected to intersect each other at angles close to right
angles much more frequently than at angles close to 0° or 180°.
2) Let W be the diameter of the largest circle contained in a polygon formed
by random lines as given above. Then
or W is distributed as a negative exponential random variable with mean r"1.
3) Let L/C denote the perimeter of a k -sided polygon formed by the random
lines. Then 2rLk/Tr is ^2 with 2(k-2) degrees of freedom. In particular, the
perimeter of a triangle is negative exponential with mean value TT/T. A corollary
is that the mean length of a side for a class of k -sided polygons is (fc -2)7r/(fcr)
which increases to TT/T as fc^oo. Thus the average length of a side of a many
sided polygon can be expected to be about twice the average length of a side for
the entire class of polygons and about three times the average length of a side of
a triangle.
4) Pr[AT = 3] = 2-7r2/6s.3551.
For S«T~I and A«r~2 the probability densities of 5 and A are
(12-7r2)T/(67r)+ O(r2S) and crA~1/2 + O(r2) respectively where
5) The random variables N, L, and A corresponding to the number of sides,
perimeter, and area of a polygon have the covariance matrix

54 
CHAPTER 3
Furthermore,
6) Let V be the set of intersections of the random lines. Define Ik as the set of
line segments / such that / joins two points of V, there are exactly k other points
of V on /, and / is part of one of the random lines. Similarly define Jk as the set of
line segments / such that / joins two points of V, there are exactly k other points
of V on /, and / is not a part of one of the random lines. Thus, for example, /0
and J0 are the sets of all sides and diagonals, respectively, of the polygons
formed by the random lines in the plane. If 5 is the length of a member of Ik,
then 4r5/7r is %2 with 2(& + l) degrees of freedom. If T is the length of a
member of Jk, then ^rT/ir is \~ with 2(k + 2) degrees of freedom. Miles presents
similar results for random lines which have a nonzero thickness.
The derivation of the exact distribution of N, L and A is still an open question.
Empirical distribution functions for these variables can be obtained by Monte
Carlo methods. Some early results from a computer simulation of random lines
in the plane by Stuart Dufour1 are the following:
For r = 1
1 Unpublished memo.

RANDOM LINES IN THE PLANE AND APPLICATIONS 
55
These rough empirical distributions were obtained from an analysis of 947
polygons formed by 65 random lines. Only polygons within a radius of 32.5 were
considered. Note the similarity between Pr (N = /) and Pr (Y = j - 3) where Y is
Poisson distributed with mean 1.
Along similar lines the following have been transmitted by R. E. Miles in a
private communication to H. Solomon in September 1969.
Miles has some suspicions about these results for he conjectures that pn ~ e " as
n -*oo, an assumption not employed in obtaining the values listed above. Miles
then fit the equation
to the four known relations
 obtaining
This seems to be rather inaccurate.
Miles also reports on two long runs of simulation of random polygons on a
computer by a colleague wherein he lists the frequencies and relative frequencies
as in Table 1.
To achieve three place accuracy, it appears that several hundred thousand
polygons may be required!
Analytically, the problem seems too formidable. It is possible to express pa, as
a complicated 3-fold integral; also for the polygon containing the origin or any
arbitrary fixed point in the plane, p3 = (ir2/6)[25-36 log 2] = .07681381.
Anisotropic lines in the plane: An application. It is possible to view the
trajectory of a car produced by its time and space coordinates on the highway as
a straight line in a plane if the car travels at a constant speed once it enters the
highway and then never leaves the highway. We assume no change in a car's
velocity when it overtakes another car, or is overtaken by another car. The
Poisson process is the random device governing car entrance times or

56
CHAPTER 3
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
i
3635
3952
1893
586
141
29
3
0
0
0
10,239
TABLE 1
ii
14082
15055
7227
2163
503
98
5
0
0
1
39,135
Rel. frequencies
(combined)
.35900
.38500
.18500
.05600
.01300
.00260
.00016
.00000
.00000
.00002
1.00078
equivalently car positions, and the speed distributions for each vehicle are
assumed to be identically and independently distributed (i.i.d.). Thus we can
view the trajectory of any car as a random line in the plane and we will shortly
formalize this notion. The intersections of these random lines in the plane will
represent time and space coordinates where an overtaking occurs.
Let one of the vehicles be an observer car (arbitrary line). The number of
intersections of the arbitrary line (observer car) by the other lines determines the
number of overtakings of slower cars made by the observer car plus the number
of times it was overtaken by faster cars. We will develop this distribution and
also the distribution of faster car overtakings of the observer car and overtaking
of slower cars by the observer car. This requires a formulation for an anisotropic
Poisson field of random lines from which a different proof of Renyi's result
(1964) and the Weiss and Herman result (1962) can follow. These authors
achieved their results without employing a geometrical probability context which
we now develop.
We have already formalized the notion of straight lines distributed "at ran-
dom" throughout the plane. We will describe the plane in terms of (t, x) coor-
dinates, where subsequently the t axis will be employed to register time of arrival
of cars at a fixed point on a highway and the x axis will in similar fashion report
on spatial positions of cars on a highway at a fixed point in time. The time
invariance property for Poisson processes will insure that the conditions will
prevail at any point in time. Any line in the (t, x) plane can be represented as
where p is the signed length of the perpendicular to the line from an arbitrary
origin O, and a is the angle this perpendicular makes with the t axis. Note that if
the intersection of the perpendicular with the line is in the third or fourth
quadrant, p is taken to be negative. Assume the set of lines {(/?,, a,): / =
0, ±1, ±2, • • •} constitutes a Poisson field.

RANDOM LINES IN THE PLANE AND APPLICATIONS 
57
This definition of randomness for lines in the plane also has the property that
the randomness is unaffected by the choice of origin or line to serve as t axis,
since it can be demonstrated that except for a constant factor J dp da is the only
invariant measure under the group of rotations and translations that transforms
the line (p, a) to the line (p', a'). We now employ it as a point of departure to
initiate discussion of a nonhomogeneous Poisson field of random lines. To
achieve this we will relax one of the conditions and ask only that the a, be
identically and independently distributed (i.i.d.). This will permit a range of
velocity distributions for the auto and make the model more realistic. The
random lines are now labeled anisotropic lines in the plane.
For ease in the algebra of our traffic flow models, we will employ instead of a,
an angle formed by the intersection of the / axis with a line in the plane and we
label this 6 where v = tan 6. Also we will only be concerned with those lines
where p, falls in the second or fourth quadrant since this will yield all positive car
velocities. The inclusion of the pt in the first and third quadrants does not
complicate the mathematical development, but they are not relevant. Thus,
a = \TT + 6 and the lines of interest will now be parametrized by (p, 0) where
Equation (3.72) takes care of the sign of p, for it insures that p will be positive if
it is in the second quadrant and negative in the fourth quadrant.
The set <£ of lines {(p,, a,): / = 0, ±1, ±2, • • •} is not anisotropic and we require
invariant measure only under translation. We look into this situation because it
will be helpful in our traffic flow models. Under this constraint, we now have the
same conditions except that the orientation angles a, of each line are i.i.d.
random variables with common distribution function in the interval (0, IT). Thus,
| dp da is no longer the appropriate measure and the origin can still be arbitrarily
chosen but only at any point on a specific and fixed t axis because invariance is
preserved now only under translation.
The orientations 6j are independent and identically distributed with common
distribution F in the interval (0,77/2), and further the sequence of values {#,} is
independent of (p,). This is equivalent to the statement that the velocities of cars,
namely r,- = tan (?,, are independent and identically distributed with common
distribution G on (0, oo) and thus (t>< = tan #,} are independent of (p,).
When #o = 0, po = 0, the traffic flow is characterized by a distribution of time
intercepts on the t axis; when 00 = n/2, p0 = 0, the traffic flow is characterized by
a distribution of cars spaced along the x axis. For any other value of 6, the traffic
flow is measured along a trajectory line. In the traffic literature, trajectories for
low density traffic flow (no delays in overtaking) may be assumed to be linear in
the time-space plane. Thus in any development, we must employ the appropriate
measure to characterize distributions of traffic flow in such matters, for example,
as distribution of number of overtakings. For our purposes where Poisson
processes are the underpinning for traffic flow in both spatial and temporal
processes the evaluation of the appropriate Poisson intensity parameter will be

58
CHAPTER 3
paramount as will be the relationships between these parameters for different
measures.
As noted above, each line is parametrized by (p, 6), where 0 g 6 < ir/2, and p
is the length of the perpendicular from the origin to the line. It is given a positive
sign if the line cuts the t axis at time t0> 0, and a negative sign if it cuts the t axis
at time (0<Q. A glance at Fig. 3.6 will indicate cars faster and slower than the
observer car.
FIG. 3.6
Label NL the number of cars intersecting the observer car before the point
t = L cos 90, x = L sin 60, i.e., in the line segment L of the line / = (0, 60) stretch-
ing from the origin to the point. Let Np denote the number of cars with the
opportunity to intersect the observer car on this stretch. Then Np is the number
of cars with -L sin 00<p<L cos B0.
Now any one of these NL vehicles actually is overtaken or overtakes, given
its d, if
Graphically we show (3.73) in Fig. 3.7.
Define /* = P{NL = 11ATP = 1}; then

RANDOM LINES IN THE PLANE AND APPLICATIONS 
59
FIG. 3.7
and
• dF(#, p|3 exactly one random line (p, 0) with —L sin 00<p <L cos ^0).
Now the distribution of 6 is independent of the distribution of p and the
condition depends only on p. Moreover the conditional distribution of p given
—L sin 6o<p <L cos 60 is uniform on the interval (— L sin OQ, L cos #o) since the
p's are from a Poisson process.
Therefore we may write

60 
CHAPTER 3
If 6 is uniformly distributed on [0, -rr/2], then dH(0) = d6/(ir/2) and /j. = 2/ir as
developed in the previous section for isotropic lines.
The number of cars NL is the number of cars with —L sin 00<p <L cos 00.
Because of our Poisson assumption, NL is Poisson with parameter A(L cos 90 +
L sin 00). A random member of this set has probability ^ of actually overtaking or
being overtaken and so the number of such overtaking occurrences is Poisson with
parameter (where A is the intensity of the process of cars entering the highway)
Since v = tan 6, we label G(v) as the distribution of the velocity and replace
dH(0) with dG(v). Also
Therefore the intensity of the Poisson process generated by faster cars overtaking
the observer car is
and the intensity of the Poisson process generated by the observer car overtaking
slower cars is
From this basic result arising from a merger of random lines in the plane and
nonhomogeneous Poisson processes, all the models developed by Renyi, Weiss
and Herman, and others can be derived as demonstrated in Solomon and Wang
(1972).
and
Thus

RANDOM LINES IN THE PLANE AND APPLICATIONS
61
Additional results for anisotropic random lines. In a previous section we found
the density for lines in the plane which is invariant under translations and rotations
of the coordinate axes. We have just seen for the highway model a much larger
class of random lines, whose distribution is required to be invariant only under
translations of the coordinate axes. Let us pursue this larger class in other
contexts. Three examples of random lines are shown in Fig. 3.8. Figure 3.8(c)
shows isotropically distributed random lines. In Fig. 3.8(a) and (b) the random
lines are clearly anisotropic (i.e., their orientations are not uniformly distributed).
We now examine the measure of lines intersecting a set. Much of the work that
follows is due to Dufour (1972).
As before we describe the position of a line in terms of the coordinates (p, 6)7
where p is the signed distance from the origin to the line (p < 0 if the line passes
beneath the origin), and 6 is the angle between the x-axis and the perpendicular to
the line. (See Fig. 3.9.) Thus the position of a random line is determined by the
FIG. 3.9

62 
CHAPTER 3
values of the random variables p and 0. We denote by F(0) the cumulative
distribution function of 6, and let J dF(6) denote integration over the probability
density corresponding to the distribution function F(6) when F(Q) is absolutely
continuous, summation over the mass function when F(0) is discrete, and
integration over the singular density when F(8) is singular.
Our translation-invariance assumption implies that the orientation of a
random line is independent of its distance from the origin. The translation-
invariance assumption also implies that for any given 6 the density of p is dp. Thus
the joint density of p and 0 is dp dF(6) and the measure m (W) of all positions of a
random line satisfying some condition W can be written
where the integration covers all positions of the random line such that W is
satisfied. Note that in the isotropic case this measure becomes (l/vr) dp dO, which
differs by a factor of I/IT from the measure usually discussed in integral geometry.
At this point we should introduce some basic equations, which we shall use
repeatedly throughout this discussion of random lines. Let dG denote the density
for the positions of a random geometrical figure Ka (e.g., a random line). Denote
by m(W) the measure of all positions of Ka such that some condition W is
satisfied, i.e.,
If AT is a random variable depending on the position of Ka, the mean value of X
given that Ka satisfies W is
where the integration is taken over all positions of Ka such that the condition W is
satisfied. In particular, if we have two conditions W\ and WQ such that W\ implies
W0, then if we define
we find that the probability that Ka satisfies W\, given that it satisfies W0, is
Returning to random lines in the plane, let us calculate the measure m(K) of all
positions of a random line such that it intersects a (measurable) set K in the plane.
Define the thickness T(6) of the set K in the direction 6 to be the length of the
projection of K onto a line with direction 6. (See Fig. 3.10.) Then the integral j dp

RANDOM LINES IN THE PLANE AND APPLICATIONS
63
FIG. 3.10
of all positions of a line with perpendicular direction 0 such that it intersects the set
K is T(6\ Thus
where the notation E(T) denotes the mean thickness of the set K in a direction
perpendicular to a random line.
Let us consider some simple examples of sets K and distributions F(6). First we
give expressions for the thickness T(d) in the direction of five simple convex
regions for which T(6) is easily obtained geometrically.
See Fig. 3.11 (a)-(e) for diagrams.
For the circle of radius r, the thickness is a constant, 2r. Thus the mean
thickness is 2r, and the measure m(K) of the positions of a random line
intersecting the circle is 2r regardless of the distribution F(0) of the orientation
of the random line.

64
CHAPTER 3
FIG. 3 . 1 1
Note that for a connected set that is not convex, the thickness T(6) is the same
as the thickness of the convex hull of the set. Thus, for example, the thickness
T(d) of two adjoining line segments of length s making an angle of ir/3 is the
same as the T(d) given above for the equilateral triangle.
As an example of F((9), consider the probability distribution
With this distribution, the mean thickness of a half circle of radius r, tor
example, is
As a second example of F(6), let us consider the isotropic distribution

RANDOM LINES IN THE PLANE AND APPLICATIONS 
65
Suppose K is a connected set. A line intersects K if and only if it intersects the
convex hull of K. In a previous section we showed that if G U K is the set of lines
intersecting a convex region with perimeter L,
Since the integral f dp over all lines with perpendicular direction 9 is just T(0\
the above relation can be rewritten
Thus with respect to an isotropic random line, the mean thickness of a convex
region of perimeter L is just
Hence, for an arbitrary connected set K on the plane, m(K) is IT 
l times the
perimeter of the convex hull of the set.
We shall now obtain expressions for the probability that a random line
intersects a set K\ given that it intersects another set A"(). It is necessary that we
consider conditional probabilities of this sort since the unconditional probability
that a line, random over the whole plane, will intersect any bounded set KI is
clearly zero. We shall consider three cases: one where K\ is a subset of /£"<>, one
where K(} and K} have a nonnull. intersection, and one where A"0 and K\ are
disjoint.
For the case where Kt is a subset of K(t, we need only substitute our expres-
sions for the measure m ( K ) to obtain the following:
A random line intersects a measurable set K(\. The probability that it also
intersects a subset K\ of A",, is
where E(Tt]) and E ( T i ) are the mean thicknesses of Kl} and K\, i.e.,
An isotropic random line intersects a connected region KQ. It intersects a
connected subset Kt with probability
where L* and L * are the perimeters of the convex hulls of Ka and Kt, respec-
tively. In particular, if A',, and A"i are convex with perimeters L0 and L\,

66 
CHAPTER 3
Let us now consider the case where KI and K0 have a nonnull intersection, but
KI is no longer necessarily contained in K0. We shall assume further that K0 and
K\ are connected sets, since without this assumption the problem seems to be
intractable. Given that a random line hits K0, the probability that it also hits K\
is
where m(Ko and KI) denotes the measure of all lines intersecting both K0 and
KI. The measure m(K0 or KI) of lines hitting K0 or KI can be written
Thus
and we have the following:
Let KO and KI be the intersecting connected sets on the plane. A random line
which intersects K0 also intersects KI with probability
here E(T0), E(T\) and E(T01) denote the mean thicknesses of A0, KI and
KQ U KI , respectively.
Note that when Ai^Ao, E(T0i) is E(T0) and the probability given in this
theorem reduces to that given before.
For an isotropic random line
where L*, L*, and L*\ are the perimeters of the convex hulls of A'o, KI and
K0UKi, respectively.
Now consider the case where K0 and KI are disjoint, connected sets. A line
intersects both A'o and A": if and only if it intersects both of the shaded regions
(A~0U Of and (Ki U Of pictured in Fig. 3.12.
The point O is the intersection of two lines just touching the edges of K0 and
KI and crossing between them. The sets (A'o U Of and (A"i U O)* are the convex
hulls of A"o U O and KI U O, respectively. Thus
Since (A^UO)* and (AjUOf intersect, a line hits (A0UOf or (A", U Of if

RANDOM LINES IN THE PLANE AND APPLICATIONS 
67
and only if it hits the convex hull of (K0U Q)*U(ATiU Of 
which is just
(/foUATi)*, the convex hull of AoUATi. Thus
and we have the following.
Let K0 and KI be disjoint, connected sets on the plane. A random line which
intersects K0 also intersects KI with probability
where £"(TU) is the mean thickness of K0 and E(r0*o), E(T*O), and E(r0*) are
the mean thicknesses of the convex hulls of K0(JQ, KI U O and K0\JK\,
respectively, where O is the intersection of two lines just touching the edges of
KQ and KI and crossing between them.
For an isotropic random line
where L*o, L*0, L*i and L* are the perimeters of the convex hulls of K0(JQ,
KI U Q, K0\JKi and K0, respectively.
Consider the mean length of intersection of a random line with a set. Suppose
a random line intersects a measurable set K on the plane. The mean value of the
length C of line within K is
The integral | Cdp is just the area A of K. (This fact is easy to see by breaking K
into thin parallel strips as in Fig. 3.13 and adding up the areas of the strips.)

68
CHAPTER 3
FIG. 3.13
If AT is a connected region and the random line is isotropically distributed,
where L* is the perimeter of the convex hull of E. In particular, when K is
convex with perimeter L we have
one of the results of Crofton.
Now consider random lines intersecting within a region. We shall now find the
probability that the two independent random lines, both intersecting a region K,
intersect within K. Suppose the line segments formed within K by the first line
have total length Ci and perpendicular direction 0\. A second random line
hitting K intersects these line segments with probability
where Ti(02) is the thickness of the intersection of the first line with K, and the

RANDOM LINES IN THE PLANE AND APPLICATIONS
69
FIG. 3.14
notation E2 indicates expectation with respect to the distribution F2(0) of the
orientation of the second line. From Fig. 3.14 we see that
so that
Integrating over all possible positions of the first line, we get
The numerator is
Thus we may write two independent random lines whose perpendicular direc-
tions have the distribution functions F\ and F2 and intersect a region K. They

70 
CHAPTER 3
intersect each other within K with probability
where Ei(T) and E2(T) are the mean thicknesses of K with respect to the
distributions Fj and F2, respectively.
Since
the factor ^ ^\sin(d1-02)\dFi(0i)dF2(02) 
is just 2/IT if either of the lines is
isotropically distributed.
If one of the lines is isotropically distributed, say the one corresponding to
subscript 1,
where L* is the perimeter of the convex hull of K. If both lines are isotropic and
K is connected,
which, when K is convex with perimeter L, reduces to
another of Crofton's well-known results.
We now examine angles between intersecting random lines. For any two
random lines with perpendicular directions Q\ and 02, the angles between the
lines are 0i —#2! and it —\Q\-6-2\, whose probability distribution can be cal-
culated from
Thus, for example, if either line is isotropic, the angle between the lines is
uniformly distributed from 0 to IT.
On the other hand, suppose we pick two random lines which are known to
intersect within some finite region K of the type considered before. The dis-
tribution of the angle between these lines is not the same as the distribution of
If, in addition, K is a connected region,

RANDOM LINES IN THE PLANE AND APPLICATIONS
71
the angle formed between two particular random lines. Let /i2 denote the event
that the two random lines intersect within K. Then
From our previous result, we have
Therefore if two random lines intersect within some finite region in the plane,
the angle <p formed at their intersection has the probability density 2 sin <p for
0 Si if si TT, if either of the intersecting lines is isotropic.
Now consider an infinite collection of random lines, independently and iden-
tically distributed over the plane. Define the intensity T of the collection of
random lines to be the mean number of lines intersecting a circle of unit
diameter. We shall find the probability distribution of the number of lines
If either of the lines is isotropically distributed, say, the second
Thus for 0 ^ a ^ 77
and
so thatn
and

72 
CHAPTER 3
intersecting a set K made up of the areas within a finite number of closed curves
on the plane.
Let C\, C-i, • • • be concentric circles, the circle Q having diameter /. Let Nj
denote the number of random lines intersecting Ch and define
that is, Xj is the number of random lines hitting C/ but not C/-i. Since the
random lines are independently distributed, the random variables X\, X2, • • •
are independent. Since the mean thickness E(T) of a circle is its diameter, a
random line which hits Cn also intersects Q within Cn (/ = «) with probability
j/n. Thus the probability that a line hitting Cn hits Q but not C/-i is
and
Since this does not depend on /, the unconditional probability P[X/ = k] does
not depend on ;'. In other words, the variables X\,X2, • • • ,Xn are identically
distributed. Since the Xt are independent and identically distributed, the law of
large numbers yields
that is,
P
where the notation -> indicates convergence in probability.
Now consider any set K made up of the areas within a finite number of closed
curves on the plane. Let K be contained in a large circle Cn of diameter n.
A random line which hits Cn also hits K with probability E(T)/n. Thus the
probability distribution of Nk, the number of lines intersecting K, given Nn, the
number hitting Cn, is

RANDOM LINES IN THE PLANE AND APPLICATIONS 
73
P
Since P[Nk -k\Nn] is a continuous function of NJn, the fact that Nn/n -» r as
n -^oo implies
Since P[Nk = k\Nn] is bounded, the above convergence implies
as n H»OO. This, in turn, implies
and so Nk has a Poisson distribution with mean rE(T\ where E(T) is the mean
thickness of the set K and 7 is the intensity of the random lines.
Moreover the intersections of random lines with a line having direction <p are
the events of a Poisson process with mean rate T£?(|COS (6 — <p)\). In particular,
the distance x from any point on the line to the first intersection by a random line
has the probability density T£(|COS (0-<p)|)e~TE(|cos(fl~<p)l)A[ for * >0. This result
has already been developed in the highway model.
For the isotropic case, we have the following simplifications. The number of
isotropic random lines intersecting a region K within some closed curve has a
Poisson distribution with mean rL*ITT. Furthermore, the intersections of the
isotropic random lines with any particular line are events of a Poisson process
with mean rate IT!-IT. Thus the distance x along the line from an arbitrary point
to the first intersection has the density (2T/7r)e~2T*/7r for x^O. This was also
derived previously.
Now consider the points of intersection of the random lines in a Poisson field
of random lines on the plane. Due to the translation-invariance property, the
points of intersection are uniformly distributed over the plane. The mean num-
ber of these points of intersection within any region K can be found as follows.
Suppose NK lines intersect the region K. Let MK denote the number of
intersections within K of the NK "chords" formed by the lines intersecting K.
(Since K may be nonconvex, each "chord" may consist of several colinear line
segments.) Define
Then MK can be written

74 
CHAPTER 3
Since, by the previous result, NK has a Poisson distribution with mean -rE(r),
Moreover the probability that two lines intersect within K, given that they hit
K,is
Combining these expressions for E(MK) and E(aik), we get the points of
intersection of the lines of a Poisson field of random lines on the plane are
uniformly distributed over the plane. The mean number of such intersections
within a region K with area A is
where T is the intensity of the Poisson field (i.e., the mean number of random
lines intersecting a circle of unit diameter).
The mean number of points of intersection of isotropic random lines within
K is
The mean number of intersections outside of K among lines intersecting K
can be obtained. The total number of intersections among the NK chords hitting
K is 2^K(NK -1). Thus the number of intersections outside of K is
and
where P[0, ^ #,] is the probability that two random lines are not parallel.

CHAPTER 4
Covering a Circle Circumference and a
Sphere Surface
In his turn of the century book Whitworth (1897) was one of the first to
consider problems relating to the coverage of a circle by random arcs. Suppose
we place n arcs of size a uniformly and independently on the circumference of a
circle. Then Whitworth's answer to exercise 667 in his volume can be interpreted
as the probability that the part of the circumference that is not covered by an arc
consists of exactly n—r connected components, that is, the pattern of arcs leaves
n— r gaps on the circumference. He restricted himself, by the comment in
exercise 666 "say c -na = ma" where c is the size of the circumference of the
circle, to the case in which na <c.
This restriction was apparently overlooked by F. Garwood (1940) who incor-
rectly credits Whitworth with the evaluation of the probability of complete
coverage of the circle by these arcs. Complete coverage corresponds to the case
r - n. However, the restriction na<c implies that there are not enough arcs to
cover the circle completely. Thus Whitworth's result excludes the case of
interest, namely probability of coverage when it is possible to cover. Indeed,
Whitworth's formula with r = n sums to zero identically for any value of a, as can
be seen using elementary theory of finite differences, and thus cannot be correct
when na>c. Darling (1953) and Shepp (1972), apparently because of Gar-
wood's remarks, also mistakenly attribute this result to Whitworth.
M. Baticle (1935) comes very close to evaluating this coverage probability
while considering a problem of partitioning an interval, but he does not state
when one should stop summing his series. To be correct, we must stop at the
[c/a] + 1 term, where brackets indicate the greatest integer less than or equal to
c/a. If one sums completely, as he indicated, one gets zero, as was the case for
Whitworth's formula.
W. L. Stevens (1939) thus appears to be the first to evaluate the probability
that n random arcs of size a cover a unit circumference completely and he
provides an ingenious solution. This probability, for a circle of circumference
one, is
where k = [I/a], the greatest integer contained in I/a. By using a geometrical
argument, Stevens also solves generally for the probability that the arcs will
75

76 
CHAPTER 4
leave exactly / uncovered "gaps" between them. This is shown to be
There is a series much like (4.1) derived by R. A. Fisher (1929) as the null
distribution of a test statistic for significance in time series analysis. Fisher (1940)
noted the similarity between his series and Stevens' result and the link between
the two problems.
We now develop the Stevens solution and then add a number of additional
results due to Siegel (1977).
Random arcs on the circumference of a circle. Consider a circle of unit
circumference. Let us drop n arcs each of length a, 0 < a < 1, at random onto the
circle with circumference equal to 1. We desire the probability that every point
of the circle is covered by at least one of the arcs.
We can identify each arc by its clockwise endpoint, and we can assume these n
points (corresponding to the n arcs) are uniformly distributed over the circum-
ference of the circle. Without loss of generality we can rotate the circle so that
the clockwise endpoint of one arc falls in the twelve o'clock position on the
circle. This arc is labeled 1 and the remaining arcs are labeled in the counter-
clockwise direction from 2 to n. (See Fig. 4.1.)
FIG. 4.1
First we shall find the probability /(I) that there is a gap or uncovered portion
of the circle after the rth arc, r specified. Let Gr denote the event that there is a
gap after the rth arc. Let Fa denote the event that no clockwise endpoint falls in
the portion of circle of length a extending in the clockwise direction from point
1. Then there is a one to one correspondence between the configurations of arcs
where Gr occurs and the configurations of arcs where Fa occurs. This cor-
respondence can be seen by considering the operator Tr which rotates arcs

COVERING A CIRCLE CIRCUMFERENCE AND A SPHERE SURFACE
77
r+l,r + 2, • • • ,n clockwise through a distance a. For any configuration C of
arcs where Gr occurs, T,(C) is a valid configuration of arcs (i.e., the ordering of
the arcs is preserved) where Fa occurs. On the other hand, if C' is any configura-
tion of arcs where Fa occurs, then T~l(C') is a valid configuration of arcs where
Gr (i.e., a gap after the rth arc) occurs. The effect of the operator Tr is illustrated
in Fig. 4.2. This one to one correspondence implies that
But P[Gr] =/(!), namely the probability that there is a gap or uncovered portion
of the circle after the rth arc, and P[Fa] = (1 -a)""1. Thus we have
In the same way we can find the probability /(2) that there is a gap directly
after arc r\ and directly after arc TI. Let Gr,.r2 denote this event. Then the
FIG. 4.3

78 
CHAPTER 4
operator TriT,2 provides a one to one correspondence between configurations
where Gri.r2 occurs and configurations where F2a occurs. This correspondence is
illustrated in Fig. 4.3. Thus
But P[Gri,rJ =/(2), namely the probability that there is a gap after the rith arc
and a gap after the r2lh arc and P[F2a] = (\ — 2a)n~l, so we have
It is clear that we can use this same procedure to obtain the probability that
there are gaps in i specified places. The distance between each pair of arcs
enclosing a gap may be reduced by a (by shifting the arcs labeled by higher
numbers a distance a clockwise), to produce a configuration with the portion of
length ia terminating at 1 containing no clockwise endpoints of arcs, and
conversely. Hence, if we let /(/') denote the probability of gaps after / specified
arcs (regardless of what happens elsewhere) then
where k is the greatest integer less than I/a.
To proceed with the solution we develop a theorem in probability concerning
a random n -tuple whose components have two possible outcomes H or T. The
components are not independent, but the probability that any h specified com-
ponents out of the n are H, whatever the remainder, is known to be f(h). We
wish to develop formulae for the probability f(h, t) that h specified components
are H, t specified components are T and the remaining n—h — t are either H
or T.
First we shall evaluate f(h, 1). Let;' be the component which is specified to be
a T. Consider the set of all outcomes of the random n-tuple in which h specified
components are H's. This set has probability f(h). Delete from this set all
outcomes in which there is a T in component /, i.e., all outcomes with h specified
H's and one specified T. The deleted set has probability f(h, I). The resulting set
has H's not only in the original h specified components but also in component /.
The probability of the set that results is f(h + 1). Thus we have
or
where A denotes the difference operator.
With a similar argument we can obtain the probability f(h, 2). Let / and m be
the components that are to be 7"s. Consider the set of all outcomes in which h
specified components are H's and the component / is a T. This set has proba-
bility f(h, 1). Delete from this set all outcomes with a T in component m. The
deleted set has probability f(h, 2). The members of the resulting set have H's in

COVERING A CIRCLE CIRCUMFERENCE AND A SPHERE SURFACE 
79
the h specified places as well as in component m and a T in component /. Its
probability is f(h +1, 1). Thus
or
This indicates that, in general, for t g n — h
This expression can be proved using induction and the same argument as above.
Assume it is true for all h and a particular t, any t0. Consider the set of all
outcomes in which h specified components are H's and t0 specified components
are 7"s. This set has probability f(h, t0). Let / be any component whose value is
not specified. Delete from the above set all outcomes with a T in component;'.
The deleted set has probability f(h, ta + l). Each member of the resulting set has
H's in the h specified places as well as in component / and 7"s in the t0 specified
places for 7"s. This set has probability f(h +1, to). Thus
or
and the proof by induction is complete. This can be done also without the use of
operators by substituting in the series expansion given above for f(h, t).
In particular the probability that h specified events are n, and the remainder
all 7", is
An easy way to evaluate this expression is to represent the difference operator
A as
where U is a unit shift operator; i.e.,

80 
CHAPTER 4
Then
Up to this point we have considered only probabilities in which the exact
positions of the //'s and 7"s are specified. The probability of h //'s and (n-h)
T"s, regardless of their positions, is obtained by noting that there are ( 
1 ways
of selecting h components from the n -tuple. Thus the probability of exactly h
H'sis
We can apply this result to obtain the solution to our problem of random arcs
covering the circumference of a circle. Let the alternative H and T in the y'th
component of the n -tuple refer to the existence or nonexistence, respectively, of
a gap after the y'th arc. We have already evaluated the probabilities
of gaps in / specified places. Thus we have:
where A: is the greatest integer less than I/a.

COVERING A CIRCLE CIRCUMFERENCE AND A SPHERE SURFACE 
81
Thus the probability of covering the circumference with n arcs can be com-
puted from P[Nogaps]=/(0). For example, if a=i /(0)=.4929 for n = 16,
/(0)= .5596 for « = 17. Thus, we require 17 arcs to be at least 50% sure that the
circumference will be covered.
C. Domb (1947) considered a generalization of Stevens' problem. Intervals of
length a are placed on R the real line, with left endpoints as the events of a
Poisson process. The moments and the distribution of the proportion of the
interval [0, y] covered by such segments is calculated, together with the proba-
bility of complete coverage, by the use of a Laplace transform argument on a
system of integral equations. These results can be transformed to give the
corresponding results for the problem of N random arcs of size a on the
circumference on a circle, when N has a Poisson distribution. By expanding his
coverage probability result in powers of A, the intensity of the Poisson process,
Domb is able to produce Stevens' formula for coverage by n arcs, with n fixed.
In principle, a similar expansion would yield the moments and the distribution of
that proportion of the circle covered by a fixed number n of random arcs.
However, these are not produced by Domb because for the distribution, "the
complete solution . . . is very complicated" and in the case of the higher
moments, because "they become rather cumbersome." Both the moments and
the distribution are produced explicitly, by a method different from Domb's, in
Siegel (1977), which we produce shortly.
J. G. Mauldon (1951) generalized Stevens' result in a different way. If we let
YI, • • • , Yn be the gaps between n points placed uniformly and independently
on the circle, then P(maxia,-Sn F,^a) is the probability that n random arcs of
size a cover the circle. This is easily seen if we place the clockwise endpoint of
one arc at each Y,. Thus Stevens' result is seen to yield the distribution of the
largest Y,. Mauldon derived the moments and the distribution of the sum of the
k largest of Y\, • • • , Yn. Thus the case k = 1 reduces to the circle coverage
probability (1).
Let YI, • • • , Yn be gaps on the circle as in the previous paragraph. D. A.
Darling (1953) found a complex contour integral representation of the charac-
teristic function of the random variable Wn =£"=1 hj(Yj) for quite arbitrary
functions hj. His method gives a unified treatment to problems arising in the
study of infectious diseases, traffic flow, etc., as well as some problems in
nonparametric tests for goodness of fit. Among results derived by the use of his
method is Stevens' formula for the circle coverage probability.
If we place arcs of size a sequentially and uniformly on the circumference of a
circle, Stevens' result yields the probability distribution of N, the random num-
ber of arcs at which complete coverage first occurs. This is because the proba-
bility of coverage by n arcs (where n is fixed) is P(N^n). L. Flatto and A. G.
Konheim (1962) considered the problem asymptotically for a tending to zero (so
that N increases stochastically without limit) and showed that

82 
CHAPTER 4
About ten years later, P. J. Cooke (1972) suggested the asymptotic form of the
first two moments of N.
A. Dvoretsky (1956) considered coverage of the circle by an infinite number
of random arcs of specified lengths but uniform independent placement. He
showed that if the length of the rth arc is /, e (0, 1), then the divergence of the
sum £, = 1 /, is necessary and sufficient for the arcs to cover almost all of the circle
with probability one. He left open the corresponding problem of determining
necessary and sufficient conditions on the sequence of lengths so as to cover all
(not just "almost all") of the circle with probability one by exhibiting a sequence
of lengths for which X^ /,- diverged, but which did not cover all of the circle with
probability one.
P. Billard (1965) gave a partial solution to Dvoretsky's problem by
exhibiting a necessary condition and a (different) sufficient condition. M.
Mandelbrot (1972) produced another partial solution and established for the
first time that arcs of lengths /„ = !/(« + 1) will cover all of the circle with proba-
bility one.
L. A. Shepp (1972) finally provided the complete answer to Dvoretsky's
problem. He showed that if the length of the rth arc is /, e (0, 1), then
is a necessary and sufficient condition for these arcs, randomly placed, to cover
all of the circle with probability one. Shepp also derived bounds on the proba-
bility of coverage of a circle by n arcs of size a, and used these bounds to study
the asymptotic distribution of the number just needed to cover.
In this section we reconsider the problem of n arcs X \ , - - - , X n of length a
placed independently at random on the circumference of a circle and present the
development by A. F. Siegel (1977). Assume that the circumference has length
one and that the centers of the arcs (or equivalently their clockwise endpoints)
are uniformly distributed over the circle. We define the coverage to be
and the vacancy to be
where p. denotes Lebesgue measure on the circumference. Thus C(nM) and D(n,a)
are random variables representing the proportion of the circumference covered
(respectively not covered) by the arcs X\, • • • , Xn. Siegel derives formulae for
the moments of coverage (i.e., the moments of C(n,a)), the distribution of
coverage, and its limiting distribution as n tends to infinity.
Moments of coverage. The moments of coverage are found by deriving a
recursive integral equation for the moments of D(n.a). Robbins' theorem (1944)

COVERING A CIRCLE CIRCUMFERENCE AND A SPHERE SURFACE 
83
is the starting point, yielding a formula for the wth moment of £>(„,„):
where ^ denotes the circumference of our circle and the subscript a of P is the
arc length. From the fact that X\,---,Xn are independent and identically
distributed sets, we have
Using invariance of the integrand under permutations of the z, to order them by
their magnitudes, 0=iZ(i)Si • • • gz ( m )< 1, together with the fact that
we can derive the recursive integral equation. For the case a < 1/2, this is
whereas, if a g 1/2, then the equation is simpler:
These may be solved. It can be shown by induction that the solution to (4.23)
and (4.24) is
where (1 — la)+ is equal to zero if (1 — la) is negative. The moments of coverage
are then obtainable as

84 
CHAPTER 4
It may be instructive to write the first four moments of Dn,a explicitly.
Distribution of coverage. From the moments of coverage, the distribution of
coverage P(C(n,a) = 0 is, in theory, completely determined because a distribution
on a finite interval is uniquely characterized by its moments. By considering
special cases, one may make an educated guess at the coverage distribution.
Because we have the moments of coverage, this guess may be verified. By the
use of this method, the cumulative distribution of coverage can be shown to be
where we use the convention that
The coverage, C(n,a), is a continuous random variable except for a point mass
arising under one of two possible situations. First, if na > 1, then n random arcs
of length a will have positive probability of covering the circle. In this case, C(n,a)
has positive mass at 1. Second, if na < 1, then n arcs of length a will have
positive probability of not overlapping. In this case, C(n,a) has positive mass
at na.
In fact, we can decompose Qn,a) into a mixture of a continuous and a
degenerate part:

COVERING A CIRCLE CIRCUMFERENCE AND A SPHERE SURFACE 
85
where
A(n,o) is degenerate at l-(l-na)+ because
and B(nM) has density
and the functions Fn,a(t) and fn,a(t) are piecewise polynomials.
Asymptotic distribution of coverage. If we hold arc length a constant and let n
become large, the coverage probability tends to 1. If we condition on the event
that the circle is not covered, we can study the conditional limiting distribution of
coverage. This can be shown by the method of moments to be asymptotically
related to the exponential distribution.
Using the decomposition (4.30), we see that the conditional coverage is
From the moment formula (4.25) it can be shown that
Thus the limiting distribution of n(l -S(n,a))/(l -a) is exponential. This is to say
that
From this, it can be shown that
for each f, as n tends to infinity, in the sense that the limiting ratio of the two
sides of (4.37) is 1.
Random caps on a sphere. The problem of random arcs covering a circle can
be generalized to three dimensions, where the situation becomes one of covering
the surface of a sphere with randomly placed circular caps. Consider a sphere of
unit radius on which are placed N circular spherical caps subtending a half angle
a at the center of the sphere (see Fig. 4.4). Assume the centers of these caps are

86
CHAPTER 4
FIG. 4.4
independently and uniformly distributed over the surface of the sphere. We seek
the probability P(N) that the sphere is completely covered.
This problem arises in practice in the study of the attachment of antibodies to
influenza virus particles. Antibodies are supposed to be cigar-shaped molecules
which attach themselves at their ends to the virus particle. The influenza virus
particle can be considered to be a sphere which infects a cell by coming in
contact with it. If enough antibodies are attached to its surface, the virus cannot
touch another cell; i.e., it is no longer infectious. In particular, since the cell
which is susceptible to virus infection is much larger than the virus, its surface
may be assumed flat (see Fig. 4.5). An attached antibody thus prevents a
spherical cap S on the virus from touching and thus infecting the cell. The virus is
no longer infectious when its surface is completely covered by the spherical caps
centered at the attached antibodies.
The exact probability that a sphere is covered by N circular caps is not known.
However, an asymptotic value for large N was derived by Moran and Fazekas de
St. Groth (1962). Their method can be most easily demonstrated by applying it
to the two dimensional problem of random arcs on the circle. Let Y be the
FIG. 4.5

COVERING A CIRCLE CIRCUMFERENCE AND A SPHERE SURFACE 
87
measure of the set of points on the circumference not covered by the N arcs.
Then the distribution of Y is clearly continuous on [0, 1] with a concentration of
probability P(N) at Y = 0.
We obtain the first two moments of Y in the following manner. Let the
random variable XN(£) be the indicator function of the event that the point £ is
not covered by N" random arcs; i.e.,
Then
and
Clearly E[x\(£)] — (I-a). Since the arcs are independent
Thus we have
Similarly
and
The expression E[xff(£)xn(d>)] is just the probability that both ^ and w are
not covered. If the arc length from ^ to w is greater than a, then £ and o> are not
covered if and only if no clockwise endpoints of random arcs fall on the two
sections of length a shown in Fig. 4.6a.
If the arc length from £ to w is less than a, say /, then (, and 01 are not covered
if and only if no clockwise endpoints of random arcs fall on the section of length
t + a shown in Fig. 4.6b. Thus

88 
CHAPTER 4
FIG. 4.6a 
FIG. 4.6b
(Here ||f-«|| denotes the positive arc length from £ to «.) Hence we have
For large N, the set of points which are not covered is with high probability a
single interval if it is not empty. Furthermore, the length Y of this interval has a
negative exponential distribution. (It may be thought of as the waiting time to
the first endpoint of the series of overlapping arcs.) Let /u.i denote the first
moment about the origin of this negative exponential distribution. Then the
second moment about the origin is 2/j. f and we have

COVERING A CIRCLE CIRCUMFERENCE AND A SPHERE SURFACE 
89
Hence the probability that the circle is completely covered is
Note that this is precisely what we would have arrived at using our previous
result
For large N, the terms (1 -ja)N~l for /> 1 will be negligible compared with the
term (l-a)N~l and we get
which is the same as that obtained above.
Application of method of moments. We shall now apply this same method to
obtain the probability that the surface of the sphere is completely covered by the
spherical caps. Since the sphere has unit radius, its surface area is 4ir. Each
spherical cap of angular radius a will have an area of 27r(l-cosa). Thus the
probability that any specified point on the sphere will be covered by a randomly
placed cap is
A ring of width d<& and angular radius 3> (i.e., the ring subtends an angle 2$ at
the center of the sphere) on the surface of a sphere of unit radius has area
277 sin $rf<t> (see Fig. 4.7).
Thus the area of a circular cap of angular radius a is
Then the probability that N random caps do not cover some particular point PI
is (1 - A )/v. Define the random variable xN(Pi) as above; that is, let xN(Pi) be the
FIG. 4.7

90 
CHAPTER 4
indicator function of the event that the point PI is not covered by N random
caps. Let Y be the proportion of the surface of the sphere not covered. Then
Y = \xN(P\)dwi where dw\ is an element of surface area surrounding PI. Then
and the second moment is
Let Pi and P2 be separated by an angle <&, and let /(<&) denote the combined
surface areas of the caps of angular radius a centered at PI and P2. A random
cap covers one of the two points if its center falls on the region of area/(<!>). Thus
the probability that one random cap covers one of the points is /(<i>)/(47r). The
probability that N random caps leave both PI and P2 uncovered is
Since E[xN(Pi)xN(P2}] depends upon PI and P2 only through 4> we can
evaluate E(Y2) by using the following trick to integrate over d<f> instead of dw\
and dw2. The integral
can be viewed as the expected value of a function E[xN(Pi)xN(P2)] of randoma
points PI and P2 which fall with a uniform distribution on the surface of the
sphere. (Remember the expectation in E[xN(Pi)xN(P2)] refers to random caps,
not the random points P\ and P2.) The two points PI and P2 subtend an angle
between <& and $ + d<t> at the center of the sphere if and only if the second point
falls in a ring of area 2ir sin 4> d$> (see Fig. 4.8). This event happens with
probability
Thus we can substitute 2 sin 3> d<i> for (dwi/(47r))(dto2/(47r)) and we have
When <t>g2a, the two circles around PI and P2 do not overlap and /(<&) =
4vr(l -cos a). When $<2a we have (by spherical trigonometry)
Thus E(Y2) can be evaluated by numerical integration.

COVERING A CIRCLE CIRCUMFERENCE AND A SPHERE SURFACE 
91
FIG. 4.8
We can therefore obtain the first two moments of the distribution of Y, the
fraction of the total area not covered. This distribution will consist of a concen-
tration of probability, Pr (N), at the origin together with continuous probability
distribution on the range (0< F<oo) and can be written
where g(y) is the density of Y given that Y>0. In other words, for Y>0 the
density is just [1 -Pr (N)]g(y). Let /u, and /u.2 denote the first two moments of
the density g(y). Then
and
Thus if we can find ^i2M f 2, Pr (N) can be obtained from the above expression.
To obtain fj.\ and ^2 we note that for large N the size of any uncovered area
on the sphere's surface will be small compared with the radius of the sphere and
with the radius of the random caps. Thus the curvature of the surface of the
sphere can be neglected, the region can be considered to be planar, and the
boundary of the region may be taken to be made up of straight lines. Further-
more since the caps are uniformly distributed on the surface of the sphere, the
straight lines are random lines of a Poisson field in the plane. Thus the area of
any single (i.e. connected) uncovered region has approximately the same dis-
tribution as the area, A, of a polygon formed by random lines of a Poisson field
in the plane. We have already obtained the values of E(A) and E(A ) during our
discussion of random lines in the plane, namely
where T is the intensity of the random lines in the Poisson field.

92 
CHAPTER 4
In the example with the random arcs on the circle we saw that for large N the
probability of more than one disjoint uncovered area was negligible. If we make
the similar assumption that the probability of more than one disjoint uncovered
areas on the sphere is negligible compared with the probability of one such area,
we get /Lti = E(A) and fi,i = E(A2\ Then
and
This formula is not satisfactory for low values of N as it yields negative values of
Pr (N). An alternative hypothesis is that the number of uncovered areas, M, is
distributed in a Poisson distribution with mean v. This cannot be true when the
random caps are large for in the cases where a s 90° there cannot be more than
one region uncovered. For smaller values of a, however, this assumption seems
plausible. We also assume that the areas, Yt, of the individual regions are
distributed independently. If the total area is Y we have Y — Y\ + • • • + YM and
using the moments of the Poisson distribution we get
and
and the probability that the random caps do not cover the sphere is
Moran and Fazekas de St. Groth tested the accuracy of the above formula
with an experiment using ping-pong balls. One hundred circular holes were
punched in an aluminum sheet. The diameter of these holes was chosen so that
the part of a ping-pong ball which may protrude through each hole is a spherical
cap of angular radius a =53.43° (i.e. subtending a half angle of 53.43° at the
center of the ping-pong ball). This value of a was chosen because for the
influenza virus the radius of the sphere is 40m£i while the antibodies are of
length 27 m//, so that the shielded area subtends a half angle of 53.43°. One
hundred ping-pong balls were placed in the holes and were held firmly against
the holes by a foam rubber pad. The spherical caps visible from the other side of

COVERING A CIRCLE CIRCUMFERENCE AND A SPHERE SURFACE
93
the aluminum sheet were sprayed with paint, thus simulating the dropping of a
random cap of paint on each ping-pong ball. After drying, the ping-pong balls
were removed, rotated randomly and replaced. Then another random cap of
paint was added to each ball. The following table (Table 2) shows the number of
balls not completely covered with paint after N sprayings in each of three times
the experiment was carried out.
TABLE 2
N
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
l-Pr(JV)
1.0000
.9846
.8009
.4916
.2502
.1143
.0489
Number of balls not covered
1st expt
100
95
76
53
28
12
6
2nd expt.
100
96
82
62
32
19
8
3rd expt.
100
97
80
52
24
11
3
An exact expression for Pr (N) is presently not known except for several
special values of a. These special cases include the following:
1) Pr(AO = 0 if ATsin2(a/2)Sl. This is obvious when we remember that
sin2 (a/2) is the fraction of the sphere's total surface covered by one cap.
2) Pr (2) = cos2 a if a > 90°. The portion of the sphere not covered by one cap
is itself a spherical cap of angular radius 27r-2a, which will be covered by a
second random cap if and only if the center of the second random cap falls at
great circle distance ITT-la or more from the center of the first random cap (see
Fig. 4.9).
Thus the probability that the sphere is not completely covered is just the
probability that the center of the second random cap falls in a cap shaped area (C
FIG. 4.9

94 
CHAPTER 4
in Fig. 4.9) of angular radius ITT - la centered at the center of the first cap. This
probability is just sin21(2TT -2a) or sin2 a. Hence the probability that the sphere
is completely covered is Pr (JV) = 1 — sin" a = cos" a.
3) Pr(/V)=l-2"(/V2-Ar + 2)whena = 90°. When a ==90° each random cap
is a hemisphere. The surface of the sphere is cut up into N" — N + 2 pieces by the
N great circles which are the circumferences of the N random hemispheres.
(This can be seen by the same argument as was used in the derivation of E(N)
for random lines in the plane, namely: One great circle splits the surface of the
sphere into two pieces, and the Ath great circle intersects each of the previous
N —I great circles twice, thereby cutting 2(/V — 1) of the previous pieces in half,
or adding 2(N - 1) to the total number of pieces. Thus if MN denotes the number
of pieces into which N great circles cut up the surface of the sphere, we have
Mjv=MN-i +2(^-1) or M,v = 2L^2(/-l) + 2 = Ar2-Af + 2.) To each great
circle there are two equally probable ways the cap could have landed and still
have had the same great circle as a circumference. For example, the center of the
cap could be either the North pole or the South pole with equal probability.
Thus, given the N great circles and the pieces into which they cut the surface of
the sphere, each piece has probability I of not being covered by a certain random
cap and probability TN of not being covered by any of them. Since there are
N2-N + 2 pieces, the probability is 2~N(N2-N + 2) that any piece is not
covered by any of the N random caps. Thus the probability that the whole
surface of the sphere is covered is
when a = 90°.
This result is a special case of a more general result in geometric probability
due to J. G. Wendel (1962). He showed that if N points are scattered at random
on the surface of the unit sphere in «-space, the probability that all the points lie
In addition to these few special cases for which an exact expression for Pr (N)
can be developed, we can obtain upper and lower bounds for Pr (N) which can
be combined to yield the exact asymptotic behavior of Pr (N) as TV goes to
infinity. These bounds were first derived by E. N. Gilbert (1965).
An upper bound for Pr (N) is easy to obtain. Any particular point, say the
North pole, has probability (1 - A )N of being left uncovered by all N caps, where
A = sin2 201 is the fraction of the sphere's surface area which is covered by a single
cap. Thus the probability that the North pole is covered by at least one cap is
1 - (1 - A) . Since the sphere is not covered unless the North pole is covered, we
have
To obtain a lower bound for Pr (N) let us define a crossing as being a point of
intersection of the circular boundaries of two overlapping caps. See Fig. 4. Ida. If
there is an uncovered crossing, some area of the sphere outside of the two

COVERING A CIRCLE CIRCUMFERENCE AND A SPHERE SURFACE
95
overlapping caps must also be uncovered. Conversely, if at least two caps
overlap, then the boundary of any uncovered area on the sphere must contain an
uncovered crossing. Thus we find that the sphere is completely covered if and
only if there are at least two caps which overlap and every crossing is covered.
A cap intersects another cap if its center falls within a great circle distance of
2a from the center of the other cap; that is, if its center falls in a large cap of
angular radius 2a centered at the center of the other cap (see Fig. 4.10b). This
event has probability equal to the fraction of the sphere's area which is covered
by the large cap of angular radius 2a, namely, sin2 a. Clearly for every pair of
overlapping caps there are two crossings. Thus the expected number of crossings
/ N\
between two particular caps is 2 sin2 a. If we drop N caps, there are ( 
1 or
N(N-\)/2 distinct pairs of caps and the expected number of crossings between
all caps is
The probability that a crossing will not be covered by the remaining A"- 2 caps is
(1—A) N 2. Thus the expected number of uncovered crossings between N caps
on the sphere is 4N(N - 1)A(1 -A)™"1. If we denote w(k) as the probability that
the N caps leave exactly k crossings uncovered, we have
Let U(N) denote the conditional expectation of the number of uncovered
crossings given that not all crossings are covered. Thus
Therefore we have
2

96 
CHAPTER 4
But w(o) is the probability that all crossings are covered, which is the same as
Pr(A^). Also, t/(7V) = 3 since an uncovered crossing occurs only if there is an
uncovered area on the sphere, which requires at least three crossings in its
boundary. Thus we have
For small N this is not very good, in fact it can be negative. On the other hand,
this lower bound can be combined with our previously obtained upper bound
to get
Since the limit of the second summand on the right is zero, we have the
asymptotic behavior of log (1 -Pr (N)), i.e.,

CHAPTER 5
Crofton's Theorem and Sylvester's Problem
in Two and Three Dimensions
Crofton's theorem on mean values. It is to M. W. Crofton, an English
mathematician whose works appear in the latter half of the 19th century, that we
are indebted for approaches by which results in geometrical probability that
normally would require difficult and sometimes intractable integration are
achieved by ingenious artifices. His methods permit the evaluation of some
definite integrals without directly performing the integrations. In previous
chapters we have referred to some of his work. We now discuss some other
situations, develop Crofton's very useful mean value theorem, and apply it in
some classical problems such as Sylvester's four point problem—namely, find the
probability that four points taken at random within a given boundary shall form
a re-entrant quadrilateral. An especially pertinent article by Crofton is the one
he prepared for the 9th edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica (1885),
particularly the section entitled "On Local Probability". We now reproduce
Crofton's results.
Let us now consider a few specific questions. Assume that a specified space S
is included within a given space A. Let a point P be taken at random on A and
let p be the probability that it falls on S or we may write
Now assume the space S is variable and that it has n equally probable values
•Si, Si, S3, • • • , Sn. Then the chance that any one 5;, say Si, is taken and that then
P falls on Si is
where M(S) is the mean value of S.
The chance of two points falling on S given that they fall at random on A is
similarly
Let p=p1+p2+...+pn and so
97

98 
CHAPTER 5
where M(S2) is the mean value of the random variable S2. Note in these two
illustrations that if the probability is known, the mean value follows, and vice
versa.
Let us explore this in connection with the following problem. Consider a line
of length / and the distance XY between two points falling at random on /—here
/ is A and XY is S. We wish to determine M(XY}n, namely the «th moment of
the random distance XY. To do this, consider the probability that n (additional)
points taken at random on I fall in XY. Then
for the probability that X is one of the extreme points out of (n + 2) points is
2/(n+2), and, if it is, the probability that Y is the other extreme point is
l/(n + 1). However, we also have
and so
Let us consider another illustration by which the relationship between mean
values and probabilities can be exploited. A line of length / is divided into n
segments by (n -1) points taken at random on the line. We wish to find the mean
value of the product of the lengths of these segments. Let a, b, c, • • • be the n
segments in one particular case and let n new points be taken at random over the
line. The probability that one falls on each segment is
Now we seek the same probability no matter how the line is divided by the
(n — 1) random points. This is
Now the number of different arrangements in which all (2n - 1) points may occur
on the line is (2n - 1)!. Out of these arrangements, the number in which a point
of the first series falls between every two of the second series is from per-
mutation theory equal to («!)(« — 1)!. Thus
and

CROFTON'S THEOREM AND SYLVESTER'S PROBLEM 
99
We shall now derive an important formula known as Crofton's formula or
Crofton's theorem on fixed points. Let n points £i,£i, • • • , £ „ be randomly
distributed on a domain 5 and let H be some event which depends on the
positions of the n points. Let S' denote a domain slightly smaller than S and
contained in 5. Denote by A5 the part of S not in 5'. If we take AS small enough
that we may neglect the probability of two or more of the £, falling in A5, we get
(where P now stands for probability)
Let 5, s' and As denote the measures (e.g., area, volume, etc.) of S, S' and AS
respectively. Since the points are random in S
and
Then we get
Since the domain AS is taken to be small enough that we can throw away the
higher order terms of AS, we have
(These approximations will become exact when we let As become infinitesimal.)
Thus we have
or
We now let As become infinitesimal. Then S' is approximately S so that s'
approaches s, the difference P[H] — P[H\g\, &,•••,£„£. S'] is a small increment
SP[H], AS becomes 5s, and P[H} ^ e AS, & . • • - , £ . < = S'] becomes the proba-
bility P [ H \ g i £ d S ] that H occurs when one of the random points is on the
boundary <5S of S. Thus we arrive at Crofton's formula

100 
CHAPTER 5
As a simple example of an application of Crofton's formula suppose £1 and &
are random points on an interval of length L. Let X = \£\-£2\ and let F(x,L)
denote the cumulative distribution function of X, that is F(x, L) = P[X < x]. By
Crofton's formula SF(x,L) = 2(P[X<*|6 at end of interval]-F(x,L))L~l SL
since £2 is uniformly distributed on the interval
and (we assume dF(x, L)/dL exists)
For L = x we want F(x, L)= 1. Thus the constant is -jc2 and
There is a form of Crofton's formula which applies to mean values. If A" is a
random variable which depends on the positions of n random points
f i» &, • • • , & in 5 and if S' and A5 are as before, we have for small AS
if, as before, s, s' and As denote the measures of S, S' and AS respectively, we
have
and by the same arguments as before we get
A more general form of Crofton's theorem has been provided in recent years
by Ruben and Reed (1973). This extension concerns problems in which points
are chosen at random in each of a number of domains. Assume for / = 1, • • • , k;
Dj is a domain in n^-dimensional Euclidean space with content V,, and that N,
points are chosen at random from D/. Now let JLI be the expected value of some

CROFTON'S THEOREM AND SYLVESTER'S PROBLEM 
101
function of £/=i Nt points that depends only on the intrinsic properties of the
points and their relative positions and not on the domains Df or the positions of
the points relative to them. Then the extended Crofton theorem states that
where dfj. is the increment in /u obtained by increasing such £>/ by an infinitesi-
mal increment dV,-, and fj, f is the expected value of the function where one point
is chosen at random in the boundary in £>/, Nt - 1 points are chosen at random in
Dj and Nj points are chosen at random in Dt for / ^ j, i = 1, 2, • • • , k.
As in the original Crofton theorem a direct corollary is that if P is the
probability that £/=i N, points satisfy some intrinsic property then
This result follows from the extended theorem by considering an indicator
function with values 1 or 0 if the property is or is not satisfied.
The extended theorem allows repeated application, and this enables the total
degrees of freedom of points selected at random in, for example, an n -simplex or
polyhedron, in n-space, to be reduced by n + 1. The expected value of a function
of points can be decomposed into a linear combination of expectations, the
degree of expectation in each of which has been reduced by n +1. In the original
Crofton theorem, the degrees of the freedom of the points is reduced by one,
and thus the degree of integration involved in finding the expectation is reduced
by one.
Sylvester's four point problem. Many complex problems are solved through
the use of Crofton's formula. One example is the famous Sylvester four point
problem, which we shall now consider. In the late nineteenth century the English
mathematician J. J. Sylvester posed the problem of finding the probability that
four points taken at random inside a convex domain D form a re-entrant
quadrilateral, that is, one of the points lies inside the triangle formed by the
other three. A re-entrant quadrilateral can be formed from four points in four
different ways, according to which of the four points occurs inside the triangle
formed by the other three. If the domain D has area AD and the mean area of a
triangle formed by three random points X, Y and Z in the domain is
E(Area XYZ) then the probability Pr [RQ] of a re-entrant quadrilateral is
clearly we can reduce or expand the scale of the domain D and the ratio
£"(Area XYZ)/AD remains unaffected. (In this section, we use Pr to denote the
probability.) Therefore the probability of four random points forming a re-
entrant quadrilateral in D is the same as if the four points were random in a

102 
CHAPTER 5
slightly smaller domain with the same shape. Thus we have <5Pr[RQ] = 0; in
Crofton's formula
which implies that
Let O denote the random point on the boundary SD of D. Given that O e SD, a
re-entrant quadrilateral can be formed from three random points in D and
O e SD in three ways, according to which of the three random points in D occurs
inside of the triangle formed by O with the other two random points. Thus if
£"(Area OXY\Oz8D)denotes the mean area of a triangle formed by X and Y
random in D and O random on SD, we have
We shall now evaluate £(Area OXY\ O zSD) and Pr [RQ] for several types of
convex domains D.
Let us first suppose D is a triangle, ABC. Figure 5.1 shows the triangle ABC
together with the random point O on the boundary. Let Si denote the part of
triangle to the left of the line AO and Sz the part to the right of AO. We shall
use the subscript O in expectations such as £0(Area OXY) to indicate that the
expectation is over the distributions of only X and Y and that O is treated as a
fixed point on the boundary. Thus for any fixed point O on the boundary the
expected area of the triangle formed by O and two random points X and Y in
ABC'K
FIG. 5.1

CROFTON'S THEOREM AND SYLVESTER'S PROBLEM 103
If we denote the areas of Si, S2 and ABC by s^, s2 and AD respectively, we get
In order to calculate E0(Area OXY) 
we must evaluate the conditional
expectations on the right hand side of the equation. We shall evaluate
E0(Area OXY X e Si, Y e S2) first. Clearly the expected value of the distance
from a random point X e Si to a line not passing through Si is the distance from
the line to the center of gravity G\ of Si- Then for a fixed point YQeS2 the
expected area of the triangle OXYo over all positions of X e Si is
where ||Oy0|| denotes the length of the line segment OY0 and ||Oy0toGi||
denotes the perpendicular distance from G\ to the line OYn. The area of the
triangle Oy()G| can also be written
The 
mean 
value £0(Area OXY\X e Si, Y e S2) is the expectation of
EolAreaOXylXeSi, Y = Yn) over all y(1eS2.Thus
where G2 is the center of gravity of S2.
We shall now evaluate the area of the triangle OGiG2. (See Fig. 5.2.) We shall
show that
We shall also show that
103

104
CHAPTER 5
FIG. 5.3
a fact which we will need later on. We use the fact that the three medians of a
triangle are concurrent at the center of gravity, which is two thirds of the way
along each median from the vertex to the opposite side. Hence Gi is the point of
intersection of the medians of ABO and GI, the point of intersection of the
medians to AOC. Since G\ and G2 are the same fraction, 2/3 of the way from A
to the line BC, the line GiG2 must be parallel to BC. Furthermore the line GiG2
extended intersects any line perpendicular to the base BC (for example the
broken line in Fig. 5.2) two thirds of the way from A to the line BC. Thus we
have
FIG. 5.2

CROFTON'S THEOREM AND SYLVESTER'S PROBLEM 
105
and
Since GI occurs two thirds of the way along the median BM (see Fig. 5.3), the
projection of BGi on the base BC is two thirds of the projection of BM on BC.
Similarly the projection of CG2 on BC is two thirds the length of the projection
on BC of the median CM. Hence the projection of GjG2, which is BC minus the
projections of BGi and CG2, is one third the length of BC. Since G^G2 is
parallel to BC, we have
Combining this result with our previous results for the altitudes of OG\G2 and
AG\G2 we have
Thus we have
We shall now evaluate E0(Area OXY X, Ye Si). We must first prove the
following fact. For any two triangles OLR and O'L'R' with random points X
and Y in OLR and X' and Y' in O'L'R', we have
This fact is not immediately apparent but can be seen in the following way. The
triangle OLR can be transformed into O'L'R' by projecting it obliquely onto
another plane and changing the scale. The projection and the change of scale
multiply the area of the inner triangle OXY and the total area of OLR by the
same factor. Thus if X and Y denote the images of X and Y under the
projection 
and 
scale 
change, 
we 
have 
Area OXY"/Area OLR =
Area O'XY/Area O'L'R'. The projection and scale change preserve the uni-
form distribution of X and Y, that is, X and Y are randomly distributed in
O'L'R' and have the same distribution as X' and Y'. Hence
We shall now use this fact to derive E(Area OXY) for two random points X
and Y falling in a triangle OLR. Let M denote the midpoint of the side LR and

106 
CHAPTER 5
FIG. 5.4
let Vi and V2 denote the areas to the left and right, respectively, of the median
OM. (See Fig. 5.4.) Then we can write
Since OM bisects the triangle,
and
Since the areas of V! and V2 are each one half the area of OLR, we have
which implies

CROFTON'S THEOREM AND SYLVESTER'S PROBLEM 
107
for ; = 1,2. Substituting i£(Area OXY) 
for E(Area OXY X, Y e V,) and
£(Area OXY \ X, Y e V2) in our equation for E(Area OXY) we get
which yields
where Fi and F2 denote the centers of gravity of V) and V2 respectively. We
have already found the area of a triangle of this type to be
Therefore
Applying this result to the two triangles 5| and S2 in our original triangle ABC
we get
We can now return to our expression for the expectation of the area of OXY
conditioned on the position of O on the boundary of the triangle ABC.
Up to now we have considered O as a fixed point on the boundary of the
triangle ABC. Now we will average over all possible positions for O on the
boundary in order to obtain the unconditional expectation of the area of the
triangle OXY, which we can then use to find Pr [RQ], the probability of four
random points forming a re-entrant quadrilateral. We need average only over

108 
CHAPTER 5
possible positions for O on one side, say BC, of the triangle because the situation
is identical for O on each of the other sides, AB and AC.
FIG. 5.5
Now suppose the length BC is b and the point O lies at a distance x from B.
Furthermore, denote the height of A above the base BC by h. (See Fig. 5.5.)
Then
and the expected area of OXY regardless of the position of O on the boundary
is
Thus the probability of a re-entrant quadrilateral being formed from four
random points in a triangle is
The method by which we have obtained Pr [RQ] for four random points in a
triangle can be extended to derive Pr [RQ] for four random points in any convex
polygon. Suppose the polygon has n sides. Then we can take a point O uni-
formly distributed on one of the sides. From O we can draw lines to each of the
vertices of the polygon thus dividing the polygon into n -1 triangles,

CROFTON'S THEOREM AND SYLVESTER'S PROBLEM
109
Si, $2, • • • , Sn-i (see Fig. 5.6). For any fixed position for the point O we can
calculate
Alikoski (1939) has solved the Sylvester problem for all regular rc-gons
employing the results obtained above for the triangle. He proves that
We now present his development. Let Pa,P\, • • • ,Pn-\ be a regular »-gon,
denoted together with its area by T. Choose a rectangular coordinate system so
that the polygon lies above the jc-axis, the side Pn-\PQ is on the x-axis, its
midpoint is the origin. (See Fig. 5.7.) Let (#„, yv) be the coordinates of Pv. We
choose a point P of abscissa x on the side Pn-iP0 and denote by T^v(x) the
triangle PP^Pv and its area. Now take two points X and Y in T at random and
let M(x) be the mean of the area of the triangle PXY. We further denote M v(x)
the mean area of the triangle PXY when only those triangles are included for
which both X and Y belong to Tv-\,v(x\ and M^v(x) the mean area when one is
in T^-i^x) and the other in Tv-i<v(x).
We can now write

110
CHAPTER 5
If Qv is the center of gravity of the triangle Tv-\,1,(x) and R,, the midpoint of
Pv-iPv, then we have from our previous results for the triangle,
Denoting
we can write (5.57) as
Using the expression of the area of a triangle as a determinant, we get (/j. < v)
where

CROFTON'S THEOREM AND SYLVESTER'S PROBLEM
Similarly one gets:
in
Noticing that Tv,,,(x) is identically zero, we can write (5.59) in the following
form:
The right hand side in (5.62) is a polynomial in .v of the 3rd degree at most.
But since M(—x) — M(x) by symmetry, the terms of even degree must be zero,
so that we may write
A simple transformation yields:
The expression for a comes directly from (5.62) while that for /3 can be deduced
from (5.62) as follows. From (5.62) it follows that

112 
CHAPTER 5
In order to get the expression above for /3 we have to show that the last two
sums—which we denote by Si and 52—are equal to one another. In fact we have
But since B^ = -Bv^
so that, since B^v = 0,
Interchanging the letters (U. and v, and noting that flv,K = -B^v, we get Sa = Si.
Let M be the mean of M(x), when J° is a randomly chosen point on Pn-\P0.
We get:
that is
If we let M be the mean of the area of the triangle XYZ where XYZ are
randomly chosen inside the polygon, then it can be shown
Therefore we get:
We chose the radius of the circle circumscribed to the polygon as unit length and
so we get
Then the coordinates of Pv are
Upon putting those values in (5.60), we get:

CROFTON'S THEOREM AND SYLVESTER'S PROBLEM 
113
and hence
Upon substituting these values in (5.61), after simple transformations we get:
In order to compute <p we put these values in the above expressions for a and (3
and then write (5.71) in the form
Using De Moivre's formula, we see the result for Pr [RQ] becomes (5.56).
In order to show that Pr [RQ] decreases with increasing n, take the derivative
of Pr [RQ] with respect to <w and we get
where
(5.78) S = sin w(9 cos2 (a+52 cos w + 44)-<w(26 cos2 w + 53 cos w +26).
A power series expansion yields:
This is an alternating series and since for n ^ 5 (CD § 27T/5) the absolute value of
its terms is decreasing, we get for these values of n:
Since the right hand side, and consequently d Pr [RQ]/dw is positive for n s5,
Pr [RQ] decreases as n increases beyond n =5. Noting that the values of
Pr [RQ] are also decreasing for n = 3, 4, 5, we find the assertion is proved.
If we let n-»oo, then <o-»0 and Pr [RQ]^35/(127r2). The following values
(Table 3) for Pr [RQ] had been determined by other investigators previously but
substitution for n =3, 4, 6, 8, oo in the Alikoski result will provide the same
answers.
Some other problems in geometrical probability can be solved by noticing that
their solutions depend on the solution to the Sylvester four point problem. For
example, if two points A and B are taken at random in a convex area, suppose
we seek the probability that two other random points C and D lie on opposite
sides of the line AB. Once three points A, B and C have been placed, the

114
Pr[RQ] or
CHAPTER 5
TABLE 3
Triangle
1
3
or
.3333
Square
(Parallelogram)
11
36
.3056
Regular
Hexagon
289
972
.2973
Regular
Octagon
1181+867v2
4032 + 2880v 2
.2970
Circle
(Ellipse)
35
12,r2
.2955
situation is shown in Fig. 5.8. The quadrilateral formed by the four random
points A, B, C and D is convex if and only if the fourth point D falls in an area
marked CQ. Clearly the regions marked CQ have the same mean area by
symmetry. There are two areas marked CQ on the same side of AB as C and
one area on the other side. Thus if we know that the quadrilateral formed by A,
B, C and D is convex, the probability is i that the fourth random point falls on
the opposite side of AB from C.
FIG. 5.8
On the other hand, the quadrilateral ABCD is re-entrant if and only if the
fourth point D falls in an area marked RQ. It does not seem intuitively obvious
that the regions marked RQ have the same mean area, but this fact can be shown
by the following considerations. If the fourth point falls in the topmost region
marked RQ then the point B will be the re-entrant vertex of the quadrilateral. If
the fourth point falls in the central region marked RQ, it will itself be the
re-entrant vertex of the quadrilateral. Each one of the random points is equally
likely to be the re-entrant vertex of the quadrilateral. Thus the mean areas of the
regions marked RQ must be the same. There are two areas marked RQ on each
side of the line AB. Thus the probability is \ that the fourth point D falls on the

CROFTON'S THEOREM AND SYLVESTER'S PROBLEM 
115
opposite side of the line AB from the third point C. Hence the probability that C
and D fall on opposite sides of the line AB is
Pr [opposite sides of AB} = Pr [opposite sides convex] Pr [convex]
+Pr [opposite sides [re-entrant] Pr [re-entrant]
where Pr [RQ], the probability of a re-entrant quadrilateral being formed from
four random points in a convex region, is the solution of the Sylvester four point
problem.
We have just shown that if K is any convex region and d, Q2, O.i, and Q4 are
four random points in K, the probability Pr [RQ] that the four points form a
re-entrant quadrilateral satisfies the relation
where Pr [same side of QiQ2] denotes the probability that Q3 and Q4 fall on the
same side of the line OiOi-
To evaluate Pr [same side of QiC?2], suppose the line QiC?2 has direction 6
and distance p from some origin. This line splits the area A of K into two
sections with areas, say, cr(p, 0) and cr'(p, 6). If/(p, d) is the joint density of the
random variables p and 0, then
which, by the symmetry between the roles of cr(p, 0) and cr'(p, d), reduces to
We shall obtain f(p, 6} as the limit as Ap -> 0 and A<? -» 0 of (A0 Ap)"1 times the
probability that the line QiQ2 has direction between 6 and 0 + A0 and distance
between p and p + Ap from the origin. For any given position of Q\, the line
joining d and Q2 has a direction between 6 and 6 + A0 if and only if Q2 falls in
the shaded region shown in Fig. 5.9. This happens with probability

116
CHAPTER 5
FIG. 5.9
Integrating this expression over a uniform probability distribution for all posi-
tions of Qi in the shaded strip in Fig. 5.10, and multiplying by the probability
that Qi falls in the strip (c(p, 6) Ap/A), we get
FIG. 5.10

CROFTON'S THEOREM AND SYLVESTER'S PROBLEM 
117
Thus
and
Calculating Pr [RQ] from Pr [same side of QiQ2], we obtain the following:
THEOREM. Three points are taken at random in a convex region K with area A.
The mean area of the triangle formed by these three points is
where 6 and p are the parameters of a line intersecting K, c(p, 0) is the chord length
of that line within K, and a(p, 6) is the area in K on one side of the line. If a fourth
point is taken at random in K, the probability that the four random points form a
re-entrant quadrilateral is
Sylvester's problem in three dimensions. Results analogous to those presented
in the preceding section were obtained by Bohnslav Hostinsky (1925) for the
three dimensional analogue to Sylvester's problem. Consider five points Qi, Q2,
Q3, Q4 and Qs independently and uniformly distributed over the volume of a
convex region K in three-dimensional space. What is the probability that one of
the points falls within the tetrahedron formed by the other four points? To
obtain an expression for this probability, we shall trace Hostinsky's steps and
shall first derive the probability that Q4 and Qs fall on the same side of the plane
passing through Q\, Q2 and Q3.
To calculate this integral, let us change our variables of integration from
to the new variables
where
and u, v and w are the parameters of the plane
passing through the points Oi, Q2 and Q3. In other words, u, v and w are the

118
CHAPTER 5
It is a well-known fact in analytical geometry that the area of a triangle whose
vertices are (x[, y{),'(*2, yO and (xj, ys) is
Thus our element of integration dx\ dy\ dz\ • • • dx3 dy3 dz3 becomes
where Ap is the area projected onto the X-Y plane by the triangle QiQ2C?3.
Multiplying and dividing by (u2 + v2 + w2)2, we have
We note that du dv dw/(u2 + v2 + w2)2 is the density for planes in space which is
invariant under rigid motions of the coordinate axes. We can rewrite this density
as sin <p dp d<p d6 where (p, <p, 6) are the spherical coordinates of the closest point
on the plane to the origin.
Then
solution of the linear system of equations
The Jacobian of this transformation reduces to
which, in turn, reduces to

CROFTON'S THEOREM AND SYLVESTER'S PROBLEM
119
Since <p is the angle between the normal to the plane and the z-axis, we see from
Fig. 5.11 that any increment d(dy of area on the plane projects onto the x-y
plane as dx dy/cos <p. Thus our element of integration
where A is the area of the triangle QiC^Qai P, <p, and 6 are the coordinates of
the plane determined by Qi, G>2, and Q$; and ^ and y^ are the coordinates of
the point Qk (k = 1,2, 3) with respect to a system of coordinates situated in the
plane QiQzQj.
FIG. 5.11
The plane QiC?2C?3 cuts K into two parts with volumes, say, 2, and 2,'. The
measure of all positions of Q4 and Q5 such that they fall on the same side of the
plane QiC?2C?3 is
and, since dx \dy\- •• dz3 is

120 
CHAPTER 5
the probability that Q* and Qs fall on the same side of the plane QiC^Qa can be
written (where P denotes the probability)
P[same side of QiQ2Q3]
where dw denotes the increment in solid angle sin <p d(p dO.
The value of S2 + S'2 depends only on the position of the plane QiC?2(?3. In
other words, the term (£2+2'2) can be factored out of the integrations with
respect to d& and dyt. The integral
is just A3/? (A), where £(A) is the mean area of a triangle formed by three
random points in the area A of the convex section of the plane OiOiOs within
K. We have already obtained a formula for £"(A), namely
where a is the area of one of the parts into which the area A is divided by the
line (q, $), and c is the length of that line within the area A. The integration is
extended over all secants of the area A. Hence we have
where the integrations with respect to q and </r extend over all lines in the plane
(p, <p, Q) which hit the curve of intersection of that plane with K, and the
integrations with respect to the coordinates of this plane extend over all planes
cutting K.
We shall now proceed to find the mean volume of the tetrahedron T formed
by four points Qi, Q2, Os and (?4 taken at random within K.
The planes containing the faces of the tetrahedron T divide the volume V of
K into 15 parts. A first part T0 is formed by the interior of the tetrahedron T. In
order to designate the other parts, let T, represent the plane containing the face
of T opposite the vertex Q,, and define the negative side of T, to be the side on
which the vertex Q, is situated. For any permutation (i, /, k, m) of (1, 2, 3,4), we
denote by Tf the part of K on the positive side of r, and on the negative sides of
TJ, Tk, and rm; by Ty the part of K on the positive sides of T, and T, and negative

CROFTON'S THEOREM AND SYLVESTER'S PROBLEM
121
sides of rk and rm; and by Tiik the part of K on the positive sides of T,, T, and rk
and the negative sides of rm. Using this notation, we can list the 15 parts of K
(5.107)
TO', 
TI, T2, TI, T4; Ti2, 723, TSI, TH, T24, T^\ 
T\T.T>, T\u, Tm, TW-
If a fifth point is taken at random in K, designate by p0, Pi, Pa or pik the
probabilities that the fifth point falls in T0, T), Tit or Tiik, respectively. By
symmetry, we have
and, since the fifth point must fall in one of the 15 sections of K,
Let O4 be a fifth random point in K, and let U be the tetrahedron with vertices
Oi, O2, C?3 and O5. The volume of K is divided by the planes of the faces of the
tetrahedron U into 15 parts which we can represent
where C7,, f/;/, and Uiik are defined analogously to Ti} Ttj and 7^yfc.
We can obtain relations between the t/'s and T's in the following way. From
Fig. 5.12 we see that if Q4 and Q5 are on the same side of the plane OiOaOs,
then Q5 and d fall on opposite sides of the plane Q2Q^Q4 if and only if O4 and
Oi fall on the same side of the plane C^QsQs. By symmetry, the same statement
is true with Q\ interchanged with Q2 or Q3. Hence Q5 is in T123 (i.e., on the
opposite side of QiC^C^t from Qi, the opposite side of QiC?3<24 from O2, the
opposite side of QiC?2C?4 from Q3 and the same side of Q\Q2Q3 as O4) if and
only if Q4 is in U0 (i.e., on the same side of Q2Q^Qs as Qi, the same side of
FIG. 5.12

122 
CHAPTER 5
OiOaOs as Q2, the same side of QiQ2Qs as Q3 and the same side of QiQiQj as
Q4). Thus
Similarly Qs is in TI (on the opposite side of Q2QiQ* from Qi, the same side
of QiQjQ* as (?2> the same side of QiQ2Q4 as Q3, and the same side of
QiQ2Q3 as Q4). Thus
Since the indices are interchangeable,
and, since by symmetry p3 = p1; we have
Combining the three equations
we get
The points Q4 and Q5 fall on the same side of the plane OiQ2O3 if and only if
Qs falls on the negative side of the plane r4, i.e., if and only if Q5 falls in a region
Tt, TIJ or Tiik where neither / nor j nor fe equals four. Thus
Eliminating pi from the last two equations, we get
which, together with our expression for Ffsame side of QiC^Qs], leads to:
THEOREM. The mean volume of the tetrahedron whose vertices are four random
points in a convex region K of volume V is
where A is the area of the intersection of K with the plane having coordinates
(p, w) [i.e., (p, tf>, 8)], E(A) is the mean area of a triangle formed by three random
points in that area, 1- and £' are the volumes of the parts into which the plane
divides K, and the integrations over dp dw extend over all planes intersecting K. In

CROFTON'S THEOREM AND SYLVESTER'S PROBLEM 
123
the second expression c is the length of intersection of the area A with a line having
coordinates (q, &) in the plane (p, w), a is the area within A on one side of (hat
line, and the integrations over dq d\l> cover all lines in the plane (p) which intersect
K. If five random points are taken within K, the probability that any one of the five
points falls within the tetrahedron formed by the other four is
(where RP denotes re-entrant polyhedron).
We can apply these general results to the case where the region K is a sphere
of radius r. A plane at distance p from the center of the sphere intersects the
sphere in a circle of radius vV2-p2 and area
From our discussion of Sylvester's problem for random points in a circle, we
recall that the mean area of a triangle formed by three random points in a circle
is 35/(487r) times the square of the radius of the circle. Thus for three random
points on the circle of intersection of the sphere with the plane at distance p from
the sphere's center, the mean area of the triangle formed is
The volume 1. in the sphere on the side of the plane, say, away from the
sphere's center is
Thus
and the formula

124 
CHAPTER 5
becomes
Thus when K is a sphere, the mean volume of the tetrahedron formed by four
random points in K is
and the probability that five random points in a sphere form a re-entrant
polyhedron is
For convex regions other than the sphere, Hostinsky's formula for P[RP] does
not seem to be tractable. Explicit values of P[RP] for random points in non-
spherical regions such as tetrahedrons, parallelepipeds, etc., have apparently not
yet been successfully calculated. On the other hand, from the relation
we have
In other words, the mean volume of the tetrahedron whose vertices are four
random points in K is less than one fifth the total volume of K, no matter what
shape K has (so long as it is convex).
It should also be noted that the above bound on p0 and the relation
yield the bounds
regardless of the shape of K.
For the case of four random points being taken in a convex region K on the
place, Sylvester conjectured and Alikoski proved that the probability P[RQ]

CROFTON'S THEOREM AND SYLVESTER'S PROBLEM 
125
that the four points form a re-entrant quadrilateral is minimized when K is a
circle and maximized when K is a triangle. The analogous conjecture for the
three-dimensional problem is that the probability F[RP] that five random points
in K form a re-entrant polyhedron is minimized when K is a sphere and
maximized when K is a tetrahedron. This conjecture remains unproven.
Kingman (1969) considers a generalization of Sylvester's problem in n
dimensions. If n + 2 points are chosen independently at random inside K, then
the convex hull of these points is a convex polytope with either n +1 or n + 2
vertices. We want to know the probability of its having n +1 vertices. This
probability is (n + 2)E{&(x0, x\, • • ' , xn)}/V, where A(*o,*i, • • • , * „ ) is the
volume of the convex polytope formed by the points XQ, • • • , xn. In particular, it
is found that for an n -dimensional ball,
If we substitute n = 3, it follows that the probability that the convex hull of five
points chosen uniformly inside a sphere has four vertices, is 9/143 and confirms
the Hostinsky result in three dimensions for the sphere.

This page intentionally left blank 

CHAPTER 6
Random Chords in the Circle and the Sphere
Techniques have recently been developed whereby cells in mitosis may be
photographed. For the normal human cell the resulting picture, called a
karyograph, displays 22 pairs of like chromosomes plus two sex chromosomes,
like in the female and unlike in the male. See Fig. 6.1. Abnormal cells may have
more or less chromosomes than these. The positions of the chromosomes on a
karyograph present an interesting problem in geometrical probability; namely,
to what extent is the position of each member of a pair of chromosomes random
in the cell nucleus with respect to the other member of the pair. For example, are
the chromosomes of a pair located closer to each other in general than would be
two points randomly dropped in the cell nucleus? This latter question was
investigated by Barton, David and Fix (1963), who used data from 70 kary-
ographs to test the hypothesis that the chromosomes of a pair are randomly
distributed within the picture of the cell nucleus versus the alternative hypothesis
that there is a force of mutual attraction (or repulsion) between the two
chromosomes in each pair.
FIG. 6.1
127

128 
CHAPTER 6
To retrace the analysis done by Barton, David and Fix, we shall need to
derive the distribution of the distance between two points randomly dropped on
a picture of a cell nucleus. For simplicity we will assume the boundary of the cell
nucleus in a karyograph is a circle. Actually the nucleus is only approximately
spherical and its boundary often appears to the camera more like an ellipse. We
shall make some allowances for this ellipticity later on in our analysis, but for the
momemt we shall assume the boundary is a circle and shall derive the probability
density function of the distance, x, between two points randomly dropped on a
circle of radius R. Let P denote the probability that the two points are separated
by a distance between x and x + Ax. Let PI denote the same probability when
one of the points is known to be on the circumference of the circle. Then by
Crofton's fixed point theorem we have
where V in this case is the area of the circle, that is, V = Tj-R2 and dV = ITJ-R dR.
We see from Fig. 6.2 that when one point is on the circumference, the second
point must fall in a section of an annulus (shaded in Fig. 6.2) for the two points to
be separated by a distance between x and x + Ax. For infinitesimal Ax, the area
of this annulus section is 2<frx Ax, where 0 can be seen from the figure to be
cos"1 (x/(2R)). Hence the probability that the points are separated by a distance
between x and x + Ax is
Substituting into Crofton's formula we have
Rearranging terms we get
and multiplying both sides by R*, we get
and integrating both sides, we obtain
where C is a constant to be determined. For R = x/2, the two random points

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE 
129
would have to fall on the circumference diametrically across the circle from each
other. This is, of course, a zero probability event. Thus when R = x/2, p = 0.
This implies C = 0. Thus we have derived the probability density for the distance
between two random points dropped in a circle:
This is the density of x under the null hypothesis (randomness).
T<
first point
Fio. 6.2
For the alternative hypothesis we suppose there is a force of attraction (or
repulsion) between the chromosomes of a pair. We shall describe this force in
terms of its effect on the distribution of x, namely that the force skews the null
hypothesis density, p(x |Ho), by a factor of xa for some power a > —2. Thus the
density of x under the alternative hypothesis, HI, is
In order that p(x HI) integrate to unity we must take for the value of K
where J3(a, b) denotes the Beta function, Y(a)Y(b)/Y(a + b). Thus
Negative values of a shift the density to lower values of x; that is, negative
values of a correspond to a force of attraction and positive values of a to a force
of repulsion between the chromosomes of a pair.

130 
CHAPTER 6
Suppose n pairs of points are dropped with the same force of attraction
between the members of each pair but with the members of different pairs
independent of each other. Let us define
where xt denotes the distance between members of the /th pair. From our
expressions for p(x |H0) and p(x |Hi) we get
Thus we have
where Kr is the rth cumulant. Now
For the values of n which we are considering (23 for each karyograph), the
standardized cumulants of D of order three and above are sufficiently small
under both H0 and HI that the distributions of D under H0 and HI can be
approximated by normal distributions with the means and variances given
above. For example when a = 1, we get ji = 0.5154«"1/2, y2 = -0.5277n^1 for n
reasonably large. Yet the normal approximation may be inadequate when a =
— 1, for then yi = 1.7612n~1/2, y2 = 2.9345«~! and are not that close to zero.
One advantage of making this normal approximation is that it reduces the
amount of work necessary to investigate the effect of noncircularity of the
nuclear walls. Since the normal distribution is completely specified by its mean

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE
131
and variance, we need only investigate the effects on the first two moments when
the boundary is an ellipse and not necessarily circular.
Fro. 6.3
Consider an ellipse of area -irR2 (i.e., the same area as a circle of radius R) and
let p (0<p < 1) be the ratio of the smaller to the larger axis. This ellipse can be
regarded as the result of a scaling down in one direction, by a factor p, of a circle
of radius R/vp, the direction being that of the minor axis of the resultant ellipse.
Any pair of points A' and B' separated by a distance x' in the ellipse will have
arisen from two points A and B separated by some distance x in the circle (see
Fig. 6.3). Define 6 as the angle between the line AB and the direction which is
scaled down when we transform the circle into the ellipse. Suppose points A and
B have fallen in the circle either randomly (H0) or with an attraction or repulsion
between them (Hi). Then all values of 6 between 0 and v are equally likely
under both HO and HI. The transformation from the circle to the ellipse leaves
the component of x parallel to the major axis unchanged, while the component
parallel to the minor axis is multiplied by a factor of p. Thus we have
Since cos2' 0 sin2fc~2' 8 is symmetric about ir/2, we need integrate only from 0 to
7T/2.

132 
CHAPTER 6
Thus for fc = 1 and k = 2 we get
For a circle of radius R we have already obtained
But the circle in which the points A and B are dropped has radius R/vp. If we
replace R by R/Jp in the above expressions for E[x2|H0], E[x2|Hi], £l[x4|H0]
and £[jt4|Hi] and substitute these results into our expressions for E[x'2] and
E[x'4] we get
Hence, if n pairs of points fall in an ellipse with major axis R/vp and minor axis
Vp R (that is, an ellipse whose axes have the ratio p (0 < p < 1) and whose area is
the same as that of a circle of radius R) and if
where */ is the distance between members of the /th pair, then

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE 
133
Using normal approximations with the above means and variances for the
distributions of D' under H0 and HI together with data from 70 karyographs,
Barton, David and Fix found that the random hypothesis is tenable for normal
male cells and for abnormal male and female cells. On the other hand the
random hypothesis is not tenable for normal female cells. The maximum likeli-
hood estimator for a in that case is typically -.4 or -.5 indicating an attraction
between chromosomes of homologous pairs in the normal female cell.
One question still to be investigated is whether the results of the randomiza-
tion model used in the above analysis (points random in a circle) would differ
very much from the results of a randomization model in which the points are
random within the volume of a sphere and are then projected onto a plane, thus
yielding a different kind of "random" points in a circle. This latter model would
seem to better reproduce the physical condition of the three dimensional cell
nucleus projected by the camera into the two dimensional karyograph. Since this
latter model would tend to cluster the "random" points closer to the center of
the circle, we might find that the randomness hypothesis under this latter
randomization model would be tenable for normal female cells as well as the
male and abnormal cells.
Random chords in the circle. Another approach to the chromosome problem
is to study the lines joining the chromosomes of each pair and see whether the
number of intersections of these lines within the nucleus wall could have arisen
through some random mechanism. This approach was taken by David and Fix
(1964). For simplicity the nucleus is taken to be circle of unit radius. Each line
drawn through a homologous pair of chromosomes forms a chord of our circular
nucleus. For the chromosome problem there are 23 such chords, but for
generality we shall suppose we have n chords in a circle. The maximum number
of intersections which these chords make within the circle is ( j, that is, every
chord intersects every other chord within the circle, and ( 
I is the number of
pairs of chords which can be formed from a set of n chords. It is a feature of the
chords drawn through the chromosomes of homologous pairs that the number of
intersections within the circle averages about 80% of ( 
J. We want to know
whether 80% of (j 
is a typical number of intersections for random chords
generated by some randomization model which is consistent with the physical
set-up. We shall consider six different randomization models by which random
chords in a circle can be formed. For each of these models we shall derive the
mean and variance of the random variable r, the total number of intersections
within the circle between the n chords. Another way of measuring how
frequently the random chords intersect within the circle is to count the number
of intersections, w, which the n random chords make within the circle with an

134 
CHAPTER 6
additional random chord placed in the circle according to the same random
mechanism as the other n chords. We shall find the mean and variance of w as
well as r for each of our randomization models.
Define a random variable <*„• to be the indicator function of the event that the
/th and /th chords intersect within the circle, that is,
Clearly, E(a,;) is just the probability that two particular chords intersect within
the circle. We can represent w, the number of intersections with one particular
chord (say chord O), as
and
The other random variable of interest, r, the total number of intersections within
the circle, can be written
so that we have

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE
135
Since a,/ and akm are independent random variables when none of the indices
are the same, we have
Thus in order to evaluate the first two moments of w and r we need only
evaluate £(«,,), the probability that two random chords intersect within the
circle, and JE^ai/a,*), j ^ k, the probability that two random chords each intersect
a third random chord within the circle.
To derive the probability that two chords intersect within the circle, we shall
first derive the probability that two chords of given lengths intersect within the
circle. The most convenient parameter by which to specify the length of a chord
is half the angle subtended by the chord (0 in Fig. 6.4). Since our circle has unit
radius, the arc intercepted by the chord has length 26.
FIG. 6.4
Suppose we have two chords with half angles 0i and 62 and suppose B\ > 62.
Once chord 1 has been placed, chord 2 will intersect chord 1 if and only if either
the counter-clockwise endpoint of chord 2 falls in shaded region A (see Fig. 6.5)
or the clockwise endpoint of chord 2 falls in shaded region B. Each of these
events has probability 202/(27r). Since 6z<B\, it is impossible for both events to
happen simultaneously. Hence

136
CHAPTER 6
FIG. 6.5
Thus we have obtained
or, in terms of ai2, we have
We can calculate E(oti2) by integrating the above expression
where /(#) is the probability density function of the random variable 6 (i.e.
(A0) * times the probability that the random chord will have a half angle
between 6 and 0 + A0 for infinitesimal A0).
For the second moments of w and r we must calculate E (a 121*13). When the
lengths of chords 1, 2 and 3 are known (equivalently, for given #1, 62 and 03), the
event that chords 1 and 2 intersect within the circle is independent of the event
that chords 1 and 3 intersect within the circle. Thus we can write

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE 
137
and
Clearly f(B) depends on what randomization model we use to define a "ran-
dom chord." We shall now consider six randomization models and derive the
probability density /(#) for each model. Then we shall be able to calculate E(atj),
EfaijOtik), 
;' ^ k, and the first two moments of w and r for comparison with
observed values taken from karyographs. The first five models appear in David
and Fix (1964) and the last model is developed by Dufour.
Model I. The simplest randomization model is to specify each chord by its
endpoints, which we take to be uniformly and independently distributed over the
circumference of the circle. The density of 0 is, for infinitesimal A0 the proba-
bility of the event that half the angle subtended by the chord is between 0 and
0 + A0, or, equivalently, of the event that the arc intercepted by the chord has
length between 26 and 20 + 2 A0. (See Fig. 6.6.) This event occurs if and only if
the chord's second endpoint falls at a distance between 26 and 26 + 2 A0 along
the circle from the first endpoint. Since there are two such infinitesimal arcs
where the second endpoint can fall (see Fig. 6.7) and each arc has length 2 A#,
the probability of this event is

138
CHAPTER 6
FIG. 6.6
FIG. 6.7
Model II. Any chord of a circle (except a diameter) is completely specified by
the length and direction of the line segment from the center of the circle to the
midpoint of the chord. For this randomization model let the length, p, of this line
segment be uniformly distributed on [0,1] and let the angle <£ which this line

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE
139
FIG. 6.8a
FIG. 6.8b
segment makes with some axis be uniformly distributed on [0, 2ir\. (See Fig.
6.8a.) A chord will intercept an arc of half angle between 0 and 0 + A0 if and
only if p falls between cos (6 + A0) and cos 0 (see Fig. 6.8b). The probability of
this event is cos (#)-cos (0 + A0) which is approximately sin(0)A0 for very
small Aft Thus in this case the density of 6 is
Model III. For this model suppose that a point is dropped at random in
the circle and the chord is drawn which has this point as its midpoint, that
is, the chord is drawn perpendicular to the line joining the random point with
the center of the circle. (If the perpendicular to the chord from the center of the
circle has length p and makes an angle $ with some prescribed axis, then the
joint density function of p and (f> is (1 /ir)pdp d<f>, O^p^ 1, OS$^27r.)Then a
chord will intercept an arc of half angle between 6 and 0 + A# if and only if its
midpoint falls in the annulus between the circles of radius cos 0 and cos (6 + A0)
(see Fig. 6.9). The probability of this event is w[cos2 0-cos2 (0 + A#)]/7r which,
for infinitesimal A0, is 2 cos 6 sin 0 A0. Thus
Model IV. Let us now define a random chord by dropping a point at random
in the circle and drawing a chord through that point in a randomly chosen
direction. Suppose the random point falls at a distance between x and x + kx
from the center of the circle. This event has a probability equal to the area of an
annulus of radius x and width AJC, divided by the total area of the circle, that is,
2-rrx Ax/7T or 2x Ax. Thus the density of x is 2x for OSx^ 1. Given that the
random point falls at a distance x from the center of the circle, the random chord
intercepts an arc of half angle between 6 and 0 + A0 if and only if the random
chord falls in one of the shaded regions A and B shown in Fig. 6.10, that is, if
and only if the random direction falls between two chords which intercept arcs of
20 and 26 + 2 A0 and which cross at a distance x from the center of the circle.

140
CHAPTER 6
The region B in Fig. 6.10 is just a reflection of region A. Therefore the total
angular measure of the region A \JB about the random point is just twice the
angle A/3 of the region A. Thus the probability which we seek is just 2 A/3/7T. The
two arcs Si and $2 in Fig. 6.10 must satisfy
The relation between si, $2 and A/8 is evident from a more detailed version of
Fig. 6.10. First it should be noted that the shorter chord makes an angle 6 with
the circle. For small A0 the longer chord is almost coincident with the shorter
chord and it makes an angle approximately B with the circle. Thus the width at
the top of the region A is approximately $1 sin 6 when A0 is very small. This
width can also be written as A/3 times the distance from the random point to the
FIG.6.10

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE
141
top of the region A. (See Fig. 6.11.) Thus we have approximately (exactly for
infinitesimal A0)
and similarly
Solving for s\ and $2 and substituting into Si — s2 = 2 A# we get
which yields
Given that the random point falls at distance x from the center of the circle, the
probability that the random chord intercepts an arc of half angle between 6 and
0 + A0 is 2 A/8/ TT or
FIG.6.11

142 
CHAPTER 6
The unconditional probability is obtained by integrating the above expression
over the density of x. We have shown that the density of x is 2x for OSx S= 1.
Note that we need integrate only from x = cos 6 to x = 1 since it is impossible for
a chord to intercept an arc of half angle 0 if any point on the chord is closer than
cos 6 to the center of the circle. Thus
Hence for infinitesimal A0 we have
Model V. For the fifth randomization model let us generate our random
chord by dropping two points randomly within the circle and drawing a chord
through both points. The derivation of f(0) for this model is very similar to that
for the previous model. The density of the distance x from the first random point
to the center of the circle is, as before, 2x. Given that the first point is at distance
x from the center of the circle, the second random point must fall in the region
A U B as defined for the previous model in order that the chord joining the two
points intercepts an arc of half angle between 6 and 0 + A0. The difference
between this and the previous model is that there our probability was the total
angular measure of A(JB divided by 2ir, whereas here our probability is the
total area of A (JB over the area of the circle, IT, The area of a wedge shaped
region of radius R and angle y is \R2y. (See Fig. 6.12.) Thus the area of the
region A is (except for terms of order (A0)2)
The probability that the second random point falls in the region A U B is
As in the previous model we have
Hence, given that the first random point falls at distance x from the center of the

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE 
143
circle, the probability that the chord going through the two random points
intercepts an arc of half angle between 6 and 6 + A0 is
and, as in the previous model
Dividing by A0 and letting A0 become infinitesimal we get
Model VI. The randomization model which is perhaps most applicable to the
distribution of chromosomes in a cell nucleus is the following. Consider the
nucleus to be a sphere of unit radius, let two points be placed at random inside
the sphere and project these two points onto a plane passing through the center
of the sphere. The sphere projects onto the plane as a circle of unit radius and
the two projected points in this circle determine a random chord as in the

144 
CHAPTER 6
previous model. This model is an attempt to take into account the fact that the
camera projects the three-dimensional cell nucleus onto a two dimensional
picture. Our method of obtaining f(Q) for this model will be very similar to that
used for the previous two models. The first random point in the sphere must fall
in a cylindrical shell of radius x, thickness Ax and length 2v 1 -x2 (see Fig. 6.13)
in order that its projection lie at a distance between x and x + Ax from the center
of the circle. The probability of this event is the ratio of the volume of the
cylindrical shell to the volume of the sphere, namely
Thus dividing by Ax and letting Ax become infinitesimal, we find that the
probability density of x, the distance from the projection of the first random
point to the center of the circle, is 3xVl-x2. Now suppose the first projected
point falls at distance x from the center of the circle. Our random chord will
intercept an arc of half angle between 0 and 6 + A0 if and only if the projection
of the second random point falls in the region A U B described for Model IV.
Thus the probability that we seek is just the volume of the sphere directly above
and below the region A \JB divided by the total volume of the sphere, ITT. By
symmetry the volume above and below A U B is twice the volume above and
below A. We shall get the volume above and below the region A by considering
elements of area in A which are at a distance between 17 and 77 + AT/ from the
center of the circle (see Fig. 6.14a). For each value of rj there are two arcs whose
lengths we shall call Afi and Af2 such that these arcs comprise the points in A at
distance 17 from the center of the circle. Similarly, the two thin strips of length
A?i and A/2 in Fig. 6.14a contain all the points in A at distance between rj and
FIG. 6.13

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE
145
TJ + ATJ from the center of the circle. The volume in the sphere above and below
these strips is just the area of the two strips times twice the height of the surface
of the sphere above the strips, i.e., [Afi + A?2] AT7(2Vl-T72). We must now
obtain expressions for Af i and A?2 in terms of TJ. For brevity let p = cos 0, the
distance from the center of the circle to the shorter of the two chords making up
the boundary of the region A. As before, let A/3 denote the angle between these
two chords. Let us consider the arc Awi as shown in Fig. 6.14b.
The length of AH^ is
For every small A/i and Awt these arcs can be assumed linear and by the same
argument as used in Model IV to show that the width at the rop of the region A
is si sin 6 we see that
where i// is defined in Fig. 6.14b (<A = cos ' (p/rj)). Equating our two expressions
FIG.6.14
FIG.6.14

146
CHAPTER 6
for Awi and solving for Afi we get
In the same manner we obtain
so that
The volume of that portion of the sphere which is projected onto the two strips
Afi and Af2 is
Volume projected on Afi and Af2 = 2[A/i + Af2]^l-Tj2 ATJ
If we now take AT/ to be infinitesimal and integrate over all values of 17 between
p and 1 we get the total volume of the portion of the sphere which is projected
onto the region A (except for terms of order (A/3)2)
Volume projected onto A
As in the previous two models we have

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE 
147
Thus
Volume projected onto A
Given the distance x of the first projected point from the center of the circle, the
probability that our random chord intercepts an arc of half angle between 0 and
6 +&6 is
As in the previous two models we now integrate over the density of x from cos 6
(which we are calling p) to 1. Remember that in this case the density of x is
3W1-*2.
Hence for our final randomization model
We are indebted to Dr. William A. Visscher2 for the following way of developing
f(6) for Models V and VI.
2 Dr. Visscher of Los Alamos Laboratories attended the Lecture Series at the University of Nevada
and submitted the derivation above by letter very shortly after the lectures terminated.

148
CHAPTER 6
Take 2 points at random uniformly in an n -dimensional sphere of unit radius.
Project the straight line connecting them onto a circular projection of the sphere.
What is the distribution of lengths of chords thus found?
DEFINITIONS. (plt <pi), (p2, $2) are projections onto the circle of the two
random points in «-dimensional spheres. One can read from Fig. 6.15 that
i.e. for each value of (6, pi, p2) there are either two values of <p (see dashed line)
or none (if p2 = min (pi, p2)<cos 8). The density function for cos & is then
where C is the solution of (6.49) for cos 6, and E means averaging the 2 value
points over the n -sphere volume. By construction we have J0 /(cos 6) d cos 0 =
1. The volume integral in n-dimensions is
where the volume of a sphere in n-dimensions is
FIG. 6.15

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE
Equation (6.50) then becomes
149
and the integral over <p can be done, using
after the effect of 2 values of tp for each & is accounted for. With (6.54) inserted
into (6.52), and the pi, p2 integral split into p2<p\ and p2>pi parts which give
equal contributions, the integration is straightforward and gives
We now use the above expressions for /(#) to calculate E(w), Var (w), E(r)
and Var (r) for each of our randomization models. For example, for Model I we
have

150 
CHAPTER 6
Thus the expected number of intersections within the circle between n random
chords and an additional random chord is
and the expected total number of intersections between the n random chords for
Model I is
To get the second moments of w and r for Model I we calculate
Hence substituting into our equation
Our expression for the second moment of r
yields
and
we get
and

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE 
151
The calculation of the first two moments of w and r for the other five ran-
domization models can be carried out in exactly the same manner as for Model I
above. The results of these calculations are summarized in Table 4.
The column of primary interest in this table is the column containing the
values of -E(ai;), the probability that two particular chords intersect within the
circle. As was remarked earlier, it is a feature of chromosomes that the chords
joining homologous pairs intersect about 80% of the time, that is, Efaj) for the
chords joining homologous pairs of chromosomes is about .8. No randomization
model we have looked at gives such a high value. Model VJ is closest with the
value of .728. We could easily devise a model, for example with /(#) =
(512/(637r)) sin10 6, which would give a value of approximately .8 for E(a,/), but
it is doubtful whether we could justify such a model on the basis of the physical
set-up. The pairs of chromosomes seem to be balanced with respect to the center
of the circle, thus causing the chords drawn through the pairs to intersect more
often than if the members of each pair were random with respect to each other
and the center of the circle.
More results on random chords. We can derive additional results concerning
the intersections of random chords for several of the randomization models
which we considered above. For Model I, for example, where the random chord
is determined by two points independently and randomly placed on the circum-
ference, a simpler derivation of E(a\2) was given by W. A. Whitworth in Choice
and Chance (1897). Not only is Whitworth's method simpler, but it applies to
random chords in any convex region, and it yields the probability mass function
of tv, the number of intersections between n random chords and an additional
random chord. For this approach we shall normalize the circumference of our
convex region to be unity.
First we shall derive E(ai2), the probability that two random chords intersect
within the convex region. Let the first chord intercept an arc of length x. Then x
is uniformly distributed on [0,1]. The two chords intersect if one of the end-
points of the second chord falls on the arc of length x and the other falls on the
remainder of the circle (of length 1 —x). There are two ways this event can
happen, namely, the first endpoint can fall on the arc of length x and the second
outside, or vice versa. Thus we have
and
which agrees with the result for the circle by our previous method. It is
interesting to note that for this randomization model E(ai2) is independent of
the shape of the convex region.
£(«i2«i3) is equally easy to derive by Whitworth's method. Given that chord
1 intercepts an arc of length x, the event that chord 2 intersects chord 1 is

TABLE 4
Model
I
II
HI
IV
Method of
determining
random chord
Two random
points on
circumferenc
Uniform
distance
to origin
and uniform
angle with
axes
(±dp*p)
Midpoint
random
in the
circle
(— pdpd<p\
One random
point in the
circle and
a random
direction
e

TABLE 4 (cont.)
v
points in
the circle
points in
a sphere
projected
onto the
plane
Two random
Two random
VI

154 
CHAPTER 6
independent of the event that chord 3 intersects chord 1. Each of these events
has a probability of 2x(\ - x). Thus
and
as before.
With this same approach we can obtain the probability mass function of w, the
number of chords intersecting one particular chord, which we shall call C. If
C intercepts an arc of length x (Os=;tgl), the probability of another chord
intersecting C is, as before, 2x(l-x). The probability of another chord not
intersecting C is i-2x(\-x), which can be written as x2 + (l-x)2. Thus the
probability that among n random chords exactly w of them intersect C is
The probability that, regardless of the length x of the arc intercepted by C,
exactly w chords intersect C is
Another form of this expression given by David and Fix (1964) is
It is rather surprising that the distribution of w is totally unaffected by the shape
of the convex region.
The probability mass function of r is not known at present except for a few
special values of r when the random chords are defined as in Model I. The values
of P[r = 0], P[r = 1], P[r = (n(n - l)/2)- 1] and P[r = n(n -1)/2] for Model I
were derived by Whitworth. The key to the derivation is illustrated in Fig. 6.16
below.
The two regions have different shapes and the endpoints of the chords are
spaced differently on the perimeters of the regions. On the other hand the

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE
155
FIG. 6.16
configurations of the chords in the two regions are identical in a certain sense;
namely, the order of the endpoints around the perimeter is 3, 1, 2, 4, 3, 4, 1, 2
for both regions. Clearly the number of intersections, r, is completely deter-
mined by the order of the endpoints around the perimeter and is unaffected by
the shape of the convex region or the spacing of the endpoints on the perimeter.
Thus without loss of generality we can fix 2n points on the perimeter of the
region to be the endpoints of the chords. Under Model I each pair of points is
equally likely to be connected by a chord. (This is not true for any of the other
randomization models.) Thus we can compute P[r = /] by finding the number of
ways our In points can be connected forming chords with / intersections and
dividing this number by the total number of ways the 2n points can be joined to
form n chords.
First we shall derive the number of ways that 2n points on the circumference
of a closed convex curve can be connected to form n chords. From the first given
point we can draw a chord in 2n — 1 ways, from the next point in 2n — 3 ways
(since the first chord used up two points), from the next in 2n — 5 ways, and so
on. Hence the number of ways is
We shall now derive P[r = 0], Let an denote the number of ways that 2n
points on a closed convex curve can be connected to form n chords with no
intersections within the region. Clearly a\ = \. Any chord must divide the
remaining 2n - 2 points so that an even number remain on either side, say 2k on
the left side and 2n - 2k — 2 on the right side. The 2k points on the left can then

156 
CHAPTER 6
be joined to form k nonintersecting chords in Ok ways, and the In - 2k - 2
points on the right can be joined to form n—k — 1 nonintersecting chords in
an~k-i ways. Thus if the first chord leaves 2k points on its left side, the
remaining chords can be drawn in akan-k~i ways. (If k = 0 or k = n — 1 then all of
the remaining chords are on one side of the first chord and they can be drawn in
an-i ways.) Since k can have any value from 0 to n -1 we have for n > 1
The expression on the right hand side is the coefficient of x"~l in the power
series (1 + a\x 4-a2x2 + • • -)2. Therefore
Let 5 denote (1 + a\x + a2x2 + • • •)• Then the above equation can be written
The solution is
We shall choose the minus sign as the plus sign yields a nonsensical answer. The
series expansion for Vl —4x is
The coefficient of *" in this expansion is (for n ^ 2)

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE 
157
Hence
Substituting in the definition of 5 we have
Equating the coefficients of x" we get
We get P[r = 0] by dividing an, the number of ways of drawing n nonintersecting
chords, by the total number of ways to draw n chords, i.e.,
In order that there is one and only one intersection among the n chords, we
must have two chords which intersect and which are not intersected by any of the
other n - 2 chords none of which intersect each other. The two chords which
intersect must divide the remaining 2n -4 points into four groups each contain-
ing an even number. Chords must be drawn connecting the points in each of
these groups so that there are no intersections. Thus if there are 2k points in a
group, there are ak ways of connecting the points so there are no intersections
among the chords of that group. Thus if there are 2k points in the first group, 2y
in the second, 2i in the third and 2m in the fourth (so that 2k + 2j + 2i + 2m =
2n -4), then there are akajaiam ways of drawing the remaining n-2 chords so
they have no intersections with each other or with the two intersecting chords. If
we draw one of the intersecting chords through a particular point A from among
the 2n points on the circumference, the number of ways of drawing the remain-
ing chords is Zic+,+i+m = n-2 afca,fl;am. The point A can be chosen in 2n ways, but
each arrangement will then be counted four times. (For example, the arrange-
ment shown in Fig. 6.17 is counted once for A = 1, A = 2, A =5 and A = 6).
Thus the total number of ways of drawing the n chords with one intersection
is («/2)£fc+;+i+m=n_2 afca/a,-am, which is n/2 times the coefficient of x"~2 in
(l+aix + a2x2 + a3x3 + - • -)4, i.e. S4. In the derivation of P[r = 0] we found that

FIG. 6.17
158 
CHAPTER 6
Thus
We also found that
Hence
Thus the coefficient of x"~2 in (n/2)S4 is n(n - l}(2n)\/(n\(n + 2)!). This is the
number of ways the n chords can be drawn with one intersection. Thus
The values of P[r=j] for !</'<n(n -l)/2- 1 are not known. We can derive
P[r = n(n -l)/2-l] as follows. In order that r be n(n-l)/2-l (i.e., one less

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE 
159
FIG. 6.18
than the maximum possible number of intersections), we must have two chords
which do not intersect but the other n — 2 chords must all intersect each other as
well as the two nonintersecting chords. This can be done only if the two
nonintersecting chords are adjacent (see Fig. 6.18) and there are n-2 points on
each side of the nonintersecting chords. Each of these remaining points must be
connected with the point opposite it on the boundary. (If the points are
numbered consecutively then point 1 must be joined to point n +1, point 2 to
point n + 2 and so on, except for the endpoints of the nonintersecting chords.)
Thus once the two nonintersecting chords have been chosen there is only one
way to connect the remaining 2n -4 points so that the n-2 chords all intersect
the two nonintersecting chords and each other. There are n different ways to
choose the two nonintersecting chords. Thus there are n ways of joining the In
points so that the chords have n(n-l)/2-l intersections within the region.
Hence P[r = n(n —1)/2 — 1] is n divided by the total number of ways the 2n
points can be joined, that is
For each chord to intersect every other chord, each of the In points must be
joined to the point opposite it. That is, if the points are numbered sequentially
around the boundary, point 1 must be joined to point n + 1, point 2 to point
n+2, and so on. There is, of course, just one way (out of the (2n)!/(n!2n)
possible ways of joining the 2n points) that this can be achieved. Thus the
probability that the total number of intersections within the convex region is
«(n-l)/2is

160
CHAPTER 6
The above methods for deriving P[r = 0], P[r = 1], P[r = («(«-1)/2)-1] and
P[r = n(n-1)/2] are applicable only to Model I and do not extend to the other
models. On the other hand, some of the above results, namely £(012) for an
arbitrary convex region and the mass function of w (for the circular case), can be
obtained for Model II also. First we must restate the Model II randomization
model so that it applies to any convex region C. Let O be any point in C. If the
perpendicular from O to the extension of the random chord has length p and
makes an angle <f> with some axis, we want the joint density of p and $ to be
proportional to dpd<{> as in the circular case. (See Fig. 6.19.) In our previous
discussion of random lines of a Poisson field which intersect a convex region, we
found that the density of such lines is L~^ dp d$ where L is the perimeter of the
region. Thus we see that random chords in a convex region C as defined by
Model II must have the same distribution as random chords formed by random
lines of a Poisson field intersecting C. We have already obtained several results
for random chords formed by random lines intersecting a convex region. The
probability that two chords intersect within C is
where A is the area and L the perimeter of C. For the case where C is a circle we
get £(0:12) = 5, which agrees with our previous result.
FIG. 6.19
Another result from the section on random lines intersecting a convex region
is the fact that the probability that a random chord intersects a line segment of
length / in C is 21/L. Thus if a random chord in a circle of unit radius has length
/, the probability that it is hit by another random chord is I/TT. We shall use this
fact to derive the mass function of w for Model II in the circular case. The

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE 
161
method is quite similar to that used above in the derivation of the mass function
of w for Model I. If p is the distance from the random chord to the center of the
circle, p is distributed uniformly on [0, 1] and / = 2Vl -p2. Thus we have
The probability that n random chords intersect a chord of length / exactly w
times is
Thus the unconditional probability mass function of w is
Letting x =p2, we get dp = 2X l/2 dx and
Hence we have shown that the probability that a chord chosen from among n +1
random (Model II) chords of a circle is crossed exactly w times by the remaining
n chords is
Random chords of a sphere. In this section, we will consider the distribution of
the length of a random chord of a sphere, under eight different randomization
models. The developments are due to Berengut (1972). This treatment will be
somewhat analogous to the discussion of random chords of a circle, under
various models, considered earlier in connection with the paper of David and Fix
(1964). We will assume in all cases that the sphere has unit radius, and we will let
L be the random variable denoting chord length, with density /(/).

162
CHAPTER 6
Model 1. Chord joining two points uniformly distributed on surface of sphere.
We can let the position Pi of the first point be arbitrary. Then the Pr {/ < L < I +
dl] is l/(4ir) times the area of the circular band in Fig. 6.20.
FIG. 6.20
Now the width of the band is ds = sec (f> dl. But q> is the angle between PiB
and the tangent to the circle at B. Hence by elementary geometry, <p is equal to
the angle subtended on the upper part of the circle by the chord P^B. But this
angle is just (Tr/2)—8. Hence <p = (ir/2)-0, and therefore ds = esc 6dl. Now the
area of the band is ds times its circumference, which is 2ir • I sin 6. Therefore,

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE
163
Model 2. Chord in random direction from point uniformly distributed on
surface. Let the position of the point be P. Let 6 be the angle between the
random chord through P and the diameter through P. (See Fig. 6.21.) Since the
chord PQ is randomly directed, we know from a previous result that the density
of 0 is proportional to sin 6, i.e., B has density g(0) = sin#, OS0S7T/2. Now
triangle PQR is a right triangle with hypotenuse of length 2; hence / = 2 cos 0.
Thus \dl/d6\ = 2sinO. The density of / is thus f(l) = g(0)/\dl/d6\ =
sin0/(2sin0)=l/2; i.e.,
Model 3. Chord in random direction, distance from center uniformly dis-
tributed. Let r be the distance of the chord from the center of the circle. Then
FIG. 21

164 
CHAPTER 6
Since r is uniformly distributed on (0,1),
Let ii = (4 - /2)/4. Then / = 2V1 - u, du = -(1/2) dl; therefore,
therefore,
Model 4. Center of chord uniformly distributed inside sphere; random
direction. Let r be the distance of the chord (i.e., the center of the chord) from
the center of the sphere.
Hence r has density

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE
165
As before, letting u = (4- /2)/4, we get
Similarly,
Model 5. Chord in random direction through point uniformly distributed
inside sphere. Let t be the distance of the random point P from the center of the
sphere. Let 8 be the acute angle between the chord and the radius through P.
Then the distance from the center to the chord is r = t sin 6. Figure 6.22, which
gives the cross-section through the sphere containing the chord and the center of
the sphere, illustrates this. Now, since the chord through P has random direc-
tion, we know that 0 has density g(0) = sin 6, 0^0^7r/2. Let t be given. Then
dr = t cos 6 dB. Thus the conditional density of r, given t is
FIG. 6.22
Now since P is uniformly distributed inside the sphere, t has density g(t) - 3t2,
O^t^l, as was demonstrated previously in Model 4. Hence the density of r is

166
CHAPTER 6
Model 6. Chord through two points independently uniformly distributed
inside sphere. Let the position of one of the points Pi be at a distance t from the
center. We will first condition on t. Consider Pr(Ls/|f), for 2Vl-/ 2g/^2.
This is just l/(47r) times the volume inside a pair of cones inside the sphere, with
axis the diameter through P\. Figure 6.23 illustrates the region.
FIG. 6.23
We have |PiC| = PiA = b, \PiB\ = \PiD\ = a, a + b = l. Also, |Pi£| = y,
\OF\ = x. (If F lies on the same side of O as PI, then we take x to be negative.) It
is clear that L ^ / if and only if the second point P2 lies inside the regions
bounded by the sides of the cones. Now the region above PI (having A and C as
boundary points) consists of a cone with flat base of height y, plus a spherical cap
that is,
therefore

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE 
167
of height 1 — t — y. Similarly, the region below Pl (having D and B as boundary
points) consists of a cone of height x +1 and a spherical cap of height 1 - x. We
want to obtain the volume of these regions in terms of t and /.
Consider a spherical cap of height h, Og/i Si. Its base is a circle of radius
Vl-(l-fc)2. (See Fig. 6.24.)
FIG. 6.24
Now, clearly, the volume of the cap is given by
Now for lsft<2, V(ft) = (4/3)7r- V(2-/i)= 7r((2/3)-(l-ft)+(l/3)(l-ft)3).
Thus
Hence the volume of the upper cap is
Now, for the lower cap, since we take * to be negative for h>l, we have
1 - h = x in all cases. Hence the volume of the lower cap is

168 
CHAPTER 6
Now the upper cone has base radius v7r-y and height y; hence its volume is
Similarly, the lower cone has volume
Adding (6.65)-(6.68), we get
We want to express V in terms of t and /. To do this, we have to find expressions
for a, b, x, and y in terms of t and /.
Now, from elementary geometry, we know that for two intersecting chords of
a circle, the product of the segments of one is equal to the product of the
segments of the other. Applying this to chords AB and GH, we get ab =
(1 -0(1 + 0- Now using the relation a +b = l, we can solve a quadratic equation
to obtain the relations.
We also have the relations £2-y2 = l-(y + tf and l-x2-a2-(t + x f , from
which we obtain the following expression for x and y:
Using (6.70) and (6.71), we obtain finally
Substituting these expressions into (6.69), after considerable simplification we
obtain

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE 
169
Now since
Now t, being the distance of P± from the center O, has density f(t) = 3t2, as we
saw before in (6.59). Hence
Hence Pr (L S /) = /6/64, 0 S / g 2, and the density of L is
Model 1. Chord normal to random plane intersecting sphere, through point
uniformly distributed inside circle of intersection. By random planes we mean
planes with measure invariant under rotations, translations and reflections. We
are interested in the conditional space of random planes which intersect the
sphere. Let p be the distance of the random intersecting plane from the center of
the sphere. The random chord is obtained by choosing a point P having uniform
distribution in the circle of intersection of the plane with the sphere, and drawing
the normal to the plane through that point. Let r be the distance of the point P
from the center Q of the circle of intersection, OSrsVl-p2. (See Fig. 6.25.)

170 
CHAPTER 6
Let p be given. Then
Hence the conditional density of r given p is
Now since OQ and the chord are both normal to the same plane, the distance
from the chord to the center O is r. Hence the length of the chord is / = 2\l — r,
\dl/dr\ = 2r/Jl-r2. Making the transformation to /, we obtain the conditional
density of /:
Now from the theory of random planes, we know (cf. Kendall and Moran (1963,
pp. 20-22)) that p has the uniform distribution. Hence the density of / is
In 
a 
similar 
manner, 
we 
obtain 
£'(/) = 8/3. 
Hence, 
Var(/) =
20/9 - (16/9) In 2 - (16/9)(ln 2)2.
Model 8. Chord normal to plane of random great circle, through point uni-
formly distributed in circle of intersection. This randomization model cor-
responds to the measure obtained by taking the restriction of "random" lines in

RANDOM CHORDS IN THE CIRCLE AND THE SPHERE
171
FIG. 6.25
3 dimensions to those intersecting the sphere, where "random" lines in 3
dimensions refers to the measure on lines which is invariant under translations,
rotations and reflections.
Let r be the distance of the chord from the center. By construction, P is
uniformly distributed inside the great circle. (See Fig. 6.26.) Hence, applying
(6.80) with p = 0, we find that the density of r is
Making the transformation / = 2Vl-r2, we obtain the density of /:
We observe that this is the same density as that obtained under Model 1,
where the chord is formed by joining two points independently uniformly
distributed on the surface of the sphere. Since the measures induced by both
models are directionally homogeneous by construction, it is clear that the
measures are identical.
FIG. 6.26

172
CHAPTER 6
We also observe that E(l), which was shown to be 4/3 in Model 1, indeed is
equal to 4V/5. Table 5 summarizes our results.
TABLE 5
Model
1. Joining two random points on
surface
2. Random direction from random
point on surface
3. Random 
direction, 
uniformly
distributed distance from center
4. Chord center 
uniformly dis-
tributed 
inside sphere; random
direction
5. Random direction through ran-
dom point inside sphere
6. Through 2 random points inside
sphere
7. Normal to random intersecting
plane, through random point in
circle of intersection
8. Normal to plane of random great
circle, through random point in cir-
cle of intersection
same as Model 1

References
H. A. ALIKOSKI (1939), Uber das Sylvestersche Vierpunktproblem, Ann. Acad. Sci. Fenn., 51. no. 7,
pp. 1-10.
D. E. BARTON, F. N. DAVID AND E. Fix (1963), Random points in a circle and the analysis of
chromosome patterns, Biometrika, 50, pp. 23-30.
M. BATICLE (1935), Le problems des repartitions, Comptes Rendus, 201, pp. 862-864.
D. BERENGUT (1972), Random chords of a sphere. Tech. Rep. 191, Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA.
P. BILLARD (1965), Sur les arcs places au hasard sur le cercle, Ann. Sci. Ecole Norm. Sup., 82, pp.
152-179.
G. BUFFON (1777), Essai d'arithmetique morale, Supplement a 1'Histoire Naturelle, vol. 4.
H. CHALKLEY, J. CORNFIELD AND H. PARK (1949), A method for estimating volume-surface
ratios, Science, 110, pp. 295-297.
P. J. COOKE (1972), Sequential coverage in geometrical probability, Tech. Rep. 198, Stanford Univ.,
Stanford, CA.
J. CORNFIELD AND H. W. CHALKLEY (1951), A problem in geometric probability, J. Washington
Acad. Sci., 41, pp. 226-229.
M. W. CROFTON (1885), Probability, Encyclopaedia Britannica, 9th ed., vol. 19, pp. 768-788.
D. A. DARLING (1953), On a class of problems related to the random division of an interval, Ann.
Math. Statist., 24, pp. 239-253.
F. N. DAVID AND EVELYN Fix (1964), Intersections of random chords of a circle, Biometrika, 51,
pp. 373-379.
P. DIACONIS (1976), Buffon's problem with a long needle, J. Appl. Probability, 13, pp. 614-618.
C. DOMB (1947), The problem of random intervals on a line, Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc., 43, pp.
329-341.
S. W. DUFOUR (1972), Intersections of random convex regions, Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. of Statistics,
Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA.
A. DVORETSKY (1956), On covering a circle by randomly placed arcs, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.,
42, pp. 199-203.
W. FELLER (1971), An Introduction to Probability Theory and its Applications, vol. 2. 2nd ed., John
Wiley, New York.
R. A. FISHER (1929), Tests of significance in harmonic analysis, Proc. Roy. Soc. London Ser. A, 125,
pp. 54-59.
(1940), On the similarity of the distributions found for the test of significance in harmonic
analysis, and in Stevens's problem in geometrical probability. Eugenics, 10, pp. 14-17.
H. FLANDERS (1963), Differential Forms with Applications to the Physical Sciences, Academic Press,
New York.
L. FLATTO AND A. G. KONHEIM (1962), The random division of an interval and the random
covering of a circle, SIAM Rev., 4, pp. 211-222.
F. GARWOOD (1940), An application to the theory of probability of the operation of vehicular-
controlled traffic signals, J. Roy. Statist. Soc., Suppl., 7, pp. 65-77.
E. N. GILBERT (1965), The probability of covering a sphere with N circular caps, Biometrika, 52, pp.
323-330.
S. GOUDSMIDT (1945), Random distributions of lines in a plane, Rev. Modern Phys., 17, pp.
321-322.
B. HOSTINSKY (1925), Sur les probabilites geometriques, Publ. Fac. Sci. Univ. Masaryk, Brno 50,
Czechoslovakia.
173

174 
REFERENCES
M. G. KENDALL AND P. A. P. MORAN (1963), Geometrical Probability, Griffin, London.
J. F. C. KlNGMAN (1969), Random secants of a convex body, J. Appl. Probability, 6, pp. 660-672.
M. MANDELBROT (1972), On Dvoretsky coverings for the circle, Z. Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie und
Verw. Gebiete, 22, pp. 158-160.
L. MANTEL (1953), An extension of the Buffon needle problem, Ann. Math. Statist., 24, pp. 674-677.
J. G. MAULDON (1951), Random division of an interval, Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc., 47. pp.
331-336.
R. E. MILES (1964), Random polygons determined by random lines in a plane, I, II, Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. USA, 52, pp. 901-907, 1157-1160.
P. A. P. MORAN AND S. FAZEKAS DE ST. GROTH (1962), Random circles on a sphere, Biometrika,
49, pp. 389-396.
R. R. A. MORTON (1966), The expected number and angle of intersections between random curves in
a plane, J. Appl. Probability, 3, pp. 559-562.
M. PERLMAN AND M. WICHURA (1975), On sharpening Buffon's needle, Amer. Statist., 29, pp.
157-163.
S. RENYI (1964), On two mathematical models of the traffic 
on a divided highway, J. Appl.
Probability, 1, pp. 311-320.
H. E. ROBBINS (1944). On the measure of a random set, Ann. Math. Statist., 14, pp. 70-74.
(1945), On the measure of a random set. II, Ibid., 16, pp. 342-347.
H. RUBEN AND W. J. REED (1973), A more general form of the theorem of Crofton. J. Appl.
Probability, 10, pp. 479-482.
L. A. SANTALO (1953), Introduction to Integral Geometry, Actualites Scientifiques et Industrielles,
No. 1198, Hermann, Paris.
(1976), Integral geometry and geometric probability. Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its
Applications I, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
E. F. SCHUSTER (1974), Buffon's needle experiment, Amer. Math. Monthly, 81, pp. 26-29.
L. A. SHEPP (1972), Covering the circle with random arcs, Israel J. Math., 11, pp. 328-345.
ANDREW F. SIEOEL (1977), Random coverage problems in geometrical probability with an applica-
tion to time series analysis, Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA.
H. SOLOMON AND PETER C. C. WANG (1972), Nonhomogeneous Poisson fields of random lines
with applications to traffic flow, Proc. Sixth Berkeley Symposium on Math. Stat. and Prob.
Ill, pp. 383-400.
W. L. STEVENS (1939), Solution to a geometrical problem in probability, Ann. Eugenics, 9, pp.
315-320.
J. V. USPENSKY (1937), Introduction to Mathematical Probability, McGraw-Hill, New York.
G. WEISS AND R. HERMAN (1962), Statistical properties of low-density traffic. Quart. Appl. Math.,
20, pp. 121-130.
J. G. WENDEL (1962), A problem in geometric probability, Math. Scand., 2, pp. 109-111.
W. A. WHITWORTH (1897), DCC Exercises in Choice and Chance (Reprint of 1897 edition),
Hafner, New York, 1965.
J. WOLFOWITZ (1949), The distribution of plane angles of contact. Quart. Appl. Math., 7, pp.
117-120.

(continued from inside front cover)
JERROLD E. MARSDEN, Lectures on Geometric Methods in Mathematical Physics
BRADLEY EFRON, The Jackknife, the Bootstrap, and Other Resampling Plans
M. WOODROOFE, Nonlinear Renewal Theory in Sequential Analysis
D. H. SATTINGER, Branching in the Presence of Symmetry
R. TEMAM, Navier-Stokes Equations and Nonlinear Functional Analysis
MIKLOS CSORGO, Quantile Processes with Statistical Applications
J. D. BUCKMASTER AND G. S. S. LuDFORD, Lectures on Mathematical Combustion
R. E. TARJAN, Data Structures and Network Algorithms
PAUL WALTMAN, Competition Models in Population Biology
S. R. S. VARADHAN, Large Deviations and Applications
KIYOSI 1x6, Foundations of Stochastic Differential Equations in Infinite Dimensional Spaces
ALAN C. NEWELL, Solitons in Mathematics and Physics
PRANAB KUMAR SEN, Theory and Applications of Sequential Nonparametrics
LASZL6 LovAsz, An Algorithmic Theory of Numbers, Graphs and Convexity
E. W. CHENEY, Multivariate Approximation Theory: Selected Topics
JOEL SPENCER, Ten Lectures on the Probabilistic Method
PAUL C. FIFE, Dynamics of Internal Layers and Diffusive 
Interfaces
CHARLES K. CHUI, Multivariate Splines
HERBERT S. WILF, Combinatorial Algorithms: An Update
HENRY C. TUCKWELL, Stochastic Processes in the Neurosciences
FRANK H. CLARKE, Methods of Dynamic and Nonsmooth Optimization
ROBERT B. GARDNER, The Method of Equivalence and Its Applications
GRACE WAHBA, Spline Models for Observational Data
RICHARD S. VARGA, Scientific Computation on Mathematical Problems and Conjectures
INGRID DAUBECHIES, Ten Lectures on Wavelets
STEPHEN F. McCoRMicK, Multilevel Projection Methods for Partial Differential Equations
HARALD NIEDERREITER, Random Number Generation and Quasi-Monte Carlo Methods
JOEL SPENCER, Ten Lectures on the Probabilistic Method, Second Edition
CHARLES A. MICCHELU, Mathematical Aspects of Geometric Modeling
ROGER TEMAM, Navier-Stokes Equations and Nonlinear Functional Analysis, Second Edition
GLENN SHAFER, Probabilistic Expert Systems
PETER J. HUBER, Robust Statistical Procedures, Second Edition
]. MICHAEL STEELE, Probability Theory and Combinatorial Optimization

