
Contents 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS........................................................................................4 
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................5 
THE SECRETS INSIDE AND HOW TO USE THEM. .............................................6 
SECTION I:  GET ANYONE TO LIKE YOU, LOVE YOU, OR 
JUST PLAIN THINK YOU'RE GREAT!   ................................................................8 
1. Get Anyone to Like You . . . Every Time ..................................9 
2. Get Anyone to Find You Irresistibly Attractive.......................16 
3. How to Make a Fantastic First Impression.............................21 
4. Get the Instant Advantage in Every Relationship...................25 
5. Get Anyone to See You as Pure Gold   ..................................31 
6. How to Appear Calm, Confident, 
and in Control in Any Situation    ..........................................33 
SECTION II:   NEVER BE FOOLED, TRICKED, MANIPULATED, USED, 
LIED TO, OR TAKEN ADVANTAGE OF AGAIN.................................................36 
7. The Six-Star Test to See if Someone Is a True Friend ..........37 
8. Does His Story Check Out?...................................................39 
9. How to Tell if Someone Is Trying to Manipulate You.............41 
10. How to Tell if a Persons Bluffing in Any Situation.................43 
11. How to See Through People  ................................................46 
12. Get Anyone to Say What He's Really Thinking...................... 48 
SECTION III:  TAKE CONTROL OF ANY SITUATION AND GET ANYONE 
TO DO ANYTHING ............................................................................................50 
13. Get Anyone to Take Immediate Action in Any Situation   . . . .51 
14. Get Anyone to Take Your Advice  ...........................................58 
15. Get Anyone to Follow Through on a 
Commitment to You  ............................................................. 62 
16. How to Get a Stubborn Person to 
Change His Mind About Anything......................................... 68 
17. Get Anyone to Do a Favour for You....................................... 76 
18. The Greatest Psychological Secrets of Leadership ................ 83 
19. Get Anyone to Understand Anything..................................... 87 
20. Minority Rule  .........................................................................89 
21. How to Get Any Group of People to Get Along.......................  92 
SECTION IV:  HOW TO WIN AT ANY COMPETITION: BEAT OUT ANYONE 
FOR THE JOB, THE DATE, OR THE GAME   ................................................... ..95 
22. Secrets to Winning in Any Competition................................  96 
23. The #1 Mistake Most People Make in Life...........................100 
SECTION V:  MAKE LIFE EASY: LEARN HOW TO INSTANTLY TAKE 
LIFE'S MOST ANNOYING, FRUSTRATING, AND DIFFICULT 
SITUATIONS AND GET THE UPPER HAND EVERY TIME!............................... 103 
24. Get Anyone to Return Your Phone Call Immediately............104 
25. Get Anyone to Forgive You for Anything...............................107 

26. The Best Way to Break Bad News.........................................114 
27. Get Back Anything You've Loaned Fast, 
and Without an Argument................................................... .119 
28. Say No Without Hurt Feelings or Guilt.................................121 
29. How to Turn a Rude and Obnoxious Person into 
Your Best Friend...................................................................124 
30. How to Stop a Rumour Before Your 
Reputation Pays a Price   .....................................................127 
31. Stop Verbal Abuse Instantly ..................................................130 
32. Get Anyone to Open Up to You ............................................132 
33. Deal with Any Complaint Fast and Easy ..............................135 
34. Stop Jealous Behaviour in an Instant .....................................138 
35. How to Get the Best Advice from Anyone ............................140 
36. Give the Harshest Criticism Without Ever Offending  .........143 
37. Get Anyone to Confide in You and Confess Anything............146 
38. How to Handle Any Tough (or Stupid) Questions   ..............149 
39. Just for Parents.....................................................................154 
40. Get Out of Almost Any Physical or Sexual Assault ...............156 
CONCLUSION.................................................................................................. 161 
BIBLIOGRAPHY   ............................................................................................. 163 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR   ....................................................................................167 

Acknowledgments 
I am grateful for the opportunity to acknowledge the pleasure I had 
in working with the outstanding professionals at St. Martins Press. 
First and foremost, I would like to thank executive editor Jennifer 
Enderlin. Every author should have the opportunity to work with 
someone so dedicated and talented. And to all those who have 
worked tirelessly, my warmest thanks to the publicity, marketing, ad-
vertising, and sales departments at St. Martins for their intense ef-
forts and commitment: Alison Lazarus, John Cunningham, Steve 
Kasdin, John Murphy, Jamie Brickhouse, Mike Sterlings, Janet Wag-
ner, Mark Kohut, Darin Keesler, Lynn Kovach, Jeff Capshew, and 
Ken Holland, and to the entire Broadway Sales Department for their 
continued efforts on behalf of this book. 
A special thanks to St. Martins publisher, Sally Richardson, and 
Fred Bootle for their continued enthusiasm for my work and this 
project. My appreciation also goes to Estelle Laurence, copy editor, 
for her outstanding work on the manuscript. 
My deepest gratitude to my friend Rabbi Henry Harris for his in-
valuable input and suggestions; his wisdom is evident throughout this 
book. I would like to thank also my friends and agents, Michael 
Larsen and Elizabeth Pomada, for their outstanding contribution to 
this project. 
Finally, this book cites numerous studies by remarkable psycholo-
gists who have devoted their lives to better understanding the human 
condition. It is because of them that this book is everything that it is. 

Introduction 
Are you tired of being manipulated and taken advantage of? Do you 
sometimes feel you're not being listened to and don't get the respect 
and cooperation that you deserve? If you've ever wanted the ability 
to take control of every conversation and situation, now you've got it\ 
Why go through life letting others lead you, when you can use the 
greatest psychological secrets to make things go your way. . . get 
anyone to do anything . . . and never feel powerless again! 
Here, you enter a world where psychology reigns and detecting 
deceit, changing a person's mind, or controlling a situation are re-
duced to an easy-to-follow formula—a series of simple techniques 
and tactics. 
You will be able to use the most complete and advanced psycho-
logical strategies to enable your mind to become your greatest 
weapon. Most exciting, you should know that we're not talking about 
"tricks" that work sometimes on some people. This book contains only 
specific psychological tactics governing human behaviour that will 
let you outsmart, outthink, and outmanoeuvre. . . anyone, 
anyplace, anytime. These are carefully formulated tactics based on 
specific psychological principles and can be applied to any situation. 
Imagine how easy life would be if you were able to predict and 
control the outcome of any encounter. And instead of wondering 
what was going to happen, you applied proven, fast-working psycho-
logical tactics to gain complete and total cooperation from all people 
in any situation. 
Have you ever asked someone to help you out and much to your 
surprise she happily obliged? Or perhaps you wanted to make a 
good impression and the person found you completely irresistible? 
You wonder if it was luck, the person's mood, or the situation—when 
in actuality you likely applied principles that govern human 
behaviour without even knowing it. The good news is that you can 
duplicate those same responses, systematically, any time you want, 
with anyone. 
To make it easy for you to learn how to apply these psychological 
secrets, the book is divided into forty mini-chapters, each governing 
various real-life situations. And best of all, once you become familiar 
with the psychological principles, you'll see that you can use the 
techniques to be successful anytime, in any situation that you find 
yourself in. 
Get ready to make life easy and have things go your way, when 
you . . . Get Anyone to Do Anything . . . and Never Feel Powerless 
Again!

The Secrets Inside and How to Use Them 
THE GREATEST COLLECTION OF PSYCHOLOGICAL 
TACTICS TO MAKE EVERYTHING GO YOUR WAY 
If you wanted to make life easy what would be on your wish list? 
Maybe . . .  in every area of life you know how to avoid ever being 
taken advantage of or manipulated; are able to end verbal conflicts 
with a single phrase; understand how to lead, influence, and motivate 
anyone to your way of thinking; and are able to become anything to 
anyone by winning friends and changing instantly how others see 
you. In short, you'd have a life made easy. You're about to learn how 
to use the greatest psychological techniques for success in every area 
of your life. 
SECTION I: GET ANYONE TO LIKE YOU, LOVE YOU, OR JUST 
PLAIN THINK YOU'RE GREAT! 
If you want to be successful in life, you often need to get cooperation 
from other people. And the number-one rule for getting people to do 
what you want is to get them to like you. Whether you want to make 
a new friend or gain an ally, these psychological tactics show you 
step-by-step how to get anyone to think you're great. Plus, in roman-
tic situations you'll discover how to get anyone to find you irresistibly 
attractive. And, once you're in the relationship, you'll be able to ap-
ply the greatest secrets for always having the upper hand. 
SECTION II: NEVER BE FOOLED, TRICKED, MANIPULATED, USED, 
LIED TO, OR TAKEN ADVANTAGE OF AGAIN 
If you want to make life go your way, you, of course, want to avoid be-
ing manipulated and fooled by people who don't have your best in-
terests at heart. You would need to "see through people" and easily 
tell who is out/or you and who is out to get you. In this section you'll 
learn psychological tactics to determine, almost instantly, if someone 
is trying to take advantage of you. Whether it's personal or profes-
sional, you never have to get that helpless feeling of trusting the 
wrong person again. 
SECTION III: TAKE CONTROL OF ANY SITUATION AND GET 
ANYONE TO DO ANYTHING 
Now, to really make things go your way, you're going to need to con-
trol certain situations. Here you'll learn how to easily influence oth-
ers to your way of thinking. Get anyone to understand, agree with, 
and then do what you want! Learn the secrets to getting a single per-
son or an entire group to trust, believe, and follow you. Whether it's 
changing one person's opinion or leading a crowd, you'll use the lat-
est and most advanced tools governing human nature to make people 
go your way. 

SECTION IV: HOW TO WIN AT ANY COMPETITION: BEAT OUT 
ANYONE FOR THE JOB, FOR THE DATE, OR FOR THE GAME 
Sometimes it's not a matter of swaying a person to your side—when, 
for instance, you are competing with someone for the same thing. 
You'll learn the greatest psychological techniques for winning at any 
competition. Whether it's a tennis match, a job promotion, or even a 
date, when it's you against him, you'll win. In this section you'll learn 
how to make your mind your greatest weapon and become the per-
fect psychological warrior. 
SECTION V: MAKE LIFE EASY: LEARN HOW TO INSTANTLY TAKE 
LIFE'S MOST ANNOYING, FRUSTRATING, AND DIFFICULT SITUA-
TIONS AND GET THE UPPER HAND EVERY TIME! 
Wouldn't it be great if everyone was as nice and pleasant as you? Sure 
it would, but some people aren't and they just get "under our skin." 
So, for life's little nuisances this section gives you an array of tactics 
where a little psychology goes a long way. Whether you want a phone 
call returned or you want someone to forgive you, these techniques 
work to make life easy] 
Note to readers: Because these techniques are based on human na-
ture, factors such as culture, race, and gender are negligible, unless 
otherwise noted. Throughout all of the examples in this book the 
pronouns he and she are used interchangeably. This was done to 
make the language less sexist, not to indicate that the technique is 
gender specific. 

Section I 
GET ANYONE TO LIKE YOU, LOVE YOU, 
OR JUST PLAIN THINK YOU’RE GREAT! 
Here you will discover those psychological factors that 
influence the levels of interest other people have in you. 
You're going to see just how easy it is for you to get anyone to 
like you (or dislike you). By following a simple strategy based 
on human nature, you can create trusting, lasting friendships 
and relationships with complete ease. And so we're clear, 
these aren't ways to manipulate other people into liking you. 
Rather, you'll be orchestrating the application of certain 
psychological principles and methodologies to bring out and 
develop a natural chemistry. 
The obvious question then is, "Why do I need these 
techniques if all I'm doing is bringing out a natural chemistry? 
Doesn't it stand to reason that if it's there it's there, and if it's 
not it's not?" While that seems as if it would be so, below 
explains why the answer is no. 
It is in our nature as human beings to seek affiliation, to 
make friends, and to care about others. But sometimes it can 
be hard for a person to reach out and "expose" his or her 
true self and feelings. Most people want to like, want to love, 
want to connect, but they are afraid. Things get in the way of 
their innate desire; things like fear of rejection, vulnerability, 
ego, and jealousy are but a few of the multitude of mixed 
emotions, attitudes, and beliefs that keep us from reaching 
out and bonding with others. What these psychological 
techniques do is to simply influence a person's natural state 
to emerge. We feel good when we give, when we love, and 
when we help. It's not about twisting someone's brain so that 
he does your unconditional bidding; it's about bringing the 
person's submerged desires to the surface. 
In this section we cover different levels of interpersonal 
relations. At the core of all relationships, though, is mutual 
liking. No one will be attracted (for any length of time) to 
someone whom he doesn't like and respect. So, the tactics 
below, while separated into individual specific strategies, can 
and should be used together. Most important, Chapter 1, Get 
Anyone to Like You . . . Every Time, is the foundation not only 
for this section but for several of the chapters throughout the 
book. Well talk more about the importance of this later. 

1
Get Anyone to like You. . .  Every Time 
What are those elusive traits and qualities that arouse 
feelings of friendship and likeability in a person? In just a 
minute you'll discover that they're not elusive at all. In fact 
they can be reduced to a simple formula that will help you to 
develop a natural chemistry with anyone. 
The fact is we like or dislike a person based upon a strict 
set of mostly unconscious processes. It does not happen by 
chance. But the reality that we're unaware of the process 
makes it seem as if it occurs without much rhyme or reason. 
Nothing could be farther from the truth. The following is a 
complete list and discussion of the nine psychological laws 
and phenomena that affect, influence, and even alter what we 
think of someone so you can get anyone to like you. 
Keep in mind, too, that research shows that our liking a 
person can influence how physically attractive we think he or 
she is, and that we also tend to like more someone whom we 
find attractive. So this chapter and the one that follows it go 
hand-in-hand and can be used as part of an overall strategy. 
1. LAW OF ASSOCIATION 
The law of association is discussed in more detail throughout 
this book, but it has a very specific application here. Briefly, 
by pairing yourself with pleasurable stimuli another person will 
begin to associate you with this feeling. Studies conclude 
that if, for instance, you were planning your vacation you 
would associate those favourable feelings with whoever was 
around you at the time, and you would subsequently like the 
person more. Conversely, research in this area shows us 
that when you have a stomach-ache, for instance, those 
around you become unconscious victims of circumstance, 
and you tend to like them less. Of course there's more to 
liking than just this pairing of pleasant stimuli with a person, 
but it can generate powerful feelings, either good or bad, 
toward you. 
So if you want to be liked by a person, try talking to him 
when he is in a good mood or excited about something. 
These feelings are anchored and associated with you, and 
this person will then come to have positive feelings toward 
you. 




 Power Point 
Sometimes it's easy to tell if a person's in a good mood. But if you're 
not sure, look at his face. 
 If he's in a good mood he'll likely greet you with a full smile, 
eyes wide open. If he greets you with a partial "lips only" smile—
one that does not involve his whole face—then this is a "forced 
courtesy smile" and usually reflects a person who is not in a good 
mood. 
 Eye contact is a strong indicator of mood. When we are in a 
good mood we tend to make more direct eye contact. Conversely, 
when we're in a bad mood we tend to look down or away from 
the person we're speaking to. 
2. REPEAT EXPOSURE 
The old adage "familiarity breeds contempt" is commonly 
accepted but interestingly enough, it's not true. In reality, it's 
the opposite. Numerous studies conclude that the more you 
interact with someone, the more he or she will like you. 
According to Moreland and Zajonc (1982), repeated 
exposure to any stimulus—in this case a person—leads to a 
greater appreciation and liking (as long as the initial reaction is 
not negative). This is true of anything—a person, a place, or 
even a product: the greater the exposure, the more positive 
the response. This is why companies sometimes advertise just 
a picture of a product, or its name, without any specific 
features or benefits of using the product. They don't need to 
tell us how wonderful it is, only remind us of it. Exposure, 
being an obvious component of repetition, can alone 
increase sales or votes, which is why advertisers and 
politicians exploit this phenomenon. This factor of human 
behaviour is so powerful that studies show that even a letter 
in the alphabet that also appears in our name is perceived 
as more attractive than a letter that is not in our name. 
By simply being around more, you will actually "grow" on this 
person. Sometimes we make the mistake of trying to appear 
mysterious, aloof, or unavailable to someone, but in doing so 
we diminish our number of interactions. Studies conclude 
that we become friends with, and tend to like more, those 
who are physically nearest to us because of this increased 
level of interaction. (By the way, you don't have to worry about 
enacting the law of scarcity, unless you want this person to be 
attracted to you\ That is because the basis of liking follows a 
different paradigm than for attraction. We will learn more 
about that law in this section.) 

3. RECIPROCAL AFFECTION 
Countless studies (and common sense) have established that 
we tend to like more those who like us. When we find out 
that someone thinks well of us, we in turn are unconsciously 
driven to find him or her more likable as well. Therefore, you 
want to let your "target person" know that you like and respect 
him, if indeed you do. 



 PowerPoint 
What if he really doesn't like me at all? Oddly enough, studies conclude 
that if he started out not liking you and gradually came around to liking you, 
he will eventually like you more than if he had liked you right from the be-
ginning. Keep in mind, if you don't have a great relationship with him, 
don't do a "180,"suddenly making this person your best friend. Studies 
show us that gradual liking is infinitely more effective than instantly be-
coming someone's best friend. So don't be overwhelming and "out-of-
the-blue" his number-one fan. To engage the law of reciprocal affection 
gradually, let it be known that you are fond of this person. 
4. SIMILARITIES 
It is not true that opposites attract. We actually like more 
those people who are similar to us and who have similar 
interests. We may find someone interesting because of how 
different he is from us, but it's the similarities and 
commonalities that generate mutual liking. Like attracts like. 
When you speak to this person, talk about what you both 
enjoy and what you have in common. 
Similar to this law is the principle of "comrades in arms." 
Essentially, people who go through life-changing situations 
together tend to create a significant bond. For instance, 
soldiers in battle or those in fraternity pledge classes who get 
hazed together usually develop strong friendships. This is 
also a powerful bonding method even if the experience was 
not shared, but similarly experienced. It's for this reason that 
two people who have never met but who have shared a 
similar previous experience—whether it's an illness or 
winning the lottery—can become instant friends. It is the 
"she understands me" perspective that generates these 
warm feelings for another who has had a similar experience. 
It all comes down to the fact that we all want to be 
understood, and this powerful event has likely helped to 
shape the person into who she is today; hence this other 
person "knows and understands" what she is all about. 

5. How You MAKE HER FEEL 
How someone feels about you is greatly determined by how 
you make her feel about herself. You can spend all day 
trying to get her to like you and to think well of you, but it's 
how you make her feel when she is around you that makes 
the difference. Have you ever noticed how nice it is to be 
around someone who is complimentary and sincerely kind 
and warm? Conversely, have you ever thought about how 
annoying it is to spend five minutes with the person who's 
always finding fault with everything and everyone? These 
people seem to drain the life right out of you. Being the 
person who makes people feel good will go a long way 
toward their finding you quite likable. 
6. RAPPORT 
Rapport creates trust, allowing you to build a psychological 
bridge to someone. The conversation is likely to be more 
positive and comfortable when two people are "in sync" with 
each other. Just as we tend to like someone who shares our 
interests, we are also unconsciously driven to like a person 
when she "appears as we do." This means that when 
someone makes gestures the way we do, or uses words or 
phrases as we do, we tend to find him likable. More on 
rapport-building skills is discussed throughout various 
chapters in the book. For now, two powerful tips for 
establishing and building rapport are: 
• Matching posture and movements: For instance, if 
someone has 
one hand in his pocket, you put your hand in yours. If he 
makes 
a gesture with his hand, after a moment and without 
being obvious, you casually make the same gesture. 
• Matching speech: Try to match his rate of speech. If he's 
speaking in a slow, relaxed tone, you do the same. If 
he's speaking 
quickly, then you begin to speak more rapidly. 

7. HELPING HER OUT 
Studies in human nature show us that people dislike others 
more after doing them harm. Please note that I did not say 
that we do harm to those whom we dislike, although this may 
be true. The point here is that when we do harm to another, 
either on purpose or by accident, we are unconsciously driven 
to dislike the person. This is an attempt to reduce dissonance. 
(Cognitive dissonance theory as it applies here states that we 
feel uneasy when we do something that is inconsistent with 
how we see ourselves. Therefore to reduce this inner conflict 
we rationalize our actions to remain consistent with our self-
concept.) The internal conflict created is, "Why did I do this 
to this person?" The rationalization then becomes, "It must 
be because I really don't like him and he deserves it. 
Otherwise I would be a bad or careless person, and that 
cannot be so." This works in reverse as well. We like someone 
more after doing something nice for him or her. If we do 
someone a favour we are likely to have positive feelings 
toward that person. 
If you can get him to do you a small favour, this will 
generate kind and warm feelings toward you. Often, in our 
attempt to get someone to like us, we make the mistake of 
doing nice things for him. And while he may appreciate your 
kindness and think you're a nice person, it doesn't make him 
like you more, even though you may be viewed as more 
likable. What you want is for him to have kind feelings toward 
you, not to just believe that you are a kind person. This is 
accomplished by him doing for you, not by you doing for him. 
8. HE'S ONLY HUMAN 
Seeing someone you admire do something stupid or 
clumsy will make you like him more (Aronson, Willerman, and 
Floyd, 1966). Contrary to popular belief, being a perfect, 
confident figure will not produce the desired outcome—
meaning that it rarely leads to your being liked more and 
thought of in a positive way. When you want to be seen as 
more likable, do something embarrassing and smile at 
yourself. Don't try to ignore it or pretend it didn't happen. 
Self-deprecating humour is a terrific way to ingratiate yourself 
with anyone. 
When you show others that you don't take yourself so 
seriously, it makes them feel closer to you and want to be 
around you. "Nobody likes a show-off or a person who is so 
consumed with himself and his image that he needs to pretend 
that he is perfect. We tend to like and gravitate toward those 
who are not self-absorbed and egotistical. Showing that you 
can laugh at yourself makes you infinitely more approachable 
and likable. This is often at odds with what we think we 
should do. In our attempt to appear as "cool" and 
"important," others perceive us as taking ourselves too 
seriously, and this air of "false confidence" can be quite 
unbecoming. 

This aspect of human nature confuses many people 
because the fact is that we do like confident people; we're 
drawn to and like those who are self-assured. But we know 
that a person who is confident doesn't feel the need to let the 
world know how great he is; he lets the world find out for itself. 
So the bragging, arrogant person is really a person who feels 
small inside and we are often instinctively uninterested and 
unattracted to this person. The one who is confident and 
secure is the one who is apt to laugh at his own mistakes and is 
not afraid to let people know that he is human. So you see, 
they are not at conflict with one another. Not taking ourselves 
so seriously and acknowledging our faults and mistakes shows 
the world that we are confident. 
9. POSITIVE ATTITUDE 
As we talked about before, we like people who are similar to 
us. But there is one exception to this rule. Nobody wants to 
be around a moody, often pissed-off, pessimistic person. We 
all seek, like, and admire those who have a positive, happy 
outlook and perspective on life. Why? Because that is what we 
all want. And seeing this desirable spirit in others makes us like 
them more. You may know a person— or may even be 
someone—who finds annoying those who wake up smiling 
and in a good mood. The fact is though, at some level we are 
drawn to that attitude and to that person. Think of the people 
in your life whom you really can't stand to be around. 
Chances are they are always complaining about something; 
always annoyed with somebody; always finding fault with 
everything. Like confidence, a positive attitude toward life will 
help to turn you into a superhuman magnet for attracting 
people and getting anyone to like you. 
But wait a minute! Doesn't misery love company? Actually it 
does. Miserable people like to be around others who are just 
as annoyed with life as they are. But this quality does not 
make them like these people more. Someone who feels 
miserable enjoys commiserating and complaining with 
another miserable individual, but the minute he's in a good 
mood he will abandon the toxic, annoying person. He seeks 
solace with somebody who feels as he does, but when he no 
longer feels that way he will instantly leave this relationship. 
This is because he never liked the person (at least not for this 
similarity); he enjoyed only the shared attitude. 

Strategy Review 
 Be around the person as much as you can because 
familiarity breeds fondness, not contempt!  
 When you speak with him try to do it when he's in a    
good mood to enact the law of association. Talk about 
common interests or experiences that you share and try to 
do more of the listening and less of the talking. 
To enact the law of reciprocal affection, if you respect 
or admire him for something make sure that he knows 
this. 
Let him do a simple favour for you, but make sure that 
it's not out of a sense of obligation. This creates an 
unconscious motivation to like you more. 
Build a psychological bridge and establish rapport by 
matching the persons gestures, rate of speech, and 
vocal patterns. 
We are drawn to confident people. Show your 
confidence by being able to laugh at yourself and not 
taking yourself too seriously. 
Make her feel good about herself. Be someone who is 
complimentary and sincerely kind and warm. 
Have a positive mental attitude. We are drawn to 
people who are excited, passionate, and happy about 
life and being alive. 
See Chapter 2, Get Anyone to Find You Irresistibly 
Attractive, because we tend to like more those whom we 
find attractive— same sex or not. 

2 _________  
Get Anyone to Find You 
Irresistibly Attractive 
While we all have different physical preferences, these 
tactics will greatly help you to maximize your "assets" and in 
most cases override another person's basic idea of what he 
finds attractive. How can this be done? Have you ever dated 
someone who was not even close to your type? Why'd you 
do it? Because he or she enacted these laws, most likely 
unwittingly, and you found that person simply irresistible. If you 
want to be appealing to anyone, use the techniques in the 
previous chapter and then move on to those in this chapter 
for maximum success. Numerous studies as well as real life 
show us that the more we like someone the more attractive we 
tend to find him or her. Although the tactics outlined below 
are especially designed for romantic interest, it should be 
said that we rarely find attractive those whom we do not like. 
So, fold into your game plan the tactics in the preceding 
chapter to give you an unstoppable overall strategy. 
1. EMOTION AROUSAL 
This single tactic will be responsible for getting you more 
dates than any hairstyle or outfit or high-powered job ever 
will. It is a foundation of human behaviour that when our 
body produces adrenaline, feelings of attraction to those 
present and sexual desire often result. Adrenaline, produced 
through any state of heightened arousal—fear, excitement, 
exercise, or whatever—generates and intensifies passionate 
feelings. (This assumes that attraction exists in some form, 
at some level.) 
Anytime a person is aroused, such as with scary movies, 
amusement park rides, or even physical exercise, his arousal 
will in part be attributed to whomever he is with. In effect, 
there is a transference of state where the excitement he 
feels gets unconsciously translated into sexual desire and 
arousal. The next time you see a couple who appears to 
be "aesthetically" mismatched, ask where they met. Chances 
are good that they met under circumstances where arousal 
was high . . . maybe at the gym or while one person (the better-
looking of the two) was apprehensive, nervous, or excited 
about something. 




 Power Point 
It's for this very fact that psychologists are becoming increasingly dis-
turbed by the trend—in video games, movies, and television—of asso-
ciating violence and sex. The pairing of these two stimuli—sexual 
content and violence—can generate enhanced arousal toward vio-
lence and aggressive tendencies in sexual encounters. 
2. WALKING STYLES 
Youth is often deemed to be a factor of physical 
attractiveness. But the good news is that you don't 
necessarily have to look young but merely appear young. 
Even something as seemingly innocuous as posture and how 
a person walks plays a powerful role in how youthful we judge 
him. Walking styles definitely influence physical attractiveness. 
People react more favourably to those whose walking style 
seems youthful than to those who seem elderly, regardless of 
the actual age or sex (Montepare and Zebrowitz-McArthur, 
1988). What exactly determines youthful posture and gait? 
Flexibility. Observe a small child, and note how flexible she is 
in comparison to an elderly person. Yoga will greatly improve 
your flexibility and will make a dramatic difference in your 
overall posture, walking style, and how attractive others 
perceive you to be. 



 Power Point 
There are several popular theories on why we are attracted to youth. 
The most widely accepted is that this is a biological instinct courtesy 
of our ancestors. Women who have youthful features are likely to be 
of childbearing age—considered a desirable state by men. Men who 
are young are perceived as more virile, considered as good protectors 
and providers by women for them and their children. 
3. GAZING INTO A PERSON'S EYES 
Did you know that gazing into a person s eyes can actually 
make the individual fall in love with you? That's the 
conclusion of numerous studies on attraction and romantic 
love. In one particular experiment, two opposite-sex 
strangers were asked to gaze into each others eyes for two 
minutes. This study concluded that the act of simply looking 
into another's eyes for only a few moments was enough for 
them to produce passionate feelings for each other 
(Kellerman, Lewis, and Laird, 1989). 

To make use of this tactic when you have a conversation with 
this person, look him directly in the eyes when speaking and 
listening. Most of the time we sort of gaze generally at a 
person's face or divert our glance when in conversation. By 
looking into his eyes, while speaking with him, you engage 
this psychological phenomenon without being obvious. 
4. THE LAW OF CONTRAST AND ASSOCIATION 
When you want someone to find you attractive your best bet 
is to meet this person initially by yourself or with you being 
accompanied by an attractive person of the opposite sex. This 
is because of the law of contrast and the law of association. 
We don't often judge a person by herself, but in contrast 
with other people. This is intensified when it comes to 
meeting someone for the first time. We see and think of her 
physical attributes in comparison to those she is with. There 
have been many studies in this area, including some that 
confirm that men who have recently been looking at bathing 
suit models find other women—or even their own wives—less 
attractive. 
Herein lies one of the biggest mistakes we often make. 
Before someone has a chance to know the real you, and to 
be influenced by these other tactics, your physical beauty is 
the first thing you're judged by. So put the odds in your 
favour. Do not, I repeat, do not find yourself in the company of 
those who are more attractive than you (of the same sex) 
when you want someone to become interested in you. 
When meeting this person, generally for the first time 
only, try also not to be in the company of terribly unattractive 
people, of either sex. This is because of the law of 
association—where we tend to see a group as a whole and 
not the individuals. 
Therefore, again, your best approach is to be by yourself 
or with an attractive person of the opposite sex. This will also 
afford you the opportunity to use your other tactics without 
distraction. (The reason you can be with an attractive person 
of the opposite sex is that the law of association takes 
precedence over the law of contrast when the members of 
the group are more different than they are similar. In other 
words, your attractiveness is enhanced by this person 
because you are seen as "one unit.") 

5. SELF-ESTEEM AND ATTRACTION 
This is a tactic to use if your own beauty is limited, as it will 
allow you to be seen initially as much more attractive than you 
might otherwise appear. 
A study by Elaine Walster Hatfield showed that a woman 
who is introduced to a man will find him more appealing if her 
self-esteem has been temporarily injured than a woman 
whose self-esteem has not been impaired (Walster Hatfield, 
1965). While you wouldn't want to go out of your way to 
make someone feel bad about herself, should you become 
aware that this person has recently had a rejection, you 
should know you would appear to be more attractive to her 
than if her self-esteem were in high gear. This law is what is 
responsible for the good old rebound effect whereby a person 
finds herself fast into a relationship right after one ends, 
usually with someone whom she wouldn't under "normal 
conditions" date. Another way to "slip in under the radar" is to 
simply approach her when she is with other more attractive 
people. Studies conclude that when we're around people 
who we feel are better-looking than we are, we tend to feel 
less confident about ourselves and our appearance. Again, 
when our own self-esteem is suffering we tend to view others 
as more attractive. 
So when the person is feeling less than good about herself, 
be flirtatious and friendly. The caveat here is the law of 
human nature that says people want what they can't have 
and they like more what they have to work for. So prevent 
this law from hurting you by not being too obvious. Be 
interested and attentive but not overly so. This is discussed at 
greater length later in this section when we talk specifically 
about relationships and getting the upper hand. 
6. RECIPROCAL LIKING 
We touched on this in the previous chapter, but it is included 
here because this law also impacts on us at a romantic level. 
Studies have shown that when we find out that someone we 
like finds us appealing, it actually awakens romantic feelings 
within us. Again, not only do we like those who like us, but 
we're also more attracted to those people once we learn that 
they are attracted to us. This is because an essential aspect 
of passionate feelings is hope. If the other person has 
absolutely no interest in you then you may find her attractive 
but not develop a real and intense attraction and desire. Hope 
paves the way for stronger, more intense romantic feelings. 
And finding out that someone likes us gives us hope that a 
relationship is possible and will intensify our feelings toward 
him or her. 

Strategy Review 
 Engage in an activity with this person where 
emotional arousal is high.  
 The perception of youth increases attraction. Your 
posture and walking style influence greatly how youthful you 
appear.  
 Passionate feelings for another can easily develop by 
simply staring into someone's eyes. Look her directly in 
the eyes when speaking and listening. 
 We find others more attractive at those times when we 
feel less confident about ourselves. Approaching her when 
she feels self-conscious will make you appear more attractive. 
 Once she already likes you, deepen the attraction by 
letting her know that you are attracted to her. 
 Review the techniques in Chapter 1, Get Anyone to 
Like You . . . Every Time. Then once the relationship gets 
going make sure you follow the techniques in Chapter 5, Get 
Anyone to See You as Pure Gold, to keep the passion strong. 
But, before you do, don't forget if you haven't already met 
you're going to want to make the best first impression 
possible. So let's go to Chapter 3, How to Make a Fantastic 
First Impression, which gives you even more psychological 
techniques to round out your overall strategy. 

How to Make a Fantastic 
First Impression 
You never have to worry again about how you're going to 
come across, because when you apply these psychological 
secrets, you'll be able to make the very best first impression, 
every time. Whether in personal or professional situations, 
these secrets will give you the winning edge over your 
competition. Remember that these techniques and Chapter 1, 
Get Anyone to Like You . . . Every Time, work in 
complementary fashion; review both in order to have all of your 
psychological weapons in line so you can carefully devise your 
strategy. 
The number-one tactic for generating a favourable first 
impression is the easiest to do: Smile! Smiling accomplishes 
four powerful things: It conveys confidence, happiness, and 
enthusiasm, and most important, it shows acceptance. People 
who smile are perceived as confident because when we are 
nervous or unsure about ourselves or our surroundings we 
tend not to smile. Smiling, of course, conveys happiness and 
we are drawn to happy people: We simply view them more 
favourably. Enthusiasm is essential to making a good 
impression because it's contagious. Your smile shows that you 
are pleased to be where you are and to meet this person and 
he in turn becomes more interested in meeting you. Finally, 
smiling conveys acceptance and lets the other person know 
that you unconditionally accept who he or she is. Have you 
ever wondered why dogs are so lovable? Because they greet 
us with complete acceptance. If you have a tail, then wag it. If 
you don't, then smile. Of course there's more to ensuring a 
good first impression, so let's continue. 
Regarding first impressions, there is something called the 
primacy effect: the process whereby our first impression of 
another person causes us to interpret his or her subsequent 
behaviour in a manner consistent with the first impression. In 
English, this means that our first impression of someone is so 
crucial because everything we see and hear afterward gets 
filtered through our initial opinion. In effect you create an 
image of the person right when you meet him and you see his 
subsequent behaviours through this image. So if his first im-
pression of you is favourable then he will tend to be kinder in 
his future evaluations of you. 

The importance of primacy is so significant that even the 
order of information that we receive about somebody alters 
our impression of him. Take a look at these two lists of words. 
A. Cold person, industrious, critical, practical, and determined 
B. Warm person, industrious, critical, practical, and determined 
In this study by Harold Kelley (1950), students who read the 
description of an upcoming guest lecturer on list A had a 
harsher perception of him than those who read from list B. As 
you can see, the words are identical, except for the first one. 
Once we read the first word all of the other qualities are 
filtered through our initial perception of this person: that he is 
either warm or cold. 
Make that initial moment the very best and the rest of your 
conversation will be filtered through it, thereby creating a 
highly favourable impression. Again, that is why smiling is so 
important. You can do it right away and it says so much about 
you—and all positive. 
Another factor that can dramatically influence how we are 
initially perceived is that of accessibility and priming. Simply, it's 
been clearly demonstrated that the ease with which we can 
recall certain thoughts and ideas colours our perception. 
In a study showing just this (Higgins, Rholes, and Jones, 
1977), those who had memorized the words reckless, 
conceited, aloof, and stubborn later formed negative 
impressions of a fictitious person. They viewed him as 
arrogant and as a person who needlessly took dangerous 
chances. However, people who first memorized the words 
adventurous, self-confident, independent, and persistent 
later formed positive impressions. Again, this is because 
these words and their corresponding ideas—what they 
represent—were in the front of their minds. And this coloured 
their perception of a person whom they were "introduced" to 
for the very first time. Even though these words had nothing 
to do with the person, these qualities were "easily accessible" 
in the people's minds and they hence unconsciously ascribed 
those traits to somebody whom they then met. 
So if you want to make a favourable impression on 
someone, it would benefit you if that person were to be 
recently exposed to positive words. If you're a job applicant 
your resume should be peppered with positive adjectives 
(e.g., assertive, energetic, decisive, passionate, resourceful). 
Instead of just saying who you are and what you are capable 
of, use strong, specific, and positive language to convey 
precisely your talents and capabilities. Then when the inter-
viewer meets you, shortly after reading through your resume, 
these traits are already "primed" for association with you. (For 
another interesting application of the power of language see 
Chapter 26, The Best Way to Break Bad News.) 




 Power Point 
One of the biggest mistakes criminal defence attorneys make is to put 
their client on the stand when the details of the crime are still "fresh" 
and easily accessible in the minds of jurors. The better tactic is to put 
a witness or expert on the stand who uses positive and trusting lan-
guage immediately prior to putting their client on the stand. 
In personal as well as business situations you also want to lay 
the unconscious groundwork before you're introduced. Having 
a sales associate or your assistant tell your prospect about a 
recent vacation or a story that uses positive, uplifting 
language can be quite effective prior to your introduction. 
For instance, she might incorporate phrases such as, 
"beautiful view of this majestic scene . . . felt completely at 
peace and such a sense of calm . . . and security." This puts 
these themes directly in the mind of your prospect. 
Personal situations offer more of a challenge, as 
introducing a third party isn't always practical. One way to 
circumvent this is to introduce these words directly yourself in 
the beginning of the conversation. Even though you don't get 
the benefit of the primacy effect, you'll recall from Chapter 1, 
Get Anyone to Like You . . . Every Time, the powerful 
influencing factor of association. These words will "rub off 
onto you and will be unconsciously associated with you. 



 Power Point 
Who says you can't get a second chance at a first impression? If you 
did something incredibly inappropriate or stupid, do not try to defend 
your behaviour. There's only one thing that will work: the phrase,"I feel 
so embarrassed." Why? Because this one phrase accomplishes three 
very important things. First, it shows that you know what you did was 
unacceptable—which means that you're unlikely to do it again. Sec-
ond, it shows that you're human and people actually like us more when 
we acknowledge something stupid and embarrassing and then take re-
sponsibility for it.Third, it shows complete honesty—and who doesn't 
want to deal with an honest person? 

Strategy Review 
 Smile! Smiling accomplishes four powerful things: It 
conveys confidence, happiness, and enthusiasm, and most 
important, it shows acceptance. 
 Engage the primacy effect and make that initial moment 
(and the first five minutes or so) the very best and the rest of 
your conversation will be filtered through it, thereby 
creating a highly favourable impression. 
 The psychological phenomenon of accessibility and 
priming can dramatically influence how we are initially 
perceived. Lay the unconscious groundwork prior to your 
meeting. 
 

Get the Instant Advantage in 
Every Relationship 
The Four Biggest Mistakes and How to Avoid Them 
You hate playing games, I know. But you're playing them 
anyway, so you might as well win. Whether it's business or 
personal the rules are the same to gain the upper hand in any 
relationship. 
When dating, have you wondered why it seems it's the 
ones that you don't really like whom you can't seem to get rid 
of and the ones you do like who never seem to stick around? 
The reason is simple. It's not the person but the way you 
behave toward him or her. 
What determines interest in another human being is a 
fascinating thing. Most people are actually on the fence at the 
start of most relationships. This means that almost every time 
someone can be swayed toward either liking or disliking you. 
And he is moved in either direction—either closer or farther—
depending on how you relate to him. 
This is because as human beings we are forever guided 
and governed by human nature. The bottom line is that it's 
not the person you're dating, it's the things you are doing that 
determine his or her level of interest. Otherwise it would be a 
startling coincidence if not a statistical improbability that 
everyone you liked just happened to "not want a 
commitment" and everyone you weren't that interested in 
wanted to marry you. So if it's not you—defined as your looks, 
personality, background, and so on—it must be your 
behaviour toward this person that determines the direction 
and, ultimately, the outcome of the relationship. 
This very powerful, yet simple psychological strategy can 
be summed up in one sentence: You need to behave with the 
person you don't like the way you've been behaving with the 
person you do like, and vice versa. While there are many little 
aspects of one's behaviour, there axe four main factors, which 
are discussed below. 

AVAILABILITY 
People want what they can't have. By constantly making 
yourself available, you're actually diminishing your value. This 
is not a trick or a game to play, but a function of human 
behaviour. Attraction is not a fixed value. This means that what 
someone thinks about you is determined to a large extent by 
what you do, not by just who you are or what you look like. 
The law of scarcity is prevalent and relevant in every area of 
our lives, especially here. That which is plentiful is often 
underappreciated and that which is rare is held in high 
regard and considered valuable. When you are dating 
someone whom you are not that interested in, you tend to 
make yourself available when it's convenient for you. And 
when you're dating someone who you really like you're 
consistently available. Do the reverse! 
This means when you're dating someone you don't like too 
much, if you're not baking cookies for him, calling him twice a 
day, asking where the relationship is going, and so on, then 
don't do it with the person you like. And by the way, when you 
do this with the ones you don't like, they'll be scared off soon 
enough, so you've eliminated this problem as well. 
But wait! In Chapter 1, Get Anyone to Like You . . . Every 
Time, we said that if you want someone to like you, you want to 
make yourself available, because this increases liking. If this is 
so, doesn't it contradict the law of scarcity? Here's what is 
often misunderstood. If you want someone to like you, then 
you do indeed want to be in their company fairly often. This is 
true, but remember that liking is the foundation for every 
relationship. That means that once you move past the liking 
stage (meaning the person is already fond of you) and the 
relationship unfolds into something more serious, you then 
want to limit your availability. 



Power Point 
Here's a question. Don't we often see good-looking people with at-
tractive partners and vice versa? If attraction has little to do with ap-
pearance then why is this so? It's because we are often most comfortable 
with those of similar levels of attractiveness. (This coincides with studies 
that show that people are generally friends with those of similar levels 
of attractiveness.) A good-looking person can sometimes make a less 
attractive person feel uncomfortable. So this less attractive person 
tends to lose perspective and act differently—meaning that she puts the 
person on a pedestal and does the four things outlined in this chapter 
that she shouldn't be doing. But it's the things that she's doing—not 
her—the physical person—that make the difference. This is validated 
by the fact that sometimes attractive people are with less attractive 
people. In these relationships it's likely that the less attractive person 
feels confident about the relationship and hence behaves differently 
than their less attractive counterparts. (This "confidence" is replicated 
here when we apply the four factors to gaining leverage in the rela-
tionship.) 

PERSPECTIVE 
In your relationships, you need perspective. In life, when we 
derive pleasure from only one source we tend to 
overemphasize its value and importance. You should find 
meaning in your life outside of the relationship so this person 
doesn't become your whole world. It's important to feel fulfilled 
in other areas of your life so you're able to maintain a sensible 
perspective and not rely on someone else's affections as your 
sole source of satisfaction and happiness. When you're dating 
someone you're not too interested in, you have plenty of per-
spective because you're not thinking, "This is the only person 
for me; if I don't have him my world is over." You're thinking, "All 
right, let's see what happens; maybe he'll grow on me, and 
maybe he won't." And it's precisely that mentality that 
translates into the best attitude. And it's this attitude and your 
corresponding behaviour that actually make you more 
attractive. 
PASSION 
Here's the crux of how and why relationships work or fail. 
Simply, you can't appreciate what you take for granted. This 
is essentially why people, in general, become unhappy in their 
own lives. They always want more but are never grateful for 
what they have. And if you are not grateful for what you have, 
you will begin to take it for granted. And when you do this, 
you no longer appreciate it. And when you don't appreciate 
something it holds no enjoyment for you. The same holds 
true for relationships. If someone takes you for granted he or 
she will not appreciate you and will begin to look for someone 
else. Similarly, if you went to the doctor and were told that you 
might lose your hearing, you would probably develop a 
renewed appreciation for sound. 
Our gratitude lies in being reminded that we should not take 
these things for granted. And you don't take for granted what 
you believe can be taken away from you at any time. 
Similarly, if the object of your affections is a bit insecure with 
the relationship—meaning there is an element of doubt—
then his or her lack of confidence will not lead to arrogance 
and ingratitude. You must create an element of uncertainty or 
you will lose the passion that drives the relationship. 



 Power Point 
Since it's possible for someone to be taken away from us at any time— 
by accident, by illness—why do you have to create more doubt? If 
you're in love, you don't. This is for those who are not yet at that stage, 
for whom we artificially and temporarily create the same "atmo-
sphere" of uncertainty. 

Again, without some doubt there is the feeling that "you 
will always be there." Then he no longer sees how great you 
are and loses appreciation for you. He begins to take you for 
granted and the passion dies. But you, in your relationship, 
can within a second reignite the passion and turn the 
relationship around by introducing an element of doubt. 
Passion is extinguished when there is no doubt because 
when there's no doubt you will be taken for granted. Just as in 
the previous example of going to the doctor: You never gave 
your hearing a second thought until you thought that it 
might not be there. When doubt is introduced into the 
equation it changes your perspective! I cannot stress this 
enough: You will be taken for granted and not appreciated 
and the passion will go out of the relationship if all elements of 
doubt are removed. 
Unfortunately, when we are insecure about a relationship 
we harm it further by being dingier because we need 
reassurance. But in doing so you reinforce that you are 
forever his and remove in his mind any doubt that you might 
not always be there. And then passion is extinguished. It is a 
fact of human nature. But now that you understand you can 
use it to your advantage. 
Remember that this and the other factors in this chapter 
are not ideas or tricks that work sometimes. These are laws 
that dictate human behaviour. If you use them and operate 
within these parameters you can succeed at gaining 
complete leverage in any relationship. But finally, make sure 
that you don't make the mistake that most do when it comes to 
. . .  how you make them feel. 



Power Point 
Why can't I have an open, honest, and trusting relationship? You can, of 
course, but you have to wait until you are in love with each other—and 
here's why. The above three tactics are ego-based and are designed to 
get you to this point, but should be discontinued so that you can move 
on to a mature and lasting relationship. Briefly, love is the absence of 
ego or the "I." And once love takes root, the dynamics of the relation-
ship change so that the more the person is available, and the more he 
does for you, the more you love him. As far as passion goes, you need 
only introduce some uncertainty should you feel that you are being 
taken for granted. 

How You MAKE THEM FEEL 
A person likes you based on how you make her feel about 
herself. This doesn't contradict the above. You should still 
maintain the above behaviour—regarding your attitude and 
availability—but you do want to treat the person well. It is bad 
advice, though often given, that you don't want to build up 
someone's confidence, and be overly flattering and 
complimentary, because then she will "know that you like her" 
and back off. To a degree, we know this can be true, 
because when someone likes us, while we are flattered, we 
can find ourselves less interested in that person. This 
reaction comes courtesy of the rule that says, We want what 
we can't have and want more of that which we have to work 
for. Simply, if it falls in our laps we tend to have less 
appreciation for it. 
But herein lies the crucial difference between being 
attentive and kind versus telling her that she is your entire world 
and the only person for you. (Because, as we talked about, this 
removes doubt and begins to erode the passion.) The former is 
more objective and has to do primarily with her. The latter 
involves your relationship and invokes the rule of scarcity. 
Notice the crucial difference between saying how much you 
like this person—which makes you lose leverage—and telling 
her that she is a likable and great person. Merely stating that 
somebody is terrific makes her feel great and makes you look 
great. It's a winning combination because it's only the confident 
person who tells another how wonderful and terrific she is. And 
we like confident and secure people! The distinction is often 
blurred and we end up trying to "play it cool" and not wanting 
to "show our hand." This accomplishes little and creates a 
cold and uncomfortable atmosphere. But lavishing this 
person with "objective" praise shows you in the best and 
most confident light and makes her feel great! Again, you 
want to let her know that you think she's great but not that she 
is your whole world and that you can't live without her. 
The fastest way to lose leverage and to lose someone that 
you like is to do the opposite of the above. That means 
making yourself completely available, having no perspective, 
removing all doubt, and being uncomplimentary. Do this and 
you can be sure that you'll be back dating someone whom 
you don't like very much. And he'll stick around because 
you'll do all the right things.  

Strategy Review 
People want what they can't have and they want more of 
what they have to work for. If you are easy to come, 
then you may be easy to let go. 
If you have an unbalanced life you will have a 
distorted view of the relationship. Balance gives you 
perspective, and perspective allows you to make better 
decisions in the relationship. 
When all doubt is removed, the person will take you for 
granted. Introduce an element of uncertainty to 
instantly reignite the passion. 
A person likes you based, in part, on how you 
make her feel about herself. Make her feel good and 
she will feel good about you. 
Read through the tactics in the following chapter to 
round out your overall strategy. 

Get Anyone to See You as Pure Gold 
#1 Rule of Selling Yourself in Every Area of Life 
Here is one of the greatest truths in life: If you don't place a 
value on yourself, somebody else will. How do you get the 
best deal, the finest advantage, or the greatest edge in 
anything? Here's how: Ask for the moon and settle for the 
stars. In the previous chapter we talked about gaining leverage 
in relationships. But when you're in a relationship of any sort, 
you want to invoke the power of this law to give you the ul-
timate edge. 
Almost everything in life is subjective. This means that there 
is no absolute truth and opinions tend to become facts in 
most new situations. All other information is then filtered 
through this new belief structure. If you want to give yourself, 
or anything for that matter, instant worth, you need to create 
the right image. In negotiations start off very high, even if it's 
a little unreasonable. This is important because you will have 
set the tone. (Bear in mind, you also don't want to be 
ridiculously high, because you want to be taken seriously.) 
Whenever you are dealing with someone or something of 
unknown value the first one who places a value on it 
establishes its worth. To be clear, when we speak of the 
value of a person, we mean the perceived value to others, 
not, of course, the individual's value as a human being. 
Therefore, value is an unknown quantity whose perception 
can be altered with the application of two specific psycho-
logical principles. 
Whenever you're dealing with an intangible, establish its 
worth where you want it, and as long as there is no 
established value, you will not be seen as unreasonable. 
Let's say you're an amateur photographer—you take 
pictures as a hobby—and someone wants to hire you as a 
freelancer. How much do you charge? Well, some pho-
tographers charge as much as $10,000 a day. Are you in their 
league? Probably not, but if you charge $100 a day clearly you 
will not be perceived as one of the best. Will you be laughed at 
if you say your fee is $3,000 for the day? Not likely. Even if you 
think they can't afford to pay you that much, you're now 
negotiating from a very high starting point—one that you've 
established. In the end you can charge them much less and 
they will be elated because they are not getting a $500-a-day 
photographer. No, they're getting a $3,000-a-day photographer 
for a mere $500! 

Let's take a look at how this law affects us in our daily life. 
Let's say that you're shopping and you notice a jacket that you 
think is reasonably priced at $69. You think, "Okay, not too 
bad." Then you realize it's $690. Suddenly your opinion of the 
jacket changes dramatically. You begin to realize that what 
you thought was fair quality is really exquisite tailoring and 
you "notice" every little detail and can now "see" how it could 
be so expensive. At $690 you might not buy it, but if it went on 
sale the next week for $129, you just might snatch it up. Why? 
Because of its perceived value. 
Now there's one other factor other than price that helps to 
establish value. The other criterion that determines worth is 
how available something is. Simply, the scarcer something is, 
the greater the value people place on it. Gold, oil, and 
diamonds are much more valuable than water and air 
because they are not as plentiful. Even though water and air 
are indispensable to our survival, it's gold and precious 
jewels that we value. (Until, of course, you're without water for 
a day; then its scarcity makes it more valuable than a king's 
ransom.) 
So how do you establish your "worth" in personal 
relationships? You can make yourself more valuable by not 
being so available. Sex? Give it freely initially, and little value is 
placed on it, and on you. This is as true for men as it is for 
women. At work . . . your time? If you're sitting by the water 
cooler all day, how do you think you'll be perceived by your 
boss and co-workers? Will you be judged as valuable or a dime 
a dozen? 
Strategy Review 
Price 
and 
availability 
are 
the 
most 
dominant 
psychological factors that determine the value of just 
about anything or any person. Manipulating these two 
factors will dramatically increase or decrease how 
valuable and worthy we think someone or something is. 

6 _____________  
How to Appear Calm, Confident and 
in Control in Any Situation 
These techniques are included in this section because as 
we talked about in the previous chapters, confidence and 
likeability go together. We are attracted to, admire, and tend 
to like those whom we see as in control and secure in 
themselves. (There's nothing less attractive than a person 
who has a low opinion of himself.) And while this chapter won't 
give you self-esteem, the techniques can make you appear 
and actually feel more calm and confident. This will allow you 
to get into an optimum state in any situation or conversation. 
The first influence to consider is the physiological aspect of 
anxiety. When we're nervous about giving a speech or 
meeting someone, for example, most of us don't eat or eat the 
wrong things. Anytime we eat foods high in sugar or refined 
carbohydrates our bodies produce adrenaline in an attempt 
to regulate our blood sugar levels. This is because these 
foods lower our blood sugar levels and the body produces 
adrenaline to compensate for the fluctuation. Adrenaline, 
which is the primary factor in the fight-or-flight response, is 
what causes you to become anxious and nervous. This is why 
people who eat a diet high in sugars and refined 
carbohydrates often seem nervous and high-strung. This is a 
psychological disorder that manifested from a poor diet. 



 Power Point 
Recent studies show that those who suffer from obsessive-
compulsive disorder (OCD), panic attacks, and anxiety attacks may 
find relief in a low-carbohydrate diet. By keeping blood sugar levels 
steady, anxiety-based symptoms can be greatly alleviated. 

Have you ever noticed that after a large meal you feel fairly 
relaxed and calm? This is because your blood sugar level is 
stable and the body is not producing high levels of 
adrenaline to compensate for fluctuations. The ideal, though, 
is to eat small nonrefined meals. This will keep your blood 
sugar levels steady and your mind calm; you won't feel too 
sluggish to think clearly. (There are countless nutritional 
books that do a much better job on this subject than we can 
in this short space. Any health food store with a book section 
can give you full and complete information on nonrefined 
foods.) 
Another fascinating aspect to consider is that the very 
things you do to appear calm and relaxed can actually make 
you feel more calm and relaxed. So by engaging in certain 
behaviours and avoiding others you can maintain a sense of 
calm and inner balance. 
By changing your physiology you can actually change your 
brain chemistry. For example, studies show that when we 
smile we actually put ourselves into a better mood. It has long 
been thought that we smile when we feel happy—which is of 
course true. There is strong evidence, however, that the act 
itself can transform your emotional state and make you feel 
happier. Conversely, if you were to frown for a minute or so, 
you would probably feel worse. While our mood reflects our 
physical state so too does our physical self bring about a 
change in our mood. The most important, dominant factors 
that affect mood and our emotional state are: 
Smile. This is a universal sign that you are comfortable. 
And again, according to several studies, the very act of 
smiling calms you down and actually makes you feel more 
relaxed. 
Breathe! When we're nervous we tend to hold our 
breath. Breathe deeply and regularly. This will calm you 
down instantly and make it easier for you to think, react, 
and speak clearly and confidently. 
 



Power Point 
Want to tell if anyone is nervous about anything? Look for these 
two signs. If they're not smiling and breathing regularly and 
deeply then they're not as calm as they would like you to be-
lieve! (You can tell if a person is not breathing regularly because 
you'll notice every so often he takes a very deep breath to get 
oxygen in very quickly.) 

Research into this area also shows us something else 
remarkable. That is, our emotions are not just in our mind 
but actually in every cell, in every organ, and in every muscle 
of our body. If you want to ensure long-term emotional 
balance and calm, try yoga or some type of stretching routine. 
Our muscles retain our emotions. Haven't you ever wondered 
why you feel so good after you stretch out your body? The 
psychological tensions are released along with the physical 
stresses. 
The central nervous system is made up of our brain and 
spinal cord. It is impossible to completely relax the mind 
unless you relax the spinal cord as well. Yoga helps to achieve 
this. Notice how high-strung and nervous people carry 
themselves. Their bodies are often tense and stiff. Working 
out the tensions in the physical body begins the process of 
releasing emotional stresses. In addition to smiling and 
deep breathing, try this for short-term and long-term 
success toward releasing negative emotions and relaxing 
yourself within minutes, every time. 
Strategy Review 
Don't overlook the powerful physiological influence of 
blood sugar levels. Avoid engaging the fight-or-flight response 
by avoiding sugars and refined carbohydrates. 
Smile! Research shows that the very act of smiling 
actually makes you feel more relaxed and calm. 
 Breathe deeply. When we're nervous we tend to hold 
our breath. Deep breathing instantly relaxes the central 
nervous system and literally calms your nerves. 
For long-term stress reduction practice yoga. The central 
nervous system is made up of the brain and spinal cord. It is 
impossible to feel completely relaxed mentally unless your 
body is at ease. 

Section II 
NEVER BE FOOLED, TRICKED, MANIPULATED,
USED, LIED TO, OR TAKEN ADVANTAGE OF 
AGAIN. 
Are you tired of looking foolish and being taken advantage of? 
Let’s face it, there are people in this world who are willing to 
say and do anything to get their way. Whether it's the car 
salesman, your date, a co-worker, or your boss, knowing if 
they are out for their best interests or yours is invaluable. With 
these psychological tactics, you will be able to tell within 
minutes what somebody is really up to. If you're tired of 
getting the short end of the stick use these techniques 
and . . . never feel powerless again! 

7 ________________  
The Six-Star Test to See if Someone Is a 
True Friend 
Does she really care about you? Is he loyal? Is he just 
pretending to like you? Sometimes it can be hard to sift out 
those who pretend to be our friends from real true friends. 
But you don't have to waste time in dead-end or selfish 
relationships anymore. With these psychological secrets 
you'll never have to worry whether he's got your best interests 
at heart—or his own! You'll know for sure, every time. This 
might be a good place to remind you that friendship is the 
foundation for any relationship. If you are with someone who 
fails this test, the relationship may not be a very sound one. 
THE SIX-STAR TEST TO SEE IF SHE'S A TRUE FRIEND 
♦Interest 
One important criterion that defines a friend is how 
interested the person is in your life. Tell her about 
something significant that is going on in your life and see if 
she calls to follow up and find out what happened. If she 
doesn't, then call her and see if she mentions it. Finally, if 
she doesn't bring it up, hint about it and see if she even 
remembers the conversation you had about it previously. 
♦Loyalty 
Tell a secret about a mutual friend and see if it gets back to 
him or her. True friends know the value of trust in a 
relationship. Just make sure that you get the permission of 
your friend to tell her secret to this other person. 
♦Pride 
Anyone can tell you to cheer up. It makes them feel good. 
But see who pats you on the back for a good job. Those 
who are not driven by jealousy and envy will do just that. 
Your true friends are proud of your accomplishments, not 
jealous of your successes. See if a friend comes to you 
when you get good news, not just bad news. There are lots 
of people who are willing to "cheer us up" when things 
aren't going well. But it's more difficult to find someone 
who will congratulate us when things are going well. 

♦Honesty 
A true friend is someone who tells you the things that you 
don't want to hear. She is willing to have you be upset with 
her if it will help you. Does she tell you things that are for 
your benefit even though she knows that it might make you 
upset with her? 
♦Respect 
Tell her that there is something exciting—something 
that is good—going on in your life but you absolutely prefer 
not to talk about it right now and see if she presses you on 
it. There's a difference between curiosity and concern. If 
she "must know" then she's just interested in the gossip and 
not in you. A good friend will respect your wishes and give 
you your space—for now. She may bring it up from time to 
time, because she's interested, but she won't constantly 
and immediately press you on it if you make it clear that 
you choose not to discuss it now. The reason you use a 
positive instead of a negative "mystery" is because if a good 
friend feels that something is wrong or that you are not well, 
she will insist on knowing now because she is concerned. 
You don't want to "test" her this way, however, because 
you wouldn't want to put your friend through this. 
♦Sacrifice 
Is she willing to give up something if it means making you 
happy? Will she sacrifice her own pleasure for your 
happiness? Who decides what you do? Is the word 
compromise in her vocabulary? And when the chips are 
down and it's you against them, most people scramble to 
protect their own interests. Notice if she is the one who 
has ideas or a plan to help both of you to "escape 
unscathed" or whether she just looks to save herself and 
protect her own interests. 
Strategy Review 
If she passes four or more of the six tests, you've 
probably got a good friend whom you can count on. If she 
scores three or less, you might want to review your friendship 
or speak to her about it. Of course, when we have a lot going 
on in our own lives we can become inadvertently distracted 
and unintentionally insensitive. So it's best to gauge the 
relationship using these six factors over a period of time and 
not just in a twenty-four-hour period. 

8 _________________  
Does His Story Check Out? 
How to Spot a False Alibi by Asking a Single Question 
Have you ever wanted to hook somebody up to a lie detector 
test to see if he was telling you the truth? Well, now with this 
technique you can instantly find out if his story checks out or if 
his alibi is nothing but a pack of lies. The technique used here 
is called conundrum. It works by introducing a piece of 
evidence and watching how your "suspect" handles it. You'll 
see that you can tell if anyone is lying by asking one question, 
and you can use this technique in any situation when you 
want to check on someone's alibi. 
Let's say a woman suspected that her husband was not 
at the movies with his friends, as he said, but out with his 
secretary for a late night rendezvous. Simply asking him if he 
really did go to the movies would only prompt him to answer 
yes. This is because if he was there he would say yes and if 
he wasn't there he would likely stick to his story and say yes. 
And she wouldn't know whether or not to believe him. With 
this psychological technique she introduces a made-up "fact" 
and then sees how he handles it. 
For instance she might say, "Oh, I heard that the traffic 
was all backed up because of a car accident right outside the 
theatre." Now all she has to do is sit back and watch how he 
responds. 
This is because her husband is faced with an obvious 
conundrum. If he wasn't at the movies, he doesn't know 
whether to acknowledge that there was an accident because 
there might not have been one. And if he says that there 
wasn't much traffic and there was, then she'll also know he 
wasn't really at the movies. But regardless of his answer, he 
will do the one thing that every liar does when confronted with 
conundrum: He will hesitate—deciding how to answer. 
Remember, had he been at the theatre he would have 
instantly said, "There was no traffic. What are you talking 
about?" But the liar isn't sure because he wasn't there, and so 
he will hesitate in his answer and in doing so give himself 
away. On top of that, he will likely answer wrongly by 
agreeing to what you say, because he doesn't know that 
you're making up the accident. 




 Power Point 
It's all in the details. The more detailed he is the more you can believe in 
what he's saying. Made-up stories often have huge gaps and are vague 
and abstract. How specific is his story? 
Strategy Review 
To use conundrum, simply introduce a piece of evidence 
and see how he handles it. Just make sure that he would 
have direct knowledge of what you're talking about if in fact his 
story is true. Make sure that this "evidence" is something 
that's plausible but not true, then sit back and see whether 
he's fast with the correct response. If he hesitates, changes 
the subject, and/or gives the wrong answer to your question, 
then you're not getting the truth. 

How to Tell if Someone Is Trying to 
Manipulate You 
The Seven Deadly Tricks to Watch Out For 
From the bedroom to the boardroom learn how to see clearly 
and easily evaluate information without being swayed by those 
with selfish interests and unkind intentions. The manipulators 
bag of tricks is stocked with seven deadly tactics that can have 
you jumping through hoops. The good news is that by 
knowing what they are, you can watch out for them, and . . . 
never be manipulated again! 
These powerful manipulators are: guilt, intimidation, 
appeal to ego, fear, curiosity, our desire to be liked, and love. 
Anyone who uses any of these is attempting to move you from 
logic to emotion—to a playing field that's not so level. He 
knows that he can't win on the facts so he will try to 
manipulate your emotions with any one or a combination of 
the tactics below. 
• Guilt: "How can you even say that? I'm hurt that you 
wouldn't 
trust me. I just don't know who you are anymore." 
• Intimidation: "What's the matter, can't you make a 
decision? 
Don't you have enough confidence in yourself to do 
this?" 
• Appeal to Ego: "I can see that you're a smart person. I 
wouldn't try to put anything past you. How could I? You'd 
be on to me in a second." 
• Fear: "You know, you might just lose this whole thing. I 
sure hope you know what you're doing. I'm telling you that 
you won't get a better deal anywhere else. This is your 
last shot at making things work out; why do you want to 
risk losing out on being happy?" 
• Curiosity: "Look, you only live once. Try it. You can always 
go back to how things were before. It might be fun, 
exciting—a real adventure. You'll never know unless you 
try and you may regret never even seeing what 
happens." 
• Our Desire to Be Liked: "I thought you were a real 
player. So did everybody else. This is going to be a real 
disappointment if you don't come through for us. Come 
on, nobody likes it when a person backs out. . . this can 
be your chance to prove what you're made of." 

• Love: "If you loved me you wouldn't question me. Of 
course I have only your best interests at heart. I wouldn't 
lie to you. You know that deep down inside, don't you? 
We can have a wonderful relationship if only you'd let 
yourself go and experience the wonders that the future 
will deliver to us." 
Strategy Review 
Look and listen objectively—not only to the words but 
also to the message. These abusive manoeuvres interfere 
with your ability to digest the facts. When these emotions 
creep into your thinking, temporarily suspend your feelings 
and look at the messenger as well as the message. If you hear 
anything that sounds like these manipulators, stop and re-
evaluate the situation. Don't act quickly and emotionally. Wait 
and objectively gather the facts so you don't become a hand 
puppet for the malevolent. 

10 _____________  
How to Tell if a Person's Bluffing in 
Any Situation 
How would you like to know if the guy sitting across the poker 
table from you really has a full house or just a pair of deuces? 
Or if your top executive is serious about quitting if he doesn't 
get a raise? There is a way to tell just about anytime, in any 
situation, if someone is bluffing because no matter what the 
situation all bluffs have one thing in common. 
To understand how this works let's define what a bluff really 
is. A bluff occurs when a person is really against something 
but pretends to be for it. Or when he is for something and 
pretends to be against it. Consequently, when a person bluffs 
he usually tries to appear as if he doesn't care when he really 
does, and he pretends to be concerned when he really isn't. 
In any case, he is trying to create a false impression 
intended to disguise his true belief. Therein lies the key: 
People who bluff generally overcompensate, in either 
direction, and if you look for it, it's glaringly obvious. 
You can uncover a bluff instantly by noticing how someone 
tries to appear. A card player bets heavily and raises the pot. 
Does he have the cards or just guts? When bluffing—in 
this case, in a poker hand—he wants to show that he's not 
timid. So he puts in his money fast. But if he did have a good 
hand, what might he do? That's right, deliberate a bit, putting 
it in slowly to show that he isn't really sure about his hand. 
When people bluff at anything, in poker or in the real world, 
they manipulate how confident they appear. This means that 
they try to create the opposite impression of how they truly 
feel. 
Again, while bluffing, and in trying to appear confident, he 
bets quickly. And when he has a good hand he will actually wait 
a moment or two to pretend that he's thinking about what to do. 
This goes for all situations. If he reacts too quickly and 
assuredly then he is trying to show that he is confident, when 
in many cases he really isn't.  

Let's take another example. A partner in a law firm says he's 
going to leave unless he is allowed to take on a certain case. 
Is it a hollow threat or the real McCoy? If it was genuine, he 
would likely not make a point of trying to convey his 
confidence. However, an air of over-confidence will be easily 
observed if he is bluffing. This is, of course, because we have 
to assume that if he's at the firm then he wants to be there. 
And that he will only be "forced" to leave if he doesn't get what 
he's asking for. So logic dictates that he would rather stay and 
get the case than not get it and leave. Therefore, if he 
appears overly committed to the idea of leaving if he doesn't 
get the case, then he's bluffing—because we know that he 
really doesn't want to leave, but is trying to create that 
impression. 
If he is sincere in his stance that he will leave if he doesn't 
get his way, then he will appear almost reluctant and not 
overly confident in his stance because he's not pleased that 
it has come down to this. He's more solemn because he 
knows that he will have to leave if it comes down to it. But if 
he was bluffing, it won't come down to anything, because he's 
not leaving! The attitudes of both are completely different and 
make it clear whether it's a bluff or the real thing. 
To understand the psychology behind this, we need only 
look at how people handle themselves in general. A person 
who has high self-esteem and confidence in himself is not 
the one going around showing the world how great he is. It's 
the insecure person who puts on airs of confidence, almost 
arrogance, to compensate for how he really feels about 
himself. He is, in fact, trying to convey a "false self." And as 
we've just illustrated, this is identical and true for specific sit-
uations as well. 
In a negotiation the person who keeps saying things such 
as, "I'm gonna walk; you have to do right by me; I'm not 
settling on this one: you're going to lose me," is not going 
anywhere . . . he's bluffing. Confidence in one's position 
usually speaks for itself. Just as a person's confidence in 
himself speaks for itself. It's the insecure who has to tell you 
how confident he is because that's the only way that we're 
going to find out. If, however, you hear something similar to 
the following phrases in a negotiation, they likely reflect a 
person who is sincere, and who is not bluffing: "I'm sorry that 
you feel that way; no hard feelings; I don't think so, but let me 
give it some thought." Remember that the confident 
person—the one who is not bluffing— isn't interested in how 
he's coming across. He's unconcerned with his image, unlike 
his bluffing counterpart, who is consumed by others' 
perceptions of him. 

Strategy Review 
 Uncover a bluff instantly by noticing how the person tries 
to appear. A person who is bluffing will always 
overcompensate to create the illusion that he is 100 percent 
behind his convictions. 

11 ___________
 
How to See Through People 
In Two Minutes Get Anyone to Reveal What They're Really 
Up To 
If you're tired of being deceived and taken advantage of, this 
psychological technique will allow you to actually look into a 
person's mind to find out if he's hiding anything. 
The tactic, which I first introduced in my book Never Be 
Lied to Again, virtually guarantees that you can find out if he's 
got something to hide, within minutes. It's called similar 
scenario and it works like a Rorschach test or what is 
commonly referred to as an inkblot test. The Rorschach test 
consists of abstract bilaterally symmetrical inkblots. The 
theory behind the test is that a person's interpretation of the 
shapes will reveal his or her unconscious attitudes and 
thoughts. With similar scenario we use the same theory but 
employ it in an entirely new way—verbally. 
What you want to do is to ask a question that does not 
accuse the person of anything but rather alludes to it. Then 
by simply gauging his response you'll be able to find out if 
he's got something to hide. 
For instance let's say that a woman suspects her husband of 
having an affair with his secretary. Casually, maybe over 
dinner, she would say, "Gee, you know what, honey? My 
boss, Jim, I think he may be having an affair with his 
secretary." Now she simply observes his reaction. If he asks 
questions and becomes interested in the conversation she 
can be reasonably sure that he's not doing the same thing. 
But if he becomes very uncomfortable and looks to change 
the subject, then it's likely he's engaged in a similar behaviour. 
And she will notice this immediate shift in his demeanour and 
attitude. 



Power Point 
Typically, when faced with this situation we confront the person, which 
of course puts him on the defensive. If it turns out that we're wrong, 
there's a good chance that we may appear as paranoid or jealous and 
the relationship may suffer. With this technique we're able to bring 
up a particular subject and find out if he's comfortable or concerned 
with the topic, and all without making a single accusation. 

Let's look at another example. You think one of your 
salespeople is stealing office supplies. Asking outright, "Have 
you been stealing from the company?" is going to put her on 
the defensive immediately, making it nearly impossible to get 
to the truth. If she isn't guilty she'll tell you that she hasn't been 
stealing. And if she is, she'll likely lie and say she's isn't. So 
instead you simply say, "Jill, I'm wondering if you could help 
me with something. It's come to my attention that someone in 
the sales department has been taking home office supplies 
for personal use. Any idea on how we can put a stop to 
this?" 
Again, if she's innocent of the charges she's likely to offer 
her advice and be pleased that you sought out her opinion. 
But if she's guilty you'll notice her becoming very 
uncomfortable and she will probably assure you that she 
would never do anything like that. There's no reason for her 
to bring herself into the picture unless, of course, she's the 
one who feels guilty. 
Do you see how effective this technique is? Let's take one 
more example where a hospital administrator suspects that a 
doctor is drinking while on duty. She might say, "Dr. Marcus, 
I'd like to get your advice on something. A colleague of mine 
at another hospital has a problem with one of her doctors. 
She feels that he may be drinking while on call. Do you have 
any suggestions on how she can best approach this doctor?" 
Again, if he's guilty of the same behaviour he'll become 
very uncomfortable. If he s not drinking on duty, then he will be 
pleased that you sought his advice and willingly and happily 
offer it. So whenever you're wondering what somebody's up to, 
use a similar scenario and find out for sure. 
Strategy Review 
Give him the instant psychological test. Ask a question 
that does not accuse the person of anything but rather alludes 
to it. Then simply gauge his response and you'll learn right 
away if he's hiding anything. 

12 ___________  
Get Anyone to Say What He's Really 
Thinking 
Ever wish you could peer into someone's mind to find out 
what he really thinks about you, your idea, your project, or 
your date? Now you can with the ultimate mind-reading 
technique that actually uses a combination of several 
psychological principles. When you think someone isn't 
telling you the truth this sure-fire technique is an excellent 
method for revealing a persons true feelings in any situation. 
Getting a truthful opinion from someone can be hard 
because you can't outright call him a liar, arguing that he 
doesn't really believe what he is saying. For this technique to 
work, you just have to get the person to commit to liking the 
idea/person, etc. (If he doesn't like it, then you don't have to 
worry about trying to get the truth because you're already 
getting it.) 
Once she says that she likes it, don't argue or press her on 
it. This is exactly where most people mess up. They'll say 
something like, "Are you sure you like it? Do you really?" The 
other person is not now going to say, "Well, now that I think of 
it. . ." She's going to become more absolute in her approval 
and you may not be getting to what she really thinks. 
With this technique, you'll see that the words you use in 
your response indicate that you agree and that there is room 
for improvement. She feels comfortable offering criticism 
because she feels that you expect her to do so. The two main 
psychological tactics at work here are consistency (human 
beings have a need for continuity with their thinking) and 
expectancy (people often do what is expected of them). Both 
of these concepts are covered more extensively in other 
sections throughout this book. 
Example I 
You're not sure if your co-worker really likes your idea for a 
new marketing campaign, even though she says that she 
does. 
Q: Do you like the concept for my new idea? 
A: Sure. It's very original. 
Q: Well, what would it take for you to love the idea? 

Example II 
You want to know if your son is looking forward to going to camp 
this 
summer. 
Q: Are you excited about camp next month? 
A: Yeah. It'll be fun. 
Q: What would it take for you to be really excited about 
going? 
Example III 
Q: Do you like my new deck? 
A: Sure, it looks fine. 
Q: How do you think I can make it even better? 
As you can see, all these people feel comfortable answering 
honestly because your questions to them make it obvious that 
you know that everything's not perfect. By not pressing the 
point of their liking it, their answer naturally unfolds as an 
extension of what they've already said, and the truth—what 
they're really thinking—merely "pops" out. 
Power Point 
Are you trying to find out what she thinks, but she doesn't want to 
speak ill of someone else or his work? No problem. Instead of saying, 
"What didn't you like about it?" or "How did she screw up?" ask in-
stead, "How would you have done it?" or "What would you have done 
differently?" This phrasing takes the focus off what the other person 
did wrong, and instead asks what this person would have done to make 
it better. But as you see you get the identical information. 
Strategy Review 
Just get her to commit to liking the idea, person, or 
object. Then simply ask her how she thinks that it can be 
improved upon. 

Section III 
TAKE CONTROL OF ANY SITUATION 
AND GET ANYONE TO DO ANYTNING 
Succeeding in life is usually a matter of influencing the 
attitudes, beliefs, and thoughts of other people. This is not 
success through manipulation, but rather success through 
the application of specific psychological strategies. There's a 
big difference. This book operates under the premise that 
most people are good, decent, and honest. (Of course, there 
are people who are not so great and this book will protect 
you from them as well so you won't be manipulated and 
taken advantage of.) But as you know from your own life, 
often our fears and hang-ups get in the way of our doing 
what's right for ourselves and for others. Most people want to 
help; it makes them feel good to do for others. So rather 
than force people to bend to your will, this section shows 
you how to naturally bring out the pure and good desire and 
intentions of others to help you and to work with you. 
You can easily direct the behaviour and thoughts of other 
people by your words and your actions. By changing the 
things that you do and say to others you'll change their 
attitudes and behaviour toward you. It's really that simple. 
People do not operate in a vacuum but instead they think and 
behave in response to their world. Change their world and you 
change their responses. 
Depending on the situation, you can use whichever 
strategies best apply. If you simply want someone to help you 
with something, then go to Chapter 17, Get Anyone to Do a 
Favour for You. If, however, you need to first change a 
person's mind about something, then you should go to 
Chapter 16, How to Get a Stubborn Person to Change His 
Mind About Anything. These tactics are designed to work 
alone and as part of an overall strategy that uses tactics from 
the various chapters and sections. 

13 _______________  
Get Anyone to Take Immediate Action 
in Any Situation 
You are about to see that by following a simple formula 
that uses six different psychological tactics, you can 
motivate anyone to take action anytime. This powerful 
strategy 
as 
outlined 
below 
virtually 
guarantees 
cooperation from anyone in just about any situation. 
1. LIMIT OPTIONS 
The first thing you want to do is narrow someone's 
options before you present them to him. Conventional 
wisdom suggests that with more options he is sure to 
find something that he likes and that this will motivate 
him to take action. The opposite is true! If what you 
want him to do has numerous alternatives he will be 
less likely to choose any of them. Nobody enjoys being 
wrong and we don't like to second-guess ourselves. 
Fewer choices mean that he will make a decision faster 
and be less likely to dwell on it afterward. 
There is a well-known furniture chain that holds on to 
every customer order for seventy-two hours before 
putting it through to the home office. Why? Because it 
found that over 60 percent of people, within three days 
of a major purchase, will come back to change their 
mind about the colour, a fabric, or the design. With too 
many choices most people freeze and take forever to 
decide, and once they do make a decision, their brain 
often churns with Did I make the right choice? Unless 
you're in a retail situation where competition mandates 
selection, offer no more than three options, with two 
being ideal. No choices can lead to a persons feeling 
his freedom is restricted and cause him to back off. Any 
option, even one, gives him a sense of empowerment 
and you want him to believe that he's in control. 

2. GIVE A DEADLINE 
Giving a deadline for action fulfils three separate and 
very important psychological motivations for fostering 
action. 
■A task will expand or contract depending upon how 
much time you allow for it. The world operates on 
deadlines and expiration dates because if there is 
no immediate need to move forward most people 
will not. It is human nature to wait until conditions 
become more favourable, or until we have more 
information, or until we are in a better mood before 
taking an action. It's important to give a clear-cut 
deadline and let the person know that the 
action must be taken now because he may not 
have a chance to act later. 
■This also invokes another psychological motivation 
in that we don't like our freedom to be restricted. 
Whenever we are told that we cannot have or do 
something we end up desiring it more. So by 
letting an individual know that he may not get the 
opportunity to act in the future, you create a 
larger incentive toward moving now. There is 
another 
well-known 
though 
less 
scrupulous retail store that puts "sold" tags on 
items that it wants to get rid of. They do it for this 
very reason. When we see a "sold" tag on 
something we are unconsciously driven to desire it 
more. Then when we find out that another "just 
like it" may be for sale we jump on the opportunity 
to purchase it. 
■Consistent with this law are numerous studies 
that show that human beings respond to that 
which is scarce and becoming scarcer. I'm sure 
you find this to be true in your own life. When 
something is the latest or hottest and everyone 
wants one, it becomes that much more desirable. 
And when the window of opportunity to act 
continues to shrink, we are driven to desire it that 
much more. We place value on that which is 
scarce. Diamonds, gold, and oil are not essential to 
our well-being yet they are highly valued—but only 
because of the perception that theyare scarce. 
Think about it. Platinum is worth more than gold 
and gold more than silver and silver more than 
copper. All because of how much of it is available 
to us. 

3. USE THE LAW OF INERTIA 
Sir Isaac Newton first informed us that objects in motion 
tend to stay in motion, and objects at rest tend to stay at 
rest. He might well have added that people in motion 
tend to stay in motion and people at rest tend to stay at 
rest. If you are able to get the person moving in the 
right direction, either physically or mentally—starting 
with something easy and/or fun—he will likely continue 
to follow through. Why is this so? 
Human beings have a strong need for consistency 
with their actions. Several studies in this area clearly 
illustrate how effective this psychological factor can be 
when applied to motivating a person. They show us 
that when someone is presented with a small request 
and subsequently does it, he is infinitely more likely to 
agree to a larger request—the thing that we wanted 
him to do in the first place—what we really wanted him 
to do. However, if he is not first presented with, and 
subsequently doesn't complete, the smaller request, 
then he has no unconscious motivation for consistency. 
Called the "foot-in-the-door technique," the following 
study demonstrates the tendency for people who 
have first agreed to a small request to comply later 
with a larger request. Freedman and Fraser (1966) 
asked home owners if they would let them place a 
huge DRIVE CAREFULLY sign in their front yards. Only 17 
percent gave permission. Other residents, however, 
were first approached with a smaller request. They 
were asked to put up a three-inch BE A SAFE DRIVER 
window sign. Nearly all immediately agreed. When ap-
proached a few weeks later the home owners were 
asked to place the gigantic sign on their front lawn. This 
same group overwhelmingly agreed—76 percent 
consented—to having the unsightly sign in their front 
yards. 
When we take a small step in one direction we are 
driven to maintain a sense of consistency by agreeing 
to larger requests. Simply, those who had agreed to 
the smaller request had reshaped their self-concept to 
include the definition that they were serious about 
driver safety. Therefore, agreeing to the larger request 
was just doing something for a cause that they already 
and firmly "believed" in. Effective fund-raisers know the 
number-one rule for raising money. The easiest person 
to get a donation from is someone who has given 
money before. 




Power Point 
Music has an impact on the speed of our actions. Consider 
the study done by Milliman (1982), which showed that slow-
paced music played in grocery stores increases sales because 
shoppers walk more slowly down the aisles. The flip side of 
this is also true. Fast-paced music furnishes an unconscious 
motivation for acting quickly. Roballey et al. (1985) found that 
if fast music is played while people eat, they respond with more 
bites per minute. If possible, have fast-tempo music playing in the 
background to increase the feeling and urgency for taking 
action. To increase the benefits of this law try speaking faster. 
You will notice that if you ask someone a question slowly, he 
will respond the same way, and vice versa. Others will be 
guided by your sense of urgency and speaking fast increases 
this feeling of necessity. 
4. EXPECTATION 
The law of expectation states that people will do what 
you expect them to do. Speak and act directly, clearly, 
and 
confidently. 
Also, 
take 
the 
appropriate 
corresponding physical action. Whether it's moving 
toward the door, picking up a pen, or dialling the 
phone, people will respond to your assuredness and 
act accordingly. In other words, you can use more than 
just words—use your actions as well—to spark action. 
If, for example, you want someone to follow you—
literally—begin walking without looking back "to make 
sure he's coming." Your words and actions must convey 
confidence and expectation that the person will comply. 

5. PROCESSING INFORMATION 
It is crucial to this process to know how people process 
information. The good news is that we all do it in the 
same way. In my book Never Be Lied to Again I talked 
about this concept and how it gives us a dramatic 
insight into human behaviour. Remember above when 
we spoke about starting with something easy and 
simple to enact the law of inertia? Let's take a look at 
another application of this process. When it comes to 
doing something that we like, we do what's called 
single-tasking. When we think about things we don't 
want to do, we do what's called multitasking. What does 
this all mean? Well, if you have to pay your bills but 
never feel like doing it, what are the thought processes 
you might go through? You think, I've got to get all of the 
bills together and organize them into different piles; 
get out my check book, stamps, and envelopes; 
address each letter; write out the check; balance the 
check book; and so on. When it comes to doing 
something you enjoy doing, you internalize the steps in 
larger groups. For example, if you enjoy cooking, the 
steps might be, go to the store and come home and 
make dinner. 
If you hated to cook, everything from waiting on line 
at the supermarket to cleaning the dishes afterward 
would enter into the equation. Fine, but what's the 
practical use of this? Well, if you want someone to take 
immediate action, you're going to show him that it's 
simple and easy. If you want to discourage a behaviour, 
you need only stretch out the number of steps into a 
long, boring, and arduous process. It's the same 
event, but depending upon how it's internalized, you'll 
generate a completely different attitude toward it. 
6. ADDITIONAL INCENTIVE 
But wait. . . that's not all! How many times have you 
heard this familiar phrase at the end of a commercial or 
late night infomercial? The "add-on" is a highly effective 
tool for generating action whether on TV, in person, or 
on the phone. So use it. It's estimated that the use of 
this technique increases the response rate from these 
programs by as much as 35 percent. It gives the person 
an extra benefit for acting, and the most fascinating 
thing is that it almost doesn't matter what it is. Once 
you've presented your request by employing the tactics 
above, use an "add-on." It can be any small additional 
benefit that the person gets for taking action now (i.e., 
"We can get ice cream"; "I'll have a loaner car for you"; 
"We'll go to dinner afterward," etc.). You'll be amazed at 
how efficient this psychological tool can be. 




Power Point 
The language that you use can also invoke the law of inertia. 
Seemingly innocuous words such as: as, while, and during are 
such powerful motivators that they are often used in hypnosis. 
Remember that when a person is already in motion—either in 
thought or physically—-it's easier for him to continue. For 
example if you want compliance, you're better off saying 
something such as, “While  we're out let's go by Jim's house, 
okay?" instead of, “When we go out, do you want to stop in 
and see Jim?" Do you see how easily the first sentence flows 
with the idea of seeing Jim? 

Strategy Review 
Narrow a person's options to avoid extensive 
deliberation. Fewer choices mean that he will make a 
decision faster and be less likely to dwell on it afterward. 
Give a deadline for taking action. A deadline restricts 
freedom and increases our desire to gain what is rare 
and becoming scarcer. This greatly motivates us to 
move forward and to take immediate action. 
Engage the law of consistency by first having an 
individual commit to a smaller request. When we take a 
small step in one direction we are driven to maintain a 
sense of consistency by agreeing to larger requests. 
Use your words and your actions to engage the law 
of expectation. 
Maximize the law of inertia by reducing what you 
want a person to do to simple, easy-to-follow steps to 
get him to begin moving in the right direction. 
Offer any small additional benefit for taking action 
now. This will significantly increase your chances of 
gaining compliance.   
Keep in mind that the number-one psychological rule 
that determines if someone will do something for you or 
even with you is that she must, to some extent, like you 
and, preferably, trust you. So glance at Chapter 1, Get 
Anyone to Like You . . . Every Time, in order to round 
out your psychological strategy for this section. 

14 
Get Anyone to Take Your Advice 
You've got a great idea but nobody is listening to you! 
This can be extremely frustrating but by following a 
specific psychological strategy you can virtually ensure 
that anyone will listen to what you have to say. The 
three main factors of influence here are (1) emotions, 
(2) strategy, and (3) consequences. 
It's been clearly established, through numerous 
studies, that you need to appeal to a person's 
emotions in your attempt to persuade. No matter how 
rational and logical your argument is, if you do not 
arouse emotions you will have great difficulty influenc-
ing him. 
Ninety percent of the decisions we make are based 
on emotion. We then use logic to justify our actions. If 
you appeal to someone on a strictly logical basis, you 
will have little chance of persuading him. You need to 
translate the facts into an emotion-based statement— 
and give clear and specific benefits that appeal to the 
persons emotions. 
Studies show that in addition to arousing strong 
emotions you will be especially effective when you offer 
a specific game plan with a clear-cut course of action for 
proceeding. When we are passionately motivated to 
take action and move forward, it is essential that we 
understand the direction and the method for 
proceeding. It makes us feel comfortable and secure 
knowing that the path is clearly lit and laid out. When 
you want someone to listen to your advice, provide 
more than just the desired destination; also give her a 
map for getting there. 
It has been shown that if you add to this how your 
idea will prevent negative or unpleasant consequences 
you will be infinitely more successful in your attempt to 
persuade (Leventhal, Singer, and Jones, 1965). A well-
known sweepstakes company used to have a slogan 
that said: You can be a winner. It did very well with this 
for a long time. But then, I'm sure after consulting a 
psychologist or two, its slogan changed to You may 
already be a winner. This greatly increased their 
success. Why? Because now the person receiving this 
envelope became fearful that he might lose something 
that he already had. Throw out an envelope that 
contains untold riches? No way! This was different than 
gaining something new, as the old slogan implied. 

Now he risked losing something. This is a much more 
powerful motivator. Therefore, focus on what he will be 
saving himself from (i.e., the heartache, money, energy, 
etc.) rather than what he has to gain from listening to 
you. 
Four other psychological factors to consider 
♦People tend to respond more favourably to solutions if 
they believe the plan of action came from them. Try to 
remind someone that it was he who first had the idea or 
put you in the right direction, etc. 
 
♦Let him know too that this new way of thinking is really 
consistent with who he is. Remind him of other things 
he's done that are consistent with this current belief or 
action. You may recall from a previous chapter that all 
human beings have an inherent need for order and 
consistency. If he views this as a continuation of his 
thinking and not a departure from it, you'll increase your 
chances of getting compliance. 
 
♦Nobody wants to hear advice from a "know-it-all." One 
of the very best ways of offering advice is to let the 
person know that you don't believe you have all the 
answers. You'll be perceived as infinitely more credible 
and sincere. A great way to phrase your advice is, 
"There are things I think I know, and there are things I 
know I know. And this is something that I know I know." 
 
♦Above all, remember enthusiasm is contagious. The 
more excited and passionate you are about what 
you're saying the more excited he will become about it. 
Follow this strategy for sure-fire success, but before you 
do, let's take a look at one of the biggest mistakes that 
people make when giving advice. This aspect of 
human nature is responsible for more "stubborn" 
thinking than anything else. Research in human 
behaviour shows us that when we feel our freedom is 
being restricted or limited we tend to move farther 
toward what is being limited. 
The name given to this is called reactance and it 
occurs when we feel that someone is trying to limit our 
freedom. And it can be so powerful that Rhodewalt 
and Davison (1983) found that people may do the 
opposite of what you are asking—just because of reac-
tance. 
In situations that are likely to generate reactance 
you will meet with great resistance if you promote a 
hard sell. No one will listen with an open mind to what 
you have to say, if he feels he's being forced into it. 
And in fact, that makes sense. Why listen if you feel 
that your own wishes aren't being considered? 

Therefore, the best approach is to let the person know 
ahead of time that he has the final say on what he 
ultimately does. Then lay out the facts, presenting both 
sides—the pros and the cons (you'll see in another 
chapter why this is necessary) and follow the rest of 
the tactics in this section. 

Strategy Review 
Ninety percent of the decisions we make are based 
on emotion. We then use logic to justify our actions. You 
must arouse emotions in your attempt to persuade. 
 Offer a specific game plan with a clear-cut course of 
action for proceeding. 
Add to this how your idea will prevent negative or 
unpleasant consequences. This is more effective than 
explaining what someone will gain by listening to you. 
 If true, remind him how he is in some way the one 
who first gave you the idea. 
Let him know too that this new way of thinking is 
really consistent with who he is. Relate the things he's 
done that are consistent with this current belief or 
action. 
Don't come across as a "know-it-all" and you'll be 
perceived as more credible and sincere in this situation.  
Remember that enthusiasm is contagious. If you're 
not excited about the idea, he will not be excited about 
it either. 

15____________
 
Get Anyone to Follow Through on 
a Commitment to You 
"But you promised!" If you're tired of saying this, the 
following strategy will help to ensure that you'll be able to 
get any person to follow through on anything that he's 
promised to you. 
The most effective psychological tool for getting 
someone to follow through is to let him know that you 
believe that he is the type of person who does follow 
through. Using phrases such as "You're the kind of person 
who . . ."; "You've always impressed me with your ability to . 
. ."; or "I've always liked the fact that you . . ." invokes the 
powerful psychological law of internal consistency. 
These phrases make the person feel compelled to follow 
through because you involve the ego and create a sense 
of desired consistency. People have an inherent need to 
perform in a manner consistent with how they see 
themselves and with how they think others perceive them. 
That's why one of the biggest mistakes people make is 
saying things like, "Come on, please do it"; "I just knew this 
was going to be a problem"; "I just knew you weren't going 
to do this"; or "I don't know why I bothered to count on you." 
This does not generate any psychological motivation to 
prove you wrong. These comments address someone's 
actions not her identity and force her ego to come up with 
reasons to justify her behaviour, not to change it\ 
For example, let's say you've asked someone to work on 
some files for you over the next two weeks. Don't say, "How 
are they coming?" or "Shouldn't you have started by now?" 
This only provides an opportunity for either an excuse or a 
chance for her to back out. Instead say, "You know, Sally I 
appreciate your helping me with those files. I respect the 
fact that you're the kind of person who not only offers to 
help but follows through until she gets the job done." With 
these words you've wrapped this person's self-concept into 
a single cause. How you see her is woven into her 
behaviour toward this project. You can be sure she will 
comply and continue working on it so that your image of 
her is not tarnished.  

This makes it nearly impossible for her to say, "I'm too 
busy or I don't feel like doing it." Because not only would 
she risk your questioning who she is but this would leave 
her wondering as well. Simply, she fancies seeing herself 
as someone who "follows through on things . . . and can 
be counted on," etc. If she abandons this project, then she 
has to ask herself, "What land of person am I?" This is 
something very few people are willing or able to do. 
Another version of this tactic—which can also be used in 
conjunction with the first one—is to invoke a generic value 
identity. For instance, you can incorporate themes such as 
friendship, commitment to work, a sense of decency—all 
qualities that most people aspire to identify with. A 
question like, "Isn't it amazing how some people don't 
know the definition of the word friendship?" is so powerful. 
With this one statement you bring her value system—what 
is important to her—into the task. Now this is not an 
isolated job, but something that actually defines your 
friendship. She's risking more than just annoying you by 
bailing out; she's risking the relationship. Instead of this just 
being an isolated project, you're able to bring your entire 
friendship and the power that it has into this one task. 
These psychology-laden phrases will help keep her 
moving along, but when you want someone to follow 
through, it's crucial to lay the groundwork when you first 
ask for the favour. Take a look at the following study and 
then we'll discuss it. 
Angela Lipsitz and others (1989) report that ending 
blood-drive reminder calls with, "We'll count on seeing you 
then, okay?" and then pausing for response increased the 
show-up rate from 62 to 81 percent. Just this one phrase 
increased the rate by about 20 percent. When you initially 
ask for the favour, make sure that you give a quick verbal 
confirmation. This dramatically increases the level of 
internal consistency as you solidify your chances of getting 
someone to follow through. 



Power Point 
Keep in mind that the act of volunteering makes it more likely that 
a person will follow through. If a certain task was thrust upon 
someone, you're going to risk an internal justification—where the 
thinking might be, "If I don't follow through, he'll be mad. I will 
feel guilty or suffer some form of retribution." This can hinder his 
enthusiasm for completing the task if he's able to resolve this 
internal conflict. In other words, he's not doing it because he's a 
great guy who follows through, but rather because he has to. To 
override this thinking (when you think it may be a problem), you just 
need to include the phrase, "I know you could have gotten out of it 
if you wanted to." 
This is because when we volunteer, cognitive dissonance is 
reduced with the continuing thought that "I must really want to be 
doing this." The only other rationale is, "I'm an idiot and I never 
should have agreed to this." Most people's psyches are more 

comfortable with the first rationalization. This is why we often see 
people doing things that seem completely absurd or out of 
character for them. 
But wait, there's more! When you initially ask a person for 
the favour, follow this five-phase process to solidify his 
intent to help. 
You tell a friend, for example, that you're having 
problems with your computer and he cheerfully offers to try 
to come by next Saturday. Now, he just might be saving this 
to be nice or because he actually intends to try to come by. 
But you really need his help, and to make sure you get it, 
you want to move him internally and turn a casual offer into 
a firm commitment. You'll see that by applying a specific 
psychological sequence, you can take a vague offer and 
turn it into a specific, firm commitment. 
Five-Step Process 
1. Get him to say it: When you say it, it's one thing, but 
when he says it, it takes his commitment to a whole new 
level. You want him to say the words. Therefore, you say, 
"Do you really mean that?" or "Are you serious?" He will 
most likely respond with, "Yes, I'll help you on Saturday." 
2. Get a specific time frame: You want him to commit to a 
time in which he will help you and/or to a time frame of 
how long it will take for him to complete his task. In 
this example, you would say, "Great, what time?" and 
"Any idea of how long it might take?" 
3. Develop a sense of obligation: It's important to let him 
know that because of his help, you are going to in 
some way alter  what you were going to do. Viewing his 
help as a plus is only part of it. He needs, too, to see 
that the withdrawal of his offer will cause a disturbance. 
If he reneges and there are no repercussions, then he 
will see that things are no worse off for you than before 
he offered. In this case, you might let him know that 
you are cancelling other appointments and moving 
your schedule around to accommodate him. 
4. A sense of conscience: You want to relay that you are 
now de pendent upon him for his help. Now is the time 
where you let him know how important his help really is. 
Mention any consequences that you might suffer if he 
doesn't come through. In this example, it might be that 
your computer is necessary to get a report in and 
maybe you'll get in hot water if it's not in on time—or 
something to that effect. 

5. Seeing is believing: Real estate agents know the power 
of this tactic. When showing a home they want the 
people to envision it as theirs. Taking it from someone 
else's house to their home is a powerful visual  
technique. So when showing the customer around they'll 
ask questions such as, "Where do you think you might 
put the TV?" and "Where will the sofa go"? In this ex 
ample you might ask your friend, "What will you do first? 
Hook up the monitor or go through the booklet?" You 
want him to "see" himself doing what he says he will. 




Power Point 
Master magician Harry Houdini offered a simple explanation when 
asked how he was able to so easily escape from a closed and locked 
safe. He said, "Safes are built to keep people from getting in, not to 
keep people from getting out." If you want to double-check to make 
sure that someone's truly committed then use this quick technique. 
There is a psychological door that we keep guarded and tightly 
closed, but there's always a back door that we can walk right through. 
This Back Door tactic is a simple and highly effective questioning tech-
nique. It works because no matter how well practiced someone is 
at convincing you of his sincerity, he isn't prepared to respond to this 
tactic. 
The key phrase is: "What would have to happen for this not to work 
out?" This is so effective because his entire line of thought is not on 
why he wouldn't do something but on why he would. He's used to an-
swering questions as to why he is doing or will do what he says he will. 
But answering clearly what would prevent him from accomplishing his 
objective requires that he would first have to have true intentions of do-
ing it. Put simply, it's asking him to think like a person who holds a dif-
ferent belief. Under normal circumstances—if he was honest in his 
intentions—this wouldn't be a problem, but it becomes one when an 
individual is not sincere. 
After you ask this question the only answer you should expect is a 
fast "nothing" or a reasonable obstacle—something specific that is be-
yond his control. We all have reservations, and acknowledging them 
doesn't hamper our commitment. It just makes us honest. But if you 
ask Jake what would prevent him from marrying his girlfriend next year 
and he smiles and says,"l don't know ... if things change ... or some-
thing," Jake is not committed. If you merely ask,"You will marry Jane, 
right?" then he'll respond with a convincing yes, and give you all the 
reasons why he loves her. Because this is the question that he's been 
getting consistently and he can answer it easily and believably. The re-
verse, however, is not what he's expecting or is prepared for. 

Strategy Review 
When you initially ask for the favour, hit as many of these 
five points as you can: (a) Get him to say it; (b) get a specific 
time frame; (c) develop a sense of obligation; (d) engage his 
conscience; and (e) have him tell you how things will unfold.  
Then end the conversation with a firm verbal 
confirmation and a simple phrase such as, "So I'll see you 
next Saturday, right?" 
Finally, as the day approaches let him know that you 
appreciate that he's someone who really follows through 
and/or that you are glad that he knows the true value of 
friendship/responsibility/loyalty—whichever best applies. 

16 _____________
 
How to Get a Stubborn Person 
to Change His Mind About 
Anything 
Fewer things can be more frustrating than trying to pry 
open the mind of a closed-minded person. But by 
following a precise set of psychological tactics you can 
get anyone to listen to what you have to say objectively 
and fairly. More than this, this strategy paves the way for 
getting someone to change his mind without a wall of 
resistance. When you're dealing with a closed-minded 
person there are four possible factors for this attitude: 
1. This person usually says no to everything, no 
matter what the idea is. If it's new, it's frightening 
and he doesn't like that. His motto is "change is 
bad." 
2. This person has a problem with some people—in 
this case you. You find that no matter how 
persuasive, no matter how much your idea makes 
sense, if he hears it from you, he wants no part of it. 
3. This person just came off another, though 
unrelated, situation, where he felt taken 
advantage of and manipulated, and the wounds 
are still fresh. Anything that further deviates from 
his usual thinking is not well received. He's not 
feeling good about his ability to make decisions 
and will retreat to safe ground to avoid being 
swayed. 
4. This person has a situational aversion. This 
means that it's got nothing to do with you but "the 
whole idea" of whatever it is just doesn't sit well 
with him—meaning that "it's just not him." Your 
idea is inconsistent with his self-concept—how he 
sees himself. 
If you've ever faced any people like this, you know that 
arguing with them will get you absolutely nowhere. The 
stronger your argument becomes, the greater their 
rejection of it. Logic goes out the window and nothing 
you say or do will make a difference. Unless, of course, 
you say or do the right thing. 
If you believe that someone's resistance is due to 
either A, B, or C, then you'll simply use a two-phase 
process to get him to re-evaluate his thinking about 
any belief, value idea, person, place, or thing. 

Phase I: Various studies show that if prior to asking a 
favour, you can get a person to make a statement that 
is consistent with granting your request, you're likely to 
get a change of attitude and then her compliance. 
What you want to do is have her agree to an idea or a 
way of thinking that will later neutralize her own 
objection. 
No matter what this person's attitude, you can adjust 
her thinking radically and quickly with just this one 
tactic. For instance, let's say that you want your boss to 
hear you out on a new idea. Simply say, "Don't you 
think that closed-mindedness is such an undesirable 
trait?" Then after a short time when you bring up the 
subject, you'll find her unusually cooperative and open 
to your suggestions. Because once your boss readily 
agrees with this statement she's unconsciously driven 
to act in a consistent manner. 
This tactic is so highly effective because human 
beings have a strong need to be congruous with their 
attitudes, beliefs, and actions. For if someone thinks 
one way and does something else he's thought of as 
confused and nutty. And we perceive ourselves in the 
same way. Once we commit publicly to a stance, our 
attitude will conform to it and then influence our 
subsequent actions. As we'll see below, depending 
upon the situation, you can ask more specific questions 
to create greater internal consistency in a person. 
Phase II: Restrict, in some way, or some part, his ability 
to do what he doesn't want to do. That's right. When 
someone is stubborn it's because he knows that he 
can do something but chooses not to. By thwarting his 
ability to do it the equation is now thrown off because 
he no longer sees the decision as his. And if you can't 
do something, then you have no reason to be stubborn 
about it. As a matter of fact, it increases the desire to 
do it! This instantly melts the wall of obstinacy. It's like 
telling someone who doesn't like to travel that she can 
never leave her town. Suddenly, with her freedom 
restricted, the ego goes into overdrive and creates an 
unconscious desire to be able to leave. Then once the 
desire to be able to leave kicks in, it's followed with the 
desire to leave because of cognitive dissonance. The 
thinking is, "I want to be able to leave because I must 
want to leave." The mind then begins to race for ways 
to do what it feels it must want to do. 
This restriction can take any form. Why do you think 
coupons have expiration dates and sales are for a 
"limited time" only? If the option is always open to us, 
our impetus to act is not so strong. But once 
something becomes restricted—whether or not we 
really wanted it in the first place—we become more 
interested in it. Does prohibition ring any bells? 

But here's the key: The restriction must be something 
that is overcome when the person comes up with the 
solution. 
Now let's follow through with the previous example 
from Phase I. Let's say that the idea you want to put 
forth to your boss is that the office should have a 
company-sponsored picnic at the park next Friday. You 
think that your boss may be against that idea so you be-
gin by laying the groundwork in Phase I with a general 
question, such as "Don't you think that closed-
mindedness is an undesirable trait?" or "Don't you just 
hate it when someone won't hear you out on 
something?" Then follow up with a more specific 
statement such as, "How important do you think 
company morale is to an office environment?" These 
are obviously two loaded questions that once agreed 
with and expanded upon will produce an internal need 
for congruence. 
Then you simply complete the tactic with Phase II, 
where you might say something like, "I'm sure that 
most people would love to go on a picnic, but I don't 
think that we could (a) get a park permit in time, or (b) 
decide on what sports to play so everybody's happy, or 
(c) get anyone to cover the phones." And that's all you 
have to do. 
Now look what you've managed to accomplish. You 
had a closed-minded person who heard you out on your 
idea, agreed that it makes sense, and then proceeded 
to figure out how the suggestion could best be 
implemented. 
This, done in conjunction with the following six power 
tips, will give you the opportunity to create a change of 
heart in even the most closed-minded person. These 
tips can be used as part of your two-phase strategy, 
though it's not necessary to employ them all. 
Six Power Tips 
1. When a person becomes adamant about his 
position, change the one thing that you can—his 
physiology. A persons emotional state is directly 
related to his physical state. If he gets locked 
into a position of denial or refusal, get him to 
move his body. This prevents what is called mind-
lock and makes it easier for him to change his 
psychological position. If he's sitting down, have 
him get up and walk around the room. If he's 
standing, try to get him to sit down. When our 
body is in a fixed position, our mind can become 
similarly 
frozen. 
Numerous 
studies 
overwhelmingly concur that there is no easier 
way to snap anyone out of a mode of thinking 
than to get him to move his body. 




Power Point 
The power of physiology on our emotions is startling. You can 
try this on yourself. Sit hunched over, legs drawn in; frown and 
put your head down. Stay that way for a few minutes. Now how 
do you feel? Chances are you feel pretty lousy. But now move 
around and wave your arms and shake and move your body. 
Notice how your entire emotional state changes. By bending 
and moving our bodies, our minds too become more flexible 
toward other ideas and ways of thinking. Have you ever given 
any thought to the belief that older people seem more set in 
their ways than do younger folks? Could it have something 
to do with the fact that as we age our bodies become less agile 
and flexible? 
2. Give additional information before you ask someone 
to again reconsider. Nobody wants to be thought of as 
"wishy-washy," meaning that if he changes his mind 
without any new information he may be perceived, and 
think of himself, as inconsistent. Rather, before asking 
him to agree, each time offer some other bit of relevant 
data or remind him of something he may have forgotten 
about. In this way he can make a new decision based 
upon additional information instead of simply changing 
his mind.  
3. Studies show us that when our self-awareness is 
heightened we are more easily influenced. This 
suggests that when we can see ourselves—literally—in 
a reflection, we are more persuadable. Having a 
conversation by a mirrored wall or reflective panel will 
increase the chance for compliance. 
4. Reciprocal persuasion:  Cialdini, Green, and 
Rusch (1992) found that if someone had previously 
persuaded you to change your mind, he would be 
more inclined to reciprocate by changing his attitudes 
about something when you ask. Similarly, if you 
had resisted his appeal and not changed your 
mind, he would often  "reciprocate" by refusing to 
change his own mind. You can use this very easily 
to your advantage by saying, "I 
thought about what you said regarding [any previous 
conversation where he was explaining his point of 
view] and I've come to agree with your thinking. 
You're right." 

5. Studies conclude that when a person holds an 
opposing view, you should adopt a two-sided 
argument. When you're dealing with a stubborn 
person, we can likely assume that he's based his 
opinion, at least in part, on fact. Therefore, a one-
sided argument will appear to him as if you are not 
taking his thinking into consideration. Consequently, 
in this instance, present 
both sides (following the rule of primacy, be sure to 
present your side first) and you will find him more 
malleable in his thinking. 
6. Let him think that he is, in some way, responsible for 
the idea. This accomplishes several things; most 
important is that he will identify more strongly with 
the objective. In this way, his actions are deemed to 
be consistent with some aspect of his belief system. 
Once you've  eliminated his resistance, you want to 
follow it up with psychological motivators to take 
action. To round out your strategy use the 
techniques in Chapter 13, Get 
Anyone to Take Immediate Action in Any Situation. 
Now, that was the easy part. But remember that a 
few pages ago we said that there are four motivations 
behind stubborn thinking. The previous tactics covered 
reasons A, B, and C. But what if his stubbornness is 
due to D? (Remember that D is a situation aversion—
meaning that this new idea is inconsistent with 
someone's self-concept—how he sees himself). 
Getting someone who is closed-minded due to D to 
change his mind is going to take a different strategy. 
The reason is that when we are entrenched in a belief, 
it usually involves our identity. And that means 
changing our mind forces us to revaluate how we see 
ourselves and how we look at the world. 
This closed-minded person has identified himself 
with his belief and this is how he sees himself. By 
questioning his beliefs he is forced to bring his identity 
into question. For instance, let's say that you want your 
boss to move up your name on a list of executives in 
line for a bonus. He adamantly refuses because he 
considers himself to be a fair and honest person who 
would not corrupt the system. To do this for you would 
mean bringing his entire self-concept—how he sees 
himself—into question. No matter how strongly you 
argue your case, he's not budging because it's not 
about you, it's about him and how he sees himself. 

No techniques of influence or persuasion will work 
unless you first address this issue. The key lies not in 
separating who he is from what he does. This is what we 
often try to do, but this person's anxiety will just increase 
the farther his actions move from his self-concept. In-
stead, this psychological methodology employs a 
technique to merge his self-concept and his behaviour. 
Let's continue with the above example where you 
want your boss to do you a favour that he sees as 
"nothing that he would do." Most of us consider 
ourselves to be good people. And it's safe to say, 
included in the definition, that we, of course, wouldn't kill 
another person. Yet, under what circumstance might 
you consider it permissible? If your own life or a family 
member's life was being threatened by a crazed 
gunman, perhaps? Now you can kill and still maintain a 
consistent self-image. By changing the parameters you 
include the behaviour to make it acceptable and even 
necessary. 
This tactic is made infinitely easier by using generic 
ideals in human behaviour—which is the ideal way in 
which we all like to think of ourselves. To do this you just 
align yourself with a greater and more important value to 
which this person holds. 
Under what circumstances might it become okay to 
move one executive's name ahead of another's on the 
list? It might be acceptable if this executive would 
suffer some sort of grave consequence if he didn't get 
the bonus. Now, so we're clear, you shouldn't fabricate 
the reason, nor do you have to. If you really need 
someone to do something then your real reason 
should prove to be all you need. And remember, its not 
so much what the reason is, as long as you present it in 
the right way. And that is to incorporate your desire into 
his idea of morality and how he sees himself. You see, 
instead of trying to overcome his sense of decency you 
simply appeal to it. Now we picked one of the toughest 
examples possible. It would be rare that you will have 
to contend with such an obstinate position. But when 
you do you'll be ready for it. 
But wait, is there a way to tell just how stubborn a
person is about something? Surely you can't change 
everybody's mind about anything? Well, there will be 
times when a person absolutely won't budge, so to 
save yourself some time and energy use the technique 
below to not only determine if he's movable but also to 
help you budge his thinking if he is at all flexible. 

THE CROWBAR 
Aren't there times when you would like to be able to tell 
if someone is willing to do something? How open-
minded is she to trying something new? Have you ever 
wanted to know if someone was just putting up a 
strong front but could easily give in to your request? Try 
this psychological crowbar to open a closed mind and 
see what she's really thinking. This is the perfect test 
to tell how open-minded someone is. Furthermore, it 
helps to pave the way to getting her to embrace the 
idea in its entirety. 
Sometimes people put up a strong front because 
they know that they will crumble if they ever have to 
defend their position. It has been said that the easiest 
people to sell are those who have a sign saying NO 
SALESMEN OR SOLICITORS. The reasoning is that these 
people know deep down that if a salesman did get to 
them they would buy whatever he had to sell. 
With this technique you tell her that you want her to 
agree to doing what you ask, but only if you can 
achieve some highly difficult and amazing task. For 
instance, you tell someone to write down on a piece of 
paper a number from one to one hundred and if you 
can guess what it is then she will agree to what you 
want. She will likely agree because she believes that 
there is little chance that you can guess right. If she 
does not agree to these terms then it is likely that she is 
adamant about her stance. 
The psychological strategy here is not in being right 
(if you are that's great) but in her agreeing to take the 
chance. Again, if at this point she absolutely refuses, 
then you know that there is no way that she is likely to 
comply. However, if she does agree then you've man-
aged to adjust slightly her belief system—and this is 
all that you need. You take her from a no to a maybe. 
Now she will have to alter her belief system to allow the 
possibility—though remote—for this to happen. In 
order to reduce dissonance she unconsciously adjusts 
her thinking and will now become more open. 
She also now believes herself to be the kind of 
person who takes risks—which is precisely the image 
you want her to hold of herself since your request falls 
outside of her usual comfort zone. 
Only someone who would, in the back of her mind, 
be willing to do what you ask for will take part in this 
test. So some part of her, to some degree, is willing. 
Now you know that you're not dealing with an 
impossible task. 

Strategy Review 
Begin with the Crowbar Test to determine just 
how closed-minded she really is. 
Because human beings have a strong need for 
consistency have her agree to a similar idea or a 
way of thinking that will negate her own 
objections later. 
Restrict in some way her ability to do what you 
want her to and give her the opportunity to 
provide the solution. 
A persons emotional state is directly related to 
her physical state. Change easily the one thing 
that you can—her physiology. 
She will be reluctant to change her mind without 
any new information because she will think of 
herself 
as 
inconsistent. 
Give 
additional 
information before you ask her to again re-
consider. 
Let her know that you've been recently 
influenced by her ideas. If someone is 
successful in persuading another person she 
usually reciprocates by changing her attitudes 
about something else in response to a 
persuasive appeal from that person. 
Adopt a two-sided argument to increase your 
credibility, being sure to present the evidence to 
support your position first. If possible show her 
how she is in some way responsible for the idea 
in the first place. 
Employ the tactics in Chapter 13, Get Anyone 
to Take Immediate Action in Any Situation. 
If the idea goes against her value system, 
change the parameters of the request, making 
the behaviour acceptable. 

17 _____________
 
Get Anyone to Do a Favour for You 
How would you like to get complete cooperation from anyone 
in any situation? Well, now you can if you follow these sure-
fire tactics for cooperation anytime, anyplace, for just about 
anything. These are the ten factors that influence whether 
somebody helps you out or politely (or not so politely) refuses 
your request. (If you're worried that once he agrees to help, 
he might not follow through, simply use the techniques in 
Chapter 15, Get Anyone to Follow Through on a Commitment 
to You.) 
1. TIME COMPONENT 
When is the best time to ask for a favour? Should you ask 
close to the time you want someone to take action or as far in 
advance as possible? The answer is when the event is 
farther in the future. As the event approaches the greater the 
anxiety and the "realness" of what he has to do sets in, and 
the less likely it will be for you to gain cooperation. If you need 
help with something right away though, studies suggest that 
you should find someone who is not rushed or preoccupied 
with something else. The ability to gain cooperation from some-
one who is not under a time constraint goes up 
dramatically, compared with someone who is preoccupied or 
rushed. 
2. RECIPROCITY 
Have you ever wondered why religious groups offer 
passers-by a flower or some other gift in the airport? They 
know that most people who accept the gift will then feel 
compelled to give a small donation. We know we don't have 
to, but we can become uncomfortable, even though we didn't 
ask for the gift in the first place. When someone gives us 
something, we often feel indebted to that person. If you offer 
something, anything, to your target person you will 
significantly increase compliance. Your "gift" can take the form 
of your time, your attention, or even a small gesture or 
compliment. 

3. 
BYSTANDER APATHY 
Numerous studies in helping show that as the number of 
bystanders increased the percentage of individuals who 
helped those in need decreased. This is called the bystander 
effect whereby behaviour is influenced by the diffusion of 
responsibility. This is true of almost all situations. When you 
want someone to do something for you let him know that you 
have no one else to turn to. If he thinks that you can go to 
anyone and that it's not up to him to be the good guy then his 
sense of responsibility is lessened and he doesn't feel any 
moral obligation to help out. 
4. MOOD 
Is it best to wait for him to be in a good mood before you ask? 
Not necessarily. There are actually slightly different dynamics 
at work, and hence strategies depending on his mood. 
Research shows that if he's in a good mood, you want to let 
him know clearly what you need for him to do and that he will 
feel good about it in some way. This is because positive 
emotions can result in less helpfulness if the need is 
ambiguous or the consequences of helping are unpleasant. 
When we're feeling good we don't want to lose our mood. 
Studies also show that negative emotions can increase a 
person's willingness to help because helping makes people 
feel good and those in a bad mood are motivated to take 
action to make themselves feel better. 
There are some exceptions here, but for the most part the 
required behaviour has to be perceived as relatively easy and 
effective and it has to seem clear that the helpful act will lead 
to more positive feelings. So when he's not in a great mood, 
be sure to emphasize that what you want him to do will not 
take a lot of effort and that he will indeed feel good after he's 
done what you've asked of him. 
5. APATHY OR EMPATHY 
If the person thinks that your situation is due to incompetence 
or ignorance, you will generate apathy, not sympathy. And if 
you don't have a person's empathy or sympathy it is much 
more difficult to get his help. 

Studies show that you will increase your chances of being 
helped if your problem is not perceived as your own doing. 
This, by the way, is why so many of us are eager to provide 
help to a sick or injured animal—a dog for instance. We feel 
so bad because we know that this was done to the dog and 
that he didn't inflict it on himself. Contrast this with the 
oblivious attitude many big-city people have as they step over 
a homeless human being in the street. He's probably on 
drugs, or a drunk, they may think to themselves. How did 
"they get themselves" into this mess? When the individual 
is not responsible, we feel empathy, which motivates within 
us a strong desire to try to be helpful. You do this by making 
the person you want to help aware—if this is the case—that 
the situation you find yourself in was caused by external 
events and that you are in a sense a victim of the situation. 
6. SIMILARITY 
Put simply, we tend to help more those whom we like and we 
like those who are like us. (For a more detailed explanation 
see Chapter 1, Get Anyone to Like You . . . Every Time.) The 
fact is that we are always more inclined to help those whom 
we like and we often like someone because he is "just like 
us" or is similar in some respects. 
7. INTERNAL CONSISTENCY 
Fascinating studies regarding memory and behaviour 
conclude that people often base their self-concept on 
availability, or how easily they can bring information to mind. 
For instance if you were asked to think of several times where 
you acted impulsively and were able to recall these events 
with relative ease, then you would see yourself— at least 
temporarily—as someone who was impulsive. However, if 
you had difficulty recalling times when you were impulsive your 
self-concept would conform around your inability to quickly 
access the memories and you would conclude—at both the 
conscious and unconscious levels—that you are someone 
who considers carefully before taking action. 
And this rule of human behaviour is pertinent because it 
coincides with the law of expectation: We act in accordance 
with how we see ourselves. You've seen by now, through the 
other chapters, the power of ego and our need for internal 
consistency with how we see ourselves and how we behave. 
So follow the logic through: If you change someone's self-
concept then you change his behaviour. And now we know 
how a person's self-concept is altered: by the ease or 
difficulty of recall. 

Since we base our judgments on the ease of recall, you 
have the technique to change how somebody sees himself. 
Then his actions automatically align themselves with this 
revised self-concept. This is so powerful because it also 
engages a third law of consistency. Put simply, consistency is 
the unconscious desire of human beings to act in a manner 
consistent with their self-concept. For example, if you see 
yourself as a loving, caring person, it is almost impossible for 
you to act in a manner that is rude and obnoxious for any 
length of time. 
Now if you want a high-strung person to be calm and 
relaxed, but you don't think that he will be able to recall too 
many times when he was calm, that's not a problem. 
Research shows that you can achieve the desired outcome—
having him temporarily think of himself as a calm person—by 
having him elaborate on a specific time that he was calm. This 
is because he will paint for himself a mental picture of his 
state. And as the saying goes, "a picture is worth a thousand 
words." The time he spends remembering the event is a fair 
substitute for the number of times he experienced it. 



Power Point 
It's for this reason that some people have such a warped perspective 
of themselves. They have a computer-like memory when it comes to 
remembering their failures and mistakes in life: so this is how they see 
themselves—as failures. Even if our accomplishments far outweigh our 
mistakes, it's what we remember, the failures, that dictates how we feel 
about ourselves. 
Getting someone to do you a favour is infinitely easier with this 
tactic because we act in accordance with how we see 
ourselves. And if you change how a person sees himself, then 
you can instantly change his behaviour. 

8. LEADING BY EXAMPLE 
Knowing others "did the right thing" invokes an unconscious 
desire to do the same. It can actually lead to an increase in 
blood donations, as Irwin Sarason and his colleagues (1991) 
found after soliciting nearly 10,000 students at high schools. 
Students who viewed a slide show that mixed in thirty-eight 
photos of high school blood drive scenes were J 7 percent 
more likely to donate than those who did not see those 
pictures. Simply, viewing photos of people donating blood 
prompted more students to do the same than among those 
who did not see those pictures. Countless studies ranging 
from donating money to one's desire to help someone 
change a flat tire show this very same thing. The evidence is 
clear that prosocial models do promote altruism. 
There will be many times when you simply aren't able to 
have someone witness others doing what you want him to do. 
And that's fine. Because you can enact this law without having 
this person actually witness another individual helping. And in 
reality, it can be more effective because as you read above in 
law number three, you want to avoid diffusing the social 
responsibility to act. Therefore, if someone learns of all those 
others who are helping, it may produce the opposite effect. 
Instead, use metaphors and stories, which are powerful tools 
of persuasion. Tell him of those who have helped in similar sit-
uations (it doesn't necessarily have to be this one) to produce 
the desired psychological effect. 
9. THE EGO 
Studies conclude that people are more inclined to be helpful 
to a friend if the friend's success does not pose a threat to 
their own self-esteem. This is why we might be more likely to 
help a stranger than someone we know. Make sure that the 
person doesn't feel threatened by you or that you are in 
some way in competition with her. Also, envy or jealousy at 
any level can inhibit an atmosphere of cooperation. Try to 
remove any element of competition between you. You want to 
promote a you and me against something else, rather than 
you helping me to get what I want. 

10. THE POWER OF PERSISTENCE 
Most people say no because they are resistant to change. 
Instead of asking just one or two times, don't give up until you 
ask six times. According to research, that's the magic number. 
Across the board most people will tend to agree to something 
after being asked up to six times. Of course some say yes 
right away or after just a few times but keep asking. 



Power Point 
Clearly he should care about you and the situation. And if you've done 
a good job with your tactics then he will. If, however, he still doesn't 
seem overly enthused about helping, research indicates that when em-
pathy is low we are more concerned with rewards and costs. Therefore, if 
in the end he simply doesn't care, then you need to explain clearly 
what he will get in exchange for helping you. Now it's a simple matter 
of illustrating how the benefits of helping exceed the trouble involved. 
Strategy Review 
If you need something done in the near future, ask when 
he is not preoccupied with something else. If it is for 
something that does not need to be done right away, ask for 
the favour as soon as possible, farthest from the time that he 
will have to do it. 
Engage the law of reciprocity by doing something for him. 
Your "gift" can take the form of your time, your attention, or 
even a small gesture or compliment. 
Avoid apathy by increasing personal responsibility. This 
is done by letting him know that you have no one else to turn 
to.   
Your request should contain three components: (a) 
specifically what you want, (b) how he will in some way feel 
good about doing you the favour, and (c) the relative ease with 
which he can accomplish the task. 
If your situation is due to your incompetence, you will 
generate apathy, not sympathy. Focus on any elements of 
your predicament that were not your own doing.   
Reshape his self-concept to include the idea that helping 
you is something that is consistent with who he is.   
Knowing others "did the right thing" invokes an 
unconscious desire to do the same. Have him witness or 
simply tell him about those who have helped in similar 
situations.  

Studies conclude that if she feels threatened by your 
success you will not get her cooperation. Explain the situation 
as the two of you working toward a common objective where 
you both win. 
Most important is to keep asking. Many times people just 
say no because it's easy and they're used to it. Persistence in 
asking—in accordance with these laws—will give you every 
opportunity to gain cooperation. 
Finally once he agrees to help, it's important that he 
follow through. Therefore use the techniques in Chapter 15, 
Get Anyone to Follow Through on a Commitment to You, to 
make sure that you get the help that is promised to you. 

18 _______________ 
The Greatest Psychological Secrets of 
Leadership 
Get Anyone to Follow You 
You've got great ideas, a clear vision, and you're ready 
to change the world. One problem . . . you're leading 
but nobody's following. Leadership seems so easy to 
those who have mastered it, and so elusive to those 
who desire it. Effective leadership though is not so 
much an art as it is a science. In this chapter we 
explore the key essentials to turn anyone into a 
charismatic, passionate, and idealized leader. 
Several factors make up the dynamics of effective 
leadership and they are divided into two main 
categories: The Personality of Leadership and The 
Mechanics of Leadership. 
A: THE PERSONALITY OF LEADERSHIP 
IDENTIFICATION 
Effective leadership means thinking in terms of the 
other person. You can motivate any action in anyone if 
you appeal to her desires, her needs, and her wants. 
But before you do, bear in mind that people do not 
care what you know until they know that you care. 
People can sense whether or not you're walking your 
talk, and you cannot lead unless you truly believe. From 
the ancient classic Tao-te Ching by Lao-tzu comes this 
enlightening passage about leadership: "Evolved 
leaders win the trust and support of the people 
through their complete identification with them. The 
interests of the people are naturally promoted 
because they become the interests of the leader as 
well" (Wing, 1986). To accomplish identification you 
must not set yourself apart from the crowd, but remain 
one of the people in the crowd. 

HUMILITY 
It is not enough to be for the people; you must be of 
the people. An ego, contrary to what is often thought, 
is not what makes a leader great. We need look no 
farther than Mahatma Gandhi or Martin Luther King, 
Jr., to know that humility breeds followers. Again from 
the ancient classic Tao-te Ching: "When it is clear in 
their words and actions that leaders do not feel superior 
to those whom they lead, the people see themselves in 
their leaders and never tire of them" (Wing, 1986). 
Those who rule with an ego rule with anger and fear 
and when those things are gone so too is their 
influence. History is full of these ego-oriented tyrants, 
dictators, and warriors. It has been said that the best 
person to lead is the one who has the role of leader 
thrust upon him, rather than one who seeks to rule 
because he desires power. Do not set yourself up as 
better than the rest, only as more willing than others to 
lead and as someone who is prepared to do what is 
necessary. 
STYLE 
Still, the most effective tool for influencing and leading 
can be summed up in one word: simplicity. Nobody 
likes or is overly inclined to follow complex and 
disorganized strategies. More wisdom from Tao-te 
Ching: "Leaders who impose elaborate strategies on 
people cause social reactions that undermine the 
structure of the organization because clever strategies 
strike a resonant chord in people and trigger their own 
cunning responses. If leaders, instead, guide the 
organization with simplicity and directness, the inherent 
cleverness of the people will be disarmed" (Wing, 
1986). 
Be clear and organized with your plan when you 
seek to inspire people to align themselves with your 
way of thinking. If your ideas are muddled with 
countless exceptions and are multifocused you will 
undoubtedly lose a person's interest and then his 
support. Be clear, be simple, and be direct. Please note 
that nowhere in here do I say to be rigid. If you are seen 
as unyielding you will be perceived as unreasonable 
and irrational. Maintain a degree of flexibility, but only 
when it makes sense, not when it's just easy. 
PERSONAL POWER 
So now you know the effective strategy for leadership, 
but as every good leader knows sometimes you need 
to be able to influence individual members to gain 
cooperation. So let's go a step farther and talk about 
how to present yourself as a person and as a leader. 

Here are some crucial personal do's and don'ts to 
act the part of a responsible and authoritative leader. 
First, never confuse passion with authority. Don't be 
overly emotional. Emotion conveys passion, which is 
fine, but that doesn't give you an air of confidence or of 
authority. Overly passionate leaders are believable but 
no one wants to follow them. Second, never yell or 
raise your voice to anybody. This will cause you to lose 
respect. And if you cannot lead yourself then you 
cannot lead others. And if you cannot control others, 
then they have no reason to listen to you. Third, be 
respectful of everyone. By ignoring a person you do not 
show how big and important you are, but how small 
you are. By giving everyone respect and attention you 
gain the one incredible ingredient that is essential to 
every great leader: charisma! This elusive trait is gained 
by showing people how great they are, not by showing 
them how wonderful you are. People will follow 
someone who makes them feel good and valuable, not 
someone who makes them feel unimportant. Great 
leaders do not try to get the people to believe in them; 
rather they show the people how to believe in 
themselves. 
Finally, numerous studies point out that when two 
people or teams work together toward a common goal 
the tension lessens. If there is infighting or lack of 
cohesion, they turn their attention to a common outside 
force. For further elaboration of this idea see Chapter 
21, How to Get Any Group of People to Get Along. 
B. THE MECHANICS OF LEADERSHIP 
Once you have the passion and the support of the 
people, you still need to gain unwavering commitment 
by applying psychological techniques. The most 
crucial ingredient in the leadership mix is knowing how 
and when to ask for input. Leaders are often made and 
broken depending on how they handle this issue. 
The question is, What level of participation is ideal 
for leadership ? Should you be running things like a 
democracy or a monarchy? The following study 
illustrates how a leader should conduct himself 
regarding participation of the group. Leaders who 
permit a fair amount of participation by followers will 
generally be more effective than leaders who permit 
either too much or too little participation (Vroom and 
Yetton, 1973). Other research shows that if the leader 
doesn't need his followers' support and can make 
decisions with his own expertise, he should not ask for 
help. If, however, he does need the people's support, 
then he should ask for it. A person's leadership style 
needs to be flexible so as to allow for the differences in 
these situations. 

Strategy Review 
Leaders win the trust and support of the people 
through their identification with them. Do not set 
yourself apart from the crowd, but remain one of the 
people in the crowd. 
Humility is one of the most powerful character 
traits for effective leadership. A strong ego creates a 
barrier between the leader and the people. 
Your vision must be clear, simple, and organized. 
Nobody likes or is overly inclined to follow complex and 
disorganized strategies. 
Don't confuse passion with authority. Overly 
passionate leaders are believable but few people want 
to follow them. 
 Never yell or publicly chastise anybody. This will 
cause you to lose respect. 
Instantly generate the often-elusive and ever-
important quality of charisma by making others feel 
important and special. 
People follow those who make them feel good 
about themselves. 
Understand the mechanics of leadership and when 
it is best to ask for input and when it is best to dictate. 

19_______________  
Get Anyone to Understand Anything 
The Two Greatest Secrets to 
Explaining Anything Complex 
If you want someone to agree to something or to take action, 
the first rule is that he should understand exactly what it is that 
you're talking about, and precisely what you are asking of him. 
It can be quite frustrating explaining something over and over 
again. But by incorporating these two tactics you can pretty 
much explain anything to anyone. 
First, the person should know the context of the 
information. To explain easily a hard-to-understand point, you 
need to offer perspective by first explaining the entire picture. 
Give him an overview so that he understands the context 
of the situation. For instance, you can listen to and memorize 
a sentence because you know and understand what the 
words mean. But ten random words such as bat, go ,fly, how, 
to, starter, never, hot, tremendous, and hen are difficult to 
keep in your head. A cogent sentence, however, with ten 
words in it is infinitely easier. The four boys were reading 
Shakespeare in the corner room. You can repeat this back 
and memorize it with great ease. But how long might it take 
you to memorize those ten random words above? The 
sentence is easier because you understand the order and 
context of the words and how they relate to one another. 
Explaining details and specifics without first making sure 
that someone understands the concept, the larger picture, is 
like putting a puzzle together without knowing what the 
picture is. Those who don't have a strong understanding of 
something usually don't have a concept of the larger picture. 
The second factor in making sure that you are understood 
has to do with expectation. Numerous studies show the 
powerful role that expectation plays in understanding and 
include such findings as (a) girls who were told that they would 
perform poorly on a math test did so; (b) assembly line workers 
who were told that the job was complex and difficult performed 
less efficiently at the same task than those who were told that 
it was easy and simple; and (c) adults who were given fairly 
complex mazes solved them faster when told that they were 
based on a grade-school level. 

Our own expectations and the expectations of others play a 
powerful role in how we digest information and consequently 
on our performance. If you want someone to understand 
something, explain the context in which the information fits in 
and communicate the fact that you expect him to understand 
it, and that it is simple to learn. Additionally, offering positive 
encouragement along the way will help to maintain his 
enthusiasm for learning and understanding. If you follow this 
approach you will greatly increase anyone's ability to 
understand, use, and retain any information. 
Strategy Review 
 Give an overview before going into the details. This puts 
the new information into an understandable context. 
 Use the law of expectation. Simply stating that you expect 
this information will be understood quickly and easily greatly 
increases comprehension and retention. 

20 ___________  
Minority Rule 
How to Get Your Way 
When Everyone's Going the Other Way 
History is full of examples of those whose thinking 
shaped 
the 
future. 
Unyielding 
as 
they 
were 
unconventional, these visionaries helped shape a world 
not yet born. And these free thinkers were not part of 
the collective thought of mediocrity but were men and 
women who flew in the face of tradition and in doing so 
paved the way for change, for progress, and for liberty. 
Men and women who fervently believed in a good and 
righteous cause, never yielding to fold into the middle, 
rose against insurmountable odds to speak their passion 
and stir a society of conscience. 
But what if you just want sushi and everyone else 
wants Italian food? No problem, you can get your way. 
When you're outnumbered and outvoted, this tactic will 
sway the majority to your way of thinking. Whether you 
want your ideas implemented at the office or you want 
to see the movie no one else wants to, you'll find this 
method very useful. And whether you've got one ally, 
ten, or none, these rules of human nature are 
strategized to help you influence forces greater than 
your own. (Techniques in Chapters 14 and 16 to get 
anyone to take your advice and changing a person's 
mind certainly can be used to round out your overall 
strategy.) 
There are six main elements that determine how 
effective you will be in swaying the majority to your way 
of thinking. They are outlined and explained below. 
1. CONSISTENCY 
First, you and/or members of your group must be 
consistent in the opposition to majority opinions. 
Studies show that if you waffle or show signs of giving 
in to the majority view your impact is reduced. In other 
words, a statement such as, "Based upon all of the 
information, we stand one hundred percent behind our 
position," is in accordance with this law. The statement, 
"Hmmm, I don't know . . . no, it's just better this way . . . 
yeah," is not suggested. 

2. 
FLEXIBILITY 
Studies show that the members must avoid appearing 
rigid and dogmatic. A minority that holds to the same 
position regardless of new information and a changed 
situation is not as effective as one that demonstrates 
some flexibility. This does not contradict the previous 
law. Within a single position you should remain unified 
and unyielding, but when presented with new 
evidence or a unique situation, you should take the 
time (or at least appear to do so) to consider this and 
weigh it, without casual disregard. A statement 
consistent with this rule would be, "That's an 
interesting thought that has not yet been considered. 
Why don't we take a short time to determine its merit?" 
An ineffective statement would be something such as, 
"No, no, no . . .  I don't care! That's where we stand and 
that's that." 
3. DIVIDE AND CONQUER 
Many studies conclusively prove that when we have an 
ally we are much more likely to stick to our guns. That 
means that if Jim knows that Bob is against your idea 
too, he'll be much harder to sway. Yet, if Jim thinks he's 
alone in his thinking, then not only is he more likely to 
change his view but he will agree to things more easily if 
he thinks that the whole group is for that way too. Don't 
let them gain confidence in their numbers. Speak and 
sway individually whenever possible. 
4. LIKEABILITY 
As a function of discord, when you disagree with the 
majority you are often perceived as less friendly and 
may be disliked. Being liked is more times than not an 
essential component of influencing people. So the 
secret is to point out how your view is in the best 
interests of others, not just yourself. Applying the tactics 
in Chapter 1, Get Anyone to Like You . . . Every Time, 
will also stem the tide of losing popularity. 
5. NEW ANGLES 
Whenever you want someone to re-evaluate his 
thinking, remember to introduce new information into the 
equation. In this way he's making a new decision based 
on additional information. This is easier for him to do 
than for him to "change his mind." A good way to use 
this phrase is, "I understand why you thought this way, 
but we just found out that [new information]. In light of 
this new information, maybe we could approach this in 
another way." 

6. 
OUTSIDE SUPPORT 
Now, what do you do if nobody's budging? When you've 
got nothing, enact the law of social proof by finding 
other people, outside your group, who share your view. 
This will make your group more inclined to re-evaluate 
their thinking. You're having trouble finding anyone to 
support you? No problem, just find an expert or others 
to agree with you that don't have a personal stake in 
the situation. 
When college students received a compelling 
message supporting a departmental exam before 
graduation 
they 
found 
strong 
arguments 
more 
convincing than weak arguments. No surprise here. But 
when the same message would have no effect on the 
students—advocating that the exam policy begin in ten 
years—the quality of the argument made little 
difference. The expertise and credibility of the source, 
however, did matter (Petty, Cacioppo, and Goldman, 
1981). 
So when you don't have a winning argument, try to 
get support from those who are not directly affected, 
as these people are prone to pay less attention to the 
quality of your points. 
Strategy Review 
You and/or members of your group must be 
consistent in the opposition to majority opinions. Do not 
show signs of waffling.  
Avoid appearing rigid and dogmatic. In light of new 
information a minority that holds to the same position 
regardless of the situation is not as effective as one that 
demonstrates a degree of flexibility. 
Divide and conquer. Many studies conclusively 
prove that when we have an ally we are much more 
likely to stick to our guns. 
When you disagree with the majority you are 
disliked, hence making it difficult to sway them. Applying 
the tactics in Chapter 1, Get Anyone to Like You . . . 
Every Time, will give you the edge. 
Don't ask someone to change his mind without 
introducing additional information. 
When you've got nothing, enact the law of social 
proof by finding other people, outside your group, who 
share your view. 
Read Chapter 18, The Greatest Psychological 
Secrets of Leadership, to make your argument as 
powerful and persuasive as possible. 

21_____________  
How to Get Any Group of People to 
Get Along 
Whether it's bickering friends or a feuding family, these 
techniques will quickly melt away disagreement and provide 
a core of unity among all members. 
Numerous studies conclude that division among people 
dissolves when there is an opposing outside threat. External 
events arouse our need for affiliation and we will seek out 
support, creating a heightened sense of unity. Civil warring, 
intersocietal conflicts, and internal unrest often cease when a 
common outside enemy comes on to the scene. 
Conversely, individuals will turn their attention and hostility on 
one another when no outside forces are present. The 
fastest way to instil cooperation within a group is to (a) create 
an external threat or (b) simply set your group against 
another group in some form of competition. A common enemy 
brings opposing sides together faster than any other type of 
group cohesion technique. 
This phenomenon is also characteristic of how people 
respond within their own lives and minds. When your mind has 
nothing to focus on it divides against itself and creates a 
breeding ground for worries and anxieties. Yet, once you get 
a clearly defined outside goal that you are passionate about 
these divisions cease. Have you ever noticed this to be true 
in your own life? When you have a clear-cut objective, you're 
in a better mood and your attention is clear and focused. 
Suddenly the "little things" don't seem as important to you 
anymore. You have perspective on what really matters. 
A mind, like a group, with nothing to occupy it, will turn 
against itself. When we have nothing to focus our attention on 
our mind creates its own unrest and fears begin to take root. 
But as soon as there is something of interest that absorbs our 
attention, our mind quiets. 
This is why many people find hobbies so relaxing. Our focus is 
external and our mind becomes absorbed completely in 
something and we lose ourselves, as it were. It’s for this 
reason that those who have nothing going on their lives are 
often the most neurotic. Without an external focus to occupy 
their attention their mind begins to turn in on itself. But once 
an objective is created our attention is turned outward. So too 
do groups who are confronted with a serious issue find that 
infighting quickly gives way to this new objective. 

Also interesting is a study done by Ross and Samuels 
(1993) who found that the name given to a game has greater 
influence on the level of competitiveness than the 
individuals' personalities. They found that when participants 
played a game they believed to be called Wall Street they 
were much more competitive than their counterparts playing 
the same game, believing it was called Community Game. 
This is so fascinating because something as seemingly minor 
as the name of the game can override the members' 
personalities. Therefore, we can reasonably conclude that 
within your group careful consideration should be given to the 
name of subsets as well as the overall group name. For 
instance, if you have two sections of your group with names 
such as The Righteous and The Victors, chances are you 
won't be inspiring as much cooperation as with names such 
as Common Ground and The Flexible Thinkers. 



Power Point 
The strategies outlined above will help you to keep the peace and 
maintain unity and cooperation. But while doing so, you may find a 
person or two whose personalities just seem to clash with others. 
With them, it's important to observe three other rules for cohesive 
cooperation to ensure the peace. 
 Arrange opposing parties so that they are next to each 
other, not across from one another. When we are opposite 
one another physically, our position becomes more entrenched 
as we begin to develop an "us against them" mentality. Side-by-
side sitting promotes the optimum atmosphere for unification 
and cooperation. 
Contact and proximity: Keep the parties close and in 
constant contact with one another. As we've seen through 
numerous studies in this book proximity increases liking. You 
want to be mindful not to keep everyone on top of each other, 
but a degree of closeness is essential for maximum 
cooperation. 
Touch. Never underestimate the power of the human touch. 
If possible, try to create a situation where members can shake 
hands or come into contact with one another. Touch increases 
greatly our feelings of intimacy. We feel more connected psy-
chologically to those whom we touch physically. 

Strategy Review 
Numerous studies conclude that division among people 
dissolves when there is an opposing outside threat.   
Make sure that your group identifies itself with an image 
that is consistent with a spirit of cooperation, not competition. 
The name given to your group or clique greatly influences 
levels of cooperation. 

Section IV 
HOW TO WIN AT ANY COMPETITION: BEAT 
OUT ANYONE FOR THE JOB, THE DATE, OR THE 
GAME 
There's an amusing story about two men who are out 
camping in the jungle when one of them spots a ferocious 
lion. One man kneels down and takes his running shoes out of 
his knapsack and begins taking off his hiking boots. "What are 
you doing?" exclaims his friend. "You'll never be able to outrun 
the lion." To which the man calmly responds, "I don't have to 
outrun the lion, I just have to outrun you." Even when you're 
dealing with good, honest, and decent people, there are 
times when it's going to come down to you against him. 
These psychological tactics will show you how to make sure 
that you come out the victor in any battle, be it a physical 
competition or a battle of wits. 

22________________
 
Secrets to Winning in Any Competition 
Strategies for Beating Anyone at Anything 
Whether it's a battle of the mind or of the flesh, the strategies 
are almost identical. This is because all battles are first 
waged within the mind; it is there where you win or lose and 
then the outcome is manifested into the material world. 
Whether it's a tennis match, a spelling bee, or two men vying 
for the attention of a woman, competition is competition. 
Attack the mind of your opponent and you will divide him 
against himself and then he will fall before you, without a 
single touch. 
You don't have to be the best or brightest in order to win, 
you just have to do the right things. Whether it's a physical 
battle or a contest of minds, it is the one who is mentally 
prepared and who psychologically strategizes that will win time 
and again. While the situation will dictate how many of these 
tactics are appropriate, any combination will prove to give you 
an overwhelming advantage. 
There are two different areas of strategy to successful 
warfare: 
1. You: SECRETS FOR BEING THE PERFECT PSYCHOLOGICAL WARRIOR 
♦Anchor in success. As we talked about before, anchors 
are often used in hypnosis to link unrelated events or 
sensations. To review, an anchor is an association 
between a specific set of feelings or an emotional state 
and some unique stimulus—an image, sound, name, 
taste, etc. We see examples of conditioned reflexes in our 
own lives. Perhaps the smell of vodka makes you sick 
because you had a bad experience with it several 
years ago. Or a certain song comes on the radio and you 
recall a friend you haven't thought about in years. These 
are all anchors. In much the same way that a stage 
hypnotist is able to snap his fingers and have a person 
fall asleep, you can "lock in" a certain behaviour. 

You can use the power of anchoring to enhance your 
performance. Let's say you're playing tennis. Anytime you 
make an exceptionally good shot, repeat a short phrase to 
yourself, or make a quick gesture with your hand. This is 
the anchor to your action. Then, when you want to 
perform in that optimum state, simply repeat the phrase 
to yourself or make that gesture and it will throw your 
brain right back into the same frame of mind you were in 
when you were at your best. This is a highly powerful tool 
that when used correctly will allow you to, at any time, 
enter your peak state of mental and/or physical 
performance. You can condition yourself to perform in an 
optimal state at will. Whenever you're performing in the 
zone and at peak performance, anchor your state and 
then fire it off whenever you want to perform at maximum 
efficiency. 
♦Focus.  Here's an undeniable fact about human nature: 
What you focus on is what you will move toward and for. 
Never, ever act out of fear. Remember that all 
significant battles are first waged within the mind. If you 
don't feel that you're mentally ready and at your best, 
and if you can delay, then don't take action. 
♦The ideal state. Your ideal state of mind is to have no 
ego and this is achieved by focusing solely on your 
objective. This will allow you to be unconcerned with how 
you are coming across and help you to avoid second-
guessing yourself. If you are absorbed with your objective 
the "I" or the ego disappears and you can pursue your 
goal relentlessly. Focus only on the outcome, not on 
yourself. 
♦Mentally rehearse.  See and feel what you will look like 
and act like in your ideal state. When it comes to 
performance, studies suggest that mental rehearsing can 
be just as effective as actual practice. Use your mind to 
get the perfect image of how you would like to perform. 
What do you sound like and look like? What is the 
reaction from others? How do they see you? Have a 
complete picture of exactly how you want your reality to 
unfold. You have to see yourself succeeding in your mind 
before you can see it with your eyes. 

♦Always have a plan B. Not only will your perspective be 
healthier, but you will also increase your chances of 
success. The challenge in doing this though is that you 
don't want to set yourself up for failure by abandoning 
your original plan too quickly. So go to plan B only if your 
original plan is impossible to execute. In the armed 
forces, during an attack, if something goes wrong, they 
always have a contingency plan to move forward. 
Remember, no matter what happens if you are prepared 
you can always move forward. 
2. THE BATTLE: USING PSYCHOLOGY TO GAIN THE WINNING EDGE 
♦If a shark and a lion are in a fight which would win? It 
depends of course on where they're fighting. Whenever 
possible, get the home field advantage. You will be more 
comfortable, and your opponent less, in surroundings 
familiar to you. Whenever possible, spend some time in 
advance at the location where the "event" will take 
place so you can become more comfortable with your 
arena. 
♦Social  facilitation  is  the  arousal  that  results  when  
other people are present and our performance can 
be evaluated;  studies show this arousal enhances our 
performance 
on 
simple 
tasks 
but 
impairs 
our 
performance on complex tasks. These studies further 
illustrate that when you are skilled at some thing, 
complex or not, having people around helps your 
performance. When you lack confidence and are not 
skilled, then you will perform worse with others watching. 
When you are competing against someone who is more 
adept than yourself do it without others around. 
However, if you are more competent then have people 
around to watch because it will help you to perform 
better, and your opponent will do worse. 

♦To summarize one of history's greatest warriors and 
strategic leaders, Sun Tzu, whenever possible do the 
unexpected and give no warning. Deception and surprise 
are key principles to confuse your opponent. By acting 
without a pattern you throw him off balance and this is 
when you want to attack the hardest. When attention is 
scattered your opponents focus is not clear. And by attacking 
first you have more options. Offence is dynamic, defence is 
passive. When you do attack, do not let up. Wear down your 
enemy mentally. A constant sustained barrage will tire him 
out by draining him mentally and physically. 
Strategy Review 
Get the home field advantage whenever possible. 
Have others watch when you feel that you are more 
competent than your opponent. When you are less 
confident, try to compete without an audience. 
To enhance your performance, anchor your successes 
so you will be able to go into your ideal state at will. 
Never act out of fear, focus on the objective, not on 
yourself. 
Mentally rehearse your performance and desired 
outcome. 
Always have a backup plan. If your tactics are not 
working, make sure that you can easily switch to a 
new game plan. 
Do the unexpected and give no warning. By acting 
without a pattern you throw your opponent off balance. 

23 ______________  
The #1 Mistake Most People Make 
in Life 
It's the Biggest Mistake Gamblers Make Too! 
The way people gamble and how they live their lives often 
parallel one another. Because, really, life is a series of 
decisions and gambles, and what we decide to risk, and the 
outcome that follows, often determines the kind of life that we 
have. Many people systematically make the same mistake in 
life and we can look at it clearly by taking the example of 
gambling. 
Casinos work on a percentage of as little as 2 percent for 
games like blackjack and baccarat. Some of the games—
depending on the gambler s skill, or lack thereof—can give the 
casino a margin as high as 20 percent or more. So why is it 
that on a typical day 80 percent of the people will lose money? 
The stock market has two directions it can move in: up and 
down. Conventional wisdom suggests that you have a fifty-fifty 
chance of winning or of losing. Yet, 90 percent of the people 
who play the market daily—by themselves, without outside 
input—will, over time, lose. Why? It's not because of the odds; 
it's because of their strategy. 
GAMBLER A: THE CHASER 
Here is a typical scenario of Gambler A. He bets $10 and 
loses; he bets $10 again and loses; now he bets $20 and 
loses; $30 and loses. He increases his bets as he does worse. 
The gambler tries to chase his money—trying to win it all back 
in one hand by betting more to make up for the times he's lost. 
GAMBLER B: A MAN DIVIDED AGAINST HIMSELF WILL FALL 
Here is a typical scenario of Gambler B. He bets $10 and 
loses; bets $10 and loses; after some time his bet goes down 
to $5.00 Good plan? No, because he never feels successful. 
If he wins the $5.00 bet then he feels he should have bet 
more and if he loses then he still lost. And he's partly pleased 
he's lost because it is through losing that he can now justify 
to himself lowering his bet! 

And what about when we're winning? Another reason why 
casinos have million-dollar marble chandeliers in the lobby is 
not because of government subsidy programs; it's because 
gamblers don't know when to stop. The longer you play the 
better it is for the house. When you run out of money you'll 
stop. But when you're winning when do you stop? Often you 
don't, since there's no reason to, so you keep going until the 
tide turns against you, you lose, and then you are forced to 
stop. 
So if increasing your bet when you're losing isn't the 
answer and decreasing it when you're losing isn't the answer, 
what is? Research suggests that when you are losing you 
should do what gamblers hate to do—stop. However, when 
you are winning or on a "streak," then it is a fair strategy to 
increase slightly your amount of play. 
One other interesting fact to note is that all unsuccessful 
gambling strategies are predicated out of fear. When you act 
out of fear your decisions are not logical, but emotional. And 
this will ensure that you will end up on the losing side of the 
game. Never do anything out of fear. If you need to win then 
you will lose. You must only focus on the game, not the 
outcome. If you are praying to win then you are fearful of 
losing. The best mentality is that of pure detachment—where 
you're completely objective and unemotional. If you're 
gambling with money that you cannot afford to lose it is 
impossible to remove the emotional element from your 
decision-making process. 
Can you recall those times when you were completely in the 
zone? You may remember that fear was absent. It was just 
pure action, where you weren't even aware of yourself, just 
what you were doing. That is how you win in gambling and in 
life. As the saying goes, he who cares less wins! If you are 
fearful, wait until you are more confident before proceeding. If 
you don't feel like it, don't do it—or you will lose. As we've 
seen, our strategy when we gamble is almost identical to how 
we handle situations in the real world. So by changing your 
tactics you can go with the odds instead of your emotions, 
and come out a winner just about every time. 

Strategy Review 
When things are going your way—when you're in the 
pattern of success—it makes sense to put more on the 
line and slightly increase your risk. And when you're 
going strong, you decide when to stop; don't be forced 
into early retirement. But when things are going against 
you, stop and regroup. 
 Never do anything out of fear, if you can avoid it. Fear 
clouds your thinking and places your focus on the 
negative outcome. If you need to win then you will lose 
because you will be focused on what is at stake and 
not on the objective. Detach yourself from the 
objective and get in the zone before you take action. 

Section V 
MAKE LIFE EASY: LEARN HOW TO INSTANTLY 
TAKE LIFE'S MOST ANNOYING, FRUSTRATING, 
AND DIFFICULT SITUATIONS AND GET THE 
UPPER HAND EVERY TIME! 
This section contains the greatest psychological strategies for 
handling life's most trying times and circumstances. If you 
want to simplify your life or just plain make things easier then 
these tactics will be invaluable for you. For life's little 
tribulations and uncertainties, you'll learn exactly how to 
make sure that things go your way. . . every time. 

24 _____________
 
Get Anyone to Return Your Phone 
Call Immediately 
There are several different strategies that people use 
to get their messages returned. The least successful but 
most often used ploy is the "this is really important" message. 
It sounds something like this: "You'd better call me back. . 
." or "This is an emergency . . ." These messages only 
manage to annoy and needlessly worry the person being 
called. Of course the situation will dictate the type of 
message that is most appropriate, but the following phrases 
are the very best psychological tactics to get anyone to return 
your call. They appeal to a basic aspect of our primal nature: 
curiosity. 
1. I found out and it's not too late! When you call, I'll fill 
you 
in. 
2. I'm so excited for you. Give me a call, we'll talk about it. 
3. I owe you this much. When you call me 111 fill you in. 
4. You were right. When you call me, we'll go over it. 
5. I know you're going to love it! When you call, I'll tell 
you 
how. 

But what message will get your phone call returned faster 
than any other? Leave these sixteen words on any machine 
or with any secretary and wait for your phone to ring. 
"I appreciate what you've done. . . . Please give me a call. 
I'd like to thank you personally." 
This is the entire message. The person called knows that 
with a message like this, it's problem free—no headaches or 
explanations. It blends curiosity with gratification. It shows that 
you're a nice person for acknowledging what he's done 
(whatever it is), and that makes him feel good: to be 
appreciated. Most important, it's confusing. No matter how 
enticing a message is, if it's clear what you're talking about, 
the person will always make the decision as to whether or not 
it's important enough to return your call. If, however, he's not 
able to make the decision because he doesn't have enough 
information, as is the case here, then he can't conclude that 
he doesn't have to call you back. Have you ever gotten a 
confusing message on your machine mixed in with a bunch of 
regular messages? If you have, you might recall that the one 
that makes no sense is the one that makes you want to call 
back first to find out what is going on—because it may be 
important. If a person understands the message, then he 
can conclude on his own whether or not it's important. And 
you don't want him to do this. 
The unknown is what needs to be clarified. It's for this 
reason that many people will disrupt an enjoyable telephone 
conversation with a good friend to answer an anonymous call-
waiting beep. Why? Because they don't know who it is, and it 
may be important! The unknown beckons us. Since you want 
your message returned, you have to say who you are, of 
course, but as for the rest of the message, leave them 
wondering. Combining all of these factors into one message 
is the sure-fire way to get anyone to respond. 



Power Point 
If you're calling a company, ask the person who answers the phone 
whether the company uses pink or white message pads. (Almost every 
company uses one of these colours.) When she responds, say "Okay, 
can you do me a big favour? Can you draw a smiley face next to the 
message for me?" You will be absolutely amazed at how many people 
comply. Then when the person you left the message for is sifting 
through his messages, it's the one with the smiley face that's going to 
get his attention—especially coupled with the message that you left 
for him. 

Strategy Review 
Leave a message that in some way shows your 
appreciation, but isn't clear as to what it's about. Human 
beings have an inherent curiosity, and by not making your 
message clear, it forces the person you're trying to reach to 
clarify what it's about. 

25_______________  
Get Anyone to Forgive You for Anything 
Okay. You've screwed up, you feel guilty, and you've promised 
never to do it again. If that's enough to set things straight, 
terrific. However, we both know that sometimes it takes a lot 
more than "I'm sorry" to make things right. Let's see how we 
can use psychology to help you get forgiveness, fast. 
The psychological strategy in seeking forgiveness for 
cheating on your spouse is of course going to be different than 
if you were late for a meeting with your boss due to a traffic 
accident. (Also, the tactics vary depending upon whether it's 
your behaviour or your words that got you in trouble. First, 
we'll look at correcting misdeeds; then you'll see how to gain 
forgiveness when you misspeak.) In instances where your 
intentions were good but outside influences interfered use the 
following. 
Research suggests that if your excuse is due to 
circumstances beyond your control it is received much more 
favourably than an excuse that mentions only reasons that you 
had control over (Weiner et al., 1987). For instance, simply 
saying that "you didn't feel up to it," or that "you completely 
forgot," will likely generate unnecessary hostility and anger 
toward you. However, if a six-car pileup on the freeway or a flat 
tire is the culprit, you will be more readily forgiven. The reason 
for this is that nobody wants to feel as if she is being taken 
advantage of, or think that you didn't "care enough." 
Therefore, by placing the blame on an outside source you 
remove the attitude that leaves her feeling angry and 
unimportant. 
So if your mistake was beyond your control, let the person 
know this. One caveat is that you also need to let her know 
that you planned for this possibility, but were unsuccessful. 
For instance, if traffic caused the delay, you want to cut her 
off at the pass because she may be thinking, You knew this 
was important to me, so why didn't you leave more time? 
When explaining the circumstances also include the fact that 
you anticipated the possibility of this problem— in this case 
heavy traffic—but it was much greater than you could have 
reasonably prepared for. 

One other thing to keep in mind is that your apology 
should be sincere and specific. It's been shown that giving a 
specific accounting of the circumstances involved, as opposed 
to vague generalities, is highly effective in reducing a persons 
anger (Shapiro, Buttner, and Barry, 1992). It's all in the details! 
This should suffice, but if it doesn't you can proceed to the 
tactics below, which are designed for more severe breaches of 
trust and consideration and when the circumstances were not 
beyond your control. 
When you've done something wrong, this person feels 
violated in some way. There is a sense of betrayal. She feels 
you don't respect her enough, you don't care, you're not 
interested in caring, etc. Therefore simply saying, "I'm sorry," 
doesn't correct the situation because you haven't restored her 
sense of dignity. Your actions took away some of her power. 
To make her feel better you need to return her psychological 
state to the way it was. 
Below is the framework for a four-phase process that will 
ensure your success in achieving swift and complete 
forgiveness. 
PHASE I: RESPONSIBILITY, APOLOGY, AND SINCERITY 
Unlike the previous situation, here it is important for you to take 
full and complete responsibility for your actions. Do not shift 
blame or assign excuses; this will only exacerbate the 
situation. The person is expecting you, to some degree, to lay 
the blame onto others. This doesn't help because if the blame 
is placed somewhere else then only that other thing or person 
can restore that person's sense of importance. If you take 
responsibility then you have the power to set things right. 
Again, balance must be restored to the person's ego. She 
needs to know that she was not taken advantage of and that 
her feelings were considered. 
Next, apologize for your behaviour. Occasionally we forget to 
actually say the words, "I'm sorry." While just these words 
often aren't enough, they are essential to your overall 
strategy for gaining forgiveness. Sometimes it's very hard to 
say this, but as hard as it is, it is that much more important to 
gaining forgiveness. 
Finally, make sure that your sincerity comes across. Any 
apology that is not sincere will not be believed. And if you are 
not believed then you will not be forgiven. If you're not truly 
sorry, then you will likely do what you've done again and put 
this person through more pain and sadness. So if you don't 
mean it, don't say it. If you're not truly sorry and remorseful it 
might be time to re-evaluate the relationship or situation. 

PHASE II: REMORSE AND PUNISHMENT 
A very important phase in this process is to let her know that 
you are willing to face and accept any and all consequences for 
your actions. An apology without remorse is like a sports car 
without fuel: It looks great but doesn't do anything. Showing 
remorse gives her back the one thing that she lost: power. 
She will likely do nothing or much less than if you never put 
your fate in her hands. But remember your fate (at least with 
her) rests in her hands at this point anyway. But freely giving 
her the power—and acknowledging it as hers—to determine 
your fate is extremely important. She wants justice for what 
you've done. She wants to be able to exercise her rights as a 
human being and be given the respect she deserves. Give her 
back what you took and you will be forgiven. You can start by 
saying something such as "I know what I did was wrong; you 
have every right to be angry with me. I'm willing to accept the 
consequences for my actions." 



Power Point 
Even in court cases, studies show that if you don't show remorse then 
you are likely to receive a higher sentence. You need to restore the 
balance with your words or you will be punished as a way of setting 
things straight. It is in balance that we find justice. And in justice that 
we find forgiveness. 
In extreme instances it may be necessary to employ the 
following technique, which will allow you to rapidly diffuse her 
anger. Here, you go a step further and actually suggest a 
punishment— the harshest one you can think of. She will 
then be forced to talk you out of it, because she will likely feel 
that even you don't deserve such a harsh penalty. And in 
doing so she inadvertently creates an effect in psychology 
called cognitive dissonance. (This is characterized by an 
anxious state, which arises when an individual holds two 
conflicting attitudes or ideas. To reduce the anxiety, this 
person has to justify the inconsistency.) Once she talks you 
out of your actions she has to reconcile that what you did was 
not "as bad as she thought" as a way of unconsciously making 
sense of her mixed feelings. In other words, she 
unconsciously rationalizes to herself, "If what he did was so 
bad, why would I talk him out of that punishment?" 

PHASE III: DUPLICATION AND EXPLANATION 
So far the previous tactics have you above water, but if you 
want to reach dry land, you'll need to go farther and 
implement the following. 
Explain to her how the set of circumstances that created this 
event can never happen again. Part of her disturbance over 
your behaviour is the unpredictability of your actions. That is, 
it's something that has happened and can happen again 
without notice or warning. If you can assure her that the 
combination of events can never repeat itself, then this will go 
a long way toward alleviating much of her anxiety. By isolating 
the event you minimize its impact on her life as an anomaly 
and not something that she will ever have to deal with again. 
Now is the time that you have to answer "why?" Her entire 
world has been upset, nothing makes sense, and you have to 
give her a plausible explanation as to why you did what you 
did. She will not be satisfied and is unlikely to be able to let it 
go unless she understands what led to your behaviour. A 
simple "I don't know" or "I wasn't thinking" will do nothing to 
allay her fears of a repeat performance. 
But here you run into a challenge—one that usually sinks 
most people who have gotten this far. How do you explain 
your actions without sounding like you're defending them? 
This is the last thing you want to do. 
The very best way to explain your actions is to root 
them in fear. Whether it s personal or a business situation, 
you're still dealing with human beings. And all people 
understand fear. It is primal and pure (e.g., "I was scared 
because things were going so well"; "I feared that you would 
fire me if I didn't lie about the warranty"; "I lied because I 
feared you would hate me if you found out the truth"). 
Now your actions are seen less as a betrayal that violated 
trust, and more as an irrational act of fear by a confused 
person. It furthers your vulnerability, and helps to restore her 
feeling of power and dignity. By assuaging your fears she 
takes an important and active role in restoring her own sense 
of control. 
Remember that the objective is to restore the sense of 
balance and this, in conjunction with the other tactics, does 
just this, because rooting your motivations in fear diminishes 
the perception of your ego. Simply, fear is a response to 
feelings of your inadequacy to deal with the situation. This is 
in stark contrast to a braggadocio, self-centred mind-set—one 
that you do not want to present. 




 Power Point 
Have you ever wondered why after someone cuts us off on the 
road we often do two things? One, become angry, and two, try to see 
what this person looks like. First, we're angry because we weren't "re-
spected" by this person and second we want to see what he or she 
looks like to determine if the individual looks like the kind of person 
who would do this to us on "purpose." A little old lady doesn't enrage 
us as much as a young male might. This is because we assume that 
she cut us off by accident and that it's not personal. The totality of 
your responses is ego-based. Someone did something to you and 
you're angry. 

PHASE IV: NOTHING TO SHOW FOR IT
Finally, it's important to let her know that your actions 
produced no enjoyment, financial gain, or any type of 
benefit whatsoever. Since no one can go back in time, you 
need to relay that not only was it a mistake but that it didn't 
produce the anticipated benefits. Remember, the key to 
forgiveness lies in restoring balance to the relationship—be it 
personal or professional. If you gained in some way, then you 
will have to "give back" more in order to set things right. 
Never acknowledge any benefits (external rewards) or 
satisfaction (internal rewards) from your behaviour. For 
example, you want to say things such as "The sex was lousy"; 
"I never spent any of the stolen money"; "I was more 
miserable and so filled with guilt afterward"; etc. 
This strategy will set into motion her forgiveness. Now you 
have to wait for the only thing you can't manipulate: time. 
Once sufficient time passes, all of the elements will fall into 
place and your life as you knew it will once again be restored. 



 Power Point 
The above are behavioural misdeeds, but sometimes it is our words that 
wound. These are simple enough to deal with using a technique called 
globalizing. For all those who have put their foot in their mouth one 
time too many and who speak without thinking, this technique will 
save you a lot of energy and heartache. 
IN PERSON 
If you offend her directly, oftentimes a quick "just kidding" doesn't do 
much to assuage her hurt feelings. Therefore you should do what's 
called globalizing the comment as soon as you say it For instance, you're 
arguing with a co-worker and you tell her that she's completely incom-
petent (oops!). Right after you say that you need to employ damage 
control:"... along with everyone else in the damn company." We are 
offended by something in great part due to our taking it personally. 
This add-on diminishes the impact. This way it's taken as one complete 
belief and it dissipates the personal impact. Instead of feeling hurt or 
that there's something wrong with her, she will probably think that you 
need a vacation. 
THIRD PERSON 
If your words get twisted or you unintentionally offend someone, glob-
alize your words and put your statement within the context of a larger 
point. For example,"No, I didn't say you were driving me crazy, I said 
everyone was driving me crazy." Since she's hearing it third person, 
there's usually enough doubt to throw you into the clear. 

Strategy Review 
If your explanation is due to circumstances beyond your 
control it is received much more favourably than an excuse 
that mentions only reasons that you had control over.   
If the situation was not beyond your control—meaning that 
it was completely your own doing—then make sure that you 
take full and complete responsibility for your actions. 
Your apology should be sincere and specific.  
Let the person know that you are prepared to face and 
accept any consequences for your actions, and that your fate 
is in her hands. You must restore her sense of power.  
Demonstrate how the set of circumstances that led to your 
behaviour can never occur again in the future.  
If fear was part of your motivation, be sure to explain 
exactly how your actions were rooted in this fear.  
Show that your actions did not produce any of the 
anticipated gain or benefits. 

26______________ 
The Best Way to Break Bad News 
How to Get Anyone to Take Bad News as 
Well as Possible 
Life can sometimes deliver to us the unkindest of blows. 
When you are in a situation where you are to be the bearer 
of bad news, this strategy will benefit you greatly. You are 
about to see that you can dramatically alter how a person 
responds to any situation by changing the way you deliver the 
information. 
Language has a powerful impact on how we perceive and 
consequently feel about what we hear. This is often why good 
salespeople know they shouldn't say, "Sign the contract." 
Instead they suggest that you, "Okay the paperwork." Even 
though you're doing the same thing, you don't feel as 
comfortable signing the contract because it's been imbedded 
into us ever since we were little not to sign anything and to 
have a lawyer look at any contracts. But okaying the paper-
work, that's something you can do without worrying. 
Cult leaders know the powerful impact of language. In 
1997, thirty-nine members of the Heavens Gate cult took their 
own lives in a mass suicide. In reviewing videotapes the 
members made before their deaths, we repeatedly heard the 
cultists refer to their bodies as a container. It is much easier 
to destroy a "container" than it is your body. Over time they 
gradually began to accept the idea that their bodies were 
merely a container, and therefore of little importance or value. 
This is why it became so easy for them to "dispose" of the con-
tainer and kill themselves. 



Power Point 
Politicians understand well the power of words to influence attitude 
and behaviour. People are more comfortable hearing about a military 
action than a war even though they mean the same thing. We would 
rather hear of collateral damage than be told that civilian property was 
accidentally destroyed; and we are not as disturbed hearing of friendly fire 
as we would be to hear what it really means—our soldiers shot at our 
own forces. And, of course, watching the morning news we are less 
moved being told of casualties, than we would be if the reporter said 
what that meant: deaths. Most of know what these words "really 
mean" but, again, that doesn't matter. It's how we digest the information, 
and language is essential to that process. 

Language alters our perception of reality because we see the 
world through words. Language is the basis of thought and 
thought is the extension of emotion. Therefore, you can 
substantially decrease a persons reaction to a situation by 
choosing the right words. So what are the "right" words? 
You want to avoid harsh language. Don't use words that 
have a strong negative connotation. Doing so avoids an 
automatic reaction—like we often have to signing contracts—
and helps the information to be processed and internalized 
more slowly. In much the same way that a body goes into 
shock if there is an overload of pain, the mind is similarly 
shocked. However, if we receive the information in smaller 
intervals (using softer language) the "shock" is diluted and that 
helps to severely lessen the impact of the news. We say 
"time is the great healer" because it is the suddenness of 
negative information that amplifies the pain. The passage of 
time allows us to put things into proper perspective. When 
something first happens we have no perspective because it 
is in the present. It is all-consuming. 
Let's say that you just found out that your nine-year-old son 
took the family car for a joy ride and was brought back by the 
police. You might be understandably upset. However, 
instead, what if you just found out that your nineteen-year-old 
son took the car ten years ago? In both scenarios you just 
found out the news but your reaction is entirely different. 
Why? Because of a perceived passing of time. Time is a 
powerful psychological tool that can dramatically shift our per-
spective. 



 Power Point 
Language also alters our perception of how we remember things. Re-
search by Loftus (1979) in eyewitness testimony shows us that how 
the question is phrased can substantially impact on how we remember 
the details. For instance, regarding a traffic accident, those who are 
asked how fast the car was going when it smashed into another car 
give higher "estimates" than those who are asked how fast the car was 
going when it hit the other car. 
How we deal with information is also influenced by our belief 
system. Whatever beliefs we hold about a particular situation 
dictate how we will respond to it. For instance, some cultures 
believe that a birth is a joyous event, so they celebrate it. 
And they believe that death is not good and so at funerals 
they are sad. But some cultures believe that death is a 
glorious transformation, an event to be celebrated, and they 
are joyous at funerals. Notice it is not the event, but our 
beliefs regarding it, that determine how we feel. All informa-
tion—specifically sad and bad news—is a function of a specific 
set of beliefs. 

When a person becomes upset about an event in her life, 
it's because of one or more of three cognitive beliefs: (1) she 
feels that the situation is permanent; (2) she feels that it is 
critical, meaning that it's more significant than it really is; and 
(3) she feels that it is all-consuming, that it will invade and 
pervade other areas of her life. 
When any or all of these beliefs are present it dramatically 
increases our anxiety and despondency. Conversely, when 
we think of a problem as temporary, isolated, and 
insignificant, it doesn't concern us at all. By artificially deflating 
these factors, you can instantly alter a person's attitude and 
make it more positive. Certainly the type of news will dictate 
how this can best be used, but if you can address at least one 
of these you will be effective in diminishing the unpleasant 
reaction. 
It's also so important to keep in mind that when information 
is at all ambiguous or has vague implications we often don't 
know how to respond. We take our cue from others. For 
example, if you're in a crowded movie theatre and somebody 
yells "fire," how might you respond? Research tells us that if 
the rest of the audience sat in their seats, you would likely 
remain seated as well. But if there were a mad rush for the 
exit, it's likely that you too would begin to leave. 
When we are unsure of what something means, we look to 
our world to provide us with information on how "upset" we 
should be. The more relaxed and assured you are in 
relating the news, the calmer she will be. 
Another psychological technique, which is part of your 
overall strategy, is based on the law of contrast. This law 
states that we don't think and see something as it is, by itself, 
but in relation to other things. In essence we contrast and 
compare. (This phenomenon is discussed in more depth in 
Section I.) By contrasting the situation with something worse 
it's perceived in a new light and in a better perspective. For 
example, if you bring your car to the mechanic and he tells 
you that you need new brakes, you might be appropriately 
displeased. However, if he were to first tell you that you might 
need a new engine, a new transmission, and a new exhaust 
system, only to inform you an hour later that you just need 
front brakes, your thinking may be, "Whew, I got away lucky 
this time." It's not the information itself that is so crucial, but 
rather the context of it and how it relates to everything else. 
Let's take an example that incorporates some of the above 
tactics. Although it depends entirely on the situation, the 
following strategy will greatly reduce the psychological impact 
and pain. In this scenario a physician determines that his 
patient has diabetes. Look at the difference in the approach, 
and decide if you were the patient, which doctor would you 
rather hear the news from? 

DR. A
Mr. Doe, I'm sorry to have to tell you this news, but you 
have diabetes. My laboratory tests confirmed this just 
now. And as you may or may not know it can be life 
threatening and you can face severe complications like 
amputation and blindness. Everything in your life has 
got to be changed from this second forward—what you 
eat, how you exercise, and so on. I'm truly very sorry. 
DR. B
Okay, you're in good health except for a variance in your 
blood sugar levels. I'm pleased with these results and 
that you came in when you did because it could have 
turned into something much worse. You're in good 
company, too, there are millions of other folks who have 
diabetes; that's the technical name for it. And the best 
news is that it's completely controllable and when 
properly cared for you won't even be aware of it. As a 
matter of fact, I think you've had this for quite some 
time and you'll see with an improved diet and exercise 
program you'll have a lot more energy and vitality. 
As you saw, both doctors delivered essentially the same 
information, but Doctor B gave the news in smaller 
increments which allows for the person to begin to 
accept the idea, mentally digesting the situation and 
hence, significantly lessening the impact. He used softer 
language and conveyed that there were positives to the 
situation such as improved overall health. His entire 
tone was positive and he said phrases such as "I'm 
pleased we caught this . . ." instead of "I'm sorry ..." 
Of course the patient will need to be informed of other 
details, but in time. And once the newness is digested 
more information can be taken in without the usual 
shock and accompanying depression. 

Strategy Review 
Avoid words that have a harsh, negative 
connotation or stigma. Language is the basis of 
thought and thought is the extension of emotion. 
Therefore, you can substantially decrease a person s 
reaction to a situation by choosing the right words. 
Present the situation when possible (or aspects of 
it) as temporary, isolated, and insignificant. 
Use the law of contrast and comparison by 
illustrating how it could have been worse than it actually 
turned out. 

27 ________________  
Get Back Anything You've Loaned Fast, and 
Without an Argument 
Many of us have had the experience of loaning something 
out, whether it's money, a chain saw, or whatever, only to feel 
uncomfortable when asking for it back. Of course the 
obligation shouldn't fall on you to get it back; the person 
you've loaned it to should return it without your having to ask. 
But when he doesn't, here's how to get back anything quickly 
and easily. (By the way, if you have trouble saying no when 
asked for things, read the next chapter and never feel guilty 
again!)
The first stage of this technique is simply to ask for it. 
Sometimes the direct approach works best. And be sure to 
include a valid reason as to why you need it back now. For 
instance, "Sam, that two hundred fifty dollars I loaned you 
last week I need back because I have to pay off a bill that 
comes due tomorrow." Simple, direct, and to the point. And if 
we lived in a perfect world this would be enough, but we 
don't, so often it isn't. 
If this doesn't work then you need to create more leverage. 
Since someone has what you want you need to up the ante 
and appeal to his ego. This can be done several ways. The 
following strategies can be used in order and until you meet 
with success. As you will see if you meet with resistance the 
tactics increase in severity. 
1. Tell the individual that you know her to be the kind of 
person who does the right thing. In fact, that's 
something you admire most about her. This statement 
brings her self-worth and belief system into the equation 
(we've covered this in detail in previous chapters). Now 
by not giving you back what she borrowed she risks 
having to re-evaluate her self-concept and how she 
sees herself. You might say something such as, "You 
know, Samantha, what I've always liked about you is that 
you try to do what's right and fair." Then in a few hours 
simply ask for your money and she's going to be 
unconsciously motivated to do what is "right and fair." 

2. With this technique you appeal to her sense of dignity. 
Tell her that a few people you both know (in shipping/on 
the block/at the salon—you need not mention names) 
told you that you would never get it back. You might 
say, "I don't want them to be right about this; it'll make us 
both look foolish." This makes her feel as if everybody is 
talking about her and she's going to want to institute 
damage control—and that means giving you what she 
owes you. 
3. If this doesn't work then you need to use more severe 
measures. You do this by saying that you're going to have 
to tell others about this so they won't lose money to her 
as you did. Most people will do anything to protect their 
public image, especially something as simple and easy 
as giving back something that they've borrowed. 
Strategy Review: 
Simply ask for it, being sure to include a reason as to why 
you need it back now. 
Tell her that you think of her as the kind of person who 
always tries to do the right thing. 
 Appeal to her sense of dignity. Tell her that a few people 
you both know told you that you would never get it back. 
Tell her that you're going to have to tell others so they 
won't lose anything to her as you did. 
Remember too that people do favours for those they like. 
And yes, some consider giving you back what's owed to you as 
a favour. If the above don't get you anywhere see Chapter 1, 
Get Anyone to Like You . . . Every Time, to ensure your 
success. 

28 ______________
 
Say No Without Hurt Feelings or Guilt 
"No" is a complete sentence—so say it. But if you think that by 
saying no you're headed for an argument, use the following 
technique. It is one of the very best psychological tools and 
will save you much grief and aggravation. 
There's a rule of persuasion called reciprocity that basically 
says, when someone does a favour for us we often feel the 
need to reciprocate. We've mentioned this before, but briefly; 
it's the same reason why religious groups offer a flower or 
some other gift in the airport. They know that most people will 
feel compelled to give them a small donation. We know we 
don't have to, but we can become uncomfortable, even 
though we didn't ask for the gift in the first place. When 
someone gives us something (i.e., time, information, a gift, 
etc.) we often feel indebted to him. This is also why so many of 
us have a hard time not buying something in a store after the 
salesperson "spent all that time" with you. It just makes us 
more comfortable to reciprocate in some way—in this case by 
buying something. Most salespeople are well aware that if they 
invest a lot of time with you, showing you a product, 
demonstrating how it works, you will feel somewhat obligated 
to buy it, even if you're not sure that you really want it. 
Well, this law of reciprocity can be applied in the reverse. 
The technique works like this. When you turn down the favour 
(that's being asked of you) ask for a favour from that person 
right after you say no to his request. By asking a favour of him, 
which he most likely won't or doesn't oblige, you've in effect 
cancelled your debt as soon as he declines your request. In 
much the same way that buying a shirt balances out the 
salesperson's investment of time with you, there is an 
unconscious feeling that balance is restored. You say no, he 
says no, and because of this, almost magically, he feels okay 
about it. 

For example, a friend calls you and asks if he can borrow 
your car. You respond with "Oh no, I can't because I've got to 
use it, but I'm glad you called. Is there any way you can walk 
my dog while I'm out of town next week?" Now he has to 
apologize to you and offer an excuse as to why he can't do this 
favour for you. This works great even on those people who try 
to "guilt" you into things. They will have a hard time arguing 
with you after just denying you a request. It will make him feel 
extremely awkward and usually too uncomfortable to press 
you on his favour. Note: Make sure that the favour you ask 
him for is something that he can't come through on. Although, 
you could ask for something really outrageous that you 
would like him to do for you, in which case if he does agree to 
it, then you might not mind doing the favour that he's asking of 
you. 
Here's another fascinating and effective addition to this 
technique. Notice the use of the word "because" in the above 
example— it's there for a reason. A study done by Langer, 
Blank, and Chanowitz (1978) found that the word "because" 
holds an astonishing power. 
Asking to cut in front of people using the copying 
machine, Langer's collaborator said, "Excuse me, may I use 
the Xerox machine?" to which a little over half of the people 
agreed. The fascinating thing is that Langer found she could 
get almost everyone to comply when they changed the 
phrasing of the request to: "Excuse me, may I use the Xerox 
machine because I have to make copies?" The reason was 
nonsensical. Of course you need a copying machine in order 
to make copies. So why does it work so effectively? Because 
the word because triggers an unconscious acceptance that a 
valid explanation will follow. We hear something and we have 
almost a Pavlovian response to accept it. Whether the 
sentence makes sense or not, we assume it does and, 
therefore, we don't bother to process the explanation. 
So when you want to say no, simply say it, use the word 
because, and ask for a favour afterward. The conversation will 
end with no hard feelings and with you feeling great. 



 Power Point 
If you're not sure if you can help out, don't say that you're not sure or 
that you'll think about it.The smartest thing to do when initially asked 
is to give a resounding,"Yes!" If you can follow through that's great, but 
if you can't, the other person at least knows that you tried because 
you initially agreed with such enthusiasm. Therefore, the reason you 
can't come through is not because you didn't want to but because you 
were just no longer able to. It starts at the beginning when you are first 
asked. If someone asks you for a favour say, "No problem," right away. 
That way if it turns out you can't oblige it won't seem as if you're look-
ing for an excuse. 

Strategy Review 
 When you turn down the favour (that's being asked of 
you) ask for a favour from that person right after you say no to 
his request. By asking a favour of him that he can't come 
through on, you've in effect cancelled your debt as soon as he 
declines your request. 
When you turn down his request, and before you ask him 
to do something for you, use the word because in your 
excuse. The word because triggers an unconscious 
acceptance that a valid explanation will follow. 

29______________  
How to Turn a Rude and Obnoxious 
Person into Your Best Friend 
Win over Anyone in No Time! 
Whenever someone acts rudely or cruelly to you it's always 
because of one of four reasons. First, she thinks you dislike 
her; second, she feels threatened by you; third, she acts 
cruelly to everyone; and fourth, you've given her a reason to 
dislike you. If four is the case, then see Chapter 25 on getting 
someone to forgive and forget. If it's one, two, or three, read 
on for a terrific and highly effective psychological strategy to 
adjust anyone's attitude toward you. 
First, make sure the problem isn't yours. By this I mean 
that research shows us that a person with a positive self-
image tends to assume that others will respond kindly to 
them. And the reverse is also true. Those with a poor self-
image tend to believe that other people simply don't like 
them. (Since they don't like themselves they feel that other 
people dislike them for the same reasons.) Therefore, if you 
have a negative self-image, this is what could be causing your 
belief that you are disliked. If this is the case there are 
several great books on developing positive self-esteem. 
Moving beyond self-image, if you expect someone to dislike 
you— independent of how you feel about yourself—she 
usually will fulfil that prophecy. Even if you have a healthy 
self-image but believe that a certain person doesn't like you, 
you are likely to perceive this person as behaving in a way 
consistent with your beliefs. Additionally, your expectations 
may even cause her to behave in this way. Expectations play 
a powerful role in how our relationships unfold because as 
we've seen throughout this book people will treat you the way 
that you expect that they will. Make sure that it's not your 
attitude or false beliefs that are causing the rift. 
Assuming your self-image, your beliefs, and your attitudes 
are not the problem, then consider the following research in 
this area for a rock-solid game plan for turning anyone into 
your best friend. 
Many studies indicate that once we discover someone likes 
us, we tend to like him or her as well. This is what's known as 
reciprocal affection. We tend to admire, respect, and like 
someone once we are told that they have these same 
feelings for us. 

Now what's the best way to communicate your affinity for 
this person? Tell a third party, maybe a mutual friend, that 
you honestly like and respect this person. Once this 
information makes its way to the other person, you will 
simply be amazed at how fast she comes around. Whether 
it's a co-worker, boss, assistant, or neighbour, everyone 
needs to feel appreciated. Let this third party know how you 
genuinely feel about this person and watch the magic 
happen. 
You may be thinking, "Why can't I just go and tell her 
myself? Why all this cloak-and-dagger stuff with a third 
party?" Well, there are actually two reasons you don't want 
to tell her yourself. One is that you run the risk of her thinking 
that you're insincere. When you hear something from a third 
party we rarely question that person's veracity. This is 
because the thinking is, "What's she got to gain by lying to 
me?" 
Another reason why it works better via a third person is 
because of a quirk in human nature as illustrated by the 
following study. People with a positive or moderate self-
concept respond to others' liking with reciprocal liking. But 
people with a negative self-concept respond quite differently 
(Curtis and Miller, 1986). Just as your self-image will distort 
how you believe others see you, her self-image will distort 
how she sees you. If she thinks of herself as not being worth 
very much or even unlikeable, your kind words will seem 
unwarranted and she probably won't respond. While simple 
logic might conclude that a person who feels "low" would 
relish somebody liking her, you have to get past her mental 
barricades, which is, "Why is this person being so nice to me? 
What's wrong with her?" However, by not bringing up your 
fondness for her directly, you bypass this negative barrier. 
If she sees you as a threat, then her dislike is rooted in 
jealousy and envy. You can dissolve her negative attitude in a 
similar way, with just a slight variation. Here, you want to focus 
on how you admire her for who she is and what she's done. It 
is very difficult for anyone to dislike you or to treat you poorly 
once she knows that you respect her. By letting her know 
(again via a third person) that she has your respect, you align 
yourself with her and she sees you as an ally and not as a 
threat. 

Okay, you use the third party tactic to turn her around, but 
when you do run into her do you just make small talk? 
Talking about the weather isn't a bad choice, but if you really 
want to make an impact then use the oldest rule of getting 
anyone to like you. It comes courtesy of Dale Carnegie, who 
was one of the greats in understanding human nature. On 
the occasions where you do speak with this person keep this 
next sentence in the front of your mind! Become interested in 
other people and you will get them to like you faster than if 
you spent all day trying to get them interested in you. And it's 
dreadfully easy to get a person to go on endlessly about 
herself. Just ask questions about her and the floodgates of 
conversation will open. 
But now a one-sided conversation is more of a monologue 
than it is a dialogue. So when you do offer up information 
about yourself remember this rule of human nature. We like 
people who not only like us but who are like us. If she 
discovers that you both share similar beliefs or ideas about 
something you will have created a psychological bridge that 
will make her feel closer to you and respond more favourably. 
And above all, remember that someone likes you based 
not on how he feels about you but on how you make him feel 
about himself. You can spend all day trying to get him to like 
you and think well of you but it's how you make him feel when 
he is around you that makes the difference. Whatever the 
dynamics of the relationship, by making him feel comfortable, 
welcomed, and relaxed you will go a long way toward 
developing a good, true, and lasting friendship. 
Strategy Review 
First make sure that your attitude is not the problem. If 
you expect someone to dislike you, you will likely interpret her 
actions through this warped perspective. 
Tell a third party that you genuinely like, admire, and/or re-
spect this person. This will engage the law of reciprocal affec-
tion. 
By showing an interest in her you will get her to like you 
faster than if you spent all day trying to get her interested in 
you. 
Talk about those things that you share and have in 
common— ideas, values, thoughts, etc. 
She likes you based on how you make her feel about 
herself. You can be the greatest person in the world, but she 
will dislike you if you make her feel unimportant and 
insignificant. 

30______________  
How to Stop a Rumour Before Your 
Reputation Pays a Price 
Would you like to defend yourself without getting defensive? 
Would you like to turn around false accusations and use 
them to your advantage? Now you'll be able to stop a rumour 
dead in its tracks, and gain leverage with this sure-fire 
psychological tactic. 
Rumours thrive in secrecy and anonymity. This means that 
gossip survives because by its very nature it's told in "secrecy." 
If you expose the source then the well dries up. The gossiper, 
in most cases, is not likely to spread rumours once she is 
exposed. 
This study illustrates the effectiveness of this tactic—how 
physical anonymity lessens inhibitions. Zimbardo (1970) 
dressed New York University women all in white coats and 
hoods. They were asked to give "electric shocks" to a woman. 
(Of course the shocks weren't real, but the participants 
believed that they were.) They pressed the shock button twice 
as long as did another group of women who were not 
masked and were wearing clearly visible name tags. 
It's also easier to do harm to those whom we do not see as 
real people, and to those whom we do not physically see as 
well. In war, dropping a bomb on a city can carry less 
psychological trauma for a pilot than shooting a single man at 
point-blank range can carry for a soldier. Several parallel 
experiments show us just this: When we are removed from 
the person—when we do not see him and he is far away, 
physically—we are more willing to inflict physical pain. This 
also holds true for inflicting psychological pain, as in the case of 
making slanderous statements. Notice that there are two 
separate psychological criteria. One is that of sight—can we 
see this person—and second is that of proximity—how near is 
this person physically to us. 
These studies, and many like it, depict three separate 
strategies for halting gossip. First, go to the source or to 
anyone responsible for the rumours and identify that person. 
Let her know you are aware of who she is and what she is 
doing. Second, you want to humanize yourself to this person 
as well. Let her know that there is a real person behind the 
rumours. Third, do this in person, when at all possible. The 
actual proximity—the closeness—makes a big difference. 

Okay, so this works fine when you know the source, but what 
if you don't? What if there's just some rumour floating around 
and you don't know how it got started or by whom? Or for that 
matter, what if you do know the person and she just doesn't 
care about what she's doing to you and the damage done to 
your reputation by these rumours? For these instances, the 
following psychological strategy is an incredibly effective 
method of damage control. 
There are essentially two characteristics of a rumour that 
dictate whether or not it spreads like wildfire or simply fizzles 
out. The reason rumours spread is that they are interesting 
and that they sound believable. It's been said that a partial 
truth is more dangerous than a total lie. That is because 
nobody gossips about what is obviously false and blatantly 
stupid, but with a grain of truth, it becomes plausible and that 
is what makes it interesting to talk about it. 
But you can use this to your advantage. Instead of trying to 
deny, defend, or minimize the rumour, which can make 
people believe it more, simply spread a more outrageous 
rumour that overshadows that one, but incorporates it as well. 
For instance, let's say that a rumour going around is that 
you've been stealing from the company. Denying it can just 
make you "appear" guilty. Instead, you should spread the 
rumour that you used the "stolen money" to support your 
thirty-six adopted children or you used it to buy a seat on the 
space shuttle. Now this newer more salacious rumour is 
harder to believe and casts doubt about the accuracy of any 
of it. Most people will dismiss it as false if it doesn't sound 
plausible. They would have no reason to pick it apart to find 
the grains of truth if the whole thing just sounds made up. This 
is because rumours are seen in black and white as either true 
or false. Since there is rarely material evidence in a rumour, 
each person decides whether or not it makes sense. So the 
more outrageous it is the less sense it makes and the less 
interesting it actually becomes. The rumour gets diluted in 
a stream of obvious untruths, buried under an avalanche of 
nonsense. Nobody knows what to believe about whom. 
So if going to the source doesn't work, simply extend the 
current rumour to include completely outrageous information 
and the whole thing will just be seen as silly. 

Strategy Review 
 If you know who is responsible for the rumours, go to 
her and let her know that you are aware of who she is and 
what she is doing. 
You want to humanize yourself. Let her know that there 
is a real person behind the rumours. 
Instead of trying to deny, defend, or minimize the 
rumour, which can make you appear more guilty, simply 
spread a more outrageous rumour that overshadows that 
one, but incorporates it as well. 

31 ___________  
Stop Verbal Abuse Instantly 
Get Anyone to Sit Down and Shut Up! 
When someone is rude to us our first reaction is to protect 
our ego. We respond with something such as, "How dare you 
talk to me like that"; "I don't like that and now I'm upset"; "Don't 
yell at me"; and so on. We make this angry person our 
problem. Why should you let someone else dictate how you 
feel? To get angry would be to give another person control 
over your emotional state. That's a lot of power for one 
person to possess, especially someone that is rude to you. 
This is more than just pie-in-the-sky self-help talk; there's 
actually a powerful psychological component to it. 
If you resist your initial inclination to get defensive you may 
be surprised at what happens. Instead of, "Why are you 
treating me like this?" try saying instead, "You seem to be 
having a rough day." Rather than, "I didn't do anything, don't 
talk to me like that," say, "This seems to have upset you." 
Don't take possession of his problem. It's his problem, not 
yours. The psychological dynamics change dramatically as 
soon as you use the word "I" or "me." Then it becomes some-
thing between you and him. By using the word "you," you 
keep the ball in his court and the problem remains his sole 
property. 
Aside from not upsetting yourself, you've now forced the 
person to think and respond defensively, in effect explaining 
his actions to you. You don't force him to find reasons to 
support his claim—that you've done something wrong. 
Instead you ask him what's wrong with him, not you\ And let 
him spend all day on this. 
You will find that by not responding defensively you won't 
become as upset by the exchange—because it has nothing to 
do with you as long as you don't try to take part ownership of 
it!

If this abusive behaviour is a part of a larger pattern and 
you have an ongoing relationship with this person, take a look 
at the following. At the core of interpersonal relations is the 
truth that a person will treat you the way that you train him to. 
You need to let him know that his behaviour is unacceptable 
and will not be tolerated. So the first thing you want to do is to 
call his attention to his behaviour and let him know that it is 
not acceptable. In a perfect world this would be enough . . . 
but we don't live in a perfect world. So let's look at why he 
does this and what you can do about it. 
He treats you this way because it makes him feel powerful. 
If you are worried about your physical safety then 
acknowledge his "authority and power" to diffuse his anger. To 
do this simply say, "You're right, I'm sorry." This magical 
phrase usually shuts down the verbal stream of venom. Then 
remove yourself from the situation and contact the 
appropriate authorities. If the above isn't working fast 
enough, you can use this tactic: Become more upset at 
yourself than the person is. He is yelling because he wants 
you to feel as he does: angry, hurt, frustrated, and small. So if 
you make him believe that you feel worse than he does, he 
accomplishes nothing more by yelling. When you beat 
yourself up he has no reason to continue kicking. When the 
tirade is over, leave and give serious thought to the 
relationship. 
Strategy Review 
Resist your initial inclination to get defensive. If it's his 
problem don't make it yours! The psychological dynamics 
change dramatically as soon as you use the word "I" or "me." 
Then it becomes something between you and him. 
If you are worried for your physical safety then 
acknowledge his "authority and power" to diffuse his anger. 
Do this by becoming more upset at yourself than he is at you. 

32
_________  
Get Anyone to Open Up to You 
Get Specific Information from Anyone 
Isn't it annoying to ask a question only to get a vague or 
apathetic response? I suppose. You get an answer, but it 
doesn't have any useful information in it. The following 
psychological tools allow you to easily narrow a vague 
response to give you a more direct, truthful answer. Here are 
some examples of how you can distil ambiguity into specific, 
detailed, and usable information. Notice how much more 
effective the "b" technique is than the traditional "a" response. 
■l a  
COMMENT: I don't think the meeting went very well. 
RESPONSE: HOW come? 
COMMENT: I just don't, all right! 
■ib 
COMMENT: I don't think the meeting went very well. 
RESPONSE #1:   How do you know when a prospect is 
interested? RESPONSE #2:   Did someone say something or 
was that your impression? 
RESPONSE #3:   Were you having an off day or were they 
just not qualified? 
If you ask for clarification, the person feels obligated to respond. 
Asking a broad question in response to a general statement 
just produces more of the same. 
■II a 
COMMENT: I don't know if I could. 
RESPONSE: What do you mean, you don't know? or Why 
can't 
you? 
COMMENT: I just don't know, all right? 
■lIb 
COMMENT: I don't know if I could. 
RESPONSE #1: What, specifically, prevents you? 
RESPONSE #2: What would have to happen for you to be 
able to? 
RESPONSE #3: What would have to change if you did? 

You'll notice in the above that sometimes the person herself 
hasn't given it much thought. So by asking these questions 
you allow her to better understand her own thinking, which in 
turn, of course, gives you a clearer, more concise answer. 
No one likes to be put in a situation where they feel they 
have to defend themselves. As a result, oftentimes when you 
ask someone what she is thinking or how she feels, she replies, 
"I don't know." This response can stall a conversation and 
leave you searching for answers. Sometimes it's just easier to 
say, "I don't know," which is often why we say it in the first 
place. If you answer her with "How come?" as is traditionally 
done, you'll often get an "I don't know" right back. Either way, 
when you hear, "I don't know," use these techniques to get 
the information that you want. (Pick the ones most appropriate 
to the situation.) 
• "Okay, then why don't you tell me how you've come to 
think the 
way you do?" 
• "I know you don't know, but if you were to guess, what do 
you 
think it might be?" 
• "Can you tell me what part of this you are okay with?" 
• "In what past situations have you felt similar to this one?" 
• "What emotion best describes what you're thinking right 
now?" 
• "Can you think of just one reason?" 
• "What one word comes closest to describing what 
you're 
thinking?" 
In all of these responses, you're taking the pressure off. 
You acknowledge the person s difficulty in answering. You 
then seem to be asking her to provide something else, when in 
reality your new question is aimed at getting your initial 
question answered and opening up the discussion toward a 
meaningful dialogue. 
An "I don't know" could also mean that the person feels 
guilty or foolish about her actions. In this case you want to 
relieve her of the responsibility. This psychological technique is 
great because it allows her to answer truthfully without fear that 
you will judge her. After all, she may believe that she didn't do 
it on purpose. This works well because she doesn't have to 
feel responsible for her actions. It was not her "intention" to do 
what she did. Her behaviour was not consciously motivated. 
Your phrasing might sound something like, "I know you're 
not sure about why you did that, so can you think of any un-
conscious motivations that may have been at work?" 

Strategy Review 
When you get a vague answer, ask a more specific 
question that is related to his answer. If you ask a general 
follow-up question you will only get another general response. 
If the person is unsure of how to answer, ask her instead to 
tell you how she feels about an aspect of the situation, instead 
of the entire situation itself. 
Ask her if there might have been any unconscious 
motivations at work. This alleviates the element of guilt as it 
does not imply that there was intent. 

33________________  
Deal with Any Complaint Fast and Easy 
Get Anyone to Stop Whining! 
Whether it's personal or professional, follow this list of tactics 
and you can be sure to assuage anyone's complaints about 
anything. 
First listen. Surprisingly most people don't know how to do 
this. To listen you simply say nothing and do nothing other 
than listen. That means you don't agree, disagree, or argue. 
In the next step you're going to agree, but if you do it right 
away you risk his thinking you're just placating or patronizing 
him. So let him say everything he wants to say without any 
interruption and then agree. 
Sometimes people just need to get something off their 
chest. So let them speak. Other times they're looking for a 
fight. If you don't interrupt, then they will eventually run out of 
things to say. If you interrupt you are going to give him more 
ammunition and risk a heated argument instead of a 
monologue. 
Nobody wants to feel he's been manipulated or taken 
advantage of. And that is 99.9 percent of the reason why he 
is so angry. His ego has been damaged. Somebody or 
something didn't respect him enough and he is hurting. 
When he is done speaking do the following. 
First paraphrase back to him what he's said, so he knows 
that you've been listening. Then build him up with phrases 
such as, "No one as important as you should have to go 
through this"; "I know you're not accustomed to being treated 
this way"; or "If I were you I would be just as upset." This 
completely takes the steam out of his tirade. The last thing 
you want is to be combative and with this first step you disarm 
him completely. You've made him feel important by listening, 
agreeing,  and stroking his ego.  Using this three-step 
process of listening, agreeing, and stroking will often diffuse 
the situation. But if it doesn't continue with the following. 
Now, ask him what he would like you to do. What he offers 
as a resolution or solution is often much less than you would 
have given to compensate him for his troubles. In business 
situations we often make the mistake of wanting to give the 
world to avoid a bigger problem. But hold off on your initial 
temptation and ask him what he would like you to do. 

In personal situations, complaints may come the way of 
vague statements, such as, "I'm not happy," or "You're 
driving me crazy." While there may be more serious 
relationship issues at hand, there is a specific way to help the 
situation. What you want to do is have him get as specific as 
possible about what is bothering him. (See Chapter 32, Get 
Anyone to Open Up to You, on how to turn a vague answer 
into a specific response.) 
While you're doing the above, try to establish rapport to 
get him to like you and to calm him down. The way you 
present yourself can greatly influence the attitude of the other 
person. If, while he's venting, your arms are crossed and 
your posture says, "When are you gonna shut up?" you're 
heading for a confrontation. That's why simple things such as 
unbuttoning your coat or uncrossing your arms can make the 
other person feel less defensive. When you have a rapport 
with someone, he is much more likely to feel comfortable and 
open up. Rapport creates trust, allowing you to build a 
psychological bridge to the person. The conversation is likely 
to be more positive and you will be much more persuasive. 
To review, here are a few powerful tips for establishing and 
building rapport: 
Matching posture and movements: If he has one hand in 
his pocket, you put your hand in yours. If he makes a gesture 
with his hand, after a moment, you casually make the same 
gesture. 
Matching speech: Try to match his rate of speech. If he's 
speaking in a slow, relaxed tone, you do the same. If he's 
speaking quickly, then you speak quickly. 
Matching key words: If she is prone to using certain 
words or phrases, employ them when you speak. For 
instance, if she says, "I was so uncomfortable with how I was 
treated," later in the conversation you might say something 
like, "I know you must have been so uncomfortable with that 
type of treatment." Make sure that you don't seem to be 
mimicking her. Obviously copying another's movements is 
unproductive. A simple reflection of aspects of the person's 
behaviour or speech is enough. This can be a very powerful 
skill for you, once you become good at it. 




Power Point 
In personal instances, where the complaint is directed at you specifi-
cally, say the following phrase and watch someone's anger dissipate be-
fore your eyes: "I couldn't be more sorry. I feel so ashamed." Again, his 
ego has been damaged and he's seeking to tear you down as well as re-
store a sense of pride and balance. By acknowledging your own fault 
you cause him to rebound. Clearly he's gotten through to you because 
that's exactly what he's been thinking—that you're an idiot. He has 
nothing left to say. If, at this point, you're still getting flack, go to Chap-
ter 25, Get Anyone to Forgive You for Anything. 
Strategy Review 
Say nothing. Just listen. Paraphrase what he's just said. 
Use "build-up" phrases to reinforce his ego and sense of 
importance. Ask him what he would like you to do.   
While doing the above, establish rapport to help him 
feel more at ease and comfortable with you. 

34 ______________  
Stop Jealous Behaviour  in an Instant 
It is commonly, though wrongly, believed that in relationships 
the person most likely to be jealous is someone who has low 
self-esteem. After all, if someone is confident and feels good 
about himself, then there is little reason to worry that he will 
lose his partner to someone else. But it turns out that the 
relationship between jealousy and a person's self-esteem 
has been found to be fairly insignificant. Rather, a person is 
most likely to feel jealous in areas that are especially relevant 
to his self-worth. 
In other words, building up your partners general self-
esteem is not usually the answer. He's threatened only in 
areas that he considers the basis for his identity. For example, 
a doctor may become jealous upon hearing about another 
doctor who is more proficient than he at a specialized 
operation. However, he will likely be unmoved upon hearing 
that Jim, his neighbour, is a better tennis player then he. Why? 
Because he simply doesn't care. Who he is, how he identifies 
himself, and how he rates his worth as a human being is by his 
skill as a surgeon, not as a tennis player. 
Let's say that you're a woman who has a wealthy male 
friend. Your boyfriend is good-looking, smart, caring, and 
hardworking. But he's insecure about the fact that he doesn't 
have much money, because to him money is something that 
is important. Therefore, as far as he's concerned, your friend 
is more valuable and "better" than he. Your typical strategy 
might be to build up your boyfriend, and tell him how great 
he is and how much you care for him; but you will find that 
ineffective. Telling him that you love him and that he's better-
looking and smarter than your friend will do very little to 
assuage those jealous feelings. That is not where he's 
coming from. Instead you should explain to him why the 
"quality" in your friend—in this case money—is unimportant to 
you and his jealousy will simply disappear. 
You take the wind out of his jealousy instantly by 
downplaying what the other person has that he doesn't. Your 
boyfriend values money and hence places a greater value on 
this guy, so he assumes that you perceive him in the same 
way. His jealousy is really envy of what your friend has that he 
doesn't. 

So it's your friends qualities—or in this case money—that 
you need to address, not your boyfriend's qualities. Simply 
give a rational explanation for why it's not important to you and 
hell be fine. For instance, you can say something like, "A true 
measure of a man is not how much money he has, but who 
his friends are. While I like my friend, I think that people who 
flaunt their money do so to compensate for feelings of 
inadequacy. I like my friend but I feel bad for him." After 
hearing this, your boyfriend is not going to mind your being 
friends with him because he no longer feels threatened by the 
issue of money. If anything, now it's the fact that he has 
money that's comforting, because he believes this is the very 
reason why you find your friend so unappealing. 
When you employ this tactic, it is best to do it casually. In 
this way he is not likely to believe that you are just saying it to 
make him feel better. A casual approach ensures that you 
believe it and that you want him to know how you feel, and 
you're not just saying this to change how he feels. 



 Power Point 
If you are dealing with someone who is just insanely jealous of everyone 
and everything, then you have to handle this a little differently. This per-
son's jealousy is rooted in a deep insecurity and he will "read into" 
everything that you say or do and conclude that he simply can't trust 
you. Even the most innocent of situations will be misinterpreted and 
logic is lost in a sea of unbalanced emotions. While therapy might be in 
order for this person there is one psychological tactic that will provide 
temporary relief. He is jealous because he perceives an imbalance in 
the relationship whereby you are more valuable than he. And he, albeit 
sometimes unconsciously, believes that it's just a matter of time before 
you figure this out for yourself. Therefore, if you become openly jealous 
about everything that he does, his perspective should shift dramatically. 
This is evidenced by the fact that you almost never see a relationship 
where both people are insanely jealous of the other. This is because 
one person's jealousy makes the other person "retreat" to more neu-
tral ground. 
Strategy Review 
A person feels threatened only in areas that he considers 
the basis for his identity. Building up his self-esteem is not the 
answer. You must downplay the trait that he feels he lacks 
and that others possess. His jealousy is really envy of what 
other people have that he doesn't. 

35________________  
How to Get the Best Advice from 
Anyone 
It's been said that advice is something you ask for when 
you know the answer but wish you didn't. Other times 
we ask for advice just to confirm our own thinking. So if 
you do seek it out, have an open mind. Good solid 
advice from people whom you can trust is invaluable. 
The problem is that we don't always go about getting 
good advice the right way. 
The first thing to keep in mind is to be wary of asking 
advice of those who are next to you, metaphorically 
speaking. Meaning, if you work at a menial job, what do 
you think your co-worker is going to think of your idea of 
going back to school? Jealousy and envy can creep 
into the advice and you may not be getting the input 
that's in your best interest. This is because your co-
worker s likely justified to himself why he hasn't 
bettered himself, and will then explain these very same 
reasons to you. This doesn't mean that it's impossible 
to get good advice from him, but that it's not likely. 
Also, never ask advice from someone who has 
something at stake or something to lose from your 
decision. The more objective the person is the greater 
value you should place on the input. Many people 
seek advice from friends and family but these people 
often have an inherent interest in the outcome. This is 
not to suggest that they would not look out for your 
best interest, but first, their judgment is clouded by 
their emotional attachment and second, they may 
impose what they would like for you without 
considering your wishes. 
The reason why we often get poor advice is that it's 
hard to find a person who always has our best interest 
at heart, isn't envious in any way, and at no level thinks 
he knows what's best for you. 
And always, always, always, get a second, third, or 
even fourth opinion about anything that you do. From 
directions on the road to directions in life, get feedback 
from a cross section of people. This will give you 
invaluable insight into what you should do. The more 
people you ask, the greater your perspective. Often a 
combination of different people's thoughts and ideas is 
what will work best for you. And you can access 
anyone's "brain," even if you don't know that person well. 
There is no better way to get someone's time and 

attention than to use the phrase: "I'd like to get your 
advice on something." You might be surprised at the 
wealth of information available to you when you just ask 
for it... the right way. 




 Power Point 
There are times when you don't want input from multiple 
people: in situations where you know that there is a right 
and there is a wrong, but you're just not clear on which is 
which. In these instances, you want a single, objective person 
who is experienced in giving such advice. Find someone who 
has wisdom in the area in which you seek advice. This is 
someone who has demonstrated know-how and has the 
experience to effectively guide you. Don't make the mistake of 
getting a consensus from several people. Do that in matters of 
taste and preference where individual opinion is subjective. 
However, the truth, or what is best for you, is often objective 
and counsel in these areas is best given by someone who is 
experienced. This is because when there is only one right 
thing to do, then you need only ask the person who knows. 
In addition to specific experience, you should go to 
someone who listens thoughtfully to what you have to say 
and thinks before offering advice. If he's quick to interrupt 
without fully hearing the situation, then he is only interested 
in being heard, not in being helpful. 
Strategy Review 
Listen with an open mind, not just to confirm what 
you want to hear.  
Don't ask advice from someone who may be 
jealous or envious of you or your ideas. 
Don't ask advice from someone who has any type 
of stake in the outcome—emotional, financial, or 
otherwise.   
Get feedback from a cross section of people. The 
more opinions you get the greater perspective you will 
have. 

36_______________  
Give the Harshest Criticism Without Ever 
Offending 
When you want to "tell it how it is," but you're worried about 
bruising his ego or making him feel embarrassed or self-
conscious, use this psychological strategy to say your piece 
without his going to pieces. When you give criticism this way 
you can be sure you won't offend anyone. 
The ego is the pivotal criterion because that is the only part 
of us that really gets injured. Think of the ego as an image or 
a projection of how we would like the rest of the world to 
perceive us. And when this image of ourselves is threatened 
we become self-conscious. And when it is injured we 
become hurt (and lash out). The ego is fragile (because it is 
only an image) and when you deal with others you must seek 
to protect their egos if you want to spare their feelings. And the 
more someone believes that what you're saying is true, and 
depending upon how sensitive he is to it, the more careful 
you need to be. 
There's a right and wrong way to criticize and how you do it 
can make all the difference in the world. As you may have 
experienced, sometimes you're open to criticism and other 
times the slightest comment can make you feel like crawling 
under a rock or make you extremely defensive and 
argumentative. What you say, how you say it, where you say 
it, and when you say it all have a bearing on how your 
comments are received. 
The most important part of this overall strategy has to do 
with the timing of your conversation. The best time to criticize 
is when you are removed from the event. For instance, if you 
want to have a discussion with your lover on how she can 
improve her lovemaking skills, don't bring it up while you're in 
bed five minutes after sex. Discuss it when you are removed 
from the environment—out for a drive, perhaps, days later. 
Being removed from the environment as well as putting 
time between the event and your critique is also significant. 
Because while you may verbally assure the person that it is 
no big deal, you don't convey that attitude by speaking up 
immediately. By waiting a few days you reduce his ego 
attachment to the situation and he's less sensitive to criticism. 
But the closer to the event (in both time and proximity) that 
you criticize, the more he identifies with his behaviour and the 
more defensive he will become. 

Additionally, when you do criticize, the following eight 
psychological factors will help to ensure that you can be free to 
voice your objections without worrying about offending him. 
1. Without making a big deal about it, let him know you're 
saying this because you care—you care about him and 
your relation ship. 
2. Always criticize in private. Even if you think that it's no 
big deal, you are best to do it behind closed doors. 
3. Preface your criticism with a compliment. For instance, 
"Bill, you're the most wonderful lover I've ever had, 
though I was wondering about. . ." 
4. Criticize the act not the person. In other words instead of 
saying, "You're annoying when you . . ." it's better to say, 
"You're great, but on those rare times that [it] happens . 
. ." 
5. Don't assume or insinuate that this is something that he's 
doing knowingly, consciously, or deliberately. It's best 
to approach this as something he's doing unwittingly or 
even unconsciously. 
6. Share some of the responsibility if you can. Notice I 
didn't say share the blame. This psychological tactic is to 
make it you and him against this "thing," not you against 
him. In other words, you might say something like, "I 
should have been more specific when we covered this . 
. ." This is, of course, more effective than, "I hate it when 
you . . ." 
7. Offer the solution. If there is no answer, then you should 
never have brought it' up in the first place, because it 
serves no purpose. And if you believe that no matter what 
you say he will not take your advice, then also don't bring 
it up. If you do then you are only serving your own 
interests and this will not help the situation. 
8. Criticism is most effective when you tell him that he is 
not alone. By conveying that whatever he's done or 
doing is very common diffuses the impact on the ego—
meaning he doesn't take it so personally. And that's really 
the reason we become so offended—it's because we 
take it personally. 

Strategy Review 
The best time to criticize is when you are removed from 
the event. 
 Put time between the event and your critique.  
Tell the person that you are mentioning this because you 
care.  
Always criticize in private.  
 Preface your criticism with a compliment.  
Criticize the act not the person.  
Share some of the responsibility if you can.  
Offer the solution.  
Let him know that he is not alone. 

37 ___________
 
Get Anyone to Confide in You and 
Confess Anything 
You can gain a person's trust instantly and get anyone to open 
up and tell you just about anything that you want to know. The 
ability to gain a person's confidence is simply a matter of 
following a specific psychological strategy, and is outlined 
below. 
Let's say that you're a police detective, a principal, or a 
minister— you can establish a trusting relationship within 
minutes with just about anybody. Here's how you do it. First, if 
possible and appropriate, tell someone a secret or something 
personal because this shows that you trust him. But it's 
important to make him think that he's earned it. Otherwise 
he'll think you're a crackpot who just spills his guts to anyone. 
If he feels that you trust him he will be more likely to trust you. 
Not only does this ingratiate you, but also it enacts the law of 
reciprocation. 
When you tell something about yourself, not only does the 
other person feel psychologically closer to you, but he feels a 
need to reciprocate by sharing something personal with you. 
He then begins to open up to you and therein lies the real 
power behind the tactic. This is a fascinating and highly 
effective psychological phenomenon that works because once 
he gives you something—even if it's his opinion—he trusts 
you more than if he didn't share this information. The more he 
shares with you, the closer he feels to you. This paves the 
way for him to really open up to more personal and private 
things. 
The unconscious interactions at play here are that once 
someone shares something with you, he trusts you more. 
The unconscious thought process is, "Why else would I 
have told you? I must trust you." In order to reduce the 
feelings produced by the dissonance, he reconciles this 
conflict by concluding that he must indeed trust you. 
If you're speaking with someone who is being tight-lipped 
with any meaningful information, try the following approach. 
Ask him what he believes about esoteric things like God, or 
how he feels about reincarnation or abortion, and so on. He 
will tell you because he doesn't consider this information to 
be a threat because it can't be used against him. He's just 
opened himself up, however, in a highly personal way. He's 
shared more than a secret; he's told you who he is, and he has 
bared his consciousness. This is what makes him feel con-
nected to you and more trusting of you. 

Interestingly enough, not all secrets are created equal. 
Our identity—who we are—is most closely linked not to what 
we do but to what we believe. The gateway to trust is easily 
entered through this unprotected back door. This type of 
information is more easily gained because the person is 
thinking, "What's the harm?" But it creates an unexpected 
vulnerability and attachment. When he does tell you his 
views, do not argue or debate the merit of his beliefs. If you 
"coincidentally" share the same views this will significantly 
increase your psychological bond. You can also increase his 
need to tell you by having him focus on his emotional state. 
This enhancement is based on the following research into 
support and emotions. Focusing on how you feel in an 
unpleasant situation results in a greater need to talk about 
your feelings. In this study, FBI trainees took part in an 
exercise in which they played the role of abducted hostages. 
Some were told to focus on the situation, others on their 
emotional state, and some were given no instructions at all. In 
this highly stressed situation, self-focusing on emotions led to 
increased emotional awareness and a strong desire to seek 
social support (Strentz and Auerbach, 1988). 
This is in part why women, who are often more in touch with 
their feelings, usually feel that their mates do not communicate 
enough or give them the emotional support that they need. By 
making the person think about his emotions, you 
unconsciously force him to seek support from you, to open 
up, and to share. To apply this, simply have the person focus 
on how he feels about the situation, not on the situation itself. 
This will greatly increase his need to talk about it and to 
express his concerns and feelings. It makes him actually 
need someone to talk to about anything stressful that is going 
on in his life. 
Keep in mind, too, never to beg. Let him know that your 
desire to know is not out of curiosity but out of concern. 
Begging portrays you as someone who's interested in 
knowing, not in helping. 
Finally, if you want specific information about something 
he's done, when appropriate, offer a benefit for telling you. 
Letting him get it off his chest is okay but not always too 
effective. Offer concrete help for the situation. If he's done 
something wrong or he's in trouble let him know that whatever 
it is you are willing to help in any way that you can. By 
combining emotional support with a concrete offer to help he 
will open up to you. 
In some instances, if he's done something that he's not 
proud of, the last obstacle may be his concern about what you 
will think of him, so let him know that you will not be 
judgmental and that everybody does things that he is 
embarrassed about or regrets. Here, too, would be a good 
time to share some of your little secrets with him that you're 
not too proud of either. 

If he hasn't told you yet, but he's close and just needs a little 
more prodding, then this next tactic will help him become 
more comfortable opening up. It forces him to reconcile why 
he did what he did and the only way to do that is to conclude 
that he was justified. 
In your conversation, continue to repeat phrases like the 
ones below, making sure that they contrast a reason vs. no 
reason, (a) "You could only do what you did if you felt you had 
to or why else would you?" (b) "Nobody does things unless 
he has a reason; only insane people do that. But you're not 
nuts." (c) "You did it because you knew you had to at the 
time. It made sense then, so that's why you did it. You do 
things that make sense, don't you?" 
These simple phrases begin to wear down his defences 
and he'll seek out confirmation of his actions. Sometimes they 
will work right away; other times it may take a little while. But if 
someone keeps hearing such phrases over and over again, he 
will break, and you will get a confession. 
Strategy Review 
Tell him a secret or something personal about what is 
going on in your life. When someone tells us something about 
himself, not only do we feel psychologically closer but we feel 
a need to reciprocate by sharing something personal with 
him. 
Ask him about his views on something general. When he 
does tell you, do not argue or debate the merit of his beliefs. If 
you "coincidentally" share the same views this will significantly 
increase your psychological bond. 
By having the person focus on his emotions, you 
unconsciously force him to seek support from you, to open 
up, and to share. To apply this, have the person focus on how 
he feels about the situation, not on the situation itself. 
 If appropriate, offer a benefit for telling you. Letting him 
get it off his chest is okay but not always effective. 
Fear of what you will think of him is often an obstacle. 
Overcome this by letting him know that you are not 
judgmental and that we all do things that we're not proud of. 

38 __________
 
How to Handle Any Tough [or 
Stupid] Questions 
Get Anyone to Back Off Instantly and 
Win Every Argument Every Time 
Being skilled in the art of verbal self-defence can be an 
invaluable asset. We so often get locked into ridiculous 
arguments and drawn into answering asinine questions. A lot 
has been written about such dialogues, but the challenge 
with much of the traditional advice is that it presumes you are 
able to have an intelligent, logical, and meaningful 
conversation with this person. The reason the conversation 
has degraded to this point is that you likely can't. Suggesting 
that you take a deep breath and tell her that you respect her 
feelings and so on is just plain bad advice. Because it almost 
never works when you're talking to an idiot. It sounds good in 
theory, but if she were interested in a calm and intelligent 
conversation and exchange of ideas you wouldn't be locked 
into this argument in the first place. The psychological tactics 
offered here assume that the line of communication is no 
longer open to rational thought. Instead, you need to use 
potent techniques that will quickly and effectively allow you to 
take control of the conversation and the situation. 
Two BIGGEST MISTAKES ALMOST EVERYONE MAKES 
I: The first rule of effective debate, argument, or heated 
conversation is to never, ever, get defensive. The 
minute you begin to defend yourself against an 
accusation, you've lost. Now you're fighting uphill. When 
you do this you are giving credence to what is said and 
you're arguing with your back against the wall. 
Unfortunately, this is what many of us instinctually want 
to do and have been told to do. But it's wrong. If you've 
ever watched anyone get defensive, he not only can 
appear guilty but he quickly becomes a verbal punching 
bag by constantly being on the defensive. 

II: The other big mistake we make is to accept the 
persons premise and argue from that point. For 
instance someone says to you, "You don't look very 
good. Why don't you take better care of yourself?" The 
starting point for the conversation is that you don't look 
very good. That's not the premise you want to start from 
because then no matter what you say as to why you do, 
don't, or how you take care of yourself, you're still 
operating from a deficit and a disadvantage. For instance, 
if you say, "Well, that's because I was up all night. . ." 
then she says, "Why were you up all night? Aren't you 
able to finish the work?" Now you're in an argument and 
you're forced to defend yourself. 
THE SOLUTION 
Since your objective is not to get defensive, you need to go on 
the offensive. This way you can defend yourself without 
getting defensive. When asked a question that you feel is a 
cheap shot respond with: "What answer would satisfy you?" 
When you ask this question you'll get one of two 
responses. You may get an "I don't know," in which case you 
can respond with "Well, if you asked the question and don't 
know what answer you want, how am I supposed to know?" 
The other answer is the one you'll likely get and it will be 
something specific—but now you've got something to work 
with. And notice that she's the one answering your 
questions, with her back against the wall. For instance, 
someone says that you're not old enough to be doing "X." 
Instead of saying, "Yes, I am because of. . ." (which is 
defensive, because now she's going to pick apart your 
reasons), your preferred answer is "How old would you like 
me to be?" For arguments sake let's say that she says thirty-
four. "Well, what about thirty-three, is that too young?" is 
your answer. Now the person has to defend what she said 
instead of you defending yourself! 
Here's the best part. When you ask someone to get more 
specific, it's harder for her to justify her statement and 
corresponding beliefs. For example, she now has to define 
the differences between thirty-three and thirty-four. No one 
can do this. Then when she does give an answer, you 
continue to press her further as to why she feels this way and 
ask her to be more specific 
The strategy here is to ask her to explain why her premise is 
right, not why your answer is. To anyone listening and watching 
she's going to appear to be very rigid and unyielding because 
she has to defend herself against her own ideas. And in 
actuality, any idea or belief that is reduced to specifics almost 
always sounds silly when you try to defend it. 

So when you're asked a question, don't get defensive and 
don't argue from her premise. Ask her a question as to why 
she believes what she does and have her argue her point. 
STUPID STATEMENTS 
Now what about those times when someone says something 
stupid about or to you, but not in the form of a question? Any 
usual attempt to defend yourself will sound like you're 
justifying the comment and getting way too defensive and 
upset. Again though, you can turn the tables on someone in a 
second. 
THE SOLUTION 
In response to something ridiculous like, "You'd be nothing 
without me" or "That's so stupid what you did," say, "You don't 
even believe that's true." Now again, the person has to 
defend what he's said and you can argue with him about his 
reasons instead of him arguing with you about yours. 
Another great response is "Why would you say something 
like that?" or "Why are you finding fault with everything? Aren't 
you at all happy with anything in your life?" You see, just by not 
getting defensive you force him to explain himself and you 
never have to say the word "I" because if you don't make it 
about you then he can't argue with you! 
TURN ANY ARGUMENT AROUND 
Okay, but what if you're losing the argument, you don't have 
the facts on your side, and you just want out? Don't worry, this 
wonderful psychological technique will save you in an instant. 
If you don't like the question you're asked, then don't 
answer it; answer a different one. To do this, simply say 
something such as, "In terms of what?" or "How exactly do you 
mean?" This forces a person to rephrase the question and 
you'll answer this new specific question instead of the original 
one, and all without seeming to have dodged it. For instance, 
you're asked, "How come all of the workers are complaining 
about the conditions?" There's no way you can answer that 
and win. It's like asking somebody if he's still beating his wife. 
Any answer is a bad one. So ask the other person to clarify 
her question and answer the new specific question. Here's 
how the exchange might go: 
"How exactly do you mean?" 
"Oh, Jose, Fred, and I think Beth has said that nobody 
gets long enough lunch breaks." Now you've got three 
people complaining about the lunch hour instead of every 
worker complaining about the conditions. It becomes a much 
easier question and situation to deal with, but you can still 
narrow it further and the questioner will begin to seem very 
argumentative instead of you. 

"Lunch breaks?" you answer, and continue. "How long 
would they like to eat lunch for?" You can see that the wind of 
her argument dissipates quite quickly. You've managed to 
answer a new question, put her on the defensive, and force 
her to get into specifics. 
Again, what's very important is that you want to avoid 
appearing as if you are trying to dodge the question. The 
technique below is another way to gently shift the focus 
without being argumentative and allow for a more constructive 
and useful conversation, all without being defensive. If the 
above techniques aren't appropriate then use the following: 
After being asked a tough question, respond with, "I think 
what you're really saying is . . ." (and then switch the 
question). The following illustrates how this is done: 
You're told, "I don't think you're capable of running this 
company." Respond with, "I think what you're really saying is 
that if I could show you how I can not only cut costs but also 
increase earnings, you'd be interested, right?" Now that 
wasn't his question but it implies the motivation behind it. He 
is forced to agree because there would likely be no other 
reason why you wouldn't be capable of running the company. 
Now you explain your strategy for increasing sales and you 
never look back. 
You're told, "I don't think you care about this relationship." 
You say, "I think what you're really saying is that you've been 
hurt and I need to be able to show you that it will never 
happen again." Again, now you have something specific to 
work with. Answering abstract questions intelligently is nearly 
impossible. Bring it to something clear and specific and then 
respond. Don't be goaded into responding to a vague 
statement. You can't win. Change the question, reduce it to 
specifics, and then answer. 
Let's take one more example. You're asked, "How could 
you have screwed up so badly?" You respond with, "If I 
understand you correctly, I think you really want to know what 
factors were involved that you may not be aware of." That's not 
his question, but it's a much easier one to answer. 

TAKE 5
Finally, when you're under the gun and you need time to plan 
your strategy, use conversation stoppers. These are phrases 
that are mild trance inducers. In other words, they cause the 
listener to zone out temporarily while his brain tries to 
process the information. Use them when you need to gain 
control of the conversation or to regroup. They give you 
some time to collect your thoughts while others temporarily 
lose their train of thought. As you read them, you'll notice that 
the syntax is off slightly, and causes the mind to sort of "lock 
up" for a few seconds while it tries to process the information. 
This technique is used widely in hypnosis to implant 
suggestions in the unconscious mind: 
"Why are you asking me what you don't know for 
sure?"  
"Do you really believe what you thought you 
knew?" 
"I understand what you're saying; it doesn't make 
it true."  
"If you expected me to believe that, you wouldn't 
have said it." 
"Your question is what you knew it would be, isn't 
it?" 
"Do you believe that you knew what you thought?"  
"Are you unaware of what you forgot?" 
Strategy Review 
Never, ever, get defensive. The minute you try to defend 
yourself, you've lost. 
Don't automatically accept the persons premise or you 
may be starting at a disadvantage. Instead gain leverage 
and ask him, to explain why he thinks the way he does. 
 Don't be goaded into responding to a vague statement. 
You can't win. Change the question, reduce it to specifics, and 
then answer. 
If you're really at a loss, use the power of hypnosis to 
gain some time to think and strategize. 

39________________
 
Just for Parents 
Get Your Child to Behave the Right Way, Right Away! 
These techniques show you how to get your child to 
cooperate with you when your parenting skills are really put 
to the test. 
It should be noted here that often hyperactivity and other 
behavioural problems are rooted in physiological causes, not 
psychological. Foods containing caffeine, sugar, or any 
substance that your child may be allergic to (even something 
seemingly innocuous such as wheat, rice, or milk) can create 
a serious psychological imbalance. Remember that small 
children who have even a few sips of cola can react the same 
way as an adult drinking two or three cans. Even the most 
effective parenting skills can be thwarted if your child is inca-
pable of paying attention because he's bouncing off the walls. 
Never underestimate the power of diet in your child's 
behaviour. 
There are essentially two elements for gaining cooperation 
from your child, or for that matter, any adult. They are giving 
him the feeling of control, and using emotion-based 
arguments. The following is an example of how both of these 
can work either independently or together. 
How do you get your child to listen to you? Whether it's a 
problem at bedtime or not wanting to get dressed, this 
technique will prove to be highly effective. Give him a choice. 
Make him an active part of the process by giving him a choice 
that implies cooperation. For instance, instead of saying to a 
child, "Will you please sit at the table for lunch?" you say "Do 
you want to sit in the chair facing the TV or would you rather 
look out the window at the table?" If you give him the illusion of 
control he is much more willing to cooperate; and once he 
commits himself then he will follow through. 
This is true for adults as much as it is for children. Studies 
show us that prisoners who are able to exercise some control 
over their environments—by being able to move furniture, 
control TV sets, and switch the lights on and off—experience 
less stress and commit less vandalism. Research in this area 
also overwhelmingly concludes that workers given leeway in 
carrying out tasks and making decisions experience improved 
morale. 

People, and that means children too, need to believe that 
they have some control over their lives. If they don't, this can 
develop 
into 
what 
is 
called 
learned 
helplessness, 
characterized by a person's perception that he has no control 
over repeated bad events or even over routine happenings in 
his life. This can lead to disruptive behaviour and 
psychological problems. We should say here that giving a 
child too much leeway, without appropriate boundaries, can 
also cause major disciplinary problems. Children need 
parameters and will push as far as they can until they reach 
them. By not setting appropriate boundaries the child's 
behaviour will reach erratic proportions until he meets with 
resistance. 
The other element is to not try to sway a child with logic. 
How do you get her to do what's best for her? Translate cold 
hard facts into something that affects her reality. If you want 
her to brush her teeth, for example, telling her she'll get 
cavities if she doesn't means nothing. Instead tell her that we 
brush our teeth so we can enjoy the foods we like. She has no 
frame of reference for cavities but she certainly does for 
eating tasty food. 
Strategy Review 
Behavioural problems are often rooted in physiological 
causes, not psychological. Foods containing caffeine, sugar, 
or any substance that your child may be allergic to can create 
a serious psychological imbalance. 
 Give your child a feeling of control over what happens in 
his life. If you give him the illusion of control he is much more 
willing to cooperate and once he commits himself he will follow 
through. 
Use emotion-based arguments. Translate cold hard facts 
into something that affects her reality. 

40 ____________
 
Get Out of Almost Any Physical or 
Sexual Assault 
Smarter Living for Men and Women 
Of all the tactics in this book, this may be one that can save 
more than just your sanity and self-respect, but possibly even 
your life. To understand the dynamics and application of the 
psychological techniques, we'll divide these attacks into two 
categories: sexual assaults and physical assaults. 
Power Point 
If your attacker just wants things—your money, wallet, purse, 
jewellery, or anything but you, give it to him! Any of these items 
can be replaced ... you cannot. If he just wants "things," then you are 
lucky. 
SEXUAL ASSAULTS: APPLY THESE TECHNIQUES IN ASCENDING ORDER 
Please remember that there are no foolproof methods that will 
work every time in every situation. You need to assess the 
situation and do whatever makes sense to you at the time. The 
following will offer you some options and ideas that may prove 
to be effective, but for more detailed information you are 
encouraged to call The National Centre for Victims of Crime at 
800 FYI-CALL. 
1. In situations where you and he know each other—you 
either have a relationship with this person, or you've met 
before—pretend to be interested and excited in what the 
person is doing. In an attempted rape situation your only 
objective is to get away before you are harmed. This can best 
be accomplished by letting your attacker believe that you do 
not want to get away. Therefore, if you initiate or carry through 
some small degree of affection, he, in his heightened state of 
arousal, will likely accept your intentions as honest. Then, 
when he is vulnerable or you have an opportunity, injure him 
and/or leave the situation. Remember that if he believes that 
you are a willing participant he will behave less aggressively 
and much differently. This will give you control over your 
circumstances. 

Sometimes the mistake people make is to resist initially, 
either verbally, physically, or both. Resist your instinct to 
defend yourself. If you do not become defensive, then he will 
not be as aggressive and will move more slowly and carelessly 
and give you your out. 
Remember that your first tactic should be to look for an 
escape, but if you can't, let him think that this is what you want. 
Some rapists who know die victim believe that this person 
wants it, so you don't need to do a lot of convincing. His guard 
will be down as long as he doesn't think that you want to 
escape. And when he relaxes his guard, move. 
Aside from initiating some small gesture toward physical 
contact, smile. That's right, smile! We've talked often about the 
power of smiling in this book. This is a universal sign that you 
are comfortable and accepting of the situation. Let him see a 
big, broad, wide, encompassing smile. 
Depending on how well you know this person, you may 
need to provide for a "reasonably logical motivation" for your 
wanting to have sex with this person. If you are convincing 
enough, you can try to convince him, too, that it has to be just 
perfect and that you want a change of venue—to go 
somewhere where it will be more romantic. 
If you don't know your attacker, you can still try to "convince" 
him of your interest. Assuming you're able to carry on some 
sort of dialogue, you should tell him that this is your exact 
fantasy and that you want it to be just perfect. Tell him what to 
do—such as lie down, take off your shirt. If he complies then 
you will have gained some control of the situation. Then, do 
whatever it takes to either incapacitate him and/or escape. 
Note: You should be aware that if the assault continues, this 
tactic may be used against you in court. The defence may 
use your 'overt interest' as an indication that you wished for 
the encounter to take place. 

2. Try to calm your attacker and persuade him not to carry 
out the attack. Some women have been successful by simply 
telling their attackers not to continue. For this to be 
effective the woman must speak confidently and assuredly. 
You should be direct and clear. "No! Stop this now." 
3. If you are at home, tell him somebody will be back soon. If 
you are in a more public place, yell, scream, and try to create 
any type of disturbance. 
4. You may be able to turn off the attacker by: repulsing 
him by vomiting, urinating, belching, and so on; claiming to be 
sick or have AIDS; pretending to be insane or mentally 
deranged. 
5. Physical self-defence. If you decide to fight, make sure 
that you are not afraid to inflict serious pain on your attacker. 
Hit him where it hurts. Eyes, groin, throat, and nose are 
particularly vulnerable. If you feel that you will be injured and 
hurt by defending yourself, do not feel guilty. Survival is your 
ultimate objective. A victim who does not fight back should 
never feel guilty or ashamed—sometimes its the smartest 
thing to do. 



Power Point 
If your attacker wants to take you somewhere, do whatever you can to 
avoid going with him. Studies show that once he gets you in a car or 
away from where you are, your chances of being harmed increase sig-
nificantly. Scream, punch, kick, and do whatever you need to do to not 
be taken from where you are. The best defence is a smart offence. If 
you don't find yourself in these situations, then you will not have to 
worry about how to get out of them. Be smart, and use caution. You 
never know who you are dealing with! 

PHYSICAL ASSAULTS: FOR MEN AND WOMEN 
If you follow these tactics, you can get out of just about any 
physical assault. Your sole objective is to get out of the 
situation without being injured. It's smarter to walk away with 
a bruised ego than a bruised face. 
1. Okay, somebody did something to you that you don't 
appreciate. The problem is you never know who you're 
talking with. In an age when many people walk around with a 
weapon and an attitude, you need to be careful. First a word to 
the wise. If somebody steps on your foot, cuts you off, bumps 
into you, whatever . . .let it go! Did he do it on purpose because 
he's looking for a fight? Was it an accident? Does he not like 
you and want to show that he's bigger and stronger than you? 
Is he trying to prove something to you, himself, or some body 
else? You don't always know, and most important, who cares? 
If you can walk away, walk away. 
2. If this is happening with someone whom you know and 
is be ginning with verbal abuse, then understand the 
dynamics here. The person treats you this way because it 
makes him feel powerful. To diffuse his anger, acknowledge 
his "authority and power." To do this, simply say, "You're right, 
I'm sorry." Then remove yourself from the situation. 
3. If the above isn't working fast enough you can use this 
tactic. Become more upset at yourself than the person is. He 
is yelling be cause he wants you to feel the way he does: 
angry, hurt, frustrated, and small. So if you make him believe 
that you feel worse than he does, he accomplishes nothing 
more by yelling. When you beat your self up verbally he has no 
real motivation to hurt you physically be cause his ego is being 
assuaged. 
4. There's an old saying: "Never argue with anyone who is 
crazier than you." Do whatever you can to make him think that 
you're nuts. Scream, yell, talk to imaginary people, whatever. 
Here's why this works. He is looking to fight you because he 
believes that he will be victorious. No matter how angry we 
get, we rarely pick a fight with some one who we know can 
beat the daylights out of us. If you do what he does not expect 
then the person will conclude that you are unpredictable, 
capable of anything and may indeed be a threat. He's no 
longer in control of the situation and, hence, doesn't feel as 
powerful. 

5. If that's not working then hit first and hit hard. Don't 
start a fight but if you have no choice, make sure that you 
finish it. Hit him where it hurts. Eyes, groin, throat, and nose 
are particularly vulnerable. 
Strategy Review 
SEXUAL ASSAULTS: 
Resist initially your inclination to defend yourself either 
verbally or physically. 
Try to calm, your attacker and persuade him not to 
carry out the attack. 
If you are at home, tell him somebody will be back 
soon. If you are in a more public place, yell, scream, 
and try to create any type of disturbance. 
You may be able to turn off the attacker by: repulsing 
him by vomiting, urinating, belching, and so on; claiming 
to be sick or have AIDS; pretending to be insane or 
mentally deranged. 
Physical self-defence. Hit him where it hurts. Eyes, 
groin, throat, and nose are particularly vulnerable. 
PHYSICAL ASSAULTS: 
To diffuse his anger, acknowledge his "authority and 
power." To do this, simply say, "You're right, I'm sorry." 
Become more upset at yourself than the person is and 
remove his unconscious "incentive" for physical abuse. 
We tend to stay away from people who are crazier 
then we are. Act unpredictably. 
If nothing else works, then be practical. Hit first and hit 
hard. Hit him where it hurts. Eyes, groin, throat, and 
nose are particularly vulnerable. 

Conclusion 
This book offers psychological solutions to correcting 
problems, not people. For instance, if you find yourself in an 
abusive relationship, this book will certainly help you to take 
control of harmful situations, but it won't address the larger 
issue, which is why you are in this relationship. If people are 
taking advantage of you, then this book will help you to see 
through them, but it won't help you to choose your friends 
better. Additionally, if you act without thinking and need 
someone to forgive you, this book will also help you to be 
forgiven. But if you are constantly apologizing for things you've 
done, it won't help you to think more about the ramifications 
of what you do and say and how that can hurt someone. 
If you find yourself on the receiving end of a jealous partner, 
you can easily quash the jealousy with a single psychological 
technique that takes all of about thirty seconds. But it won't 
help you to re-evaluate the relationship or to examine the root 
of your partner's jealousy. 
This is like no other self-help book because it makes life easy 
without much effort. You simply plug in the psychological 
technique and the problem is solved. But if you continue to 
find yourself in these difficult situations, I would encourage 
you to look more closely at your choices in life. 
In compiling these tactics, every attempt was made to 
instil a sense of morality, using the barometer of "the greater 
good" for all concerned. For example, lying to protect 
someone from embarrassment or hurt feelings is likely to be 
beneficial to everyone. And using deception is acceptable if it 
will keep you from being harmed or taken advantage of. 
These, however, are not always black-and-white issues, so 
appreciation goes to my friend Rabbi Henry Harris for helping 
me to clarify certain points of morality. If, however, these 
techniques seem to veer from this "higher ground," please 
know that it is not a reflection of Rabbi Harris's wisdom, but 
rather a departure to effectively illustrate a point. 
You will notice that you feel much better about yourself and 
life in general. This is because much of our inner turmoil and 
frustration comes from our inability to deal effectively with 
people and to handle difficult situations and conflicts. So as 
you begin to apply these techniques, you'll find new doors 
opening up for you as you gain a greater sense of who you 
are and what you are capable of. And this renewed self-image 
can help you to shape your future into anything that you 
choose. Instead of being a victim of the tides, you will be able 
to direct your destiny and take full advantage of life's greatest 
gift—-free will. 

This book was written to help give you a sense of 
empowerment and control over your life. But with that control 
comes an incredible, tremendous opportunity. 
It can—if you will let it—allow you to benefit others in ways 
you never could have before. When things in our own life are 
not going well, it can be hard to extend a helping hand to 
others. When you're in control, you're accomplishing more and 
feeling terrific about yourself and about your life. Empowering 
others will allow you to take your personal growth to an 
entirely new level. 
Enjoy your new life.  

Bibliography 
Aronson, E., B. Willerman, and J. Floyd (1966). The effect of 
a
pratfall 
on 
increasing 
interpersonal 
attractiveness. 
Psychonomic Science, 4. 
Asch, S. E. (1946). Forming impressions of personalities. 
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 41. 
Carlsmith, J. M., and A. E. Gross (1969). Some effects of guilt 
on compliance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
11. 
Cialdini, R. B., B. L. Green, and A. J. Rusch (1992). When 
tactical pronouncement of change becomes real change. The 
case of reciprocal persuasion. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 6. 
Curtis, R. C., and K. Miller (1986). Believing another likes or 
dislikes you: Behaviors making the beliefs come true. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 51. 
Dutton, D. G., and A. P. Aron (1974). Some evidence for 
heightened sexual attraction under conditions of high anxiety. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 30. 
-------- (1989). Romantic attraction and generalized liking for 
others 
who are sources of conflict-based arousal. Canadian Journal 
of Behavioral Science, 21. 
Frank M. G., and T Gilovich (1998). The dark side of self and 
social perception: Black uniforms and aggression in 
professional sports. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 54. 
Freedman, J. L., and S. C. Fraser (1966). Compliance without 
pressure: 
The 
foot-in-the-door 
technique. 
Journal 
of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 4. 

Higgins, E. T., W. S. Rholes, and C. R. Jones (1977). Category 
accessibility 
and 
impression 
formation. 
Journal 
of 
Experimental Social Psychology, 13. 
Kahneman, D., and J. Snell (1992). Predicting a change in 
taste: Do people know what they will like? Journal of 
Behavioral Decision Making, 5. 
Kellerman, J., J. Lewis, and J. D. Laird (1989). Looking and 
loving: The effects of mutual gaze on feelings of romantic 
love. Journal of Research in Personality, 23. 
Kelley, H. H. (1950). The warm-cold variable in first 
impressions of persons. Journal of Personality, 18. 
Kleinke, C. L., F. B. Meeker, and R. A. Staneski (1986). 
Preference for opening lines: Comparing ratings by men 
and women. Sex Roles, 15. 
Langer, E., A. Blank, and B. Chanowitz (1978). The 
mindlessness of ostensibly thoughtful action: The role of 
"placebic" information in interpersonal interaction. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 36. 
Leventhal, H., R. Singer, and S. Jones (1965). The effects of 
fear and specificity of recommendation upon attitudes and 
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2. 
Lipsitz, A., K. Kallmeyer, M. Ferguson, and A. Abas (1989). 
Counting on blood donors: Increasing the impact of reminder 
calls. Journal of Applied Social Pscyhology, 19. 
Loftus, E. F. (1979). Eyewitness Testimony. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
Michaels, J. W., J. M. Blommel, R. M. Brocato, R. A. Linkous, 
and J. S. Rowe (1982). Social facilitation and inhibition in a 
natural setting. Replications in Social Psychology, 2. 
Milliman, R. (1982). Using background music to affect the 
behavior of supermarket shoppers. Journal of Marketing, 46. 

Montepare, J. M., and L. Zebrowitz-McArthur (1988). 
Impressions of people created by age-related qualities of 
their gaits. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54. 
Moreland, R. L., and R. B. Zajonc (1982). Exposure effects in 
person perception: Familiarity, similarity, and attraction. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 18. 
Petty, R. E., J. T. Cacioppo, and R. Goldman (1981). 
Personal involvement as a determinant of argument-based 
persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 41. 
Rhodewalt, E, and J. Davison, Jr. (1983). Reactance and the 
coronary-prone behavior pattern: The role of self-attribution 
in response to reduced behavioral freedom. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 44. 
Roballey, T. C, C. McGreevy, R. R. Rongo, M. L. Schwantes, 
P. J. Steger, M. A. Wininger, and E. B. Gardner (1985). The 
effect of music on eating behavior. Bulletin of the 
Psychonomic Society, 23. 
Ross, L., and S. M. Samuels (1993). The predictive power of 
personal reputation versus labels and construal in the 
Prisoner's Dilemma game. Unpublished manuscript, Stanford 
University. 
Sarason, I. G., B. R. Sarason, G. R. Pierce, E. N. Shearin, and 
M. H. Sayers (1991). A social learning approach to increasing 
blood donations. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 21. 
Shapiro, D. R., E. H. Buttner, and B. Barry (1992). 
Explanations: 
What 
factors 
enhance 
their 
perceived 
inadequacy? Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes, 1. 
Strentz, T, and S. M. Auerbach (1988). Adjustment to the 
stress of simulated captivity: Effects of emotion-focused 
versus problem-focused preparation on hostages differing in 
locus of control. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
55. 
Vroom, V. H., and P. W. Yetton (1973). Leadership and 
Decision-making. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. 

Walster Hatfield, E. (1965). The effect of self-esteem on 
romantic liking. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1. 
Weiner, B., J. Amirkhan, V. S. Folkes, and J. A. Verette (1987). 
An at-tributional analysis of excuse giving: Studies of a naive 
theory of emotion. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 52. 
Wing, R. L. (1986). The Tao of Power. New York: Doubleday. 
Zimbardo, P. G. (1970). The human choice: Individuation, 
reason, and order versus deindividuation, impulse, and 
chaos. In W. J. Arnold and D. Levine, eds. (1969), Nebraska 
Symposium on Motivation, 17. Lincoln: University of Nebraska 
Press. 

About the Author 
DAVID J. LIEBERMAN,
Ph.D., whose books have been 
translated into eleven languages, is an internationally 
renowned leader in the field of human behaviour. He has 
appeared on more than two hundred programs and is a 
frequent guest expert on national television and radio shows 
such as The Today Show, National Public Radio, The View, 
PBS, The Montel Williams Show, and A&E. Dr. Lieberman 
holds a Ph.D. in psychology and is the creator of Neural-
Dynamic Analysis, a revolutionary short-term therapy. He is a 
sought-after speaker, lecturer, and consultant. Techniques 
based 
on 
his 
work 
have 
led 
to 
groundbreaking 
advancements in numerous fields and are used by 
governments, corporations, and professionals in more than 
twenty-five countries. He lives in New York City. 

