A Critical Chain Project 
Management/Theory of 
Constraints Novel
―
Eric Bergland
Get it Done 
On Time!

 GET IT DONE ON TIME! 
 A CRITICAL CHAIN PROJECT 
MANAGEMENT/THEORY OF 
CONSTRAINTS NOVEL  
 Eric Bergland
 
 

Get it Done On Time! A Critical Chain Project Management/Th eory of Constraints Novel
Eric Bergland 
 
 
 
Redwood City, California 
 
 
 
USA 
 
 
 
 
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4842-1859-4 
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4842-1860-0
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-1860-0 
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016941935
Copyright © 2016 by Eric Bergland
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part 
of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, 
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission 
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dis-
similar methodology now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are 
brief excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied specifically for the 
purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of 
the work. Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the 
Copyright Law of the Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission for use must always 
be obtained from Springer. Permissions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright 
Clearance Center. Violations are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a trademark symbol 
with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we use the names, logos, and images 
only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringe-
ment of the trademark.
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even if they 
are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or not they are 
subject to proprietary rights.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of pub-
lication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for 
any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with 
respect to the material contained herein.
Managing Director: Welmoed Spahr 
Lead Editor: Jeffrey Pepper
Technical Reviewer: Suzan Bergland
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Pramila Balan, Louise Corrigan, Jonathan Gennick, 
Robert Hutchinson, Celestin Suresh John, Michelle Lowman, James Markham, 
Susan McDermott, Matthew Moodie, Jeffrey Pepper, Douglas Pundick, 
Ben Renow-Clarke, Gwenan Spearing
Coordinating Editor: Mark Powers
Compositor: SPi Global
Indexer: SPi Global
Artist: SPi Global
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media New York, 
233 Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 348-4505, e-mail 
 orders-ny@springer-sbm.com , or visit  www.springeronline.com . Apress Media, LLC is a California 
LLC and the sole member (owner) is Springer Science + Business Media Finance Inc (SSBM Finance 
Inc). SSBM Finance Inc is a  Delaware corporation.
For information on translations, please e-mail  rights@apress.com , or visit  www.apress.com . 
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or promotional 
use. eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For more information, reference our 
Special Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page at  www.apress.com/bulk-sales .
Any source code or other supplementary materials referenced by the author in this text are available 
to readers at  www.apress.com/9781484217085 . For detailed information about how to locate your 
book’s source code, go to  www.apress.com/source-code/ . Readers can also access source code at 
SpringerLink in the Supplementary Material section for each chapter.
Printed on acid-free paper

Contents
About the Author. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v
About the Technical Reviewer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix
Preface. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xi
Chapter 1: 
 Introductions   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Chapter 2: 
 High-Level Critical Chain Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Chapter 3: 
 Factors for Successful Implementations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Chapter 4: 
 How Does the Critical Chain Solution Work? . . . . . . . . . . 37
Chapter 5: 
 Championing Ideas. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Chapter 6: 
 High-Level Implementation Steps  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Chapter 7: 
 Using Ambitious Targets to Handle Past Issues. . . . . . . . . 93
Chapter 8: 
 Individual Buy-In . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
Chapter 9: 
 Almost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
Chapter 10:  Board Room Meeting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
Appendix A:    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
Index  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189

  

   About the Author 
 Eric  Bergland  has been in software product 
development for over 20 years working as a 
software engineer, product manager, and project 
and program manager. Eric completed a com-
puter science degree from Ithaca College and 
his master’s degree in telecommunications from 
the University of Pittsburgh. He started his TOC 
journey in 1993 with the Goldratt Institute’s 
Odyssey college program lead by Dr. Eli Goldratt. 
Eric also worked for the Goldratt Institute and 
went through its Academy training program 
learning the Critical Chain project management 
solutions, Theory of Constraints problem solv-
ing model, Management Skills Workshop day-to-
day tools, replenishment distribution solution, 
and drum-buffer-rope manufacturing solutions. 
He has applied his Theory of Constraints and Critical Chain knowledge in a 
variety of organizations and enjoys sharing his experiences with TOC in the 
stories collected here.  

  

 About the Technical 
Reviewer 
 Suzan   Bergland   has worked with numer-
ous organizations to help them improve their 
bottom-line results and to create a sustainable 
competitive advantage. In 2013 she retired from 
AGI-Goldratt Institute after serving as a part-
ner and as president of the North American 
group. She is a founder and lifetime member 
of the Theory of Constraints International 
Certification Organization (TOCICO) and holds 
all six TOCICO certifications (Supply Chain 
Logistics, Thinking Process, Holistic Strategy, 
Project Management, Finance, and Measures and 
Fundamentals). Suzan is coauthor of the book 
 VELOCITY–Combining Lean, Six Sigma, and the 
Theory of Constraints to Achieve Breakthrough Performance, published by Simon & 
Schuster. Suzan holds a bachelor’s degree from Furman University, a master’s 
degree from Converse College, and a master’s degree in quality management 
from Loyola University in New Orleans.  

  

  Acknowledgments 
 I would like to thank the Goldratt Institute, where I first learned about the 
Theory of Constraints, Eli Goldratt, who created the Theory of Constraints 
methodology, and the TOC community. Thanks also to Jeff, Mark, Matt, and 
the Apress team for their support and publishing expertise. I would also like 
to thank Suzan Bergland for sharing her insights and expertise and my family 
(Frances, Spencer, and Ryan) for their love and support.  

  

 Preface 
 This book is based on actual real-world experiences and project management 
tools. It covers a variety of project management, Critical Chain, Theory of 
Constraints, and organizational adoption (buy-in) situations and concepts. It is 
designed to provide a fun, entertaining, and comprehensive way to learn these 
concepts, trigger discussions, and give you some ideas of what to look for in 
your organization. 
 If you interested in the Theory of Constraints and Critical Chain, this book 
will provide a great overview of the various concepts, how they can be imple-
mented in real-world situations, and the buy-in required when putting these 
(or any) project management tools into place. 
 If you are interested in learning more about project management and are 
familiar with other tools and techniques, you should find the examples and 
situations in the stories familiar and compelling. You should be able to see 
common project management challenges, look at what tools you are familiar 
with and how they could apply, and then see how they compare or comple-
ment the tools and approaches the characters use to implement, gain adop-
tion, and gain success in your organization. 
 To help with understanding the concepts introduced in each chapter, a series 
of concept summaries and optional discussion questions are provided in the 
appendix. 
 
■ Note   At the end of some chapters, I provide Current Reality Tree (CRT) and Future Reality Tree 
(FRT) diagrams. These will be explained fully in the relevant chapters. However, as key issues and 
benefits are raised in the story, they will be tagged with [crt #] or [frt #] to help you connect them with 
items captured and summarized in the CRT and FRT. In other words, [crt #] and [frt #] are references 
to items in the CRT and FRT, respectively. 

xii
Preface
 Like any field, Critical Chain and the Theory of Constraints (TOC) is ever 
evolving and new ideas, concepts, understandings, and refinements are always 
being developed. To learn the latest information and more about TOC, TOC 
solutions including Critical Chain, TOC conferences, results, and testimonials, 
consider the following:
• 
 The Goldratt Institute (   www.goldratt.com  ), which is the 
birthplace of TOC.  
• 
 The Theory of Constraints International Certification 
Organization (   www.tocico.org  ).  
 
 

© Eric Bergland 2016 
E. Bergland, Get it Done On Time!, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-1860-0_1
 C H A P T E R 
 Introductions 
 Tim sat watching as all of LivingTV  Interactive  ’s employees slowly gathered 
into the company’s atrium to hear the CEO’s latest pep talk. 
 “We have a great product. We delivered a great service..,” the CEO started 
out. Then it turned, “We were just before our time. We could not build the 
market fast enough. We are being forced to close our doors.” 
 Everyone looked around shocked. Everyone knew things had been challeng-
ing over the last year, but they did not realize they were this bad, or that they 
would end this suddenly. 
 LivingTV 
 LivingTV had started out small with wild ideas and big dreams. They built a 
prototype out of blood and sweat, pouring in hours of overtime to steadily 
growing the company’s technology. Then a few years later came the big push 
to expand. Go public—launch a new technology and make everyone million-
aires. As part of this big expansion they leased out a building four times their 
current size. They pushed to build up reserves of venture capital and major 
investment money. They grew from 40 to 150 employees. But, they could not 
develop the market fast enough. They could not get the new technology out 
soon enough. They were unable to grow the revenues as quickly as they had 
expanded the company and counter the resulting growth in expenses. Dreams 
are good but expanding quickly past your capabilities can turn out to be very, 
very fatal. 
1
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter 
(doi:  10.1007/978-1-4842-1860-0_1  ) contains supplementary material, which is available 
to authorized users.

Chapter 1 | Introductions
2
 The company was gone; left to a handful of patents for its investors and law-
yers to fight over. Tim started to promote the Theory of Constraints ( TOC  ) 
at LivingTV. But too little, too late. Now, like 149 others, Tim too had to figure 
out what was next. Do some engineering work? Maybe consulting? Probably 
best to ponder his next steps over a cup of coffee at his favorite coffee shop.  
 Tim and Randal Reconnect 
 “TIM!!! Hey Tim!!” Tim looks around and tries to shake the cobwebs out of 
his head. Someone is yelling across what used to be a quiet coffee shop dis-
turbing  Tim and multiple patrons in the process. It is Randal, an old college 
buddy Tim has not seen in years. He has aged a bit, is dressed to the hilt in a 
fancy suit, and is quickly advancing toward Tim’s table. 
 “TIM!! What are you up to buddy?”  Randal  says, full of zeal and vigor. 
 “Not too much at the moment Randal; just contemplating my options,” 
Tim responds somewhat lethargically. 
 “Options! So how soon is your company going public? Will you be able to cash 
them out pretty soon or are you in the lock-out period?” 
 “Well,” Tim says, wanting to get this over with, “my options started out at 
$12 per share.” 
 “Not too bad; so what are they worth now? Have they grown in value?” 
 “Well, the company just folded a few hours ago,” Tim responds, “so I’m figuring 
they’re worthless now. But I could possibly use them for wallpaper,” he says, 
half joking. “What I was really contemplating were my job options.” 
 “Oh Tim! I am very sorry to hear that. No worries, though. You’re good. 
I’m sure you will figure out something in no time.” 
 “So how about you, Randal?” says Tim, anxious to change the topic. 
 “I worked at a few companies here and there, building up my marketing skills 
over the last few years since we last saw each other. Right now I’m very 
excited about finishing up my executive marketing MBA. I’m hoping it will 
give me a chance to move up the corporate ladder a bit. As part of the MBA 
graduation requirement, I have an internship at a software start-up. 
 “What is the new software start-up like?” The software part catches Tim’s 
interest. 
 “The software company has been around for a few years and they are getting 
ready to launch their latest line of products. The company has made it through 
several rounds of funding. We just need to get some of our new products out 
to a few key customers and we’re good to go. I even get some of the pre-IPO 

Get it Done On Time!
3
stock as part of my internship contract. How about you, Tim? Last we talked, 
you were looking into project management consulting.” 
 “Correct. I learned about the Critical Chain project management solution and 
I was trying to use it to help LivingTV deliver its projects more quickly and 
reliably.” 
 “Interesting,” Randal says, thinking about some of the issues he heard during 
his internship, “I might want to hear a bit more about that.” 
 “I was also able to learn a great set of TOC tools.” 
 “TOC as in Table of Contents?” Randal says, staring strangely at Tim. 
 “No, no. TOC as in Theory of Constraints. It is a great set of general problem-
solving tools that you can use to look at the organization as a whole, identify 
areas to focus on, and drive overall improvements.”   
 “That part sounds a bit involved,” Randal says, his eyes glazing over. 
 “It can be an important step. The TOC analysis can help ensure the Critical 
Chain implementation’s success. In fact, the TOC analysis can help focus teams 
on any improvement effort from Critical Chain, Scrum, Agile, new technology 
deployments, and so on.” 
 Randal looks a bit unconvinced. Then, looking down at his watch, he says, 
“Crap, late again. Tim I have to head off to an exec strategy meeting. Maybe we 
can meet here Monday and you can tell me a bit more about Critical Chain 
and meeting deadlines? Same time? I’ll call you just before to confirm.” 
 “Ahh…sure,” Tim says hesitantly. “My schedule seems to be pretty open.”  

© Eric Bergland 2016 
E. Bergland, Get it Done On Time!, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-1860-0_2
 C H A P T E R 
  High-Level 
Critical Chain 
Overview 
 Tim sits idly in his favorite café, looking repeatedly at his watch. He’s 15 min-
utes late. Don’t marketing guys have any concept of time, he thinks, half joking 
to himself. Finally he sees Randal’s BMW drive into the packed parking lot 
and pull into an empty handicap spot. Randal turns off the car and then casu-
ally places a temporary handicap placard on his rear view mirror and quickly 
strides into the cafe. 
 “Hi Randal, good to see you. I saw the handicap placard. Are you doing okay?” 
Tim asks, somewhat concerned and curious. 
 “Hi Tim. Thank you for asking. I’m doing alright. I thrashed my back last week 
playing tennis; couldn’t walk a damn. It expires next week. I figured I just might 
as well take advantage of it while I still can.” 
 Tim thought back to the last time he had worked with Randal. Tim had always 
been an altruistic spirit of the rules, try-and-make-a-better-system kind of guy, 
where Randal had been much more practical, making the most of the rules he 
was given. “I’m glad your back is doing better,” Tim replies. “So Randal, over the 
phone you said you wanted to learn a bit more about Critical Chain?” 
2

Chapter 2 | High-Level Critical Chain Overview
6
 “Correct Tim. I was hoping you could give me a high-level explanation and I 
wanted to see if it was something our engineering team could use. I did some 
checking and heard that they talked about Critical Chain, but I don’t think they 
got very far. I wanted to hear about your experience and if it was something 
that you found useful.” 
 Tim thinks to himself briefly. In the past, he tried to provide lots of project 
management details to someone who was more business focused. It only suc-
ceeded in confusing the person rather than helping them understand. Always 
best to start high level and then go into details as needed. “Sure Randal, I’ll 
walk you through a quick introduction. If you want more details, just let me 
know. Does that work for you?” 
 “Sure Tim, fire away.” 
 “Critical Chain is a Theory of Constraints  solution  that addresses the common 
problems found in project management so we can better plan, manage, and be 
more successful with projects. Randal, are you familiar with traditional sched-
uling and Critical Path?” 
 “Just the basics, Tim. You build out an overall schedule by looking at defining all 
of the tasks and work involved and their inter-connections. Then you identify 
the Critical Path, which is the longest sequence of tasks needed to complete 
the project. From there, you focus your efforts on managing the Critical Path. 
I’ve seen Gary, the engineering manager, run a few schedule building sessions.” 
 “So one of the first steps in the Critical Chain is to be sure that your  resources  
are leveled.” 
 “Resource what?” 
 “Resource leveled. It is a function within the scheduling tool that makes sure 
that you do not schedule more than one task to a resource at a time. Think of 
it this way. If I asked you to go to one customer tradeshow the first week of 
June  and I asked you to fly to Florida to support a customer demo the same 
week…” 
 “It would be impossible to do, Tim.” 
 “Exactly. So we resolve resource contention or level the work so we’re not 
asking resources to do more than one full time task at a time.” 
 “Sure, put that way, it sounds like a very good idea.” 
 “Second, Critical Chain is very focused on  managing variability  —any time a 
task might finish later or sooner than expected. Simply put, if there were never 
any delays in schedules then project management would be a snap. Since there 
are always delays and we don’t know where or when, Critical Chain helps us 
manage this variability.” 

Get it Done On Time!
7
 “How?” 
 “So Critical Chain focuses on trying to reduce behaviors that cause delays and 
sets up buffers to absorb and manage delays. It also focuses less on individual 
deadlines and more on the overall deadline, also known as the project due 
date.” 
 “Tim, I know Gary gets all bent out of shape when resources are late and the 
project starts to run late. So is Critical Chain just setting up more milestones 
and is less focused on the tasks?” 
 “Not quite, Randal. Think of it this way. If every task was late but the project 
still delivered on time, the project would be a success. At the same time, if 
every task was on time, but the project was still late it would be not be a 
success.” 
 “True Tim, but not realistic.” 
 “But true in the sense that at the end of the day we care the most about the 
overall project deadline. So if the schedule was set up in a way that task delays 
could be absorbed by an overall buffer that protected the overall deadline—
the thing we care about the most—this would be of value.” 
 “I guess, Tim. We definitely have issues hitting our overall deadlines. So anything 
to better protect them would be of value. I would have to think a bit more 
about this and more likely need to pull Gary in. So you said Critical Chain was 
part of the Theory of Constraints. Like a physics theory or something?” 
 “So the  Theory of Constraints (TOC for short) is a general  problem-solving 
model  that can be applied to a variety of environments, but it has one funda-
mental concept. In looking at any kind of system such as project management, 
manufacturing, or distribution, it implies that if you look in the right way and 
hard enough you will find that there is one thing, one constraint, that limits 
the overall system. So if you focus improvement efforts on this one area, 
the whole system will benefit and the bottom line of the organization will 
improve.” 
 “Hmm…Tim, like you said, it sounds a rather bit academic and theoretical. Is 
it really true? 
 “Well, let’s go back to Critical Chain. TOC looked at all of the common  project 
management issues  , looked at how they were interconnected, and what were 
the root issues driving them. It then focused building a solution to address 
these issues. For example, one of the biggest issues with traditional schedules 
is that once you are late there is not an inherent system to recover. So that 
is why Critical Chain focuses so much on reducing variability (behaviors and 
level loading) and managing it (buffers). The better you can manage variability 
(one possible constraint) the more likely the overall project (system) will 
succeed.” 

Chapter 2 | High-Level Critical Chain Overview
8
 “So TOC was used to create Critical Chain?” 
 “Correct. And it can be used to help with the implementation of Critical 
Chain.” 
 “Hmm. Interesting thoughts Tim,” Randal turns to his coffee and takes a few 
sips. “So, that was a good text book background do you have something more 
real world you can share with me? So it’s a project management system. So 
what is the marketing pitch? Which customer pain points does it address? 
What are the benefits? What is the value? Give me some real-world examples.” 
 Critical Chain Issues, Benefits, and Sample 
Results 
 Tim pauses for a moment and collects his thoughts. “Sure Randal. So Critical 
Chain helps us address several common project management  issues that hap-
pen in a variety of project management environments. Some of the most com-
mon ones are:  
• 
 Projects miss critical deadlines and market opportunities 
[crt 25]  
• 
 We cut too many key features to make deadlines [crt 19]  
• 
 Our products are not competitive enough (due to slow 
project turnaround, missing deadlines, and cutting key 
features) [crt 23]  
• 
 There is too much resource burn-out and turnover [crt 14]  
• 
 We go over budget due to project overruns and do not 
make expected revenues for our product lines [crt 26]  
• 
 There are internal projects that fight over shared 
resources [crt 18]  
 “That’s quite a list, Tim. Missing deadlines, cutting features, and being competi-
tive all make sense to me. We would have to talk with Gary about resource 
burn-out and struggles. Give me some more time and I could work with Gary 
and probably come up with a few more items to expand your list.” 
 “True, these are the key issues. Depending on the organization, some of these 
issues will stand out more than others or be phrased slightly differently.” 
 “So, Tim, let me give you a marketing tip. It’s great that Critical Chain can help 
address all of those issues. The real question is if one of those issues is really 
critical and more significant than the others, then I am very likely to pay big 
bucks to fix it. In other words, what are the customer’s biggest pain points?” 

Get it Done On Time!
9
 “Okay…” feeling a bit odd to be lectured by Randal, “So Randal, from the list 
of issues I just went over, what really stands out to you?” 
 “Great question Tim! For us, hitting the major deadlines is the single most 
important factor. If we miss the deadlines, we delay our funding. Cutting fea-
tures and resource burn-out are some factors. But far and beyond everything 
is about hitting the deadlines.” 
 “And Randal, what happens if you consistently miss schedules to the point that 
you continue to lose funding?” 
 “Well in that unlikely case it happens enough, it is likely the company could 
eventually run out of money and fold shortly thereafter [crt 28]. Which would 
be bad. But hey I’m a marketing consultant and missing schedules would be 
engineering’s fault.” 
 “And how well is engineering holding up meeting schedules?” 
 “They’re okay, but as the company is ramping up, so does the work, the dead-
lines, and the pressure. I guess, thinking more about it, the delays are likely to 
get worse and worse pretty soon.” 
 “And if the company folds soon, what happens to your MBA internship?” Tim 
asks, building on the discussion. 
 “My internship goes away. Oh crap! That means I would not be able to close 
out the internship requirement for my MBA and I could be held back at least 
a year!” 
 “And the company’s health and employees could be at risk too?” Tim inquires, 
trying to get Randal to think beyond just his own interests. 
 “Yeah, yeah, that too,” Randal says a bit disheartened. 
 “Okay, Randal, as you say, I think we have successfully found the company’s, as 
well as your personal, biggest pain point, and why we need to look at improv-
ing the company’s project management.” 
 “Yeah, I’ll say. I thought being in marketing and an intern, I was safe. I guess it’s 
a bit more complicated than I thought.” 
 “So we covered the common project management issues. Being a bit more 
hopeful, let us talk about some of the common Critical Chain  benefits. They 
include:
• 
 On-time delivery of products significantly improves [frt 8]  
• 
 You are able to complete projects much faster [frt 8]  
• 
 Hidden or misused resource capacity is identified [frt 12]  
• 
 The company and its products are more competitive [frt 14]  
• 
 The company is more profitable [frt 20]”  

Chapter 2 | High-Level Critical Chain Overview
10
 “That seems like a reasonable list, Tim. 
 Taking a cue from Randal’s earlier comment, Tim asks, “So what benefits stand 
out to you the most, Randal?” 
 “Well Tim, as I said before, right now it’s critical to get reliable, consistent, on-
time delivery. Not only is it important for the survivability of the company, but 
also for our long-term profitability.” 
 “So we have identified your key issue as well as the key benefit to focus on and 
help move the company forward with Critical Chain,” states Tim. 
 “Um, not quite Tim. The issues and benefits sound nice and all. But I have 
heard these same benefits time and time again claimed by other project man-
agement vendors and solutions. I need to know this is real. Show me proven 
results. And tell me without confusing me why this Critical Chain can really 
deliver these results. Then I might be a bit more motivated and convinced.” 
 “Okay, okay, Randal,” Tim concedes, a bit surprised at the push back. “Give me 
a bit more time and I can address all of your questions.” 
 “Wouldn’t want to make it too easy for you Tim,” Randal says with a friendly 
smile. 
 “Well Randal, you are in luck. I happen to have a few examples with me.” Tim 
then proceeds to pulls out a folder of printed documents. “So every company 
and circumstance is unique, but what you can see here are some of the excep-
tional  results that some companies have been able to achieve from a variety of 
different Critical Chain providers.” 
 Avraham Goldratt Institute ( AGI  )  
 Using their experience and Critical Chain, they have the following customer 
results (see    www.goldratt.com   ) (2.3):
• 
 Seagate brought the first 15,000 rpm disc to market 
ahead of competition, causing all competition to pull out 
of the market.  
• 
 Harris Semiconductor used Critical Chain to manage 
construction of its $250 million wafer fabrication plant, 
completing it in just 13 months where the historic aver-
age was 54 months.  
• 
 Lucent Technologies tripled its development project 
capacity (5 to 17), reduced its new product introduction 
interval by 50%, and completed 100% of their projects 
ahead of time.  

Get it Done On Time!
11
 Goldratt Marketing Group  
  www.toc-goldratt.com  has a TOC reference bank of results that includes (2.4):
• 
 eIRCOM telecommunications improved due date perfor-
mance from 40% to 90% and significantly reduced lead 
times.  
 Realization 
 Realization  lists several customer summaries, brief case studies, and customer 
videos at   http://www.realization.com (2.6). 
 High Tech New Product Development. HP Digital Camera Group:
• 
 Before: Six cameras launched in 2004. One camera 
launched in the spring window. One out of six cameras 
launched on time.  
• 
 After: 15 cameras launched in 2005, with 25% lower R&D 
expenses. Seven cameras launched in their spring window. 
All 15 cameras launched on time.  
 Aircraft Repair and Overhaul. US Air Force, Warner Robins Air Logistics 
Center, C17 Production Line:
• 
 Before: Throughput of 178 hours per aircraft per day. 
Turnaround time 46-180 days. Mechanic output 3.6 hours 
per day.  
• 
 After: 25% increase in throughput. Turnaround time 
reduced to 37-121 days. Mechanic output increased to 
4.75 hours per day. 40% overtime reduction.  
 ProChain 
 ProChain lists several customer success stories as well at   http://www.
prochain.com  (2.7). Clients have experienced:
• 
 20-50% reduction in actual execution of projects  
• 
 30-60% increase in productivity  
• 
 50-200% increase in project throughput  
• 
 Return on investments ratio greater than 100:1  
• 
 Significant improvement in quality of life  
• 
 Stable and continuous process improvement  

Chapter 2 | High-Level Critical Chain Overview
12
 There is also an example of Habitat for Humanity using Critical Chain sched-
uling to set a new world record building a four bedroom house in 3 hours, 
44 minutes, and 59 seconds. (2.8) 
 “So Tim, these are some very compelling results. Can I expect these same 
results in my organization?” 
 “That is a great question, Randal. It depends on your individual circumstances. 
In implementing Critical Chain, some organizations have found huge opportu-
nities where they can significantly improve their operations. Other companies 
have found significant improvements, but not as dramatic as these. As we walk 
through better understanding Critical Chain as well as how your organization 
works, we can highlight the opportunities and potential impacts of implement-
ing Critical Chain.” 
 “Okay, Tim, that makes sense. These results look promising. Individual results 
may vary. So tell me how can Critical Chain really deliver?”  
 Key Parts of  Critical Chain  
 “So, as you asked Randal, how does Critical Chain get these  results  ? Some of 
the key parts include:
• 
 Project buffers to better manage task variability [frt 1]  
• 
 Reducing bad multi-tasking to find hidden and misused 
resource capacity [frt 1]  
• 
 Setting goals and building schedules back to front [frt 1]  
• 
 Organizational analysis (TOC TP) to better understand the 
overall project environment (creating the CRT and FRT)  
 “Whoa, Tim, this is a little terminology heavy and some of these do not make 
sense to me. I’m just a simple marketing guy.” Randal says, raising his hands up 
and smiling. “Can you give me a high-level explanation of these and then we 
can possibly dig into them in more detail with Gary?” 
 “Sure, Randal.” 
 Project Buffers to Better  Manage Variability  
 “So Randal, as I asked before, what is the key issue in project management?” 
 “Managing project risks effectively, hitting deadlines, staffing, managing scope, 
and building the right product all come to mind, Tim.” 
 “Those are all good Randal, but as I noted before, one key thing to look at is 
 variability .” 

Get it Done On Time!
13
 “Sure Tim, I have some familiarity with variability. It is what Gary talks about 
all the time when his team misses a deadline. He talks about there being more 
work involved than originally expected, that additional scope and requirements 
were added, resources were not available, tasks took longer than expected, 
and worse project disasters happened that can totally sink a project.” 
 “True and when we originally build a schedule, how do they take into account 
this variability?” 
 “Well of course Gary does. Kinda… Well, maybe not exactly. He asks the 
engineers for their estimates, he ties everything together, and then we call it 
a schedule. Well, actually an initial estimate. Then management looks at the 
estimate and starts cutting out time. Then we end up with something that 
management feels is aggressive and somewhat realistic and something that 
engineering doesn’t scream too excessively about.” 
 “And how often do you meet these schedules, Randal?” 
 “The original schedule or the latest version of the revised schedule?” 
 “The original.” asks Tim. 
 “Well Tim, in general, not at all or at least never consistently. Engineering hits 
the typical unexpected and unplanned issues—they’re juggling multiple proj-
ects, complain about being stretched out and understaffed. They ask for more 
time; sometimes we replan and give them more time, and even then they’re 
likely to miss it. If we don’t give them more time, they’re likely to push out 
anyway or cut major features.” 
 “So Randal, does it look like this process is working for you in the long run?” 
 “Well… No, not really” 
 Tim draws the following diagram.  

Chapter 2 | High-Level Critical Chain Overview
14
 “So, Critical Chain sets up a formal system to better manage project variabil-
ity. When an engineer estimates a task, there can be two sets of time.   Focused 
time is the ideal time the task would take if the engineer just worked on that 
one task with no problems and no interruptions.   Safety time is the padding 
the engineer adds to that focused time estimate to take into account possible 
issues, such as the other work they are doing, paranoia, etc. For Critical Chain, 
we build the schedule based on the focused time and aggregate the safety time 
from all tasks to create a project buffer at the end of the project [frt 1].” 
 “So Tim, is this similar to using  aggressive task estimates  and then putting a 
management buffer at the end of the project since you figure they will run 
late?” 
 Tim then draws the following diagram.  
 “Close, but there are some fundamental differences. A management buffer is 
simply adding more time to a schedule that includes safety time in it. So you 
are adding a management buffer to an engineering task buffered schedule. This 
stretches out the schedule even more. Critical Chain uses aggressive focused 
times and the project buffer at the end of the project is more strategic and 
effective. In addition, you define strategies to manage this buffer and trigger 
actions if the buffer is being consumed too quickly too soon, so there is more 
to it than a management buffer at the end of a schedule. Since the project buf-
fer is more strategic than buffering each task, we find that we can often use 
less time and still get good protection against delays. To help effectively man-
age the project time, we also focus on behaviors to reduce bad multi-tasking 
and look at ways to more rigorously build the schedule, which leads us to our 
next two items.” 
 “Okay, Tim that sounds a bit more developed than what we are currently 
using.” I will have to bring in Gary and see what he thinks.”  

Get it Done On Time!
15
 Reducing Bad Multi-Tasking to Find Hidden and 
Misused Resource  Capacity  
 “So Randal, have you ever driven on Highway 101 during lunch time?” 
 “Sure, it’s a breeze; I can often finish my work commute in 20 minutes or so.” 
 “And Randal, during the 5:00 rush hour, how long is your commute?” 
 “Horrendous. It can take up to an hour; worse if there is an accident.” 
 “So your commute time can actually triple, but the distance from work to 
your house never changed.” 
 “Correct.” 
 “So that is what we look for with   bad multi-tasking . A highway has a certain 
capacity of cars it can handle. When there are not a lot of cars, traffic can flow 
rather quickly and just adding more cars has minimal effect. But once you 
start to swamp the road’s capacity, all the cars slow down more and more. 
The distance people have to drive has not changed, just the rate at which they 
can travel. The same is true with assigning projects to resources and to orga-
nizations. At a minimal point, we can just assign a handful of projects and they 
get done quickly—this is a reasonable amount of multi-tasking. But when we 
assign too many projects and all of them need to get done, the work starts to 
slow down more and more. This is a big sign of bad multi-tasking, where work 
and the time to finish our projects is getting more and more stretched out.” 
 “Interesting, Tim. Our engineers are getting busier and busier. And it certainly 
seems like they are getting overworked and are slowing down; in fact the 
more work we add, the more it just piles up and we have to just sit and wait 
for them to even get to it.” 
 “This is exactly what we look for in trying to address this area. Give resources 
clear priorities; focusing resources on key projects versus spreading them out 
on multiple projects; drive the resources on focused time so they focus on 
the key task; minimize set up and set down time; encourage quick hand-offs 
when tasks are completed; and don’t punish resources for finishing early or 
for when their tasks take longer than the focused time and consume some of 
the project buffer.” 
 “This is an interesting observation, Tim. We’ll have to go into this one a bit 
more when Gary is here.” 
 “Fair enough.” 
 “So Tim, project buffers and reducing bad multi-tasking are the key differences 
that Critical Chain has?” 
 “Two main differences, but let me share the last two major differences as well.”  

Chapter 2 | High-Level Critical Chain Overview
16
 Setting Goals and  Building Schedules (Back to Front)  
 “So Randal, there are a variety of approaches to building a project sched-
ule. The one key thing I have seen is that true dependencies are not always 
called out.” 
 “Okay…” Randal responds a bit hesitantly. 
 “In building the schedule, back to front, we first outline the goal of the project. 
From there, we work backward, in regard to what is essential to accomplish 
that goal. This helps us identify what is critical and confirm we have captured 
the true dependencies.” 
 “Tim, that kinda makes sense, but do you have a real example that I can better 
relate to?” 
 “Sure, let me give you my interpretation of one example I have seen. At the 
time, the industry average for building a semiconductor plant was 54 months. 
This was based on building the facility, installing the machines, and then train-
ing the employees. All of these areas must be operational before revenues 
from the project would be realized. It was a very involved and linear process. 
Using Critical Chain, Harris Semiconductor identified and challenged these 
assumptions. That, in turn, allowed them to significantly compress their entire 
schedule. They completed an industry average task of 54 months in 13 months. 
Think three and half years of additional revenue!” 
 “This example seems to be too good to be true, Tim. From what little I under-
stand, semiconductor plants are extremely complex and involve very technical 
and experienced people to build them. And people have been building them 
for years. What could the whole industry miss that Harris  didn’t  ?” 
 “Using Critical Chain, Harris was able to challenge the conventional wisdom. 
The convention was to break the overall project into distinct and manageable 
sub-projects. You have one project and team build the building and once it was 
done then you had another project and team install the machines and only 
then you hired and staffed the building. One key step of Critical Chain and 
setting the goal of the project is to drive the project all the way to  throughput , 
or more specifically when the plant would generate revenue.” 
 “You are losing me here, Tim. Why was one large project going to revenue be 
any better than the multiple sub-projects?” 
 “It changed the mindset. Instead of just focusing on the sub-project goal of 
finishing the building, the team was able to focus on how to get the plant 
operational and generating income. It drove them to think about several key 
and previously assumed questions. Did you really have to finish the entire 
building or just key parts before installing the machines? Did you really have to 
install all the machines before you could start hiring and training? Why could 
you not train people as each machine was installed and parts of the building 

Get it Done On Time!
17
were being finished? In this way, they were able to find ways to run large parts 
of these previously assumed sequential tasks in parallel.” 
 “Okay, I think I get you Tim. With the teams looking at revenues (throughput 
of the organization as you would say) as opposed to just the sub-project 
goals, they focused on the real value of the project. By building the schedule 
backward from this goal, they could really look at what items were the most 
important.” 
 “Exactly.” 
 “Hmm, I get the ‘set the right goal/throughput’ part. We talked about goal 
setting in my MBA classes. The ‘building schedules back to front’ part is more 
of a Gary thing. Perhaps you could walk through an example of this with him.” 
 “Sure.” 
 “Tim, goal setting and building schedules back to front does not sound like 
something exclusive to Critical Chain.” 
 “Sort of. It is an important piece of building a Critical Chain schedule. 
And Critical Chain looks at pulling several project management best practices 
together and having them reinforce each other so it creates a complete solu-
tion. You can use some pieces individually and use them with other method-
ologies, but you would then miss out on the full and combined benefit when 
you use all of the techniques together.” 
 “Sure Tim, synergy. The value of the parts working together is greater than the 
sum of their individual pieces.”   
 Organizational Analysis  to Better Understand the 
Environment (Creating the CRT and FRT) 
 “So Randal, this is the last major piece.” 
 “Sounds good Tim! My head is spinning and I’m almost out of coffee.” 
 “So Randal, when you implement any process, its success and value heavily 
depend on the environment you are implementing the solution into. If the 
culture does not support the solution, it will not work. If the process only 
addresses part of the organization’s problems, then the new process may fail 
to work. This is true for Critical Chain, Agile, Scrum, and so on.” 
 “Makes sense, Tim. It also explains why some organizations have great success 
with a proven solution, and others fail miserably with the exact same process. 
The organization’s willingness to adopt the solution as well as its culture, and 
the nature of the organization all heavily influence the level of success. I’ve 
seen case studies highlighting this point time and time again.” 

Chapter 2 | High-Level Critical Chain Overview
18
 “So the  Theory of Constraints Thinking Process (TOC TP)  provides a way to 
do a root cause analysis of your organizations issues. From there, you can not 
only see which issues the Critical Chain general solution can help you address, 
but, as important, you can also see what other areas you will need to work on 
that need to be addressed outside of the Critical Chain solution. This enables 
you to develop a complete and overall solution that will significantly improve 
your organization.” 
 “Makes sense. Can you possibly show me an example another time?” 
 “Sure.” 
 Mixing  Multiple Project Management Methodologies  
 “So Randal, all of these areas come to come together to make a more rigor-
ous project management system. We can use the organizational analysis to 
look at the company’s environment and use Critical Chain to ensure the proj-
ects are planned and executed based on bottom line impact and effectively 
manage project variability.” 
 “Hey Tim, what about other solutions such as extreme programming, Lean, 
and Agile? Are all of these mutually exclusive?” 
 “You can certainly mix project management methodologies, but you really 
need to have a solid grounding in each of the methodologies you are trying 
to mix. For example, I have seen people use Critical Chain for the high-level 
strategic schedule and use Scrum to drive the tactical deliverables into the 
high-level schedule. In some cases it works really well. In some cases it is put 
together incompletely and gets poor results. If you really want to learn more 
about combining methodologies like Lean, Six Sigma, and TOC, take a look at 
the book   Velocity .” 
 Wrapping Up 
 “So Randal, we covered several  items  :
• 
 Common Issues that Critical Chain can help you address  
• 
 Common benefits of Critical Chain  
• 
 Some sample results  
• 
 Key components that enable Critical Chain to achieve its 
results and benefits”  
 “It’s quite a list Tim, and much more complete and thought-out than what I 
heard our engineering team did. Would you be able to spend some time and 

Get it Done On Time!
19
meet with Gary and walk through the details a bit more? He lives this project 
management stuff more than I do and it could end up really helping us.” 
 Tim paused a bit, thinking about all of the work he was getting himself into. It 
takes a lot of effort and commitment to put a new process, any process, into 
place. “Hmm, are you sure Randal?” 
 “Definitely,” Randal says, looking a bit excited, “I have talked to Gary several 
times during my internship. He really needs help and is a bit shy to ask for 
it. You have a really good handle on this solution and I think he would find 
it interesting. If we can get results even half as good as the examples you 
explained, it would really help us out. I’ll set up a meeting for us.” 
 “Sounds good, Randal. My schedule is pretty open.” 
 “Perfect! I’ll work with Gary to set up a meeting. I will also see if we can set 
you up with a brief consulting contract. I figured while you are helping us out, 
it couldn’t hurt to pay you a bit for your time and effort,” Randal says with a 
smile. “I’ll e-mail you specifics shortly.”  
 Current Reality Tree (CRT)  
 As their meeting wraps up, Randal heads out and Tim takes out a piece of 
paper and starts to jot down some of the issues he and Randal had discussed 
(items denoted as [crt #] above). Then Tim started drawing arrows on how 
they are loosely connected. After sketching it out, he started to review it. Then 
Tim hears… 
 “What is that?” 
 Looking up, Tim is a little surprised to see Randal. “I thought you left.” 
 “I forgot my keys,” Randal states as he waves them in front of Tim. 
 “I see.” 
 “So is your diagram related to our company?” 
 “Actually, it is. I had mentioned that the TOC Thinking Process organizational 
analysis is helpful in understanding the company’s environment. It takes a while 
to build and gather up all of the data to make it. Based on our conversation I 
wanted to sketch out a few of the items we discussed. I figured I could pos-
sibly show you the organizational analysis once it was done.” Thinking for a 
moment, he continues, “Then again, if you want to see what I have so far, I’m 
fine with sharing it with you.” 
 “Sure Tim. A picture is worth a thousand words. So what do you call this 
diagram?” 
 “The first page is the Current Reality Tree or CRT for short.” 

Chapter 2 | High-Level Critical Chain Overview
20
 Curiously, Randal inquires, “And what is the CRT diagram used for?” 
 “It captures the current issues an organization is facing, how they inter-relate, 
and what the core drivers of those issues are. This allows me to have a quick 
summary of your organization, see what the key issues are, and where to 
focus our efforts. They can get pretty complex. This one is just a summary.” 
 Randal  pulls up a chair, “Can you walk me through it?” 
 “Um, sure,” Tim says, feeling a bit odd. Usually he waits until someone has got-
ten more familiar with Critical Chain or TOC before sharing an analysis. 
 Randal stares at it briefly, trying to figure it out and then asks, “So is there a 
special way you are suppose to read it?” 
 “Sure,” says Tim and he proceeds to review the CRT with Randal.  
25 We miss key customer
deadlines, miss market
windows, and lose contracts
more and more
26 We do not make our
expected revenues from our
product lines
23 We see that our
products are not
competitive enough more
and more
20 We cut quality and /or
innovation to maintain
schedules more and more
19 Cutting corners (quality)
helps us keep on schedule.
14 Too many resources burn out
and leave
13 Many departments
resources are stretched
more and more
15 We are likely to slip
schedules more and 
more
18 Resources needed
for future projects
are unavailable and 
committed to
existing projects
28 The company
could go 
bankrupt
UDE (undesirable effect)
Summary Current Reality Tree (CRT)

Get it Done On Time!
21
 “So Randal, the CRT is like a logical proof based  on  if-then logic and depen-
dencies. For now, I am just sketching out some of the issues and connecting 
them with rough logic and long arrows. From example, starting at the bottom 
of the chart if 14) too many resources leave the company, then one conse-
quence is that 13) departments get stretched out.” 
 “Makes sense, I guess. As we unfortunately lose people, it will add pressure to 
the department that lost that person. What about the other arrows?” 
 Tim continues, “The stretched out departments lead to 15) schedules slipping.” 
 “Kinda of a jump there, Tim. If resources leave, well, sure it puts pressure on 
the schedules, but there are other reasons why our schedules slip.” 
 “True. Like I said it is with long arrows, but as you noted it is insufficient by 
itself. There are other issues that impact schedules that we’ll need to capture.” 
 “Fair enough.” 
 “So continuing, 13) departments being stretched and 15) the slipping sched-
ules lead to 18) resources for future projects are being delayed.” 
 “Makes sense. We are trying to get the current projects out so the future 
projects suffer.” 
 “Yes. 15) We slip schedule then 19) and 20) cutting corners will keep us on 
schedule that leads us to 23) we’ve cut too much and we’re not competitive.” 
 “Yuck, I see that on both sides. Engineering is under pressure to make dead-
lines and marketing is complaining that our products are not competitive 
enough.” 
 “Then 23) being not competitive leads to 26) we miss our expected revenues. 
And in addition to that, 15) we slip schedules leads to 25) we miss market 
windows and lose contracts, which also leads to 26) we miss revenues and 
finally that leads to 28) the company goes bankrupt.” 
 “Not very pretty, Tim. But yes in a rough way you seem to have captured our 
concerns. Is there a bright side to this analysis?”  
 Future Reality Tree (FRT)  
 “Sure Randal. The Future Reality Tree is the vision of where we want to move. 
It includes key items we need to put into place and the benefits we want to 
obtain.” Tim then takes out a second sheet of paper and jots down some of 
the desired benefits he and Randal discussed before (items denoted as [frt #] 
above).  

Chapter 2 | High-Level Critical Chain Overview
22
 “Starting at the bottom of the chart, if we 1) set up project buffers, reduce 
bad-multi-tasking, set clear goals, define the project in terms of throughput, 
and build schedules back to front, we then will 6) successfully implement 
 Critical Chain.”   
 “I am guessing, Tim, that is not the only step we need to implement Critical 
Chain?” 
 “No, it is a key one though. As we go through the implementation, I will need 
to add others. Continuing, once 6) Critical Chain is implemented then 7) our 
schedules can better handle delays, which leads us to 8) we can better meet 
or beat deadlines.” 
 “I like the sound of meeting or beating our schedules. But we have a lot of 
challenges and we have tried several things to improve our schedule perfor-
mance. This looks a bit light.” 
Key Benefits
Key Injections
Summary FRT
18 We increase our 
sales
17 We are able to
meet key customer
deadlines and 
market windows
20 We meet and exceed
expected revenues
21 The company is more
financially solid
14 Our products are
more competitive
8 We are better able to
meet or beat our
schedules
7 Our schedules can
better handle delays
6 We successfully
implement Critical Chain
(CC) single project into our 
company’s environment
1 We set up project and feeding
buffers, reduce bad multi-tasking, 
set clear goals, define the project in
terms of throughput, and build
schedules back to front [ch2,4]
15 Future project
resources are
available
12 Department
resources are better
balanced and happier

Get it Done On Time!
23
 “True Randal; it is just a start. We will need to add several more items to 
strengthen our ability to meet or beat our schedules.” 
 “I also added if we have 7) better schedules then 12) department resources are 
better balanced. If we have 8) better delivery dates then 15) future resources 
should be more available.”  
 “Okay.” 
 “Building off 8) have better schedules then 14) our products can be more 
competitive and then 20) we can have better revenues. In addition, 8) better 
schedules leads us to 17) meeting key customer deadlines, 18) increased sales, 
20) meeting revenues, and 21) the company being more profitable.” 
 ”It sounds like it is in the right direction, Tim. A bit thin, but promising. I am 
curious to see how your diagrams build out. For now, I’ll set up that meeting 
with Gary and we can see where things go from there.” 
 “Sure, Randal.”  

© Eric Bergland 2016 
E. Bergland, Get it Done On Time!, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-1860-0_3
 C H A P T E R 
  Factors for 
Successful 
Implementations  
 Tim sits in the coffee shop, calmly waiting. After a few minutes, Randal enters 
followed by another man in his early 40s with thinning grey  hair  . 
 “Hi Tim, please meet Gary, our engineering manager. He’s excited to hear 
more about your TOC expertise and he can fill in any engineering and sched-
uling specifics we need.” 
 “Hello Gary, it is good to finally meet you,” says Tim. 
 “Hi Tim,” says Gary a bit cautiously, “Randal has told me you have quite a bit 
of experience with Critical Chain project management and he thought you 
would be able to help us out.” 
 “Yes. I am looking forward to it,” replies Tim. 
 “So Tim,” Randal says a bit sheepishly, “Just to let you know, I’m closing out a 
few loose ends with your contract. Once that is taken care of, I can get your 
office and security badge set up.” 
 “Sounds good. Thanks Randal. So Gary, Randal said that you have already 
started looking into Critical Chain?” 
3

Chapter 3 | Factors for Successful Implementations
26
 “Well Tim, we tried Critical Chain at our company and it looked promising, 
but it did not seem to work very well.” 
 “Interesting. Can you let me know who helped you put the Critical Chain 
methodology into place?” inquires Tim. 
 “Actually we did some research looking at a few white papers and articles we 
found on the Internet,” Gary dryly replies. 
 “So Gary I assume no one is certified in Critical Chain, the TOC Thinking 
Process, and has prior experience in implementing Critical Chain at your 
organization?”   
 “Well, not really. The concepts seemed pretty straightforward at the time. 
You know set up some buffers, tell people not to multi-task, and all that.” 
 Tim sighs, “On a high level, the Critical Chain concepts are simple. In fact they 
can be deceptively simple. Yes, the ideas and concepts on the surface are 
pretty straightforward, but the details and what is really needed to success-
fully put them into place can be pretty involved.” 
 “Tim, is this your consultant speak for saying we might of overlooked some 
things?” inquires Randal. 
 “When you are getting started with any process you can certainly read up and 
get some initial experience implementing it. But it also helps to have someone 
with prior experience to help look things over as well so you can learn from 
them what works and does not work.” 
 “So Tim on that note, a quick question,” asks Gary. 
 “Sure.” 
 “Randal tells me you were just recently let go?” 
 “Yes.” 
 “And you are trying to apply some of your TOC concepts there?” 
 “Yes.” 
 “Yet the company failed, Tim?” 
 “I see your point, Gary. Well, I can share a few things with you. First I can point 
out a few other implementations I’ve done as well as references for them.” 
 “That would be helpful, Tim.”   
 “As far as my prior company, I was hired to help out with project manage-
ment. Critical Chain was something the organization was not familiar with, but 
were initially open to hearing about. As I started working on improving their 
schedules, I looked at applying Critical Chain and some of its principles. The 
company was very rooted in their existing process. So I had to  implement 

Get it Done On Time!
27
schedules their way, but I was working on influencing some of their key peo-
ple. It takes time and the company’s funding ran out before I was able to get 
them to try a pilot.” 
 “I see,” replies Gary. “Well, we can continue to look at Critical Chain, but I will 
be looking for solid reasons and justification. I’ll also want to talk to some of 
your references. That will help me feel a bit more comfortable implementing 
something established.” 
 Key Characteristics of Successful 
Implementers and Implementations [frt 2] 
 Tim looks over a bit at Randal and then at Gary. “So Gary, as we discussed we 
both want to be successful with implementing Critical Chain. Just be aware it 
is not enough to try to implement the concepts. In my experience, I’ve seen 
several things contribute to   successful implementations :
• 
 A Critical Chain implementation expert who really 
understands the mechanics of the Critical Chain solution, 
including how to use it correctly to help organizations 
increase throughput, and how to successfully implement 
it in an organization.  
• 
 Someone who has Critical Chain software tool 
experience.  
• 
 For complicated and political environments, I personally 
like to see someone who has a Theory of Constraints 
thinking process background that can do an organiza-
tional analysis.  
• 
 The organization has a compelling need and desire to 
change.  
• 
 We set up the correct metrics.”  
 “Interesting list, Tim,” states Gary. 
 “So Gary, let me walk through each of these, one-by-one.” 
 Critical Chain Implementation Expert 
 First, you need a   Critical Chain implementation expert who really understands 
the solution. Someone who understands the mechanics of the solution 
(creating buffers, removing safety at the task level, etc.). You also need some-
one who understands how to use the Critical Chain solution to increase 
the organization’s throughput (managing constraints, Process of Ongoing 

Chapter 3 | Factors for Successful Implementations
28
Improvement (POOGI), reducing bad multi-tasking, and so on). In regards to 
understanding Critical Chain, the question is—where and how did they learn 
about Critical Chain? Did they just read a book and wing it? Where were they 
trained? Are they  certified and what is the background of the organization 
that certified them? Is it a methodology-based organization or a tool-based 
organization? 
 The second and very critical part is   experience . How many implementations 
have they done? What were the results? What is their process? Have they 
done implementations in organizations or industries similar to yours? If the 
results were so good, is there someone who would be willing to be a refer-
ence that you can talk to? 
 “So Tim, you are saying there is a whole set of expertise involved in under-
standing the solution and being able to implement it into an organization?” 
inquires Gary. 
 “Exactly, expertise and experience. For example, I went through certification 
training on Critical Chain and the Theory of Concepts thinking process, and 
I went through the recommendations process at the Goldratt Institute. I am 
not an expert to the degree they are, but I am familiar with the mechanics of 
the solution and using it to move an organization to increase throughput as a 
whole. I’ve worked at implementing TOC at several companies. Some of those 
implementations went well, and as with my last company, some did not.” 
 “So Tim, is this expertise and experience something we could eventually bring 
in house to our organization?” asks Gary. 
 “Yes, in fact it is necessary to help the solution succeed. I can help with train-
ing your team in the methodology. Your team in turn will then be responsible 
for managing and setting up future schedules using the methodology.” 
 “Okay, Tim. I will need a better understanding from you as far as what is 
involved in the team training. How long will it take? What benefits we should 
expect?” 
 “Sure, Gary. Not a problem! That will be part of the implementation plan I can 
provide.”  
 Critical Chain Software Tool 
 “So Gary, the second point is having  Critical Chain  software tool experience . To 
support a Critical Chain implementation, you need software that supports the 
Critical Chain methodology. Which Critical Chain software vendor does your 
Critical Chain implementer recommend and why? Who can provide training 
and support in the software tool to best support your organizations needs? 
As a customer, have you compared the pros and cons of the various Critical 
Chain software solutions? Without the Critical Chain software, it is difficult 

Get it Done On Time!
29
to impossible to effectively manage the projects within the Critical Chain 
methodology.” 
 “That part I guess makes sense. We were just trying to make it work with MS 
Project,” replies Gary. 
 “Gary that is a good starting point, but when it comes to actually putting the 
Critical Chain buffers in, identifying the Critical Chain, and managing the buffer 
consumption, it is a lot easier if your project management tool can support 
the Critical Chain methodology. I have seen a few good Critical Chain soft-
ware tools, and like everything, each one has its advantages.” 
 “I guess that makes sense. Is the Critical Chain software expensive? Is it 
scalable?” 
 “Gary, we can pilot with a few licenses. As your needs grow, you can decide if 
a site license makes sense.” 
 “Sounds reasonable, Tim. We can start small, review the results, make sure it 
is addressing our needs, and scale up as it makes sense from there.”  
 TOC Thinking Process Background 
 “So the third successful characteristic is having the   Theory of Constraints Thinking 
Process (TOC TP)  background . So for complicated and political environments, I 
really like to see someone who has a Theory of Constraints thinking process 
background that can do an organizational analysis. It helps get everyone on the 
same page regarding the project management issues everyone shares, highlight 
the costs of these combined issues, and the value and steps needed to switch 
to a new system. The organizational analysis also highlights that there may be 
several things that need to be addressed in addition to just implementing the 
Critical Chain solution. For example, if the organization lacks good require-
ments management, basic project management fundamentals, or has policies 
that make sense locally but could hinder the overall organization’s success, the 
organizational analysis will help highlight these areas. The analysis will help us 
with creating an overall picture.” 
 “Tim, I can kinda see your point here,” Randal jumps in. “I have put together 
simple marketing processes and the changes were fairly easy to do within our 
own department. When it came to trying to make our entire organization 
customer focused, we not only had to change marketing, but get the whole 
organization—engineering, sales, marketing, and HR—to align and work with 
us. It was really challenging, time consuming, often dragged things to a halt, and 
caused us to put several compromises into our overall solution.” 
 “Exactly. When you start crossing and trying to coordinate multiple depart-
ments, it can become a much larger issue. This is where the Theory of 
Constraints thinking process can help significantly.”  

Chapter 3 | Factors for Successful Implementations
30
 Compelling Reason to Change 
 So the forth point is  that the  organization needs  to have a compelling reason to 
change . Desperation works best, but a really strong drive to keep succeeding, 
desire to grow, or vision can work too. Companies losing key customers due 
to repeatedly missing deadlines or under strong competition are by nature 
more willing to take steps to change and improve their processes… or they 
will simply be driven out of business. Organizations that see themselves as 
successful can often be very hard to change. They are successful, their current 
processes got them there, so why would they want to change or mess with 
what is already working so well? 
 Using the  TOC thinking processes  can help us better understand the orga-
nizational issues and clarify the significant value of changing thus helping to 
motivate them to improve the organizations processes. One way to look at it 
is a desperate situation often gets people motivated to start making changes; 
a determined organization is more likely to keep on the path of ongoing 
improvements. 
 Randal looks at Tim directly, “Well Tim, as we have talked before, I think that is 
where we are and I am sure Gary will agree. We keep missing key deadlines. 
We know this is critical if our company is to succeed. In addition, Micky, our 
interim CEO, is very determined to make a difference and significantly grow 
the company. So he is not willing to sit idle with what has been done in the 
past as well. ” 
 Gary looks over at  Tim with a sigh, “Actually Tim, the missing deadlines situa-
tion is getting pretty bad; engineering has been slipping features and schedules 
for a while [crt 15]. This in turn has stressed our customers and in some 
cases caused us to renegotiate existing contracts and lose some future con-
tracts [crt 25]. This has put Micky a bit on the war path. He is working to 
amend agreements with our customers and find new contracts to replace the 
lost ones, but he is infuriated by engineering for putting him into this position. 
Rumor is that if we do not dramatically change things soon the company will 
be out of business within a year [crt 28].” 
 Randal looks at Gary with a bit of shock. “I did not realize things were that 
severe.” 
 “We have some time Randal, but we need to make changes and do something 
quickly and it needs to make a significant difference,” says Gary. “That is why 
Tim talking to you is very timely.” 
 Tim pauses for a little bit. “Randal you said Micky was the interim CEO; can 
you clarify this a bit for me?” 
 “Sure thing, Tim. Roger was our last CEO. Great guy. Had a good feeling for 
the overall business. Engineering, marketing, the customers. He had a good 

Get it Done On Time!
31
sense of it all. Well, he ran into some medical issues. So he has temporarily 
stepped down so he could focus on the issues and spend some more time 
with his family. Micky pitched that he could cover for Roger and the board 
approved it.” 
 “And one more thing, Tim,” Randal says, continuing. “Micky was the Director 
of Marketing and is a pretty aggressive guy. He is great with customers and 
contracts. He sees this as his big play to move up. He wants to deliver out-
standing results so the board will keep him in the CEO spot and he is hell 
bent on it.” 
 “Interesting…interesting,” thinks Tim. “Thank you for letting me know, Randal.” 
 “Sure Tim, I just want to be sure you don’t get bored.” 
 Everyone pauses on that thought for a minute…  
 Setting Up the Correct  Metrics  
 “So Gary, one last item. I have seen it where Critical Chain implementations 
have gone really well and the team is successful and then the whole thing gets 
unraveled by executive management. Management looks for ways to make the 
schedules more aggressive or pushes traditional metrics into a Critical Chain 
schedule. It is a bit disheartening after all of the hard work that goes in.” 
 “Tim, I am not sure I entirely follow you. Can you give a few examples?” 
 “Sure, Gary. So Critical Chain works by driving teams to work on aggressive 
focus times and then using a project buffer to protect the overall deadline. 
Some managers feel that if they pile on work and drive their teams to very 
aggressive deadlines, they will get more out of their teams. So when these 
managers see the schedule with the focused time finishing weeks to months 
ahead of the buffered date, they want their teams to commit to delivering 
to the aggressive focused time or they want the teams to cut the size of the 
project buffer.” 
 “I think I can see your point Tim,” states Randal. “I could see Micky being that 
aggressive.” 
 “The problem, Randal, is that the aggressive focus times are exactly that. If 
everything goes perfectly well the dates would work, but that is completely 
unrealistic and never happens. So the teams that are forced to meet an overly 
aggressive date will miss it and then management will blame the team and the 
Critical Chain methodology for not working.” 
 “So Tim, what do you do in these cases?” inquires Gary. 

Chapter 3 | Factors for Successful Implementations
32
 “It depends on the level of trust. If exec management is willing to learn and 
work with the Critical Chain methodology, then we can openly discuss aggres-
sive focus times and the project buffer. If exec management is not that involved 
then it is best to focus on the team’s committed deadline (the end of the 
project buffer) and focus discussions on how well they are tracking to meet 
this deadline.” 
 “That makes some sense Tim,” states Gary. “It has always been a balance for us 
when we provide dates to the execs. It has to be both aggressive and realistic. 
Although our definitions and their definitions of what this means can vary a 
great deal.” 
 “True, the metrics also require managers to change how they manage their 
teams.” 
 “What do you mean, Tim?” 
 “If we move the teams to work with focus times, we know that sometimes 
they will run late. We cannot punish them. If we do they will start padding 
their dates more and more and that will undermine the point of having focused 
times.” 
 “Hmm, that will be tricky Tim. We need accountability.” 
 “True. In the next meeting we can talk about the rate that the project buffer 
gets consumed as a way to help manage the project. At this time, just note 
for Critical Chain the focus is on the overall project deadline and less on the 
individual deadlines.” 
 “Fair enough, Tim. I can appreciate the points you make in regards to success-
ful implementations, but I really need to see the details you have regarding the 
mechanics of the solution so I can understand how Critical Chain is going to 
deliver the results we need.” 
 “Sure Gary; perhaps we can talk more about the Critical Chain mechanics in 
our next meeting.”  
 Environmental  Factors  
 “So Tim,” Randal interjects, “By finding a wiz-bang TOC consultant like your-
self to help us with the points you mention can we pretty much guarantee the 
success and results we need?”  
 “It’s not that simple, Randal. If you find a wiz-bang TOC consultant, your odds 
of succeeding significantly increase, but there are still a variety of issues that 
could happen as well. Critical Chain is not just the mechanics of how you set 
up a schedule. Ideally you are changing and improving the process, culture, and 
overall way the organization approaches projects.” 

Get it Done On Time!
33
 Randal looks a bit crestfallen. “Tim, you are starting to sound like a glass half 
empty kinda guy. So I see from the implementation side what you think is 
needed, but from our side—the client side—are there issues that could derail 
an implementation?” 
 “Randal, the possible problems can be endless, but some of the main   organiza-
tional issues  I have seen include:
• 
 Does the organization’s project team take ownership of 
the Critical Chain solution? If you have not won them 
over and they do not understand what you are trying to 
achieve and how, it will limit or prevent your success.  
• 
 Has senior management bought into the solution? Do 
you have a senior manager who is the organization’s TOC 
champion? Does management understand what Critical 
Chain changes and how they need to change what they 
manage and focus on? If not, they may try to make changes 
that violate the methodology and limit your success. 
They also may actively or passively fight adding the new 
methodology that they do not understand or threatens 
what they were used to, even though you are trying to 
use the new methodology to improve the organization.  
• 
 The other way of looking at it is your department inde-
pendent and isolated enough that you can set up and man-
age schedules how you want without senior management 
involvement as long as you deliver products successfully?  
• 
 How complex is your project environment? It is more 
straightforward to implement Critical Chain in a small 
simple single project environment than a large heavily 
matrixed multiple project environment?  
• 
 How good is the organization’s project management 
practices? If the organization does not have basic proj-
ect management fundamentals, it makes implementing a 
more developed project management methodology diffi-
cult. Critical Chain can help underscore key practices, but 
the organization will still need to have a plan to develop 
the project management basics as far as requirements 
gathering, charters, managing requirements, planning, etc. 
   www.pmi.org  is one organization that helps with overall 
project management certifications.”  

Chapter 3 | Factors for Successful Implementations
34
 “So Tim, all these issues pretty much make Critical Chain a difficult  solution  
to implement?” 
 “Overall Randal, these organizational issues are not Critical Chain specific. 
They are general organizational issues that could make implementing  any 
project management methodology (Critical Chain, scrum, agile, ) hard or 
impossible to successfully implement. There is a cost-benefit decision. Do you 
understand what is involved in putting the solution into place, what benefits 
you are looking for, and does the cost justify the benefits? The benefits and 
improved organizational throughput should be significant enough to justify the 
cost of putting the new solution, training, and changes in place.” 
 “Well Tim, I guess the same is true for our company as well. The more we 
understand Critical Chain and the characteristics and factors you mentioned, 
the better we can help move the implementation along as well as make sure 
the person I have helping implement it in our organization is covering every-
thing we need.” 
 “Exactly Randal, and sometimes you might have different people cover differ-
ent roles. One person might focus on the organization issues where another 
specializes in the Critical Chain software.” 
 Gary looks over, “Tim, engineering is pretty swamped already. There is no 
way we have the time for our resources to work on making an organizational 
change.” 
 “No worries Gary,” Randal jumps in. “That is what Tim is for. He is to help 
guide and educate us;. He will help make the transition as smooth as possible 
and work with me on moving management.” 
 “Okay, Randal. But we should be clear on  roles and responsibilities  ,” states 
Gary. 
 ”Sure Gary,” states Randal.  
 Wrapping Up 
 “So to move things forward, we should look at the following,” Randal  continues :
• 
 Tim, can you work with Gary to improve the project 
team’s understanding of Critical Chain.  
• 
 I will work with Tim on getting senior management buy-in. 
Micky, the interim CEO, definitely sees a need to improve 
project management. We just need to gather some real 
results first to help convince him why this approach will 
work.  

Get it Done On Time!
35
• 
 Tim, environment wise, I think we’re okay. We have sev-
eral projects running in parallel, but we’re not a Fortune 
500 company yet.  
• 
 Gary, what is your take on our project management 
practices?  
 “Randal,” Gary says, now a bit more confident, “I think we’re okay. Our project 
managers have good experience and know our projects. We did some initial 
research with Critical Chain, so we know some of the concepts. What we 
really need is for Tim to help us understand the concepts in more detail and 
help us get better results without thrashing the projects we are working on 
currently.” Turning to Tim, he says, “Tim, can we walk through the concepts in a 
lot more detail in our next meeting? I really need to see how they are going to 
work so I can feel confident that they will actually help us get back on track.” 
 “Sure Gary. I will set up a meeting for it.” 
 Randal looks around, “Any other issues?” Randal sees that no one speaks up. 
“Good then, sounds like we have the starting of a plan.”  
 Future Reality Tree (FRT) 
 As Gary heads out, Tim waits a few minutes and takes out the piece of paper 
he has been drawing the  Future Reality Tree (FRT) on. 
 Randal lingers behind and looks on, “More boxes to add to your chart?” 
 “Just one,” says Tim.  

Chapter 3 | Factors for Successful Implementations
36
 Tim says to Randal, “In order to 6) successfully implement Critical Chain what 
is needed? We need 1) to understand and implement the Critical Chain con-
cepts. We also 2) need to be aware of the factors for successful implementa-
tions. A good start, but there are still a few more items needed to help us 
successfully implement Critical Chain.”   
 “I see, Tim. Your tree is pretty thin. Is the goal to fill the page with boxes?” 
 “Not really. I’m just trying to capture the key items that are needed. As we get 
further along, the page will fill up.”  
Key Benefits
Key Injections
Summary FRT
18 We increase our 
sales
17 We are able to
meet key customer
deadlines and 
market windows
20 We meet and exceed
expected revenues
21 The company is more
financially solid
14 Our products are
more competitive
8 We are better able to
meet or beat our
schedules
7 Our schedules can
better handle delays
6 We successfully
implement Critical Chain
(CC) single project into our 
company’s environment
1 We set up project and feeding
buffers, reduce bad multi-tasking, 
set clear goals, define the project in
terms of throughput, and build
schedules back to front [ch2,4]
15 Future project
resources are
available
12 Department
resources are better
balanced and happier
2 We identify a CC expert,
identify CC tool, conduct an
org analysis, determine a 
compelling need & set up
the correct metrics [ch3]

© Eric Bergland 2016 
E. Bergland, Get it Done On Time!, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-1860-0_4
 C H A P T E R 
 How Does the 
Critical Chain 
Solution Work? 
 Tim sits in the coffee shop idly waiting for Randal and Gary, again. Then he 
sees something so bright, so shocking, so… pink. “Randal, your pink shirt is 
hurting my eyes.” 
 “Tim, it’s not pink, it’s salmon. And being a marketing guy, we like to stand out.” 
 “Well, you certainly have succeeded. Any luck with the office setup?” 
 “I was able to find you an office; now it’s just a matter of getting a phone and 
computer.” 
 “I see. Hi Gary, how are you?” 
 “I am doing well Tim; sorry to hear about the office delays. For some reason, 
these things take some time to get setup. But at least we can meet at the cof-
fee shop. Things have been getting pretty tense, so it is good to get away for 
a few minutes.” 
 “So Tim, what did you want to cover today?” says Randal. 
4

Chapter 4 | How Does the Critical Chain Solution Work?
38
 “Well, as Gary noted last time, I think it’s important we dive a bit deeper into 
how Critical Chain works so we can be sure we understand the different 
concepts.” 
 “Sounds technical,” says Randal cautiously. 
 “We need the details. Think about it like peeling an onion. We need to under-
stand the high-level basic concepts to start. Then we need to dig into the 
concepts a bit deeper on the implementation level, which is this conversation. 
We will then need to go through the implementation steps and plan on how 
we will put Critical Chain into place, which we can cover next time.” 
 “Tim, how do the different managers, project managers, and engineers learn 
about the concepts?” asks Gary. 
 “That is a good question. As part of the implementation plan, we set up dif-
ferent training courses focused on the needs of the individuals. The managers 
need to understand the concepts on a strategic level. The software engineers 
need a basic overview so they understand how the solution impacts them and 
what they need to do to support it. The project managers need training on 
the concepts and how to manage the project under Critical Chain.” 
 “Well, try to keep it fun Tim. I don’t want you to put me to sleep.” 
 “I’ll try Randal, but we need to go a bit deeper on the key concepts. The train-
ing course will also go into more detail. But it is important for you and Gary 
to really understand the concepts if you are going to help implement them.” 
 “Fair enough, Tim.” 
 Key Critical Chain  Benefits  
 “There are a variety of books, white papers, and classes that overview Critical 
Chain concepts. But to summarize, I would say the  key Critical Chain benefits 
[frt 1] that help us get results are:
• 
 Project and feeding buffers are used to manage variability  
• 
 Reducing bad multi-tasking to find hidden or misused 
resource capacity  
• 
 Defining the project goal and building schedules 
back-to-front 
• 
 Organizational analysis (TOC Thinking Process) to better 
understand the company’s work environment and issues 
that could impact the success of our implementation  
 “Okay Tim, some of those I have heard about with our past research and 
implementation,” states Gary. 

Get it Done On Time!
39
 “Good, having some familiarity helps us out. So Gary let’s walk through them 
one by one in more detail just to be sure we have it covered. Let me know if 
you have any questions. We will try not to lose Randal,” Tim says with a smile. 
 “Hey, I heard that,” Randal says, looking up from his coffee cup.  
 Project and Feeding Buffers  
 Padding Dates  : 
 “So let’s start with  buffers . You have already seen why you need buffers 
[Chapter   2 ], but now let’s look at how Critical Chain sets them up. I will 
assume you are familiar with the management practice of  padding due dates, 
Randal?” 
 “In the sense that I know engineers often miss their commitment dates, so I 
ask them to deliver to an earlier date, knowing it is very likely they will miss 
it. Then it is a guessing game of what date I really think they will really hit.” 
 “Well Randal, on a simple level that works; on more complex projects it gets 
tricky. For a yearlong project, how much can you pad the due dates without 
someone else calling it out and cutting it? With tight deadlines, will the sched-
ule even allow you to add additional time to protect the deadline sufficiently? 
Do you have a formal way to manage this padding? What happens to your 
schedule when the engineers know there is really more time than you are 
saying?” 
 “Okay, okay, Tim. The padding works well on a task level, but on a large project 
it does not work as well. But Tim, everyone does it. The engineers pad their 
task estimates and management pads the overall project estimates. The irony 
is that the projects still come in late and the padding can make the project 
length so huge and unrealistic we end up cutting time estimates like crazy.  It is 
a big poker game . How much time can the engineers get management to add 
to the schedule to ensure features and quality versus how much time manag-
ers can cut from the engineers’ estimates to manage costs and hit key market 
windows? Unfortunately, neither way is without its consequences.”  
 Project Buffers  : 
 “Well Randal, that’s where Critical Chain comes in. The focus is on the  strate-
gic use of that padding or safety time. We want to pull the safety time out of 
each of the tasks where it can get wasted, and we want to aggregate and move 
that safety time to the end of the project. In Critical Chain terms, we create a 
 project buffer . In this way the safety time of the project better protects the 
overall project’s deadline, which is critical, as opposed to using the safety time 

Chapter 4 | How Does the Critical Chain Solution Work?
40
to somewhat protect each task’s deadline and offer limited protection to the 
overall project deadline.”  
 
 “So Tim,” asks Gary, “I understand the idea of putting a buffer at the end of the 
project. After all, the thing I care most about is hitting our project’s deadline. 
So how is this project buffer any different than the padding I’ve done in the 
past?” 
 “Well Gary,  there are a few key differences. One, I am not just adding more 
time to the project, and lengthening it. I can actually shorten the overall  project 

Get it Done On Time!
41
duration by being more strategic with the time I have. This is done in two 
ways. By removing safety from the tasks, I am pulling time out of the schedule. 
By putting the safety at the end of the project, I get the most value out of this 
time. By implementing some key behaviors such as roadrunners, relay races, 
reducing bad multi-tasking, and trying to eliminate student syndrome, I waste 
less time. Between the strategic buffer and behaviors I can reduce the overall 
schedule duration compared to a traditional schedule.” 
 “Wow Tim, you just threw out a bunch of new terms; can you clarify them?” 
 “Sure Gary. I can walk through them more in the Critical Chain training, but 
on a high level,   roadrunner refers to the fact that we want resources to start 
working on a task as soon as the project manager sees that the task is ready 
to be worked on and has assigned it to the resource.   Relay race is that as soon 
as a task is finished, we want to execute a clean, quality hand-off to the next 
resource so they can start right away.   Bad multi-tasking is when resources 
work inefficiently on several tasks at once.   Student syndrome is the temptation 
to put work off to the last minute. This can also be paired with bad multi-
tasking in the sense that I will not start a task right away, but I will work on 
one task and then only switch over when I realize the deadline is coming up 
for another task. All these behaviors impact the amount of time it takes to 
complete our schedule.” 
 “I’ll need a bit more of a walkthrough, but on a high level I think I see what 
you are saying,” states Gary. “Basically there are a variety of ways people act 
during a project and these can have an impact on how long it takes the project 
to complete. So with the right behaviors in place, the project might be able 
to finish faster.” 
 “Correct Gary. The second part to why project buffers are different than just 
padding is that I can compare the rate that I consume the project buffer to 
the progress I am making in completing the project. If I am using up the time 
in my project buffer quickly, but not making much progress in my project, I 
know there is a problem. I can project out this trend [fever chart] and see if 
my project is still meeting or likely to miss my deadline way before I actually 
miss it and I can start to put response plans into place to recover before I am 
actually late. Once traditional schedules start to fall really behind there is no 
 inherent mechanism to recover. You just have to replan when it becomes too 
late to recover.” 
 “Interesting, Tim. We certainly need a better way to manage delays. Will 
the training cover some examples so we can get some experience to better 
understand how this works?” 
 “Definitely Gary, I will be sure to include some exercises in the team training.”  

Chapter 4 | How Does the Critical Chain Solution Work?
42
 Feeding Buffers  : 
 “So the project buffers protect our end date. To help protect the project buf-
fer, we create  feeding buffers .” [frt 1] 
 “You kinda lost me there, Tim. What is a  feeding buffer  ?” 
 “Okay Randal, pretend we are making a car. In a simple world, the engine gets 
built, the transmission gets built, and the car body is built. We then need to 
assemble them to make the car.” 
 “Simple enough.” 
 “If any one of these are late, we’re stuck. For example, if the car engine is a 
week late, we have to wait a week to finish the car. If the transmission is a few 
days late, we have to wait a few days. We need all three components to be 
available at the same time.” 
 “Again, that makes sense,” says Randal. 
 “Tim, isn’t this the nature of the project? There are often multiple paths with 
the critical path or as you would say, the Critical Chain, being the primary 
one?” asks Gary. 
 “You are correct, Gary. Projects can often have multiple paths. But people do 
not always see the added risk these multiple paths add. For example, if each 
component had a 90% chance of arriving on time and we needed all three at 
the same time then we have a 90% * 90% * 90% = 73% chance that they all 
would be available when we need them.”  
 “Well, that is lousy Tim,” Randal says, jumping in. “27% of the time we miss our 
deadline. That is not acceptable.” 
 “Exactly. So let’s say the engine takes the longest to build, so it could be our 
Critical Chain. We will watch and monitor its progress like crazy. For the 
transmission and car body, they do not take as long to build, so we want to try 

Get it Done On Time!
43
and have them finish slightly earlier. There is a way to calculate how much 
feeding buffer we need, but let’s say three weeks in this case. If for some rea-
son either the transmission or car body is a few days late, then the time in the 
feeding buffer will absorb this delay. So instead of having a 73% combined 
chance of being on time we are back to 90% on time—the confidence we have 
that the engine will be done on time.”  
 “Okay, I think I understand Tim. The feeding buffer increases our ability to 
deliver on time by minimizing the number of paths that could delay our project.” 
 “Correct, Gary. In this case, the   feeding buffers protect the assembled car from 
being delayed by the transmission or car body, and the  engine is our Critical 
Chain.” 
 “I definitely like this idea Tim, and I can see where we could apply it in some 
of our projects to help minimize delays. I also see another point. On some 
past projects, we saw the critical path jump from one set of tasks to another. 
It really threw us off. In using the feeding buffers, I can see how it can help us. 
By adding some protection to the feeding paths, we both minimize their delays 
impacting the Critical Chain or causing them to become the Critical Chain. 
But one key question: where does the time for the feeding and project buffers 
come from, Tim?” 
 “Well Gary, like with the project buffer, we aggregate the safety from the tasks 
to strategically create the feeding buffers. The training course will cover some 
examples of this.”  
 Safety Time  
 “So Tim, for both the project buffer and feeding buffer, you keep talking about 
this safety time or engineering padding. When I talk with the engineers, their 
schedules are pretty tight and I can’t see much safety time being there if they 
are always late and missing their deadlines,” states Randal. 

Chapter 4 | How Does the Critical Chain Solution Work?
44
 Tim looks at Gary who shrugs with a smile. “That is a good point, Randal. First, 
let’s first talk about estimates. So if you were to drive from San Francisco, 
CA to San Jose, CA how long would it take you?” 
 “About an hour, give or take.” 
 “So Randal if you had a critical, once-in-a-lifetime interview at 5 PM for a 
fantastic job position, when would you leave for it?” 
 “Probably around 2 PM. Give myself an hour to get there, an hour buffer in case 
there are traffic issues, and an additional hour just in case and time to prep.” 
 “So you have just tripled your time estimate. You said it take about 60 min-
utes, but you gave yourself three hours. So basically for a 60-minute task, you 
added two hours of safety.” 
 “Well Tim, that is for a unique case. Not for a task estimate.” 
 “What happens to engineers who regularly miss their deadlines, Randal?” 
 “Regularly? They get yelled at and possibly written up.” 
 “And if these tasks are on the critical path?” 
 “Then they get really yelled at by several people, and told to shape up or 
they’ll lose their job.” 
 “So Randal, if you were an engineer getting yelled at all the time for missing 
your estimates, what type of estimates would you provide: the one hour or 
three hour kind?” 
 “I guess the three-hour estimate. I would have to start inflating my estimates, 
more and more, until I was confident there was no way I could miss them and 
people would stop yelling. Actually, if I start finishing them earlier, I would look 
like a hero.” 
 “And Gary, what happens if an engineer keeps completing tasks earlier and 
earlier than their estimates?” 
 “That engineer would be accused of padding their estimates way too much 
and managers would start cutting their durations.” 
 “Exactly. So the project environment encourages people to try and pad their 
estimates the best they can, and at the same time discourages resources from 
letting you know that they finished early.” 
 “Okay, Tim I can see your point that people will try and pad their estimates. 
But if they have all this extra time added to the tasks, why are they still late?” 
 “Randal, this ties back to some of the behaviors we talked about before that 
can cause time to get wasted: student syndrome, Parkinson’s law, bad multi-
tasking, and so on. Overall, we just want to put the best project behaviors in 
place to help finish on time, report early finishes, and enable us to move the 

Get it Done On Time!
45
safety time from the tasks to the end of the project where the overall project 
gets the most benefit from it. One of the key steps in doing this is the Critical 
Chain training we do for the resources and project managers.” 
 “Tim what is Parkinson’s law? It sounds official.” 
 “Sure Randal, Parkinson’s law in this case is simply the fact that work will fill 
the available time. So the more time I give a resource to do something, the 
more likely the resource will use all of that time. That is one of the reasons 
we want resources to work toward focused times as opposed to padded or 
buffered times.” 
 “Is this also covered in the training?” inquires Gary. “You are covering the 
concepts in much more detail and in a much more applicable way than I have 
seen from the white papers we read.” 
 “Yes Gary, we can cover it in the training as well. As part of the training we 
set up several exercises to help reinforce and see how the various concepts 
work together.”  
 Overall Benefit, Managing Project  Variability  
 “So Randal, you still look a bit perplexed.” 
 “Well Tim, there are a good number of buffers and some overhead associated 
with them. Isn’t there a less complicated way?” 
 “So Randal, here is another way to look at it. There is an endless list of what 
can cause a project to be late: resources that are late, tasks that take longer 
than expected, unexpected problems or complications, minor delays, major 
delays, etc.” 
 “Makes sense.” 
 “So if we had a magic wand and could make all the things that could cause 
delays go away, how hard would it be to manage a project?” 
 “Well Tim, other than just setting up a schedule, I guess, not very. Since there 
were no delays, in theory the project would just finish on time with no prob-
lems. In fact, managing a project would be trivial. But Tim, it is totally unrealis-
tic. There are always delays, problems, and variability in project management.” 
 “And that is a key focus of Critical Chain. Instead of ignoring or hoping delays 
do not happen, we try and set up ways to  manage the variability of a project so 
we are less impacted by delays. The feeding buffers minimize delays from feed-
ing paths. Moving safety time out of the tasks and into a project buffer allows 
us to better protect the project’s overall deadline from delays, without adding 
additional time. The project behaviors are to help us move as quickly as we 
can. All of these together help make Critical Chain a more complete project 
management solution.” 

Chapter 4 | How Does the Critical Chain Solution Work?
46
 “That is interesting, Tim. Not only are the different pieces helpful, they are 
actually very complementary and work together to build on each other to 
create a more complete solution.” 
 “Exactly, Gary.” 
 “So Tim, how do we put these buffers into place?” 
 “The Critical Chain enabled software handles it for you. For example, both 
ProChain and Realization build on top of MS Project. You just need to enter 
the focused durations (times without buffers) and buffered times. The soft-
ware will automatically calculate and create the project and feeding buffers in 
your schedule. 
 “So we could start using Critical Chain software in a few of our key projects 
fairly quickly?” 
 “Yes, once the team knows the Critical Chain concepts, they can use the soft-
ware to help better manage their projects.” 
 Reducing  Bad Multi-Tasking   
 “So Randal, the next part is multi-tasking.” 
 “Of course it is an important skill,” states Randal. “In fact, we should hire 
people on their ability to be good multi-taskers.” 
 “But one prone to problems too,” states Tim.  
 Highway Analogy  
 “So Randal, here is one informal example. Say you are driving your fancy 
BMW convertible at top speed from San Francisco, CA to San Jose, CA on 
highway 280 at 3 AM in the morning. How long does it take you?” 
 “Cool! Without police, I could go at 120 miles per hour; probably half an 
hour,” Randal states with a big grin. “Okay, more realistically we’re talking 
65 miles per hour, deal with a bunch of lights, and I’ll be there in about an 
hour.”  
 “And if it was 5:15 PM in the thick of rush hour?” 
 “Ouch, torture! Probably two hours and likely I’m never leaving first gear. My 
poor car.” 
 “So why the difference between 30 to 60 minutes and 120 minutes? It is not 
like you are going any further distance wise. The work is exactly the same.” 
 “Tim, it’s rush hour! It’s like sitting in a parking lot crawling inch by inch.” 

Get it Done On Time!
47
 “So Randal, relating back to the project management example. How fast can 
I finish a project if it is the only thing I am focusing on and I start right away 
(i.e., roadrunner)?” 
 “Tim, probably pretty fast.” 
 “Like driving at 3 AM with no traffic on the highway. How long will it take 
me to finish the same project if I am juggling and switching back and forth 
between several tasks at the same time and I cannot start on it right away.” 
 “Painfully longer.” 
 “Exactly, like driving in traffic at rush hour. The amount of work on the one 
specific task does not change, but juggling between all the other tasks, starting 
and stopping work on one task, then another task, then another task, then 
coming back to the original task, then switching again. It’s just stretching out 
how long it takes to complete something.” 
 “So Tim, you are basically saying if we flood people with work, it is like adding 
more cars to the highway. It works to a point, but once I go too far, I just flood 
the resource and all the work just slows down almost to the point of a crawl. 
Project rush hour.” 
 “Exactly, Randal. Exactly. It can vary by environments, but as organizations try 
to put more and more simultaneous work on resources, the more likely they 
are at risk of really stretching out the deadlines.” 
 “Ahh, but wouldn’t the converse be true? If I reduce the overloaded resources 
to some reasonable level, then I would be able to speed things up.” 
 “Very true!” 
 “But Tim,” states Gary, “Management expects engineering to manage multiple 
tasks and projects simultaneously. They see this as having the workers be 
efficient.” 
 “And Gary, this is the challenge. For some, having resources multi-task on sev-
eral tasks or projects is seen as squeezing more work out of the resources. 
And if the work comes in bits and pieces, this may work. But if we are seeing 
the additional work stretching out timelines more and more, this is a sign of 
bad multi-tasking. For example, in some organizations, before Critical Chain, 
we can see that the resources are overloaded and switching between tasks 
constantly (bad multi-tasking) and it takes forever for things to finish. By add-
ing Critical Chain, and better prioritizing and balancing the work, we take bet-
ter advantage of that resource’s true capacity and now we can finish projects 
sooner.”  

Chapter 4 | How Does the Critical Chain Solution Work?
48
 Bad Multi-Tasking  Example 
 “Tim you make it sound like all multi-tasking is bad. This cannot be true, and in 
our environment we need to split resources across several tasks and projects. 
Do you have a more specific example?” 
 “Sure Gary. Let’s say I have John the engineer working on three tasks. Each 
task is two weeks long and all three are assigned at the same time. John is 
a really hard worker and tries to get things done as soon as he can. So he 
spends the first week on task A and completes the work for it. But alas, the 
manager for task B comes by and is upset that nothing has been accomplished 
on his task. So John works on that for a week. Then the manager for task C 
comes by. What happened to my task? So John works on that task.” 
 Task 
 week1 
 week2 
 week3 
 Task A 
 Xxxxx 
 Task B 
 Xxxxx 
 Task C 
 xxxxx 
 “Makes sense Tim. The different managers try to get John to finish the work 
for their tasks and we often have resources shared across projects or having 
multiple tasks they work on within the same project. So, in some manner I 
can see this happening.” 
 “True Gary, but let’s look at the next set of work. After task C, the task A 
manager comes by and it’s been three weeks! John scrambles and finishes it in 
week 4. Then the manager for task B comes by and it’s been five weeks? So 
John finishes that task. Then finally the manager for task C comes by and it’s 
been six weeks! So John finishes that task under duress. So Randal, what do 
you see from this example?” 
 Project 
 Week 1 
 Week 2 
 Week 3 
 Week 4 
 Week 5 
 Week 6 
 Project A 
 xxxxx 
 Xxxxx 
 Project B 
 Xxxxx 
 xxxxx 
 Project C 
 xxxxx 
 Xxxxx 
 “I certainly don’t want to be John is the first thing that comes to mind.” 

Get it Done On Time!
49
 “True, it is a stressful situation for John. Gary, note for a simple two-week task 
how long did the project managers have to wait for him to finish? Two weeks? 
Three weeks? Four weeks?” 
 “Well Tim, looking at what you wrote, it took… four to six weeks for John to 
finish each of the two-week tasks.” 
 “Tim, this is crazy. Basically John is doubling and tripling the length of work for 
a two-week task.” 
 “Correct, Randal. This is what we call bad multi-tasking. John did work hard 
and we did not even look at any lost time due to switching between projects, 
but overall his lead times were horrible. By doing a little of each project at a 
time, he ended up stretching out the duration of all three projects. So let me 
give another version of the same story.” 
 “Okay.”   
 “John is assigned the three tasks. But in working with an overall program man-
ager, he is able to focus and have the program manager prioritize the three 
tasks. Task A is to be done first, then Task B, and finally task C. The only time 
he can switch from one project to another is if he is either blocked or he has 
finished that project.” 
 “Okay, Tim.” 
 “The first week John works on Project A. Everything seems fine, so he then 
spends the second week and finishes Project A. Project B and C project man-
agers do not rush him to start their projects, but they do watch his progress 
on Project A so once he is done, they know he can start on the next priori-
tized project. So Gary, how long was the lead time for task A?” 
 Task 
 Week 1 
 Week 2 
 Task A 
 Xxxxx 
 Xxxxx 
 Task B 
 Task C 
 “Two weeks.” 
 “And Gary, how does that compare to the previous example?” 
 “It is two weeks versus four weeks. Much better! He finished it twice as fast. 
But Tim he has not made any progress on the other two tasks and this is an 
ideal case.” 

Chapter 4 | How Does the Critical Chain Solution Work?
50
 “True, so let’s look at the next two tasks. John’s now done with task A and 
moves onto task B. He works one week (week 3), but alas, gets blocked. He 
needs someone else to finish their work first, before he can do anything else. 
So based on our rules John starts work on task C. He works a week and then 
finds out that the work that was blocking him on task B is now finished. John 
finished task B in week 5 and then finishes task C in week 6.” 
 Project 
 Week 1 
 week2 
 Week 3 
 Week 4 
 Week 5 
 Week 6 
 Project A  xxxxx 
 Xxxxx 
 Project B 
 xxxxx 
 xxxxx 
 Project C 
 Xxxxx 
 xxxxx 
 “So Gary, what is different for task B and C compared to the prior example? 
 “Time-wise, nothing. They both finished in weeks 5 and 6 like they did last 
time.” 
 “True, but what about the lead time? From when we were expected to start 
to when we were expected to finish, what is the difference?”   
 “Hmm. In the first example they were two-week tasks so I would figure week 
2 or 3 John would have been done, but it ended up being week 5 and week 6, 
so about three weeks later. In the second example I knew he had to do task A 
first. So I knew it would be later.” 
 “Tim this sounds like a much more organized way to run projects—if we can 
make it work correctly.” 
 “Exactly, Randal. As you saw, we did not change the duration of the proj-
ects, but by prioritizing and by setting clear rules, each manager understood 
the lead times and could manage their projects and expectations accordingly. 
There were no major delays versus their expectations.” 
 “But Tim, is this a realistic issue?” 
 “Yes, Gary. In several ways. One, if we assign multiple tasks to a resource, with 
unclear or conflicting priorities, we can run into the above inefficient behavior. 
If some of these tasks gate other tasks then we could have problems and risk 
stretching out our timelines unexpectedly.” 
 “How does this tie back to the overall Critical Chain solution?” inquires Gary. 
 “If we allow Critical Chain resources to jump back and forth, working on 
different tasks or projects incorrectly, they will stretch out the project, just 
like the first example with the three tasks. Resources need to focus solely on 
finishing a task unless they become blocked.” 

Get it Done On Time!
51
 “Would the Critical Chain software help us with this planning?” 
 “The software will resolve resource contentions so that a resource will not 
have multiple tasks assigned at the same time. But we also need to be sure that 
managers are not asking resources to work on multiple tasks at once and to 
try and minimize the resources from doing this as well.” 
 “So, you will have to cover this in the team training.” 
 “Correct. Gary, do you see examples of bad multi-tasking in your current 
project management environment? For example, resources jumping back and 
forth and not finishing tasks?”   
 “Hmm, Tim I am going to have to think about this one a bit. We certainly 
juggle some key resources between multiple tasks and projects. We also run 
into issues where there is the current project they are working, and at the 
same time, high-priority bug fixes for a prior release comes up. In some cases, 
we certainly have them jumping around trying to maximize what they are 
working on, in some ways we have them start multiple things at once. But as 
you noted, maybe we need to rethink our strategy, prioritize tasks better, have 
people actually finish the tasks they start, and limit the number of tasks they 
are trying to do at once.” 
 “That sounds very good, Gary. In some environments it can make a big differ-
ence.” Tim also thinks to himself that Gary will need to be sure to reduce bad 
multi-tasking as part of their single project work, but if it is a significant issue 
and multiple projects are impacting shared resources, Tim might have to look 
into the Critical Chain multi- project   solution as well.  
 Defining the Project Goal and Building 
Schedules Back-to-Front 
 Tim continues. “So the third way we can benefit from Critical Chain is  building 
schedules back-to-front  . There are two parts to this. The first is setting a clear 
goal. For it to be a clear goal it needs to be measurable with a specific timeline. 
For example, saying we need to buy a new house is not as clear as saying that 
need to buy a new house under $450,000 and finish moving in before the end 
of the year. It needs three bedrooms. And note, one of the children is in a 
wheelchair. The latter is clearer and gives you much more guidance.” 
 “Makes sense Tim, the clearer the goal the better we can identify require-
ments and prioritize,” states Gary. “We regularly do this, but it is good to be 
sure we stay on top of it.” 

Chapter 4 | How Does the Critical Chain Solution Work?
52
 “Good. The second part is to build schedules back-to-front. So Randal what 
are some of the main items that come to mind when buying and moving into 
a house?” 
 “Hmm, get a loan, find a realtor, find and buy the new house, and move every-
thing to the new house all come to mind.” 
 “That is a good starting point. Note one concern with just having a list of 
items is that we can unintentionally forget something. There is no sense of 
dependencies or checks with a simple list. So Randal, let me sketch out what 
we have already and then we can start working backward by checking 
dependencies.”  
 “So Randal, one of the ways we check dependencies is to use the phase in 
order to and we must. For example,  in order to unpack what  must happen 
immediately before it?” 
 “Okay, I see where you are going with this, Tim.  In order to unpack  we must have 
packed things from the old house first.” 
 “Exactly. And when we move into our dark house with no running water or 
working phones we must…??” 
 “Run away in fearing of being in a horror movie. Just kidding, Tim. We can 
set up the phone, utilities, and even add Internet. And… we should probably 
change our address to get our mail.” 
 “Good. So now our updated schedule looks like this…”  

Get it Done On Time!
53
 “So Gary, going back and checking against our goal,  in order to buying a new 
house under $450,000, finish moving in before the end of the year, and one of 
their children is in a wheel chair  what must happen ? Did we overlook anything?”  
 “Hmm, Tim. We have buying the house, but it would probably be good to add 
the clarification that it needs to be less than $450k and purchased before the 
end of the year.” 
 “True. Anything else come to mind?” 
 “Umm, I do not see anything about the child in the wheelchair. It would be 
difficult to find a wheelchair accessible house already, so more likely we would 
need to find a contractor, spec out changes, and remodel the existing house.” 
 “Exactly. With the contractor and adding additional clarification, we can 
review and make sure we are addressing the goal of our project. So with a few 
more changes…”  
 “Overall it looks okay, Tim and not to nit-pick your example, but I am sure we 
have missed a few things.” 
 “True, Gary. So we can always build a schedule and then find an area expert 
to help us review it. For example, we did not talk about the house-purchasing 
process in our schedule, but if we talked with a realtor he could help us add 
the missing steps. The other part with Critical Chain is throughput. We want 
the project to have bottom line impact on the organization.   ” 
 “Tim last time we talked about Harris and you had said the throughput was 
building the schedule out until they reached revenue,” Randal recalls. “I do not 
see how that would work here. The family is not planning on renting out the 
house; they want to move in.” 

Chapter 4 | How Does the Critical Chain Solution Work?
54
 “Good point, Randal. Throughput is the value to the organization. For compa-
nies we can often focus on scoping the project out to the point they generate 
revenue. For non-profits (or the family in this case), it is more of the goal of 
the organization. Sure the family wants to move, but overall what are they 
trying to do?” 
 “If it was me, I would want to get settled into the new community. So sell 
the old house, find schools for the kids, possibly find new activities and social 
groups in the area.” 
 “Exactly. I’ll add in the new items you identified…”  
 “But Tim, didn’t you just complicate and make the schedule a lot more work?” 
inquires Randal. 
 “Actually Randal,” Gary says, stepping in. “I think I see Tim’s point. We set a 
goal, make sure the goal is throughput focused, and build the schedule back-
to-front using  In order to and  we must to check dependencies. This is all part 
of making sure we go through and capture all of the possible work when 
we build out the schedule. From there, we can properly size and scope the 
project before it even starts and potentially minimize the number of surprises 
from items we might have overlooked.” 
 “Exactly, Gary. Just a few final notes. Once the project network is constructed 
from back-to-front, we make a forward pass reading it from front-to-back in 
order to sanity check one last time for any missing dependencies or tasks. 
When we go from front-to-back, we read it as  if I have everything at for the first 
task, then is there anything else that is needed before I can work on the next task .” 

Get it Done On Time!
55
 “You go through the network again, Tim?” asks Randal. 
 “Of course. The network is on paper now. It is the best time to review and 
challenge it. Once we begin executing the schedule, things get a lot more 
complicated. Actually Randal, we are still not done with the network building.” 
 “Really?” 
 “Two more items. We use the  in order to.. we must to help challenge assump-
tions to find missing tasks, but we also try and run as many tasks in  parallel as 
we can. For example, do we have to buy the new house  before we find a real-
tor to sell the old house? Same as with the Harris example.” 
 “Harris?” inquires Gary. 
 “It is an example I explained to Randal where Critical Chain challenged estab-
lished assumptions. By challenging assumptions they were able to find ways to 
run more items in parallel and compress the schedule more than people had 
previously thought was possible.” 
 “Sounds interesting. We have several existing schedules already in process. 
Possibly you could help us review these schedules and look for opportunities.” 
 “Sure Gary, next time we chat we could discuss it. Actually, it would be a good 
time for us to review the Critical Chain implementation steps.” 
 “Tim, you had said there was one, just one, other item for building schedules??” 
 “Almost there, Randal. The last item is that we like to build Critical Chain 
schedules based on resource hand-offs. So anytime work is handed off from 
one resource to another, we generally like to capture it as a separate item. 
For example, we did not detail all of the work the contractor is doing for the 
remodel, but we do want to be sure we capture the hand-off of our specs to 
the contractor.” 
 “Tim, can you clarify this a bit more,” inquires Gary. 
 “Sure. Disconnects can happen between resources, so we want to be sure to 
capture the hand-offs.” 
 “Makes sense, resource hand-offs are critical and can often be misaligned. But 
what if a particular task is huge? Like the contractor has to modify the stair-
ways, bedrooms, floor plans, and so on. That is a lot of work to hide behind 
one task.” 
 “It would be a confidence-level question Gary. If we are confident, we could 
have just one task for the contractor work. If it was really involved and we 
wanted to capture the work in more detail, we could potentially set up a sepa-
rate sub-schedule detailing all the work for that task.” 
 “Okay, Tim. Makes sense. As we work on our schedules, I will want to see how 
you build this out and how it works,” states Gary.   

Chapter 4 | How Does the Critical Chain Solution Work?
56
 “Tim, I think I’m going to need a schedule to see how you build schedules. You 
have quite a few steps there,” Randal says jokingly.  
 Organizational Analysis   
 “Hey Tim,” Randal says, yawning a bit, “I’m kinda wearing out and I think our 
waitress is waiting for us to vacate the table; are we done yet?” 
 “Almost. The last part is organizational analysis. Often organizations look at a 
department’s top issues or maybe even have an overall top issues list between 
departments. The problem is that these top issues do not highlight the inter-
connection between issues or root causes for the various issues. The organi-
zational analysis, otherwise known as the TOC Thinking Process, allows us to 
look at the various issues the organization experiences across departments, 
see how they interconnect, and identify the core drivers that are causing the 
various problems. From there, we can see which of these problems Critical 
Chain can help with and which ones, outside of the Critical Chain solution, we 
need to address to help the overall organization improve.” 
 “So Critical Chain does not solve every problem?” 
 “No Randal, there are no cure-alls. Critical Chain helps address the common 
project-management issues. The organizational analysis helps us identify orga-
nizational issues that could significantly limit the results of our Critical Chain 
implementation as well as help us see what is needed to help improve the 
organization as a whole. Together we get a more complete solution.” 
 “I understand what you are saying Tim, but I dread to say I don’t think we have 
the time to have you walk me through an organizational analysis example to 
better understand.” 
 “No problem, Randal. We can cover it in more detail another time.” 
 “Sounds good Tim,” states Gary, “I like your ideas and we need to work with 
you on putting them into place. Micky is putting more and more pressure on 
engineering to make sure we are getting our projects done on time. With 
Critical Chain, we can work on addressing his concerns.” 
 “Sure Gary, the next thing we need to do is to set up some training time with 
your team to review the concepts and begin to implement them into Critical 
Chain schedules. We should also set up some time so I can walk you through 
the implementation steps so we are sure we cover all the necessary steps for 
Phoenix as well as the other projects.” 
 “Sounds good, Tim.”  

© Eric Bergland 2016 
E. Bergland, Get it Done On Time!, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-1860-0_5
 C H A P T E R 
 Championing 
Ideas 
 Tim sits in the coffee shop, going back and forth between staring at the blank 
wall and skimming through his resume for the umpteenth time. It is a contest 
between which one is more interesting. He heard about a project manager 
position for Software Dynamics and is wondering if it would be a good fit 
or not after he finishes his contract work for Randal and Gary. As Tim sees 
Randal pull into the parking lot, he puts away his resume. 
 “Hey Tim,” sorry I’m a few minutes late,” Randal mentions as he pulls up a chair. 
 “No worries, I’m just killing time. So Randal, how are things since our last 
TOC discussion?” 
 “Well not too good, Tim. Since we last talked a few things have happened. 
First between you and me, Micky, our interim CEO pulled a key staff meeting 
together and pretty much put a gun to our heads. He said we have to nail the 
next three contracts or we’re going to be severely challenged in lining up our 
next round of funding. Which loosely translates to we could be out of busi-
ness if we don’t fix things ASAP.” 
 “That sounds pretty serious.” 
 “Exactly! Gary is working harder than ever to get his team to implement 
Critical Chain based on what you have been teaching us. But he needs results 
quickly. So I’m hoping you could step things up. Possibly get some compelling 
results in a week or two?” 
5

Chapter 5 | Championing Ideas
58
 “Umm Randal; it’s not that simple. I really wish it was, but as with any process 
and culture change, it takes time to bring people up to speed, get their buy-in, 
and start implementing and changing behavior. I have been doing some training, 
but it takes time to set in.” 
 “It isn’t something we could quickly put together?” 
 Tim, realizing Randal is not really understanding how much time can be 
involved in implementing a new process, explains, “It takes time just advocat-
ing an idea and shepherding it through an organization. Let me give you an 
example of what it took for me to push what was supposed to be a simple 
idea through an organization. Sometimes it really needs passion and commit-
ment to get something through. You need a champion.” [frt 3] 
 LivingTV Interactive Company Background 
 One of the companies Tim worked for in the past was  LivingTV  Interactive. 
LivingTV Interactive was ahead of its time, but the concept was pretty clever. 
The basic premise is opposed to just watching TV, the company wanted you 
to be “Living it”. The “Living it” aspect was due to interaction. This interaction 
with the show was handled by a combination of onscreen graphics displayed 
on the user’s TV and a special remote. Most of the games broke into three 
major categories: sports, game shows, and dramas. 
 For sports, LivingTV Interactive would have someone in its studio watch the 
game and log every event into the system in real time. So if someone in a 
baseball game hit a ball, they would let the system know. If someone ran to 
a base they would let the system know. For the LivingTV Interactive play-
ers watching the game they would use the special remote to indicate if they 
thought the baseball player would hit the ball, strike out, take another base, or 
whatever. The system would then compare the LivingTV Interactive player’s 
choice with the actual outcome in real time and score the player accordingly. 
The player that could best predict the events in the game would end up with 
the highest score and at the end of the game, their username would be shown 
for all to see. 
 LivingTV game shows and dramas were created in an entirely different way. 
To be able to create the LivingTV game, you needed to see the contents of 
the show before it aired. In this way you could create a game where LivingTV’s 
players would play along with the game show contestants or ask them trivia 
about the show itself  while it was airing. But to get access to the show and 
write about its contents  prior to it being aired was challenging. You had to 
ask the TV show broadcasters to get access to the show before it aired and 

Get it Done On Time!
59
few broadcasters were willing to do this. The ones who were willing would 
charge very large fees. LivingTV Interactive, being a startup, was tight on cash 
and could only finance a small handful of basic shows for their subscribers. 
The major dramas and the associated huge audiences associated with them 
were far too expensive. 
 LivingTV Interactive’s  Dilemma 
 In working at LivingTV, Tim would often hear the same conversation over and 
over in LivingTV Interactive’s hallways. The basic gist was the following… 
 If LivingTV Interactive put its limited resources into developing a  nationwide 
service then it could attract the interest of major advertisers and in turn gen-
erate the revenues LivingTV needed to be profitable. The negative to this 
approach is that LivingTV would have a very broad nationwide market,  but 
it would also have very limited programming options for its subscribers, as 
LivingTV could only support a few sporting events and a handful of drama and 
game shows. 
 The other approach was for LivingTV Interactive to put its limited resources 
into developing and paying broadcasting fees to increase the number of shows 
and  programs it supports. This approach would provide depth to LivingTV’s 
programming and would lead to multiple subscriber packages and a larger 
number of people subscribed in a given market. But with all the money 
invested in depth of programming only a limited number of markets could be 
addressed. 
 The arguments would then go back and forth. LivingTV Interactive simply did 
not have the funding to do both. It wanted a nationwide service to get more 
advertising, yet at the same time it needed to expand programming to gener-
ate more subscriber revenue in the markets it was in. Without a clear resolu-
tion or direction, LivingTV Interactive was simply   stuck . 
 LivingTV Interactive’s  Conflict Cloud  
 Tim thought about the company discussions for a while—then it dawned on 
him. The discussions were really a conflict and Tim had the tool to try and find 
unique resolutions to conflicts, the TOC Cloud. 
 The first part was to draw out the cloud to help him visualize the conflict. 
It took about an hour to get all the wording right, but Tim was able to work 
through it and had sketched out the following diagram.

Chapter 5 | Championing Ideas
60
 
 
 Everyone wanted LivingTV to grow and be successful so that was a  common 
goal (A). 
 One side wanted LivingTV to invest its limited resources into creating a 
nationwide service (D). The  need for this nationwide service was that by being 
nationwide we would have a market large enough to attract major advertisers 
that in turn would generate the revenues we wanted (B). This was the “Go 
Broad” strategy. 
 On the other side of the conflict was to invest our limited resources into cre-
ating and acquiring more LivingTV programs (D’). The reason was with more 
programs we could increase our subscriber reach and revenues for a given 
market (C). This was the ”Go Deep” strategy. 
 The conflict was that there just was not enough money to do both strate-
gies and people had ongoing disagreements about which strategy was better 
or they simply wanted to do both. The good part was now Tim was able to 
summarize, visualize, and look for ways to challenge and resolve the conflict.  
 Looking for Possible Resolutions 
 Based on the conflict cloud, Tim had three areas to challenge and see if he 
could find a  resolution  . 
 The first area was  the  direct conflict (D and D’). Was there a way to invest 
resources into both creating a nationwide service (D) and create more pro-
grams (D’)? They could try and borrow enough money to do both, but that 
was unlikely. They could try and cut corners on both to spread the money 
around, but that really would not work well either. 

Get it Done On Time!
61
 The second was to look at the assumptions both sides were making. Tim 
looked to see if there were ways for LivingTV Interactive to reduce the cost 
of building a network (B D). Were there new technologies that could do 
more with less? Unfortunately no. Was there a way to deploy a low cost 
barebones LivingTV Interactive’s service in more cities? Tim checked, no. 
Could LivingTV Interactive leverage someone else’s existing infrastructure? 
No, nothing existed or could be modified to fit LivingTV Interactive’s needs. 
At this time, their network was too specialized. Could LivingTV Interactive 
partner with another company and share the costs? Possibly. So some good 
thoughts, but nothing solid. 
 The last place Tim looked was to see if there was a way to get more program-
ming in a less expensive way (C D’). Is there a way to get broadcasters to 
charge us less? Nothing apparent at this time. They either didn’t care about 
LivingTV or just wanted the royalties. Would it be possible to partner with 
the broadcasters? It has been tried and there was just not much interest. 
 So overall the conflict held. Tim was able to better verbalize and challenge some 
of the conflict’s assumptions, but he seemed just as stuck as everyone else.  
 Spark of an  Idea 
 A few days later, Tim talked with Lori, one of the programming directors. “Lori, 
what limits LivingTV Interactive from doing more shows?” 
 “It depends on the show,” responded Lori. “For sports, the events are done in 
real time. Since the show is publicly broadcasted, we do not need to pay for 
any royalties, so our costs are mainly around our people and equipment. The 
only issue is that there is no way for LivingTV Interactive to survive on just 
producing for the sports audience alone. 
 The segment our business really wanted was primetime dramas. It has huge 
audiences that we could tap into. To do that, we need to see the show in 
advance so we can create the LivingTV interactive script. To legally produce 
something in advance, we need permission from the broadcaster so we end 
up paying huge royalties. Since the royalties are based on the show’s popular-
ity, we can only do a handful of less popular day time dramas; forget anything 
in primetime. It’s just too expensive for us.” 
 “Isn’t there a way to create a TV show script in real time like sports? After all 
if the TV show has been broadcasted you would not need to pay royalties,” 
Tim asked. 
 “It has been looked at, but just did not make sense. There were just too many 
variables to try and do something on the fly. Certain events in sports are 
binary—either the player hits the baseball or does not. This does not trans-
late as well over to dramas.” 

Chapter 5 | Championing Ideas
62
 “What about having something right after a TV drama?” 
 “It’s a nice thought Tim, but it takes a few hours to put together a good 
script for a show. By the time you have the script done, that show’s audience 
is long gone.” 
 Tim kept looking for ways to challenge the assumptions. “If we can’t afford to 
pay to get all the dramas in advance, and we can’t produce the dramas in real 
time, and it takes too long to create something for right after the TV drama, 
what is left?” Then it dawned on me pretty much every show is a weekly 
show. “Lori, what if we created a show that was based on the prior week’s 
show. Then we could show it ten to fifteen minutes before this week’s show. 
It would be a warm-up or pre-show before going into the main TV show. 
People could compete based on their knowledge of the show and last week’s 
episode.” 
 “Tim, given that it would shown right before next week’s show, it would give us 
plenty of time to script out the show. Since it is based on an already broadcast 
show, the events in the show would be public domain so no royalties. Since 
we would not have to pay royalties, we pretty much could do as many shows 
as we want, even the primetime ones that we could not afford before. I think 
you might be onto something! Let me run it by my manager, if you can run it 
by yours, we’ll see if there are any initial issues. We could also put together a 
proposal for your pre-show idea and run it by the weekly manager meeting.” 
 Tim was feeling pretty good. He had hit upon the idea that might help break 
the organization’s conflict. Going back and looking at his earlier cloud diagram, 
what assumption and connection did he actually break?
 
 

Get it Done On Time!
63
 Tim’s idea basically challenged the assumption that a LivingTV Interactive 
show has to be shown at the same time as the broadcast show. In look-
ing at the diagram,  in order for them to focus on user subscription revenues 
(C Need),  they must invest resources into creating and acquiring more pro-
grams (D’ Want). The underlying assumption was that there was no way to 
get programs without paying royalties. Tim challenged and broke this assump-
tion with the what he called the  pre-show concept. By building a game off a 
show already broadcast, LivingTV Interactive did not need the broadcaster’s 
permission or to pay any royalties. LivingTV Interactive was free to develop as 
many shows as it needed (C Need) without needing to pay expensive royal-
ties and thus would be able to focus its limited resources on building a larger 
market (B Need). Win win. Neither side (or need) of the LivingTV Interactive 
conflict loses out.  
 Initial Manager Meeting  
 Tim caught up with Mike, his manager, and gave him a quick run through of 
the concept. Mike felt pretty comfortable with it and agreed to add a quick 
15-minute intro of the idea to the weekly manager meeting. Then Tim caught 
up with Lori and worked on the presentation. The only part left was to choose 
the snack that went with the presentation. LivingTV Interactive had a tradition 
of having a snack that related to the newest concept pitch. So for sports there 
were mini pretzels, for game shows there were animal crackers in the shape 
of letters (so you could spell things out). For the pre-show concept Lori and 
Tim agreed on Lays Potato Chips since they advertised that “you could not 
just eat one.” Their hopes with the pre-show was that it was so fun that “you 
could not play just once.” 
 At the meeting, people felt the pre-show idea had some potential. The “are 
we sure we can legally do this without getting sued” and “are we willing to do 
this” issue came up multiple times. Lori agreed to follow up with legal. The 
managers did agree that the concept was good enough so that it should be 
shown in the upcoming Exec review. There the goal would be to get approval 
to move forward with the idea to develop the concept and if approved, then 
on to the engineering development. 
 Tim  was   feeling pretty confident and thought after the Exec review, engineer-
ing could start working on the concept, but Lori was a little more cautious. 
 “Tim, getting the go-ahead to present in the Exec review is very good, but 
there is no guarantee. I’ve seen promising ideas proposed before only to have 
a few Execs hold out, ask for additional reviews, and basically drag out the 
approval process for months until people just give up. So take things with a 
grain of salt.” 

Chapter 5 | Championing Ideas
64
 “Lori, that does not sound very encouraging. Do we know who the key people 
that are in the Exec review?” 
 “Pretty much. There is John who heads up my group, programming. Your man-
ager Mike who heads up engineering, Bill heads up advertising, and Jim is the 
VP of operations. Those four are the key players. I’ll talk with Terence in legal 
since we already have a copyright question. Human resources and IT are not 
involved in concept approvals, so we are okay there.” 
 “Lori, I think I see your point. If we just give a 15-minute pitch in the Exec 
review where no one has seen or heard the idea before, we will get a whole 
bunch of questions, issues, and concerns that could cause the review process 
to drag out. What if we meet up with the key players before the Exec review? 
In this way, we can give them an overview, have them ask questions, and give 
us a little time to develop some answers to their concerns.” 
 “Tim, that sounds possible. We can certainly meet with our managers. Bill is 
pretty approachable. Jim will be tough. His schedule is always booked.”  
 Lobbying in Preparation for the Exec  Review  
 Meeting with Lori’s manager John, the head of programming, went pretty well. 
Overall he had been pushing for over a year to aggressively fund and expand 
the number of shows LivingTV Interactive supported. So anything that helped 
with his goal was an easy sell. The fact the pre-show concept did not require 
any royalties and could be created for any show was just ideal. The fact that 
the scripting team had a full week of real time to create the questions and 
interactions for each week’s pre-show addressed his key logistical issues. Like 
everyone, he just had the concern about checking with legal. 
 The engineering meeting with Mike went pretty smoothly as well. He thought 
the idea was an interesting one. From a development perspective, the pre-
show format followed similar games LivingTV Interactive had done, so he felt 
technically it should not be too hard to do, just a matter of getting approval. 
He asked Tim to review the idea with one of the senior engineers, Peter, just 
to get his take on it. 
 It took an hour of walking through the concept for Bill in advertising to under-
stand how it all worked, but once he understood that a pre-show could be 
developed for any show and this could significantly increase the number of 
shows and programs LivingTV Interactive could support, Bill got excited. More 
shows meant a larger audience and more time with the audience. Even better, 
was prime time. With larger numbers, better demographics, and prime time, 
it would significantly boost Bill’s opportunities to work with advertisers to 
sponsor and promote their products through LivingTV Interactive’s network. 
Granted, LivingTV Interactive was available in only three cities at the moment, 

Get it Done On Time!
65
but with more shows they could have much broader coverage in those cities 
and set up to expand from there. 
 The last person left was Jim, the VP of operations. In talking with his admin, Jim 
was regularly traveling to broadcasters, seeking venture capital, investors, and 
advertisers, trying to get support and investment money that kept LivingTV 
Interactive alive and going on a daily basis. He did not have an open spot for 
months. Yet he was also the most critical person. 
 Lori and Tim strategized for a while. They could just wait for the Exec review, 
but this was risky. Calling Jim without an appointment was out. They could try 
e-mailing him, but likely their e-mail would be lost. Then again, Tim thought if 
something stood out that caught his attention, it might get them the meeting 
they wanted. He looked at Lori and said he had it covered. “Let me double-
check something and I’ll get back to you.” She looked a bit perplexed but 
decided to go along with it. 
 A few days later Tim got back to Lori and said they had a meeting next 
Thursday at 1 PM, Jim had a recent cancellation and wants to see what we 
have to show. Lori was floored. 
 “How did you get the meeting so quickly?” 
 “I’ll tell you later,” Tim coyly replied. 
 Thursday came around pretty quickly and Tim and Lori headed up to the third 
floor corner office. As they entered the office, the floor to ceiling windows 
offered amazing views of the LivingTV Interactive campus. Sunlight filled the 
room with warm light. Two paintings adorned the walls. Jim himself sat behind 
a large oak desk in an overstuffed recliner chair. It was quite a contrast from 
the grey engineering cubes and black ergonomic chairs three floors  below . 
 “So… please come in. I’m anxious to see what you have to share,” Jim said. “It’s 
exceptionally rare that I get three e-mails all at the same time from my pro-
gramming director, advertising director, and engineering director encouraging 
me to meet with someone. Usually they’re busy arguing with each other over 
corporate strategy, funds, resources, and the like.” 
 Lori looked over to Tim, “So that’s how you got his attention to set up a meeting.” 
 Tim smiled. 
 Tim and Lori spent about 20 minutes reviewing the pre-show concept. Jim 
nodded here and there and then looked over to them. “It’s an interesting 
concept. I like the fact that it gives us the opportunity to produce any show 
and as many shows as we want without putting us through the ringer paying 
for royalties. We will have to double-check the royalty part with the lawyers 
of course. The other concern is that it is important for us to strategically 
align with broadcasters. We want them to see us as a way to leverage their 
content assets, not a parasite taking advantage of their work. Right or wrong, 

Chapter 5 | Championing Ideas
66
they could sue us out of existence if they wanted or cared. Let me mull this 
over. You have done a good job addressing my initial questions. We have an 
upcoming Exec review, so we can revisit the idea there. Thank you for putting 
so much work into this.” 
 Meeting with Peter 
 Lori and Tim had about two weeks before  the   Exec review. Lori had already 
had a few meetings with the lawyers over the whole legality of the pre-show 
concept. Finding an identical case was proving unlikely given that LivingTV 
Interactive and its interactive service was a “never been done before” con-
cept. Jim’s major concern about being sued out of existence by the broadcast-
ers if LivingTV Interactive was legally wrong was a bit haunting. 
 In the meantime, Tim decided to follow up with Peter, the senior engineer 
Mike had suggested. Tim reviewed the overall concept with Peter and he 
picked up on it pretty quickly. 
 “Tim, the pre-show interaction seems pretty straightforward,” replied Peter. 
“We already have a scripting program for game shows. If we dropped some 
of the game show specific parts and focused on the trivia aspect of the pre-
show, and simple interactivity, we could have a pretty quick prototype for your 
pre-show idea. So if you were able to get approval, I think it would take just a 
month to develop.” 
 Tim thanked Peter for the insights and compared last minute notes with Lori 
as the Exec review approached.  
 Prep for the Exec Review 
 So there was one last item before the Exec  review  . Tim anxiously asked Lori 
about the legal status; it was one of the few things that could kill the whole 
pre-show concept. 
 “Legal got back to me,” said Lori. “Basically they say it’s our call. The shows 
themselves are copyrighted of course. But once the TV shows have been 
broadcast we can create trivia games asking our users what happened. For 
example, did John ask Jane out? How many times did Bill ask about the movie 
tickets, and so on.” 
 “Sounds good, then I think we are ready.” 
 “Agreed,” said Lori.  

Get it Done On Time!
67
 The Exec Review 
 The time for the Exec review came and Lori and Tim finished up their last-
minute preparations. As with the management meeting, there were plenty of 
Lays potato chips to go around. 
 Jim, the operations VP, went through a few key items and then went to the pre-
show concept. “So are we ready to introduce the the pre-show concept?” He 
looked at the murmurings around. “Is anyone here not familiar with the pre-
show concept?” No one answered. “Hmm, Tim seems like you and Lori have 
been busy and saved us some time. Does anyone have any open questions or 
concerns about the concept?” A few minor questions here and there, but basi-
cally it distilled down to the willingness to move forward with it. Jim sighed… 
 “I basically see it this way; we have been trying to get the broadcaster’s inter-
est for years. This concept gives us a chance to be able to expand our content 
and create interactive trivia shows for almost any TV program we want. I think 
it’s worth the risk. On one side the broadcasters just ignore what we’re doing. 
On the other side, we get their attention and it gives us a chance to discuss 
our company, possible partnerships, and advertising opportunities with them. 
All in favor of moving forward with a pilot show?” Everyone’s hands went up 
to move forward. 
 Jim turned, “Mike how many months will it take to get this concept developed 
given the number of projects we currently have in the queue?” Mike looked 
over at Tim, “Tim, do you want to explain?” 
 “Jim, it’s basically done,” Tim happily stated. 
 “What do you mean, done?” 
 “In between our meeting and the exec review, Mike had me talk with Peter. 
Peter looked at an existing application initially. He thought it would take about 
a month to develop. He had a few days free about two weeks ago while he 
was having a project go through quality testing. He pretty much completed 
the pre-show concepts in a few days. He did not have to really code anything; 
he just stripped out a bunch of code from a prior game show project he had 
done before. Since quality assurance testing had already tested the original 
game show project, the pre-show just needed some simple sanity checking. 
We can start our first show next week if we want.” 
 Both Mike and Tim smiled. Jim was surprised, “Impressive. Alright then. 
Let’s get something on the programming schedule and start our first pilot 
next week. We can start with something small and then  w e can branch out 
from there.” 
 The meeting finished shortly afterward. Lori looked over at Tim and said, 
“Good job.” 

Chapter 5 | Championing Ideas
68
 Jim then pulled Tim aside. “Nicely done, Tim. You really went all out and did 
your homework. Usually, we spend weeks discussing and debating issues in 
the Exec review, but you addressed everyone’s issues upfront so when we 
got to the Exec meeting, the main concerns were already resolved. It was just 
a matter of everyone seeing that they all agreed. You were even able to get 
a prototype up and running. I really appreciate the work you have done and 
hopefully it will help a great deal to make LivingTV Interactive a success.” 
 The following week LivingTV Interactive started providing a pre-show for 
a primetime sitcom. It quickly became one of the most popular shows with 
LivingTV Interactive subscribers.  
 Back to Tim and Randal 
 “Well Tim, that is quite a story,” states  Randal . “You put a lot of work into 
developing the ideas and advocating for them.” 
 “Yes, it was hard work. But also fun. Now imagine trying to do something 
more involved like changing the methodology of how an organization works.” 
 “Actually Tim, it sounds a bit daunting,” Randal says, letting out a deep breath. 
“Your story by itself was very involved. If we have to do that much work to 
implement Critical Chain into our environment is it even worth the effort? 
We don’t have that much time to work with. And the list of items you are 
coming up with keeps growing and it is starting to sound impossible,” Randal 
states with a touch of frustration. 
 “It’s not so bad, Randal. There is a good amount of work involved. But it will 
have a real impact on the entire organization.” 
 “I think you are being  idealistic Tim,” Randal a bit louder than he intended. “I 
know you want to help out, but do we really have to change the  whole orga-
nization to get results? We need something simpler and quicker given our 
situation.” 
 Tim ponders for a few minutes, then frowns. Sighing in resignation, “I think you 
are right Randal. Ideally we try to move the whole organization and culture, 
but like you said it can be a bit daunting and we’re tight on time… Another 
approach is that we focus on one or two high-impact, high-value projects. We 
can get some good results and use that momentum and experience to help 
carry the rest of the implementation forward.” 
 Perking up, Randal says, “That sounds much much better, Tim. Focusing on one 
project would be a lot simpler and a more reasonable given our time con-
straints. It would be much more doable. So how can we make this happen?” 

Get it Done On Time!
69
 “I’ll set up a meeting with the three of us tomorrow. We can look at the 
implementation steps and as you noted focus on getting results out of the 
one project. I can work with Gary to train the team and build the schedules.” 
 “Good Tim. You were worrying me there for a minute.” 
 “So speaking of worry, just one more thing, Randal.” 
 “Just one?” Randal says with a touch of concern. 
 “We still need to get the Exec buy-in. Gary is swamped in engineering details 
and even more so with putting Critical Chain into place. I need your help. 
Even though I have been working with some of the engineers, I’m still an 
outsider. Especially to the Execs. You have been with the company for several 
months, met and worked with the Execs, gained their respect, and built up 
some internal creditability. You have the visibility and influence across the 
different departments. I need you to help me work with and influence them. 
If they are not bought into the direction we are going, the whole implementa-
tion could quickly fall apart.” 
 “Sounds a little challenging.” 
 “But you want the company to succeed? Survive?” 
 Randal thinks for a moment. “They’re good people, Tim. We will make it hap-
pen,” Randal says with a smile… “We will definitely make it happen.”  
 Future Reality Tree (FRT)  
 Tim ponders for a minute. To successfully implement Critical Chain we need 
to move the organization, on the other side we need to get early results to 
have momentum to move forward. Tim had always tried to move the whole 
organization first. In some cases, maybe it works better to work in a phased in 
approach with smaller steps. 
 “So any updates to your diagram?” 
 Tim looks up and sees Randal, “Just one for the FRT.” Tim then takes out his 
Future Reality Tree and draws a box.

Chapter 5 | Championing Ideas
70
 
Key Benefits
Key Injections
Summary FRT
18 We increase our 
sales
17 We are able to
meet key customer
deadlines and 
market windows
20 We meet and exceed
expected revenues
21 The company is more
financially solid
14 Our products are
more competitive
8 We are better able to
meet or beat our
schedules
7 Our schedules can
better handle delays
6 We successfully implement
Critical Chain (CC) single 
project into our company’s
environment
1 We set up project and feeding
buffers, reduce bad multi-tasking, set
clear goals, define the project in terms 
of throughput, and build schedules 
back to front [ch2,4]
15 Future project
resources are
available
12 Department
resources are better
balanced and happier
2 We identify a CC expert,
identify CC tool, conduct an
org analysis, determine a 
compelling need & set up
the correct metrics [ch3]
3 We identify an
internal CC champion
[ch5]
 
 “So Randal, in order to 6) successfully implement Critical Chain we have to 1) 
implement the Critical Chain concepts, 2) be aware of the factors for success-
ful implementations, and 3) identify an internal champion.”   
 “Cool, since I am our company’s internal TOC champion, I get my own box,” 
says Randal. 
 “Sigh, I never quite thought of it that way, but yes, congratulations, you have 
your own box.”  

Get it Done On Time!
71
 Current Reality Tree (CRT)  
 Core Conflict 
 Tim thinks for a few more minutes. “So Randal, at the base of the CRT is a 
core conflict. A central struggle that the organization is faced with. In the 
LivingTV Interactive example, their main conflict was between trying to go 
nationwide versus increasing the number of programs. So for our issues what 
is the core conflict driving the company? What are some of the conflicts we 
are seeing around the issues we are facing?” 
 “Well Tim, there is certainly ongoing tension between marketing and engi-
neering. We could start there.” 
 “Sure, can you explain it a bit more?” 
 “When I talk with Micky and Ashley about marketing, the focus is certainly on 
how to do more, go faster, and not lose quality. Micky wanted Exec reviews 
to ensure quality products were going out; he wanted to add urgent cus-
tomer requests to the development schedules to show the customers that 
we can be responsive and attentive to the customer’s needs; and he wanted 
to expand and add new products.” 
 “Okay, that makes sense. So Randal, what is holding marketing back?” 
 Randal thinks for a moment, “Engineering I guess. They have only so many 
people and they are only able to get so much done, in fact it seems less and 
less of late.” 
 “What is holding up engineering?” Tim thinks out loud for a moment. “The 
company is contractually obligated to deliver certain features and if marketing 
wanted future contracts then they needed to deliver a quality and innovative 
product on time. At the same time, the company needs to grow and take on 
new customers. Ahh…that is it!” 
 “What?” asks Randal. 
 “That is where the tension and conflict came from. With the company’s cur-
rent project-management process, we cannot meet current commitments  and 
add new ones at the same time. Something has to give.” 
 “I’m not completely following you, Tim.” 
 “Here, it’s like the LivingTV Interactive example,” Tim then sketches out a few 
boxes, crosses them out, and then draws a few more. After a few minutes, he 
settles on one. “Here, I merged a few sample clouds together and created this. 
It might not be perfect, but it is good for now.”

Chapter 5 | Championing Ideas
72
 
 
 “So this is another conflict diagram thingy.” 
 “More than that—it is  your conflict cloud thingy.” Not wanting to swamp 
Randal with too much theory, Tim asks, “Are you okay with this? The next few 
steps are a bit involved.” 
 “Sure Tim. Pictures help and you certainly seem excited about it. And I’m now 
the champion so I might as well try and be familiar with what I can. Feel free 
to continue.” 
 “So this  cloud captures  the struggle of your company. Everyone wants A) 
the company to be successful. On one side in order for A) the company to 
be successful, it must B) meet its existing commitments. In order to B) meet 
existing commitments, it must D) focus on the original requests. For exam-
ple, engineering must work on the contracted features, deadlines, and quality 
expectations.” 
 “Makes sense. The company needs to meet our current obligations.” 
 “Correct Randal. At the same time in order for A) the company to be suc-
cessful, it must C) grow and adapt. In order to C) grow and adapt, it must D’) 
focus on new requests. For example, it must respond to urgent customer 
requests, make adjustments based on Exec reviews, and accept new projects.” 
 “Ahh…this is the company and marketing needs to grow and expand the company.” 
 “Yes, but it is struggling to do both.” 
 “I kinda see it Tim. I mean every company needs to work on current needs  and 
future needs. And I see that we are struggling a bit with that. But why would 
this be so compelling for us?” 
 “Hmm, let me redraw it as part of the bottom of the CRT. Like I said, if it 
is the true core conflict, you should see that it drives all the key issues you 
are facing.”  

Get it Done On Time!
73
 Bottom of the CRT 
 Tim takes a few minutes and starts sketching and adding boxes to the CRT. 
He adds the boxes from the conflict and bolds their lines so they stand out. 
Then he sketches out some additional boxes at the base and bottom of the 
 CRT diagram  .
 
15 we are likely to slip
schedules more and 
more
resources are stretched
more and more
18 Resources needed
for future projects
are unavailable and
committed to
existing projects
8 We feel pressure to
focus on new requests
7b Our competition is
already catching up to our
current/original requests
7 We must grow and 
adapt
5 We feel pressure to focus
on our original requests
4 We only have enough
resources to meet
existing commitments
3 We must meet
existing commitments
1 We want our projects
and company to be
successful
2 We are contractually
obligated to deliver features,
deadlines, and quality
6 Adding new projects (grow) and
responding to Exec and customer
requests (adapt) helps us maintain
and gain new contracts and
customers
14 Too many resources burn out
and leave
Summary Current Reality Tree
Bottom
20
20
13 Many departments
 

Chapter 5 | Championing Ideas
74
 “Okay Tim, you added a whole bunch of boxes. Care to elaborate?”   
 “So I added the core conflict to the bottom of our CRT diagram. The bold 
boxes relate to the cloud we just talked about. The other boxes add more 
clarity. So if we 1) want to be successful and 2) we are obligated to meet our 
contractually agreements with customers (deliver specific features, on-time 
and of high quality) then the company must 3) focus on meeting our existing 
commitments. If we must 3) meet existing commitments and 4) we only have 
enough resources to meet our existing commitments, then 5) we must focus 
our efforts on meeting our original requests.” 
 “Makes sense. This is the area Gary and engineering struggles with—meeting 
existing commitments. And he always talks about wanting more resources. So 
yeah, I can see that he has some struggles there. So what next?” 
 “At the same time if we 1) want to  be successful and 6) adding new projects 
(grow), responding to Exec and customer requests (adapt) helps us maintain 
and gain new contracts and customers, then 7) we must grow and adapt. If we 
7) must grow and adapt, then 8) we must focus on new requests. But why? 
Sure Micky and marketing wants to grow the company, but are they pushing 
impossibly hard?” 
 “I can answer that one, Tim. Part of it is that Micky wants to make his mark, 
but even more so Micky feels that the company has fallen farther and far-
ther behind and that the competition will overtake us. Once that happens, 
the competition will start pulling away critical and long-term contracts that 
have sustained our company. He feels we have to keep growing to ensure our 
survival.” 
 “Ahh, that makes a lot more sense. So in order to 7) grow, we must 8) focus 
on new requests because 7b) the competition is catching up and putting the 
entire company at risk. This helps to explain why Micky is so driven.” 
 “Yep.” 
 “Randal, it also explains that Gary and the company must be under intense 
and impossible pressure. On the one side, everyone is trying to 5) meet cur-
rent expectations at the same time 8) there is all this pressure to focus on 
new requests and 4) we only have enough resources for the original requests. 
So we either focus on one or the other or oscillate between the two and do 
neither particularly well.” 
 “And that is why engineering is not only struggling with the original con-
tracts, but they are falling more and more behind. They are getting pulled into 
growth work as well.” 

Get it Done On Time!
75
 “But the current product development system can’t support both areas. So 
8), 4), and 5) all lead to 13) many departments resources are stretched more 
and more and the problems get worse and worse.” 
 “I think you need to rename your CRT the doom cloud. It doesn’t paint a very 
pretty picture.” 
 “True and if I keep talking theory we’re going to be in trouble,” Tim says, thinking 
back to the LivingTV Interactive layoffs all over again. Too little, too late. 
“Randal, we need to get moving.”  

© Eric Bergland 2016 
E. Bergland, Get it Done On Time!, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-1860-0_6
 C H A P T E R 
  High-Level 
Implementation 
Steps 
 Tim sits patiently waiting  for  Randal. Sighing, he looks out the window. The 
grey skies cast long shadows in the company parking lot. The raindrops slowly 
gather into puddles. Randal enters the company café, shaking out his umbrella 
and taking off his rain coat. Gary follows Randal in shortly thereafter. Tim 
checks his watch—only two minutes late, which is not too bad for Randal. 
 “So Tim,” Gary says, sighing very heavily and looking at Tim, “Micky is putting 
even more pressure on us. Before you started, we promised to make changes 
to improve the Griffin project, but it is looking like the results are not going 
to be very good and we are running into the same issues our past projects 
have run into—despite all the changes we tried to make. We need to put this 
Critical Chain approach into place quickly.” 
 “I was discussing the same thing with Tim yesterday!,” states Randal. “We 
determined that we need to pick one or two top projects, focus our efforts 
there, and then use the early results to convince management.” 
6

Chapter 6 | High-Level Implementation Steps
78
 “Umm,” Tim says, stepping in. “Just a quick note on that. Ideally we try and 
move the whole organization for a Critical Chain implementation. If time is an 
issue then we can look at staggering the implementation and pick one or two 
high-impact projects to focus on. They need to have a bottom line impact as 
well and cannot be side projects since the effort needed and results created 
would not be taken seriously.” 
 “Does it have to be a new project, Tim?” inquires Gary. “We have Phoenix 
that has been in development for the last two months. The next new project 
starting up will be in three months.” 
 “Given the time constraints, I think we’re going to have to intercept Phoenix,” 
Tim suggests. 
 “Timeline-wise I agree it makes sense, but Tim, I can’t afford to have the whole 
team stop work and pull them into a network build.” 
 “I see your point, Gary. Do you know the Phoenix schedule pretty well?” 
 “Between myself and Jeremy the Phoenix project manager, we know it inside 
and out,” says Gary. 
 “Then the three of us could work on the schedule offline, pull some of the key 
info from the teams, and then when it looks okay, review it with them. It would 
be better if they were involved in creating it and would have more ownership, 
but this is the next best alternative I could think of.” 
 “That is workable, Tim. We need results and the Griffin post mortem is in a 
few days. I don’t want to be standing there saying that we are going to use the 
exact same approach for Phoenix when Griffin did not go so well.” 
 “Tim, just a quick note,” interjects Randal. “If we focus all of the resources 
and attention on Phoenix, won’t it just look like we are sacrificing the other 
 projects  to make this one look good?” 
 “Hmm, I see your concern, Randal. We will be working with the existing 
resources. The only part we are changing is the methodology. But you are 
correct that we will have to manage the perception as well as having the 
managers agree on the priority of the different projects. We will also need to 
bring the key stakeholders up to speed. Gary, other than the project team and 
yourself, who else is involved in how the projects are set up and run?” 
 “Mainly it is my area of expertise. But Grant, the Chief Operating Officer, and 
Micky still need to sign off on it. I already have given them a heads up that 
we’re looking into something new, but it would be good if you could provide 
a more detailed overview.” 
 “Sure, I can work with Randal and set up some meetings with them next 
week. Are you up for it, champ?” 

Get it Done On Time!
79
 Randal looks over at Tim, “So you have given me about a day to get settled into 
this internal champion role you have created?” 
 “Pretty much. We can review the high-level concepts with the Execs [Chapter   2  ] 
and review the detailed concepts with the Phoenix project team [Chapter   4  ]. 
I have also been working on the TOC organizational analysis so I can share 
what I have so far with you as well. Don’t worry…I can lead the discussions, 
but you should be there for some of them just to see how I go through the 
process.” 
 “Fair enough, Tim,” Randal says contently. 
 “So Gary and Randal, just one last thought. To really make a culture change in 
an organization, we need three things:
• 
 Top management buy-in and agreement to lead the charge.  
• 
 Determine key measurement changes that will incentiv-
ize the desired behaviors of the new culture.  
• 
 Education for all involved. The education includes the 
new measurements. (Bibliography 1)  
 Gary, you are already leading the development efforts. Randal and I can follow 
up with Grant and Micky. So that should help us cover the first point. I will 
cover metrics in just a few minutes when we talk about how to manage the 
schedule. And lastly the education…” 
 “Tim and I will handle the Exec reviews and team training,” Randal injects. 
“What?” looking at Tim, “you said you wanted me to work more closely with 
you. So I can’t finish your sentences?” 
 Tim just rolls his eyes. “Come on Gary. We have a schedule network build to 
start on for Phoenix.” 
 Phoenix  Network Build  
 Gary takes Tim over to meet the Phoenix project manager’s cube. “Tim, 
I would like you to meet Jeremy. He has been with us for about two years now 
and has a very good handle on the Phoenix project.” 
 Tim looks over at Jeremy. He is a young 30-something engineer with dark hair 
and a few grey hairs starting to creep in. “It is nice to meet you, Jeremy. Has 
Gary talked with you about Critical Chain and what we need to do?” 
 “Not so much,” replies Jeremy while looking over at Gary a bit cautiously. 
 “Well, it looks like we will need to give you a crash course. Is there a conference 
room we could use for a while?” 
 “Sure.” 

Chapter 6 | High-Level Implementation Steps
80
 From there, Tim and Gary bring Jeremy up to speed on the company’s 
situation, the issues with Griffin, how they need to do something different, 
and why they want to target his project to show results. Tim also provides a 
summary of the key Critical Chain concepts [Chapters   2 and   4 ].” 
 Jeremy looks over at Gary, “So Gary, you are the VP of engineering and you 
are signing off on this?” 
 “Yes.” 
 “And you are okay that we are adding more risk and potential delays by chang-
ing our process during the execution?” Jeremy cautiously asks Gary. 
 “If we stick with what we did for Griffin, we’re likely to get the same results.” 
 “Agreed. I just wanted to be sure I have your signoff. Okay, a new process it is. 
Sounds pretty cool. So Tim, where do we start?” 
 “Jeremy, we need to start with a clean slate, but we can quickly pull in items 
from the prior schedule. As I noted in the review, we need to clarify our 
project goal and make sure it is clear, measureable, and has a timeframe.” 
 “Sure Tim, already done.” 
 “Next we need to drive the project to throughput, where we actually generate 
revenue.” 
 “That is an interesting question, Tim. Typically we count the product as done 
when we finish QA and make the software available to the customer to down-
load,” explains Jeremy. 
 “Tim,” Gary interjects, “Phoenix is custom software. Per the contract we set 
up, we actually do not receive payment at that time. The customer has to 
actually download the software, integrate it into their environment, and 
confirm it is functional per the features and specs promised in the contract. 
Only then do we get paid.” 
 “Okay, Gary, then that is where the project ends. We need to include the 
customer integration and signoff that is feature complete per the contract as 
part of our schedule.” 
 Jeremy  loo  ks over to Gary. “You okay with this? It will really stretch out the 
timeline of the project.” 
 “But hopefully Jeremy it can shorten the time it takes us to complete the 
project and get paid,” responds Gary. 
 “Ahh, that would be good.” 
 Tim then looks over to Jeremy, “How often do you do software drops to the 
customer?” 

Get it Done On Time!
81
 “We have ongoing discussions and clarifications with the customer, but 
typically they do not get the actual software until we are done. So we spec 
out the product, develop it, test and fix issues, and deliver. Some products are 
just six to eight months.” 
 “Jeremy, have you tried sharing early versions of the software with the 
customers earlier?” 
 “It has been problematic, Tim. It triggers a ton of changes. That is why we 
spend so much time upfront on the specs. That way when the development 
and testing is done, we can safely say the development is complete.” 
 “Have there been customer issues when the product has been delivered?,” 
asks Tim. 
 Jeremy looks over to Gary. “Ongoing issues, Tim. There are always items that 
come up even though the provided solutions line up to the spec.” 
 “And does this delay payments, Gary?” 
 “Pretty much. Sometimes we’re rushed so it is not an ideal implementation; 
sometimes the customer gets what they asked for and spec’ed, but they really 
intended something else. If they are important enough and complain enough 
Micky will have us rework some areas just to pacify the customer and so we 
can get paid.” 
 “Jeremy if we are building the project out to throughput and where we get 
actually paid, we might want to consider some early customer drops and 
reviews to customers. They will likely have some issues and changes, but you 
can negotiate them during development as opposed to the customer stalling 
payments.” 
 “I can see where you are going with this, Tim. It is not easy, but in theory it 
could reduce some of the issues we have once the customer gets the software. 
So we could certainly try it.” 
 “I will also be sure to include the contracts team in the discussions. If the 
customer tries to change something mid-project, we will need to negotiate 
it,” Gary adds. 
 From there Tim, Jeremy, and Gary look at the revised goal and worked back-
ward using the phrasing  in order to.. we must… They add in dependencies, build 
out the schedule, and leverage the items that were created in the original 
schedule, just as Tim had shown Gary before [Chapter   4 ]. For each task, Gary 
and Jeremy assign a resource and provide the unbuffered focus time as well as 
the 90% confidence low-risk duration.   
 “I think it looks like a pretty good network for a first pass,” states Gary. 
 “It’s huge,” Jeremy remarks. “Micky would never go for this.” 

Chapter 6 | High-Level Implementation Steps
82
 “It’s okay Jeremy,” Tim replies. “It’s the first pass. Now we need to scrub the 
schedule. Since we already did a backward pass, let’s do a forward pass  if I have 
everything at first task then is there anything else I need before I can work on the 
second task ?” 
 Tim, Jeremy, and Gary talk at look at the schedule’s PERT or network view to 
see and check the tasks and dependencies and proceed to walk through the 
schedule from beginning to end. 
 “Tim, why is the Critical Chain tool staggering this set of tasks? There is no 
dependency?” 
 “Hmm, good question, Jeremy. Critical Chain resolves resource contentions. It 
looks like Jim is doing this entire set of tasks. Since he cannot do them all at 
once, the Critical Chain tool staggered them.” 
 “That isn’t right though. Jim is the lead for that area and he has plenty of 
people on his team to do the work.” 
 “So is Jim is not the resource doing the work?” 
 “No Tim, not at all. Jim is responsible for assigning resources to work on that 
area. That is why we assigned his name to those tasks.” 
 “For Critical Chain, that is not going to work. We need the actual resources 
or possibly a resource pool assigned, not the manager. Since these tasks are 
resource-driven, the more resources we can have work in parallel, the more 
we can compress the overall schedule.” 
 “Fair enough Tim, it’s an easy fix.” And with that Jeremy updates the schedule 
accordingly. 
 Tim is wary of additional managers in the schedule and so he scans for more 
tasks staggered by resource available versus actual dependencies. He zeros in 
on another area. “So, why are so many of these tasks with Amy staggered due 
to resource contention? Is she a resource manager also?” 
 “No Tim,” Jeremy indicates, “She is one of our top user interface designers. 
When we need something critical done really well she is the go-to person and 
people often ask for her to work on certain areas specifically.” 
 “That is fine up to a point. But when you look at this part of the schedule, 
you can see her availability is stretching out the timeline. Is she the only user 
interface designer, Jeremy?” 
 “No, not at all. Jenny has ramped up since Griffin and has gotten pretty good.” 
 “So could we have Jenny cover some of these tasks where Amy is resource 
constrained? It would help us compress our schedule that much more.”   
 Jeremy thinks for a moment, “Sure Tim, it’s workable.” 

Get it Done On Time!
83
 The team then goes back to the schedule once more. 
 “Jeremy, why is this sequence of tasks significantly longer than this parallel 
sequence? From my experience, they should both take about the same time,” 
inquires Gary. 
 “I added some additional time into the focused estimates for the first sequence. 
I figured that it is a newer task for the team and a bit riskier.” 
 “You need to be careful Jeremy,” states Tim. “We don’t want to add padding 
and safety time back into the focused durations. If you are concerned about 
risk, add time to the low-risk duration. In that way you will add more time to 
the feeding or project buffer to account for the risk and at the same time you 
will not unnecessarily stretch out the schedule.” 
 “Okay Tim. I recall you mentioning that point; just trying to get the hang of 
actually implementing it.” 
 “No problem. It takes some practice.” 
 From there they continue to go through the schedule and Tim pushes them 
to challenge several other dependencies and look for additional ways to make 
more items in the schedule parallel. After a while and a few challenging discus-
sions, they have significantly compressed the schedule. 
 “So Tim, it looks like we are almost there. Any other network building tricks 
you might have?” 
 “Sure Jeremy, the last item I have is BORA (Bibliography 2).” 
 “BORA?” 
 “ B reak a link,  O verlap tasks,  R educe scope or duration, or  A dd a resource. In 
short, BORA. So we can review the Critical Chain and see if these can help 
us. Would breaking a dependency allow us to do more work in parallel? Does 
one task have to completely finish before the successive task starts? If not, we 
could overlap them. In looking at the tasks, can we reduce scope or duration? 
And lastly, are there tasks that if we added more resources to them, could 
they finish faster?” 
 “It’s an interesting question, Tim. We can do yet one more pass just in case 
your BORA can help us get to where we need to be.” 
 They begin working and then after about 20 minutes Jeremy inquires, “So Tim, 
the schedule is looking better, but one more question.” 
 “Sure, Jeremy.” 
 “You say the project buffer is at the end of the project and we build the project 
all the way out until we get paid. At the same time per contract we have a 
solid delivery date to provide the final software drop. We can’t miss this date, 
but it is not protected by the project buffer.” 

Chapter 6 | High-Level Implementation Steps
84
 “Very good question. For those cases, we can use something called a  buffered 
end point. So for the main schedule all the tasks have to tie together and to 
a project end task. For the delivery we can set up a separate task for this 
deliverable without any successive tasks. The Critical Chain tool will auto-
matically create a separate buffer just for this milestone.”   
 From there, Tim and Jeremy meet with the project team. Tim provides a high-
level overview of Critical Chain [Chapter   2 ]. Then he and Jeremy walk through 
the schedule and the estimates with them and make minor adjustments as 
needed. Overall the teams were good with the schedules, liked the project 
buffers, but were wary of the unbuffered focus times and being held to them.  
 Phoenix Execution 
 “So once the schedule has been built, we have three areas we focus on for 
 execution  : buffer management, recovery, and behaviors. For each end point 
in the schedule, there is a project buffer and for each project buffer we can 
check its fever chart.” Tim reaches into his computer bag and pulls out the 
following diagram. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
Red
Green
Yellow
 “Here is a fever chart for a simple and short sample project. So there are 
three main colors: green, yellow, and red. After each schedule update, typically 
weekly, we need to review the fever charts. The fever charts tell us how far 
into the project buffer we are as well as how quickly we are using it.” 
 “Tim, can you explain the red, yellow, green zones a bit more?” inquires Jeremy. 
“Your Critical Chain overview with me did not cover this.” 
 “Sure, each color relates to the amount of project buffer left in relation to 
how far we are into the project (or Critical Chain completed). So as you can 
see with updates and points 1-3 we have consumed some of the project buffer, 

Get it Done On Time!
85
but in relation to our progress we are in the green and doing okay. Then with 
point 4 you can see we hit a major challenge, used a good amount of time in 
the buffer, and did not make much progress on the Critical Chain.” 
 “So what did you do in this case?” inquires Gary. 
 “Well, being in the red, we knew the overall project deadline was at risk yet 
we still had a fair amount of time left in the project. So we went back and 
looked at BORA to find ways we could  recover . In this particular case we were 
lucky and could just add an additional resource to help out with a few key 
tasks. That allowed us to recover and get back on track. So as you can see 
with update 5 we were back in the green.” 
 “But Tim, point 6 is in the yellow.” 
 “Correct, with the schedule being short and the project buffer so small you 
will see the fever chart go up and down more quickly. With a larger project 
and larger buffer, we should see it go up and down more gradually pending any 
major issues. In the case of point 6, we are in yellow. So we are not late, but 
we are at risk of being late. So we have reviewed the remaining tasks to see 
what steps we can take to move us back to yellow or to green pending any 
additional issues.” 
 “So Tim, if I understand you correctly, the project buffer serves as a bank of 
time. Using the fever chart, we can see if we have enough time reserved to 
protect our overall deadline based on where we are in the project.” 
 “Correct, Jeremy.” 
 “So we covered the mechanics of managing the project buffer. The next part 
we need to cover is the behaviors we need during execution. For example, 
we are managing the resources to the unbuffered focus times and aggregating 
the safety time into the project buffer. So we expect the resource to be late 
on some tasks.”   
 “But Tim, if we let the resources go too late, it could put the schedule at risk.” 
 “Jeremy, we want to be sure we are managing the project against the overall 
deadline. If we beat up resource for minor delays, especially when they are 
working to unbuffered dates, they will start putting time back into the tasks 
and that will in turn stretch the schedule out more and more.” 
 “Tim, this is a bit different than what I’m used to.” 
 “No problem Jeremy, we can set up some simulations and practice exercises 
and so you can get a better feel and get more comfortable with it. To help us 
keep moving forward, we want to be sure to encourage  roadrunner and  relay 
race behaviors.” 
 “Tim, can you elaborate a bit more?” 

Chapter 6 | High-Level Implementation Steps
86
 “Sure Jeremy, like in the concepts review [Chapter   4 ], we want resources to 
start working on a task as soon as they get it, so that’s roadrunner. We also 
want to make sure resources hand off completed work to the next resource 
as quickly and smoothly as possible, so that’s the relay race.” 
 “Okay, makes sense Tim. Maintain forward momentum; try to minimize task 
delays.” 
 “Correct, and in addition we want to avoid and minimize bad multi-tasking and 
student syndrome.” 
 “Clarity please; you’re introducing a whole new vocabulary,” Jeremy says with 
a smile. 
 “Student syndrome is short for people being deadline driven and waiting until 
the last minute to work on something. As noted we want them to start as 
soon as possible—roadrunner. Bad multi-tasking is where people work on too 
many things at once and in turn it causes all of the work to stretch out. I can 
walk you through more examples if you want [Chapter   4 ].” 
 “I think I’m good for now. I think doing the practice exercises and getting 
some hands-on experience with this will be more critical. I’m seeing lots of 
little pieces. Is this captured anywhere?” inquires Jeremy. 
 “The team training and exercises will cover the same items. I am also working on 
a document that will capture the prior issues and the new direction we are going 
(CRT/FRT). I will have it done shortly and can review it with you if you want.” 
 “That would be good, Tim. So are we done?” 
 “One last item.”   
 Phoenix Post-Mortem Plan 
 “Jeremy and Gary, the last item I just wanted to  note was POOGI, which 
stands for the Process Of OnGoing Improvement. So we have set up Critical 
Chain to help address some of the organization’s key issues. Once we imple-
ment it, the issues the organization will face will change. We just need to be 
aware of that and note that we need to work to improve our process to be 
more effective and efficient.” 
 “Seems very Agile-like?” states Jeremy. 
 “True, several different methodologies say similar things. Mainly don’t get 
complacent. Don’t rest on your laurels.” 
 “We do regular post-mortems at the end of our projects,” Jeremy indicates. 
“I have been thinking that it would be good to do a review after each major 
milestone. Given that this is a new process for the team, a more frequent 
review would be valuable.” 

Get it Done On Time!
87
 “Good idea, Jeremy. I think you are onto something. So Gary, I can work with 
you, Jeremy, and the team on the Critical Chain training and exercises. I’ll also 
work with Randal to schedule some meetings with the Execs. For me and you 
is there any other area you need my help on?” 
 “We have the Griffin post-mortem coming up. I think it would be good for you 
to listen in, Tim, and see some of the issues we have run into the past and then 
see what adjustments you might want to make so we can be more successful 
with Critical Chain.” 
 “Sounds good, Gary. I will be there.”  
 Micky’s  Urgent Requests 
 Tim hesitates for a minute, “So Gary and Jeremy, before we leave I just wanted 
to touch base on something I have been hearing about.” 
 “Yes Tim?” Gary inquires. 
 “Can you tell me a bit more about these urgent customer requests and late 
Exec reviews?” 
 “It’s a new thing Micky started once he became the interim CEO,” states Gary. 
“He has been pushing to get more contracts and more out of the contracts 
we have. As part of this, he has been trying to build out the products and 
make engineering more responsible. Is that your sense Jeremy?” 
 “Some, Gary.” Jeremy says, looking a bit frustrated. “His goals make sense. 
But it has also lead to Micky trying to sneak extra work and urgent customer 
requests [crt 11] into our projects without changing the deadlines. We typically 
call this  scope creep. We keep trying to push back, but he has taken it more 
as defiance than understanding and it is making meeting our schedules more 
challenging.” 
 “Don’t you use a change control process?” inquires Tim. “Basically once 
execution starts, any new requests have to be reviewed and assessed for 
schedule impact. If it’s a large enough change, then new resources have to be 
added, features traded off, timelines changed, and contracts adjusted and/or it 
is simply added to the next release.” 
 “We have a process, Tim.” Gary replies somewhat frustrated. “Just Micky 
chooses to ignore it from time to time.” 
 “So Gary, these requests complicate and delay the project?” 
 “Correct Tim. Micky doesn’t want to hear it, but yes it does impact the 
schedules.” 
 “What about the late Exec reviews?” [crt 10] 

Chapter 6 | High-Level Implementation Steps
88
 Gary sighs. “Yeah, that is another thing Micky recently added. He wants to 
make sure we’re releasing a quality product. He does not believe in PowerPoint 
presentations since the actual software could look and work much differently. 
So he  wan  ts to see the actual product.” 
 “He also does not want to see buggy alpha code or module development,” 
Jeremy adds. “He wants to see it as complete as possible. Sometime between 
beta and gold release he wants a demonstration. So while we are in the final 
stretch of development, I have to have engineers work on presentations. 
Worse than that, Micky regularly has changes he wants made in these meetings. 
So we have to scramble to try and include his adjustments in addition to all of 
the other final software coding that needs to be done.” 
 “Hmm, it sounds a bit challenging to me,” states Tim, concerned. 
 “It is, Tim. Our schedules were already tight [crt 16] before all of this. Now 
we have to add customer requests and late Exec requests to other delays 
and issues and we’re prone to have problems hitting our deadlines with the 
features we’re contractually required to deliver,” Jeremy adds. 
 “And talking to Micky about this?” inquires Tim. 
 “Again, he doesn’t want to hear what he feels are engineering excuses,” states 
Gary. “He wants us to be nimble and more responsive.” 
 Tim thinks for a minute. “Ideally, we could get Micky to better understand and 
possibly back off a bit, but that does not seem easy. It would be better if we 
could be more disciplined with our change control policies [frt 9].” 
 “It would be a miracle if you could get better change control. A much needed 
miracle,” states Gary. 
 Thinking a bit more, “If I can’t get Micky to reduce the Exec changes what if 
we just reserved some of the development capacity instead. Gary, you know 
urgent requests are going to come in and you know Micky will make changes. 
So just plan it in.” 
 “It’s a bit tricky, Tim. We don’t know what the changes will be. But I see 
where you are going with it. It’s too late for our Griffin project, but maybe in 
the Phoenix project it’s something we could look at.” Gary feels a bit more 
optimistic. “It doesn’t solve the problem, but it could at least help us better 
manage it. Jeremy, could you look at the schedule and possibly work this in?” 
 “Sure Gary, I’ll work on it right away. I’ll add it in as management changes so it 
does not look like we’re just trying to pad the schedule” 
 “I’ll chat with Randal and see how we want to go about working with Micky. 
Instead of directly confronting him about the problems with the  urge nt 
requests and late Exec reviews, possibly we could work around it to better 
support his and the company’s needs.” It is not ideal, but just maybe it could 
work, thinks Tim.  

Get it Done On Time!
89
 CRT 
 As Gary and Jeremy leave, Tim drops Randal a quick IM. “Working on the CRT 
and FRT; are you still interested?” 
 “Sure. Be over in a minute” Randal replies. 
 Tim then takes out his CRT diagram and sketches in a few more boxes. 
 
15 we are likely to slip
schedules more and 
more
resources are stretched
more and more
18 Resources needed
for future projects
are unavailable and
committed to
existing projects
8 We feel pressure to
focus on new requests
7b Our competition is
already catching up to our
current/original requests
7 We must grow and 
adapt
5 We feel pressure to focus
on our original requests
4 We only have enough
resources to meet
existing commitments
3 We must meet
existing commitments
1 We want our projects
and company to be
successful
2 We are contractually
obligated to deliver features,
deadlines, and quality
6 Adding new projects (grow) and
responding to Exec and customer
requests (adapt) helps us maintain
and gain new contracts and
customers
14 Too many resources burn out
and leave
17 Project delays often happen
Summary Current Reality Tree
Bottom
20
20
13 Many departments
16 Product development
schedules are tight and do not
handle delays well.
12 Late changes in our product development
process regularly cause major rework
11 Sometimes we feel
the need to take on
urgent customer
requests during the 
project
10 We regularly hold
Exec reviews late in our
product development
process
9 Exec reviews late
in the development
process help us
manage overall
product quality
 

Chapter 6 | High-Level Implementation Steps
90
 “So sketching in more boxes, I see. Your shrub has started to grow into a 
tree,” Randal says as he  enters  the room. 
 “Yes it has. Some of it relates to marketing. So I thought you would be 
interested.” 
 “Sounds good.” 
 “So I was working with Gary and Jeremy. The first two boxes are simple, as we 
know 16) product development schedules are already tight and 17) project 
delays can often happen. This by itself can lead to 15) schedules slipping.” 
 “Makes sense, but it’s good to highlight the issue since it’s a significant concern 
for us.” 
 “In addition to this, I added a few items from the “grow the company” side. 
First 9) and10) we regularly hold Exec meetings late in the development 
process and 11) sometimes we get urgent requests. These lead to 12) late 
changes in our development process that cause additional rework that leads 
to 13) stretching out our departments.” 
 “Interesting, Tim. I know Micky wants those changes to grow the company and 
wants to be sure we are not letting quality slip. But the way you have it drawn 
here it also highlights the added pressure engineering is under.”   
 “Exactly. There are good reasons for the changes, but we can also see the 
tension and looking at the rest of the CRT we can see the consequences 
coming out of it. I just need to get some additional Exec feedback and I should 
have a pretty complete picture of our overall challenges. Then with the FRT 
I will be able to show a solid way to move forward.” 
 “Part of your master plan, Tim?” 
 “Pretty much. Critical Chain by itself can help cover some items, but, yes, with 
the overall plan I can see what else is needed and why.”  
 FRT 
 Tim then takes out the FRT diagram he has been working on and adds a few 
more boxes. 

Get it Done On Time!
91
 
Key Benefits
Key Injections
Summary FRT
18 We increase our 
sales
17 We are able to
meet key customer
deadlines and 
market windows
20 We meet and exceed
expected revenues
21 The company is more
financially solid
14 Our products are
more competitive
8 We are better able to
meet or beat our
schedules
7 Our schedules can
better handle delays
6 We successfully implement
Critical Chain (CC) single 
project into our company’s
environment
1 We set up project and feeding
buffers, reduce bad multi-tasking, set
clear goals, define the project in terms 
of throughput, and build schedules 
back to front [ch2,4]
15 Future project
resources are
available
12 Department
resources are better
balanced and happier
2 We identify a CC expert,
identify CC tool, conduct an
org analysis, determine a 
compelling need & set up
the correct metrics [ch3]
3 We identify an
internal CC champion
[ch5]
4 We target a high impact project, build out the schedule, and
manage the project based on buffers and CC behaviors [ch6]
10 We minimize and better
manage the impact of late
schedule changes
9 We are more discliplined in our
change control policies and
better manage exec changes
[ch6,10]
 
 “So Randal, just a few items here. The first is the meeting I just had with 
Jeremy and Gary where 4)   we focus on a high-impact project, build out the 
schedule, and  manage (not just set up) the project based on buffers and CC 
behaviors.” 
 “Sounds better, Tim. We have talked a good amount about concepts. If we want 
results, we need to start implementing. So good to hear that this is moving along.” 

Chapter 6 | High-Level Implementation Steps
92
 “The other two items are 9) and 10) we need to be more disciplined in our 
change control and better manage Exec changes if we 8) want to keep our 
schedules.” 
 “I am sure that was a fun discussion with Gary and Jeremy. Micky and marketing 
will likely push back.” 
 “True. But we have to do something and just putting in Critical Chain without 
addressing this won’t solve our problems.”   
 “Well Tim, I can talk with Gary and possibly Grant. The good part is that 
I have confidence that with your help, we’ll figure something out,” Randal says 
with a smile.  

© Eric Bergland 2016 
E. Bergland, Get it Done On Time!, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-1860-0_7
 C H A P T E R 
  Using Ambitious 
Targets to 
Handle Past 
Issues 
 Tim sits quietly as Micky the interim CEO spends three hours talking over the 
Griffin project post-mortem and ripping into the poor results and anyone he 
felt was responsible. Rushed release, faulty code [crt 20], frustrated and lost 
customers [crt 27], and below expectation revenues [crt 26] were his key 
criticisms. The Griffin project manager looked sheet white, ready for a firing 
squad and his impending demotion. 
 Micky zeroed in on Gary, the engineering manager. “You need to fix this! We 
cannot afford these types of mistakes and hope to survive. I want a report 
next week on how you are going to improve this. Change something, fire 
someone, or get something out of that new consultant you hired. We cannot 
do this again!” Micky storms out of the room. Everyone sits quietly. 
7

Chapter 7 | Using Ambitious Targets to Handle Past Issues
94
 Gary looks nervously over at Tim. “Tim, I am going to finish talking with the 
software engineers. Can you talk with QA and see how we let so many issues 
go out to our customers?” 
 “Sure Gary,” replies Tim. 
 Tim walks over to the QA offices, anxious to let the intensity of the prior 
meeting cool off. Once there, he found the QA leads Anthony and Nir. Anthony 
is a rather burly guy. Nir is a bit lean, bald, and definitely looks tired and worn out. 
 “Hi Anthony and Nir. I am working with Gary to help improve his project 
management process,” states Tim. 
 “We need it. I heard Micky crashed the engineering review meeting guns blazing,” 
Nir replies. “I figure the next place people he is looking to blame is QA.” 
 “So can you give me a little background on your QA process?” Tim asks, not 
trying to get too caught up in Nir’s soap box. 
 “Sure. Whatever. I just finished the Griffin project, the one that just exploded. 
We worked like mad to finish that with the time they gave us. Anthony over 
here is in the process of developing the base test plan for the Phoenix project.” 
 “And how are these test plans put together?” inquires Tim. 
 “We’ve reviewed the initial feature spec, broken out the key areas, and then 
detailed the various functional tests and test cases to exercise,” Anthony replies. 
“Once the engineers get further along in their coding, we should be able to do some 
initial testing. And then at the end of the project, it’s the final testing phase.” 
 “So you feel that we are in pretty good shape?” 
 “It’s the tried and true process we’ve been using for a while.” 
 Nir is tired and overly frustrated and he reflexively interjects, “We had a 
pretty good plan going into Griffin too! The engineers  always kill us in the end! 
We had set up our test plans, ramped up our testing teams, and had our test 
systems all ready. We planned a standard two-month test cycle for the final 
testing phase. Engineering just could not give us stable code that worked. At 
first we just could not get anything for weeks. Then when we received the 
early code and it just crashed so there just was not much to test. By the time 
engineering had something that did not blow up right away, we had a little 
more than two weeks left. We complained like crazy, but we were talking to a 
wall. The client had a drop-dead date, so it was not like we could push out the 
schedule. The engineers were working like crazy and since it took longer than 
expected, they took all the time out of the QA schedule. So we did very little 
testing and shipped out an extremely buggy and poor-quality product [crt 20]. 
So as far as our plan on paper right now, we look fine. But if engineering is 
late as it usually is, the plan goes out the window. In fact, the last few projects 
engineering ran late, QA had to scramble with what little time was left over.” 

Get it Done On Time!
95
 Anthony looks a little ticked. “We can plan out our side; we know how to set 
up a good QA test plan. I have done it at other companies and I try to do it 
here. If engineering compresses our schedule, we just do what we can to work 
around it. It’s the nature of development. If there is a deadline, it’s not like they 
are going to wait for QA.” 
 Tim ponders this for a minute. “Let me walk through a few key questions and 
see if I can better understand and possibly help improve the situation…” 
 Define a Clear,  Concise  , and Measurable  Goal 
 “First let’s level set,” Tim states. “What is the overall goal of QA?” 
 “To catch issues and help ensure the quality of the product,” Anthony rattles 
off without a second thought. 
 “Okay, that is good on a high level, but can we be more specific?” 
 “Tim, do you mean our gating customer release gating criteria?” Nir sighs. 
“We have a whole 10-page spec if that is what you are looking for. It includes 
the various areas of testing, the types of testing, systems we test on, number 
of leads, number of hours, types and severities of issues, allowable number of 
issues prior to release, and so on….” 
 “I was more looking for a concise and measurable goal. What would the goal 
or mission statement be for QA on the Phoenix project?” 
 Anthony thinks for a second then says, “To ship a product that meets the QA 
customer release criteria by the November ship deadline.” 
 “Perfect. It is  clear, measurable, and has specific criteria and dates .” Tim opens up 
an Excel sheet and adds the following line: 
 Goal: To ship a product that meets the QA customer release criteria by the 
November ship deadline.  
 List the Clear Issues and Their Impact 
 “So guys, what are the key  issues that prevent us from meeting that goal for 
Phoenix?” inquires Tim. 
 “Everything; a ton of things based on my experience on Griffin.” Nir states. 
“Starting with engineering. They are always late. They give us code that is not 
ready for testing, but if we wait for code that is stable, there would not be any 
time for QA. No one respects the QA process. Engineering can run as late as 
it wants and QA has to make up for it.” 
 Nir and Anthony argue for 15 more minutes and then Tim steps in and sum-
marizes their issues into an Excel spreadsheet. 

Chapter 7 | Using Ambitious Targets to Handle Past Issues
96
 
  
 They talked for half an hour more, but pretty much agreed that these four 
issues are the main ones.  
 Define  Intermediate Objectives (IOs)  
 “So Tim, it is nice that we list some of the issues better, but I do not see how 
this solves our issues,” Nir states. 
 “Now that we have the issues clearly defined, we need to look at each issue 
and see if we can come up with something to overcome it. This is known as 
 an   intermediate objective . By design, the person who suggested the issue gets to 
be the first to suggest a possible way to overcome it.” 

Get it Done On Time!
97
 “Well, I had the first issue— Engineering provides the software very late and there-
fore it limits the overall time QA has —it seems rather pointless, because there is 
not much we can do to control engineering.” 
 “So Nir, one  flying pig suggestion is that engineering deliver code on time.” 
 “Pretty much, Tim. It would be ideal if they were on time, but yes, based 
on my experience with Griffin, engineering delivering on time would be a 
minor miracle and an unrealistic expectation, despite what their managers and 
schedules claim.” 
 “Sometime it helps to look at a wild idea and then come back and see if we 
can find a way to make it more realistic. For example, I’m working with the 
engineers on their planning. My understanding is that the Phoenix project is 
made up of multiple modules. So possibly we could plan to complete some 
of the modules earlier. It is not the same as all of the code being delivered on 
time, but maybe we could at least get some of it early,” explains Tim. 
 “That would at least give us a chance to close out some of the testing on 
those areas and minimize the overall amount that needs to be done at the last 
minute,” says Nir. 
 “It sounds promising,” Anthony adds. 
 “It’s a start, but I do not think it’s nearly enough to address my concern that 
engineering is  always late and in turn it reduces the time QA has to work,” 
Nir says. 
 “Okay Nir, let’s try it from a different angle. Let’s assume that Phoenix will 
run badly and engineering will run late, which means QA will only have a very 
limited time.” 
 “Seems more like reality than any assumption in my experience.” 
 “So what makes sense to do in this situation, Nir?” 
 “Typically, our test plans go out the window. There is not enough time for a 
full cycle, so we just test the high risk areas the best we can.” 
 “Since we are at the beginning of the project, is there a more methodical way 
we could set up up effective testing in a short time?” 
 “Maybe we could modularize our test plans better,” Anthony indicates. “So 
we will have different sections of the test plan for different areas of the code. 
We can also set up a high-level test pass as well as a more detailed test pass. 
In this way, if it is a low risk area or we have tested the code before, we might 
be okay with a quick high-level test, and when we get to a high risk or new 
area, we would focus on the longer detailed pass.” 
 “Anthony, are you sure there would be enough time for all the testing we 
need?” Nir inquires. 

Chapter 7 | Using Ambitious Targets to Handle Past Issues
98
 “Well, not all areas take the same amount of time, Nir. With a little bit of 
work, we could give an approximate amount of time it would take to do a high 
test pass on an area, and based on that how many overall hours we need to 
do a complete test cycle.” 
 “So,” Tim summarizes, “Basically, when we get down to the last few weeks, we 
can look at which areas we are okay doing with a high test pass and which 
areas we need to do a detailed test pass, add up the time it takes to run all 
those tests, and balance it against the time we have left.” 
 “Pretty much,” says Nir.   
 “Ideally, we would have the time we need, but at least this is more methodical 
than the two-week scrambles we’ve done in the past.” 
 “So Anthony and Nir, are we comfortable that setting up a modular test plan 
should help us address the concern that engineering provides software late?” 
 “It’s better than where we are at currently,” Anthony chimes in a bit more 
enthusiastically. 
 ------------ 
 “So the next issue was raised by Nir as well.— The software going into QA is of 
poor quality.” 
 “Yeah, this was pretty annoying. We would be delayed weeks trying to get 
something out of engineering to test. When we finally received something, it 
would just blow up as soon as we started. So we could not run any real tests, 
just acknowledge that it did not work. It was of little value to us and gave engi-
neering the chance to say that had given us code to test for weeks.” 
 “Was it all the code or just code from a few people?” Tim inquires. 
 “We have a few Engineers that are a little too quick to throw something that 
is not complete to QA. The other part is when there are tight deadlines and 
they are running late, the engineers are rushed and so they are quick to move 
code into QA.” 
 “Nir, do you have any voice in what the engineers hand over?” 
 “Well Tim, one idea is that QA could refuse to test code that does not meet 
our quality standards.” 
 “That sounds a little rigid Nir,” states Anthony. “We want the engineers to 
give us early code so we can start working. The early code just needs to be 
something that does not just crash as soon as we try and start testing.” 
 “Is there a test that could be done that would be a little less rigid?” 
inquires Tim. 

Get it Done On Time!
99
 “I guess we could set up a  simple smoke test ,” states Nir. “Some basic criteria 
such as—the code must be able to load in the system without crashing and 
the features must be exercisable without immediately breaking. We are fine 
with early and flaky code, but it needs to have some minimal functionality.” 
 Anthony jumps in, “We also will need to get the engineering managers to sign 
off on the smoke test, but it should not be too much of a problem.” 
 “So overall, if the engineering code passes the smoke test, it can be formally 
accepted by QA. That sounds pretty good,” Tim summarizes.   
 ------------- 
 “Tim, the next issue was Anthony’s— QA is blamed for the poor software quality . 
We tell management that we are never given enough time, but they do not 
understand.” 
 “With the detailed high-level and detailed-level test plans, I think we can better 
quantify the time we need to test and the reasons for it. In the past, we just 
said three weeks sometimes based on a one-page plan. If we have something 
more comprehensive and flag what areas we are doing a high-level plan, which 
areas need more detailed testing, I think they will better understand the time 
and work involved,” Anthony indicates. 
 “Anthony, how will you handle the last two-week mad dash? The managers 
state that everything is okay despite issues, then a few months later, when 
the customer sees the issue, they get all ticked off that QA did not catch it,” 
Nir states, concerned. 
 “What if we have a formal signoff sheet? If they want us to skip certain tests, 
we can have them sign off on a form saying they approved it.” 
 “So if a customer issue comes up for an area we wanted to test, we will have 
the documentation they signed off?” 
 “Pretty much. It should work. But even if they sign off on not testing some-
thing, we still should try to do some of the priority tests off the detailed test 
plan. Sign off or not, it is still important that we feel that a solid test has been 
done.” 
 -------------------- 
 “The last one was— Engineering changes the requirements during development 
without telling QA.” 
 “This was a pain and just caused a lot of frustration and wasted time. Once 
the engineers start coding, they do not go back and update all the specs until 

Chapter 7 | Using Ambitious Targets to Handle Past Issues
100
much later. The specs are simply not their priority. We would like to talk with 
the engineers, but their time is pretty limited,” Nir states. 
 “In the past, I’ve informally had coffee with some of the engineering managers and 
they often fill me in on some of the key changes. The engineers can’t change 
something significant without their manager’s approval. Maybe we just need 
to formalize this process. So just have a weekly update with the engineering 
manager on any changes not in the spec.” 
 “Certainly worth looking into Tim. After too much pestering and the engi-
neers having super-tight deadlines, I’ve had it where they would stop respond-
ing to my e-mails and calls. So if the engineering managers are more open to 
giving us updates on changes, it is worth a try.” 
 ------------- 
 “So with all of these suggestions, do you think we will be able to meet our 
goal? Specifically, to be able to ship a product that meets the QA customer 
release criteria by the November ship deadline?” Tim asks, confirming that all 
of the key areas have been sufficiently addressed. 
 “I feel better about that possibility, Tim. Much better,” both Nir and Anthony 
indicate. Tim updates the Excel list accordingly. 

Get it Done On Time!
101
 
 
 Sequence the Intermediate Objectives (IOs) 
 Tim looks at Nir  and  Anthony, “So based on our discussions, I captured and 
labeled the following suggestions:
• 
 A. Look at ways to complete some of the engineering 
software modules earlier.  
• 
 B. Develop more detailed test plans that have high-level 
test passes, detailed test passes, how long it takes to 
complete each pass, and how long it takes to complete 
a complete test cycle.   

Chapter 7 | Using Ambitious Targets to Handle Past Issues
102
• 
 C. Set up a simple smoke test that needs to be completed 
before checking code into QA and have the engineering 
managers sign off on the idea of the test.  
• 
 D. Use the more detailed test plans to better quantify to 
management the time needed for testing.  
• 
 E. Set up a formal signoff sheet to document testing that 
management wants to skip tests due to time constraints.  
• 
 F. Work to set up a weekly meeting with engineering 
managers to review code changes not captured in the spec.  
 It is not too bad of a list, but we cannot do all of them at once. We should go 
through and see which ones make sense to do first. It would also be good to 
 specify an owner and a timeline for each suggestion as well. Anthony, based on the 
list, would [A] look at ways to complete some engineering software modules 
earlier come before [B] develop more detailed test plans?” 
 Anthony indicates, “They both can pretty much be done in parallel.” 
 “I can follow up on looking at ways to complete software modules early over 
the next few weeks since I am meeting with the engineers,” Tim suggests. 
 “Nir and I can work on the test plans. It will take us about a month, but we 
are pretty early in the test process, so there is time.” 
 “Okay, Anthony, so for [C] set up the smoke test, would it come before [A] 
complete some modules early or [B] develop more detailed test plans, or 
would they be done in parallel?” asks Tim. 
 “Again something in parallel. I can look at it over the next week or so. Given 
that I was burned by it pretty bad on Griffin, I have a pretty clear idea of what 
we need. Once it is done, Nir and I can meet with the engineering managers.” 
 “Sounds good. So would [D] use the test plans to better quantify to manage-
ment the time needed to do testing go after [B] develop more detailed test 
plans?” asks Tim. 
 “We need the plans first, and then we can use them to help level set manage-
ment on how long it takes to test. Once we are pretty comfortable with the 
test, I can bring it up with the regular bi-weekly meeting I have with some of the 
management team. After that I can look at bringing it in for a formal manager 
review,” Anthony explains. 
 “Okay Anthony, looking at the Excel sheet, this is what I have so far for our 
plan. A, B, and C can be done in parallel. D can be done only once we have 
completed B.” 

Get it Done On Time!
103
 
  
 “What about [E] set up a formal sign-up sheet when management wants to 
skip tests due to time constraints?” inquires Tim.   
 “That one is a little touchy,” Nir says, jumping in. “Definitely after [B] set up 
the test plans, probably better after [D] get management to see how long the 
test plans are and what they involve. I can set up the basic form. Anthony, since 
you are working with the managers, can you take this one?” 
 “That is fine,” states Anthony. “I will bring it up as we do the manager review 
of the test plans. If they know they might be asked to sign off on something, 
they will be a lot more attentive about what the test plan says.” 
 “The last one—[F] work to set up a weekly meeting with the engineering 
manager to review code changes?” Tim continues. 
 “I can take that one,” Anthony volunteers, “Since I already talk with the 
engineering manager. I can meet with him over the next month or so. In 
regards to your question, we should be able to do that in parallel with the 
other tasks.” 
 “So, looking at the Excel sheet, this is what I have for our plan,” Tim explains. 

Chapter 7 | Using Ambitious Targets to Handle Past Issues
104
 
  
 “Looks like a good start, Tim. What if we find additional items later on?” 
inquires Nir. 
 “Duh,” states Anthony, “We just add them to the plan.” 
 “Correct Anthony,” confirms Tim, “We can continue to build out the  plan  as 
needed. We do not want to get too detailed, but we do need to cover the 
key areas.”  
 Results 
 “So Nir and Anthony,   before we wrap up this meeting, what do you think 
about the process we went through and the plan we developed?,” asks Tim. 
 “Well Tim, to be honest, based on Griffin, I was feeling pretty burned out 
and seeing the whole test process as pointless,” states Nir. “Sure, the test 
plans helped in the beginning, but at the end we just had to wing it. I was sure 
Phoenix was just going to be another repeat of Griffin. Going through this 
exercise, I feel a bit more optimistic and empowered. There will be issues, 
but at least I feel like there is something we can do to try ahead of time to 
improve the situation.” 

Get it Done On Time!
105
 “Actually Tim, I like the fact that you could take Nir’s endless complaining and 
put it to good use,” states Anthony. “All kidding aside, you let him vent his 
issues and once we were done with that, we turned around and started to 
constructively look at what we could do to address the issues he had raised.” 
 “The part I liked Tim is that you did not just complain or dictate a plan. 
Anthony and I were involved and able to share our different concerns and 
insights. Overall, we provided the detail and helped to put the plan together. 
We have ownership of it.” 
 “I’m glad I could help,” states Tim. “Now I need to catch up with Gary and 
see how he is doing.”  
 FRT 
 Just as Tim leaves, he pulls out his FRT diagram and adds one more box: 13) 
we improve our quality assurance testing.  

Chapter 7 | Using Ambitious Targets to Handle Past Issues
106
 
Summary FRT (org analysis, frt 2)
Key Injections
Key Benefits
18 We increase our 
sales
20 We meet and exceed
expected revenues
21 The company is more
financially solid
14 Our products are
more competitive
13 We improve our quality
assurance testing [ch7]
and set up marketing
checkpoints
17 We are able to
meet key customer
deadlines and
market windows
8 We are better able to
meet or beat our
schedules
7 Our schedules can
better handle delays
6 We successfully implement
Critical Chain (CC) single 
project into our company’s
environment
1 We set up project and feeding
buffers, reduce bad multi-tasking, set
clear goals, define the project in terms 
of throughput, and build schedules 
back to front [ch2,4]
2 We identify a CC expert,
identify CC tool, conduct an
org analysis, determine a 
compelling need & set up
the correct metrics [ch3]
3 We identify an
internal CC champion
[ch5]
4 We target a high impact project, build out the schedule, and
manage the project based on buffers and CC behaviors [ch6]
10 We minimize and better manage 
the impact of late schedule 
changes
9 We are more discliplined in our
change control policies and
better manage exec changes
[ch6,10]
15 Future project
resources are available
12 Department
resources are better
balanced and happier
  

© Eric Bergland 2016 
E. Bergland, Get it Done On Time!, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-1860-0_8
 C H A P T E R 
 Individual Buy-In 
 Tim, Randal, and Gary quickly grab some coffee and head off to a small 
conference room. 
 “So Tim, the Exec review is coming up in a few weeks,” states Randal. “We need 
to be ready for it. Micky is going to overview the direction of the company 
and we need to be able to show that we can support that vision. Gary, how 
are we doing with the results?” 
 “I am gathering them up now. We are already seeing benefits just with the 
schedule build and Critical Chain process for Phoenix. Give it a few more 
weeks and we can see how well the schedule is holding up in execution and 
how well we hit our first milestone.” 
 “Sounds good. Gary, I can work with you to put the slides for the Exec 
review together. How about you, Tim? Where are you at with meeting with 
the execs?” 
 Tim pauses briefly, not used to seeing Randal in a take-charge mode before. 
“I need to meet with Ashley in sales and marketing and Herb in HR so 
I can capture their key issues. From there, I can complete the overall orga-
nizational analysis. I also have a meeting scheduled with Grant the COO 
and Micky. I wanted to check what their concerns are as well, but more 
importantly get their buy-in on the direction we are going with implementing 
Critical Chain.” 
 Randal looks at Tim for a bit and takes a deep breath, “Grant and Micky are 
both on board so both of them are key players. And with the Exec review 
coming up, Micky has been on a bit of a war path lately. He’s been super busy 
and super touchy. Most of us have been giving him more space than usual.” 
 “I can tell from the Griffin project post-mortem. I’ll be careful,” responds Tim. 
8

Chapter 8 | Individual Buy-In
108
 “Actually Tim it would be good for me to sit in on your meeting with Grant 
so I can see what you present and if there are key items I could pull into the 
overall Exec presentation.” 
 “Sure Randal, I think that would be a great idea. How much does Grant know 
about Critical Chain?” 
 “He has shown a good amount of interest in the Critical Chain concepts I 
have shared with him in the one-on-one meetings we’ve had. I mainly covered 
the high-level concepts, but he seems to get it and asks a good number of 
questions. What is your take, Gary?” 
 “I agree,” says Gary, “Grant has an engineering background and is more hands 
on. He wants to know the details of what is going on. He has already agreed 
with applying Critical Chain to the Phoenix project and we’ve spent a few 
meetings going into the implementation details and how it is different than 
what we did on the Griffin project.” 
 “That sounds very promising. Randal, does Micky, Ashley, or Herb have any 
background on Critical Chain?” 
 “Not really, Tim. I have talked with Micky and he has listened. But Ashley and 
Herb generally do not get too involved in the particulars of how engineering 
operates. They usually defer to Gary, Grant, and Micky unless there is some 
impact to their area.” 
 “Okay, good to know. Randal, I have a meeting with Ashley and Herb later 
today. Once I have done that can we possibly sync up before the meeting with 
Grant and Micky and strategize?” 
 “Sure, Tim.” 
 Meeting with the  Sales and Marketing Director  
 Over the next few days, Tim follows up with some of the execs in prep for 
the upcoming Exec review. The first person Tim decides to follow up with is 
Ashley, the interim sales and marketing director covering for Micky. Tim takes 
the elevator to the executive floor and walks down the well carpeted hall to 
her office. Tim then carefully knocks on the door. 
 “Hey Tim, you are right on time. Come on in.” Tim slowly walks into her office. 
It has a huge window overseeing the company campus. In front of it is a very 
classic solid wood desk with a few chairs in front of it. 
 “Tim, feel free to sit down. I have just a few minutes and then I have my next 
meeting,” says Ashley. 

Get it Done On Time!
109
 Ashley is a tall blonde who is probably in her mid 40s. She wears a cream 
colored business-like skirt and jacket. “Sure,” replies Tim, “Thank you for 
fitting me into your schedule.” 
 “So Tim, I’m short on time. Is there something specific you want to discuss and 
I can try and help you the best I can.” 
 “Sure, I’m working with Gary and Randal to improve the company’s project 
management and engineering. But I am also seeing that a lot of the issues are 
crossing departments and holding back the company as a whole. I wanted to 
know from your side what key issues you were seeing in your area.” 
 “Why?” 
 “I believe that if we can help engineering it will not only help them, but help 
the company overall.” 
 “Kinda, if they succeed we all will exceed?” Asks Ashley. 
 “Yes.” 
 “Fair enough,” Ashley replies matter of factly. Pausing for a moment and thinking 
things over, she continues, “Like you said, the engineering issues are not just 
confined to engineering. Engineering has been regularly missing deadlines. The 
customer contracts we set up require key features to be delivered by set 
time frames. We regularly miss those dates and drop the features [crt 20]. This 
incurs penalties. Worse, we get less desirable terms the next time around or 
lose future contracts altogether [crt 25]. Micky has even been making regular 
calls, both within the United States and internationally to see what possibili-
ties there are. But overall, we are not meeting our revenue targets [crt 26] 
and have to change something. But you should be aware of that already.” 
 “True,” states Tim. “So if we improved our ability to deliver, it would dramati-
cally improve things?” 
 “Yes, once we can prove it was not a one-time success, we can work on 
repairing our damaged and strained customer relationships [crt 27]. Micky has 
been doing a tremendous job trying to keep them happy and not to drop our 
contracts. But he can only do so much. But honestly,  betw een Micky and I and 
some of the other execs engineering has very much lost our trust. We do not 
see how they are going to improve. Micky once asked me to look into adding 
more product lines [crt 30], figuring if we made less per product we could try 
and make it up with more products.” 
 “This would make engineering’s work load even worse. It would cripple them,” 
says Tim, very concerned. 

Chapter 8 | Individual Buy-In
110
 “Agreed. We considered it, saw how many additional lines we would need, 
and then dropped it. We didn’t think engineering could deliver. And there is 
more.” 
 “More?” Tim inquires. 
 “Our competitors are building up their resources and expertise; they are 
getting several of the contracts we once had. Their quality is going up; they 
are getting more efficient and more experienced [crt 22]. If we do not move 
faster, they  will catch up and surpass us.” Ashley says in a very serious tone. 
“Micky is working on a way out of it and he is pretty furious at engineering for 
putting him and the company in this spot.” 
 “I understand. We have made great progress with engineering, Ashley. 
The development process is running better. We are on track to meet our 
milestones. Gary is pulling together the latest data now.” 
 “We have heard that claim from engineering before.” 
 “I understand. We are gathering the data to back up the claims and we are 
getting the schedules back in line. That will enable us to be on time and 
feature complete as well as enable us to do more R&D. That would make 
the products more competitive. That should help you improve the customer 
relationships [frt 19].” 
 “And if engineering sacrifices quality to hit schedules again?” 
 “We can add marketing checkpoints [frt 13] along the development process 
to review the feature development and ensure it is in sync with customer and 
contract needs as long as it is part of a change control process,” Tim explains. 
 Ashley looks down at her calendar. “It sounds promising Tim, but it really 
depends on Micky. My 3 PM meeting is just starting up. If you can excuse me, 
I need to call in.   Possibly we can talk more after the board meeting and see.” 
 “Okay, thank you for your time.” Tim states as he walks out of Ashley’s office 
and closes the door. He hopes that the results and progress he has made with 
Gary and Randal are enough to show that things are turning around. At the 
same time, he is wondering if Ashley was holding back.  
 Meeting with  Human Resources (HR)  
 Tim wanders down a floor to the HR department. As he approaches Herb’s 
door, he hears him on the phone chatting and joking. Tim lightly knocks on the 
door. Herb looks up and over his reading glasses. 
 “Hey, come on in Tim. I’m glad to catch up with you again.” 

Get it Done On Time!
111
 Herb is average height, filled out with a bit of a belly and dressed in khaki 
pants, an untucked dress shirt, a vest, and comfortable dress shoes. “Sure 
Herb,” Tim responds, “I’m not interrupting?” 
 “No, never.” He tells the person on the other line he has a meeting and 
will catch him later in the day. “So Tim, sorry about the delays getting your 
desk and phone. With the new hires, a few people leaving, and moving things 
around, it’s been a bit chaotic.” 
 “No problem, Herb. As I noted in my e-mail I just wanted to follow up on a 
few things. I have been working with Gary and Randal to improve our project 
management and help engineering. I’m feeling several of the issues they are 
running into are not limited to engineering. Are there other issues you see 
holding back the company?” 
 “Sure Tim, I can help. Is this just for you or something else?” 
 “I’m talking with other managers and looking to see what their top-level issues 
are and trying to see how they interconnect. So I will just share the top-level 
issues not the details of the conversations.” 
 “And the audience is…” 
 “Exec staff,” said Tim. 
 “Fair enough. Just needed to know my audience. So I’m sure you have been 
seeing the various going-away lunch invites. We’re losing good people [crt 14]. 
Some due to jitters about how we are doing, others just burning out. Worse, 
some of our  competitors are ramping up and have picked up some of our 
people and those people in turn have lead our competitors to try and poach 
other people from our company. It’s a bit disheartening.” 
 “The high pressure to deliver was driving them away?” 
 “Tight deadlines, priorities switching, unrealistic schedules, and adding more 
work to already unrealistic deadlines have been most of the complaints I’ve 
heard during the exit interviews. I have heard from a few people that Phoenix 
is looking better thanks to your help. But yes, people are stressing out and 
burning out. Micky stepping up  thin  gs added more pressure.” 
 “Fair enough, Herb. Like you said, we are making great progress with Phoenix 
and we are getting back on track.” 
 “That is great to hear, Tim. It is nice to have some good news again. Things are 
still tight. I am hoping your changes are going to stick. One of the past items 
out of Micky’s Exec meetings that concerned me a great deal was his discus-
sion to see if we could stem the corporate revenue bleeding by cutting 10% 
of the resources across the company [crt 29].” 
 “That is pretty drastic.” 

Chapter 8 | Individual Buy-In
112
 “Things are tight and have gotten worse over the last few months, Tim. The 
various managers have already had to identify the resources for the 10% 
reduction and at the same time promise to maintain existing commitments.” 
 “Will Micky go through with the reduction?” Tim asks, concerned. 
 “Unsure. I figure it might come up in the Exec review. But Micky knows that 
it would be a short-term fix and in the long run likely do more damage than 
good. My guess is that it was a bit of a scare tactic to shake things up and get 
the managers to move and see how dire things are. I figured you should know, 
but please do not pass this info around. People are already jittery. Like I said, 
it’s good to hear you are making progress. Hopefully they can step it up and 
the company can focus on moving ahead.” 
 “Definitely. Gary has some encouraging results he will be reviewing in the 
Exec review. We are making great progress. As we get the schedules run-
ning better it should dramatically reduce the priority thrashing and unrealistic 
deadlines, and better manage the new requests, which will enable people to 
better focus and not burn out [frt 12].” 
 “Great to hear, Tim. If you need anything from my side, my door is always open.” 
 “Thank you for the support, Herb.”  
 Randal and Tim Prep for the Meeting with Grant 
 Randal strides into Tim’s new cube. “So Tim, all settled in?” He looks around 
and sees the three blank gray walls of Tim’s cube—no pictures, no papers, just 
a laptop, computer bag, table, and a  chair . 
 “Pretty much, Randal. It just became official a few days ago. It’s not much, but 
it works.” 
 “So how did the meetings with Herb and Ashley go?” 
 “Pretty well, Randal. I picked up a few more details that are helping me get a 
more complete overall picture.” 
 “Good to hear.” Randal says, a bit anxious. “So Tim for the Exec meeting com-
ing up it will be just a small group of key people focusing on Gary and Micky’s 
updates. Me, you, and Gary can present the engineering update. Gary owns 
the overall update, but he often lets me cover a few slides that tie in engineer-
ing and marketing. You can cover any Critical Chain detailed questions that 
come up. As interim CEO, Micky will provide the update on the company 
strategy. The board itself has three members. Other than that there will be 
Herb and Ashley.” 
 “Who are the decision  mak ers?” inquires Tim. 

Get it Done On Time!
113
 “Micky, Grant, and the external board members.” 
 “Hmm, I have meetings with Grant and Micky to talk with them before 
the Exec meeting. Do the external board members have any Critical Chain 
experience?” Asks Tim. 
 “Unlikely Tim. Mainly they will defer to Gary or Grant for the engineering 
details, then see how Micky weighs in. If everything falls in line, things will go 
forward. If there are disagreements then the whole board will step in, review 
the issues, and provide some directives that it will expect to be carried out. 
So we have some time, but not much. What is your plan to talk with Grant?” 
 “Mainly I need to get his buy-in. Not just to Critical Chain, but how everything 
is tied together and impacts the whole company.” 
 “Tim, you have just an hour with Grant and his schedule is pretty packed. 
You’re not going to try and fit in the whole high-level Critical Chain concepts, 
what is needed to implement, and we need a champion with him are you?” 
Randal asks, a bit nervous. 
 “No no. More succinct and high level. We have two phases. The first is the 
behind-the-scenes homework where we leverage our organizational analysis 
and work through the six layers of resistance. The second phase is the actual 
presentation to the customer where we conversationally pull key items from 
the work we did for the six layers.” 
 “So the six layers is like a 12-step program?” Asks Randal. 
 Tim sighs, “To buy in to a new concept such as the Theory of Constraints or 
Critical Chain, we organize our analysis into the six layers of resistance. This 
way we can step through our buy-in proposal in an effective and systematic 
way, help address people’s concerns, and help them understand and ideally 
agree to our proposal.” 
 Randal looks at Tim oddly. 
 “Here, let me walk you through the layers:
• 
 Layer 1: Lack of consensus on the problem  
• 
 Layer 2 :  We do not agree on the direction of the solution  
• 
 Layer 3: Arguing the proposed solution cannot yield the 
desired outcome  
• 
 Layer 4: Yes,  but . Concerns about potential side-effects 
from the proposed solution  
• 
 Layer 5: Obstacles that stand in the way of implementing 
the solution into the environment  
• 
 Layer 6: Raising doubts, wait and see, unverbalized fears”  

Chapter 8 | Individual Buy-In
114
 “Tim, why are you always so cryptic. You have a sales process. I’ve seen similar 
things before. Build rapport, learn something about the customer, understand 
their issues, etc..”   
 “Kinda. It certainly has parallels to a sales process, but also specific tie-ins to 
the Theory of Constraints tools. For example, ‘layer 1: lack of consensus’ is 
based on the CRT we have been working on.” Tim takes out the CRT diagram 
and shares it with Randal. 
 “Whoa! Tim that diagram is pretty complex. I have watched you build it. 
But someone seeing it as a whole, especially for the first time, can be pretty 
overwhelming.” 
 “The key part is that it captures all of the different issues, ties them together, 
and helps us focus on the organization’s core conflict and root causes of our 
problems.” 
 “Okay Tim, I can certainly agree that the CRT is capturing our issues, but 
please tell me you were not planning to share that with Grant or at least not 
on your first meeting with him?” 
 “It’s tempting…” Tim admits. 
 Randal looks harshly at Tim. 
 “It’s tempting since it took a good amount of work to create and it does a 
really, really good job of summarizing the issues and their interconnections, 
but like you said it’s a bit overwhelming especially if you are not familiar with 
TOC,” concedes Tim. 
 “That sounds much better Tim,” Randal says, breathing a sigh of relief, “So 
what is your real plan?” 
 “Similar to the conversation we had when we first talked about your company 
[Chapter   2 ]. I’ll pull out a few of the major issues that impact the company 
and are likely to resonate with Grant. From there, we can quantify how 
significant they are and confirm that he agrees that they are inter-related. 
Likely he knows how they inter-relate, but if not I have the CRT I can fall back 
on and conversationally walk him through. That should cover layer 1, which is 
to agree on the problem.” 
 “Hmm, Tim, couldn’t you have simply said you need to identify and quantify 
the customer’s biggest pain points and loosely show they’re inter-related? 
It sounds so much simpler.” 
 “Possibly. I guess. One other key item with the CRT and meeting with Grant. 
We need to be sure to blame the system. It is not that any one person or 
group is trying to undermine the company. The system, the way we operate, 
is holding us back. The CRT outlines this system and how it is interconnected. 
We need to focus our efforts on understanding, blaming, and changing the 
system.” 

Get it Done On Time!
115
 “Interesting approach. So the system is the fall guy and the one we go after.” 
 “It avoids finger pointing and helps us move forward in a productive and 
problem solving way,” explains Tim. 
 “I’m curious to see this in action. So what’s next?” 
 “I talk about the struggle (conflict) that the company is in, how it really 
challenges us, and how it drives the major  issu  es.” 
 “Why bother, Tim?” 
 “We want to focus Grant’s attention to one central and critical struggle. 
From there, we can propose our solution (layer 2) and then immediately 
start dealing with the next question, which is why do you feel this solution 
will address the problems (layer 3).” 
 “Hmm. It feels like you are taking all of the key pain points and pulling them all 
together into one single overall pain point/organizational struggle.” 
 “Focusing our efforts, yes. The main part is that we want to focus on the 
system and the challenges to the system, not any one specific department or 
person.” 
 “So Tim, how are you going to sell the fact that your solution is the one that 
will work and is better than other competing ideas, solutions, or products? 
As we say in sales, why should I buy this from you?” 
 “I have my FRT.” Tim then takes out his FRT diagram and shows it to Randal. 
 Randal rolls his eyes. “Tim,  not another overly complicated diagram.” 
 “As before, it would be fun to show Grant all the hard work that went into 
creating this and how wonderful it is. Unfortunately when you start showing 
CRTs, FRTs, and start using TOC lingo to people who are not familiar with 
TOC—instead of them being amazed by your insights—they in fact get turned 
off by the complexity and your arrogance in assuming they would understand 
something so new and different instantly. As you note, I will conversationally 
pick out a few key items, quantify them, and do my best to translate them into 
terms that are familiar to the organization and to that individual.” 
 “Sounds promising, again translating back into English, focus on the key 
benefits and value to the organization. I have seen you build out the FRT. It 
makes sense to me on a high level, but it’s not something someone would just 
understand right away. So Tim, after you  conversationally share your grand vision 
and Grant is stunned with your brilliance, what happens next? Are we done?” 
 “For this meeting, yes. If we can agree on the problem (layer 1), direction of 
the solution (layer 2), and that Critical Chain will get us to where we need 
to be (layer 3), we should be good! If Grant has additional questions we can 
certainly address them as they come up. This is also covered by the six layers. 

Chapter 8 | Individual Buy-In
116
Layer 4 is yes,  but (fear of some negative consequence), Layer 5 is you can’t 
because (some obstacle blocks us), and Layer 6 is hesitation to move forward 
even after all concerns have been addressed. We can proactively think of likely 
concerns and responses. But for this meeting, we should just focus on any 
specific questions he has. As you say, keep it simple.” 
 Randal shakes his head back and forth, “Well Tim, as usual you are very through 
if not a bit overwhelming. Your sales model seems pretty complete. Just one 
last item. Where do you seal the deal?” 
 “Actually that is the last critical piece. Closing the deal. We are meeting with 
Grant for a reason. We should be sure we get Grant’s commitment to take 
some action, otherwise why have this meeting in the first place.” 
 “With the company running out of time and the Exec meeting coming up, 
we want Grant on our side. We need him to help promote and back up our 
recommendation,” restates Randal. 
 “Exactly.” 
 “Actually Tim, one more thing. Stepping back—why bother? I mean why bother 
with the organizational analysis, CRT, FRT, getting all of the execs to buy-in? 
Wouldn’t it just be simpler to just build the Critical Chain schedules, add the 
buffers, and implement it in engineering without the rest of the organization’s 
involvement?” 
 “It could work, but briefly. In the long run it would likely fall apart. As I noted 
in the factors for success [Chapter   3 ], the organizational buy-in is needed. If 
management is not on board and they see the project buffers, they will just cut 
them and that will undermine Critical Chain’s success. With the cut project 
buffers we are more likely to miss deadlines and in turn management will push 
even more to switch to some other methodology du jour. The same is true 
with the buffer management and project behaviors. Without management 
support they will not work and in turn the Critical Chain solution will not 
work.” 
 “So what if we got Gary and Grant behind it and told the others to let 
engineering manage the schedules the way they need to without interference?” 
 “It’s a team sport. We’re trying to improve the whole company. The whole 
system, not just one department. Think of it like a rowing boat. If everyone 
is in sync, we will move forward and quickly. If someone moves too slow or 
even too fast the whole boat goes off course. Just look at where things are at 
now. Engineering is struggling and Micky is just adding more changes and more 
work. They’re not in sync.” 
 Sighing, Randal concedes, “I guess you’re right, Tim. Ideally we need to get 
everyone working together. Engineering is just where we are seeing all of 
the issues.” 

Get it Done On Time!
117
 “Yep, speaking of getting everyone to work together, it’s time to meet 
with Grant.” 
 “Tim Tim Tim—the things you are getting me into…” 
 “I’m helping to build your character.”   
 “Ahh Tim…so many things I could say to that,” Randle chuckles.  
 Meeting with  Grant  
 Tim and Randal head up to exec row and over to  Grant’s  office. Like Ashley’s 
office, it is well appointed with filled book cases and a solid wood desk, and 
then it differs from there. Grant’s desk is covered with piles of paper. What 
does not fit on the desk overflows to the nearby chairs. Grant is easily in his 
50s with black and gray peppered hair. He is dressed in a very sharp business 
suit and carries himself with an athletic stride. 
 “Hi Tim,” Grant walks up to the door to greet him. “I have been interested 
in meeting you.” 
 “Hi Grant, thank you for making the time to meet with me.” 
 “Hi Randal, please come in as well.” 
 “So Tim,” Grant starts, “I appreciate the time and effort you have been 
putting in working with Gary and Randal. Given the Griffin issues, your timing 
is pretty good.” 
 “Thank you, it’s a good group of people.” 
 “So Tim you called the meeting. What can I do for you?” 
 “With the Exec meeting coming up in a few weeks I wanted to talk to you 
about the Critical Chain work we’ve been doing and how it can have an over-
all impact on the company.” 
 “Fair enough, Tim. Gary and Randal have been keeping me up to date on the 
consulting work you have been doing as far as ramping them up on the Critical 
Chain methodology as well as the Phoenix schedule build. They have been 
very positive about it. So I was assuming this was something engineering and 
project focused.” 
 “Critical Chain and TOC will certainly help engineering, but it can have a much 
broader impact than that. And we  need that broader impact to help the 
company succeed and grow. 
 “How so,” Grant asks, curious to see where Tim is going with this. 

Chapter 8 | Individual Buy-In
118
 Quantifying the Issues 
 “When I first started, the key  issue was that we were slipping schedules more 
and more [crt 15]. The prior product development system was very aggres-
sive and did not handle delays well. We were struggling to meet our existing 
requests and, even worse, the new requests we are making.” 
 “Correct Tim, that was one of the reasons Gary and I were interested in 
seeing how you could help us.” 
 “And to just put some numbers around this about this, I’m guessing about 
40-60% of the schedules were late by some amount?” 
 “Worse now than before, but about 40%. Some a few days late and the ones 
that really blew out were a month or more. Gary and I had put various initia-
tives in place to try and tighten things up. Some of these initiatives worked, but 
others not as well as we hoped.” Grant explains.   
 “And this impacted the perception of how well the engineering department 
was operating?” Asks Tim. 
 “Very much so. It’s something that concerns Gary and me a great deal. We 
even tried juggling our project priorities between proprietary features and 
infrastructure versus general features and infrastructure but it all needs to be 
done [crt 12b]. 
 “And the prior scheduling system’s slipped schedules would in-turn impact 
customer deadlines [crt 25] and customer relationships [crt 27]. This would 
then impact the company’s existing and future contracts, putting more pres-
sure on the company?” 
 “Yes, Tim.” 
 “Is it possible to quantify how contracts have been impacted?” 
 “Marketing and sales could probably give you some numbers. It’s a bit intangible 
since there are a variety of factors that impact if we win or lose a contract, but 
I’ve heard Micky state the revenues from contracts are down 30% and putting 
a great amount of financial pressure on the company [crt 28]. Thus his ambi-
tious charter to reverse the decline and grow the company by 20%.”  
 Explaining the  Core Conflict and Key Injection  
 “So stepping back a bit, the company is under great pressure. Our current 
project management system is failing us. On the one side, we want and struggle 
to meet existing contracts. At the same time we find that we must work 
to grow the company to make up for lost revenues. We do not have the 
resources to do both, but we find ourselves struggling to trying to do one, the 
other, or both. In the meantime our schedules slip, our customers get upset, 
our revenues decline, and the company’s financial situation gets worse.” 

Get it Done On Time!
119
 Grant pauses a bit and ponders for a moment and takes a deep breath. “That 
is quite a statement, Tim. So I agree that our current project management 
system has its shortcomings and we’re having some significant problems, but 
what would you recommend?” 
 “I strongly suggest that we need to put Critical Chain into place with a few 
key additional items.” 
 “That is a bit much to take on faith, Tim. Can you elaborate?”  
 Walking Through the Vision/ FRT 
 “Sure. So there are a few key reasons why Critical Chain would help us address 
the various issues the company is facing:
• 
 Build out the schedule to the point we generate revenue 
(throughput [frt 1])  
• 
 Protect the deadline and behaviors (project buffers [frt 1])  
• 
 Look at the whole organization (organizational analysis 
[frt 2])”  
 Walking Through the Vision:  Throughput  
 “Okay, Tim.” 
 “One key part is that traditionally your schedules are often built to the point 
that it is engineering complete. But that is not the point we generate revenue. 
The customer still has to integrate and confirm the feature is functional per 
the contract. Randal, my understanding is that this can sometimes take about 
a month?” 
 “Give or take. It depends on how complicated the features are and how ready 
the customer is to integrate it. It go a bit longer if additional back-and-forth 
discussions are required” 
 “So with the Phoenix schedule we are building in sync points with the cus-
tomer and aligning our resources to better help them integrate and confirm 
faster. This adds a bit more to the schedule, but overall it helps us generate 
revenue from the project much faster.” 
 “It’s an interesting idea, Tim. Gary said something similar and that with Phoenix 
he figures the customers will feel we are better engaged and it should go 
much faster.”  

Chapter 8 | Individual Buy-In
120
 Walking Through the Vision:  Project Buffers and Behaviors  
 “The next part is that we are working to better use the time available in the 
project. As with any project  variability is critical. At any time tasks can take 
longer than expected—surprises, issues, and problems all happen. It is the very 
nature of projects. The tricky part is that once delays start to accumulate peo-
ple can only react by compromising the project. They cut scope, add resources 
and spend more, or push out deadlines. Critical Chain challenges this.” 
 “How?” 
 “With Critical Chain, we create a bank of time. Any time there is a delay we 
can take time out of this bank versus having to cut scope, add resources and 
go over budget, or push out due date,” Tim explains. 
 “We don’t want to add more time to the schedule. Where does this time 
come from?” 
 Tim continues, “So let me give you an example. If I asked my son to give me 
a very conservative estimate on how long it would take to mow the lawn, he 
might say an hour. And if he did it very quickly with no issues he would say 
the focused time would be 35 minutes. So I manage the task to the 35-minute 
focused time and put the remaining 25 minutes (60-35=25) into a bank. If it 
takes him 45 minutes then I use up the 35 minutes of focused time and use 10 
minutes from the bank of time. But it also leaves me with 15 minutes left over 
in the bank. I can use this remaining time to cover any delays from any other 
tasks he was working on.” 
 “Okay Tim, I think I understand what you are trying to say on a high level. You 
subtract the focused times from the overall estimates and use that to create 
a bank of time. Then you drive people to the focused times. Any time there 
is a delay, you take the time out of the bank. It kinda makes sense, but I would 
feel better seeing a real example.” 
 “Sure. Gary and I can walk you through the Phoenix schedule and you can 
see the focused times we’re driving the team to, the overall estimates, and the 
bank of time we have setup. You can also ask Gary how much of the project 
we have completed compared to how much of the bank of time we have used.” 
 “Okay Tim, I’ll ask him in our one-on-one next week.”  
 Walking Through the Vision:  Organizational Analysis  
 “The next part is that we are not blindly putting the Critical Chain methodology 
into your environment and expecting it to magically fix everything. I have gone 
through and reviewed the organization to better understand the challenges 
and overall issues. As I noted, the current project-management process is not 
working. Building the schedules to revenue can help us move faster. Setting 

Get it Done On Time!
121
up the bank of time can help us protect our deadlines. This helps us with our 
original commitments.” 
 “Okay Tim.” 
 “But there is also the challenge and need of growing the business at the same 
time. For example, there are urgent customer requests, exec reviews, add-
ing new projects, and the quality assurance (QA) process. The bank of time 
(project buffers) can help with this some, but it can’t absorb all of it. That is 
where additional key items are needed. On the QA side I worked with Nir 
and Anthony to create a better and more flexible process [frt 13]. If we know 
that we can expect customer requests and exec review changes, we can 
reserve some capacity for these items, but we really need a more disciplined 
change control process. Regardless of how well we design our system, if we 
flood it with work it will eventually fail.” 
 “I have talked with Micky in the past about this. He has expressed two main 
concerns. We  have to grow the business and engineering needs to move 
faster,” presses Grant. 
 “We can show how we can help grow the business. With the Phoenix project, 
we can show that we can move faster and more reliably. With the reserved 
capacity we can accommodate some urgent customer requests and exec 
changes. We can provide more consistent and on-time delivery to customers, 
which will improve our relationships and future contracts. But we will lose this 
and put the company at risk if we don’t have effective change control.” 
 “Tim, I can talk with Micky and the board about this. I like the way you framed 
it. We don’t need change control to limit our growth, we need it to  enable our 
growth. I think that will better resonate with the team and move us forward, 
as opposed to them thinking that engineering is just complaining again,” Grant 
says excitedly.  
 Walking Through the Vision:  Summary  
 “So lastly is the old versus the new,” Tim continues, “With the old scheduling 
system we could not consistently meet our original commitments. In addition, 
we could not do the things we needed to grow the company. Departments 
were getting stretched out. Schedules were slipping. We missed key deadlines 
and damaged our customer relationships.” 
 “Okay,” acknowledges Grant. 
 “With the new process we have added a bank of time (project buffer), built the 
schedules to capture revenues quicker, added capacity to accommodate growth 
requests, and improved quality assurance and change control. This sets us up to 
be successful and in turn reliably deliver features to our customers, improve our 
relationships and grow our business with them, which increases our revenues.”  

Chapter 8 | Individual Buy-In
122
 Close the Deal 
 “You make a very compelling argument, Tim. It sound much more promising. 
Let me  review  some of these items with Gary and we will need to see how 
well Phoenix does.” 
 “That is great to hear, Grant.” 
 Randal then gently slaps Tim on the shoulder. “ Close the deal. ” 
 “Of course, go ahead,” Tim pushes back. 
 “Ug,” Randal turns to Grant, “So Grant, based on what you have seen, can you 
back us up in the Exec meeting?” 
 Grant puts his hand on his chin and ponders for a moment. “I was going to 
wait and see what Micky was proposing. Likely more marketing plans and 
strategies. He has been working hard on something.” 
 “A lot is at risk and we’re running out of time,” Randal presses. 
 “Fair enough, Randal. There are a few weeks until the Exec review. I want to 
see if Phoenix stays on track and review your plan with Gary. A lot rides on 
his team’s ability to put Critical Chain into place and get results from it. If he’s 
confident, then I can back you up.” 
 “Sounds good. Thanks Grant.” Randal replies.  
 Final Current Reality Tree 
 After the meeting, Tim sits down with Randal.   
 “So Randal, are you ready for the final tweaks to the CRT?” 
 “Sure Tim. It looks like you have grown it quite a bit.”  

Get it Done On Time!
123
 
UDE (undesirable effect)
Core Conflict
25 We miss key customer
deadlines, miss market
windows, and lose
contracts more and more
26 We do not make our
expected revenues from our
product lines
28 The company
could go 
bankrupt
29, 30
23 We see that our
products are not
competitive enough more
and more
-24 We will slip our schedules
to fix major quality issues and
hold more exec reviews
-22 Sometimes we see our
competitors shipping higher
quality, low cost, and /or more 
innovative products
20 We cut quality and /or
innovation to maintain
schedules more and more
19 Cutting corners (quality)
helps us keep on schedule
15 We are likely to slip
schedules more and 
more
5 We feel pressure to focus
on our original requests
18 Resources needed
for future projects 
are unavailable and
committed to 
existing projects
-21 We have less
and less time and 
money to 
research,
experiment and
innovate
-27 We sour and
lose customer
relationships
Summary Current Reality Tree (CRT)
  
 “So I split the CRT to top and bottom since it was getting too big to fit on one 
page. Not ideal, but it works. On the top of the tree, we can see higher-level 
management issues. After meeting with Ashley I wanted to add and clarify 
two items. 22) We see that are competitors are catching up, specifically 
their quality is going up, their features are improving, and their costs are going 
down. The second was 27) we sour and lose customer relationships.”   
 “Makes sense Tim. Competition and customer relationships are two of her 
major concerns.” 
 “I also added two clarifications. First, 23) if our products are not competitive 
then 24) we will slip schedules and hold additional Exec reviews. Lastly, 21) we 
have less time to research is one of the consequences from 18) resources for 
future projects are unavailable.” 
 “Ug Tim, you are capturing even more complications.” Randal admits. 
 “Just trying to capture all of the major issues. Next is the bottom of the CRT. 
This is where the drivers of the higher-level management issues appear.” 

Chapter 8 | Individual Buy-In
124
 
20
20
15 We are likely to slip
schedules more and
more
26 We do not make our
expected revenues from
our product lines
13 Many departments
resources are stretched
more and more 
18 Resources needed 
for future projects
are unavailable and
committed to
existing projects
29 Management is
tempted to cut
costs by minimizing
staff
30 Management looks at
adding more product
lines to increase revenue
5 We feel pressure to focus
on our original requests
3 We must meet
existing commitments
4 We only have enough
resources to meet
existing commitments
1 We want our projects
and company to be
successful
7b Our competition is
already catching up to our
current/original requests
8 We feel pressure to
focus on new requests
9 Exce reviews late
in the development
process help us
manage overall
product quality
10 We regularly hold
Exec reviews late in our
product development
process
12 Late changes in our product development
process regularly cause major rework
17 Project delays often happen
16 Product development
schedules are tight and do not
handle delays well.
14 Too many resources burn out
and leave
12b We oscilate between
proprietary and general features
11 Sometimes we feel
the need to take on
urgent customer
requests during the 
project
6 Adding new projects (grow) and
responding to Exec and customer
requests (adapt) helps us maintain
and gain new contracts and
customers
7 We must grow and
adapt 
2 We are contractually
obligated to deliver features,
deadlines, and quality
21
25
Summary Current Reality Tree
Bottom
  
 “So Randal, based on our conservation with Grant I added that 12b) we oscillate 
between proprietary and generic features. In talking with Ashley and Herb, 
I am adding 30) management looks at adding more projects and 29) management 
is tempted to cut costs by minimizing staff.”   
 “Minimizing staff?”   
 “Management is under pressure. If we can’t make enough revenue from exist-
ing products there are two ways you can go. Add more products or reduce 
staff. Management has looked at both, but neither is viable.” 

Get it Done On Time!
125
 “A bit scary Tim, but yes. We have enough trouble with our existing products 
to try and add more. And we’re busy with existing products, so cutting staff 
will just put us farther behind. Just looking at  all the issues you have captured 
on both pages makes me feel a bit more depressed  abou  t your doom tree.” 
 “Well, the goal of the CRT is not to depress everyone. The goal is to show 
the connections between the issues, see where to focus efforts, and show the 
compelling need to change.” 
 “Well Tim, we all knew we needed to change. This just is showing us how 
much has to change. It is looking like everything.” 
 “But the key is that everything is connected. We need to focus on the conflict 
between original requests and new requests and we need to look at what is 
going into 13) departments are stretched.” 
 “Well Tim, I knew engineering is a target, but in looking at 13) I can see eight 
arrows going into it. That is a target if I ever saw one.” 
 “We need to fix the system, not a specific issue or department. If we focus 
on the drivers (bottom of the tree) the changes should carry up through the 
tree with the help of a few key injections. Here, let’s walk through the FRT. 
It should be much more encouraging.”  

Chapter 8 | Individual Buy-In
126
 Future Reality Tree 
 
Summary FRT (org analysis, frt 2)
Key Injections
Key Benefits
18 We increase our 
sales
20 We meet and exceed
expected revenues
21 The company is more
financially solid
14 Our products are
more competitive
22 Projects can be
better staffed and
funded 
13 We improve our quality
assurance testing [ch7]
and set up marketing
checkpoints
17 We are able to
meet key customer
deadlines and
market windows
8 We are better able to
meet or beat our
schedules
7 Our schedules can
better handle delays
6 We successfully implement
Critical Chain (CC) single 
project into our company’s
environment
1 We set up project and feeding
buffers, reduce bad multi-tasking, set
clear goals, define the project in terms 
of throughput, and build schedules 
back to front [ch2,4]
2 We identify a CC expert,
identify CC tool, conduct an
org analysis, determine a 
compelling need & set up the
correct metrics [ch3]
3 We identify an
internal CC champion
[ch5]
5 We get exec buy-in [ch8]
4 We target a high impact project, build out the schedule, and
manage the project based on buffers and CC behaviors [ch6]
10 We minimize and better manage 
the impact of late schedule 
changes
9 We are more discliplined in our
change control policies and
better manage exec changes
[ch6,10]
15 Future project
resources are available
12 Department
resources are better
balanced and happier
19 Our customer 
ralationships improve
16 We are better able
to research and
innovation
 

Get it Done On Time!
127
 “So a few quick additions: 13) we add marketing checkpoints per my discus-
sion with Ashley and with 14) better products, which helps 19) our customer 
relationships improve. With 20) better revenues we can also make sure 22) 
 p rojects are better staffed. Then we can add 5) we need to get Exec buy-in 
as well.” 
 “Whoa Tim, slow down. How about a short summary?” 
 “Sure. We put boxes 1-5 in place to help us successfully implement the Critical 
Chain. With the 6) Critical Chain in place, we can 7) better handle delays. If 
we can 9) put better change control in, we won’t flood the system with work. 
With 6) better schedules, 13) better QA, our products will be better 14). In 
addition, with 6) better schedules, 16) we will have more time to innovate and 
that will get us 14) better products as well. With 14) better products and 8) 
better schedules customers will be happier, we will hit deadlines, and revenues 
will increase.” 
 “Well, it sounds much better. We have worked on boxes 1-5 to put Critical 
Chain into place. With Phoenix and talking to Gary, I can see the schedules 
getting better. We just need time to see those results carry over to meeting 
the deadlines and happy customers. So yes, I can see we are getting there Tim. 
Interesting to see how it is all laid out here in your happy tree diagram. It will 
be interesting to see how well Micky will buy in to your plan, but real results 
on Phoenix will certainly get his attention.” 
 “We’ll my meeting is coming up with Micky shortly. Let’s grab some coffee and 
then we can strategize from there.” Tim suggests.   

© Eric Bergland 2016 
E. Bergland, Get it Done On Time!, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-1860-0_9
 C H A P T E R 
  Almost 
 Randal finds Tim in his new cube just before his  meeting  with Micky. “So Tim, 
what is the plan?” 
 “Same as with Grant.” 
 “Seems a bit simple, Tim.” 
 “True. With Grant, I highlighted the meet original commitments issues and 
the engineering concerns since that is his area of expertise. With Micky, it 
will be better to highlight the ‘grow the business’ aspects such as customer 
relationships and meeting revenues issues.” 
 “That part makes sense. Be sure to highlight their areas of ownership and 
interest.” 
 “Possibly this time I’ll start with the cloud versus the issues as well.” 
 “Eh? You are being TOC cryptic again, Tim.” 
 “Cater to the audience. With Grant he lives a lot of the engineering issues, 
so it made sense to start the discussion there. Micky is the CEO and sees 
and lives the company’s struggles, so starting with the cloud of the company’s 
conflict should work well for him.” 
 “Fair enough. Any other prep; we went through a lot of details for Grant?” 
 “Nope, we did all of the ground work and analysis already. I think we’re good 
to go.” 
 “Do you need me to be your wingman on this one?” 
9

Chapter 9 | Almost
130
 “I have been going a bit back and forth on that one, Randal. You certainly know 
the organization more so that would help. At the same time you also noted that 
Micky will be more open one on one. I need him to feel comfortable and I need 
to know where he stands. So probably best for me to go solo this time around.” 
 “Okay, I have a few meetings this afternoon. Why don’t we catch up tomor-
row morning and we can review how things went and continue preparations 
for the Exec meeting.” 
 “Sure.” 
 Tim Meets with  Micky  
 The next day, Tim walks up to Micky’s office. As he enters he sees  Micky  fin-
ishing up a call just before he waves Tim to come in. Micky is over 6 foot, well 
built, and dressed impeccably. 
 “Hi Tim, it is nice to meet with you,” Micky states, sizing Tim up. 
 “Hi Micky, it is good to meet with you as well.” 
 “So I have been having regular meetings with Randal and he has indicated that 
you have been working with engineering to try and improve our process.” 
 “That is correct; I have been looking through the different issues and see what 
we can do.” 
 “And what have you seen?” Micky pausing to see what Tim comes up with.  
 Step 1: Show the Cloud 
 “I see that everyone wants the company to be successful. On one side we are 
obligated to meet existing contract commitments [crt 5].”  
 “True,” agrees Micky. 
 “On the other side the competition is catching up and we need to grow 
revenues. This causes us to feel the need and pressure to focus on new 
requests and grow the business [crt 8].” 
 “Also very true.” 
 “We have enough resources to meet existing commitments [crt 4], but not 
enough to meet existing commitments and grow the company at the same 
time. So we oscillate back and forth trying to meet these two needs.” 
 Micky takes a short breath and, giving Tim some more time to see where he is 
going with this, he responds, “That certainly sums up a few of our challenges, 
Tim. So what do you suggest we do?” 

Get it Done On Time!
131
 Step 2: Blame the System and Highlight Key 
Issues from CRT 
 “The current product development system is not working for us. We run into 
schedule delays, cut quality to meet deadlines, and miss customer deadlines. 
This is all impacting the company’s revenues and our ability to move forward 
to the  extent  that contract revenues are down 30%.” 
 “Yes, revenues are down,” Micky states, a little frustrated and waiting for Tim 
to finish his pitch.  
 Step 3: Introduce the Key Injection and Vision 
 Tim continues, “We need a new system. A system that can better accommo-
date our needs, support the original commitments, allow growth, has better 
change control, and allow us to deliver on-time. The Critical Chain project 
management system can get us there.”   
 “This is the project management system that Grant and Gary have been 
working on for Phoenix?” 
 “Yes. We developed a stronger schedule, designed it to get revenues faster, 
and built it to better absorb reasonable delays and changes.” 
 “And what about the other projects we have going on?” asks Micky. 
 “We can take the process and lessons from Phoenix and carry them over to 
the other projects.” 
 “How long until we get results? What types of results can I expect, Tim?” 
 “As the projects execute, we can see that they are holding to their overall 
deadlines. We can also see them accommodate some of the customer and 
Exec changes better, but we have to use good change control to be very 
selective of the changes we choose. As the project’s finish up, we should 
see them reaching their revenues sooner and the customers more engaged 
and happier.” 
 “Tim, Phoenix is months out. The other projects are even farther out.” 
Micky’s patience is running out and his voice raising slightly. “We need  some-
thing to go to the customers  now . I can’t go back to them with engineering 
promises of things getting better in half a year. We have done that already 
and our deliveries and quality got worse not better. We’ve lost a few key 
accounts and the others are not doing much better. I need something better 
to turn things around.” 

Chapter 9 | Almost
132
 Tim stirs uncomfortably. “We have made the schedules much better and we 
have made the process significantly better for Phoenix. It  is running better. It 
 will help out the company. But it will take time for products to get developed. 
That part I can’t control.” 
 Micky sighs and sits back in his chair putting his hands down on his desk. 
“I can’t just tell our customers to buy more from us based on the fact that 
we have just tweaked our process and we expect everything will be better 
in a few months. We have already been down that road. I am also concerned 
about getting everyone’s hopes falsely stirred up if your new process can’t fix 
our immediate problems.” 
 Tim is a bit shocked, but he tries to recover. “Critical Chain can get us there, 
but we need to give it time. I can share results other organizations have 
gotten, but it takes time.” 
 “That is the concern, Tim. We have run out of time. Maybe Critical Chain 
could get us there. Gary and Grant seem to think it shows promise. But engi-
neering has promised changes time and time again. They make incremental 
improvements, yet we keep falling behind our deliveries and our competition 
is catching up. We need a game-changer Tim and I need it today. If engineering 
can’t provide it then I will,” Micky states a bit more defiant and resolved.   
 Tim and Micky sit there quietly for a moment. Micky is comfortable and defiantly 
holding the silence. Then Tim wants to end on some positive action going 
forward, “I’ll keep working with Gary on the schedule and we can bring the 
results to the Exec meeting. We can highlight how we have improved and how 
we are staying on track.” 
 Micky pauses, “Sure Tim. That sounds reasonable.” Looking at his watch, he 
says, “Tim, I have a call coming up.” 
 “Sure. Thank you for your time,” and with that, Tim left Micky’s office starting 
to think about how things went and what next steps would make sense.”  
 Next Steps 
 The next morning things seem a bit somber. Randal had called and wanted to 
meet over at the company coffee shop right away. Tim was still thinking about 
how things had gone during his talk with  Micky.   
 As Tim walks over to the coffee shop, surprisingly, Randal is already there at 
a table. 
 “Let’s go for a walk, Tim.” 
 “Sure.” They quietly walk down the hall and out the building. Randal is looking 
very somber and turns to Tim. 

Get it Done On Time!
133
 “I found out Micky’s next step this morning.” 
 “Oh?” replies Tim. 
 “Micky cut your consulting contract effective immediately. He wants you to 
clean out your desk and be gone. Something about us being tight on money 
and budget cutting, but all of us know it is just a ruse. You must of really pushed 
his buttons somehow.” 
 Tim stops walking for a second and takes everything in. “Actually, it didn’t feel 
that way. As soon as I said we needed to improve the product development 
process and it would take time, he was done.” 
 “Hmm, before you started consulting, engineering has been in the hot seat 
for months and has made a lot of promises. Micky took those promises to 
the customers. But then the promises didn’t work out and Micky had to back 
pedal. Possibly this was the last straw.” 
 “Possibly. I guess. Either way he was not open to the direction I was going 
unless I could guarantee results instantly. He seemed to have already made up 
his mind before we even started talking. At this point in time, I think I could 
have said anything and it would not  have mattered.” 
 “We can figure something out, Tim. Maybe you just caught Micky on an off day. 
Both Gary and I want to appeal his decision to end your contract. Grant was 
a bit surprised by Micky’s actions as well. He said he would look into it, but 
that no matter what we did, it was not going to get resolved before the Exec 
meeting.” 
 Tim changing the subject, “So what are you and Gary going to do about the 
Exec meeting?” 
 “We will continue to gather the results. So far they are looking promising. 
As expected, we’ve hit a number of issues, consumed some of the project 
buffer, and we’re still on track to hit our deliverables. The team feels more 
confident that the schedule is realistic and they actually have a chance to 
succeed. I have been working with Gary to talk with the customers to better 
enable a clean feature check-out. The customers appreciate the attention 
and Gary feels it will help us get payments a month early if the schedules 
continue to hold up.” 
 “That sounds very good, Randal.” 
 “It was all from your help and support, Tim. I have also taken items from our 
discussion with Grant and I’ll see if I can work them into the presentation as 
well. Although with the Exec review it is more of a status update then a buy-in 
discussion. If I need help, is it okay to call you Tim?” 

Chapter 9 | Almost
134
 “Sure, of course.” 
 “Seems like you have a little bit of a break until we can get something sorted 
out,” Randal notes. 
 “I guess I need to get back to updating and sending out my resume again,” 
Tim says, trailing off. 
 “Gary and I will work with Grant. We will see if we can figure something out. 
You have put a lot of time and heart to help out our company. It really has 
made a difference.”  

© Eric Bergland 2016 
E. Bergland, Get it Done On Time!, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-1860-0_10
 C H A P T E R 
 Board Room 
Meeting 
 Gary and Randal enter the board  room . It has a large oak oval table sur-
rounded by over 20 overstuffed chairs. Actual paintings, not prints, adorn the 
walls. A side bar of ice water with lemons, three types of coffee, and pastries 
sits off to the side. Gary looks nervously at Randal, “It has been a while since 
I last visited this room.” 
 Randal looks back, “It is the first time I’ve been here.” They go off to the side and 
pick two chairs next to each other. Shortly thereafter Ashley (the marketing 
and sales director), Herb (HR), and Grant (COO) walk in and take their places. 
Micky enters the room, pauses to look around, and enters as if it is friendly 
surroundings and sits next to Ashley. Then Clint, Neal, and Bryn enter. They 
are the company’s three external board members. Clint was the CEO and 
Neal was the president of their respective software companies. Bryn was a 
founder of a software start-up that went from five employees to 150 before 
she solid it off for a small fortune. 
 Randal watches as Bryn approaches the podium. “So for this quarter’s board 
meeting, we have three agenda items. Grant will go over the current financials, 
Gary and Randal will discuss the engineering status, and Micky will review 
strategy and direction. At the end, we can cover any additional opens people 
have.” She looks around the room, and seeing no concerns about the agenda, 
she says, “Okay, then, Grant please provide your financial overview.” 
10

Chapter 10 | Board Room Meeting
136
 Grant  approaches  the podium and starts walking through various numbers, 
charts, and diagrams covering ROI, burn rates, revenues, and company reserves. 
Randal’s eyes go blurry, but he tunes back in when Grant goes on to say, 
“We are in a tight spot. We cannot sustain the company based on our current 
revenues. Bottom line, we must change and quickly.” The board members ask a 
few clarifying questions with seriousness in their tone, but at the same time, it 
does not seem to be news to them. This had been going on for a while. 
 Randal leans over to Gary and whispers, “This is serious.” 
 Gary replies, “Yes, we have tried several things in the past, but the results have 
not been compelling enough. That is why Tim’s Critical Chain caught my and 
Grant’s attention. It was something new, with a track record, and the more we 
worked with it, the more it made sense. It wasn’t easy, but it made a difference 
to both engineering and the company as a whole.” 
 “So if the issues are serious and have been going on for a while, I can see why 
Micky has been freaking out. This is his first time as acting CEO and I’m sure 
he does not want the company to fail in his first year. It would look terrible. 
And considering he killed Tim’s contract I can see that he is not bought into 
Critical Chain. So he has to be stressed.” 
 “Then why does he look so confident?” inquires Gary. 
 “I have no idea, Gary, but it makes me nervous.” 
 Grant finishes his presentation and steps down from the podium. Bryn speaks 
up, “Gary and Randal, the engineering update please.” Randal and Gary then 
walk over to the podium. 
 Gary and Randal Present 
 Gary carefully  approaches  the microphone. “We have made great progress 
with engineering. The Phoenix project has made significant improvements. The 
teams are more focused. The schedules we have created are more complete, 
solid, and reliable than before. The QA plans are more complete and flexible as 
well. We are 30% ahead and on track to finish our first customer milestone early.” 
 Micky looks over to Ashley. “Gary,” Ashley speaking up, “We have heard engi-
neering promises before. How do we know this is sustainable and not just 
going to fall apart like some of the past attempts?” 
 Randal steps in, “That is a good question, Ashley. We have implemented a new 
project management process with the help of a consultant. With his help, we 
put new systems into place. Captured the process and learnings so we can 
share it with other development teams. The system allows us to manage our 
schedules and protect our deadlines as long as we stay disciplined. The pro-
cess itself has a good track record with helping other organizations as well.” 

Get it Done On Time!
137
 “What about the recent Phoenix feature requests you tried to rejected from 
marketing? From our customers?” she continued. 
 Gary looked over to Ashley, “We built out our schedules to hit the timelines 
marketing provided. We absorbed some of the requests, but other requests 
would require us to push out the schedule and marketing did not want us to 
do that.” 
 Micky stepped in from there, “If we cannot respond to urgent customer 
requests then we lose their favor and future contracts.” 
 “I think we all agree,” said Randal trying to channel Tim, “We all want the 
company to be successful. We need to both support our current requests as 
well as be willing to take additional requests. But if we take on more requests 
than we can realistically support, we will miss the schedules and that will not 
help anyone.” 
 Micky stares coldly at Randal for a few moments. The room sits quiet. 
“You still have not answered the sustainability question. You say things are 
on track now. How do we know if things will remain on track?” Micky asks, 
poking the engineering results a bit more. 
 Randal looks at Gary. “We have a new process in place. A sustainable process,” 
Gary replies. 
 “How long until we know for sure?” inquires Micky a bit coldly. 
 “We are making progress with Phoenix. We’re ahead of the next milestone. 
The final delivery is in a few months. So it will be very clear then. From there 
we can continue the process and any knowledge we have from it to the next 
project.” 
 “So it will be months to know for sure for Phoenix and even longer for 
the other projects. We’re tight on funds. We have had engineering problems 
before. But you think it will be  okay .” Micky emphasizing the word okay and 
looks around the board room. 
 After a long moment of silence Grant steps in, “Gary and Randal I do not 
believe some of the board members are familiar with this new process. Can 
you summarize it for them?” 
 “Sure Grant,” states Randal. “The new process is focused on creating banks 
of time to manage and protect our project deadlines, reducing inefficient 
multi-tasking, and building more robust schedules that will help us reach our 
revenues sooner. The better managed schedules will benefit us by helping to 
reduce employee burnout, address more customer requests, and help with 
maintaining and gaining new contracts.” 

Chapter 10 | Board Room Meeting
138
 The board members nod and ask several clarifying questions that both Gary 
and Randal cover. Grant then asks, “So Gary and Randal, do you have confi-
dence in this process?” 
 “Yes,” They both agree. 
 Grant also steps in, “Tim, the consultant Gary and Randal hired, walked me 
through this new product development process. I was pretty impressed with 
it. As Randal said, it will help us manage our schedules better and more reli-
ably. At the same time, Tim showed me how it can help us grow the company. 
With some key items the new process and stronger schedules will enable us 
to meet our existing commitments as well as  some of the urgent customer 
requests and late changes marketing needs to improve our relationships 
with customers. As Gary noted, the results on Phoenix are solid and we can 
transfer this process to other projects. So I believe we can turn the company 
around using this methodology, but as Micky noted, it will take time. We 
have some benefits to Phoenix. It will not take a lot, but it will take some 
time to start rolling it onto other projects and in turn start seeing benefits 
there as well.” 
 Bryn looks around. “Thank you Gary, for the update. Any other questions at 
this time?” Ashley looks over at Micky and he gives a dismissive sideways head 
nod no. Seeing no additional questions, Bryn states, “Micky your update on 
strategy and direction.”  
 Micky Presents  
 Micky  confidently walks up to the podium, “We’re on the Titanic and heading for 
an iceberg. We either change course and do something different or the whole 
ship goes down. We’re not delivering the products our customers need when 
they need it. We’re losing contracts and barely making money on the contracts 
we have. We keep hearing the same story over and over—engineering needs 
more resources, more time—yet it keeps missing its deadlines. We do not 
have the time or funds to keep waiting. We simply cannot survive this way.” 
Micky lets the statement stand… “I want to increase the marketing budget by 
20% and aggressively push into the market and make our products stand out 
and distinguish ourselves from our competitors.” 
 Everyone pauses. Grant is the first to speak, “Micky, where do we get the 
funds? We are already maxed  out .” 
 “We outsource engineering. I have already talked to several software organi-
zations in China. We can get same development work done at a fraction of 
the cost. They are familiar with our markets and they have an  actual record of 
delivering on time,” Micky says, emphasizing the word actual.   

Get it Done On Time!
139
 The execs and board look shocked. Micky stands there gleaming. “I have 
already started the preliminary contracts; we could turn this over to them 
in a matter of weeks. Free ourselves from the engineering deadweight that is 
pulling us down and come out stronger and faster than before.” 
 Gary is the first to speak, “Micky, they don’t know our technology.” 
 “I have already talked to them. They have already worked in similar areas. 
We would need to retain some local technical experts and they can help ramp 
them up and get familiar with our existing code base.” 
 “What about our intellectual property? You outsource our development 
then you are outsourcing our intellectual property. We would be completely 
dependent on the other company. I’ve heard of less scrupulous organiza-
tions taking funds and developing products for one company and then turning 
around and selling the same products to their competitors. Something like 
that would cripple us,” states Neal. 
 “We would have to put safeguards in place. I’ve talked with peers at other 
organizations and know which companies to steer clear of,” Micky states 
confidently. 
 “What about the local engineers? We have already invested heavily in training 
them and getting them to use to our code base,” Gary asks, concerned. 
 “We would lay off the majority of them and keep a core team of architects to 
help guide and manage the work in China. We have to change course. This 
will get us there. It will be at a fraction of the current development cost and 
they have a successful track record of delivering products. We can get our 
pipeline of products quickly and reliably on track, expand it, and aggressively 
market it. We will be significantly better off than we have ever been,” Micky 
states soundly and confidently. 
 The board and execs look around. Bryn speaks up, “Clint, you have some 
outsourcing experience. What is your take on it?” 
 Clint thinks for a moment. “We certainly did some outsourcing in my organi-
zation, but we phased it in. As Micky noted, the cost savings can be significant; 
that is why so many organizations look into it. The coordination has to be 
really well done. There is also ramp-up time. And as Micky noted, you need 
to find a really good company to work with. And as Neal noted, you have to 
watch your intellectual property with any place you outsource. You don’t want 
to give them too much. Overall it’s an interesting proposition Micky brings up. 
It has some real strengths to it and some really big concerns as well.” 

Chapter 10 | Board Room Meeting
140
 Then Bryn steps in to lead the meeting, “As Micky pointed out and the updates 
Grant presented we can’t just stick with what we have been doing. We have 
to change something. We have two very different directions to consider. We 
can try and trust that engineering will continue to make great progress soon 
enough or, as Micky said, we can try and change the game all together and 
outsource. To make this decision, we need to review each option more deeply 
and then as a group decide.”  
 Board  Review  
 The board dismisses Gary, Randal, and Ashley and convenes to review the 
decision. As the three of them wait, they see a man in his late 50s approach 
the board room and enter. Gary does a double take and then turns to Randal, 
“Randal, that was Roger. He is our CEO who had temporarily stepped down 
and let Micky step up as interim CEO.” 
 “Really? Interesting. I wonder what they asked him here for.” 
 “I’m not sure…” Looking over to Ashley, she seemed puzzled as well. 
 After a long hour and half everyone was invited back in. Bryn stands at the 
podium. “Gary, you have made great progress. If you had just brought prom-
ises again, the board wouldn’t believe you. You brought data, results, and a 
solid plan to move ahead. Grant spoke very highly of your consultant Tim and 
how he thought your plan had been worked out not just to help engineering, 
but to grow the company.” Gary nodded. 
 She continued, “Micky, true to your reputation you have brought a great and 
bold plan to radically change things and get us to a much better position 
quickly. But it also comes with great risks both in how fast and successfully it 
would work and it potentially puts our intellectual property at risk.” Micky 
holds himself confidently. 
 “This is not a winner-takes-all decision. We need what is best for the company 
and its future,” Bryn emphatically states. “The board has decided to very care-
fully monitor Phoenix and we want a monthly report and review of its status 
and progress. We also want to see this new Critical Chain methodology and 
learnings rolled out to additional projects as quickly as possible. In the past, 
we have had cost over runs, excessive overtime, customer delay penalties, and 
customer penalties for incomplete features. These have combined to drag our 
overall company financials down. Per Grant’s estimates, Phoenix will beat its 
original revenue estimates, deliver on time, and meet the required customer 
requirements. If we can carry this success forward and to the other projects, 
this will enable us to increase our overall revenues, improve and grow our 
customer relations, and turn around and grow the company. Gary, your team has 
done very well, but we definitely need and expect this progress to continue.” 

Get it Done On Time!
141
 “Understood.” 
 Bryn continues, “Micky. Under a very challenging situation you have done well 
and continued to innovate. Roger has indicated that he intends to formally 
step down due his medical concerns and we thank him for all of his accom-
plishments and sharing his insights about our current situation. Micky, you will 
need to continue to work with Grant to leverage and successfully sell and 
market Phoenix’s success. You  and Grant will work as co-CEO’s to move us 
forward. Grant will continue to focus on operations and engineering. Micky, 
you will be promoted to co-CEO immediately and will continue to drive the 
company’s overall marketing strategy and customer relationships. Once the 
company stabilizes, we can possibly revisit outsourcing as a way to expand and 
extend our existing development efforts. But we need to get the ‘here and 
now’ stable before we can look too far forward. You will need to work with 
and leverage Grant and Gary’s technical expertise if we are to be successful.” 
 Micky looks over warily to Gary, “Understood.” 
 “Any remaining questions or open topics for this forum?” inquires Bryn. 
Looking around the room and seeing everyone quiet, she continues. “Good. 
Then that concludes this quarter’s meeting.”  
 Epilog  
 A few days, Gary, Randal, and Tim reconnect at the coffee shop where Tim first 
saw Randal. They filled Tim in on what came out of the board meeting. 
 Tim looks over to Randal, somewhat baiting him, “So who won?” 
 Randal looks a bit puzzled, “In some ways I want to say engineering. But hon-
esty I’m not sure; it seems like everyone got something.” 
 Tim smiles, “I would go along with what Bryn said as far as the company win-
ning. It is less of one department out-doing the other. It’s more about the 
company as a whole doing better.” Tim looks at Gary, “Looks like you saved 
the engineering team from outsourcing.” 
 “True, Tim. I realize now that I needed your and Randal’s help to do it. We 
had done some improvements here and there but the processes we have now 
work much better. “ 
 “Tim helped us look past the symptoms of our issues and figure out where 
the root of our problems are and where we needed to focus our efforts,” 
Randal states. 
 Gary looks a bit oddly at Randal, “You are starting to sound like Tim.” 
 “Umm, possibly he rubbed off on me. But I definitely dress better,” Randal says 
with a smile. 

Chapter 10 | Board Room Meeting
142
 Gary continues, “With Critical Chain, Phoenix is launching on time, with the 
required features, and we should achieve the customer sign-off significantly faster 
than our past projects. With Grant’s help and new position we have balanced out 
marketing’s sudden feature requests and been able to put in a stronger change 
control process [frt 9]. We are also in the process of rolling it out to other projects.” 
 “That sounds great, Gary.” 
 “And Randal, your take on Micky’s promotion?” 
 “Umm, I think it is more politics. Sure it’s called a promotion, but Micky is 
not  the CEO or at least the only CEO. They moved engineering away from 
him and Grant kept operations. It was clear that Micky had grown to resent 
the engineering team. He is exceptionally good at what he is good at and not 
so good at what he isn’t. They want to keep him focused on marketing and 
customer relations. He knows our market and has long-standing relations 
with customers. It’s something that the board and to my understanding Roger 
underscored. The company could not risk or survive losing Micky and the 
customer relationships he has built up and cultivated over the years.” 
 “And the outsourcing, Gary?” 
 “It was Micky’s idea. He talked to a few people and really latched onto the idea, 
but he had oversimplified the technical challenges involved. As the board said 
definitely something we can’t do now, but Grant mentioned in a year or two 
that we might consider outsourcing some of the non-proprietary develop-
ment to help extend our existing development [frt 11]. We really need to get 
our current projects under control before we can even consider it.” 
 “And Tim,” Randal interjects, “Now that Grant has reopened your consulting 
contract as well as an opportunity to join full time, what do you win?” 
 “I get to keep working with you guys,” Tim says with a big smile. 
 “True true,” say Randal and Gary, both laughing. 
 “But Tim, with Critical Chain implemented in Phoenix and the process docu-
mented so we can carry it over to other projects, what will you focus on?” 
inquires Randal. 
 “Ahh Randal, we have implemented a single project Critical Chain to help each 
project do well. Once we have got it down and things are running well, we 
can next look at Critical Chain multi-project to help the organization manage 
multiple parallel projects effectively [frt 21].” 
 “I see,” says Randal jokingly, “More theories, concepts, and terminology for 
Gary and me to learn.” 
 “It isn’t that bad, is it?” 
 Randal turns to look at Tim, “Well one last thing Tim, in regards to your office 
cube. I seem to have run into a bit of a delay….”  

Get it Done On Time!
143
 Final  Future Reality Tree (FRT)  
 Tim, ever reviewing and tuning his plan, adds two last items to his FRT. 
 
Summary FRT (org analysis, frt 2)
Key Injections
Key Benefits
18 We increase our 
sales
20 We meet and exceed
expected revenues
21 The company is more
financially solid
14 Our products are
more competitive
22 Projects can be
better staffed and
funded 
13 We improve our quality
assurance testing [ch7]
and set up marketing
checkpoints
17 We are able to
meet key customer
deadlines and
market windows
8 We are better able to
meet or beat our
schedules
7 Our schedules can
better handle delays
6 We successfully implement
Critical Chain (CC) single 
project into our company’s
environment
1 We set up project and feeding
buffers, reduce bad multi-tasking, set
clear goals, define the project in terms 
of throughput, and build schedules 
back to front [ch2,4]
2 We identify a CC expert,
identify CC tool, conduct an
org analysis, determine a 
compelling need & set up
the correct metrics [ch3]
3 We identify an
internal CC champion
[ch5]
5 We get exec buy-in [ch8]
4 We target a high impact project, build out the schedule, and
manage the project based on buffers and CC behaviors [ch6]
10 We minimize and better manage 
the impact of late schedule 
changes
9 We are more discliplined in our
change control policies and
better manage exec changes
[ch6,10]
15 Future project
resources are available
12 Department
resources are better
balanced and happier
19 Our customer 
relationships improve
16 We are better able
to research and
innovation
11 We consider outsourcing
non-proprietary features
[ch10]
21 We implement
Critical Chain multi-
project into our
environment [ch10]
  

Chapter 10 | Board Room Meeting
144
 The future needs to 21) look at Critical Chain multi-project and the possible 
consideration of 11) outsourcing non-proprietary features. Then he stands 
back and says to himself, “Now that looks a bit more complete. We have 
6) Critical Chain in place as our foundation, 9) change control to pace new 
requests, 13) a better QA process, and 21) Critical Chain multi-project as we 
move forward. We also have a future possibility to 11) outsource some work 
to expand capacity without impacting existing resources. Now that is a more 
solid plan.”   

© Eric Bergland 2016 
E. Bergland, Get it Done On Time!, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-1860-0
A P P E N D I X
  Key Concepts 
 Chapter   1 : Introductions 
• 
 Critical Chain  can be used to help deliver projects faster 
and more reliably.  
• 
 Theory of Constraints (TOC)  is a set of general prob-
lem-solving tools that can be used to look at an orga-
nization as a whole, identify areas to focus on, and drive 
overall improvements. It can be used help focus teams on 
any improvement effort from Critical Chain, Scrum, Agile, 
new technology deployments, and so on.  
 Chapter   2 : High-Level  Critical Chain  Overview 
 Critical Chain is a Theory of Constraints solution that addresses the common 
problems found in project management so you can better plan, manage, and 
be more successful with projects. 
 Theory of Constraints (TOC) is a general problem-solving model that can be 
applied to a variety of environments, but it has one fundamental concept. In 
looking at any kind of system such as project management, manufacturing, or 
distribution, you can find one constraint that is limiting the overall system. If 
you focus improvement efforts on this constraint, the whole system will ben-
efit and the bottom line of the organization will improve. 
 Common project-management   issues Critical Chain can help address:
• 
 Projects miss critical deadlines and market opportunities 
[crt 25]  
• 
 You cut too many key features to make deadlines [crt 19]  
A

Appendix
146
• 
 Your products are not competitive enough (due to slow 
project turnaround, missing deadlines, and cutting key 
features) [crt 23]  
• 
 There is too much resource burn-out and turnover 
[crt 14]  
• 
 You go over budget due to project overruns and do not 
make expected revenues our product lines [crt 26]  
• 
 There are internal projects fights over shared resources 
[crt 18]  
 Possible Critical Chain   benefits :
• 
 On-time delivery of products significantly improves 
[frt 8]  
• 
 You are able to complete projects much faster [frt 8]  
• 
 Hidden or misused resource capacity is surfaced [frt 12]  
• 
 The company and its products are more competitive 
[frt 14]  
• 
 The company is more profitable [frt 20]  
 For sample results, see these  web sites  for the latest results:
• 
 Avraham Goldratt Institute (AGI):    www.goldratt.com  
• 
 Goldratt’s Marketing Group:    www.toc-goldratt.com  
• 
 Realization case studies:    www.realization.com  
• 
 ProChain success stories:    www.prochain.com  
• 
 Theory of Constraints International Certification 
Organization:    www.tocico.org  
 Key Critical Chain  components  that help you get results are:
• 
 Project buffers to better manage task variability [frt 1]  
• 
 Reducing bad multi-tasking to find hidden and misused 
resource capacity [frt 1]  
• 
 Building schedules (back-to-front) and challenging 
assumptions [frt 1]  
• 
 Organizational analysis (TOC TP) to better understand 
our overall project environment (creating the CRT 
and FRT)  

Get it Done On Time!
147
 You can mix project-management methodologies (Critical Chain, Scrum, Agile, 
etc.), but you really need to have a solid grounding in each of the methodolo-
gies you are trying to mix. If you want to learn more about combining Lean, 
Six Sigma, and TOC, you can look at the TOC book  Velocity .  
 Chapter   3 : Factors for Success 
 Successful implementations  ideally have:
• 
 A certified Critical Chain implementation expert who 
really understands the mechanics of the Critical Chain 
solution, including how to use it to improve the organiza-
tion’s throughput and how to successfully implement it in 
an organization.  
• 
 Someone who has Critical Chain software tool 
experience.  
• 
 For complicated and political environments, someone 
who is certified Theory of Constraints Thinking Process 
background who can complete an organizational analysis.  
• 
 An organization with a compelling need and desire to 
change. 
• 
 Metrics that encourage desired behaviors.  
 Some of the  environmental issues  to consider can include the following:
• 
 Does the organization’s project team take ownership of 
the Critical Chain solution?  
• 
 Is senior management on board with the solution? The 
other way of looking at it is your organization indepen-
dent and isolated enough that you can set up and manage 
schedules how you want, without senior management 
involvement as long as you deliver products successfully?  
• 
 How complex is your project environment? Single proj-
ect? Matrixed multi-project?  
• 
 Does the organization have good or poor project-man-
agement practices?  
 The better the organization understands Critical Chain and the characteris-
tics and factors mentioned, the better you can help move the implementation 
along as well as make sure the person you have helping implement it in your 
organization is covering everything needed.  

Appendix
148
 Chapter   4 : Concepts 
 Key  CCPM benefits  that help you get results are:
• 
 Project and feeding buffers to better manage variability  
• 
 Reducing bad multi-tasking to find hidden or misused 
resource capacity  
• 
 Building schedules back-to-front challenging assumptions  
• 
 Organizational Analysis (TOC TP) to better understand 
your environment  
 The  Organizational Analysis  (TOC TP) can help you:
• 
 Understand the organizational environment and con-
straints that limit your success  
• 
 Understand the issues, how they interconnect, and what 
the core drivers are 
• 
 Understand how Critical Chain can help you address 
these issues  
• 
 Understand what outside of Critical Chain is needed to 
ensure your success  
 Chapter   5 : Championing Ideas 
• 
 Just having a good  idea by itself does not make things 
happen; you often need someone who can help champion 
the idea through the organization. This person needs to 
meet with key stakeholders to identify the benefits for 
their area, identify the concerns they have for their area, 
and work to minimize these concerns. The champion 
also needs to understand the organization’s approval pro-
cess and drive the idea through this process in the most 
efficient way possible.  
• 
 In addition to having external Critical Chain expertise to 
help you implement the Critical Chain solution, it is advis-
able to have an internal Critical Chain champion to help 
drive the implementation, work on key stakeholder con-
cerns and issues, and navigate the organization’s adoption 
process.  

Get it Done On Time!
149
• 
 The TOC Cloud tool can be helpful in looking at conflicts 
to find unique ways to resolve them.
• 
 For day-to-day conflicts, the clouds from the 
Management Skills Workshop (MSW) can be helpful.  
• 
 For organizational conflicts in complex environments, 
it is important to look at the TOC Thinking Process 
in addition to the cloud to fully develop solutions and 
implementation plans.  
• 
 The  TOC cloud is composed of the following pieces:
• 
 The  common goal both sides share (A)  
• 
 The  needs each side has (B, C)  
• 
 The  wants each side is verbalizing that are being 
driven by the wants (D, D’)  
• 
 The  assumptions  you should commonly challenge on the 
cloud are:
• 
 The true conflict between both sides’ wants (DD’)  
• 
 Each side’s connection between the need and want 
(BD, CD’)  
 Chapter   6 : Implementation Steps 
 Phoenix  Setup :
• 
 When looking at moving an organization onto Critical 
Chain ideally, you should try to move the whole organiza-
tion. If time is an issue then you can look at staggering the 
implementation and pick one or two high-impact projects 
to focus on. They need to have a bottom-line impact as 
well and cannot be side projects since the effort needed 
and results created would not be taken seriously.  
• 
 If necessary, it is possible to intercept a project already in 
process and simply build the new Critical Chain schedule 
from where the project is currently at to the end.  

Appendix
150
• 
 To really make a culture change in an organization, you 
need three things:
• 
 Top management buy-in and agreement to lead the 
charge  
• 
 Determine key measurement changes that will 
incentivize the desired behaviors of the new culture 
• 
 Education for all involved, including the new 
measurements.  
 Phoenix  Network Build  :
• 
 As part of the network build, it is important that the man-
agers and the team learn the key Critical Chain concepts 
[Chapters   2 and   4 items].  
• 
 You want to be sure to build the project to throughput 
(where you generate income or further the goals of the 
organization). 
• 
 When you build the schedule, you look at the project’s 
goal and build backward using the phrasing  in order to.. we 
must.. and add in any dependencies.  
• 
 When you need to compress and tighten a schedule up, 
look at BORA:  B reak a link,  O verlap tasks,  R educe scope 
or duration, or  A dd a resource.  
 Phoenix  Execution  :
• 
 As you execute the schedule, the team should have regu-
lar, typically weekly, schedule updates. As part of these 
updates, the project manager and the team should review 
the fever chart for the different project and endpoint/
milestone buffers. The fever chart measures how much 
buffer you have consumed compared to how much of 
the project you have completed. Green means you are 
on track, yellow means you are falling behind and need 
to look at ways to recover, and red means that you are 
putting the project deadline at risk and need to act to add 
time back into the buffer.  
• 
 To add time back into the buffer, review BORA:  B reak a 
link,  O verlap tasks,  R educe scope or duration, or  A dd a 
resource.  
• 
 As you execute the project, there are several behaviors 
you’ll want to be sure to maintain. These were covered in 
Chapters   2 and   4 . Some of these behaviors include:

Get it Done On Time!
151
• 
 Roadrunner: You encourage people to work as 
quickly as they can.  
• 
 Relay race: You encourage people to cleanly hand off 
work to the next resource (dependency) as quickly 
as possible.  
• 
 Reduce bad multi-tasking: You want to avoid any multi-
tasking that stretches out work and delays hand-offs.  
• 
 Management does not beat up resources for missing 
focused times, the focus times are aggressive by design 
so you should expect that several will be missed. 
You’ll want to manage the overall project buffer and 
overall deadline, not micro-manage resources.  
 Phoenix  Post-Mortem Plan  :
 1.  POOGI stands for the Process Of OnGoing Improvement. 
Once you have set up a new process, you need to main-
tain and continue to improve upon it. 
 Micky’s Urgent  Requests  :
 1.  Even when you set up Critical Chain, it is not foolproof. 
If you let too much work into the system, you will flood 
it. So you must have good discipline and manage a good 
change control process.  
 2.  If you know you will always have changes at key points in 
the schedule, you should try to minimize these changes 
(i.e., change control) as well as proactively reserve capacity 
for these changes.  
 Chapter   7 : Ambitious Targets 
• 
 When people put together a plan for a project, they often 
focus on the tasks involved. For example, the QA tests 
that need to be identified and run. The ambitious target 
tool can help you look broader. You can clarify the goals 
of the overall project and identify issues and concerns 
that the team has in general based on past experience as 
well as in trying to meet the project’s goal.  

Appendix
152
• 
 The Ambitious target tool allows you to successfully use 
an individual’s innate ability to complain in a construc-
tive way to find ways to address concerns and make the 
project more successful.  
• 
 Key steps in creating an Ambitious target include:  
 1.   Define a goal that is clear, concise, and measurable.  
 2.  Have the team identify issues and concerns in trying 
to reach the specific goal, leveraging past experience 
when possible.  
 3.  Develop suggestions (sometimes called  intermediate 
objectives ) to address each issue. Make sure that the 
team feels confident that the suggestions can suc-
cessfully help them reach the goal. If not, review the 
additional issues and develop additional suggestions.  
 4.  Sequence the suggestions into a tangible plan that is 
regularly tracked.  
 5.  When reading ambitious targets, use  in order to 
(above item)  we must (below item). For example,  in 
order to reach the goal of shipping a product that meets 
the QA customer release criteria, we must detail out the 
QA customer release criteria . 
 Chapter   8 :  Individual Buy-In  
• 
 The six layers of resistance give you a systematic framework 
on how you can organize your analysis (CRT, FRT, etc.).  
• 
 The buy-in process is how you  conversationally walk 
through someone through your analysis and the layers 
of resistance to get their understanding and potential 
acceptance.  
 The six layers of resistance:   
• 
 Layer 1: Lack of consensus on the problem.  
• 
 Layer 2: People do not agree on the direction of the 
solution.  
• 
 Layer 3: Arguing the proposed solution cannot yield the 
desired outcome.  
• 
 Layer 4: Yes,  but . Concerns about potential negative side-
effects from proposed solution.  

Get it Done On Time!
153
• 
 Layer 5: Obstacles that stand in the way of implementing 
solution into the environment.  
• 
 Layer 6: Raising doubts, wait and see, unverbalized fears.  
 How to approach each layer:   
• 
 Layer 1: Lack of consensus on the problem.
• 
 Pre-work : Build out the CRT for the organization to 
understand the issues, how they interconnect, and 
the core problem driving the issues.  
• 
 Buy-in : Pick a few key issues that resonate with that 
person’s area and the organization as a whole and 
work to quantify their impact. Then verbally walk 
through how they are interconnected.
• 
 Don’t show the CRT or FRT to people (at least 
not the first meeting). It tends to overwhelm 
and frustrate people not familiar with TOC. It’s 
just like showing a page of calculus formulas to 
someone who doesn’t know calculus and saying, 
“isn’t this great”!  
• 
 Layer 2: People do not agree on the direction of the 
solution.
• 
 Pre-work : Focus on the core conflict and the key 
injection(s) necessary to break it.  
• 
 Buy-in: Review the cloud by showing or verbally 
walking through the conflict. Then work with the 
person to realize (better) or reveal to them the 
key injection. Then promptly move onto Layer 3 to 
justify why the injection addresses the issues of the 
organization.  
• 
 Layer 3: Arguing the proposed solution cannot yield the 
desired outcome.
• 
 Pre-work : Build out the organization’s FRT.  
• 
 Buy-in : Start with the key injection and verbally walk 
through and show how the key injection leads to and 
is connected to several of the key benefits of the FRT. 
Cover just the key benefits that the person you are 
talking will find of value; there is no need or value to 
cover them all.  

Appendix
154
• 
 Layer 4: Yes, but. Concerns about potential side-effects 
from proposed solution.
• 
 Pre-work : If possible, try to anticipate negative effects 
from your suggested direction. Then try to come up 
with recommendations that negate these issues if 
they come up. The  negative branch (NBR)  TOC tool 
is typically used for these issues.  
• 
 Buy-in : Be patient and be ready to address any 
concerns raised.  
• 
 Layer 5: Obstacles that stand in the way of implementing 
solution into the environment.
• 
 Pre-work : If possible, try to anticipate any potential 
obstacles and how they could be overcome.  
• 
 Buy-in : Be patient and ready to address any concerns 
raised.  
• 
 Layer 6: Raising doubts, wait and see, unverbalized fears.
• 
 Pre-work : Be aware of this challenge and look for 
ways to address it.  
• 
 Buy-in : As you get buy-in, work to get commitments 
and timelines for people to act.   
• 
 If you find some people are holding back, try to 
see what their concerns are. Work to surface 
any “yes, but” concerns and obstacles then work 
to address them.  
• 
 If people seem to be holding back and it seems 
more driven by fear and doubt, work with them 
to see the pain with the current process and the 
value in moving to the new process.  
• 
 Be sure to focus blame on the system. Avoid finger point-
ing and focus on the system and how the way it operates 
is holding the company back.  
• 
 Be sure to close the deal. For an initial or exec meeting, 
layers 1-3 are good. Always be sure to close the deal and 
get some commitment at the end of the meeting (oth-
erwise, why did you hold the meeting in the first place?). 
Address the remaining layers (yes..but, obstacles, etc.) as 
they come up or in subsequent meetings.  

Get it Done On Time!
155
 Chapter   9 : Almost 
• 
 Randal and Tim  Prep :
• 
 Once you have created the CRT, FRT, and your plan 
to address the six layers of resistance, you are ready 
to start working with people to get their buy-in. You 
just have to tailor what you present based on your 
audience by highlighting and focusing on the issues 
that relate to that specific person’s area of interest. 
You can start the conversation with issues or with 
the cloud. It depends on which one you think will 
better resonate with the person you are talking to.  
• 
 Next Steps:
• 
 Even when you have everything ready for the buy-
in, some people may be more open to suggestions 
(like Grant) and others will be less open or will have 
their own and potentially competing suggestions (like 
Micky). There are no guarantees.  
 Chapter   10 :  Exec Review  
• 
 It is important to have executive buy-in, otherwise your 
implementation of Critical Chain could be blocked or 
hampered.  
• 
 Once you have single project Critical Chain implemented, 
the next step to consider is to look at Critical Chain 
multi-project to help manage multiple parallel projects 
effectively.  
 Chapter Questions 
 Chapter   1 : Introductions 
 LivingTV  :
 1.  What happened to LivingTV?  
 Tim and Randal Reconnect:
 1.  What is Critical Chain useful for?  
 2.  What is TOC useful for?  

Appendix
156
 Chapter   2 : High-Level  Critical Chain  Overview 
 What Is TOC and Critical Chain:
 1.  What is Critical Chain?  
 2.   What is TOC?  
 Critical Chain Issues, Benefits, and Sample Results:
 1.   What are some of the common project-management 
issues Critical Chain can help address? 
 2.   What are some of the Critical Chain benefits?  
 Key Parts of Critical Chain:
 1.   What are some of the key Critical Chain components 
that help us get results?  
 Project Buffers:
 1.   What do project buffers do?  
 2.  What are some of the issues that can cause project 
variability?  
 Multi-Tasking:
 1.  What does reducing bad multi-tasking give you?  
 2.  Is all multi-tasking bad?  
 Building Schedules:
 1.  What does building schedules back-to-front give you?  
 Organizational Analysis:
 1.  What is the benefit of an organizational analysis?  
 Multiple Methodologies:
 1.  What can influence the success of implementing a 
new project-management process even if it is a proven 
process?  
 2.  Can you mix other project-management methodologies 
with Critical Chain?  
 CRT and FRT:
 1.   What does Tim’s CRT/FRT flowcharts help with?  
 2.   Is this something that should be shared with everyone?  

Get it Done On Time!
157
 Chapter   3 : Factors for Success 
 Introductions:
 1.  What was Gary’s feeling on how good the Critical Chain 
methodology was?  
 2.   What was Tim’s thinking on why Gary did not get very 
good results?  
 Key Characteristics of  Successful Implementations  :
 1.  Which areas are important for successful implementa-
tions? What is the benefit of each area?  
 2.   If your company is already using Critical Chain, how 
well do you address the above areas for successful 
implementations?  
 Environmental Factors:
 1.   What four organizational issues can be important for 
successful implementations? For extra credit, explain why.  
 2.   What other areas beyond this list do you see as criti-
cal for a successful implementation or a potential major 
issue that could de-rail an implementation?  
 3.   If your company is already using Critical Chain, how well 
do you address the above organizational issues? Are there 
other issues that are a concern?  
 Chapter   4 : How Does the  Critical Chain  
Solution Work 
 Key Critical Chain Benefits:
 1.  What are the key Critical Chain benefits?  
 Project and Feeding Buffers, Padding Dates:
 1.   What does it mean to pad dates? Why can it be 
problematic?  
 2.   What is the management and engineering poker game 
over? 

Appendix
158
 Project and Feeding Buffers, Project Buffers:
 1.  What is the value of a project buffer? How is it different 
than management adding padding (additional time) to the 
team’s deadline?  
 2.  What are some of the behaviors that Critical Chain tries 
to implement to improve project performance? Briefly 
describe them.  
 Project and Feeding Buffers, Feeding Buffers:
 1.  What is the value of feeding buffers?  
 Project and Feeding Buffers, Safety Time:
 1.  What is safety time?  
 Project and Feeding Buffers, Managing Project Variability:
 1.   What does Critical Chain try to do in regard to 
variability? How?  
 Reducing Bad Multi-Tasking:
 1.   What does bad multi-tasking do to your deadlines, 
resource capacity, and responsiveness?  
 Defining the Project Goal and Building Schedules Back-to-Front:
 1.   What is the first step in building a schedule back-to-front?  
 2.   What does the phrase  in order to (previous task) we must 
(successive task) first help you with?  
 3.   What does  in order to (goal) we must (and list out the key 
tasks in the schedule) allow you to do?  
 4.  Overall, how does building the schedule back-to-front 
help you? 
 Organizational Analysis:
 1.  How does Critical Chain and the organizational analysis 
work together to provide a more complete solution?  
 2.  How does the organizational analysis help?  
 Chapter   5 : Championing Ideas 
 LivingTV Interactive’s  Dilemma:
 1.  What was LivingTV’s dilemma? What choice was it strug-
gling with?  
 2.  Why was LivingTV stuck?  

Get it Done On Time!
159
 LivingTV  Interactive’s Conflict Cloud:
 1.  What is the common goal that both sides share?  
 2.  What are the wants of each side?  
 3.  What are the needs driving the wants of each side?  
 Looking for Possible Resolutions:
 1.  Of the AB,BD,AC,CD’, DD’ connections, which three 
connections in the cloud does Tim try to challenge? Why 
those three specifically?  
 Spark of an Idea:
 1.  What link (AB, AC, BD, CD’, DD’ ) did Tim challenge?  
 2.  What assumption did he identify that he was able to 
challenge?  
 3.  How did breaking this assumption create a win-win solu-
tion for the company? 
 Initial Manager Meeting:
 1.  What was Tim trying to prevent by meeting with each of 
the directors before the Exec review?  
 Lobbying in Preparation for the Exec Review:
 1.  What did John, Mike, Bill, and Jim like about the pre-show 
concept?  
 2.   What were John, Mike, Bill, and Jim’s reservations about 
the pre-show concept?  
 3.  How did their responses relate to each of their respec-
tive departments?  
 4.  When pitching an idea, how would your approach change 
based on your audience? 
 The Exec Review:
 1.  How did Tim and Lori’s work help in the Exec review?  

Appendix
160
 Chapter   6 : Single Project Implementation Steps 
 Phoenix  Setup :
 1.  What are two ways to implement Critical Chain into an 
organization? Which one is more ideal than the other?  
 2.  Is it possible to intercept a project that is already in flight 
with Critical Chain?  
 3.   To really make a culture change in an organization, what 
three things do you need? 
 Phoenix Network Build:
 1.   As part of the network build, does all of the team need to 
know the Critical Chain concepts?  
 2.   What defines the end of the project?  
 3.   What phrasing can you use when building out the sched-
ule and checking dependencies?  
 4.   What is BORA and what is it used for?  
 5.   What are some of the issues that Tim, Gary, and Jeremy 
ran into when building out the Phoenix schedule?  
 Phoenix Execution:
 1.  How often should the team update the schedule?  
 2.  What does the fever chart measure?  
 3.  What do the different colors of the fever chart mean?  
 4.  How can you recover time?  
 5.  What are some of the key behaviors you want during 
project execution? See Chapters   2 and   4 for more details. 
 Phoenix Post-Mortem Plan:
 1.  What is POOGI and what is it for?  
 Micky’s Urgent Requests:
 1.  What is the value of a change control process?  
 2.  If you know you will always have changes at key points in 
the schedule, what are some of the possible options?  

Get it Done On Time!
161
 Chapter   7 :  Ambitious Targets  
 Background and QA Issues:
 1.  What is the challenge faced by the QA team?  
 Define Your Goal:
 1.  What criteria makes up a clear goal?  
 List Out Clear Issues and Their Impact:
 1.   What issues are impacting QA?  
 Define Intermediate Objects (IOs):
 1.   Who should be first to make suggestions to address an 
issue raised? Why? 
 2.   What are “flying pig” suggestions and why are they useful?  
 3.   At the end, Tim checks the suggestions that Nir and 
Anthony came up with against the goal. Why?  
 Sequence the Intermediate Objectives (IOs):
 1.   What three things is Tim looking for from each suggestion?  
 2.   What does Ambitious Targets allow us to do over a task 
oriented schedule?  
 3.  What are the high-level steps in building an ambitious 
target?  
 Chapter   8 :  Individual Buy-In  
 Meeting with Sales and Marketing:
 1.  What does Tim learn in talking with Ashley?  
 Meeting with Human Resources:
 1.   What does Tim learn in talking with Herb?  
 Randal and Tim Prep for the Meeting with Grant:
 1.   What are the six layers of resistance used for?  
 2.  What are the six layers of resistance?  
 3.  What TOC tools are used for the first four layers?  
 4.  Why is it bad to show the CRT/FRT and use TOC ter-
minology when trying to get buy-in from someone not 
familiar with TOC?  

Appendix
162
 5.  Why is it important to blame the system?  
 6.  Why bother with the organizational analysis, CRT, FRT, 
and getting all of the execs’ to buy-in? Wouldn’t it just be 
simpler to build the Critical Chain schedules, add the buf-
fers, and implement it in engineering without the rest of 
the organization’s involvement?  
 7.  Why is it so important to close the deal?  
 Meeting with Grant:
 1.  What major stages does Tim go through in talking with 
Grant? 
 2.   What areas does Tim go through when he walks through 
the vision (Layer 2) with Grant?  
 3.   What does Tim learn in talking to Grant?  
 Chapter   9 : Almost 
 Randal and Tim  Prep :
 1.  What does Tim choose to focus on for his meeting with 
Micky compared to his meeting with Grant?  
 Tim Meets with Micky:
 1.  What three steps does Tim go through when presenting 
to Micky?  
 2.  Would you have done anything different in meeting with 
Micky?  
 Next Steps:
 1.  What are some of the benefits Randal and Gary are see-
ing from implementing Critical Chain on the Phoenix 
project?  
 Chapter   10 : Exec Meeting 
 Gary and Randal Present:
• 
 What are the pros and cons of Gary and Randal’s Critical 
Chain proposal?  
• 
 Did Grant follow through on his commitment to help 
Gary and Randal in the Exec meeting (Chapter   8 discus-
sion)? If so, how?  

Get it Done On Time!
163
 Micky Presents:
• 
 What are the pros and cons of Micky’s outsourcing 
solution?  
 Epilog:
• 
 Who won at the board meeting? Micky? Gary and Randal?  
• 
 What does Tim want to implement next and why?  
 Basic Answers to Chapter Questions 
 Chapter   1 : Introductions 
 LivingTV  :
 1.  What happened to LivingTV?
 a. 
  They could not develop the market fast enough. They 
could not get the new technology out soon enough. 
They were unable to grow the revenues as quickly 
as they had expanded the company and counter the 
resulting growth in expenses.  
 Tim and Randal Reconnect:
 1.   What is Critical Chain useful for?
 a. 
 To help deliver projects faster and more reliably.  
 2.   What is TOC useful for?
 a. 
 It is a great set of general problem-solving tools 
that can be used to look at an organization as a 
whole, identify areas to focus on, and drive overall 
improvements.  
 b.   It can be used help focus teams on any improvement 
effort from Critical Chain, Scrum, Agile, new technol-
ogy deployments, and so on.  

Appendix
164
 Chapter   2 : High-Level Critical Chain Overview 
 What Is TOC and  Critical Chain  :
 1.  What is Critical Chain?
 a. 
  Critical Chain is a Theory of Constraints solution that 
addresses the common problems found in project 
management so you can better plan, manage, and be 
more successful with projects.  
 2.  What is TOC?
 a. 
  The  Theory of Constraints (TOC for short) is a general 
problem-solving model that can be applied to a vari-
ety of environments, but it has one fundamental con-
cept. It focuses on identifying the one constraint that 
is limiting the system overall. So if you focus improve-
ment efforts on this one area, the whole system will 
benefit and the bottom line of the organization will 
improve.  
 Critical Chain Issues, Benefits, and Sample Results:
 1.  What are some of the common project-management 
issues Critical Chain can help address?
 a. 
  Your projects miss critical deadlines and market 
opportunities.  
 b.  You cut too many key features to make deadlines.  
 c.   Your products are not competitive enough (due to 
slow project turnaround, missing deadlines, cutting 
key features, etc.).  
 d.   There is too much resource burn-out and turnover.  
 e.   You go over budget (due to project overruns).  
 f. 
 There are internal projects fights over shared 
resources. 
 What are some of the Critical Chain benefits?
 a. 
 On-time delivery of products significantly improves.  
 b.   You are able to complete projects much faster.  
 c.  Hidden or misused resource capacity is surfaced.  
 d.  Your company and products are more competitive.  
 e.  Your company is more profitable.  

Get it Done On Time!
165
 Key Parts of Critical Chain:
 1.   What are some of the key Critical Chain components 
that help you get results?
• 
 Project buffers to better manage task variability 
[frt 1]  
• 
 Reducing bad multi-tasking to find hidden and 
misused resource capacity [frt 1]  
• 
 Building schedules (back-to-front) and challenging 
assumptions [frt 1]  
• 
 Organizational analysis (TOC TP) to better 
understand the overall project environment 
(creating the CRT and FRT)  
 Project Buffers  :
 1.  What do project buffers do?
 a. 
 Help to better manage the variability in all projects.  
 2.  What are some of the issues that can cause project 
variability?
 a. 
 There is more work involved than originally expected, 
additional scope and requirements are added, 
resources are not available, tasks take longer than 
expected, and project disasters happen that might 
sink a project.  
 Multi-Tasking:
 1.  What does reducing  bad multi-tasking  give you?
 a. 
 It provides clear priorities, focuses resources on key 
projects versus spreading them out, and encourages 
quick hand-offs.  
 2.   Is all multi-tasking bad?
 a. 
 No, if you are working on one task and get blocked, 
working on a second task is fine. If you are juggling 
multiple tasks and going back and forth between 
them is slowing you down, then it is bad. 

Appendix
166
 Building Schedules:
 1.   What does  building schedules  back-to-front give you?
 a. 
 A better way to call out true dependencies that can 
also be creatively challenged.  
 Organizational Analysis  :
 1.   What is the benefit of an organizational analysis?
 a. 
 It provides a way to do a root cause analysis of your 
organizations issues. From there, you can see which 
issues the Critical Chain general solution can help 
you address. But as important, you can also see what 
other areas you will need to work on. This enables 
you to develop a complete and overall solution that 
will significantly improve your organization.  
 Multiple  Methodologies  :
 1.  What can influence the success of implementing a 
new project-management process even if it is a proven 
process?
 a. 
 How well the culture supports and adopts the 
solution  
 b.   How well the process addresses the organization’s 
problems 
 2.   Can you mix other project-management methodologies 
with Critical Chain?
 a. 
 You can certainly mix project-management method-
ologies, but you need to have a solid grounding in 
the methodologies you are trying to mix. It is really 
important to first focus on getting your Critical 
Chain experience then you can look at adding other 
methods into it.  
 CRT and FRT:
 1.  What does Tim’s CRT/FRT flowcharts help with?
 a. 
 Tim’s chart helps visually map out several of the key 
components and connections between them for both 
the current situation as well as the desired situation.  

Get it Done On Time!
167
 2.  Is this something that should be shared with everyone?
 a. 
  Tim’s charts can be shared with some key people, but 
in general they are often too detailed and technical 
to share with everyone. In these cases you may want 
to leverage the information from the flowcharts for 
discussions but not share them directly.  
 Chapter   3 : Factors for Success 
 Introductions:
 1.  What was Gary’s feeling on how good the Critical Chain 
methodology was?
 a. 
  The methodology did not seem to work well when 
they had tried to implement it on their own.  
 2.   What was Tim’s thinking on why Gary did not get very 
good results?
 a. 
 No one was certified in Critical Chain and had no one 
had prior experience implementing Critical Chain.  
 Key Characteristics of  Successful Implementations  :
 1.   What areas are important for successful implementa-
tions? What is the benefit of each area?
 a. 
 A Critical Chain implementation expert who really 
understands the mechanics of the Critical Chain 
solution, how to use it correctly to help organiza-
tions increase throughput, and how to successfully 
implement it in an organization.  
 b.   Someone who has Critical Chain software tool 
experience.  
 c.  For complicated and political environments, I per-
sonally like to see someone who has a Theory of 
Constraints Thinking Process background who can 
do an organizational analysis.  
 d.  The organization has a compelling need and desire to 
change. 
 e.  Setting up the correct metrics.  

Appendix
168
 2.  If your company is already using Critical Chain, how 
well do you address the above areas for successful 
implementations?
 a. 
  Optional student exercise. Answers vary. 
 Environmental Factors  :
 1.  What four organizational issues can be important for 
successful implementations?
 a. 
  Does the organization’s project team take ownership 
of the Critical Chain solution?  
 b.  Is senior management brought into the solution?  
 c.   How complex is your project environment?  
 d.  Existence of poor project-management practices.  
 2.   What other areas beyond this list do you see as criti-
cal for a successful implementation or a potential major 
issue that could de-rail an implementation?
 a. 
 Optional student exercise. Items can include how well a 
team understands its customers, how well they know 
the market, how well can they define the product’s 
requirements, etc.  
 3.  If your company is already using Critical Chain, how well 
do you address the above organizational issues? Are there 
other issues that are a concern?
 a. 
 Optional student exercise. Answers vary. 
 Chapter   4 : How Does the Critical Chain 
Solution Work 
 Key Critical Chain  Benefits  :
 1.  What are the key Critical Chain benefits?
 a. 
  Project and feeding buffers to better manage 
variability  
 b.  Reducing bad multi-tasking to find hidden or misused 
resource capacity  

Get it Done On Time!
169
 c.   Building schedules back-to-front and challenging 
assumptions  
 d.   Organizational Analysis (TOC Thinking Process) to 
better understand the environment  
 Project and  Feeding Buffers  ,  Padding Dates  :
 1.  What does it mean to pad dates? Why can it be 
problematic?
 a. 
 Padding dates is the practice of adding additional time 
on top of an engineering deadline. It can be problem-
atic since it can extend the overall project’s length and 
if it is too long this time can get cut by management.  
 2.  What is the management and engineering poker game 
over?
 a. 
 How much time engineers can get management to 
add to the schedule to ensure features and quality 
versus how much time managers can cut from the 
engineers’ estimates to manage costs and hit key 
market windows.  
 Project and Feeding Buffers,  Project Buffers  :
 1.  What is the value of a project buffer? How is it different 
than management adding padding (additional time) to the 
team’s deadline?
 a. 
 It provides strategic use of safety time to more effec-
tively protect the overall project’s deadline. In doing 
this, it can help shorten the overall project duration 
versus padding that just adds additional time.  
 b.   The project buffer consumption can also be used 
to trigger planning and response plans if the project 
starts encountering too many delays.  
 2.  What are some of the behaviors Critical Chain tries 
to implement to improve project performance? Briefly 
describe them.
 a. 
 Roadrunner refers to the fact that you want resources 
to start working on a task as soon as it is assigned to 
them.  Relay race is that as soon as a task is finished you 
want them to hand off to the next resource so they 
can start right away.  Bad multi-tasking is when resources 
work on several tasks at once.  Student syndrome is the 
temptation to put work off to the last minute.  

Appendix
170
 Project and Feeding Buffers, Feeding Buffers
 1.   What is the value of feeding buffers?
 a. 
 To minimize overall project delays from feeding task 
issues and delays.  
 Project and Feeding Buffers, Safety Time:
 1.  What is safety time?
 a. 
 The extra time (padding) engineers add to a task to 
protect against delays and paranoia.  
 Project and Feeding Buffers, Managing Project Variability:
 1.  What does Critical Chain try to do in regard to 
variability? How?
 a. 
 Critical Chain sets up ways to manage the variability 
of a project so companies are less impacted by delays. 
The feeding buffers minimize delays from feeding 
paths. Moving safety time out of the tasks and into a 
project buffer allows you to better protect the proj-
ect’s deadline from delays without adding time. The 
project behaviors are to help you move as quickly 
forward in executing the project as you can.  
 Reducing  Bad Multi-Tasking  :
 1.  What does bad multi-tasking do to your deadlines, 
resource capacity, and responsiveness?
 a. 
 Bad multi-tasking causes deadlines to get stretched 
out, resource capacity to be wasted, and your respon-
siveness to be wasted.  
 Defining the Project Goal and  Building Schedules Back-to-Front  :
 1.  What is the first step in building a schedule back-to-front ?
 a. 
 The first step is to be sure that you have a clearly 
defined project goal.  
 2.  What does the phrase  in order to (previous task) we must 
(successive task) first help you with?
 a. 
  It allows you to make sure you have captured all of 
the necessary tasks and dependencies.  

Get it Done On Time!
171
 3.  What does  in order to (goal) we must (and list out the key 
tasks in the schedule) allow you to do?
 a. 
  Make sure that you have captured all of the key 
requirements in the schedule.  
 4.  Overall, how does building the schedule back-to-front 
help you?
 a. 
  It allows you to make sure you capture key dependen-
cies and tasks that might be overlooked by just list-
ing requirements, it helps you make sure you clearly 
define the project goal, and it helps you make sure 
the key tasks you are doing are sufficient to reach 
that goal.  
 Organizational Analysis  :
 1.   How does Critical Chain and the organizational analysis 
work together to provide a more complete solution?
 a. 
 Critical Chain helps address the common project-
management issues. The organizational analysis helps 
you identify organizational issues that could signifi-
cantly limit the results of your Critical Chain imple-
mentation as well as helps you see what needs to 
help improve the organization as a whole.  
 2.   How does the organizational analysis help?
 a. 
 The organizational analysis helps in getting the 
organizational buy-in on what problems need to be 
addressed, how, and why Critical Chain and some 
other key improvements are necessary.  
 Chapter   5 : Championing Ideas 
 LivingTV Interactive  ’s Dilemma:
 1.  What was LivingTV’s dilemma? What choice is it strug-
gling with?
 a. 
  In order to expand, LivingTV needed to decide if it 
wanted to first expand into a nationwide service or 
expand the number of programs and games it offered.  
 2.   Why was LivingTV stuck?
 a. 
 LivingTV was stuck because it only had the funding 
to either go nationwide or expand programming; it 
could not do both.  

Appendix
172
 LivingTV Interactive’s  Conflict Cloud  :
 1.  What is the common goal that both sides share?
 a. 
 Everyone wanted LivingTV to grow and be successful.  
 2.  What are the wants of each side?
 a. 
 One side wanted LivingTV to go nationwide.  
 b.   One side wanted LivingTV to expand its programming.  
 3.  What are the needs driving the wants of each side?
 a. 
 One side needed to have a market large enough to 
attract advertising revenue.  
 b.   One side needed to have enough programming to 
develop subscriber revenue.  
 Looking for Possible  Resolutions  :
 1.  Of the AB,BD,AC,CD’, DD’ connections, which three 
connections in the cloud does Tim try to challenge? Why 
those three specifically?
 a. 
 DD’ to challenge the assumptions behind the conflict 
itself.  
 b.   BD and CD’ to challenge the assumptions between 
each side’s need and each side’s want.  
 Spark of an Idea:
 1.  What link (AB, AC, BD, CD’, DD’ ) did Tim challenge?
 a. 
 CD’ 
 2.  What assumption did he identify that he was able to 
challenge?
 a. 
 There was no way to get additional programming 
without paying additional royalties.  
 3.  How did breaking this assumption create a win-win solu-
tion for the company?
 a. 
 The “go deep” subscriber/programming side ben-
efited since there were now able to increase the 
number of programs supported without significant 
expense by not having to pay royalties to get pre-
distribution access to shows.  

Get it Done On Time!
173
 b.  The side that wanted to “go broad” benefited since 
they will now have the money and resources to expand.  
 c.  With the pre-show, both sides were able to protect 
and move forward with their needs.  
 Initial Manager Meeting  :
 1.   What was Tim trying to prevent by meeting each of the 
directors before the Exec review?
 a. 
 His idea failing by getting stalled by the company’s 
approval process. In addition, Tim could educate 
each decision maker about the idea as well as have a 
chance to address their concerns in advance.  
 Lobbying in Preparation for the  Exec Review  :
 1.  What did John, Mike, Bill, and Jim like about the pre-show 
concept?
 a. 
 John liked how it supported his goals to expand the 
number of shows LivingTV supported, the idea’s abil-
ity to support any show, and the concept gave his 
team a full week to develop each week’s script.  
 b.   Mike liked that the idea was not technically challeng-
ing to implement.  
 c.  Jim liked that it gave the opportunity to produce any 
and as many shows as LivingTV wanted without the 
high cost of royalties. 
 2.  What were John, Mike, Bill, and Jim’s reservations about 
the pre-show concept?
 a. 
 Everyone had concerns around the legality of the 
developing LivingTV content based on TV shows that 
have been broadcast.  
 b.   Mike wanted Tim to review the idea with Peter in 
case there were additional technical concerns.  
 c.  Jim had concerns around legal and maintaining the 
company’s relationship with broadcasters.  
 3.  How did their responses relate to each of their respec-
tive departments?
 a. 
 John focused on programming operations questions, 
Mike on engineering and technical questions, and Jim 
on executive and strategic relationship questions.  

Appendix
174
 4.  When pitching an idea, how would your approach change 
based on your audience?
 a. 
  Everyone needs a general idea of the solution, but 
each person’s interest and questions often focus on 
where they are in the organization (i.e., John in oper-
ations, Mike in technical, and Jim in strategic).  
 The  Exec Review  :
 1.  How did Tim and Lori’s work help in the Exec review?
 a. 
  At the start of the meeting, everyone already under-
stood the concept and Tim and Lori had been able 
to understand and help address the majority of con-
cerns. This streamlined the meeting.  
 Chapter   6 : Single  Project Implementation  Steps 
 Phoenix Setup:
 1.  What are two ways to implement Critical Chain into an 
organization? Which one is more ideal than the other?
• 
 When looking at moving an organization onto 
Critical Chain ideally, you should try to move the 
whole organization. If time is an issue, then you can 
look at staggering the implementation and pick one 
or two high-impact projects to focus on. They need 
to have a bottom-line impact as well and cannot be 
side projects since the effort needed and results 
created would not be taken seriously.  
 2.  Is it possible to intercept a project that is already in flight 
with Critical Chain?
• 
 If necessary it is possible to intercept a project 
already in process and simply build the new Critical 
Chain schedule from where the project is currently 
at to the end.  
 3.  To really make a culture change in an organization, what 
three things do you need?
• 
 Top management buy-in and agreement to lead the 
charge. 
• 
 Determination of key measurement changes that will 
incentivize the desired behaviors of the new culture.
• 
 Education for all involved, including the new 
measurements. (Bibliography 1)  

Get it Done On Time!
175
 Phoenix Network Build:
 1.  As part of the network build, does all of the team need to 
know the Critical Chain concepts?   
• 
 As part of the network build, it is important that the 
managers and the team learns the key Critical Chain 
concepts [Chapters   2 and   4 items]  
 2.  What defines the end of the project?
• 
 You want to be sure to build the project to throughput 
(where you generate income). 
 3.  What phrasing can you use when building out the sched-
ule and checking dependencies?
• 
 You look at the project’s goal and build backward 
using the phrasing  in order to.. we must.. and add in any 
dependencies.  
 4.  What is BORA and what is it used for?
• 
 When you need to compress and tighten a schedule 
up, you can look at BORA:  B reak a link,  O verlap tasks, 
 R educe scope or duration, or  A dd a resource.  
 5.  What are some of the issues Tim, Gary, and Jeremy run 
into when building out the Phoenix schedule?
• 
 Jeremy wants to be sure Gary has signed off on 
replanning the Phoenix schedule using a new 
methodology. 
• 
 They need to build the schedule to throughput, so 
when the customer actually approves the features 
and revenues are generated.  
• 
 Critical Chain is staggering the tasks based on 
resource availability.  
• 
 Tasks are assigned to the manager’s name as opposed 
to the resource’s name.  
• 
 Jeremy added padding back into some of the focus 
times for some of the tasks. 
• 
 The schedule is too long and the team needs to use 
BORA to tighten it up.  

Appendix
176
 Phoenix Execution:
 1.  How often should the team update the schedule?
 a. 
  The team should have regular, typically weekly, 
schedule updates.  
 2.   What does the fever chart measure?
 a. 
 The fever chart measures how much buffer you have 
consumed compared to how much of the project you 
have completed.  
 3.   What do the different colors of the fever chart mean?
 a. 
 Green means you are on track, yellow means you are 
falling behind and need to look at ways to recover, and 
red means that you are putting the project deadline at 
risk and need to act to add time back into the buffer.  
 4.   How can you recover time?
 a. 
 To recover time, review BORA:  B reak a link,   O verlap 
 tasks,  R educe scope or duration, or  A dd a resource.  
 5.  What are some of the key behaviors that you want during 
project execution? See Chapters   2 and   4 for more details.
 a. 
 Roadrunner: You encourage people to work as 
quickly as they can.  
 b.  Relay race: You encourage people to hand off work to 
the next resource (dependency) as quickly as possible.  
 c.   Reduce bad multi-tasking: You want to avoid any multi-
tasking that stretches out work and delays hand-offs.  
 d.   Do not beat up resources for missing focused times; 
they are aggressive by design so you should expect 
that several will be missed. You’ll want to manage the 
overall project buffer and overall deadline, not micro-
manage resources. 
 Phoenix Post-Mortem Plan:
 1.  What is POOGI and what is it for?
• 
 POOGI stands for the Process Of OnGoing 
Improvement. Once you have set up a new process, 
you need to maintain and continue to improve upon it.  

Get it Done On Time!
177
 Micky’s Urgent Requests:
 1.  What is the value of a change control process?
• 
 Even when you set up Critical Chain (or any system) 
it is not foolproof. If you let too much work into 
the system, you will flood it. So you must have good 
discipline and manage a good change control process.  
 2.  If you know you will always have changes at key points in 
the schedule, what are some of the possible options?
• 
 Look at trying to minimize these changes (i.e. change 
control) as well as proactively reserve capacity for 
these changes.  
 Chapter   7 : Ambitious Targets 
 Background and QA Issues  :
 1.  What is the challenge faced by the QA team?
 a. 
  The engineering schedule ran late and the over-
all project deadline held so the QA timeframe was 
severely compressed with the expectation that the 
team would hold to the original quality and testing 
guidelines.  
 Define Your  Goal  :
 1.   What criteria makes up a clear goal?
 a. 
 It’s clear, measurable, and has specific criteria and dates.  
 List Out Clear Issues and Their Impact:
 1.   What issues are impacting QA?
 a. 
 Software is often late, software’s delays reduces the 
time left for QA, software going into test is of poor 
quality, QA is blamed for software’s low quality, and 
software engineers change requirements without 
informing QA.  

Appendix
178
 Define  Intermediate Objects (IOs)  :
 1.  Who should be first to make suggestions to address an 
issue raised? Why?
 a. 
 The person who first raised the issue should have the 
first opportunity to make a suggestion. Afterward, 
others can add their own suggestions as it makes 
sense.  
 2.  What are “flying pig” suggestions and why are they useful?
 a. 
 Flying pig suggestions are “way out there” sugges-
tions that initially seem impossible, such as we can 
breathe under water, we can land on the moon, we 
all become rich, etc. They are useful in that they give 
you a direction as long as you can eventually come 
back and convert the flying pig idea back into some-
thing realistic and implementable.  
 3.  At the end, Tim checks the suggestions that Nir and 
Anthony came up with against the goal. Why?
 a. 
 Tim is doing a quick check to make sure that there 
were not any other major issues that would prevent 
the team from reaching the goal that had not been 
discussed.  
 Sequence the  Intermediate Objectives (IOs)  :
 1.  What three things is Tim looking for from each suggestion?
 a. 
 Sequencing, owner, timeline.
 i. 
 Sequencing: Can this be done in parallel with 
other tasks or is it dependent on another task 
finishing first?  
 ii. 
  Owner: Who owns completing this task?  
 iii.   Timeline: When do you expect them to finish the 
task? Will you have several status checkpoints to 
review progress?  
 2.  What do ambitious targets allow you to do over a task-
oriented schedule?
 a. 
 Focus on putting together an overall plan that includes 
not only the traditional tasks needed to complete a 
schedule, but also a plan that captures the issues you 
are concerned about and your plans on how to over-
come these concerns.  

Get it Done On Time!
179
 3.  What are the high-level steps in building an Ambitious 
Target?
 a. 
  Develop a goal  
 b.  Identify issues  
 c.   Develop suggestions  
 d.   Sequence the suggestions  
 Chapter   8 : Individual Buy-In 
 Meeting with  Sales and Marketing  :
 1.  What does Tim learn in talking with Ashley?
 a. 
  Missed dates and features have caused the company 
to incur penalties, get less desirable contract terms, 
and lose future contracts.  
 b.   The company is missing revenue targets.  
 c.  Several of the execs have lost trust in engineering’s 
ability to deliver.  
 d.  Micky has once looked into adding additional product 
lines [crt 30].  
 e.  Competitors are catching up and getting contracts 
the company once had.  
 Meeting with  Human Resources  :
 1.   What does Tim learn in talking with Herb?
 a. 
 The company has lost several good people due to 
tight deadlines, priorities switching, and unrealistic 
schedules.  
 b.   Competitors are ramping up and picking up some 
of the people who left and that in turn has lead to 
poaching of additional employees. 
 c.  Micky had asked the execs to look at a potential 10% 
resource cut across the company, but is unlikely to 
follow through on it since it would have long-term 
consequences.  

Appendix
180
 Randal and Tim Prep for the Meeting with  Grant :
 1.  What are the six layers of resistance used for?
 a. 
 To help get buy-in in an effective and systematic way, 
help address people’s concerns, and help them under-
stand and ideally agree to your proposal.  
 2.  What are the six  layers of resistance?
 a. 
  Layer 1: Lack of consensus on the problem.  
 b.   Layer 2: People do not agree on the direction of the 
solution.  
 c.   Layer 3: Arguing the proposed solution cannot yield 
the desired outcome.  
 d.  Layer 4: Yes, but. Concerns about potential negative 
side-effects from proposed solution.  
 e.  Layer 5: Obstacles that stand in the way of imple-
menting solution into the environment.  
 f. 
 Layer 6: Raising doubts, wait and see, unverbalized 
fears.  
 3.   What  TOC tools  are used for the first four layers?
 a. 
  Layer 1: Lack of consensus on the problem. CRT tool.  
 b.   Layer 2: People do not agree on the direction of the 
solution. Cloud and Injection tool.  
 c.  Layer 3: Arguing the proposed solution cannot yield 
the desired outcome. FRT tool.  
 d.  Layer 4: Yes, but. Concerns about potential side-effects 
from proposed solution. Negative Branch (NBR) tool. 
 4.  Why is it bad to show the CRT/ FRT and use TOC ter-
minology when trying to get buy-in from someone not 
familiar with TOC?
 a. 
 When you start showing CRTs and FRTs and start 
using TOC lingo on people who are not familiar with 
TOC, instead of them being amazed by your insights, 
they in fact will be turned off by the complexity and 
your arrogance in assuming they would understand 
something so new and different instantly.  

Get it Done On Time!
181
 5.  Why is it important to blame the system?
 a. 
  You want to focus attention on the system, not go 
around finger pointing and blaming people.  
 b.  It is not that any one person or group is trying to 
undermine the company. The system, the way you 
operate, is holding you back. The CRT outlines this 
system and how it is interconnected. Companies 
need to focus their efforts on understanding, blaming, 
and changing the system.  
 6.   Why bother with the organizational analysis, CRT, FRT, 
and getting all of the execs’ to buy-in? Wouldn’t it just be 
simpler to build the Critical Chain schedules, add the buf-
fers, and implement it in engineering without the rest of 
the organization’s involvement?
 a. 
 It could work briefly. But in the long run it would likely 
fall apart. As noted in the factors for success [Chapter 
  3 ], the organizational buy-in is needed. If management 
is not brought in and understand the project buf-
fers they will just cut them and that will undermine 
Critical Chain’s success. With the cut project buf-
fers, you are more likely to miss deadlines and in turn 
management will push even more to switch to some 
other methodology du jour. The same is true with the 
buffer management and project behaviors. Without 
management support, they will not work and in turn 
the Critical Chain solution will not work.  
 7.   Why is it so important to close the deal?
 a. 
 You are holding a meeting for a reason. If you present 
everything, but do not close it with a confirmed call to 
action, then people are informed but nothing changes. 
You need the call to action to get ensure that you get 
some level of commitment and cause change.  
 Meeting with  Grant :
 1.   What major stages does Tim go through in talking with 
Grant?
 a. 
 Quantify the issues (Layer 1)  
 b.   Explain the core conflict and key injection (Layer 2)  
 c.  Walk through the vision/FRT (Layer 3)  
 d.  Close the deal  

Appendix
182
 2.  What areas does Tim go through when he walks through 
the vision (Layer 2) with Grant?
 a. 
  Throughput 
 b.  Project buffers and behaviors  
 c.  Organizational analysis  
 d.  Summarize the vision  
 3.   What does Tim learn in talking to Grant?
 a. 
 About 40% of the projects have some delays.  
 b.   He and Gary have to juggle project priorities between 
proprietary features and infrastructure versus gen-
eral features and infrastructure.  
 c.  Micky states the revenues from contracts are 
down 30%. 
 Chapter   9 : Almost 
 Randal and Tim  Prep :
 1.  What does Tim choose to focus on for his meeting with 
Micky compared to his meeting with Grant?
 a. 
  Tim is catering to the audience. Grant lives a lot of 
the engineering issues, so it made sense to start the 
discussion there. Micky is the CEO and sees and lives 
the company’s struggles so starting with the cloud of 
the company’s conflict should work well for him.  
 Tim Meets with  Micky  :
 1.  What three steps does Tim go through when presenting 
to Micky?
 a. 
  Show the cloud  
 b.  Blame the system and highlight key issues from the 
CRT 
 c.  Introduce the key injection and vision  
 2.   Would you have done anything different in meeting with 
Micky?
 a. 
 Optional student exercise. Answers vary. 

Get it Done On Time!
183
 Next Steps:
 1.  What are some of the benefits Randal and Gary are see-
ing from implementing Critical Chain on the Phoenix 
project?
 a. 
  They hit a number of issues and consumed some of 
the project buffer, but are still on track to hit their 
deliverables.  
 b.  The development team feels more confident that the 
schedule is realistic and they actually have a chance to 
succeed.  
 c.   Randal has been working with Gary to talk with the 
customers to better enable a clean feature check-
out. The customers appreciate the attention and 
Gary feels it will help them get payments a month 
early if the schedules continue to hold up.  
 Chapter   10 :  Exec Meeting  
 Gary and Randal Present:
 1.  What are the pros and cons of Gary and Randal’s Critical 
Chain proposal? 
 Pros:
• 
 Phoenix is on track to generate better revenues than 
with past projects (no excessive overtime, no customer 
penalties for incomplete features).  
• 
 Phoenix is on track to generate revenues earlier than 
with past projects.  
• 
 The techniques used can be carried over to other projects 
and, in turn, help them bring in better revenues sooner.  
• 
 Keeping development in internal will protect their intel-
lectual property.  
 Cons:
• 
 Engineering has a long history of missing deadlines.  
• 
 Engineering has a long history of promising to improve 
with limited success.  
• 
 Engineering needs time to fully implement this new 
process across the company’s various projects.  

Appendix
184
 2.  Did Grant follow through on his commitment to help 
Gary and Randal in the Exec meeting (Chapter   8 discus-
sion)? If so, how?
• 
 Yes, Grant followed through on his commitment. 
Grant shared his belief that Critical Chain would 
help the organization move forward and would help 
them turn things around.  
 Micky Presents:
• 
 What are the pros and cons of Micky’s outsourcing 
solution?  
 Pros:
• 
 Development can be done at a fraction of the cost.  
• 
 They can use freed up funds to aggressively market and 
expand product offerings. 
• 
 Development can be done by a company with a history 
of delivering on time.  
• 
 They can transition to the outsourcing company quickly 
(in theory).  
• 
 They can add development capacity by expanding their 
contract. 
 Cons:
• 
 How quickly the outsourcing company can actually ramp 
up needs further investigation.  
• 
 They are entrusting their intellectual property to an out-
side organization.  
• 
 They lay off a significant number of their existing staff.  
• 
 They assume the outsourcing company can innovate as 
well as the existing teams that have had years to ramp up.  
• 
 They assume the outsourcing company will not signifi-
cantly increase its fees.  

Get it Done On Time!
185
 Epilog:
 1.  Who won at the board meeting? Micky? Gary and Randal?   
• 
 The company won overall by getting a solution that 
would help it succeed. Gary and Randal were able 
to preserve the local development team based on 
the early success they were able to get using Critical 
Chain on the Phoenix project as well as set the 
development team up for continued success. Micky 
was able to cement his leadership role as the new 
co-CEO.  
 2.  What does Tim want to implement next and why?
• 
 After implementing single project Critical Chain to 
help each project do well, he wants to look at Critical 
Chain multi-project to help the organization manage 
multiple parallel projects effectively.  
 TOC Resources  
 To learn the latest information and more about TOC, TOC solutions including 
Critical Chain, and TOC conferences, results, and testimonials, consider the 
following:
• 
 The Goldratt Institute (   www.goldratt.com  ); the birth-
place of TOC 
• 
 The Theory of Constraints International Certification 
Organization (   www.tocico.org  ); TOC Training and 
Certification Organization  
• 
 Googling your favorite topic  
 Bibliography  
 Chapter   2 : High-Level Critical Chain Overview 
• 
 Goldratt Success: “AGI Results” [Online]. Available at 
   www.goldratt.com  , November 13, 2010. 
• 
 Goldratt Marketing Success [Online]. Available at 
   www.toc-goldratt.com  , November 13, 2010. 

Appendix
186
• 
 Realization Success [Online]. Available at 
   www.realization.com  , November 13, 2010. 
• 
 Prochain Success: “Prochain Results.” [Online] Avail-
able at    www.prochain.com/clients/results.html  , 
November 13, 2010.  
• 
 “Using Critical Chain to break the World Sped Record 
for Building a House,” [Online]. Available at    www.
toc-goldratt.com/tocweekly/2013/05/using-
critical-chain-to-break-the-world-speed-
record-for-building-a-house/   , January 20, 2016.  
 Chapter   4 : How Does the Critical Chain 
Solution Work? 
• 
 Goldratt, Eliyahu M.  Critical Chain, North River Press, 
2002. 
• 
 Wikipedia. “Critical Chain.” [Online]. Available at    www.
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Critical_chain_project_
management   , December 23, 2014.  
• 
 Avraham Y Goldratt Institute. “A White Paper: Theory of 
Constraints Project Management—A Brief Introduction 
to the Basics.” Available from AGI December 13, 2010.  
 Chapter   5 : Championing Ideas 
• 
 Avraham Y Goldratt Institute, “Management Skills Course: 
Conflict Resolution,” 1993.  
• 
 Wikipedia. “Evaporating Cloud.” [Online]. Available at 
  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Core_Conflict_
Cloud  , December 23, 2010.  
 Chapter   6 : Implementation Steps 
• 
 Bibliography 1 interview with Suzan Bergland, January, 
2016. 
• 
 Bibliography 2 interview with Tina Merry, October, 2006.  

Get it Done On Time!
187
 Chapter   7 : Ambitious Targets 
• 
 Avraham Y Goldratt Institute, “Management Skills Course: 
Ambitious Targets,” 1993.  
 Chapter   8 : Individual Buy-In 
• 
 Interview with Suzan Bergland, January, 2016  
 Basic Answers to Chapter Questions 
 Chapter   2 
• 
 Wikipedia. “Critical Chain.” [Online]. Available at 
  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Critical_chain_
project_management  , April 3, 2016.  
• 
 Wikipedia. “Theory of Constraints.” [Online]. Available at 
  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theory_of_con-
straints  , April 3, 2016.  

I
© Eric Bergland 2016 
E. Bergland, Get it Done On Time!, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-1860-0
 A 
 Ambitious targets 
 background and QA issues , 177 
 key steps , 152 
 questions , 161 
 Avraham Goldratt Institute (AGI) , 10 
 B 
 Bad multi-tasking , 41, 165, 170 
 reduces , 46 
 tasks and projects , 48–51 
 Bibliography , 185, 187 
 Board room meeting , 135 
 epilog , 141 
 exec meeting , 183, 185 
 exec review , 155 
 Gray approaches , 136 
 Micky presentation , 138 
 Randal presentaion , 136 
 review , 140 
 Building schedules , 166 
 Building schedules back-to-front , 170 
 C, D 
 Clear 
 definition , 95 
 issues and impacts , 95 
 Concise definition , 95 
 Critical Chain 
 AGI , 10 
 answers , 164 
 benefits , 9, 38, 146, 168 
 building schedules 
back-to-front , 51, 53–54, 56  
 CCPM benefits , 148  
 common project management 
 issues , 8 
 components , 146  
 Goldratt’s marketing group , 11  
 high level mechanics , 12  
 issues , 145  
 managing variability , 6 
 multiple project management 
methodologies , 18  
 problem-solving model , 7 
 ProChain , 11  
 project and feeding buffers 
 bad multi-tasking , 46, 48  
 feeding buffer , 42  
 highway analogy , 46  
 padding dates , 39  
 project buffers , 39–40  
 project variability management , 45  
 safety time , 43  
 project buffers 
 aggressive task estimates , 14  
 bad multi-tasking , 15  
 building schedules 
(back to front) , 16–17  
 focused time , 14  
 manage variability , 12  
 organizational analysis , 17  
 safety time , 14  
 project management issues , 7 
 questions , 156–157  
 realization , 11  
 resources , 6 
 results , 10, 12  
 TOC solution , 6, 145  
 velocity , 18  
 web sites , 146  
 wrapping up , 18  
 Index 

190
Index
 Current Reality Tree (CRT) , 19–21 
 LivingTV Interactive 
 cloud captures , 72 
 core confilct , 71 
 CRT diagram , 73–74 
 meeting peoples , 122, 124 
 Phoenix project , 89–90 
 E 
 Environmental factors 
 organizational issues , 33 
 overview , 32 
 Randal implementation , 34 
 roles and responsibilities , 34 
 solution and implementation , 34 
 F 
 Feeding buffers , 42–43, 169 
 Future Reality Tree (FRT) 
 board room meeting , 143–144 
 Critical Chain , 21–23  
 Intermediate Objectives (IOs) , 105 
 LivingTV Interactive , 69–70 
 meeting peoples , 122–125, 127 
 Phoenix project , 90–92 
 successful implementations , 35–36 
 G 
 Gary 
 presentation , 136 
 questions , 162 
 Grant , 117 
 approaches , 136 
 core conflict and key injection , 118 
 FRT , 119 
 organizational analysis , 120 
 project buffers and behaviors , 120 
 synopsis , 121 
 Throughput , 119  
 issue , 118 
 review , 122 
 H 
 High-level implementation , 77–78 
 Micky, requests , 151 
 Phoenix 
 execution , 150  
 network build , 150  
 Post-Mortem plan , 151  
 setup , 149  
 questions , 160  
 Human resources (HR) , 110–111  
 I, J, K 
 Individual buy-in 
 approaches , 153–154  
 key steps , 152  
 layers , 152  
 questions , 161  
 Intermediate Objectives (IOs) , 178  
 concatenation , 101, 103–104  
 definition , 96, 98–100  
 results , 104–105  
 L 
 LivingTV Interactive 
 answers , 163  
 assumptions , 149  
 background , 58  
 conflict cloud , 59, 172  
 Critical Chain , 145  
 dilemma , 59, 171  
 direct conflict , 60  
 exec review , 64–67, 173–174  
 history , 1 
 idea , 148 
 initial manager meeting , 63, 173  
 Peter meeting , 66  
 questions , 155, 158–159  
 Randal reconnection , 2 
 realtime ideas , 61  
 resolutions , 60, 172  
 stuck , 59 
 Tim and Randal , 68  
 Tim reconnection , 2 
 TOC , 2, 145, 149  
 M 
 Measurable goal definition , 95  
 Meeting peoples , 129  

191
Index
 CRT/FRT issues , 180 
 Grant , 180–181  ( see also Grant) 
 human resources , 110–111, 179 
 layers , 180 
 meeting preparation , 112, 114–115, 117 
 Micky , 130 
 cloud , 130 
 CRT issues , 131 
 injection and vision , 131–132 
 steps , 132–133 
 sales and marketing , 108–110, 179 
 TOC tools , 180 
 Methodologies , 166 
 Micky , 87–88, 130 
 cloud , 130 
 CRT issues , 131 
 injection and vision , 131–132 
 presentation , 138  
 requests , 151 
 steps , 132–133  
 N 
 Negative branch (NBR) , 154 
 O 
 Organizational analysis , 56, 148, 166, 171 
 P, Q 
 Padding dates , 39, 169 
 Phoenix project 
 execution , 84–86, 150 
 Micky , 88 
 network build , 79–82, 84, 150  
 post-mortem plan , 86, 151 
 setup , 149 
 ProChain , 11 
 Project buffers , 40, 165, 169 
 Project implementation , 174–176 
 R 
 Randal 
 and Tim preparation , 182  
 and Tim presentation , 155  
 Micky , 182  
 presentation , 136  
 questions , 162  
 Relay race , 41  
 Roadrunner , 41, 169  
 S 
 Sales and marketing director , 108–110  
 Student syndrome , 41  
 Successful implementations 
 characteristics , 27, 167  
 Critical Chain Implementation 
expert , 27–28  
 environmental factors , 168  
 environmental issues , 147  
 experience , 28  
 factors , 25–26, 147   ( see also 
Environmental factors) 
 organization needs 
 compelling reason , 30  
 Randal and Gary , 30  
 Tim , 30  
 TOC thinking processes , 30  
 questions , 157  
 software tool experience , 28  
 metrics , 31  
 TOC TP thinking process 
background , 29  
 T, U, V, W, X, Y, Z 
 Theory of Constraints Thinking Process 
(TOC TP) , 18, 29  
 Theory of Constraints (TOC) , 2–3  
 key concepts , 145  
 resources , 185  

