

Getting
Naked

Also by Patrick Lencioni
Leadership Fables
The Five Temptations of a CEO
The Four Obsessions of an Extraordinary Executive
The Five Dysfunctions of a Team
Death by Meeting
Silos, Politics, and Turf Wars
The Three Signs of a Miserable Job
The Three Big Questions for a Frantic Family
Field Guide
Overcoming the Five Dysfunctions of a Team

Getting
Naked
A BUSINESS FABLE ABOUT SHEDDING
THE THREE FEARS THAT SABOTAGE
CLIENT LOYALTY
Patrick Lencioni

Copyright © 2010 by Patrick Lencioni. All rights reserved.
Published by Jossey-Bass
A Wiley Imprint
989 Market Street, San Francisco, CA 94103-1741—www.josseybass.com
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning,
or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States
Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the publisher, or authorization
through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.,
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400, fax 978-646-8600, or on the Web
at www.copyright.com. Requests to the publisher for permission should be addressed to
the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030,
201-748-6011, fax 201-748-6008, or online at www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Readers should be aware that Internet Web sites offered as citations and/or sources for
further information may have changed or disappeared between the time this was written
and when it is read.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their
best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect
to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁcally disclaim any
implied warranties of merchantability or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. No warranty may
be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and
strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with
a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any
loss of proﬁt or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special,
incidental, consequential, or other damages.
Jossey-Bass books and products are available through most bookstores. To contact
Jossey-Bass directly call our Customer Care Department within the U.S. at 800-956-7739,
outside the U.S. at 317-572-3986, or fax 317-572-4002.
Jossey-Bass also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that
appears in print may not be available in electronic books.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Lencioni, Patrick, 1965-
Getting naked : a business fable about shedding the three fears that sabotage client
loyalty / Patrick Lencioni.
p. cm.
ISBN 978-0-7879-7639-2 (cloth)
1. Customer loyalty. 2. Customer relations. I. Title.
HF5415.525L46 2010
658.8’12—dc22
2009046010
Printed in the United States of America
FIRST EDITION
HB Printing
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

CONTENTS
Introduction
vii
The Fable
Part One: Theory
3
Part Two: Practice
17
Part Three: Research
69
Part Four: Testimony
119
The Model
The Origins of Getting Naked
195
Naked Service Deﬁned
197
Shedding the Three Fears
201
Broader Applications of Nakedness
214
Acknowledgments
215
About the Author
219
v

This book is dedicated to all The Table Group consulting
partners around the world who are practicing naked
service with clients every day.

INTRODUCTION
V
ulnerability. It is one of the most undervalued and misunder-
stood of all human qualities.
Without the willingness to be vulnerable, we will not
build deep and lasting relationships in life. That’s because
there is no better way to earn a person’s trust than by
putting ourselves in a position of unprotected weakness and
demonstrating that we believe they will support us.
Yet society encourages us to avoid vulnerability, to always
project strength, conﬁdence, and poise. Although this is cer-
tainly advisable in some situations in life, when it comes
to important, ongoing relationships, it stiﬂes our ability to
build trust.
For those who provide service to clients, vulnerability
is particularly powerful. Those who get comfortable being
vulnerable—or as I call it, naked—are rewarded with levels
of client loyalty and intimacy that other service providers can
only dream of.
Whenever I explain this to an audience, I am often asked,
‘‘But can’t you be too vulnerable?’’ Surprisingly, the answer is
no. Of course, if you come to your clients every day admitting
that you’ve made yet another mistake or that you don’t know
vii

Introduction
how to do yet another required element of your job, that
would be a serious problem. But it would be not an issue of
vulnerability, but rather of competence; the problem would
not lie in the admitting of so many weaknesses, but in the
having of them!
Which reminds me of the ﬂaw in that old adage never let
them see you sweat. The truth is, our clients almost always
know when we are sweating, often before we do. And so we
have a choice. We can either pretend we’re not sweaty and try
to hide our weaknesses, and then watch our credibility erode.
Or we can raise up our arms, acknowledge our sweatiness,
and show them that we are honest and self-assured enough
to be worthy of their trust.
If this is so simple in theory—and I’ll be the ﬁrst to admit
that it is—then why do we so often resist being naked with
clients?
For one, we think it will hurt our chances for success.
We fail to realize that, even though clients require us to be
competent enough to meet their needs, it is ultimately our
honesty, humility, and selﬂessness that will endear us to them
and allow them to trust and depend on us.
But even if we come to understand this on an intellectual
level, most of us will still struggle with vulnerability because
we are human beings who don’t like to be weak, which
means we are subject to the completely natural but irrational
fears that make us uncomfortable being naked. This book is
about overcoming those fears, which is not easy. It requires
levels of self-sacriﬁce and discomfort—and, at times, real
suffering—that few people are willing to endure.
So naked service is rare, which means it provides
an opportunity for a powerful and tangible competitive
viii

Introduction
advantage for those who embrace it. They will build stronger,
stickier relationships with their clients; they’ll have an easier
time getting those clients to actively and enthusiastically rec-
ommend and endorse them, even without being asked; they’ll
have more comfortable and collaborative discussions about
pricing and fees; and they’ll enjoy their work much more.
But more than any of that, what makes naked service
worthwhile is that it puts us in a position to more effectively
help our clients, which, of course, is what providing service
is all about. It is my hope that this little book helps you
understand how to do just that.
Okay. Now it’s time to get naked.
ix


Getting
Naked


The Fable


PART ONE
❖
Theory


ENEMIES
I
can’t say that I hated Michael Casey.
For one, Sister Rose Marie Hennessey had taught me in
second grade that I should never hate anyone. And besides,
I had never actually met Casey. I don’t think you can really
hate someone you haven’t met, even if you ignore Sister Rose
Marie’s advice.
But I’m not going to lie; Michael Casey was one of my
least favorite people in the world. Even the mention of his
name could put me in a moderately bad mood.
And so, if you had told me a year earlier that I would
spend four solid months of my professional life learning
about him and his annoying little consulting ﬁrm, I would
have told you it was time for me to change careers.
But that’s exactly what happened, and I’ve lived to tell
about it.
5

ME
I
’m Jack Bauer, and yes, I share a name with that guy on TV
who saved the world every year. Unlike him, though, I’m not
a superhero. I’m just a consultant.
For ﬁve years I’d been working within the strategy
practice at Kendrick and Black, a prestigious, international
full-service management consulting ﬁrm headquartered in
San Francisco.
In addition to being one of the senior consultants in our
division, I headed up sales for the strategy practice of our ﬁrm.
This meant I sometimes competed for clients with Michael
Casey and his ﬁrm, Lighthouse Partners.
Now, Lighthouse was a much smaller ﬁrm than ours, and
they focused most of their work in the Bay Area, so we didn’t
run up against them in more than 5 or 10 percent of the
projects that we pursued. But when we did, we lost every
single time.
That’s not exactly true. We won once. But a year later
the client, a small start-up called DecisionTech, threw us out
and hired Lighthouse, which was more painful than losing to
them in the ﬁrst place. What was especially painful was the
fact that all of these losses occurred in our own backyard,
6

Me
providing particularly high-proﬁle defeats for all of our local
peers to see. This only exacerbated our bitterness toward
Michael Casey.
Keep in mind that, unlike in the world of sports, when
you compete against a consulting ﬁrm you almost never actu-
ally see your competitors. But you hear about them. And after
listening to story after story about how amazing and smart
and effective Michael Casey and his team were, I would have
liked nothing more than to hear they were going out of
business.
Or so I thought.
7

HORRIBLE
PROMOTION
W
hen I was ﬁrst told by a colleague that Michael Casey was leav-
ing Lighthouse and that his ﬁrm was for sale, I was ecstatic.
We had ﬁnally worn him down, I decided. There was a chink
in their armor after all; no one could be that good.
When I learned that he was leaving to ‘‘spend more
time with his family,’’ my euphoria diminished a little, but
not much. Spending more time with your family was one
of the most commonly used phrases for papering over a
performance issue. Regardless of the reason, Lighthouse was
up for sale and we wouldn’t have to compete with and be
humiliated by them ever again.
My glee at hearing about the demise of my enemy came
to an abrupt end ﬁve days later when the founder of our
ﬁrm, Jim Kendrick, pulled the rug out from under me.
Keep in mind that Jim had stopped by my ofﬁce only
twice before. Once to formally welcome me to his ﬁrm.
Another time to warn me not to screw up a project for one of
our biggest clients. He wasn’t known for being overly warm
or tactful.
8

Horrible Promotion
‘‘Here’s the deal, Jack. You probably know about a little
consulting ﬁrm over in Half Moon Bay called Lighthouse
Partners.’’
‘‘Yeah, I know them.’’ I said it like I had never given them
a second thought.
He continued, ‘‘Well, they were desperate to be sold in
a hurry, and Marty said they were probably worth the risk.
So we bought them before anyone else could. And so I
wanted to—’’
I was shocked and felt suddenly threatened, which is
probably why, before he could ﬁnish, I interrupted: ‘‘What
are we going to do with them?’’
‘‘We . . . ’’ He paused, smiling a little condescendingly at
my impatience. ‘‘ . . . are going to have you manage it for a
while. We want you to spend ﬁve or six months overseeing
the ﬁrm, which shouldn’t take more than half of your daily
hours. As soon as you get your hands around what’s going on
over there, we can integrate whatever parts of it we decide
to keep into our strategy division, and ﬁgure out what to do
with the rest. And if all goes well, you should be heading
the strategy division by then, given that Marty will be retiring
next summer.’’ He paused as if he were simply out of words.
‘‘Okay then.’’ And he left.
Just like that, my world had been turned upside down,
and for the rest of the day I couldn’t decide how to digest
it all. As I explained to my wife that night, I should have
been happy. But there was something about the situation that
made me uncomfortable.
Part of it was certainly the realization that if this went
poorly, my career would be considerably damaged—and that
9

Getting Naked
I’d have Lighthouse Partners to thank for it. Michael Casey
just might continue to haunt me even after his departure.
Another reason for my discomfort was the thought of
having to ﬁnally meet the man, to sit down with him face-to-
face to discuss the transition.
As it turned out, that would not happen.
10

ACCELERATION
C
asey’s departure from Lighthouse turned out to be more
abrupt than anyone expected. As soon as the ink was dry on
the deal, he was gone.
I was relieved by this, but less than I would have
expected, probably because I was suddenly suspicious about
whether there was something wrong at the ﬁrm.
When I asked my boss, Marty, about the circumstances,
he shrugged. ‘‘I don’t know. It happened so fast, we had very
little time for any due diligence. But for Kendrick, the cost
was relatively low, and for some reason he thought it was
worth the risk.’’
I sensed Marty wasn’t telling me the whole story.
‘‘Come on—you were the one pushing hard for the deal,
weren’t you?’’
Marty smiled. ‘‘Maybe.’’
‘‘So how are these people feeling about the whole thing?’’
Marty shrugged. ‘‘I really have no idea. But you’ll proba-
bly ﬁnd out on Wednesday.’’
‘‘Wednesday?’’
‘‘Yeah.’’ Marty grinned. ‘‘You’re meeting with the partners
over at Lighthouse Wednesday morning.’’
11

Getting Naked
Marty was a wiry, well-dressed ﬁfty-seven-year-old work-
aholic who had suddenly decided he was ready for early
retirement and a chance at unlimited golf. And evidently he
never had a Sister Rose Marie in second grade, because out
of nowhere he remarked, ‘‘I really hate Michael Casey.’’
Unlike me, Marty had actually met the man on a few
occasions, and considering it was his division that Lighthouse
had been beating up on for the past dozen years, I suppose
his hatred could be at least partly justiﬁed.
‘‘Phony,’’ ‘‘falsely modest,’’ and ‘‘self-righteous’’ were the
terms Marty used to describe Casey. I can’t deny that Marty’s
feelings inﬂuenced me—or more accurately, infected me—
and encouraged my hostility toward our rival. But I didn’t like
losing any more than Marty did, so I had nurtured my own
bitterness toward the man and his little ﬁrm during my ﬁve
years at Kendrick and Black.
‘‘What’s your hypothesis about how all of this is going to
pan out?’’ I wanted to know.
Marty took a breath and thought about it for a second.
‘‘It’s hard to say for sure. But I’ll tell you this: I don’t see too
many of their partners making it through the next year.’’
‘‘Why do you say that?’’
‘‘I don’t know.’’ As he thought about it, he winced. ‘‘More
than anything else, we just have two completely different
cultures.’’
I wasn’t surprised by his comment, but I wanted a little
more in terms of speciﬁcs. ‘‘For instance?’’
This time he didn’t hesitate. ‘‘From what I hear, the place
is a country club.’’
12

Acceleration
Marty could see that I didn’t understand what he meant,
so he explained. ‘‘They’ve got this funky ofﬁce that used to
be a kindergarten or preschool or something like that. I hear
that their parking lot is empty by seven o’clock every night.
They don’t work weekends. Ever. It’s a playground. Their
partners would get eaten alive here.’’
‘‘Isn’t that a problem for us?’’
Marty shook his head and smiled. ‘‘Not really. We’ll get
their clients and the consultants who do all the real work.
That’s the reason we did the deal in the ﬁrst place.’’
I was starting to get a little nervous. ‘‘So, why don’t you
come with me Wednesday?’’
Marty’s eyes went wide. ‘‘Oh, I’d love to.’’
I was relieved, until he continued, ‘‘But Kendrick and
I agreed that this is something you need to do on your
own. At least for now.’’ He paused. ‘‘But if you don’t come
back and give me a detailed, blow-by-blow account of the
meetings, and a vivid and dramatic description of every detail
about that damn company, I’ll ﬁre you.’’
We laughed. Or at least he did. I was probably a lit-
tle distracted, thinking about what would be coming on
Wednesday.
13

BAND-AIDS
A
s a consultant, I had always advised my clients who acquired
companies to accelerate the transitions and integrations, to
avoid letting problems linger or fester. ‘‘Ripping the Band-Aid
off quickly’’ is how I liked to characterize it. But now that
I was the one doing the integrating and ripping, I was starting
to question that advice. Still, I had no choice.
So, forty-eight hours after the contract had been signed,
I found myself driving west along the crooked highway
connecting the San Francisco Bay Area to the coastal town of
Half Moon Bay. That’s where the twenty-ﬁve employees
of Lighthouse Partners were waiting to hear what I had to say
about their future. They could not have been more curious
than I was.
The Lighthouse ofﬁce was not exactly what Marty had
described. But it was darn close.
Standing alone and apart from the rest of the small
agricultural town was a tiny campus of sorts, with four
rectangular buildings separated by breezeways and small,
neatly manicured lawns. It had certainly once been a school of
some kind (I would later learn that it had been an elementary
school for the developmentally disabled who were now being
14

Band-Aids
mainstreamed into the school system). Today it was the home
of three companies: a small wine distributor, an agricultural
supply sales ofﬁce, and Lighthouse Partners.
After parking my car in what had once been a playground,
I immediately saw why Michael Casey had chosen the name
for his company. No more than a quarter of a mile to the
west was a small but unmistakable lighthouse, mostly white
with three equally spaced blue stripes. I wondered why so
many people, including me, liked lighthouses so much.
The school building reminded me of my own grammar
school, except that this one had been spruced up and redec-
orated to look somewhat corporate. I was surprised—and,
I’ll admit, somehow pleased—to see that the bathrooms in
the center of the building still had ‘‘Boys’’ and ‘‘Girls’’ signs
on the outside, and that an old-fashioned drinking fountain
with three separate spigots was mounted on the wall between
them. I couldn’t help but think about Sister Rose Marie.
Walking the corridor, I found a door with a Lighthouse
sign on it and went inside.
15


PART TWO
❖
Practice


CONTACT
T
he inside of the building did not match the exterior. A recep-
tion
area
and
a
large,
ﬁshbowl-like
conference
room
dominated the front part of the building, which had been
redone in brick and simple wood. The rest of the building
and, as I would later learn, another across the quad, had
been converted into open ofﬁce areas. Everything was neat
and simple, with desks and bookshelves along the walls, and
skylights everywhere.
I was greeted by a petite, fortyish blonde woman in blue
jeans who was sitting at the front desk. ‘‘Can I help you?’’
Before I could answer, she continued, ‘‘Are you Jack?’’
Though she apparently knew who I was, she smiled politely
as though I were just another visitor, maybe the FedEx guy
or a caterer, but certainly not the conquering general arriving
to size up the spoils of his victory.
‘‘I’m here for a meeting with Amy Stirling and Dick
Janice.’’ I’m pretty sure that I didn’t smile, because I felt a sud-
den surge of self-consciousness and inferiority. I wondered if
she noticed.
Without a trace of anxiety, she responded, ‘‘I’m Amy
Stirling.’’
19

Getting Naked
Like a moron, I spoke without thinking, asking a question
that was as unnecessary as it was inane. ‘‘Is this where you
sit, Amy?’’
She smiled in a puzzled kind of way. ‘‘No, this is the
reception desk. Christa is on her honeymoon, so we’re all
trying to cover for her. And I was waiting for you.’’
Seeming to sense my discomfort, Amy continued, ‘‘Why
don’t you go on into the conference room, and I’ll see if I
can’t ﬁnd Dick and Matt. Grab a drink from the kitchen if
you want something.’’ She motioned to a doorway next to
the conference room.
A minute later I was sitting alone at the oak table in the
ﬁshbowl room, opening a Diet Coke. And then it dawned
on me.
So this is it. This is the physical source of the frustration
and anxiety that Marty and I have been feeling.
Suddenly, I had an urge to get up and explore every
nook and cranny of the ofﬁce, to invisibly observe the meet-
ings and listen in on the phone calls where they plotted
to drive us crazy. That impulse was quickly and strangely
replaced by an urge to leave.
I couldn’t decide whether I was more afraid of con-
fronting the little monster I had been loathing for these past
few years, or of discovering that it wasn’t as ugly as I had
imagined. Whatever the case, it was too late to consider,
because at that moment Amy and two of her colleagues
walked into the room.
20

Q&A
D
ick Janice, the oldest of the partners and someone whose
name I had heard a few times in the course of my sales
adventures, greeted me ﬁrst. He was a bigger, balder man than
I had expected, in good shape for someone who looked to
be half way between ﬁfty and sixty years old. His handshake
was a ﬁrm one, which didn’t surprise me. Anyone under the
age of seventy who hadn’t changed his name from Dick back
to Richard would have to be fairly tough, I ﬁgured.
Dick seemed as friendly and calm as Amy, which I found
disturbing all over again. Do these people even know who
I am and why I’m here?
Fortunately, the last and youngest of the partners, Matt
O’Connor, gave me a nervous vibe that reconnected me with
reality. A freckle-faced redhead, Matt didn’t manage to smile
when he shook my hand, and he looked away as soon as
he could.
Dick spoke ﬁrst. ‘‘Welcome to Half Moon Bay, Jack.
I hope you didn’t have any problem ﬁnding our strange little
ofﬁce.’’
I assured him I hadn’t, and we exchanged a few pleas-
antries about the weather and the blue-striped lighthouse and
21

Getting Naked
the school building where they worked. Then I decided to
take control of the discussion.
‘‘Okay, so how are you guys doing?’’ I didn’t give them
a chance to answer. ‘‘Things must be a little unsettling right
now.’’
I was afraid they were going to look at me as though they
didn’t know what I was talking about and say ‘‘No, actually
we’re good.’’
Thankfully, they didn’t. Dick went ﬁrst, smiling painfully.
‘‘I’d say things are at an all-time low from a morale stand-
point.’’
The others nodded, but Amy clariﬁed. ‘‘It’s not that any-
one’s going to jump out a window or anything. They’re just
in shock, and a little worried. But they’re busy, and that’s
good.’’
‘‘How is business these days?’’ I asked. Before they could
respond, I felt the need to clarify. ‘‘I mean, normally I would
have all that information before coming in here today. But
I just found out about all this two days ago and I’ve been
traveling, so—’’
Dick interrupted, reassuringly: ‘‘Don’t worry about it.
We’re all spinning a little right now.’’
Finally, Matt spoke, in a slightly defensive tone. ‘‘We’re
busier than we’ve been in a long time, and we’re completely
maxed out in terms of bandwidth. We had to turn down
two clients this month, good clients, because we just couldn’t
handle the load. But just this morning we reluctantly agreed
to work with a new client, and that’s going to be a push for
us until a few people get back from vacation.’’
22

Q&A
Though I’m sure that I concealed my surprise, I couldn’t
believe what I was hearing.
At K&B, we had never turned down a client, not if they
could pay us. Even if we were strapped for consultants, we
would borrow someone from another practice, accelerate our
hiring, or, more often than not, just work people that much
harder into the evening and on weekends. This must have
been what Marty was referring to when he talked about the
country club.
‘‘Well, it’s great that you’re busy.’’ I tried my best to
seem sincere, but I realized that I probably came across as
patronizing. Whatever. ‘‘By the way, who is your new client?’’
Amy responded ﬁrst. ‘‘A supply chain company in San
Mateo called Boxcar.’’
This time I had to work even harder to hide my reaction.
Boxcar had been one of the potential clients in our sales
pipeline, and I had them rated pretty high in terms of our
probability of closing them. I hadn’t known they were even
talking to Lighthouse.
As much as I wanted to ask about how they won the
deal, I didn’t want to acknowledge my own loss. I decided
to let it go and change the subject.
‘‘So, how much do you know about Kendrick and Black?’’
Amy went ﬁrst. ‘‘Well, I know you’re headquartered in
the city, and that you’re a lot bigger than we are. But to
be honest, I don’t really know a lot about how you guys
approach the market and how you work with clients. I’m
assuming that you have a variety of different practices, but
I couldn’t say what they are and how you compare to any
23

Getting Naked
of the other big consulting ﬁrms out there. They all kind of
blend together for me.’’
I have to admit that I didn’t believe her for a second. As
a partner, she had to know more than that about one of her
biggest competitors.
Matt chimed in before I could ﬁll in the blanks for Amy.
‘‘You know, ﬁve or six years ago I sat next to someone on
an airplane who worked in the Human Capital practice at
K&B. I remember her telling me that you,’’ he directed his
remarks at me, ‘‘have four or ﬁve ofﬁces around the country,
and something like ﬁve different practices.’’
I politely corrected him. ‘‘We’ve grown the number of
ofﬁces to seven, one in London and another in Beijing, and
consolidated our practices down to four. There’s strategy,
which is my practice. Human capital, which includes HR
and team-building and organizational stuff. Finance, which
includes everything from mergers and acquisitions to invest-
ments. And M&O—manufacturing and operations—which
I suppose is pretty self-explanatory.’’
Matt was writing all of this down as though he really had
no idea.
‘‘What’s the culture at K&B like?’’ Dick asked.
‘‘Well, it’s very collegial and professional and client-
focused,’’ I responded without even thinking.
‘‘How so?’’ Dick wanted to know.
‘‘Well, I hoped you weren’t going to ask that, because
I don’t really know what any of that means. We just say it
because it’s printed in our brochures and on our website.’’
Actually, I didn’t say that. Instead, I gave him some
generic pitch about working together across disciplines and
24

Q&A
going the extra mile for clients, blah blah blah. Frankly,
I wasn’t sure there really was a culture at K&B, other than
doing whatever you had to do to keep your clients happy
and paying their bills. And to me, that seemed like the best
kind of culture for a consulting ﬁrm.
‘‘What about you?’’ Amy asked. ‘‘How long have you
been there? What is your role at the ﬁrm?’’
I was actually starting to believe that she really didn’t
know anything about me, my ﬁrm, or what was going on
here. If I had been in her shoes, sitting on the wrong side of
a merger, I’d have tapped into every resource this side
of the CIA to ﬁnd out who and what and why things were
happening. She seemed to be just going along for the ride.
‘‘Well, I head up sales for our strategy practice. I’ve been
at K&B for a little more than ﬁve years. Before that I served as
a VP of strategic planning for a big medical device company.
And before that I was at business school in Boston.’’ I paused,
then embarrassed myself when I felt the need to add, ‘‘At
Harvard.’’
They seemed genuinely interested and gracious, even
when I did my academic name-dropping.
Without changing his facial expression or tone of voice,
Dick asked the sixty-four-thousand-dollar question: ‘‘So, what
do you guys plan to do with us, anyway?’’
And there it was.
25

BRASS TACKS
I
paused, but not in an awkward way. If I had come to this
meeting prepared to answer any question, it was this one.
‘‘That depends. Obviously we didn’t acquire you without
having a healthy respect for what you do. And in this business,
people are your only asset, so I don’t think your employees
should be worried about anything.’’
I should have felt worse for giving such a vague and
empty, if not downright dishonest, answer. But isn’t that
what companies say to the ﬁrms they acquire?
I wasn’t about to tell him how Marty felt about their ﬁrm.
And I certainly didn’t mention that one of the most likely
reasons they had been acquired was to remove a thorn from
our side and add to our client list. If that were in fact the
case, it would become evident soon enough, so there was
no reason to make this initial phase of the integration more
difﬁcult than it already was.
Now Amy dove in, and her demeanor seemed to change
in a subtle but unmistakable way. She was suddenly conﬁ-
dent, if not just slightly aggressive. ‘‘Jack, how much do you
know about us?’’
26

Brass Tacks
I felt threatened. I stammered. ‘‘Well, you guys have a
good reputation, as far as I can tell.’’ I wanted to be compli-
mentary but without giving them too much credit and losing
my authority. ‘‘I know you do most of your work in high
tech, and so a lot of it is local.’’
They nodded and seemed to be waiting for more details.
When she realized that I had nothing else to offer, Amy dove
back in.
‘‘Okay, you’re right that most of our clients are here in
the Bay Area, but they’re not exclusively high tech. We focus
on local clients because years ago Michael Casey decided
that there was plenty of work in this area to keep us busy
and off of airplanes. So we travel only in rare and special
circumstances.’’
That was the ﬁrst mention of the famous Mr. Casey, and
I wasn’t going to do or say anything that would provoke
more discussion of him. I wasn’t ready for that yet.
So I decided to ask a deﬂective question. ‘‘Your work is
exclusively in strategy, am I right?’’
Matt shot back, ‘‘No. We actually do a lot more than
strategy.’’
Dick smiled and explained, ‘‘We market ourselves as a
strategy ﬁrm, but we almost always end up doing more,
usually in the areas of organizational development and oper-
ational consulting.’’
This was news to me. ‘‘So once you get a new client and
prove yourselves, you sell other projects to them?’’
Amy squinted. ‘‘Well, I don’t think that’s how we describe
it. It’s usually just a matter of clients asking us to take on
27

Getting Naked
different projects, and so we’ve developed something of a
competency in those areas. But we don’t really advertise any
of that, because it really begins and ends with strategy.’’
As much as I wanted to write all of this down, I didn’t
want to come across as being too interested or surprised.
Then we were interrupted by a young woman wearing
jeans and a sweatshirt who carried a stack of binders into
the room and set them on the table. Amy introduced her as
Mary, one of the junior consultants at the ﬁrm, and she went
on her way.
I picked up one of the binders, saw that it contained
ﬁnancial information and client records, and started to get
excited. I love data, and I had a feeling that the meeting was
about to get fun.
28

DISCOVERY
D
ick explained the documents on the table in front of us. ‘‘We
thought you might want to see our books. We’ve got a list of
our clients, what kind of work we’re doing, how much time
we spend with each of them, and a basic breakdown of our
fees and our costs.’’
For the next half hour we tore through the binders, diving
into the areas that were interesting to me. It would be an
understatement to say that I was stunned by what I saw.
First, their client list was much stronger than I had
expected. A shorter list than ours, without a doubt, but in
some ways a more impressive one, I had to admit. But only
to myself.
Their costs per client were slightly higher than ours,
which I quickly learned was caused by the fact that they
had very few junior consultants. In fact, their average con-
sultant salary was considerably higher than ours, even though
they paid their partners less than we did. Lighthouse simply
had no legion of young, underpaid worker bees like we had
at K&B.
Given their cost structure, I assumed that their proﬁt
margins would be lower than ours. This would seem to be
29

Getting Naked
inevitable. That’s why I had to look twice when I found the
page on proﬁtability. They were actually doing a little better
than us!
‘‘I’m afraid this doesn’t add up,’’ I said out loud—and
immediately regretted. ‘‘According to these numbers, you
guys make about three to ﬁve percent more proﬁt per client
than we do. That seems impossible!’’
Amy and Matt turned the pages in their binders to the
same one that I was looking at.
Dick was staring at me, as though he were trying to read
my mind. ‘‘Why does that seem impossible?’’
‘‘I don’t know,’’ I stammered. ‘‘I mean, if you don’t use
junior consultants, which leads you to have a higher salary
structure than we do, which leads you to have a higher cost
basis than we do, then the only way you could be making
that much more than we are is if you—’’
I don’t know if I paused or if she interrupted me. In any
case, Amy ﬁnished my sentence: ‘‘If we charge higher fees?’’
‘‘Right,’’ I said, conﬁdent that this would be impossible.
Kendrick and Black was a prestigious ﬁrm, and we were
known, even criticized at times by clients, for charging so
much for our services.
As I turned through the binder looking for a section on
revenue and fees, I kept talking. ‘‘Granted, we probably have
a little more overhead, but not enough to explain—’’
This time no one had to interrupt me. I stopped in mid-
sentence as I found the page with the ﬁrm’s fee structure.
Not realizing that I was actually saying what I was thinking,
I quietly blurted out, ‘‘No way.’’
30

Discovery
‘‘Is something wrong?’’ Dick seemed genuinely con-
cerned.
It took me a while to realize he had asked me a question.
‘‘Wrong? No. No. It’s just, well, do you guys actually charge
your clients these rates?’’
Amy took my binder to conﬁrm what I was reading. ‘‘Let
me see. Um, no. This isn’t right.’’
I was relieved. Then she explained.
‘‘We changed this last month. Our fees should be about
seven percent higher.’’
Normally I would have played it cool and found a way
to disguise my amazement and save face for myself and my
company. But the cat was already out of the bag. ‘‘You have
got to be sh--ting me!’’
They smiled, which I took to be a mixture of amusement
at my language and pride that I was impressed. ‘‘Yeah,’’ Dick
conﬁrmed. ‘‘That’s what we charge.’’
I had already started digging a hole, and I wasn’t in a
position to stop shoveling. ‘‘Don’t your clients complain? I
mean, these rates are really high.’’
The three of them seemed genuinely puzzled.
Matt ﬁelded this one. ‘‘Not really. I mean, sure, sometimes
a client will tell us they can’t afford us. That’s a reality in any
business. But generally they’re ﬁne with our fee structure.’’
Amy ﬁnished the thought. ‘‘And once we’ve worked to
build a relationship with them, they almost never mention it.’’
I cannot deny that it was at that moment that I started to
get angry inside. Why, I don’t know. Looking back, I suppose
it was jealousy, but at the time, it felt like they were rubbing
31

Getting Naked
salt in my wounds, reminding me how much better they were
than me, than my ﬁrm.
I tried to back off and save face at the same time. ‘‘Well,
obviously there are some other things going on here that
explain all this. And there is probably room here for you
guys to reduce your cost structure.’’
I could tell they were suddenly dumbfounded. And I
knew what they were thinking. You think we’re overpaid?
You want to cut salaries?
It was as though any goodwill we had built up so far
during our meeting had vaporized in that moment. But before
they could say anything, two employees started to come into
the room, followed by a trickle of others.
Amy looked up at the clock. ‘‘Oh, it’s already ten-thirty.
We’re having our employee meeting.’’ She looked at me and
said without enthusiasm, ‘‘We were hoping you could speak
to everyone.’’
This was not going to be good.
32

GASOLINE ON A FIRE
I
n a matter of minutes, the room ﬁlled up with somewhere
close to twenty people. I don’t remember exactly how many
there were or even what they looked like, because, frankly, I
was reeling. Having lost the support of the three partners,
I had this strange feeling as though the khaki-clad employees
were a mob of angry townspeople with torches and pitch-
forks, coming to destroy a beast.
Well, if I was going to be a beast, I would be a good one,
I decided.
When the gathered employees had settled down, Dick
began. ‘‘Thanks for coming, everyone. We thought it would
be a good idea to have Jack Bauer . . . ’’ He turned toward
me—as a few barely audible chuckles came from those who
noted that I share the name of the well-known television
character—and went on, ‘‘introduce himself and tell us a
little about what we can expect in the next few months.’’
And with that he turned to give me the ﬂoor.
‘‘Thanks, Dick. Yes, I’m Jack Bauer, but not the super-
agent on TV.’’ No one laughed. I had used that line with
clients and employees and strangers on the rental car shuttle
33

Getting Naked
a thousand times, and I’d always elicited an appreciative
reaction. Today, nothing.
Fine, if that’s how they’re going to be . . .
‘‘I’m one of the senior partners at Kendrick and Black,
and I work in the strategy practice there. I’m going to be
assuming the responsibility of overseeing Lighthouse and
ﬁguring out how to integrate you all into K&B.’’
A hand went up in the back of the room. One of the
torch-bearing townspeople, a guy in a sport coat.
‘‘What do you mean by integrate?’’
‘‘Well, let me be clear about something. We did not pur-
chase your ﬁrm because we think you’re broken. Obviously,
you’re doing something very well.’’
I didn’t notice any sense of relief among the townspeople.
I might as well have been droning on like one of the grown-
ups on the Charlie Brown TV specials. Still, I continued.
‘‘But with any acquisition, in order to achieve synergies,
you make some adjustments to ensure that you’re aligning
your assets in the way that maximizes your potential.’’ Even
I thought that sounded like consultant speak.
Another hand went up, this time from a woman with a
pitchfork. ‘‘Why isn’t one of our partners running Lighthouse
during the transition?’’
The room went cold and silent.
I lurched for comic relief. ‘‘Well, ﬁrst of all I’d like to ask
you all to be a little more direct. It seems like you’re holding
back.’’ To my relief, this elicited a hearty round of laughter,
though I detected more cynicism in it than affection.
Unbelievably, Dick jumped in to save me. I think. ‘‘Lis-
ten, guys. Someone from Kendrick and Black has to be
34

Gasoline on a Fire
responsible for us and connect us into their management
structure. It isn’t like they were just going to leave us alone
and have us send smoke signals over the coastal range every
quarter letting them know how we’re doing.’’
A few heads nodded to acknowledge the wisdom of his
answer.
Amy spoke up, ‘‘And it’s not like the three of us are
going away. Jack isn’t going to be here every day. We’ll still
be handling the day-to-day operations.’’
I couldn’t decide if she was helping me or trying to put
me in my place. I let it go, not wanting to come across as
defensive. But I couldn’t resist exerting my authority a little.
‘‘Right. I’m still responsible for my own client portfolio
and for heading up sales for the rest of the strategy practice
at K&B. So I’m on the road plenty, and I’m depending on
you,’’ I looked to the part of the room where Dick, Amy, and
Matt were standing, ‘‘to hold down the fort.’’
That sounded patronizing, and I knew it. Fine. ‘‘But
you’re going to have to be open to some change. Whether
that has to do with sales, consulting fees, salary structures, I
don’t know. But as you all know, when executives say they
plan to make no changes to the company they’ve acquired,
they’re lying.’’
Amy spoke next. ‘‘Jack, can you tell us a little bit about
how K&B is organized, and how it’s changed over the years?’’
I was glad to move the conversation into less trou-
bled waters, so I spent the next twenty minutes providing an
overview of my ﬁrm, and generically answering a few innocu-
ous questions about trends in the industry and company
beneﬁts. People seemed to lay their torches and pitchforks
35

Getting Naked
down for the time being, though I was sure they kept them
within reach.
I was feeling like I was going to get out of there relatively
unscathed and with no further damage, until someone asked
about the culture of the company. ‘‘I hear that Kendrick
and Black is a sweatshop, and that there is little work-life
balance.’’
The fact that it wasn’t really a question, but more a
statement, made me feel slightly defensive. I made a bad
decision. ‘‘Well, I don’t know about that. But I will tell
you that there are people in our ofﬁce after six o’clock
at night, and if you were to show up on a Saturday you
wouldn’t be the only one there. I’d say we have a culture
of accountability and dedication to clients, and that it’s not a
great place for someone who prefers a country club,’’ and, as
if I hadn’t already done enough damage, I continued, ‘‘or a
playground.’’
I was sure that the pitchforks and torches were going
to start ﬂying, but instead, there was just an extremely awk-
ward silence, followed by Dick bringing the session to an
abrupt close.
‘‘Okay, everyone, if there aren’t any more questions.’’ He
paused for less than a second before continuing. ‘‘Thanks for
your time. We’ll be keeping you posted.’’
And with that they ﬁled out of the room, a few of them
stopping by to shake hands with me, but without any real
commentary.
I thought that maybe I had survived the worst of it.
I was wrong.
36

BACKLASH
A
s soon as the room emptied, I was approached by my three
new best friends.
Amy dove in. ‘‘Okay. I think we need to spend some time
together, and soon, ﬁguring out how this is going to work.’’
At that point I was really wishing that Marty had come
with me, and I was starting to feel like he had simply
chickened out. Or maybe I wanted to chicken out myself.
Whatever the case, I needed some time to regroup.
I tried to be calm and unrufﬂed. ‘‘Yeah, and we’re going
to need more than a few hours.’’ I paused and looked at my
watch. ‘‘Unfortunately, I’ve got to be back in the city in an
hour, and I’m out of town the rest of the week.’’
Dick frowned and was about to say something, so I made
my unpopular pitch. ‘‘Why don’t we get together on Saturday
in my ofﬁce and hammer all this out?’’
I hadn’t really asked a question as much as made a
suggestion. And even though I knew they would hate the
idea, I wasn’t going to back down. It’s time you guys learned
that life on the playground is about to change, I thought to
myself, unsuccessfully ﬁghting off pride and insecurity.
‘‘How about eleven o’clock?’’
37

Getting Naked
To their credit, none of them let me see whatever shock
they were feeling. They went to their PDAs to check their
schedules.
‘‘I’m coaching a soccer game at nine-thirty, so the earliest
I can make it is noon.’’ Matt looked at me in a way that
suggested deﬁance and permission at the same time.
I wasn’t about to be completely unreasonable. ‘‘Does
noon work for you guys?’’ I looked at Amy and Dick.
They nodded.
‘‘Okay, then. I’ll make arrangements for lunch. Let’s plan
on being there until four o’clock or so.’’
They entered the appointment into their devices as I gath-
ered my things to go.
Then Matt looked at me. ‘‘Are you always such an ass, or
is this going to get better?’’
Well, he didn’t actually say that, but I know that’s what
he was thinking.
I thanked them for their time and showed myself to the
door. As I drove away, I decided that the schoolhouse that
they called an ofﬁce was childish, after all, and that these
people needed some adult supervision.
And I had a feeling that Saturday was going to be
interesting.
38

DEBRIEF
O
n the way back to the ofﬁce I left a message for Marty. By
the time I returned, he was sitting at my desk, waiting for
me. He didn’t bother to get up.
‘‘So, tell me about it. Was it fun?’’ He grinned like a high
school kid questioning a friend about a recent date.
I took my time, milking the drama. ‘‘Well, fun isn’t exactly
the word I would use.’’
‘‘Okay, what word would you use?’’
‘‘Strange. Painful. Those would probably work.’’
Marty’s interest only grew. ‘‘Why? What happened?’’
And so I began to explain my brief visit to the playground,
which was how we started referring to Lighthouse. Marty was
riveted, and I have to admit that I probably exaggerated and
embellished a little, trying to play to him.
Then I mentioned that we had lost the Boxcar deal to
Lighthouse. Marty was stunned.
‘‘You were there just last week. I thought we had the
thing closed.’’
I shrugged. ‘‘It gets worse. They said they almost didn’t
take the gig because they’re so busy. A bunch of people are
on vacation or something.’’
39

Getting Naked
Marty shook his head, and I could almost feel his blood
pressure rising.
The last thing I wanted to do was make him any angrier,
but I knew that I had to show him the binder. He took it
from me before I could ﬁnish explaining what it was. As he
ﬂipped through it, I considered whether I should point out
the fee structure or just let him discover it on his own. It
didn’t take him long.
‘‘Well, this can’t be right,’’ he said conﬁdently. ‘‘Did you
see this page on revenue and fees?’’
I nodded. ‘‘Actually, it’s a little higher. And their clients
don’t seem to mind.’’
‘‘Bullcrap,’’ he declared, continuing his perusal of the
binder. ‘‘I know what we quoted Boxcar, and there is no way
they’re paying anything close to these rates.’’ Marty paused.
‘‘Call them.’’
‘‘Who? Boxcar?’’
‘‘No. Call someone over at Lighthouse and ask them what
they’re charging.’’
I hesitated. ‘‘You’re not serious.’’
‘‘Of course I’m serious. I want to know.’’
‘‘Don’t you think that will look a little desperate? Or
pathetic? Especially so soon after my—’’
He cut me off. ‘‘I don’t care. Listen, we bought them. We
own them. They work for us. I don’t care what they think.’’
I wasn’t convinced, so he said, ‘‘Here, I’ll call them
myself.’’
‘‘No, no. That would be even weirder. I’ll do it.’’
Ten minutes later I had my answer. Boxcar was going to
pay Lighthouse 10 percent more than we had quoted them!
Marty was livid.
40

Debrief
‘‘This makes no sense.’’ He looked out the window. ‘‘I’m
coming to your next meeting with those guys. When is it?’’
‘‘Saturday.’’
‘‘Saturday? Why?’’
‘‘For one, I’m on the road the rest of this week.’’ I decided
to confess. ‘‘And to be honest, I wanted to make a statement
about how their work lives are going to be changing.’’
Marty frowned. ‘‘I’m going to the Cal game on Saturday.
Let’s do it tomorrow instead.’’
‘‘Tomorrow? Isn’t that a little soon?’’
Marty shook his head. ‘‘Not for me. I’m open after one.
We can clear out the rest of the day and go through dinner
if we have to. Jim will be here too, so he can stop by and
meet his new employees. Do whatever you have to do to
rearrange your schedule.’’
‘‘I’m supposed to be in Dallas tomorrow.’’
‘‘For the Rockridge meeting? Forget about it. You don’t
need to be there. This is more important.’’
The thought of having to back out of that meeting on
such short notice wasn’t a pleasant one for me. And I didn’t
like the idea of having Jim Kendrick involved, not this early
in a process that was already off to a predictably rocky start.
But I could see that Marty was bent on doing this, and I knew
him well enough to know that he would get his way.
41

MESSINESS
E
xplaining our request for a meeting was not as difﬁcult as I
had feared, probably because I didn’t present it to Dick as
though they had a choice. He agreed to move his and his
colleagues’ schedules around to accommodate us, which I’m
sure was not easy.
I did compromise just a little, agreeing to start at two
o’clock so that Matt could make it back from a morning
session with a client. Luckily, that client was located in San
Francisco, which would cut down his travel time to our ofﬁce.
Our ofﬁce was in the Transamerica building—the pointy
one that pretty much deﬁnes the skyline of San Francisco.
Unlike Lighthouse’s headquarters, ours was built to impress.
The main conference room where we would be meeting was
on the twentieth ﬂoor and provided a view of Alcatraz, Angel,
and Treasure islands, with plenty of bay shipping and sailing
trafﬁc to keep the scene moving. The lobby wasn’t Old World,
but had a sleeker, slightly minimalist feel, a combination of
stainless steel, black leather, and mahogany accents.
Though we didn’t always wear suits to work, more often
than not we wore a tie and a sport coat. Our friends from
Half Moon Bay were more of a khaki and loafer crowd.
42

Messiness
By one forty-ﬁve, Dick, Amy, and Matt had arrived and
were waiting in the lobby. They certainly hadn’t dressed
up for the occasion. I felt much more conﬁdent greeting
them in my territory, and I decided I would try to make them
comfortable.
‘‘Hi everybody. You’re early. Trafﬁc must not have been
too bad.’’
Matt explained that his client event didn’t go as long as
he had anticipated, and his co-workers said their trip was a
breeze. They didn’t seem to be holding any obvious grudges
from our interaction the previous day. I tried to be gracious.
‘‘I’m glad we could do this today instead of Satur-
day. Whenever we can avoid working a weekend that’s a
good thing.’’
They politely agreed, and I brought them into the con-
ference room.
As all visitors did, they marveled at the view, and each of
them seemed to have a story about a ﬁeld trip to Alcatraz or
a sailing adventure on the Bay. Amy pointed to Coit Tower
at the top of Telegraph Hill and explained that her husband
had proposed to her there fourteen years ago.
While we were still gawking and talking, Marty arrived.
He greeted our guests graciously, asking some of the
same questions and making some of the same comments
about the commute and the view and his relief at not having
to do our meeting on Saturday. That was a little embarrassing.
And then we sat down and got started.
43

SHOW
I
kicked off the meeting by setting the context. As it would
eventually turn out, I was focused on the wrong areas.
‘‘Okay, I think the most important thing we can do today
is go through each of our methodologies. What models and
tools we use with our clients. How we evaluate our success
with them. How we break out our fees.’’
Marty jumped in. ‘‘As you guys know, there are as many
different approaches to consulting as there are consulting
ﬁrms in the world, and I’m guessing that what we do is pretty
different.’’
‘‘What is that based on?’’ Matt asked, but not in a defen-
sive way.
‘‘Excuse me?’’ Marty was suddenly either confused or
slightly pissed off.
‘‘I mean, what makes you think that our services and our
methodologies are different from yours?’’
Marty hesitated. ‘‘Well, for one, the size of your ﬁrm
would indicate that you might do less research than ours.
And the mix of consultants you have, in terms of experience,
would suggest that you have a less . . . ’’ He hesitated. ‘‘A less
rigorous model in terms of data analysis.’’
44

Show
Amazingly,
none
of
the
Lighthouse
folks
ﬂinched.
Although they certainly didn’t nod their heads in unison to
corroborate what Marty had said, they didn’t seem at all
put off by the presumptuous remark. After a few awkward
moments of silence, Dick spoke.
‘‘Why don’t we get started? I’m excited to see how all
of it compares.’’ He seemed just a little too polite, and
I couldn’t decide whether I should feel like I was being conde-
scended to.
He continued. ‘‘Why don’t you guys go ﬁrst?’’
I agreed, opened up my laptop, connected it to the
projector on the table, and started my presentation.
For the next ninety minutes, I took them through our
entire catalog of tools and models and methodologies.
They had plenty of questions—genuine ones, it seemed to
me—and Marty and I ﬁelded them with conﬁdence and
self-assurance. After we were done, Marty suggested we
take a ﬁfteen-minute break, and I showed our guests where
the bathrooms and kitchen were, and how to log onto our
wireless network to check e-mail.
Marty and I regrouped in his ofﬁce.
As soon as the door was closed, he started in. ‘‘What do
you think?’’
‘‘About what?’’
‘‘I don’t know. What do you think they’re thinking? Is that
Matt guy cocky or what?’’
I wasn’t sure I agreed with Marty’s assessment, but I cer-
tainly wasn’t going to play devil’s advocate with my boss.
‘‘I think it’s going ﬁne. They seemed to be taking lots of
notes, and I think they probably learned some things. Not
45

Getting Naked
that they’re necessarily unsophisticated, but I’m guessing their
tools are a little less up-to-date than ours.’’
He was waiting for me to go on, so I did.
‘‘I think they’re probably a little overwhelmed, wondering
what we’re thinking.’’
‘‘What about Matt? What’s his deal?’’
‘‘He’s just insecure. And probably for good reason. He’s
pretty young.’’
At that moment the phone rang. Marty looked to see who
it was. ‘‘That’s Kendrick.’’ He picked it up.
After no more than seven seconds of conversation, he
hung up and announced with an almost sinister smile on his
face, ‘‘Jim will be joining us for the next half hour or so. This
will be interesting.’’
We left, for round two.
46

TELL
W
hen we returned to the conference room, a few minutes later
than we had planned, it was empty.
‘‘You think they left?’’ I joked to Marty, slightly under my
breath.
He laughed sheepishly. ‘‘Maybe they just decided ‘To hell
with it.’’’
At that moment Amy and Matt came in, followed by Dick,
who was carrying a ﬂip chart.
Before we could ask, Amy explained, ‘‘Joanne at the front
desk found this for us.’’
Dick set up the easel at the front of the room, and we
took our seats.
‘‘Okay, this shouldn’t take long,’’ he announced. ‘‘Our
methodologies are pretty similar to yours.’’
That was not what I wanted to hear, but I didn’t believe
him; I decided that I’d be the judge of whether he was right.
Before he could begin, however, Jim Kendrick came into
the room.
‘‘Excuse me, everyone. I don’t mean to interrupt, but
I thought I should come by and say hello.’’
47

Getting Naked
I stood and introduced my boss’s boss to the visitors.
They took turns shaking hands while Jim explained that he
was the company’s namesake and managing partner.
When the formalities were over, Jim dove right in. ‘‘I’m
sorry for interrupting, but I’d like to ask a few questions
and then let you get back to your work.’’ He didn’t wait for
anyone to acknowledge or accept his apology, but continued.
‘‘Can you all give me a quick overview of your backgrounds?
As you know, Michael Casey and I did this deal in record
time. I’m sure I’ve glanced at your resumes, but I have to
admit that I remember very little detail about you personally.
You’ll have to forgive me for that.’’ Again, it wasn’t really an
apology, but rather an explanation. Still, I thought he was
being remarkably gracious, at least for him.
Dick went ﬁrst. ‘‘I’ll start. I helped Michael start the ﬁrm,
so I’ve been with Lighthouse almost ﬁfteen years. I went to
Chico State and studied agricultural engineering, and after
ﬁguring out that I was tired of the smell of manure, I got a
job selling insurance.’’
Everyone laughed politely.
‘‘Then I was hired by a friend to be a line manager at an
automobile manufacturing plant here in the Bay Area, where
I worked my way slowly up the ladder. We had a parade of
management consultants come through the factory, and I got
to know one of them pretty well, and when they offered me
a job, I took it. Five years later I met Michael, and two years
after that we decided to start doing executive recruiting and
coaching.’’
How old are you? Ninety-ﬁve? I wanted to ask.
48

Tell
Jim seemed mildly interested in Dick’s story, but it was
Marty who was particularly enthralled. He asked the ﬁrst
question.
‘‘How did you guys decide to become a management
consulting ﬁrm?’’
Dick continued, ‘‘Well, right away we realized that our
clients needed basic strategic help more than anything else,
so we started doing that for them. Then they started referring
us to other execs who needed help, and before we knew
what was happening, we had a growing strategy practice. So
we ditched the executive recruiting, moved out to Half Moon
Bay, and started what is now Lighthouse.’’
‘‘Why did you name it Lighthouse?’’ Jim wanted to know.
For some reason, I decided to explain. ‘‘There’s a great
little lighthouse not far from their ofﬁce near the coast.’’
None of my three best friends seemed to mind that
I answered for them.
Jim turned to Amy. ‘‘How about you?’’
She explained that she had attended Fresno State Univer-
sity in the central valley of California where she grew up on
an almond farm. She studied business, moved to the Bay Area
to be a management trainee at a retail store, then took a line
position doing marketing and public relations at a technology
company and worked her way up the ladder before joining
Lighthouse as a junior consultant.
‘‘And two years ago Michael and Dick forced me to
become a partner.’’ She laughed.
‘‘Forced you?’’ Marty didn’t understand.
Dick said, ‘‘Yeah. She said she wasn’t ready.’’
49

Getting Naked
‘‘They told me they’d ﬁre me if I didn’t do it,’’ she
half-joked.
This was all just a little too cute for me, so I moved the
conversation along.
‘‘What about you, Matt? What’s your story?’’ I tried to
sound friendly, but I wasn’t sure it came out that way.
‘‘Well, I’m a little younger than these geezers.’’ We all
laughed. ‘‘I’ve been with the company for four years.’’
He just stopped his bio there, so I decided to become the
lead interrogator.
‘‘What did you do before that?’’
He looked at Dick and Amy with a smile and seemed
slightly nervous. ‘‘Well, I worked at my grandfather’s bakery.’’
Again he stopped, and again I pressed him. ‘‘And where
did you go to school?’’
Without hesitating, he replied, ‘‘Notre Dame.’’
Dick and Amy laughed.
‘‘Why is that funny?’’ Marty wanted to know.
Matt explained, ‘‘Because the Notre Dame I went to is
actually Notre Dame des Victoires, which is a little Catholic
high school in downtown San Francisco.’’ He paused. ‘‘I
didn’t go to college.’’
Jim was now staring at Matt as though he had just claimed
to be an amphibian.
Marty was playing it cool. ‘‘So, how did you come to join
Lighthouse, Matt?’’
Amy jumped in to rescue her younger colleague. ‘‘Matt’s
being a little modest here. The bakery he’s referring to is
Fanucchi’s.’’
50

Tell
Everyone in the Bay Area knew about Fanucchi’s.
Their delivery trucks were everywhere, and you could
ﬁnd their products in any grocery store or restaurant within
a hundred miles of the Golden Gate Bridge.
Amy continued, ‘‘That’s a two-hundred-million-dollar
company. And Matt wasn’t just working there, he was in
charge of operations. At age twenty-four.’’
Dick explained the rest. ‘‘We were consulting to Matt’s
dad, the CEO, and spending a lot of time with Matt and the
rest of the management team. A few years later they sold
the company to General Mills, and Matt became available.’’
‘‘Why did you want to be a management consultant?’’
I asked Matt.
‘‘He didn’t,’’ Amy explained. ‘‘We recruited him.’’
Matt added, ‘‘Which was hard, because I wanted to go to
college. But I was approaching thirty and had two kids.’’
Dick smiled. ‘‘We made him an offer he couldn’t refuse.’’
They laughed.
We didn’t.
Dick explained, ‘‘This kid had read more business books
and case studies than ten Harvard MBAs combined.’’ He
paused and looked at me. ‘‘No offense, Jack.’’
I waved it off like it was no big deal, but the worst little
part of me wanted to punch him in the face.
Jim Kendrick then said what we were all thinking: ‘‘Well,
I have to admit that I’m a little surprised by your lack of
education and formal training. Which I guess is my own fault
because I pulled the trigger on this deal without the beneﬁt
of doing any real research.’’
51

Getting Naked
Any warmth in the room seemed to suddenly disappear.
Marty piled on gently. ‘‘I’m curious. Is there anyone at
your shop who has a graduate degree?’’
Dick nodded. ‘‘A couple of them have MBAs.’’
Matt smiled. ‘‘And Christa has a master’s from UCLA.’’
‘‘Who’s Christa?’’ Marty wanted to know.
‘‘Our receptionist,’’ said Amy. ‘‘She studied classical liter-
ature and is an aspiring screenwriter.’’
True to form, Jim ended his appearance as abruptly as
he started it. ‘‘Well, the next few months are going to be
interesting, folks.’’ He smiled at his guests, shot Marty and
me a raised-eyebrow look that said What did you get us into?
and left the room.
52

RECOVERY
W
e sat in the awkwardness of the moment for a long ten
seconds. Jim’s departures were always uncomfortable.
Finally, it was Amy who spoke. ‘‘Dick, why don’t you go
ahead and take them through our stuff?’’
Marty nodded his agreement, so Dick went to the ﬂip
chart, where he spent the next hour summarizing the various
tools that he and his colleagues used to help their clients.
I should have taken notes, because a few of the tools he
presented were actually interesting and a little different from
ours. But I didn’t want to give him the satisfaction of thinking
I was learning anything new.
By and large, though, the Lighthouse methodology was
indeed very similar to what we had been using at K&B as
long as I had been there. I found this immensely frustrating.
So did Marty, and he did a poor job of hiding it.
‘‘That’s it?’’ he asked, trying his best not to sound critical
or judgmental.
Matt reacted. ‘‘It’s not much different from what you guys
presented. Were you expecting more?’’
Marty searched for an answer.
53

Getting Naked
Before he could come up with one, Amy offered, ‘‘We
could certainly go into more detail, if you really want us
to. And there are a few other things we’ve used on occa-
sion. But I was thinking you were more interested in an
overview.’’
Now Marty was ready to respond, and I could tell he
really tried to be nice. ‘‘No, no, you don’t need to go into
more detail. Your overview was right on. It’s just I thought
your approach would be, I don’t know, more comprehensive
or something.’’
I decided to change the line of questioning, in search
of a major point of differentiation between our ﬁrms. ‘‘Can
you guys tell us how much time your consultants spend at a
client? I realize it probably varies, but what’s a fairly typical
situation?’’
Dick raised his eyebrows and looked at his colleagues,
as if to say I haven’t really thought of it that way before.
‘‘Let’s see.’’ He looked out the window. ‘‘Like you said,
it varies from client to client. But if I had to guess, I’d say
we’re on site with our clients on average . . . ’’ He hesitated.
‘‘Maybe four or ﬁve days a month.’’
Amy and Matt nodded their agreement.
‘‘Wow.’’ Marty was mildly shocked.
‘‘Does that sound like a lot or a little?’’ Amy asked.
‘‘A lot! What in the world are you doing there?’’ Marty
was genuinely curious.
‘‘We’re working,’’ Matt explained, without the slightest
hint of sarcasm.
‘‘And how many clients do you usually work with at any
one time?’’
54

Recovery
‘‘You mean the ﬁrm, or individual consultants?’’ Amy
asked.
‘‘Individual consultants.’’
‘‘Most of us have three or four at a time.’’ she said.
Now Marty frowned, like he was trying to solve a puzzle,
or a crime.
‘‘You have three or four clients at a time and you spend
as much as ﬁve days a month with them?’’
They nodded, and Marty seemed to be on the verge of
asking his big question, when all of a sudden he did an
impression of Jim Kendrick by bringing the meeting to
an abrupt end.
Taking a deep breath, he announced, ‘‘Okay, then.
Thanks for rearranging your schedules for us today. This
has been really helpful. I feel a lot better about moving for-
ward. I want to get you guys out of here and on the road
before trafﬁc gets too bad.’’
The three visitors seemed as stunned as I was, but went
with the plan to avoid any weirdness. Ten minutes later they
were gone, and Marty and I were back in the conference
room debrieﬁng.
‘‘This just doesn’t make any sense,’’ he said.
‘‘Then why did you close down the conversation so fast?’’
‘‘Because in situations like this, the only way to ﬁgure
out what’s going on is to see for yourself. It’s no different
from some of our clients. You can sit around and talk about
it all you want, but sometimes you just have to walk the fac-
tory ﬂoor.’’
I wasn’t sure what he meant. ‘‘So what did you have
in mind?’’
55

Getting Naked
‘‘I think you need to spend most of your time in Half Moon
Bay and at their client sites for the next few months. Something
doesn’t make sense, and we need to understand it.’’
‘‘But I can’t afford to be down there all the time. I’ve
got—’’
Marty interrupted me. ‘‘Who’s the new client you just
took on?’’ he asked.
‘‘You mean Cymerc?’’
‘‘Yeah. Forget about them. They’re my client now. And
hand off the SkyWest project team to Craig. I’ll run sales for a
few months. That’ll allow you to dedicate pretty much all of
your time to your Lighthouse team.’’ Something occurred to
him and he smiled. ‘‘Hey, maybe you can work with Boxcar
after all.’’
The look on my face must have betrayed my dread at
what the coming months had in store for me, because before
I could say anything, Marty stopped me. ‘‘I know this sucks
for you. Just make this work, so Kendrick doesn’t think we’re
total idiots. I’m ten months from retirement, and this is the
last thing I need.’’
I felt like I was going to be sick. I had no idea how the
next few months would change my life.
56

ANTICIPATION
T
he next day was a push as I prepared for my temporary
move to Half Moon Bay. From a transportation standpoint
it would be a wash, as I lived near the San Francisco Air-
port and would be doing a reverse commute. But in every
other way I braced for what I was sure would be a major
transition.
Amy arranged for me to have a desk and phone line
installed in Half Moon Bay, and she sent me more information
about their clients so I would arrive on Monday morning
well-informed.
As I sat on the couch in my family room on Saturday
afternoon digesting as much as I could, my wife, Diane,
started asking all the right questions.
‘‘Tell me again why you guys bought this company.’’
Diane knew how unenthusiastic I was about my new assign-
ment, and she wanted to help.
‘‘I don’t know. It was deﬁnitely Marty’s thing more than
anyone’s. And it was more about pride and morbid curiosity
than strategy.’’
‘‘That’s ironic, given what you guys do.’’
57

Getting Naked
I couldn’t argue with that. ‘‘Consulting ﬁrms do a lot of
things that would be considered ironic. Or hypocritical. Ego
is usually at the heart of it.’’
‘‘What about you?’’ she asked.
‘‘What do you mean?’’
‘‘Where’s your ego in this?’’
I put my papers down. ‘‘I don’t know. I’m pretty sure I’ve
been more of an idiot in the last few days than I have been
in a long time. But I just don’t like these people. I don’t like
competing with them. I don’t want to be friends with them. I
just wish Marty had never convinced Kendrick to do this deal
so I wouldn’t have to worry about any of it.’’
‘‘What is it you don’t like about them?’’
‘‘I don’t know. They’re just—’’
Diane
interrupted,
‘‘You
know,
I
don’t
think
I’ve
ever heard you say ‘I don’t know’ so many times in one
conversation.’’
I shook my head. ‘‘Yeah, it’s all confusing to me. I just ﬁnd
them to be a little too casual and oblivious and easygoing.
And I can’t stand the thought of that ﬁrm standing in the way
of me taking over the strategy practice.’’
‘‘How can they stand in the way?’’
‘‘Well, if this integration doesn’t go well, and if we can’t
ﬁgure out why their ﬁnancials look better than ours, Jim
Kendrick certainly isn’t going to be feeling great about giving
27 percent of the ﬁrm’s revenue to me. All of a sudden
my career seems to be riding on my ability to deal with a
bunch of people who look like they should be working at
the Gap.’’
58

Anticipation
She smiled in a warm and motherly way. ‘‘I think you
need to leave your ego behind when you go out there on
Monday.’’
‘‘Yeah, yeah,’’ I said as I dove back into my reading.
I knew Diane was right, but I also knew I was nowhere near
the point of being able to do what she suggested.
59

REENTRY
A
s I made my second drive on the two-lane highway to the
coast, I had a sudden eerie feeling that I might never make it
back to my ofﬁce at K&B in San Francisco. Dismissing it as
paranoia, I drove westward.
When I caught my ﬁrst glimpse of the blue-striped cylin-
der marking my approach to my new ofﬁce, I decided that
I didn’t like lighthouses after all. Wishing I could bring Diane
with me to work, I pulled myself out of my Lexus and went
inside.
‘‘Surprise!’’ The entire ofﬁce was there shouting to me,
and Dick was holding a big cake with the words ‘‘Welcome
to our company, Jack Bauer!’’ stenciled in blue icing across
the chocolate top. They lifted me onto their shoulders and
began singing ‘‘For He’s a Jolly Good Fellow.’’
Of course that’s not what happened. In fact, there was
no one sitting at the front desk. It was eight-ﬁfteen in the
morning and barely anyone was there. I did ﬁnd an envelope
on the front desk with the name ‘‘Jack’’ written neatly across
the front. Inside was a note from Amy, in which she indicated
where my desk was and that we would have a meeting at
nine-thirty. She did write ‘‘Welcome’’ at the bottom, which
was a far cry from a cake, but nice to see, I had to admit.
60

Reentry
My desk was in the building across the quad from the
reception area, in the same part of the ofﬁce that the three
partners shared. Getting used to sitting in the open, without
privacy, was going to be an adjustment for me. But then again,
so was going pee-pee in a urinal built for a ﬁfth-grader.
By the time our nine-thirty meeting rolled around, I was
glad for something real to do.
This was our weekly executive committee meeting,
and once again, I found myself sitting alone with my three
new BFFs.
‘‘How was the commute, Jack?’’ Matt seemed genuinely
interested, even warm.
‘‘Twenty-eight minutes door to door,’’ I reported. ‘‘Not
bad. That’s actually ten minutes faster than my ride to
the city.’’
We made small talk for a few minutes until Dick kicked
things off.
‘‘Okay, what we usually do at these meetings is talk about
what we’ve got on our plates for the week, how we’re doing
in terms of our primary goals for the period, and then take on
one or two key issues that might be ﬁxable in the near term.’’
I nodded.
‘‘But today, we thought we’d give you a chance to ask us
any questions you might have.’’ He paused and changed his
tone just slightly. ‘‘And ask you a few of our own.’’
I responded without thinking much. ‘‘Why don’t you go
ﬁrst? I’m guessing you’ve given some thought to the questions
you have for me.’’
Dick smiled, looked at his colleagues, and took a breath.
‘‘Okay, here’s the deal, Jack. We’re going to have to work
together, at least for a while, and so we might as well be
61

Getting Naked
honest with each other. We’re a little confused about some
things, and we’d appreciate it if you told us where you’re
coming from.’’
Taking a deep breath myself, I tried to think about Diane’s
advice. ‘‘Fire away.’’
Amy began, ‘‘Okay, I have a question, and I don’t want
you to think I’m attacking you.’’
‘‘That usually means an attack is coming,’’ I smiled.
Amy was quick to explain, ‘‘No, no. That’s not what I
meant.’’
‘‘It’s okay. I was joking. Go ahead.’’
A little calmer now, she continued. ‘‘Alright, I’d like to
know why you haven’t asked us a single question about
Michael Casey.’’
Suddenly I felt myself blushing, and I was sure they
noticed. I tried to be cool. ‘‘Well, I don’t know.’’ There
was that phrase again. ‘‘I guess I just assumed that if there was
something you wanted me to know . . . ’’ I paused, which
gave Dick a chance to interrupt.
He wasn’t buying it for a second. ‘‘There is a lot you need
to know about him.’’
I braced myself for a lecture, but it didn’t come.
Mercifully, he went on, ‘‘But that will come in time as
you learn more about the company. First we want to make
sure that you get to know our clients, what’s going on with
us right now, that kind of stuff.’’
Doing my best to take my wife’s advice, I rose above
my own pride and pettiness. ‘‘Well, I’ll admit that I’d like to
know more about why Michael decided to sell the business.
It still doesn’t make sense to me.’’
62

Reentry
Amy took this one. ‘‘Obviously you know why he left in
the ﬁrst place.’’ It was a question more than a statement.
I shook my head.
Dick was incredulous. ‘‘You mean they didn’t tell you?
What did they tell you?’’
‘‘Just that it was for personal reasons. Wanting to spend
more time with his family or something.’’
‘‘But that can mean anything. It’s usually code for ‘He
screwed up big time,’’’ said Matt.
I agreed. ‘‘Yeah, I ﬁgured it was something like that.’’
Everyone paused, amazed at what I didn’t know.
‘‘So, is anyone going to tell me the truth?’’
Dick nodded his head, but he wasn’t happy. ‘‘Sure. I just
can’t believe no one told you any of this. What kind of ﬁrm do
you work for?’’ He paused. ‘‘I’m sorry, it’s just a little bizarre
to me. Anyway, Michael has three grown kids, and his oldest
daughter lives in Texas with her family, two young girls.’’
He paused again, and I waited patiently for him to
continue.
‘‘Six weeks ago she and her husband were sideswiped
by a semi truck. Her husband died, and she sustained very
serious injuries.’’
‘‘What about the kids?’’ I wanted to know.
‘‘They were at home.’’
I was relieved, but only for as long as it took to realize
the situation those kids were now in.
Amy picked up the story. ‘‘Michael and Liz, his wife, went
there immediately. She hasn’t been back since. Michael’s just
come back to wrap up the sale of the company. He’s now in
San Antonio taking care of his daughter and her children.’’
63

Getting Naked
It took a few moments for me to recalibrate what had
been in my head for the past week and to digest the situation.
And then something hit me.
‘‘I’m guessing you know his daughter pretty well, being
that this is such a small company.’’
Amy nodded. ‘‘We went to her wedding. My daughters
were her ﬂower girls. Dick’s the godfather to one of her
daughters. We all went to the funeral.’’
It wasn’t like anyone in the room was about to cry; they
had certainly already begun the process of dealing with this.
But I was surprised at how much it affected me. I thought of
my own kids, and the fact that I had never even met Marty’s
children.
After a few moments to digest this, I came up with a
question, which I asked delicately. ‘‘So, why did he sell the
company? Why didn’t he just let you guys run it, or sell it
to you?’’
Dick smiled at his colleagues in a way that said, There’s
that question again.
‘‘Selling it to Kendrick was the right thing to do,’’ he
explained.
‘‘Why?’’
‘‘Well,’’ Matt said, ‘‘for one, Michael’s never coming back.
His daughter’s injuries are serious ones, and he was adamant
that taking care of her family was his new full-time job.’’
Damn it. I had to respect Michael Casey. I had really
hoped that I could keep loathing him.
Matt went on. ‘‘Selling it to us would have put a huge,
risky burden on us. If Michael’s departure hurt the business,
the value of the ﬁrm could have disappeared. Michael wanted
64

Reentry
us to share in some ﬁnancial upside, and this was the right
time to do it.’’
‘‘Besides,’’ Amy explained, ‘‘if things don’t work out with
K&B, we can always take a year off and go start another ﬁrm.’’
I couldn’t argue with the logic I was hearing. ‘‘So why
do you think K&B did the deal?’’ I wanted to get their
perspective.
‘‘You want our honest answer?’’ Amy asked.
I opened my eyes wide and nodded my head as if to say
I can’t wait to ﬁnd out.
‘‘Well, we think that you—not you personally, but some-
one over there—didn’t like us and wanted to get rid of us.
Not like the maﬁa or anything.’’
We laughed.
‘‘But it sure didn’t feel like a marriage made in heaven.’’
‘‘And then there’s the deep pockets.’’ Matt explained.
‘‘Kendrick and Black can afford to take a ﬂyer on us, but
that’s a lot of money to our little ﬁrm. We received a nice
little payout, and we get to keep our jobs.’’
I didn’t want to tell them that there was a good chance
some of them wouldn’t. As it turns out, I didn’t have to.
‘‘And if some people don’t get to keep their jobs,’’
Dick explained, ‘‘then they’d get a severance package to
add to their payout, which would be more than enough
to bridge them through to their next job.’’
It was at that moment that I was about to embrace these
people—not literally, of course—and become part of the
team. But then it dawned on me. They were actually in a
better position than I was! If things didn’t go well with the
65

Getting Naked
merger, they’d be ﬁne. Probably better off. But my career
would be in serious trouble.
The more I learned about Lighthouse Partners, the worse
I felt about myself and about the state of my career. And
that put me in a horrible situation. I had to make this merger
work with a bunch of people who constantly reminded me
that I was sometimes a complete ass.
Fortunately, my wife was a much better person than
I was.
66

ADVICE
T
hat night I put my kids to bed early—with more affection
than I had in a long time—and helped Diane clean the
kitchen more than I usually do. My motives were not pure.
I needed her advice.
Sitting down in the kitchen, I explained my predicament.
‘‘So I’m stuck with these people for at least a few months,
I’m guessing. I don’t particularly like them, which might not
be fair, but it is what it is. And if I can’t salvage this thing,
Marty is going to look bad and throw me under the bus when
he retires.’’
Diane listened patiently.
‘‘This is all Marty’s mess, and he’s making me deal with
it. It isn’t fair,’’ I complained.
‘‘You’re right. It isn’t fair.’’ Diane was neither patronizing
nor cold. ‘‘But it wasn’t fair that those kids lost their dad, and
that their mom can’t care for them, either.’’
‘‘I know that. I realize that I seem like a selﬁsh jerk right
now. But that doesn’t change the fact that I’m being asked to
do something that isn’t possible.’’
‘‘Why do you think it isn’t possible?’’
‘‘Because Kendrick thinks they’re a bunch of yahoos from
the beach. Marty can’t stand them. I’m supposed to make the
67

Getting Naked
deal work, but in a way that allows Marty and Jim to keep
hating them. And now I realize that these people would
probably be better off if the whole thing blew up. Heck, a
year from now Marty will be retired, these Lighthouse people
will be sitting at home counting their severance packages, and
I’ll be looking for a job and trying to explain why I ﬂamed
out at one of the most prestigious consulting ﬁrms in the
country.’’
Diane smiled at me.
‘‘Oh, I hate when you do that.’’
‘‘What?’’ she asked.
‘‘Give
me that smile that says you know what I
should do.’’
She laughed. ‘‘I think you know what I think you
should do.’’
I shook my head. ‘‘I got nothing.’’
‘‘Come on. You should go in there and learn every-
thing you can about that little ﬁrm, and make this the best
acquisition that Jim Kendrick has ever done.’’
Before I could say anything, she went on, ‘‘And who
cares if Marty gets the credit? You’ll still get promoted, and
you’ll be better for the experience.’’
I shook my head again—not to disagree, but because
I knew she was right and that I was going to have to become
a better person to make this work.
‘‘I hate personal growth.’’
Diane laughed and gave me a hug. I thought about
Michael Casey’s daughter.
68

PART THREE
❖
Research


EXPOSURE THERAPY
T
he next day was the beginning of my personal crash course
in Lighthouse Partners and Michael Casey, the man.
During my ﬁrst three days in Half Moon Bay I met
with at least a dozen consultants and most of the other
staff members. I sat in on a handful of account reviews,
analyzed the ﬁnancials of the ﬁrm in greater depth, and went
through a personality proﬁle called the Myers-Briggs with
Amy. (I turned out to be an ENTP, whatever that means.)
And in spite of the fact that the people at Lighthouse
were friendly, if not a little too casual for my taste, I learned
nothing that helped me understand why the ﬁrm had been
successful and how we were going to extract any goodness
from them.
It wasn’t until my fourth day that I saw my ﬁrst glimpse
of the secret behind the success of this strange little ﬁrm.
Dick asked me to go on a sales call with him, and
I gladly agreed, wanting to get out of the ofﬁce. On the way,
he explained that we were going to stop by one of his clients,
a fast-growing regional chain of upscale Mexican restaurants
called Mariscos. Dick had canceled a meeting with the head
71

Getting Naked
of marketing there the week before in order to meet with us
in the city, and he wanted to check in on a new branding
initiative they had been working on. He also thought it would
be a good opportunity for me to meet one of the ﬁrm’s older
clients, even if it was one of the smallest.
The
restaurant
chain’s
headquarters
wasn’t
what
I
expected. I guess I had hoped it would be an adobe structure
next to a mission, complete with a guy out front taking a nap
under a big sombrero. But it was just a plain, glass-walled
building with an unattractive lobby and a receptionist named
Marge. Marge wasn’t necessarily unattractive. Just the lobby.
Dick knew her by name, and I was a little surprised
that Marge didn’t ﬂinch when he walked by her and into
the ofﬁce area behind the reception desk without getting a
badge or needing an escort. We passed by a series of ofﬁces
and cubicles decorated with food advertisements and other
Mexican paraphernalia. More than a few of the cube dwellers
greeted Dick.
Eventually we reached a windowed ofﬁce where the
door was closed. Through the ﬂoor-to-ceiling window in
the hallway we could see a guy in a sport coat sitting behind
a desk talking on the phone. He waved us in, but kept talking
into his handset.
‘‘No, we can’t do that until we’ve opened up the Boston
and Toronto stores.’’
He pointed to the chairs in front of his desk to provoke
us to sit down.
‘‘No, Montreal can wait. Listen, Tim. I’ve got some visitors
here, so I have to go. I’ll talk to you on Wednesday. Bye.’’
72

Exposure Therapy
As soon as he hung up the phone, the man I would later
learn was the head of marketing at Mariscos stood up and
extended his hand to me. ‘‘You must be the new guy. Hi,
I’m Charlie.’’
I shook his hand and told him my name.
‘‘So, you’re the guy who’s going to make something of
this hopeless little consulting ﬁrm, huh?’’
He and Dick laughed. I think I did too.
I tried to be nice. ‘‘I don’t think they need any help
from me.’’
Charlie changed the subject, teasing his consultant. ‘‘So,
Dick, you blew me off last week. Had to go to the city to
meet with the big boys.’’
Dick held up his hands. ‘‘It wouldn’t have been a good
start to refuse my ﬁrst meeting with Jim Kendrick.’’
Charlie suddenly had an idea. ‘‘Hey, come with me.’’
Before I knew what was happening, he was out from behind
his desk and through the door in his ofﬁce.
We followed him to a conference room where a half
dozen easels had been set up around a big table. Each held
a poster depicting artists’ renditions of a storefront, a logo, a
website, even a business card. Each poster had a green
and red border around a silhouetted picture of a ﬁsherman
in a boat.
‘‘So, these are the mock-ups the creative people sent us
on Friday. We’ve got to decide by the end of the month.
What do you think?’’ Charlie was obviously excited.
Dick looked at them for a few seconds, frowning. ‘‘I’m
sorry,’’ he began, ‘‘but I don’t think these are right.’’
73

Getting Naked
At ﬁrst Charlie looked like he thought Dick was kidding.
‘‘Really?’’
Dick nodded. ‘‘Yeah. I mean, I thought you decided you
wanted to move away from the refried beans and pi˜nata
scene. Create more of a Latin feel.’’
‘‘We do,’’ Charlie countered. ‘‘We want to differentiate
from all the tired and typical Mexican restaurants.’’
‘‘Well, it looks pretty typical to me. I mean, all you need
is to put a picture of a guy in a big hat taking a nap, and
you’ve got it perfect.’’
I almost laughed.
Dick seemed a little harsh, but Charlie laughed too,
glanced at the door, and then whispered to Dick. ‘‘Mike
likes it.’’
I would later learn that Mike was Miguel Cantos, the
owner of the restaurant chain.
Dick didn’t hesitate. ‘‘Well, bring him in here then. We
can’t let him do this.’’
Charlie shook his head and smiled, but in a slightly
pained way. ‘‘I’ll be right back.’’
As soon as he left, Dick turned to me. ‘‘We did a bunch
of competitive research for them, even focus groups. And
everything said they needed to be attracting a younger, more
upscale crowd. And they’re planning to expand into the
Northeast and Canada, where most of the Hispanics aren’t
Mexican.’’
We inspected the posters in silence for a few minutes,
until he shook his head again. ‘‘This stuff is terrible.’’
‘‘What’s terrible?’’ The question came from the company’s
well-dressed CEO, a gray-haired man who was now standing
behind us.
74

Exposure Therapy
Dick didn’t hesitate. ‘‘These mock-ups. This isn’t deliver-
ing on what we agreed to a couple of weeks ago, is it?’’
‘‘These were done by one of the top agencies in the city.
I don’t think they’re terrible at all. I like them.’’
‘‘What do you like about them?’’ Dick asked politely but
with conﬁdence.
Mike took a breath. ‘‘They’re much classier than what
we have now. They make it clear that our specialty is ﬁsh.’’
He paused. ‘‘And we already paid ﬁfteen thousand dollars
for them.’’
We laughed.
Dick didn’t let up. ‘‘Come on, Mike. We talked about
being more like P.F. Chang’s and less like Red Lobster. This
is pretty Red Lobster.’’
Mike wasn’t smiling now. ‘‘I think you’re wrong.’’
‘‘No, you don’t,’’ Dick countered, teasing slightly. ‘‘You
just don’t want to tell those creative people that they whiffed
on this.’’
I could not believe what I was hearing. Mike didn’t seem
to ﬁnd any humor in Dick’s comment, but he didn’t seem par-
ticularly upset at him either. Even Charlie wasn’t at all rufﬂed
by the exchange.
‘‘Listen,’’ Dick continued. ‘‘I have no vested interest in
one design or another. And I’ll be the ﬁrst to admit that I
don’t have a creative bone in my body. All I know is that I’m
not going to pay nineteen bucks for a Chilean sea bass at a
restaurant that looks like that.’’ He pointed at the poster with
the storefront on it.
Mike didn’t say a word, but continued staring at the poster
that Dick had pointed to. Finally, he weighed in. ‘‘Neither
would I.’’
75

Getting Naked
Charlie ﬁnally spoke up, and as usual made a joke.
‘‘I wouldn’t pay ﬁve dollars for Chilean sea bass.’’
Mike smiled. ‘‘Yeah, but you don’t like ﬁsh. Let’s try
this again.’’
We laughed, and Charlie scolded his consultant. ‘‘Now
I have to go back and talk to those artsy-fartsy guys again.
Thanks a lot, Dick.’’
Dick was back to business. ‘‘Hey, are we still on for the
twenty-seventh?’’
Mike nodded. ‘‘Everyone will be there.’’
Then Dick ﬁnally introduced me to Mike. We exchanged
pleasantries until Dick explained that we were on our way to
an appointment, and we left.
On the way to San Jose for our sales meeting, I didn’t
know how to act. Technically, I was Dick’s boss, but I felt
more like his guest. And given that I was ﬁfteen years younger
than him, I didn’t want to sound critical.
‘‘Are you always so direct with your clients?’’ (Trust me.
It came out sounding nice.)
‘‘Are you kidding? That was nothing. You should have
been there when I told Mike I thought he needed to replace
his last head of marketing.’’
‘‘That’s a little more typical, though. I’m talking about the
way—’’
Dick interrupted. ‘‘The head of marketing was his son.’’
I laughed out loud. ‘‘Wow. How did he take it?’’
‘‘Mike or his son?’’
‘‘Both.’’
‘‘Jimmy, his boy, was actually easier than his dad. He
knew he was in over his head, and he wanted to be in
76

Exposure Therapy
operations anyway. Mike moved him into the ﬁeld, where
he’s running two of the newest restaurants.’’
Dick laughed. ‘‘Mike was a different story. He did not
want to hear that his son was the problem on the management
team. And no one else was going to tell him.’’
‘‘How did you broach that subject with him?’’
‘‘Well . . . ’’ Dick thought about it. ‘‘If I remember cor-
rectly, I said, ‘Mike, I think Jimmy is the problem on the
management team.’’’
Again I couldn’t help but laugh. ‘‘Come on.’’ I didn’t
believe him.
‘‘I’m serious.’’
‘‘You must know this guy pretty well to say something
like that to him.’’
Dick agreed. ‘‘Yeah, I know him very well. But at the
time I didn’t. I mean, we had been working with them for a
couple of months, but we’ve become closer since then.’’ He
thought about it for a second. ‘‘In fact, that’s probably when
the relationship grew the most.’’
‘‘So what did he say? Did he argue with you?’’
‘‘Well, to be clear, I didn’t just go into his ofﬁce and
announce that his son was incompetent. I respected the fact
that any dad would have a hard time coming to grips with
the idea that a family member needed to be addressed. So
I told him about the time that I had to bench one of my
boys in baseball for having a bad attitude, and how my wife
and my other kids were mad at me. As it turned out, my son
didn’t like baseball, which was why he was acting out. He
started playing tennis instead and wound up getting a partial
athletic scholarship in college.’’
77

Getting Naked
‘‘What would you have done if he had kicked you out of
his ofﬁce?’’
‘‘I’d have left his ofﬁce. But that wasn’t going to happen.’’
‘‘You weren’t concerned at all then?’’ I pushed him.
‘‘Well, it wasn’t easy, if that’s what you mean. But Michael
Casey always said that if we weren’t willing to tell a client the
kind truth, why should they pay us?’’
Though I should have been over it by now, I still wasn’t
ready to start asking questions about Michael. So I just stored
all of this somewhere in the recesses of my brain and changed
the subject.
‘‘So, tell me about this potential client we’re pitching to
today.’’
78

GIVE AWAY
‘‘R
am Transport is a trucking company, one of the top ten in
the country, I think. We’re meeting with the CEO and the
head of operations.’’
‘‘What kind of revenue do they do?’’
Dick thought about it. ‘‘I’m not sure exactly.’’
I thought it was odd that he didn’t know, but I assumed
he just didn’t have the exact ﬁgure in front of him.
‘‘How many employees?’’ I asked.
He didn’t ﬂinch. ‘‘I don’t know. I’m not even sure how
many of their people are independent contractors or full-time
staff. I’m guessing that most of their drivers aren’t employees.’’
I decided that this wouldn’t be the best time to challenge
Dick’s preparation regimen, so I stopped my questions. Soon
enough we pulled off the freeway and into the parking lot of
an ofﬁce complex near the San Jose Airport.
As we got out of Dick’s Acura, I noticed something
strange. The only thing in Dick’s hand was a black leather
portfolio.
Without thinking, I asked, ‘‘Is that all you’re bringing?’’
Dick looked surprised. ‘‘Yeah, why?’’
79

Getting Naked
‘‘You’re not going to do a presentation? No proposal? Do
you have any handouts?’’
Dick shook his head. ‘‘Nope.’’ He looked at the folder in
his hands and smiled. ‘‘Heck, this thing is just a prop.’’ He
opened up the portfolio to reveal that it held nothing but a
pad of paper and a pen. ‘‘I’d feel kind of strange if I weren’t
carrying something.’’
I was starting to think that our initial assessment of
Lighthouse was accurate after all, and that they must be
running an illegal narcotics distribution business to make
their numbers look so good, maybe taking middle-of-the-
night shipments in Half Moon Bay and storing the drugs in
that lighthouse. It would have been a good story.
We went into the building, and this time the receptionist
didn’t just let us roam free, but gave us security badges
and had us wait for someone to get us. The lobby was
typical corporate, clean and professional, nothing attractive
or interesting.
Within minutes we were greeted by a woman who was
an administrative assistant of some kind. She escorted us to
the elevators and to a conference room, where we declined
her offer of coffee or soda and waited for what I thought was
going to be a sales presentation.
When the CEO and head of ops arrived, we did our typical
meet and greet and sat down to talk. The CEO went ﬁrst.
‘‘So, I was telling my friend, John Sullivan—he’s the
COO over at Frigidata—that we needed some help ﬁguring
out how to do better planning, and he said I should call you.
And that’s why we’re here.’’
80

Give Away
Dick nodded. ‘‘Okay. Tell me why you think you need
to do better planning.’’
The CEO looked to his operating guy. ‘‘Well, it’s getting
harder and harder to make revenue forecasts. Our costs are
rising faster than they should be, and we’re not sure why. And
we’re starting to lose market share, which hasn’t happened
in ten years.’’
Pulling out his pad of paper, Dick began asking a series
of questions. Revenue. Number of employees. Competitive
landscape. Cost structure.
I couldn’t believe it.
If this were my sales call, I’d have come to the meeting
already knowing the answers to these questions. I’d be using
industry language and referring to anything I’d read in the
Journal or in trade reports. Hell, I’d probably be 75-percent
sure what we’d propose doing for the client. And here Dick
was, doing basic, primary research during his ﬁrst sales call.
What was worse, the clients didn’t seem to mind.
After he had exhausted his initial questions, Dick went
to the whiteboard. ‘‘Okay, let me explain what a strategically
healthy company looks like, and ﬁgure out whether any of
this is helpful to you.’’
He drew a diagram similar to one that we used from
time to time. Basic. Then he wrote a few questions next to
it having to do with customers and competitors and core
principles.
And for the next forty-ﬁve minutes we just talked. Or
better yet, Dick asked questions and the CEO and his sidekick
talked. From time to time Dick would draw another diagram
81

Getting Naked
or chart, almost always the right one given what they were
talking about, and the clients would get animated.
At one point the same assistant who had greeted us in
the lobby came in to remind them that they had a confer-
ence call in ten minutes. They asked her to push it back
by an hour. They were too involved in the conversation to
stop now.
For another forty ﬁve minutes we—yes, even I joined in
the session—talked about whether the problem they were
facing was really a planning issue or more about clarity
around competition. I have to admit that it was fascinating,
and the time ﬂew by.
Finally, the CEO looked up at the clock and said, ‘‘Okay,
we’re running out of time here. I’d like to continue this
conversation with the rest of my team, because we’re going
to need input from marketing and ﬁnance to ﬁgure this out.’’
Dick nodded. ‘‘Okay. Should we shoot for next week?’’
The two men who were already acting like clients looked
at each other, nodding.
‘‘Why don’t we use the second part of our staff meeting
on Tuesday for this?’’ the ops guy asked his boss.
Dick scrolled through his PDA. ‘‘I’m good for Tuesday
afternoon.’’
‘‘Done. We’ll be in the board room on the fourth ﬂoor.
I’ll have Nancy set you up.’’
I felt like I was going crazy, or that I was watching a bad
movie about business. No one had even mentioned fees or
contracts or scopes of engagement. Finally, the CEO restored
my faith in humanity.
‘‘So, should we talk about what this is going to cost?’’
82

Give Away
Dick didn’t seem surprised, but he certainly wasn’t wait-
ing for the question. ‘‘If you want, we could, I guess. But why
don’t I just come next week and we’ll see how it goes. If you
decide we can help you, we can ﬁgure it out from there.’’
The CEO seemed to like that idea. He eagerly shook our
hands, thanked us for our time, and genuinely remarked,
‘‘I’m looking forward to next week.’’
And we were gone.
I was stunned. It reminded me of the time in high school
when I ﬁnally got up the courage to ask Christine Owens to
the prom. ‘‘Okay,’’ she said, almost immediately. ‘‘Pick me up
at seven-thirty.’’
It was all too easy.
83

CONSISTENCY
A
t ﬁrst, I didn’t have the courage—or, perhaps, the humility—
to challenge or congratulate or even ask questions of Dick
about what he had just done. All I could do was try to
convince myself that it was one of those ﬂuky situations
where everything comes together at once. I’m sure every sales
pitch doesn’t go like that, I tried to convince myself.
I decided that I couldn’t hold it in.
‘‘So, I’m curious,’’ I said, still trying to play it cool. ‘‘Why
didn’t you try to wrap up the deal today? I think they’d have
agreed to just about anything.’’ And then, in a rare moment
of graciousness, I added, ‘‘By the way, you did a great job
in there.’’
‘‘Thanks. Your input was helpful.’’
He didn’t seem like he was going to answer my question,
but before I could ask it again, he explained.
‘‘You know, I’m pretty sure they’re going to want to
be a client. So I don’t really want them thinking about
what we’re trying to get out of the arrangement. At this
point, all I want to focus on is ﬁguring out their issues.’’
He paused, and again, just before I could ask a follow-up
question, continued: ‘‘And we need to make sure that they’d
84

Consistency
be the right kind of client. We’ll have a better sense of that
next week.’’
‘‘What do you mean?’’ I was confused. ‘‘What would make
them the wrong kind of client?’’
Dick didn’t hesitate. ‘‘Well, for all I know the real problem
is the CEO. If that’s the case, and he’s not willing to deal
with that, then we don’t want to be in there wasting our time
and energy, and their money, rearranging deck chairs on the
Titanic.’’
I laughed. ‘‘I’d be glad to waste their money rearranging
the deck chairs, as long as they paid me enough.’’
Dick laughed too. ‘‘We’ve learned over the years that
having a bad client is worse than having none.’’
‘‘How could that be if they’re paying you?’’
Dick didn’t have to think about it. ‘‘Well, for one, it
prevents you from ﬁnding other good clients. And you’re
unlikely to get a good reference. In fact, they’re likely to
tell everyone they know how you weren’t able to help them,
because they certainly aren’t going to admit it was their fault.’’
He paused. ‘‘And, as Michael used to say, it just makes you
feel bad about coming to work. It destroys the culture.’’
I didn’t say anything. Mostly, I wasn’t buying the logic,
and maybe even the sincerity, of what he was saying. This
was, after all, a business, and revenue is a big part of that.
Without the slightest hint of defensiveness, he asked me
a question. ‘‘So what would you have done?’’
I thought about it. ‘‘I don’t know. I guess the whole
thing would have been different. I’d have gone in there with
a bunch of research and a slide presentation. I’d probably
show them other work we’ve done for clients, to give them
85

Getting Naked
a sense of our capabilities. I’d have given them a bio of our
consulting team and a list of references they could call. And
I’d probably tell them what they could expect to pay, too.’’
And then it dawned on me. I was a salesman. Dick was
just a consultant. He didn’t do any selling at all. Instead, he
just went in there and started helping them.
I had more questions for him. ‘‘Do you ever worry that
you’re going to do too much during your sales call, and that
the client will take it and use it and not hire you?’’
Dick smiled. ‘‘That’s exactly what Matt said after his ﬁrst
few sales calls. And no, I don’t worry about it. Very few
people are going to do something like that. If they need help,
they need help. Even if what I show them makes perfect
sense, they usually know they need help implementing it and
getting the rest of their team on board.’’
I was surprised that I agreed with him.
‘‘And besides,’’ he went on, ‘‘even if they did do that,
then they’d probably be a pretty lousy client anyway. So it
would be better to ﬁnd that out up front.’’
Again, I felt like I was sitting next to Christine Owens on
the way to the prom. It was all too easy. If only Dick had
been wearing a corsage, the scene would have been perfect.
86

SPEED READING
A
lmost every day for the next two weeks I learned something
new and strange about Michael Casey and his odd little ﬁrm.
And I wrote it all down, both because I needed to ﬁgure
out what was going on, and because it was fascinating. And
painful.
Soon enough I realized that they had a fairly long list of
principles that Michael had been espousing over the years,
but otherwise not much structure around their approach. I’m
a structure guy, so naturally I was trying to ﬁgure out the
unseen model behind it all.
Well, I didn’t go with Dick to the follow-up meeting at
Ram Transport because Amy and I decided it would be more
interesting, and useful, for me to help her with a two-day
off-site meeting she was doing for a client in Walnut Creek,
a city on the east side of the Bay.
During the morning drive eastward across the San Mateo
Bridge, Amy gave me some background about the client.
MediTech was a medium-sized software company that helped
hospitals, doctors, and insurance companies automate records
management and prescription drug tracking. Though they
had hired Lighthouse to help them assess the efﬁcacy of a
87

Getting Naked
merger they were considering, the work had shifted toward
organizational dynamics. This included getting the executive
team aligned around a common strategy, and breaking down
barriers between departments.
Some people, including me at one point in my career,
thought this kind of thing was ‘‘touchy-feely.’’ I had come
around to believing that it was usually the biggest problem
that most clients faced. The key was having a practical
approach that yielded results—and that didn’t entail any
hugging or interpretive dancing.
The ﬁrst half of the ﬁrst day of the off-site was focused
on the company’s strategy, with heavy emphasis on technol-
ogy. Though I wasn’t completely unfamiliar with technical
issues, I was usually a little in the dark when it came to
anything sophisticated. Combine that with a bunch of new
medical terms and more three-letter acronyms than I could
possibly remember, and my head was spinning. I ﬁgured
I was the only one in the room lost in the depth of the
conversations.
But on more than one occasion, Amy did something
that was at once ridiculous and wonderful. Often, when
the chief technology ofﬁcer or one of the medical doctors
on the team started using an acronym or term that I didn’t
understand, she would interrupt and ask them what it meant.
Evidently she didn’t know either.
And a few times, the answer was obvious. Once she even
provoked a parental smile from the CEO when she asked him
a question that you could have known from watching ER on
TV for one season. But more often than not, when Amy asked
88

Speed Reading
a question, one or two of the others in the room turned out
to be just as confused as she was.
As simple as this was, I couldn’t help but think that I
would have been mortiﬁed to ask a client those questions.
Though I would have been terriﬁed of being caught, I would
simply have pretended to know what they were talking about
and then looked up the terms during a break or, if I was
feeling particularly bold, ask someone quietly, one on one.
Amy didn’t seem to care what they thought.
And her boldness wasn’t limited to questions. She threw
out a few suggestions that had me scratching my head. One
had to do with patient records, if I remember correctly. Some
of the executives were talking about how to make them
more easily accessible, and Amy made a suggestion that was
greeted with mild if not good-natured surprise. I’m not sure
what a guffaw is, but I think I heard a few of those, too.
And I remember someone saying, ‘‘But that would be in
complete violation of HIPAA!’’ which has to do with privacy.
What amazed me the most about the situation, more than the
reaction of the clients, was the way Amy handled it.
She was surprised at ﬁrst that her suggestion was so off
base, but then she seemed to shrug it off almost immediately.
And although I expected it to be an uncomfortable moment
for her and the rest of the people in the room, I’m sure if you
were to ask them about it now, none would remember it. It
was that uneventful.
On another occasion, one that probably none of them
remember either, Amy made a ridiculous suggestion. It was
a conversation about a small competitor in another region of
the country that had a much better user interface for their
89

Getting Naked
product than MediTech. They were lamenting the difﬁculty of
selling a product that seemed harder to use and wondering
how they could imitate their competitor.
‘‘Why don’t you just license their technology?’’ Amy asked.
‘‘I bet they’d let you do that.’’
No one reacted. I was certain they were simply trying
to avoid or, at the very least, mitigate the discomfort of the
moment so that Amy wouldn’t be embarrassed.
Finally, the technology guy said, ‘‘You know, I’ve been
wondering about the same thing. It wouldn’t hurt them to let
us use it, and they’d get some revenue out of it.’’
The head of business development jumped in. ‘‘In my
last company, we did the same thing with a company in the
U.K. Since our markets were so different, they thought it was
a great idea.’’
And just like that, Amy was off the hot seat—not that she
ever looked like she was sitting on it in the ﬁrst place. And
I have to admit, if you asked her about it today, I’m sure she
wouldn’t remember that one either.
I was starting to wonder—or, to be more accurate, to
worry—about how I would explain any of this to Marty.
Of course, I had no idea that the second day of the off-site
would be even better. And crazier.
90

DANGER
A
my and I went to dinner with the MediTech team that evening,
so by the next morning I was feeling fairly comfortable with
the group. Most were friendly and interesting people, but one
woman, in particular, was a little less friendly and a lot more
interesting than the others.
Her name was Mikey (or maybe Mickey, but I’ll go
with Mikey), and she was the head of marketing. There was
just something skeptical—or more accurately, cynical—about
her. Whenever a problem arose, she made it clear that it
wasn’t her fault and that if everyone had just listened to her,
there would be no problem at all.
At ﬁrst it was bearable. But after sitting next to her at
dinner, it became annoying. And by the second day I wanted
to strangle her, though I have to admit that I was a little
frightened of someone who could be that cynical and self-
conﬁdent.
Anyway, it was almost lunchtime on day two, and we
were talking about competitors and how we were going
to position ourselves against them. She started in on how
great the last company she had worked for was, and
how we should have adopted a different technology platform
91

Getting Naked
years ago than the one MediTech had chosen, and on
she went.
By now I had come to realize that the team’s way of
dealing with her was just to let her rant and then resume their
conversation. As uncomfortable as that was, I couldn’t think
of a better solution.
But then there was Amy. Holding up her hand like she
was asking a question of Sister Rose Marie in second grade,
she didn’t wait to be called on. ‘‘I’m sorry, but I think it’s time
we dealt with something, because I don’t think we’re going
to make this strategy work if we don’t.’’
The room was quiet, though I’m pretty sure they had no
idea what Amy was about to do.
‘‘Mikey, I’m sure you mean well.’’ She paused long
enough for the room to reach a completely new level of
silence, and for Mikey to raise her eyebrows. ‘‘But when you
approach every issue with such . . . ,’’ she searched for the
right word, ‘‘negativity, it’s a real buzz kill for the team.’’
(On the way home I learned that Amy didn’t know the
original meaning of a buzz kill. I was liking her more and
more.)
Amy continued, ‘‘I mean, are you noticing how the room
goes quiet when you do that? And what about the rest of
you? Am I the only one?’’
The third-grader inside me wanted to stand up and shout,
‘‘This is the best off-site ever!’’
No one spoke.
‘‘Or maybe it’s just me,’’ Amy said, looking a little uncom-
fortable now.
More silence.
92

Danger
Finally, the CFO, another woman, weighed in. ‘‘I have to
agree, Mikey. It just seems like you’re never happy, and that
everything is always someone else’s problem.’’
Amy walked right over to the CEO and stood in front of
him, but without looking at him. Somehow, this seemed to
provoke him to weigh in.
‘‘Okay, you guys know I hate talking about this kind of
stuff. I went to med school, for heaven’s sake, and I like
dealing with medical stuff.’’
They laughed a little.
‘‘But we’ve got to deal with this. And yes, I see it, and
I know others in the room do too.’’
A few heads nodded in a barely perceptible way. The
tension was peaking.
Amy stepped right into the middle of it. ‘‘Here’s the thing.
Every team has issues like this, so this isn’t something that we
can’t deal with. And I’m sure that every person in the room
has an area where they can improve, and that if they did, the
team would be exponentially better off.’’
No one nodded their heads, but there seemed to be an
unspoken agreement in the air.
‘‘So let’s take a few minutes,’’ she paused, ‘‘no, more like
ninety minutes, and deal with this.’’
A few of the team members, most notably the chief
technology ofﬁcer, sighed in a complaining kind of way.
Amy took him on.
‘‘Come on, Jim. Are you telling me that this kind of stuff
doesn’t make a difference? Do you think we’re going to come
anywhere close to tapping into the technology that you’ve
put together if we keep wasting time and energy like this?’’
93

Getting Naked
He responded. ‘‘I know. But do we really need to take
an hour and half? I mean, we’ve got real work to do.’’
Amy was about to respond, when the CEO stepped in.
‘‘Wait a second, Jim. You know how many times you’ve
come by my ofﬁce and complained about this.’’
Everyone seemed to sneak a glance at Mikey to see how
she would react. Stone cold.
The CEO went on, with a little more emotion than he
looked like he was accustomed to showing. ‘‘Frankly, I’m
tired of it.’’
Finally, Mikey stood up. ‘‘Okay. Here’s the thing.’’ She
took a big breath. ‘‘I know I’m a pain in the ass. I left the
last start-up I worked for because I had a hard time with
the executives there.’’
This was better than TV.
‘‘But that’s not going to happen again. So I’d appreciate
it if you guys would just tell me straight up when I’m pissing
you off, because I can take it.’’ She paused. ‘‘What I can’t take
is you telling each other, or him,’’ she pointed at the CEO,
‘‘and me ﬁnding out later.’’
She sat down.
The CEO looked at Amy as if to say back to you, and
she proceeded to take the group through one of the most
intense, interesting, and—from what I saw—effective behav-
ioral therapy exercises I had ever witnessed. All in a little
more than an hour.
Starting with the CEO, they went around the room and
told him what they thought his most valuable attribute was
for the team, and then they went around and told him the
one thing they thought he should work on. The answers were
94

Danger
pretty consistent; he took them well, and promised to do his
best to address his biggest area of weakness, which I don’t
remember.
Then they went around the table and did the same for
everyone else, including Mikey.
At one point she almost cried, but interestingly, it was
when they told her that she was one of the most creative
marketing people they had ever met. And they meant it.
When they explained to her that she was way too defensive
and critical of everyone else, she accepted it and reiterated
her desire for them to hold her accountable. And as far as
I could tell, she meant that too.
When it was over, there was a palpable sense of relief
among the team members, even laughter. It was incredible.
I thought the team should have lifted Amy onto their shoul-
ders and paraded her around the room. Instead, they went to
the bathroom.
95

DIGESTION
T
he rest of the session was pretty much a blur for me, as I tried
to process what I had been witnessing, not only that day but
during my ﬁrst few weeks at Lighthouse.
The two-hour drive home with Amy gave me a chance to
do some debrieﬁng.
‘‘How typical was that session?’’ I asked, trying not to
betray the awe that I had felt.
Amy thought about it. ‘‘I don’t know if any session is
typical. They’re all a little different.’’
‘‘Right. But in terms of the level of tension and drama,
how did that one rate?’’
She laughed. ‘‘Oh, that was deﬁnitely on the dramatic
side. I don’t usually have to do anything like that.’’ She
paused. ‘‘But stranger things than that have happened more
than a few times over the years.’’
I wasn’t about to let her get away with that statement
without asking for details, so she told me some seriously
unbelievable stories about difﬁcult clients and embarrassing
moments. The best one had to do with a time that Michael
Casey was giving a strategy presentation to a room full of
executives at a big client’s worldwide planning meeting.
96

Digestion
‘‘The CEO and his executive team worked with Michael
for three weeks putting together the content for the meeting,
crunching numbers, creating slides, and reviewing the key
priorities and messages for what was looking like a particu-
larly difﬁcult year.’’ Amy shook her head in disbelief. ‘‘Then
the CEO gets sick and Michael has to present the new strat-
egy to the seventy-ﬁve senior managers by himself. When he
does, they throw up all over the plan.’’
‘‘How so?’’ I wanted speciﬁcs. The gorier the better.
‘‘Well, I wasn’t there, but Dick swore that one of the
managers, the head of sales for Europe, a French guy, stood
up and said something like, ‘You American consultants have
no idea how to approach the European market. This is one
of the worst pieces of analysis I’ve ever seen, and I’m afraid
that whatever we are paying your ﬁrm is too much.’’’
I laughed. ‘‘Come on. That’s hard to believe, even for
a Frenchman.’’
‘‘That’s what I said when they told me, but they were
adamant. And others at the meeting conﬁrmed it.’’
‘‘What did the rest of the executives in the room do?’’
‘‘That’s the thing!’’ she said excitedly. ‘‘They did nothing!
A few even piled on, saying that the direction of the company
was all wrong. And half a dozen members of the executive
team, all of whom were certainly more responsible for the
actual input and decision about the company’s strategy than
Michael, sat there and didn’t say a word.’’
‘‘Michael must have been ticked off.’’
Amy took a second to think about it. ‘‘You know, he
was deﬁnitely embarrassed. Or at least a little humiliated. But
I don’t think he was really all that angry.’’
97

Getting Naked
‘‘What did he say to the CEO and the other executives
afterward?’’
‘‘That’s the thing,’’ Amy smiled. ‘‘He didn’t really say
anything. He just went back in there the next week and
helped them put together a new plan.’’
I was starting to see an opportunity to lose some respect
for Michael Casey, and I wasn’t disappointed about that. Still,
I tried to be tactful. ‘‘Isn’t that a little weak?’’
‘‘That’s exactly what I thought. Dick too.’’
This was too good to be true. There had to be a ‘‘but’’
coming. And there was.
‘‘But when we asked him what he was going to do, he
didn’t seem to understand our question.’’
‘‘What do you mean?’’
‘‘I mean, we asked him point blank, ‘Are you going to
go in there and tell those guys what a bunch of spineless
jellyﬁsh they are?’ Heck, we ﬁgured Michael would want to
walk away from a client for hanging him out to dry like that.’’
‘‘So what did he say?’’
Amy didn’t hesitate this time. ‘‘I can remember what he
said almost word for word: ‘Listen, this is just an unpleasant
part of our job sometimes. Those executives know that I took
a bullet for them. I’ll make sure they acknowledge that in
some way, but I’m not going to punish them for it. Remember,
they’re paying us to help them make their company more
successful, and if I had to be a trial balloon or a strategic
pi˜nata to make that happen, so be it.’’’
I’m sure I rolled my eyes just a little, but Amy was watch-
ing the road and probably didn’t notice. ‘‘What happened
with the client?’’ I wanted to know.
98

Digestion
‘‘Well, the next time Michael met with the executives,
they teased him about taking one for the team. So they knew
what had happened. And then they asked Michael to help
them ﬁgure out how to adjust the strategy.’’
‘‘Did it work?’’
Amy shrugged. ‘‘I don’t know. I assume so, because the
client is doing well today. And they became one of our most
enthusiastic references. Their CEO probably brought us half
a dozen other clients during the next ﬁve years.’’
I sat there in silence, watching brake lights mock me as
we drove across the San Mateo Bridge.
Marty isn’t going to want to hear any of this.
99

COUNSEL
I
t was ironic that I was a strategy consultant, because what I
needed most right then was a strategy of my own. I suppose
Diane is my personal consultant, because she’s the one I go
to when I’m out of ideas.
‘‘So explain the dilemma again,’’ she invited me, without
the slightest hint of impatience.
‘‘It’s complicated. Or maybe it’s not. I don’t know. Basi-
cally, there’s something going on at this ﬁrm that is completely
different from what happens at Kendrick and Black. I don’t
quite understand it all, but I’m pretty sure these folks come
from a different planet.’’
‘‘And why is that such a big deal?’’
‘‘Because my job is to integrate Lighthouse into K&B
and then, if all goes well, take responsibility for running the
practice. I don’t know that either of those things is going to
happen.’’
Diane looked a little stunned. ‘‘Whoa. Wait a second.
Where is that coming from? You’re a few weeks into this and
you’re already projecting problems that are way out on the
horizon.’’
‘‘Yeah, I realize it seems a little pessimistic.’’
‘‘More like morose, but go on.’’
100

Counsel
‘‘Whatever. It’s just that I’m okay at seeing around cor-
ners, and there’s no way that Marty is going to buy into
whatever it is that I’m learning here. He’d never want to
work with these people, which means the acquisition will
tank, I’ll get tossed aside, my career will get thrown for a loop
and . . . ’’ I paused, which gave Diane the opportunity she
needed.
‘‘You’ll be sent to Siberia for ﬁfteen years of hard labor,
and then spontaneously burst into ﬂames.’’
I would’ve laughed, except that was the line Diane always
used with me and the kids when we were predicting doom.
Instead, I pushed back. ‘‘Yeah, I know. I can deal with what-
ever happens. There’s nothing to fear but fear itself. What
doesn’t kill you makes you stronger.’’
Diane was just a little annoyed now. ‘‘Are you saying that
my advice is that stale? Because I don’t think I—’’
‘‘No, no. It’s not that. I’m just stuck.’’
‘‘Okay, here’s what you’re going to do, Mr. High-Priced
Management Consultant. I’ve said this to you before but
you’re going to spend the next few months learning every-
thing you can about this ﬁrm, and you’re going to enjoy
yourself doing it. Goodness gracious. Can’t you just ﬁnd a
way to like these people?’’
‘‘It’s not that I don’t like them.’’
‘‘Okay then. You’ve got that going for you. So learn
everything you can, present it all to Marty, and then let the
chips fall—’’ She caught herself before ﬁnishing the clich´e.
‘‘You know what I mean. Let whatever happens happen.
Maybe Marty will grow a little here.’’
101

Getting Naked
We both laughed. She went on, ‘‘Okay, so he’s not going
to grow. But he’s going to want to make this work for himself,
so it’s not like he doesn’t have some vested interest.’’
Then she brought out the big guns. ‘‘Besides, do you
think God put you on this earth to worry about how to keep
people like Marty and Jim Kendrick happy? Do your best,
speak your mind, and stop worrying about things before they
happen.’’
I took a breath. ‘‘You know, you should write one of those
self-improvement books that people keep in the bathroom
for when they have a few minutes to themselves.’’
Diane threw a pillow at me. ‘‘Hey, you’re lucky I don’t
charge you for my advice, buddy.’’
I laughed and, as usual, decided to follow most of my
wife’s counsel.
102

ENDURANCE
F
or the next ﬁve weeks I pretty much threw myself into the
day-to-day business of Lighthouse Partners, and I deﬂected
Marty’s occasional e-mails and phone calls with trite and
general answers sprinkled with enough criticism of Half
Moon Bay to keep him in the dark about what I was really
thinking.
Gradually, I became more involved in the consulting and
decision making, but always in unspoken deference to Dick
and the others. By my sixth week, I had taken on two of
my own clients, working with Matt on one of them and with
another relatively young guy on the other.
I’m more than a little embarrassed to admit that it wasn’t
until I was almost two months into my Lighthouse experience
that I came to realize something that should have been
obvious—I was doing almost no selling!
At K&B I had spent as much as 60 percent of my
time preparing for, delivering, and following up on sales
103

Getting Naked
calls. I had come to enjoy the gamesmanship of selling, but
suddenly I wasn’t missing it anymore.
I also came to the realization that this lack of formal
selling was the primary cause of the ﬁnancial gap between
Lighthouse and K&B, and it had a much bigger impact than
fees or salaries did.
Almost all of the time and energy in Half Moon Bay was
being directed toward consulting to paying clients. Those
clients in turn became the sales engine for the ﬁrm, and even
when we did an occasional cold call, it was the references
from clients that shortened the sales cycle considerably. I’m
not even sure I’d call it a sales cycle at all.
As I approached the twelfth week of my integration
project, Marty decided it was time to evaluate our progress
and begin the process of more formal integration. I pushed
him off for a week, and then another, until he started to
get annoyed and insisted that we get together ‘‘next week.’’
I relented and scheduled the meeting. And when he told
me that Jim Kendrick and two additional partners from the
managing team would join us, I started to get even more
nervous.
With less than a week to prepare, I began assembling
my notes and asking more pointed questions than ever about
Michael Casey and his various rules of thumb that, more than
anything, deﬁned his approach to client service and business.
I was also starting to see a few patterns connecting many of
those points.
As I put together my thoughts for the meeting at K&B,
I decided that talking to Marty and Jim Kendrick and the
other partners about culture would be about as popular as
104

Endurance
leading them in a session of hot box yoga (to be honest,
I don’t really know what that is). And yet I was at a loss for
how to convey what I had been learning. There was no way
around it—this was going to be an ugly meeting.
And then something happened that made me question
whether I should go to the meeting at all.
It was my ﬁrst opportunity since joining Lighthouse to do
a solo project for a client. That’s when I was reminded that
there is a big difference between understanding something
and putting it into practice.
105

TEST RUN
I
had just begun working with a small hospital located in
Morgan Hill, a semi-agricultural town south of San Jose.
St. Therese de Lisieux Regional Medical Center had been
founded by an order of nuns, a few of whom still served on
the board. They had hired us to help them decide whether to
expand or to open a new satellite facility to serve their patients
who lived in some of the more remote areas further south.
I had met with the CEO of the hospital a few weeks
earlier to scope out the project, and we decided that I should
spend a full day with three or four of her executives and
try to come to a decision. Though I had grown accustomed
to the Lighthouse method of doing collaborative, real-time
client research rather than preparing an answer ahead of
time, I couldn’t resist looking at my old ﬁles to get ready for
the meeting.
I had worked with plenty of hospitals in my career, at
both K&B and the medical device company where I spent
three years after business school. Most of those were larger
and more sophisticated facilities than St. Therese’s, so I
ﬁgured there was no reason not to use my prior knowledge
with this client.
106

Test Run
So I found my ﬁles and reviewed them, paying particular
attention to cost analysis associated with multisite hospitals.
By the time the working session came around, I felt conﬁdent
that I’d be able to help them, and that there would be plenty
of low-hanging fruit for me.
The hospital CEO, Michelle Thomas, introduced me to
the handful of executives who would be holed up in the
third-ﬂoor conference room for the next nine hours. Then
she clariﬁed the purpose of the day. ‘‘We are going to sit here
for the next nine hours, or as long as it takes, until we ﬁgure
out what makes sense in terms of expansion. And while I’m
sure there are plenty of opinions and emotions at play here,
let’s make sure that we make our decision based on what
makes the most sense long term.’’
With that, she handed it over to me.
I had already sized up the room and decided that the
group probably had never made a decision like this before,
and most likely they didn’t have the analytical horsepower or
experience to grasp all the variables that would be necessary.
So I decided to start with my own hypothesis about what
the ultimate answer would be and work backward from
there. I guessed that we would be done by ten o’clock, if
not sooner.
‘‘Okay, I worked with a hospital in Bend, Oregon, a few
years ago, Good Shepherd Medical Center, that was roughly
the same size as St. Therese’s and served a community not
unlike yours. In addition to rebranding and cost management,
we helped them sort through a similar decision about satellite
expansion, and we came up with a model that I think might
be helpful for us.’’
107

Getting Naked
I pushed a button on the overhead projector to reveal a
graph that I had used with my Oregon client.
‘‘The team at Good Shepherd was pretty adamant about
growing and establishing new facilities in outlying areas, both
to serve patients there and fend off competitive threats. But
as you can see, the data made it very clear that it would have
been ﬁnancially irresponsible to do so.’’
The eclectic group of executives stared at the chart far
longer than it would have taken to digest its data. I realized
that they were not merely digesting it intellectually, but
coming to terms with the idea of not building the satellite
facility, and possibly not growing at all.
For the next ninety minutes I answered question after
question about Good Shepherd and my model and my back-
ground and my conﬁdence that my client in Oregon had
made the right decisions. Though the questions were asked
without accusation or frustration, it was impossible not to
detect the disappointment in the room.
As the conversation began to slow, it became apparent
to me that the audience was coming to terms with the reality
before them. All except one of them.
He was the oldest of the group, the chief medical ofﬁcer,
Dr. Something, but I think his ﬁrst name was Carl. He was
an OB-Gyn by trade and still practiced part-time. Like most
labor and delivery doctors, he seemed like a nice guy, but
I could tell he wasn’t satisﬁed.
‘‘Okay, I’m no accountant, and I certainly didn’t learn any-
thing about business strategy during my residency, but I just
don’t feel convinced by this.’’ He paused and looked directly
at me. ‘‘I’m not questioning your integrity, or anything.’’
108

Test Run
I smiled and shook my head as if to say it’s okay if
you do.
He continued, ‘‘But given the population growth in the
area and the lack of competition, I just can’t imagine why we
couldn’t make this work.’’
I started to say, ‘‘Well, sometimes—’’ but he inter-
rupted me.
‘‘Just a second, Jack, I’m not quite ﬁnished.’’
He wasn’t trying to be rude, I was sure. But it stung a
little nonetheless.
‘‘Our occupancy rate here is not at capacity, but it’s higher
than it’s ever been and seems to be growing. Within a couple
of years, we’re going to be turning people away. Something
just doesn’t add up here.’’
To my credit, I forced myself to be gracious and avoid the
slightest hint at condescension, though I would have liked to
have said Listen pops, you stick to pap smears, and I’ll do the
ﬁnancial analysis.
What I actually said was, ‘‘I understand where you’re
coming from. And what you’re saying is exactly what some
of the folks up at Good Shepherd said when they saw this.
But when they went through the numbers, even with the
potential for growth, it just wasn’t feasible.’’
The doctor frowned, but not in a combative way. It was
as though he was looking at a patient and trying to decide
what was causing their pain. And like a good doctor, he
wasn’t about to give up.
‘‘So you’re telling me, Jack, that someone else isn’t going
to come into this valley and put up a new hospital in the next
ﬁve years? Last year Kaiser almost did, and then they had to
109

Getting Naked
retreat because of their own internal issues, but not because
of anything having to do with this market.’’
At the time I was proud of myself for not letting the
doctor ﬂuster me. In the past, I would have made sure he
understood the differences in our levels of expertise, and
I would have pummeled him with data. Instead, I tried to
reassure him.
‘‘This is a complicated time in health care, and sometimes
what seems like common sense actually makes no sense at
all. I’m sure there are times when, as a doctor, you come to a
conclusion that your patients just don’t understand, and you
have to trust in your training and expertise and experience.’’
He was nodding now, not necessarily convinced, but
accepting my analogy. I was glad to have won him over
without having to deliver a blow to his self-esteem. Who
would have known that within the hour, it would be my
self-esteem that would be on the ground?
110

HUMILITY
M
ichelle called for a break, and we all scrambled for a private
space to make phone calls. I decided to see if I could track
down one of the executives at Good Shepherd. Luckily, he
was in his ofﬁce, and I convinced his assistant to interrupt
him for a quick conversation.
I asked him about the decision we had helped them
make, and how it had turned out, and he conﬁrmed that
though they were initially skeptical, it had proved to be the
right one. We then spent a few minutes reminiscing about
the late nights we had spent on that and other projects,
and then he jokingly said something innocuous that rocked
my world.
‘‘Between the expansion project, the cost-cutting, and the
proﬁtization work you did, I think you must have racked up
quite a few points at the Hilton up here.’’
Somehow I was able to laugh politely at the comment and
thank my old client for his time. But inside I was experiencing
that sensation I had when I realized that my zipper was down
for the ﬁrst half of the prom, and that Christine Owens must
have noticed. I wanted to go back in time and erase the past
two hours and start over. And for that matter, go back twenty
years and zip up my tuxedo pants.
111

Getting Naked
The word that triggered all of this adolescent angst was
‘‘proﬁtization.’’ In fact, I don’t think it’s a word at all, but
something we made up with the folks at Good Shepherd. In
any case, it had to do with transforming the hospital from
a non-proﬁt to a for-proﬁt, and I had completely forgotten
about that part of my work there.
The problem, of course, was that St. Therese’s was a non-
proﬁt hospital. This meant that the model I had been using
was at best incomplete, and at worst, completely wrong.
I tried to convince myself that there was a way out of this
dilemma. Maybe the models aren’t really that different, and
the ﬁnal conclusion will be the same. I decided that if I could
postpone the meeting for a half hour or so, I could ﬁnd the
right model, rerun the numbers, and ﬁgure out whether any
of this mattered.
I went back to the conference room a little earlier than
everyone else, and conﬁrmed for myself, just to be sure, that
I had, indeed, used the wrong model.
‘‘Crap!’’ I said out loud.
And so I thought about how I would convince my clients
to take an extended break that would give me the time to do
a Houdini and somehow pull myself out of the ﬁre.
When Michelle and the rest of the group returned, some-
thing horrible happened. Dr. Something, or Carl, came up to
me, shook my hand, thanked me for helping them, and then,
to make matters worse, complimented me. ‘‘Jack, it’s clear
that you are very good at what you do. It’s always a treat for
me to watch someone who has mastered their craft.’’
I wanted to cry.
112

SWALLOWING
MEDICINE
H
olding myself together, I thanked Carl for his comment. When
he returned to his seat, I stood up and did something I had
never done before.
‘‘Okay, I have an announcement to make.’’ I paused
and everyone quieted down. ‘‘I’m afraid that everything I’ve
shown you so far may have been wrong.’’
I certainly had their attention now.
‘‘The model I used for the analysis was based on a
for-proﬁt hospital. I completely forgot that Good Shepherd
changed their proﬁt status the year before we did the expan-
sion study. These numbers are certainly wrong, and I wouldn’t
be surprised at all if my conclusions are way off.’’ I paused.
‘‘I can’t tell you how embarrassed I am.’’
In a matter of seconds the looks on the faces of the
people in front of me seemed to morph from disbelief to
disappointment to frustration, and then, to my astonishment,
to consolation. And it was my new friend the doctor who
went ﬁrst.
113

Getting Naked
In the kindest voice imaginable he said, ‘‘Well, I’d say
you should be embarrassed, son.’’
Now, I hadn’t been called ‘‘son’’ in years, but it certainly
applied, because I felt like a nine-year-old boy.
He went on. ‘‘So what is your hourly rate, Jack? Because
I think you owe us double that because we’ve just wasted
two hours.’’
The people in the room burst out in laughter.
‘‘Let’s make him buy lunch!’’ Michelle chimed in.
I took my wallet from my hip pocket and threw it into
the center of the table, and everyone laughed. At me. With
me. I’m not sure. But it wasn’t half as bad as I had imagined.
After the humor started to fade and the reality of the
situation returned, I decided to push forward down this same
road. ‘‘Okay, I can’t believe I made such a ridiculous mistake.
But I think we can salvage the day and still arrive at the right
decision before midnight.’’
They laughed, and one of the analysts piled on. ‘‘Then
you’re going to be buying us dinner, too.’’
I smiled and accepted the punishment. ‘‘I’m going to
need about twenty or thirty minutes to redo my analysis, and
by lunchtime I’ll have some preliminary numbers.’’
‘‘What does your gut tell you the answer will be?’’
It was the doctor who asked.
I gave it some thought. ‘‘My gut tells me that if you really
think your occupancy numbers are going to continue growing
and that the economic development in this area is not a ﬂuke,
expansion probably makes sense. But I’m guessing it would
be here at the main facility, not in the satellite communities.’’
‘‘Why is that?’’ Michelle wanted to know.
114

Swallowing Medicine
‘‘Because most of my hospital clients—’’ I paused to
qualify myself. ‘‘Though I’m not saying it would be exactly
the same here, most of them ﬁnd that there are so many
redundancies and inefﬁciencies in satellite sites that it would
be more cost effective to pay for free patient shuttles than it
would be to build remote facilities.’’
‘‘What about competition? Wouldn’t we be exposed?’’
‘‘I don’t think so. If you grow enough here, I think
you’ll be ﬁne. You might see some remote labs and walk-in
emergency centers come into the market here and there,
but not enough to warrant a major ﬁnancial investment on
your part.’’
Unbelievably, they were nodding their heads as though
they might actually believe anything I would say. I wanted
to set their expectations lower. ‘‘But we’ll know more after
we do the analysis and discuss what you’re seeing in the
community. I could be way off.’’ I don’t think I had ever said
anything like that to a client during my ﬁve years at K&B.
With that, we took a break. As Carl walked by me on his
way to the door, he didn’t say anything, but patted me on
the shoulder, which meant more than he could have known.
Personal growth might not be so bad after all, I decided.
115

PREPARING THE
WITNESS
T
he rest of the afternoon and evening at St. Therese’s was
intense, exhausting, and difﬁcult. And I had never enjoyed a
day of consulting more in my life!
I challenged them. I argued with them. I changed my
mind four times. I made mistakes. I had some great insights.
I learned a lot about hospitals that I thought I already
knew. I even served them pizza, and I cleaned up the con-
ference room after we were done eating.
When we wrapped things up a little after eight o’clock,
there was no doubt in our minds that building a new out-
patient wing at the hospital was the right strategy. I seem to
have a painful and suppressed memory of two of the team
members high-ﬁving each other at one point.
As I drove home that night, I felt a strange mix of euphoria
and dread. Euphoria about coming to terms with a new way
to be a consultant and feeling like I was actually part of the
team I had just helped. And dread that it might all come
to an end on Monday morning when I met with Marty and
Kendrick.
116

Preparing the Witness
Fortunately, it was the weekend, which would give me a
chance to regroup.
As usual, it was at church on Sunday that I had an
epiphany, and I began to feel better about what would tran-
spire during the next thirty-six hours. It’s hard to remember
exactly what happened during mass that changed my out-
look. It was a mixture of the Bible readings, which so often
seem to be chosen for exactly what I needed to hear; the ser-
mon, which on this Sunday was about ﬁnding joy in suffering
and trial; and just sitting there with my wife and kids and
wondering how I had become such a wuss. And of course
there was prayer.
Before bed that night, Diane asked how I was feeling
about everything, and I told her that I was actually looking
forward to the meeting, and that I had no idea what would
happen. Though I had expected her to say ‘‘Way to go, tiger’’
or something perhaps a little less cheesy, she shocked me
with two simple words: ‘‘Be careful.’’
She might as well have said ‘‘You’re screwed big time,
buddy!’’ because in that moment my conﬁdence started
to fade.
‘‘What do you mean by that?’’
Diane caught herself. ‘‘Nothing. It’s just, well, nothing.
You’ll do ﬁne.’’
It was too late. ‘‘No, you’re not going to get away with
that. What did you mean when you said ‘be careful’?’’
She hesitated. ‘‘Well, it’s just that I don’t want you to be so
conﬁdent that you, I don’t know, say something unnecessary
and get into a weird situation.’’
117

Getting Naked
I was partly exasperated, partly amused. ‘‘A weird
situation?’’
‘‘It’s just that you have a good job, and you’ve worked
hard to get where you are . . . ’’
She didn’t ﬁnish the sentence, and I knew it was my turn
to be the consultant in the relationship.
‘‘Listen, Diane, we’re going to be ﬁne. I’m sure that I can
make this integration work and that everything will turn out
better than we could have imagined. Marty isn’t exactly a Boy
Scout, but he’s not Darth Vader either.’’
She smiled. ‘‘I know. I’m sorry. I shouldn’t have said
anything.’’
I assured her that it was okay—and quietly wished
I believed half the things I had just said.
118

PART FOUR
❖
Testimony


TRIAL
A
s I nervously rode the same elevator to the twentieth ﬂoor
where I had been going to work uneventfully for the past
ﬁve years, I decided that I had probably overdramatized the
magnitude of this meeting and the situation in general.
Jim Kendrick’s opening comments at the meeting made
it clear that I had not.
‘‘We paid real money for this ﬁrm. What I want to
understand today is what kind of return we’re going to get.’’
That was it. Classic Kendrick.
The setting could not have been any more ominous, like
something right out of a movie. We were in the most formal
conference room in the building, the one with a mahogany
table and expensive black leather chairs. It provided a
straight-ahead view of Alcatraz, which seemed appropriate.
Kendrick was sitting at one end of a table that could easily
accommodate ten people. Janet Neves, the head of the ﬁrm’s
ﬁnancial consulting division who was in town from New
York, sat at the other end, ﬂanked by another partner whose
name I can’t, for the life of me, recall. But I do remember that
he looked like the Penguin, Batman’s nemesis, but without
the top hat.
121

Getting Naked
I took one of the middle seats, leaving plenty of room
between me and my superiors.
Marty, sitting directly across from me, didn’t react at all
to his boss’s opening remark, but left me to respond on my
own, as though this acquisition had been my idea all along.
So this is how you’re going to play it. Maybe he was Darth
Vader after all.
‘‘Okay. I guess I’ll go ﬁrst. If you’re asking what the
speciﬁc ﬁnancial impact of the acquisition will be, I can tell
you right now that I have no idea.’’ I paused for effect,
deciding to milk the drama for whatever it was worth. ‘‘But if
you’re interested in what kind of beneﬁts we might be able
to get out of it, I can certainly speak to that.’’
Surprisingly, Janet Neves responded ﬁrst. She was an
extremely tall woman, maybe six feet plus, and she always
wore pin-striped suits that made her look even taller. Her
demeanor matched her clothes. All formality. ‘‘Well, I’m
assuming we’ll be able to monetize any of the nonﬁscal
beneﬁts you address here.’’
I didn’t know whether I needed to answer this ambigu-
ous, jargony question or not, but before I could, Marty jumped
in. ‘‘Absolutely. I think Jack’s point is that it’s too early to
know exactly how this will impact our ﬁnancials. That’s all.’’
Janet nodded as though Marty had said something insight-
ful, and it was then that it occurred to me how much I had
enjoyed being away from K&B these past few months.
‘‘Can you tell us about what you’ve learned since you’ve
moved your ofﬁce down to Half Moon Bay, Jack?’’ Suddenly
Marty wanted to facilitate the meeting, no doubt to put
122

Trial
himself in a position to ask questions rather than having to
answer them.
I took a breath. ‘‘Okay, why don’t we just get right to the
point? You guys want to know how we’re going to integrate
Lighthouse and how that’s going to make us stronger as
a ﬁrm.’’
Kendrick seemed to like the direct approach and nodded
approvingly. Unfortunately, he wasn’t going to like what I had
to say next.
‘‘Well, I think this could be an extraordinary opportunity
for Kendrick and Black, much bigger than I would have
imagined a few months ago when the deal was announced.’’
Wait for it.
‘‘But I’m not going to lie to you. We’re going to have to
work hard to learn how to do what they do.’’
It took more than a few seconds for my words to sink
in with the shiny people sitting around the table. Marty went
ﬁrst.
‘‘Did you say that we’re going to have to learn how to do
what they do?’’
Without the slightest hint of sarcasm, humor, or defen-
siveness, I nodded my head. ‘‘That’s right.’’
Kendrick was certainly engaged now. ‘‘You’re going to
have to explain this one, son.’’
It was the second time in a few days that someone had
called me son. Suddenly I felt like the Tom Hanks character
in the movie Big.
Marty was starting to look uncomfortable, which, I must
admit, I found slightly enjoyable.
123

Getting Naked
I dove in. ‘‘From a ﬁnancial standpoint, Lighthouse has
slightly better proﬁt margins than we do, and slightly higher
revenue per client.’’
‘‘That doesn’t mean we should be copying them,’’ the
Penguin countered. ‘‘They’re a much smaller ﬁrm, and you
can’t really compare apples to—’’
I couldn’t help but interrupt: ‘‘You’re right. It isn’t a fair
comparison.’’ He seemed pleased by my response. Until I
ﬁnished.
‘‘We should be blowing them out of the water. We
have hundreds of smiling college grads running around here
all hours of the night who think they’re well paid until
they calculate their hourly compensation and realize they’re
earning a little more than minimum wage.’’
Even Janet chuckled.
I wanted to clarify my point. ‘‘Don’t get me wrong.
I realize that’s the way consulting ﬁrms like ours make
money. I’m not trying to be Norma Rae here.’’
Kendrick pushed on. ‘‘How many junior analysts or con-
sultants do they have?’’
I didn’t hesitate. ‘‘They have Mary.’’
‘‘Mary?’’
‘‘Yeah, she’s the only consultant at Lighthouse under
twenty-six years of age. Everyone else is pretty much an
adult. It’s unbelievable.’’
Janet was puzzled. ‘‘So why are their numbers so strong?
Their salary per employee must be high.’’
‘‘It is,’’ I conﬁrmed.
‘‘Are their fees higher than ours?’’
‘‘A little. But not much.’’
124

Trial
Kendrick was beside himself now. ‘‘Wait. Did you just
say that their fees are higher than ours?’’ He looked at Marty.
‘‘Why aren’t we charging more?’’
Under pressure now, Marty didn’t have time to carefully
formulate a politically correct answer. So he was uncharac-
teristically honest. ‘‘There is no way we can even think about
increasing our fees right now. If anything, we’re getting more
pushback than ever about them being too high.’’
Kendrick turned to me. ‘‘Then how are they charging so
much? And why aren’t their clients complaining?’’
‘‘Before I get into that, let me make it clear that the fee
differential isn’t the big issue here. It’s merely a symptom,
and it’s not even the most important one.’’
‘‘Then how do you explain the ﬁnancial discrepancy?’’
Janet wanted to know.
‘‘It’s all about their cost of sales.’’
‘‘Explain.’’ Kendrick was impatient.
‘‘They spend almost none of their time selling.’’
Marty was getting increasingly annoyed and nervous,
which would have been ﬁne except that I was the only one
in the room he could take it out on. ‘‘Then what have you
been doing over there for the past four months?’’ It wasn’t a
question as much as an accusation.
I was caught off guard and struggled to defend myself.
‘‘Well, I’ve been—’’
Kendrick cut me off: ‘‘Forget about that. I want to know
what you mean when you say they aren’t spending any time
selling.’’
Deciding not to thank Kendrick for shutting my boss up, I
regrouped and explained. ‘‘Well, most of their business comes
125

Getting Naked
from referrals and warm leads. And in the rare event that they
do a cold call, they spend very little time doing research or
writing up proposals or wordsmithing presentations.’’
‘‘What do they do then?’’ Marty demanded to know.
I smiled, but barely. ‘‘They just show up.’’
I thought Marty was going to jump across the table and
strangle me. ‘‘What’s that supposed to mean?’’
‘‘It means that when they meet with a client they spend
their time asking questions and doing primary research right
there. It’s like they skip the entire sales process. And they’re
remarkably successful.’’
I could see that my colleagues around the table were
getting annoyed, so I went on the offensive a little.
‘‘Listen, instead of trying to outsmart the companies
they’re selling to, they just go in there and start consult-
ing. I’ve watched this a half dozen times now, and it’s really
incredible.’’
The dynamics in the room were as complicated as they
were ugly.
It was clear that Kendrick was feeling a little embarrassed
in front of his fellow partners, Janet and the Penguin. I would
later ﬁnd out that they had opposed the Lighthouse acquisi-
tion in the ﬁrst place and wanted to hold Kendrick’s feet to
the ﬁre.
Marty was all too aware of the fact that the wrath of
Kendrick was about to come down on him. And I was pretty
much in everyone’s direct line of ﬁre.
That’s when Marty decided it was time to throw me under
the bus. ‘‘If they’re so good at this, then why aren’t we doing
it? You’re the one responsible for sales in this division, Jack.’’
126

Trial
Normally, I would have melted in that situation. Today,
all I could do was tell the truth. ‘‘That’s the thing, Marty. It’s
not really about sales at all.’’
He was confused, but wasn’t about to let me off the hook.
‘‘Well, it sure sounds like a sales issue to me.’’
Though no one else spoke, the looks on their faces made
it clear that they agreed with him. It was all on the line for
me now.
‘‘That’s what I thought when I ﬁrst went down there. And
then I saw how they worked with their clients. That is the
biggest difference between us and them.’’ I paused for effect.
‘‘And it’s huge.’’
Kendrick frowned and looked squarely at me. ‘‘This better
be good.’’
127

OFFENSE
A
t that point in the conversation, I could have sworn I heard
Diane whispering ‘‘Be careful’’ in my ear. But somehow
I could also hear her saying, ‘‘Let ’em have it!’’ I opted for
somewhere in between. At least for the time being.
‘‘Well, based on my observations during the last several
weeks, I’d have to say that Lighthouse is far less professional
than we are. They’re also less sophisticated, less rigorous,
and less systematic.’’
Marty seemed to breathe a sigh of relief.
‘‘But they are so much more effective.’’
If I had been sitting in an ejector seat, that was the
moment I would have been launched into San Francisco
Bay. But because I was still ﬁrmly ensconced in my chair,
I decided to keep going.
‘‘Frankly, it’s like they’re in a completely different industry
from the one we’re in.’’
My audience was not about to take this lying down.
Kendrick went ﬁrst.
‘‘Do you have any real evidence for what you’re saying?
Any data?’’
128

Offense
‘‘Data?’’ I was slightly incredulous. ‘‘Well, the numbers we
talked about a few minutes ago are pretty good indications.’’
Before he could counter, I continued, ‘‘But the real evidence
can be found with their clients.’’
The Penguin now had a question. ‘‘You mean their clients’
ﬁnancial performance and stock price?’’
I shook my head. ‘‘No, it’s the fact that their clients love
them so much.’’
Kendrick rolled his eyes.
‘‘Don’t you roll your eyes at me, old man!’’
That’s what I wanted to say. Instead, I wisely let it go.
The Penguin didn’t. ‘‘What are you thinking, Jim?’’
‘‘Well, I don’t know if we can really say with any degree
of certainty that their clients’ feelings about them are different
from our clients’ feelings about us.’’
I wasn’t a brain surgeon, but I was pretty sure Kendrick
was calling me a liar. Or at the very least, incompetent. Just
in case that wasn’t clear, he went on: ‘‘Again, do you have
any data that substantiates this, Mr. Bauer?’’
Mr. Bauer? Suddenly I wasn’t a little boy anymore, but a
defendant on trial. I decided that playing it soft was riskier
than going for broke.
‘‘Listen, every client I’ve spoken to raves about these
people. They do most of the marketing for them, and with-
out being asked. More than half their clients come from
unsolicited referrals.’’
I could see they weren’t buying it, so I pushed a little
harder. ‘‘Come on, half of our clients won’t agree to be a
reference for us at all, and most of the others are less than
129

Getting Naked
enthusiastic when they do agree. Do you guys really think
I’m lying to you here?’’
And then I said something I would have thought impossi-
ble a few months before: ‘‘Do you really hate Michael Casey
that much?’’
Before Marty could say anything, Janet and the Penguin
asked the same question, almost in unison: ‘‘Who’s Michael
Casey?’’
Kendrick explained, ‘‘He’s one of the founders of Light-
house.’’
I added, ‘‘He’s really the one who created the model for
how they do business.’’
‘‘So they have a model?’’ the Penguin wanted to know.
‘‘Can we see it?’’
‘‘Well, it’s not so much a model . . . ’’ I hesitated. ‘‘They
just operate on a set of informal principles.’’
Kendrick was done being nice. ‘‘Come on, Mr. Bauer,
this is ridiculous. You’re sitting here telling us that this little
boutique consulting ﬁrm is so much better than we are, and
that we have to learn to be more like them. And then you’re
telling us that you don’t really know how they do it, that it’s
just an informal list—’’
That’s when I interrupted the man whose name was on
my paycheck. And I wasn’t being particularly meek. ‘‘No,
I said they don’t have a model.’’ I paused. ‘‘But I’ve created
one, and I think it captures what they do.’’
At that point I really thought that Kendrick would back
down and ask me to explain the model.
I had underestimated his self-esteem, or lack thereof. He
reacted as though he hadn’t heard my previous sentence.
130

Offense
‘‘So there’s no real model. No data. No way of measuring
the value of this deal to the ﬁrm. Do you have anything
substantive?’’
I sat there in silence for a moment, sensing that my
credibility and career were eroding with every second that
passed. Janet and the Penguin shufﬂed their papers to try to
escape the uncomfortable situation.
I was desperate. ‘‘Give me a minute.’’
Before they could respond, I pulled the triangular speaker
phone in the middle of the table toward me and dialed a
number.
After just two rings, someone answered.
‘‘Boxcar. How can I help you?’’
Marty looked like he was going to kill me.
131

NO HOLDS BARRED
I
couldn’t let myself be distracted by my boss’s fury.
‘‘Is this Candace?’’
‘‘Yes, it is.’’
‘‘Hi Candace, this is Jack Bauer.’’
I prayed that she wouldn’t say ‘‘Who?’’
‘‘Hi, Jack. What can I do for you?’’
‘‘I need to talk to Gene.’’
Candace hesitated. ‘‘Let’s see. Gene’s in a budget meeting
until four, but I can have him give you a—’’
I interrupted, as politely as I could. ‘‘Actually, Candace,
I need to speak to him right away.’’
She hesitated again, so I preempted her. ‘‘It’s kind of an
emergency. A huge favor.’’ I hated having to say that in front
of the people who were trying to skewer me.
She paused. ‘‘I’ll do my best. Can you hold?’’
I had no choice. ‘‘Sure.’’
While we waited anxiously, Marty tried to divert me.
‘‘What are you doing, Jack? Is this really appropriate? Calling
a client?’’
Kendrick
and
his
peers
seemed
confused—and
concerned.
132

No Holds Barred
I bluffed conﬁdently, pretending to be dumbfounded by
his questions. ‘‘Appropriate? Why not? It’s ﬁne. You’ll see.’’
I didn’t know how much time that would buy me. I half
expected Marty to lean across the table and hang up the
phone. Luckily, Candace had come through.
‘‘Jack?’’
It was Gene Kravets, the CEO of Boxcar.
‘‘Hey, Gene. Thanks for taking my call. Sorry to interrupt
your meeting.’’
‘‘No problem. We needed to take a break anyway. What
do you need?’’
I hesitated and then decided there was no way to sug-
arcoat this. ‘‘Well, I’m trying to explain to a group of very
interested people what it is that Lighthouse does and how it
differs from Kendrick and Black.’’
‘‘Okay.’’
‘‘And since you recently chose Lighthouse over K&B,
and even agreed to pay a higher retainer, I thought you
would be able to articulate for us why you made that deci-
sion.’’
‘‘Sure, I can do that. But it sounds like I’m on speaker-
phone. Do I have an audience?’’
I hesitated again, thinking hard about how I could avoid
answering this question. There was no way. ‘‘Yeah, I’ve got
Janet Neves here, and Marty Shine, and the Penguin.’’ Of
course I didn’t call him that. I suppose I must have known
his name at that point. ‘‘And Jim Kendrick.’’
There was silence on the phone for a moment. ‘‘Did you
say Kendrick?’’
‘‘Yeah, Jim Kendrick. The founder of our ﬁrm.’’
133

Getting Naked
I could almost hear Gene smiling on the other end of the
phone. ‘‘And you want me to tell you why I chose Lighthouse
over Kendrick and Black?’’
‘‘That’s right. And why you’re okay with paying higher
fees.’’ I was wishing Diane could have been in the room,
because I was sure she wouldn’t believe any of this when
I told her.
Gene Kravets wasn’t quite ready to give me what I
wanted.
‘‘Can you tell me what the purpose of this is? I mean,
how honest do you want me to be?’’
Marty shot me another look, one that I brieﬂy thought
about capturing on my phone camera, but I decided it would
have been weird. Besides, I needed to answer Gene’s question.
‘‘I’m asking you to be completely honest, Gene. In fact,
I’m begging you. Now that we’ve acquired Lighthouse, we
need to understand what they do so well.’’
‘‘Are you sure?’’
I looked at Jim Kendrick to solicit his permission, know-
ing that anyone with any integrity at all would have to
welcome the truth, at least in public.
Jim cleared his throat. ‘‘This is Jim Kendrick, Gene, and
I would appreciate complete candor here.’’ I could tell he
didn’t mean it, but Gene didn’t know any different.
‘‘Okay then. Where do you want me to start?’’
To my surprise, it was the Penguin who took the lead.
‘‘Why don’t you just tell us why you made the decision
you did?’’
Gene paused, most likely to collect his thoughts. ‘‘Well,
ﬁrst of all, I should say that you guys compared well against
134

No Holds Barred
some of the other ﬁrms we talked to. In fact, for a while
there, it came down to you and Strategic Insights.’’
Strategic Insights was one of the relatively large competi-
tors that K&B faced in most of our accounts.
‘‘And we were just about to make our decision when I
spoke to a guy I know who used to run a manufacturing
company in San Jose, and he told me that I’d be crazy not to
talk to Lighthouse. I had never heard of Lighthouse, but he
gave me the number right there and even set up a conference
call so he could make the introduction himself.’’
Kendrick, Janet, and the Penguin exchanged glances that
seemed to be a mix of equal parts condescension toward
Lighthouse, and jealousy and awe of their new acquisition
and the enthusiasm of its clients.
Gene went on, ‘‘So, I had a ﬁfteen-minute phone conver-
sation with Dick Janice, and then I met with him and another
consultant for an hour or so. And without even having to
think about it, I knew we’d be working with them.’’
‘‘What exactly happened during that meeting?’’ the Pen-
guin wanted to know.
‘‘Well, I’m not sure. I mean, it was like they made the
decision for me. I wish I could explain it better than that.
Trying to do this over the phone isn’t easy.’’
Jim Kendrick changed the line of questioning. ‘‘Maybe
you could tell us what the K&B people did during their sales
call, and compare the two approaches.’’
‘‘Okay. That would probably be helpful. I guess the peo-
ple
from
your
ﬁrm,
Jack
and
someone
else
I
don’t
remember—’’
‘‘Margaret Stevens,’’ I reminded him.
135

Getting Naked
‘‘Right. Margaret. They were very nice, and competent,
and came with a bunch of material already prepared about
our industry and our competitors. They told us about the
resources that your ﬁrm has, and about all the clients you’ve
worked with. They showed us some of the work you did with
another technology company that was about the same size as
us. I mean, I had no doubt that they were smart enough and
experienced enough to help us. And I can’t say I was at all
unhappy with what they said or did. Like I said before, we
were going to go with you or Strategic Insights.’’
The Penguin pushed a little harder. ‘‘So can you remem-
ber anything speciﬁc about the Lighthouse meeting?’’
‘‘Yeah, I guess now that I think about it, I do remember
being a little surprised that Dick didn’t bring any collateral
or handouts and didn’t really do a presentation. In fact, it
was obvious that they hadn’t had time to do much research
before the meeting, because they spent the ﬁrst hour asking
questions about our business and our competitors and our
market.’’
Gene laughed. ‘‘You know, I’m betting that Jack and
Margaret would have been able to answer those questions
themselves.’’
I smiled. ‘‘Yes, we could have. But you didn’t pick us.
Why?’’
‘‘Well, since you asked me to be honest, I’m just going
to say it straight.’’ He paused. ‘‘It just felt like you guys were
going to tell us how to run our business, and you were trying
to convince us that you knew more than us, I guess. And you
were telling us all the things that you would do for us if we
hired you.’’
136

No Holds Barred
‘‘Lighthouse didn’t do that?’’ Marty asked.
‘‘No. They just started doing it.’’
‘‘Doing what?’’ Marty asked again.
‘‘Helping us. Offering suggestions. Giving us advice.’’
Marty was getting a little impatient now. ‘‘But you just
said they didn’t know anything about your business.’’
Gene paused, and I could have sworn that if we could
have seen him he would have been scratching his head.
‘‘Yeah, that’s the thing. They didn’t come with any answers.
But they asked questions. And they had suggestions, but they
admitted that some or all of those suggestions might not
be right. And some of them weren’t, but some were, and
more than anything, it felt like they were more interested in
helping us ﬁgure out our problems than they were in closing
the deal.’’
Kendrick gave me a look that seemed to say Hey, that’s
what you’ve been trying to tell us. Or maybe he was just
having gas. In any event, one of us should have felt better.
Before we could ask any more questions, Gene brought
the conversation to a close. ‘‘Hey, I’d be glad to give you any
more information you need another time. I’m going to have
to get back to this meeting, though.’’
‘‘One more question.’’ It was Kendrick, and he didn’t wait
for permission to ask it. ‘‘What has it been like working with
Lighthouse since then?’’
‘‘It’s been the same.’’
‘‘The same as what?’’
‘‘The same as it was that day. It’s like all they’re interested
in doing is helping us solve our problems. I’ve already told
half a dozen other CEOs about them. I couldn’t be happier.’’
137

Getting Naked
The Penguin stepped in. ‘‘Thanks for your time, Gene.
And your business.’’
‘‘No problem. Take care.’’ And he hung up.
For a long ﬁve seconds, the room was dead silent.
‘‘So, Jack, now we understand what you’ve been trying to
tell us. You were right. We were wrong. And we never should
have doubted you. Would you help us learn how to be more
like Lighthouse so that we can become a better ﬁrm?’’
And if you believe anyone said that to me, then I have
some swampland to sell you.
The reality was far less pretty.
138

SUCKER PUNCH
M
arty got the bloodletting started.
‘‘So, Jack, let’s summarize this meeting. You’ve come here
today to tell us that you don’t really know what kind of value
we’re going to get from this acquisition, and that you don’t
know how we’re going to integrate them because they’re so
much better than we are.’’
I could tell he was being sarcastic, so I didn’t say ‘‘You
betcha!’’ Instead, I just waited for what would come next.
‘‘And the evidence you have for all this is one client
who chose Lighthouse over Kendrick and Black, and the
consultant that lost that deal for us was . . . ’’ He paused for
dramatic effect. ‘‘You.’’
Looking back, I have to admit that what Marty did there
was impressive, albeit in a slimy trial lawyer kind of way.
After all the evidence that I had presented, he had somehow
distorted it so that it seemed to condemn me.
My only hope was the jury. Unfortunately, they had a
vested interest in one particular verdict.
‘‘I’m going to have to agree with Marty on this one,’’ Janet
offered. ‘‘And I’m also going to have to say that putting a
139

Getting Naked
client on the spot like that was not a very professional thing
to do.’’
The Penguin nodded his agreement.
I could not believe what I was hearing. I knew that these
people were not idiots, so the only thing I could attribute
their insane response to was a profound lack of courage and
intellectual integrity.
I turned to Jim Kendrick in a last-ditch plea for reason.
He looked at me with kindness and said, ‘‘This isn’t your
ﬁnest hour, is it Jack?’’
After digesting, regurgitating, and redigesting his com-
ment, I slowly pushed myself away from the table, stood,
moved around to the back of the chair, pushed it under
the table, and delivered a response that was superior to
anything I could have come up with in two weeks of
preparation.
‘‘Not my ﬁnest hour? Did you just say that it’s not my
ﬁnest hour? I have spent the last four months behind enemy
lines studying the methods of a company that we have been
jealous of for years. It has been difﬁcult and humbling and
eye-opening. I have come here and tried to give you all an
unvarnished account of what I’ve learned, and what we need
to learn if we’re ever going to rise above the transactional,
sweatshop mentality that makes our employees, our clients,
and even us weary.’’
And yes, I actually did say exactly that.
But I wasn’t ﬁnished. I then looked directly at Darth
Vader. ‘‘And you have the gall to suggest that somehow
all of this is simply a matter of my own shortcomings as a
consultant. Did you pay attention to anything that CEO just
140

Sucker Punch
said? Or are you simply too proud, too afraid to admit that
there might be a better way to do this?’’
It was at that moment that Jim Kendrick showed his true
colors. He was not about to let one of his minions get called
on the carpet. ‘‘Why should we listen to you, Jack? Marty
is right. You lost the account. I don’t think you have any
credibility here. If anything, you’re the one who’s in denial.
What that CEO said was more a condemnation of you than
of Kendrick and Black.’’
Ouch. If you had told me two months or two weeks or
even two hours earlier that Jim Kendrick was going to say
something that harsh to me in a meeting, I’d have considered
quitting right there. But fortunately, I had purposely held
back one vital piece of information, something that I had
hoped to avoid using and should never have had to use. But
they gave me no choice.
‘‘Oh, but I do have credibility. What Gene said didn’t
condemn me at all.’’
Now Marty jumped back in. ‘‘How can you say that? The
man just admitted that you couldn’t sell—’’
I interrupted him calmly, saying in a quiet, unemotional
tone, ‘‘Dick Janice couldn’t take on Boxcar and had to ﬁnd
someone else to run the account.’’
The people in the room didn’t seem to understand what
I was trying to say, so I made it clear. ‘‘The lead consultant
on that project is me.’’
Marty froze. Janet, Kendrick, and the Penguin were sud-
denly speechless. Evidently they couldn’t ﬁnd the words, or
the courage, to respond.
So I just walked out of the room.
141

DELIBERATION
A
s I made my way to the elevators, I had this cheesy
hope that someone—Kendrick would have been my ﬁrst
choice—would come running after me, imploring me to
come back and share my insights. A raise and a promise
to ﬁre Marty would have been nice too.
But life isn’t a movie, and in the real world people have
less courage and dramatic ﬂair. So I rode the elevator down
alone, balancing feelings of exhilaration, fear, and nausea.
The nausea subsided before I arrived home, and within
ﬁfteen minutes of talking to Diane, I realized that much of
the fear was gone too.
‘‘I don’t care if they ﬁre you and we have to move
to North Dakota,’’ Diane promised me. ‘‘What you did was
awesome.’’
And the thing is, she meant it, which made all the differ-
ence to me. Still, I found myself obsessing about the fallout
from the episode and the repercussions it would have on my
career.
Spending time with my children before bed that evening
had an interesting impact on my worries. On the one hand,
142

Deliberation
it calmed me by giving me a sense of perspective about what
mattered in life. On the other hand, it made me worry about
my livelihood, which was primarily devoted to providing
for them.
Needless to say, I didn’t sleep well that night.
The next morning I woke up and wondered what I would
do that day. Was I going to be ﬁred? Should I just go back
to Half Moon Bay and act like the previous day had never
happened?
So I checked e-mail and found a note from Marty,
which was certainly shorter and more cryptic than I would
have liked.
From: Marty Shine
To: Jack Bauer
Subject: Lighthouse
Jack,
After you left, we spent more than an hour
discussing the Lighthouse situation. We want you
to come back today at noon to finish the
conversation. We’ll have lunch brought in. Call
me if you can’t make it.
Marty
I showed it to Diane.
143

Getting Naked
‘‘This is a good thing,’’ she said. ‘‘They’re deﬁnitely feeling
bad about what happened. They just couldn’t come right out
and say it because they’re too insecure.’’
I wanted to believe her, but I just couldn’t. If that were
the case, even a cretin like Marty would have put something
marginally nice in the note.
So I got dressed and had breakfast, feeling a little like a
prisoner getting ready for the gallows. I would never have
guessed that Honey Nut Cheerios would be the choice for
my last meal.
144

CROSS-
EXAMINATION
W
hen I arrived at the ofﬁce, I learned that we would be meeting
in a different conference room. I was somehow relieved not
to be going back to what I would forever think of as the
Alcatraz Room. My relief was short-lived.
I was sent down to the nineteenth ﬂoor, to a smaller,
windowless conference room. As I walked in, I was shocked
to see that all the chairs in the room—I think there were
seven—were taken by the various partners who headed the
assortment of departments located in the San Francisco ofﬁce.
There was Janet Neves, the Penguin, and a handful of others.
But Marty and Jim Kendrick were nowhere to be seen.
Janet came over to greet me, and she got right to the point
without even acknowledging what had happened the day
before. ‘‘Okay, we’ll have you present from the front of the
room. At the whiteboard. You’ve got thirty minutes.’’
‘‘To do what?’’ I asked.
‘‘To go over this model, or whatever it is, that Lighthouse
does.’’
I was confused. ‘‘And what’s the goal here?’’
145

Getting Naked
She looked at me in a puzzled kind of way, as though
I had asked her why she was so tall. ‘‘Well, the goal is to
explain to these people what it is that Lighthouse does. You
know. What we were talking about yesterday.’’
At that moment I was shocked to see Jim Kendrick enter
the room, pushing a chair. He positioned it in one of the few
remaining open spots in the crowded room and sat down.
My mind was reeling, but I had to pull myself together,
because at that point Janet turned to the nicely dressed exec-
utives sitting around the table and announced, ‘‘Jack is going
to tell us what he’s learned about the way that one of our most
recent acquisitions approaches consulting with their clients.’’
And she sat down.
I found myself smiling, but I was thinking You peo-
ple really are insane, aren’t you? Going to the whiteboard,
I picked up a blue pen—blue is my favorite color—and
turned to the audience, all of whom I had met before, but
most of whom I knew only casually.
It would be a real understatement to say I was nervous,
not to mention confused as to what I was going to do.
And then it hit me. Don’t tell them. Show them.
I stood there slightly dazed by this simple realization.
And suddenly the world looked very different. I dove in.
‘‘As you may know, I’ve spent the last four months or so
working with Lighthouse Partners, a relatively small boutique
ﬁrm we acquired earlier this year. During that time I’ve seen
some things that I’ve never seen before, in terms of how to
work effectively with clients.’’
I turned toward the whiteboard but didn’t know what to
write, so I turned back to my audience again. Normally that
146

Cross-Examination
would have been awkward, but suddenly I was in a place of
quiet conﬁdence, where awkward didn’t seem to matter.
‘‘Okay. Some of you may not know that Jim, Janet, the
Penguin, and I had a fairly contentious meeting yesterday.’’
I looked toward Jim, who looked decidedly surprised and
uncomfortable that I was being so open about our ugly get-
together in the Alcatraz suite. I didn’t include Marty in my list
of attendees because today he wasn’t in the room.
‘‘As you can probably imagine, this is a difﬁcult situation
for me. I mean, the fate of my career here at K&B pretty much
lies in your hands, and I’m about to tell you why I think your
ﬁrm, our ﬁrm, needs to change what we do.’’
It was astounding how much more comfortable I felt just
being honest. So I kept going.
‘‘And I realize that it would be natural for you to feel
a little defensive about what I’m going to say, so I want
to assure you that my only motivation here is to make the
ﬁrm more successful. I’ll admit that most of my comments
are based on my observations and intuition, not on reams of
data or rigorous statistical analysis. But I can stand here and
tell you that I’m extremely conﬁdent about the conclusions
I’ve drawn, and that I welcome any of your questions and
pushback.’’
I couldn’t believe it, but Janet actually smiled. Like she
was proud of me, and wanted to reach down and pat me on
the head. And I would have let her.
I took a breath and continued.
‘‘Essentially,
Lighthouse Partners uses a handful of
principles that one of their founders, a guy named Michael
Casey, put in place years ago. Based on what I’ve seen, these
147

Getting Naked
principles have created a more loyal and enthusiastic client
base than anything I’ve seen, in any industry.’’
I could tell my audience’s interest in what I was saying
jumped a few notches. ‘‘And I’d like to tell you about those
principles, and what I think lies beneath them.’’
Before I could dive in, one of the younger partners in the
ﬁrm, Larry DeWitt, raised his hand. Larry ran the accounting
and audit practice.
‘‘I don’t mean to be difﬁcult,’’ he began, meaning he was
going to be difﬁcult. ‘‘But why haven’t I heard of Lighthouse
Partners? If they’re so good at this . . . ’’ He didn’t bother to
ﬁnish the sentence.
‘‘Well, they’re deﬁnitely a boutique ﬁrm, and they do
almost all of their work here in the Bay Area. From the
beginning they wanted to keep the ﬁrm relatively small.’’
Before DeWitt could counter, one of the other executives
in the room, a woman who ran the organizational consulting
division, came to my defense.
‘‘Our division certainly knows about Lighthouse,’’ she
said. ‘‘They’ve taken clients from us on more than one
occasion. And I’ve heard stories about how good their con-
sultants are.’’
DeWitt wasn’t about to give up, trying with some success
to hide his arrogance. ‘‘Still, when a company says they
want to stay small, it’s often an excuse for not knowing how
to grow.’’
At that moment I felt like I wanted to passionately defend
Michael Casey, a man I had never met and had loathed just a
few months earlier. But not wanting to seem too biased, I did
my best to be ¨uber-diplomatic. ‘‘Yeah, I know what you mean.
148

Cross-Examination
However, in this case the company really was purposeful
about maintaining its size. The founder is a family man, ﬁrst
and foremost, and was determined to avoid letting his work
ruin his home life.’’
The reaction to that statement surprised me. As I would
have expected, a few of the partners glanced at each other
subtly in a way that suggested they thought what I had said
was touchy-feely. But a few of the others—and I’m sure I read
their faces correctly—seemed to almost smile in admiration,
even nodding their heads a little.
Bolstered by the untested assumption that some of the
people in the room might actually be my allies, I then said
something that, in retrospect, I could have phrased more
delicately. ‘‘But I’d have to say that if they wanted to, Light-
house could have scaled what they did into a much bigger
ﬁrm. And that would not be have been a good thing for us.’’
Suddenly everyone in the room, including my potential
allies, seemed to shift into defense mode, with a few of
them laughing dismissively. And wouldn’t you know it, Jim
Kendrick spoke ﬁrst.
‘‘Now wait a second, Jack.’’ He smiled and responded
in a way that simultaneously seemed condescending and
apologetic. I was just glad he didn’t call me Mr. Bauer or
son. ‘‘I think we could have held our own against them.’’
The people in the room seemed glad that their leader
had defended them. I had to be careful.
‘‘Well . . . ’’ I paused. ‘‘I’m not going to stand here and
say that Kendrick and Black is not a great ﬁrm.’’
I felt a little dirty because, in fact, I didn’t think K&B was
a great ﬁrm. But I suppose in a technical sense my statement
149

Getting Naked
wasn’t a lie because I wasn’t about to stand there and actually
say it.
‘‘But . . . ’’ I paused again and realized that, even if I had
wanted to, it was too late to hold back what I was about
to say next. ‘‘Pretty much every time we’ve come up against
Lighthouse Partners over the past ﬁve years in a head-to-head
sales situation, we’ve been beaten.’’
People didn’t respond but glanced toward Kendrick to
see how he would react. I decided I should continue before
he could say anything.
‘‘And don’t get me wrong. I’ve been on the receiving end
of their butt-kickings as much as anyone, and I learned to
hate them for it.’’
Fortunately, my audience seemed to accept my sincere
self-deprecation.
‘‘But now I understand exactly how they were beating us
and why it worked so well.’’
Kendrick didn’t say a word, but I could see by the looks
on the faces of the others in the room that I had ﬁnally earned
my permission, albeit tentatively, to convince these people
that I had something worthwhile to tell them.
I had twenty-ﬁve minutes to salvage my career. I can
honestly say that I wasn’t all that nervous. But then again,
I had no idea what was going on.
150

MAKING THE CASE
I
couldn’t decide whether to start by telling them about Michael
Casey’s various principles or to go right into the model
that I had come up with around them. I chose to go with
my model, on the grounds that it was my own and I felt
more comfortable explaining it with conﬁdence. And I knew
I needed to be conﬁdent.
‘‘More than anything else, the power of what Lighthouse
does can be explained by one word: vulnerability.’’
Okay, I wasn’t expecting the room to burst into sponta-
neous applause. But neither did I expect anyone to mock me
before I could explain. Which was exactly what my friend
Mr. DeWitt did.
‘‘Did you say vulnerability?’’ He smiled and didn’t wait
for me to respond. ‘‘Is this some kind of new-age hippy thing
where we’re going to get naked and hold hands?’’
The room chuckled collectively, and I forced myself to
laugh along with them. I even joined them in the skepticism.
‘‘Yes, and then we’ll be smoking dope and singing Grateful
Dead songs.’’
They laughed even more.
151

Getting Naked
‘‘But it’s interesting that you used the word naked,’’
directing my comment at Larry, ‘‘because that’s not a bad
way to describe the way Lighthouse presents themselves to
clients.’’
I had their attention again. After writing ‘‘vulnerable’’ and
‘‘naked’’ on the board, I continued.
Vulnerable/Naked
‘‘What I’m talking about here is a certain kind of fearless-
ness they have. Whether they’re selling or consulting, they
just don’t seem afraid of anything.’’
The Penguin spoke next, not skeptically, but out of what
seemed to me like genuine curiosity. ‘‘What would they be
afraid of?’’
‘‘Three things,’’ I said like a conﬁdent professor who had
been baiting his students. I ﬁnally had them where I wanted
them, and I was ready to unleash my model.
Suddenly I wondered if it made any sense and if I should
have reviewed it with someone at Lighthouse ﬁrst. Too late
to worry about that, I decided, and dove in.
152

THE FIRST FEAR
‘‘T
he ﬁrst one is the fear of losing the business, either during
the sales cycle or in the process of doing consulting. I think
that’s pretty straightforward.’’ I wrote it on the board:
#1 Fear of losing the business
I was about to go on to the second of the three fears,
when I turned and noticed that most of the partners were
frowning—not cynically, but more in a way that suggested
they were trying to understand my model.
‘‘What do you mean by that? How can they not care about
losing the business?’’ It was the Penguin again.
‘‘Well, it’s amazing to me how little anyone at Lighthouse
worries about whether they’re going to close a deal, or
whether a client might decide to stop working with them.’’
Before I could explain further, Jim Kendrick spoke and
shocked everyone—not by what he said, but by how he
said it.
‘‘Now, I’m sorry if this sounds cynical, Jack.’’
I’m pretty sure no one, including myself, had ever before
heard Jim Kendrick say something so politely and genuinely.
153

Getting Naked
He might as well have stripped to his boxers and started
singing show tunes. Of course, I had no way of knowing if
he was being sincere, because I had never witnessed him
being particularly nice before.
He continued, ‘‘But how can they be good consultants if
they don’t care about keeping their clients?’’
No longer fretting about my children’s college fund, I
conﬁdently stayed true to my own naked approach. ‘‘That’s
a good question, Jimbo.’’ (Oh, come on. You know I didn’t
say ‘‘Jimbo.’’) ‘‘It’s not that they go out of their way to tick
off their clients. It’s just that they’re so focused on saying
and doing whatever is in the best interests of those clients
that they stop worrying about the repercussions. They make
themselves completely vulnerable, or naked, and don’t try to
protect themselves.’’
My audience seemed to be trying to decide whether to
accept my ideas or pick them apart. I was grateful when Janet
asked the ﬁrst question:
‘‘Can you give me an example of this?’’
Moving back toward the whiteboard in anticipation of
needing to write something down, I began by explaining the
difference between how Lighthouse goes about doing sales
calls and how Kendrick and Black does it.
The new members of my audience, those who hadn’t
been with us in the Alcatraz room the day before, were
dumbfounded by Lighthouse’s lack of preparation and rigor
during the sales process.
‘‘So, you’re saying that they don’t do research before they
start selling?’’ Larry asked.
‘‘Well, they’ll usually look at a company’s website and get
a general sense of what business the client is in. But they do
154

The First Fear
most of their research when they meet the client, by asking
questions. And they certainly don’t come with a slideshow or
a marketing packet.’’
I’m pretty sure Larry thought that I was an alien. ‘‘And
the clients respond to that? I’d think they’d be unimpressed,
if not insulted.’’
‘‘You know, they might be. But only at ﬁrst. It’s not like
they’re going to kick a consultant out of their ofﬁce in the
ﬁrst ﬁve minutes for being unprepared. Once they spend
some time with the Lighthouse folks, I think they forget
about their initial impression and are disarmed by their . . . ’’
I struggled for the right phrase, and settled on ‘‘humble self-
conﬁdence.’’
Now the Penguin jumped in, a little impatiently. ‘‘Even
after our meeting yesterday, this is still too vague for me.’’
Feeling virtually no discomfort, I explained, ‘‘Well, two
of Michael Casey’s ﬁrst rules of thumb are to be a consultant
and not a salesperson, and to give away the business.’’ I
wrote both of these on the board:
Consult, don’t sell.
Give away the business.
‘‘What they mean is that you shouldn’t try to sell to a
client by telling them what you would do for them if they hire
you. You should just start consulting right then and there.’’
‘‘But what if you give them a great idea, and they decide
they don’t need to hire you and that they can just use the
idea themselves?’’ Larry asked.
155

Getting Naked
‘‘I wondered the same thing myself when I ﬁrst went
to Lighthouse. But in reality, it almost never happens. I
mean, sure, if all a client is looking for is one idea, then
you’d be better off just giving it to them and letting them
burn you and get it over with. But in reality, clients want
someone who not only has good ideas, but who also will
help them implement them. Which, when you think about it,
makes sense.’’
Larry nodded, acceding the point to me.
I went on, ‘‘The other part of this, giving away the
business, is about never worrying about the fees. Don’t bring
them up during the sales call unless they ask. Don’t apologize
for what you charge when they do ask. And if there’s ever a
dispute about fees, side with the client and charge the lesser
amount.’’
Janet frowned at me. ‘‘That sounds like a recipe for being
taken advantage of.’’
‘‘Exactly. That’s what nakedness and vulnerability are all
about. If a client wants to take advantage of you, let them.’’
‘‘I’m confused,’’ Kendrick announced, echoing what
seemed to be on the minds of most of the others in the
room. ‘‘Yesterday you said that these people charge higher
fees than we do. And now you’re saying they let clients
underpay them.’’
I smiled. ‘‘That’s the crazy thing. Most of their clients
would never even think of underpaying them. Which makes
sense, because once a client trusts you and really understands
that you care more about them than about yourself, they
usually stop worrying about micromanaging the cost or seeing
if they can take advantage of you.’’
156

The First Fear
One of the other partners raised his hand but didn’t
wait to be called on. ‘‘Is Lighthouse ever tempted to take
advantage of clients? To pad the bills?’’
I was shaking my head before he ﬁnished the question.
‘‘Never. That would be selling their soul to the devil. In fact,
I’ve seen consultants at Lighthouse go to a client and suggest
that they pay a lower retainer because they weren’t using
their services enough.’’
At least half the room gave me a look that said, We don’t
believe that for a second.
I insisted. ‘‘I know it sounds insane, but I saw it with
my own eyes. These people are nuts.’’ I laughed, and so did
most of the others in the room. ‘‘It’s all about standing there
naked in front of the client. It’s about building trust. And
in the end, that means the client trusts them and takes care
of them.’’
Now a few more of the partners were taking notes, and I
knew that I was making progress. But there was more to the
fear of losing the business yet to explain, not to mention
the other two fears, so I pushed on.
‘‘Okay, another one of Michael Casey’s rules of thumb
related to overcoming the fear of losing the business is
something he calls ‘telling the kind truth.’’’
Tell the kind truth.
‘‘This might be the most powerful of all the things they
do. It’s something that I was never taught in my career, and
it doesn’t come easy. But it’s key to their success.’’
157

Getting Naked
One of the partners who hadn’t spoken yet, a roundish
guy with suspenders named Finley (I don’t know if that was
his ﬁrst or last name), offered his ﬁrst comment. ‘‘This sounds
a little like kindergarten talk to me.’’
Though I wasn’t put off by the comment, the rest of
the room seemed to be. It felt like Finley had drained a
little of the goodwill that I had been building up, and, given
that it was his ﬁrst interaction with me, I think they were
embarrassed for him. Even I felt bad for the guy.
‘‘Well, there is nothing kindergarten-like about what this
looks like in practice. In fact, it can be brutal.’’
They seemed anxious for me to explain, so I went on.
‘‘I know a consultant at Lighthouse who told his client that
he needed to move his son out of a leadership position
because he was incompetent. Another guy I know recently
told a CEO that he doesn’t hold his staff accountable. And
last week I had to tell a guy that I thought he talked too
much during meetings. But remember the ‘kind’ part. We
give them that sort of feedback with a level of empathy and
concern that you would normally reserve for a friend.’’
‘‘I thought you said this wasn’t going to be touchy-feely,’’
Larry challenged me.
‘‘Touchy-feely? Are you kidding?’’
‘‘Yes. I’m kidding.’’ Larry smiled, and the others laughed.
I was relieved, but Finley pushed back.
‘‘I think we’ve all had those kinds of conversations with
clients, Jack. You might be building these consultants up a
little too much.’’
I was prepared for that objection, but I didn’t want to
be too tough and crush my suspender-wearing colleague.
158

The First Fear
‘‘That may or may not be the case. But I have to tell you,
the frequency with which these people do this is beyond
anything I’ve ever seen in this business. And the response
they get from those clients is ridiculous.’’
‘‘Ridiculous how?’’ the Penguin wondered out loud.
‘‘In terms of the level of appreciation they get. No matter
how uncomfortable the conversation might be in the moment,
eventually the clients are so glad that someone cares enough
about them to be honest—’’
Janet Neves completed my point. ‘‘They probably can’t
imagine not having you around.’’
I smiled and nodded. ‘‘Exactly.’’
As a few of the partners were writing this down, Jim
Kendrick spoke. ‘‘Can you move on to the other two fears?
We’ve only got ﬁfteen minutes.’’
I looked at the clock. ‘‘Oh crap.’’
They laughed.
‘‘There is one more part of the fear of losing the business
that you need to understand. It’s probably my favorite one.’’
I went to the board and wrote,
Enter the danger.
‘‘Okay, this one comes from the world of improvisational
theater. Or at least that’s what my wife tells me. The idea
is that when a group of actors are doing improv, and one
of them says something particularly bizarre, it’s important for
the others to avoid the tendency to dodge or ignore that
comment, but instead to walk right into the middle of it.
159

Getting Naked
That’s where the best improv comes from—the wackiest,
most uncomfortable stuff.’’
I think the people in the room might have known where
I was going, but I had to ﬁnish the point.
‘‘In consulting, entering the danger comes into play in
those moments when you’re in a meeting and someone says
something that is either strange or politically sensitive, and
you know that the level of anxiety and discomfort in the
room is high. What you’re tempted to do is just be quiet and
let the moment pass, but what great consultants do, at least
according to Lighthouse, is walk right into the middle of the
situation and call it out.’’
No one was writing this down, so I continued.
‘‘I’ve seen this plenty of times in the last few months, and
I’ve even done it myself. It’s terrifying and uncomfortable.
And clients absolutely love it.’’
Larry squinted and shook his head. ‘‘Wait a second. I can
see that this might be a good thing, but how can you say
with any degree of certainty that clients love it?’’
‘‘This is a serious question, right? I just want to make sure
you’re not kidding again.’’
They laughed.
‘‘Yes, I’m serious. I mean, it’s one thing to say—’’
I interrupted. ‘‘No, it’s okay. I understand. You want to
make sure I’m not exaggerating this stuff. I get it.’’
He nodded his head in a somewhat conciliatory way, so
I answered.
‘‘Whenever I see someone enter the danger—and that
includes the one time I did it—clients inevitably come up to
you individually and thank you. They say things like ‘I’m so
160

The First Fear
glad you made us talk about that,’ and ‘I’ve been wanting to
do what you did today for three years, but I felt like it would
have been a career-limiting move.’’’
A light went on just above Janet’s head. ‘‘So you have
to be conﬁdent enough to do something that is potentially
client-threatening.’’ It was sort of a question.
I wanted to go up to her, step up on my tippy toes, and
give her a big kiss. Instead, I just said, ‘‘Yes.’’
Jim Kendrick interrupted, impatiently but not cynically,
which I’ll take from him any day. ‘‘Okay, can you move on
to the second one, whatever you call it?’’
The Penguin helped him. ‘‘Fear. The second fear.’’
‘‘Right,’’ Kendrick acknowledged. ‘‘Can you move on to
the second fear? We’re running out of time here.’’
Thrilled by the idea that my audience was actually inter-
ested in what I was saying, I gladly obliged.
161

THE SECOND FEAR
‘‘T
he second fear that Lighthouse doesn’t have—and one that
most consultants, including myself, struggle with—is the fear
of being embarrassed or looking stupid in front of their
clients.’’
#2 Fear of being embarrassed
I didn’t wait for a question. ‘‘Now, I’m not saying that
they go out of their way to look stupid, or have no ﬁlter on
what they say to their clients, but when in doubt, they speak
up. And as painful as that is in the moment, it is disarmingly
effective in terms of adding value and endearing them to their
clients.’’
‘‘Do you have an example, Jack?’’ Suddenly Finley was
sounding friendlier. And I couldn’t help but wonder if sus-
penders were more comfortable for a large guy than a belt.
Stay focused, I thought to myself.
‘‘Yeah. But they fall into a few different categories. And
again, these are Michael Casey’s principles or rules of thumb.’’
162

The Second Fear
I went to the board and wrote,
Ask dumb questions.
‘‘When a Lighthouse consultant doesn’t understand some-
thing, they always probe. Whether it’s an industry term or an
acronym or a concept that everyone else in the room seems
to understand, they just never pretend to know more than
they do. And I have to admit that when I’m sitting there too
afraid to ask what I think might be a stupid question, and then
one of my colleagues does, I always admire them and feel
like a wuss for not asking it myself. And I think their clients
appreciate that about them.’’
Not quite satisﬁed, Kendrick asked, ‘‘Speciﬁc examples?’’
‘‘Let’s see.’’ I took a minute to stare at the whiteboard,
as though I would ﬁnd a good story written in magic spy
writing there. ‘‘It’s hard, because this happens all the time
and usually it’s not all that interesting.’’
Then something occurred to me. ‘‘I suppose the dumbest
question I’ve heard about came from Amy Stirling, one of the
senior partners at Lighthouse. As the story goes, and I heard
it straight from her, she was in a strategy session with some
executives from the San Francisco 49ers football team. Now,
Amy isn’t a big sports fan and knows next to nothing about
football. So they’re in the middle of a conversation about mar-
keting and reviving the team’s brand by reconnecting with the
team’s history, when someone suggests they use Jerry Rice in
their advertisements. After a few comments from others in the
room, Amy raises her hand and asks, ‘Who is Jerry Rice?’’’
Most of the room broke out into laughter.
163

Getting Naked
Janet Neves smiled and shook her head. ‘‘Come on. Even
I know who Jerry Rice is!’’
I defended my story. ‘‘I’ve talked to people who were in
the room at the time, and they swear it happened.’’
‘‘What did the 49er executives do?’’
‘‘Well, for a second they sat there stunned, thinking that
Amy was kidding. And then when they realized she was
serious, I guess they razzed her pretty good. At the end of the
meeting, someone even gave her a signed Jerry Rice jersey,
just to rub it in. But she recovered.’’
I worried that my audience would somehow think that
my Lighthouse colleagues were ignoramuses, so I qualiﬁed my
story. ‘‘Now remember, unlike that particularly egregious case,
usually when one of the consultants asks a dumb question at
least one other person in the room admits that they don’t know
the answer either. And then the consultant looks like a hero.’’
Goodwill or not, Kendrick was still impatient. ‘‘What else
do you have for us?’’
I went to the board. ‘‘Well, similar to asking dumb ques-
tions, they believe in making dumb suggestions.’’
Make dumb suggestions.
‘‘I’ve seen people do this quite a few times too.’’
‘‘Examples?’’ Kendrick asked.
I had to think about it for a moment. ‘‘Let’s see. Do
you want a really dumb one, or an idea that turned out to
be good?’’
‘‘Both.’’
164

The Second Fear
Bummer. I was really hoping to avoid telling them another
rare but ridiculous story about one of my Lighthouse col-
leagues. So I gave them one of my own.
‘‘Okay, let’s do the dumb one ﬁrst. I was recently facilitat-
ing an off-site meeting for one of my technology clients. They
were explaining that they were having a hard time managing
new sales leads, so I suggested that they go out and get some
better software tools for lead management.’’
‘‘Why was that a dumb idea?’’ Janet wondered.
‘‘Because one of their products, albeit a minor one, is a
lead management software suite.’’
Their winces suggested that they felt sorry for me. I gladly
accepted their pity.
‘‘How did you survive that one?’’ the Penguin wondered.
‘‘The same way you survive them all. You admit that it
was dumb. In fact, you celebrate it.’’
I went to the board and added,
Celebrate your mistakes.
‘‘How do you do that?’’
‘‘You admit it was a bad idea as soon as you realize it. You
laugh at yourself. You take their ribbing. And most important,
you don’t stop making suggestions. Most of your ideas won’t
be horrible. Even the ones that aren’t so good won’t hurt you
as long as you’re humble enough to acknowledge that you’re
not an expert. And if you’ve built trust with the client, they
don’t think about it for a second.’’
‘‘How do you know?’’
165

Getting Naked
‘‘Because every time I hear someone make a dumb sug-
gestion, the client just says ‘No, that wouldn’t work,’ and they
move on. It’s really not that big of a deal.’’
‘‘But what if most of your ideas are bad ones?’’ It was
Kendrick.
‘‘Well, then you’ve got a big problem. But it’s not because
you’re too naked or vulnerable. It’s because you’re not
competent.’’
They laughed.
‘‘The idea is that your clients are looking for good sugges-
tions, and they don’t mind sifting through some not-so-good
ones as long as they’re offered with good intentions and with
no ego attached.’’
‘‘Okay, give me some dumb suggestions that turned out
to be good ones.’’ Kendrick was pushing me along, but
seemingly with enthusiasm.
So I told them about Amy’s suggestion to the medical
technology company about licensing from a competitor. And
about her idea to create a family-friendly, alcohol-free section
at 49er games. And Dick’s recommendation that one of his
manufacturing clients move all their factories to the U.S. and
go with a made-in-the-USA marketing plan. And whether the
people sitting in the room thought those ideas were good
ones didn’t really matter, because, as I reminded them, the
clients ended up implementing the suggestions, and, more
important still, they worked.
I was starting to feel extremely conﬁdent that the people
in the room were eating out of my hand now, and that the
ﬁnal part of my little lecture would be relatively easy. And
then Marty walked into the room.
166

DECEPTION
M
arty went straight to Jim Kendrick. The fact that he didn’t
even look at me or acknowledge that I was in the middle of
a presentation was infuriating.
Marty whispered something in Kendrick’s ear and then,
for the ﬁrst time, glanced at me while trying to hide the smile
on his face. And before I knew what was happening, he
turned and left the room.
Jim Kendrick stood and went to the middle of the con-
ference table near the speaker phone.
‘‘Gentlemen, I guess you’ve heard enough. Is there any-
thing else you need from us right now?’’
At ﬁrst, I thought he was talking to the partners sitting
around the table. But his voice had that tone people use
when they’re talking to someone on speakerphone. And
others in the room didn’t seem confused, but were staring at
the triangular phone sitting in front of them.
Finally, after a few seconds’ delay, a voice came over the
phone.
‘‘No, I’m good. We’ll ﬁnalize the details on Monday.
Thanks, everyone.’’
167

Getting Naked
Jim then addressed someone else on the line. ‘‘What
about you, Michael? What did you think?’’
‘‘I thought he nailed it, probably better than I could have.
Great job, Jack.’’
I said ‘‘Thank you’’ half-heartedly, not knowing who I was
talking to and why there were people on the line.
Jim ended the phone conversation. ‘‘Thanks guys. We’ll
talk soon.’’ And he hit a button on the phone and hung up.
At ﬁrst I didn’t know what to say. I looked at Jim, but he
was shaking hands with the Penguin.
‘‘Excuse me,’’ I said, not delicately. ‘‘Do you mind telling
me what’s going on here?’’
168

FURTHER
EXPLANATION
J
im turned toward me, smiling in a way that suggested both
pride and guilt. ‘‘Yes, of course. I owe you an explanation,
Jack.’’
He went back to his chair. ‘‘The two gentlemen on the
phone were Tom Paulson from Strategic Insights, and Michael
Casey, the founder of Lighthouse. I thought they should hear
today’s meeting.’’
Before I could ask for more context, he ﬁnished.
‘‘See, we’re selling Lighthouse to Strategic Insights, and
I wanted Michael to conﬁrm that your description of his
company was accurate, and I wanted Tom Paulson to hear
it directly from someone with no vested interest in selling
the ﬁrm. He and Paulson were listening from the beginning,
and discussing your presentation on another line. Evidently,
Paulson liked what he heard, and Michael afﬁrmed that it was
true, and so we have a deal.’’
I was at a loss for words, but apparently my face betrayed
my anger. Janet tried to preempt any tirade I was considering.
‘‘Jack, it was the best thing to do.’’
169

Getting Naked
‘‘You mean letting them secretly listen to my presentation,
or selling the company?’’
‘‘Well, selling the company is what I was thinking about.’’
I was obviously dumbfounded, and pretty pissed off, so
Kendrick continued.
‘‘Here’s the deal. Not long after we purchased Lighthouse,
Marty started to worry that the cultural differences were bigger
than he had thought. He was getting nervous about how it
would all turn out, that it would fall back on him, and decided
we should cut our losses before we screwed this thing up
even more.’’
I shouldn’t have been surprised that Marty was behind
all this.
Kendrick continued, ‘‘Over time, I started to agree with
him. As much as I liked their proﬁtability numbers, I talked to
a few people in the industry and realized that our consultants
are just a different breed from theirs. I even called Paulson
at Strategic Insights a few weeks ago and ﬂoated the idea
by him.’’
‘‘A few weeks ago? You knew that the merger wasn’t
going to work then?’’
‘‘No. In fact, I wasn’t convinced of that completely until
your presentation today. I mean, there’s no doubt in my mind
that we wouldn’t be able to do this naked, vulnerable stuff.
It’s an ‘old dog trying to learn new tricks’ kind of thing.’’
‘‘So when did you set up today’s call?’’
‘‘Last night, after you left. It was all contingent on hearing
your presentation and having Michael Casey verify what we
suspected.’’
‘‘Why didn’t you tell me?’’
170

Further Explanation
‘‘Because I didn’t want you to be distracted by what we
were trying to do. You were passionate last night, and I
wanted you to be passionate today.’’
I was having a hard time digesting it all, trying to decide
whether to empathize with Kendrick or loathe him.
He then pulled a classic Kendrick. ‘‘Well, I’m late for
another meeting.’’ He looked at me. ‘‘You can talk to Marty
about how all this plays out for you.’’
And he turned to leave.
‘‘What about the third fear?’’ I asked, sounding pathetic,
I’m sure.
Barely turning around to address me, he responded,
‘‘Sorry, I’m late. And the sale is pretty much a done deal.
Thanks, Jack.’’ And he was gone, followed quickly by Finley,
Larry, and DeWitt.
I felt like a little boy who didn’t get picked on a kickball
team at recess.
Janet, the Penguin, and two others remained seated.
The look on Janet’s face suggested she might actually be
restraining some sort of emotion, and after an awkward
silence, she spoke. ‘‘Well, I want to hear about the last fear.’’
The Penguin and the others nodded.
Now, if I had sensed any pity from them, I’d have
politely but insistently refused. But they seemed genuinely
curious—maybe even a little desperate—to know the rest of
the model.
Setting aside my frustration, not to mention the uncer-
tainty I was feeling about what I was going to do with my
career, I decided that I would ﬁnish my presentation—after
a quick break so I could pull myself together a little.
171

THE THIRD FEAR
D
uring the break I called Diane and gave her the forty-two-
second version of what had just happened. I had never heard
so many PG-13 words come out of her mouth. When I went
back to the conference room, I half expected no one to be
there. But there they sat. Trying to be somewhat cool, I dove in.
‘‘Okay, the third and ﬁnal fear that the Lighthouse con-
sultants seem to have overcome is the fear of feeling inferior
to their clients.’’
I forced myself to go to the whiteboard and write it down
with my favorite blue pen.
#3 Fear of feeling inferior
I was not surprised to see that my smaller audience
seemed more confused by this one than the others, so I
explained.
‘‘One of the last things consultants want is for their clients
to look down on them or, even worse, look right through
them. There is something about wanting them to see you as
being important that goes with the job.’’
The Penguin frowned. ‘‘This sounds like the last one, the
fear of looking stupid.’’
172

The Third Fear
I nodded. ‘‘Yeah, it does. And they’re related, I suppose.
But different. The fear of being embarrassed or looking stupid
is about taking an intellectual risk. It’s about the pride of not
wanting to be wrong. The fear of feeling inferior is more
about humility as a person, not needing to be the center of
attention. Even taking on a role of true subservience to a
client.’’
My students were a little clearer, but still not quite where
I wanted them. The woman who headed up the organiza-
tional practice—I’m pretty sure her name was Helen—made
a helpful suggestion. ‘‘What are some of the principles that
go with this one?’’
‘‘Great idea.’’ I turned toward the whiteboard and decided
to write down all four principles at once. ‘‘Let’s see.’’
Take a bullet for the client.
Make everything about the client.
Honor the client’s work.
Do the dirty work.
I decided not to wait for them to object, but instead beat
them to the punch. ‘‘Yes, I know that these sound like a
consultant’s version of the Boy Scout oath. But there’s more
to them than that.’’
Janet raised her hand. ‘‘I think it also sounds like the
butt-kisser’s oath.’’
Everyone laughed, especially hearing that come from
Janet. And because it wasn’t offered as a criticism or an
attack, I enjoyed the moment as much as anyone.
‘‘Right,’’ I said, ‘‘if you do this in an obsequious kind
of way, then that’s what it will be. But remember, you’re
173

Getting Naked
the same consultant who is telling them the kind truth and
entering the danger, so they’re not going to see you as telling
them what they want to hear. That’s what makes this so
powerful.’’
I could see little imaginary lightbulbs starting to ﬂicker
over the heads of my audience, so I pressed on.
‘‘There is something so powerful about a person who in
one moment can be conﬁdent enough to confront a client
about a sensitive personal issue, and then in the next moment
humble themselves and take a position of servitude. It’s the
paradoxical nature of it all that makes it work.’’
The Penguin laughed, but not cynically. ‘‘Now you’re
sounding like a professor. How about a few speciﬁc
examples?’’
I gladly obliged and decided to start with ‘‘taking a bullet’’
because it was the most difﬁcult.
I began by telling them the story of Michael Casey being
skewered by the executives at the strategy session. And if I do
say so myself, I did a good job of helping them understand
why that story was an example of courage and strength, and
not weakness.
‘‘So you’re not saying that you should let clients abuse
you.’’ Janet asked her question in the form of a statement,
like the opposite of Jeopardy.
‘‘No. It’s about knowing that in certain moments you
have to offer yourself up as a minor sacriﬁce to help them
accomplish what they need to accomplish. Letting them abuse
you, on the other hand, would be a terrible disservice. I know
it seems like a ﬁne line, but it’s a real one, and it can be done.’’
174

The Third Fear
‘‘Give me another example,’’ Janet asked. ‘‘Maybe a little
less dramatic.’’
I thought about it. ‘‘Okay, you’re helping a client imple-
ment a new program and it’s not working. They’re taking
heat for it from employees, and you’re not sure what the
problem is. You stand there in front of whoever is listening
and tell them that you’ve obviously overlooked something,
that this is your responsibility to ﬁgure it out, and that you
apologize for the frustration and inconvenience.’’
‘‘That’s harder than it sounds,’’ Helen remarked.
‘‘Yes it is,’’ I assured her. ‘‘It is painful. And it is powerful.’’
Suddenly the Penguin had an epiphany. ‘‘Hey, this sounds
like the fear of losing the business now.’’
I agreed. ‘‘Yes, sometimes there is overlap. If your biggest
fear is losing the business, that’s one thing. But if your fear is
standing there and having to absorb the blame for something
that may not be entirely your fault, that’s about being com-
fortable with temporary inferiority. In most cases, it’s a little
bit of both.’’
He acknowledged that my answer wasn’t ridiculous.
Janet looked at her watch. ‘‘What about ‘Honor the client’s
work’?’’
I tried to go fast. ‘‘That’s about genuinely displaying
enthusiasm and respect for what the client does.’’
‘‘What if you’re not enthusiastic about what the client
does?’’ the Penguin asked.
‘‘You ﬁnd a way to get enthusiastic. I mean, if you’re
trying to help a client do a better job of manufacturing paper
clips, then you need to realize that it’s important to them, their
clients, their vendors, and their families, and that paper clips
175

Getting Naked
are their bread and butter. If you can’t get excited about help-
ing them—not about paper clips necessarily, but about your
client’s livelihood—then by all means let another consultant
work with them. You owe them that much.’’
‘‘What if they do something that you think is just plain
bad?’’ he countered.
‘‘For instance?’’
‘‘I don’t know. Pornography. Tobacco. That kind of
thing.’’
I smiled. ‘‘Well, I don’t know about you, but I’m not
going to take a client that does something I ﬁnd morally
indefensible.’’
‘‘But the examples are not always that cut and dried.’’
‘‘You’re right. Last month an on-line gambling company
in Vancouver called Lighthouse about working with them.
We talked about it and agreed it wasn’t something that we
would feel good about promoting and that we couldn’t honor
the client’s business. So we called the client and told them
exactly that.’’
‘‘What exactly is dirty work?’’ Janet asked, pushing hard
to get through all the points.
‘‘Lots of things. Sometimes it’s typing up notes after a
meeting, sometimes it’s going out to get food. Other times it’s
cranking out slides for them for a meeting.’’
‘‘So, naked consultants always do that stuff?’’ Janet wasn’t
liking this part, I could tell.
‘‘No, but they make it very clear that they’ll do their
share of it, and more, and they’re not above anything when
it comes to helping the clients.’’
Janet accepted my explanation.
176

The Third Fear
Helen didn’t. ‘‘I still don’t understand how this is different
from not wanting to look stupid. Or why you make a
distinction.’’
I knew there was a difference, but I was having a hard
time thinking about how to describe it. And then an idea
occurred to me. ‘‘Let’s try something that might help with
this. Everyone here look at the three fears and tell me which
your biggest challenge is.’’
They looked at me like I had asked them to strip down
to their skivvies and do the funky chicken.
‘‘Come on,’’ I urged them, ‘‘you have to have some idea
which of these is hardest for you.’’
My audience members were now studying the board and
glancing around the room as though they were comparing
themselves to one another. Finally, the Penguin spoke.
‘‘I don’t like to look dumb.’’ He said it emphatically. ‘‘Not
knowing the answer and getting something wrong kills me.’’
He then explained that this made sense given his Myers-
Briggs personality type, something having to do with being a
rational person. I could relate to that.
Helen countered, ‘‘I don’t care so much about that one.
My big thing is keeping the client happy and not having them
reject me. I guess that’s about losing the business.’’
I nodded my agreement with her analysis.
‘‘That’s probably because I’m a pleaser, and I’m really
competitive. The idea that someone beats me, and that a
client or prospect didn’t think I was good enough to earn or
keep their business, worries me the most.’’
177

Getting Naked
The Penguin smiled. ‘‘Not me. If they reject me, I
ﬁgure they were just too dumb to understand how I could
help them.’’
We laughed.
‘‘I’m serious. That’s what my wife calls my arrogance
thing.’’
Now Janet was staring at the board and nodding her head.
‘‘Okay. I think I get this now. One of my staff members has
the inferiority one. It’s a pride thing. Whenever a client asks
her to do something that she thinks is below her education
level, or if they don’t appreciate her enough, she gets all bent
out of shape. I’ve always thought she lacked humility, and so
this makes sense.’’
‘‘What’s yours?’’ I asked Janet.
‘‘I was afraid you were going to ask me that.’’ She looked
at the board again.
‘‘What do you guys think?’’ She asked Helen and the
Penguin and the remaining partner in the room, a nameless,
faceless man about whom I remember nothing.
In unison, they replied, ‘‘Losing the business.’’
She smiled. ‘‘Yeah, yeah. You’re right.’’
Suddenly her expression changed: she looked puzzled.
‘‘What’s up?’’ I asked her, feeling very comfortable with
this particular group of students.
She studied the board, apparently still working out her
thoughts. ‘‘I was just thinking about my husband’s business.
He’s a residential contractor, a home builder. His clients love
him, and almost all of his business comes from unsolicited
referrals.’’ She paused. ‘‘I think he does most of these things.
I mean, he’s never described it like this and I don’t think he
178

The Third Fear
has a speciﬁc methodology around any of it, but I think he’s
deﬁnitely very naked with his clients.’’
The others chuckled.
And then I saw a lightbulb go on over Helen’s head. She
asked her colleagues a question. ‘‘Which department within
the ﬁrm provides the best internal service?’’
After two quick seconds, Janet and the Penguin and the
faceless man said almost in unison, ‘‘Legal.’’
‘‘And why is that?’’ asked Helen.
The Penguin answered without hesitation. ‘‘Because
Jeremy . . . ’’ He paused and turned to me to explain: ‘‘He’s
our corporate counsel—and he does most of this stuff too.’’
Janet was nodding her head. ‘‘They admit when they’re
wrong. They tell us when they don’t know something. They
roll up their sleeves and do the dirty work that other legal
departments think is beneath them.’’
Helen smiled. ‘‘And they deﬁnitely tell us the kind truth.’’
Her colleagues laughed, apparently referring to a situation
that I wasn’t privy to.
It was at that happy moment that Marty poked his head
into the conference room and interrupted. ‘‘Jack, can you
stop by my ofﬁce when you’re done here? I’ll be there for
another hour or so.’’
I nodded, and he left, having severely diminished the
levity in the windowless room, which was suddenly quiet.
The Penguin broke the silence. ‘‘So what do you think,
Jack?’’
‘‘I think that you’re right about the legal department.
Whenever I deal with one of their—’’
179

Getting Naked
He interrupted me. ‘‘No. I mean, what do you think about
the conversation you’re about to have with Marty?’’
I was surprised, both by the question and by his concern.
I thought about if for a second. ‘‘Maybe I should ask you.
You probably have a better idea.’’
He smiled in a kindly, patronizing way. ‘‘I wish I did.
But as you know, Kendrick pretty much lets us run our
departments the way we want. It’s probably up to Marty.’’
‘‘That’s not the answer I was looking for.’’
The smiles on the faces in the room seemed to be a
mixture of pity and affection. I accepted them both.
‘‘So, do you guys have any other questions about the
Lighthouse approach?’’
They shook their heads and deﬁnitely seemed more con-
cerned about my career than about satisfying their curiosity.
I pushed them a little. ‘‘Do you think that Kendrick and
Black can use this?’’
‘‘Are you kidding?’’ It was Helen. ‘‘We’d be crazy not to.’’
‘‘I’m not sure everyone here could put it into practice,
though.’’ I think it was the nameless, faceless guy who said
it, but for some reason, I still can’t recall a single thing
about him.
Helen agreed with him. ‘‘No doubt. There are certain peo-
ple in the ﬁrm who would have a very hard time being naked.
And more important, would have no interest in nakedness.’’
We laughed. And then Janet said something that again
made me want to stand on my tippy toes and kiss her.
‘‘But I’m going to do what I can to teach my people.’’
The Penguin seemed to be encouraged by his colleague’s
declaration. ‘‘Me too. Why wouldn’t we?’’
180

The Third Fear
At that moment one of the receptionists from the front
desk, a new woman who had evidently joined the ﬁrm since
I had moved down to Half Moon Bay, came into the room.
‘‘Excuse me. Is Jack Bauer here?’’
I raised my hand.
‘‘Marty’s getting anxious and is wondering what time you
think you’ll be stopping by his ofﬁce.’’
I looked at my room full of new friends.
Janet said what they were all thinking. ‘‘You better go.’’
I agreed, and began what felt like a death march.
181

DROPPING SHOES
A
s I approached Darth Vader’s ofﬁce, I tried to keep myself
in ‘‘naked mode.’’ But I can’t deny that I was ﬁghting fear,
not so much because of what might happen, but because
of how it would happen. To have to stand there and take
Marty’s crap was more than I was ready for, especially after
the afternoon I had just had.
I said a prayer for strength.
When I opened the door, Marty was on the phone, so I
paused in the doorway. He smiled falsely and pointed to a
chair in front of his desk. I remained standing just to defy him.
After a moment he wrapped up the conversation and
ﬁnally spoke to me.
‘‘Crazy times, huh?’’ he said with a smile.
‘‘If by crazy you mean having to deal with a self-absorbed
boss who will throw you to the wolves at the ﬁrst sign of
trouble, then yes, these times are indeed crazy.’’ And yes,
I actually said that, but with a smile. I wish I had been able
to muster more self-control, but I wasn’t.
‘‘Whoa. Whoa. Hold on. I think you should give me a
chance to explain.’’
182

Dropping Shoes
The better part of me won out. ‘‘Okay. I’m sorry. I’m
listening.’’
Marty paused, as though he really didn’t have anything
to say in his defense, and that his request to plead his case
was simply a ruse. But being the slick guy that he was, he
found something to say. ‘‘This hasn’t been easy for me either.
I had no idea how strange the culture at Lighthouse was
going to be, and that we wouldn’t be able to make this thing
work.’’
He paused to see if I would empathize with him. When
it was clear that I wouldn’t, he continued, ‘‘And I was
under a little pressure myself to get us out of the situa-
tion. Putting together this deal with Strategic Insights wasn’t
easy or pretty.’’
I decided that remaining silent was best, both to ensure
that I wouldn’t say anything I would regret and to make him
stew a little.
And then Marty did something that I could not have
anticipated. ‘‘Look, Jack, I’m sorry. I know I’ve been an ass.
None of this turned out the way I hoped it would, and you
got caught right in the middle of it. And I didn’t do much to
get you out of it. I don’t know what to say.’’
There it was again. Someone that I was determined to
hate—or, with a nod to Sister Rose Marie, dislike—doing
something redemptive. How dare this guy who had caused
me so many problems suddenly force me to have to grow,
again!
I took a breath. ‘‘Well, I appreciate the apology.’’ I was
at a loss. ‘‘I do.’’
183

Getting Naked
There was a moment of silence, until Marty moved the
conversation forward.
‘‘Anyway, as you know, I’m going to retire next summer,
and we’re going to ﬁnd a partner to run this division. I’ve
already talked to Kendrick about it, and we agreed it should
be you.’’
Four months ago, even four weeks ago, I would
have been relieved, if not slightly ecstatic, to hear those
words. Today I was decidedly ambivalent. Or maybe even
disappointed.
‘‘Okay.’’ That was all I could say. I could tell Marty was
hoping for more enthusiasm and gratitude, but I just couldn’t
muster it.
‘‘Is this something you’re interested in doing?’’ he asked.
‘‘You don’t seem quite as excited as I expected.’’
I tried to recover. ‘‘No, it’s just, yes, I’m interested. I’m
just tired, and this has been a crazy day, and everything is
coming at me kind of fast.’’
‘‘I can only imagine,’’ he said, and moved on to the topic
of next steps. ‘‘So, take the next day or two to wrap things up
down at Lighthouse and get set up here again. In fact, take
a day off in the mean time. I know it’s been a lot of work
lately.’’
I nodded my head, not knowing what to say. Finally
I managed an ‘‘Okay, thanks.’’ And walked out.
184

GUT CHECK
B
y the time I ﬁnished telling Diane the longer version of the
story, I was a little tired of having her say ‘‘No, no, no. Tell
me exactly what they said.’’ But I couldn’t blame her, and
I obliged her as well as I could.
‘‘Wow,’’ she declared when I was done. ‘‘I wish I could
have been there.’’
We both agreed that she would have strangled Marty,
and that her presence would not have been to my advantage.
I spent the rest of the evening with the family, avoiding
any more discussion of work. And again, I spent more time
thinking than sleeping that night.
The next morning I went to Half Moon Bay to tell Dick,
Amy, and Matt what had happened and to clear out my desk
there. During my drive to the coast, the reality of the situation
really hit me.
First, it would be the last time I make this drive, or work
with these people. Though it had been only a few months,
I couldn’t deny how much I had come to enjoy Lighthouse,
and how much it had changed me.
Second, I didn’t know how we were going to deal with
the clients I had been working with. Transitioning to a new
185

Getting Naked
consultant usually took weeks, and I didn’t have that kind
of time.
My colleagues’ reaction to my narrative from the previous
two days at Kendrick and Black surprised me. I expected
them to be somewhat indifferent, or maybe even relieved,
about the sale to Strategic Insights. They weren’t. When I
asked why, I was stunned by Dick’s response.
‘‘Because of you,’’ he replied, as though I should have
known.
True to form, Matt was sarcastic, or so I thought. ‘‘Do
you know how hard it’s been breaking you in? I don’t think
I have it in me to go through that again.’’
We laughed, and we talked about what we should do
with my clients. And then it hit me. There was no way I could
go back to work at K&B after my experience of the past four
months. And so I laid my cards on the table.
‘‘Do you think I should try to jump over to Strategic
Insights and keep working here?’’
None of my friends looked at all surprised by my ques-
tion. In fact, it seemed that they had been waiting for me to
ask it. But their response blew me away.
‘‘Not unless you want to work alone.’’
I was completely confused. They didn’t wait for me to
ask the obvious questions.
Amy made the announcement. ‘‘We’re leaving.’’
‘‘What?’’
Dick conﬁrmed it. ‘‘We’re giving them six months to
integrate things and transition the clients to new consultants,
and then we’re leaving.’’
‘‘Why?’’
186

Gut Check
Matt responded ﬁrst. ‘‘I just told you. We don’t want to
have to break in another new guy.’’
They laughed.
Dick clariﬁed the situation for me. ‘‘Look, part of what
Matt said is right. But more than anything, this is just the right
time to make a change. I’m going to semi-retire and cut back
on my hours.’’
‘‘Me too,’’ Amy announced. ‘‘My kids are at an age that
I want to spend more time at home.’’
‘‘Yeah,’’ Matt complained. ‘‘I’m the one being abandoned
here.’’ He laughed.
‘‘What are you going to do?’’ I asked him.
‘‘I’m going to start my own practice. Focus more on
organizational stuff.’’
‘‘So where does that leave me?’’ I wanted to know.
‘‘You’re pretty much screwed,’’ Matt teased.
I laughed, but in that way a man laughs when, if he were
a boy, he might have cried.
187

ONWARD
W
hen I turned down the offer to run the strategy practice at
Kendrick and Black, Marty had the gall to suggest I was
ungrateful. If it were a movie, I might have punched him in
the face. But that is neither realistic nor noble, so I merely
smiled and said, ‘‘Wow.’’
Two hours later I received an offer from Tom Paulson,
the managing partner at Strategic Insights, to run the practice
formerly known as Lighthouse. Even before I hung up the
phone, I decided that I should turn down that offer too. I’d
had enough of institutional consulting, and besides, Matt had
suggested that I join him in starting his consulting practice.
Suddenly that was sounding like the best option.
But I couldn’t quite decline the offer right away. That’s
because Tom Paulson, who had sounded like a decent
enough guy during my two brief phone conversations with
him, asked me to come to Half Moon Bay to give him an
opportunity to change my mind. I decided that refusing really
would be a sign of ingratitude, so I agreed.
When I discussed all of this with Diane that night, I
was surprised by her opinion, or lack thereof. Normally, she
would have showered me with more advice than I might
188

Onward
have asked for, but now she was holding back and simply
reassuring me that I would make the right decision.
‘‘Whatever you decide, just make sure you can be yourself
and enjoy what you’re doing.’’
‘‘Thanks for nothing,’’ I teased her, hoping she would
make my decision easier. She just smiled.
When I arrived at Lighthouse the next day, I strolled a
little more slowly along the corridor, stopping to take a long
drink from the little fountain between the boys’ and girls’
bathrooms. I was even a little disappointed that I didn’t have
to pee, because I would have liked to use the little urinals
there one last time.
When I entered the conference room, I saw only two
men, neither of whom I knew, though one looked vaguely
familiar. They introduced themselves.
‘‘Hi Jack, I’m Tom Paulson.’’ He was a nicely dressed,
professional-looking man, the kind you would think would
run a high-end consulting ﬁrm. And from the smile on his
face and everything else I could gather about him in that
nanosecond, he did indeed look like a decent guy.
The other man, the one who looked just slightly familiar
to me, was older but wore jeans and a polo shirt. He smiled
at me as though he knew me or, better yet, was somehow
proud of me. It was strange.
‘‘I’m Michael Casey. I’ve heard a lot about you, Jack.’’
Though I suppose I shouldn’t have been completely
surprised, I can’t deny that I was stunned to ﬁnally be
standing face to face with the man who for a number of years
had provoked my jealousy and anger—and now, somehow,
my admiration.
189

Getting Naked
Michael looked familiar because I had seen informal
pictures of him around the ofﬁce. But his voice I had heard
only once, two days earlier on the speakerphone.
‘‘I want to thank you for doing such a nice job explaining
my ﬁrm the other day.’’
I nodded, accepting his compliment but not knowing
what to say.
Fortunately, he continued. ‘‘And I don’t know why I never
thought about your model. The three fears.’’
‘‘Probably because you never had to.’’
He smiled. ‘‘I suppose so.’’
We sat down, and I asked about his daughter, wife, and
grandchildren. He thanked me for my concern—he seemed
to genuinely appreciate it—and reported that they were ‘‘still
struggling but hanging in there.’’
Then he changed the subject. ‘‘Jack, I’m here to ask you
to stay on and run this ofﬁce.’’
I turned to Tom Paulson, who smiled and made his pitch.
‘‘We want to maintain this culture and see if we can’t infect
the rest of our ﬁrm with it.’’
Michael continued, ‘‘I can’t blame Dick and Amy for
wanting to leave. They’re in a place in their lives where it
makes sense to move on. But I’m pretty sure we could talk
Matt into staying, as long as there’s a leader here for him to
work with.’’
I didn’t say anything, but my body language must have
suggested that I wasn’t convinced yet, because Michael
went on.
‘‘Listen, I don’t want to see this place disintegrate, and
I don’t want to see people over here lose their jobs. When I
190

Onward
left, I knew that it might not be perfect and that there was
a possibility things would unravel, but when I heard you on
the phone this week, I decided that there was a chance to
keep it going. And that’s why I got on a plane for the ﬁrst
time in months.’’
I couldn’t help but feel for this man who had seen his life
turned upside down. And I was genuinely surprised at what
Tom Paulson had said, and how sincere he seemed. I didn’t
want to be rash, but neither did I want to leave these decent
men hanging.
‘‘Well, I need to talk to my wife,’’ I said, knowing she
would be happy for me, ‘‘and if I can talk Matt into—’’
Michael interrupted me, sheepishly. ‘‘Actually, I already
did.’’
‘‘You did what?’’
‘‘I asked Matt if he would stay if you agreed to run the
practice, and he said yes. I’m sorry I didn’t wait, but I wanted
to—’’
Now I interrupted him. ‘‘No. That’s ﬁne. I understand.’’
Suddenly the surreal nature of the moment hit me. In a
matter of days, I had gone from anticipating being ﬁred and
having my career ruined, to being offered the job I thought
I had wanted, to refusing that job and being called ungrateful,
to being courted by this pseudo-mythical ﬁgure sitting in front
of me in blue jeans.
‘‘Wait a second,’’ I said, catching myself. ‘‘I already know
what my wife is going to say. Of course I’ll take the job.’’
Tom shook my hand enthusiastically, which was nice.
Michael just smiled at me like a parent who had known all
along what I was going to do.
191

Getting Naked
After we called Matt to let him know what had happened,
I called Diane to tell her the news. Her reaction conﬁrmed
that I had made the right decision.
So I thanked Tom Paulson and made arrangements to
meet with him two days later to ﬁnalize the agreement. I said
goodbye to Michael Casey, whom I would not see again.
As I left the building, I could not deny that I felt better
about my career than I had in a long time. Maybe ever. And
as painful as the last few months had been, I knew that it
was something to be grateful for. I even considered sending
Marty a thank-you note, but decided against it.
As I walked down the breezeway and passed the boys’ and
girls’ bathrooms and child-sized drinking fountains, I couldn’t
help but think of Sister Rose Marie. I decided I would send her
a thank-you note instead.
192

The Model


THE ORIGINS OF
GETTING NAKED
I
n the late 1990s, I helped start a management consulting ﬁrm
called The Table Group that provides a variety of services to a
wide range of clients in just about every respectable industry
imaginable. From the beginning we adopted a simple and
informal approach to serving clients that provoked surprising
levels of loyalty and trust. This book is about that approach,
which we call naked consulting.
Explaining the effectiveness of our naked consulting and
service model is something of a challenge for me because,
unlike in my other books, it requires me to cite my own ﬁrm
as an example. The possibility that this will come across in
any way as immodest is particularly terrifying for me because
one of the keys to the naked service model—as well as the
basis for the core values of our ﬁrm—is humility. But if I
don’t adequately convey the power of our approach, perhaps
you won’t think it is worth adopting. And I deﬁnitely think
it’s worth adopting. So here goes.
Naked service has allowed us to build extraordinary trust
among our clients over the years, beyond anything we could
195

Getting Naked
have imagined. They have welcomed us into their most
critical and sensitive discussions without hesitation. They
have consistently sought our advice and counsel, often about
matters that were outside of the scope of the core services
we provided. They have kept us around even when budgets
were tight. And they have vouched for us enthusiastically
and authentically with other clients who were considering
working with us.
In essence, our clients have treated us more like real
partners and team members than as vendors or outsiders.
Or as we like to say, they treat us like members of their
family. Cousins, maybe, but really close ones. And aside from
making our work more enjoyable, proﬁtable, and rewarding
than we would have thought possible, this naked approach
to consulting has allowed us to more effectively serve and
help those clients in meaningful ways.
Now, the story in this book is about a management
consulting ﬁrm, because that is what we are. However, the
naked approach is certainly not limited to our ﬁeld. It applies
to anyone who provides ongoing, relationship-based advice,
counsel, or expertise to a customer, inside or outside of a
company. Or better yet, it applies to anyone whose success is
tied to building loyal and sticky relationships with the people
they serve.
Okay, let’s look at what naked service entails.
196

NAKED SERVICE
DEFINED
A
t its core, naked service boils down to the ability of a service
provider to be vulnerable—to embrace uncommon levels
of humility, selﬂessness, and transparency for the good of
a client.
As obvious as that may sound, it is more difﬁcult than
it seems, because humility and selﬂessness and transparency
often entail suffering. And suffering is not something most
human beings, especially in our modern culture, understand
or welcome. Most of us live our lives trying to avoid awkward
and painful situations, which is why it is no surprise that we
are susceptible to the three fears that prevent us from building
trust and loyalty with our clients.
#1: FEAR OF LOSING THE BUSINESS
No service provider wants to lose clients, business opportu-
nities, or revenue. Ironically, though, this fear of losing the
business actually hurts our ability to keep and increase busi-
ness, because it causes us to avoid doing the difﬁcult things
197

Getting Naked
that engender greater loyalty and trust with the people we’re
trying to serve.
What clients want more than anything is to know that
we’re more interested in helping them than we are in main-
taining our revenue source. And when we do something, or
fail to do something, in order to protect our business, they
eventually lose respect for us and understandably question
whether they should trust us.
Naked service providers refuse to be overly concerned
about the possibility of losing a client or, for that matter, being
undercompensated or having their ideas misappropriated by
a client. In fact, they willingly put themselves in positions
of exposure in each of these areas, knowing that by doing
so they will earn the trust of their clients. They understand
that in the end, more goodwill comes about even if there are
setbacks along the way.
It’s worth reminding ourselves that clients can smell fear
and are repelled by it. They are attracted to a service provider
who will be honest and direct with them, even if it might
jeopardize the relationship. If I remember correctly, the same
principles applied in dating: girls prefer honest and self-
assured guys over desperate ones who tell them what they
want to hear. Sounds crazy and counterintuitive, I know, but
it is true.
#2: FEAR OF BEING EMBARRASSED
No one likes making mistakes in public and having to endure
the scrutiny of spectators, especially when those spectators
are paying us for our advice or counsel. And yet, like a
ﬁfth-grader, we know that the only thing worse than raising
198

Naked Service Deﬁned
our hand and having the wrong answer is failing to put our
hand up at all (and realizing that more often than not, we did
indeed have the right answer). This fear, then, is rooted in
pride, and it is ultimately about avoiding the appearance of
ignorance, wanting to be seen instead as smart or competent.
Naked service providers are so concerned about helping a
client that they are willing to ask questions and make sugges-
tions even if those questions and suggestions could turn out
to be laughably wrong. They readily admit what they don’t
know and are quick to point out—even to celebrate—their
errors because protecting their intellectual ego is not impor-
tant to them.
Clients come to trust naked service providers because
they know that they will not hold back their ideas, hide
their mistakes, or edit themselves in order to save face. As
painful as this can be for a consultant who wants to be seen
as smart, it is a turnoff to clients who want to hear all of
our suggestions, and who are yearning for transparency and
modesty—qualities that are immensely more attractive than
intelligence.
#3: FEAR OF FEELING INFERIOR
Like the previous fear, this one has its roots in ego, but
there is an important difference between the two. Fear of
feeling inferior is not about our intellectual pride, but rather
about preserving our sense of importance and social standing
relative to a client.
It is completely natural for service providers to yearn
for respect and admiration, and to have a disdain for being
overlooked, condescended to, or treated as though we are
199

Getting Naked
inferior. And so it is no surprise that, as consultants, we
try to achieve and preserve a certain level of standing and
importance in the eyes of our clients. But sometimes we
forget that the word ‘‘service’’ shares the same root meaning
as ‘‘servant’’ and even ‘‘subservience.’’
Naked service providers not only overcome their need to
feel important in the eyes of their clients, but also purpose-
fully put themselves in a lower position. They do whatever
a client needs them to do to help them improve, even if
that calls for the service provider to be overlooked or tem-
porarily looked down on. Ironically, clients come to trust and
respect service providers who do this and ultimately come to
think more highly of them. That’s because there is nothing
more attractive and admirable than people who willingly and
cheerfully set their egos aside and make the needs of others
more important than their own.
200

SHEDDING THE
THREE FEARS
V
ulnerable service providers demonstrate nakedness by engag-
ing in a variety of simple but powerful practices, all of which
correspond to one or more of the three primary fears. And
as important as it is to understand the fears that underlie
these principles, the speciﬁc actions that demonstrate naked
service are what is required to achieve client loyalty.
The principles of naked services are as follows.
ALWAYS CONSULT INSTEAD OF SELL
(Fear of Losing the Business)
Naked service providers transform every sales situation into
an opportunity to demonstrate the value of what they do.
They avoid, as much as possible, telling clients what they
would do if they were to be hired; instead, they just start
serving them as though they were already a client. And
they don’t worry about whether the potential client will take
advantage of their generosity; they know that for every client
that does, nine others will appreciate their generosity and
start to see themselves as a client even before they formally
decide to become one.
201

Getting Naked
Sales situations then become service giveaways, which
are more enjoyable experiences because they give the service
provider higher levels of conﬁdence than they would have
had if they were simply trying to convince a potential client
to make a decision.
Many of the people who work with me would probably
say that I’m a good salesperson, but the fact is, I’m miserable
at traditional sales. I don’t like to talk about fees, and I don’t
like to go for ‘‘the close.’’ But I love consulting, so I just go
into sales meetings with the idea that I’m going to ﬁnd a way
to help them in some meaningful way. Then, if they choose
not to hire me, I realize it was probably the right decision
because they could see exactly what it is I do and decide
whether or not it is something they need.
GIVE AWAY THE BUSINESS
(Fear of Losing the Business)
This principle has two applications. On the one hand, it is
related to the ‘‘always consult instead of sell’’ principle
because it is about giving a prospective client advice and
service even before they agree to become a paying client. By
demonstrating generosity and trust, you drastically increase
the likelihood of making them a client, not to mention proving
to them that you can help them.
The other part of giving away the business is more
ﬁnancial. It entails always erring on the side of the client when
it comes to fees. Because you’re interested in a long-term
relationship with a client, it is in your best interest to show
them that you are more focused on helping them than you
are in maximizing your short-term revenue.
202

Shedding the Three Fears
A colleague of mine once did work for an ongoing client
without having agreed to a price ahead of time. When he sent
a bill for his services, the client responded with a genuine
‘‘Whoa, I didn’t think it was going to cost that much.’’ Instead
of pressing for the full amount, my co-worker simply charged
them what they expected the work would cost. That client
continues to work with our ﬁrm today.
Another consultant I know who practices naked service
met with a potential client who admitted that they were hop-
ing to do the work themselves instead of hiring an outsider.
He met with them and gave them the information and advice
they needed to do it without him. Two years later, they came
back to him to be a paying client, remembering that he had
been more interested in helping them than in charging them.
TELL THE KIND TRUTH
(Fear of Losing the Business)
Naked service providers will confront a client with a difﬁcult
message, even when the client might not like hearing it.
As a result, they put the relationship with the client at risk,
knowing that it is more important to serve the client’s needs
than it is to protect the service provider’s own business.
But they do this in a way that recognizes the dignity and
humanity of the client. Instead of bluntly hitting them over the
head with a difﬁcult message, they present their counsel with
kindness, empathy, and respect. Still, they don’t sugarcoat
their advice or present it in an obsequious way. Naked
consultants understand that they have a responsibility for
being a truth teller, even if this means they will be sacriﬁced.
A consultant I know was working for a client, a native
New Yorker, who was having trouble working with his
203

Getting Naked
Southern colleagues. He was being too direct—an approach
that had served him well in his career back home but was
now intimidating his Southern peers. The consultant knew
he needed to address the client, but in a way he could hear.
Drawing on characters from the movie The Godfather, he said,
‘‘Maybe you could be a little less like Sonny and a little more
like Michael.’’ The client immediately understood, agreed,
and over time was able to change his style. On numerous
occasions since then, he has expressed his gratitude for the
advice and the way it was delivered.
ENTER THE DANGER
(Fear of Losing the Business)
Naked service providers don’t shy away from uncomfortable
situations; they step right into the middle of them. This
concept is taken from the world of improvisational theater.
In improv, it is natural for novices to avoid playing off of
a bizarre comment or behavior of a fellow actor, worried that
they won’t know how to build on it. Great improv actors take
the opposite approach by seeking out and engaging in the
most wacky situations (entering the danger), knowing that
this is where an opportunity for genius lies.
When it comes to consulting and service, entering the
danger has to do with having the courage to fearlessly deal
with an issue that everyone else is afraid to address. Per-
haps more than any other service a consultant provides, this
one provokes the most appreciation from clients, many of
whom have grown weary of avoiding the ‘‘elephant in the
room’’—one that, over time, has become smellier and messier
and therefore more untouchable.
204

Shedding the Three Fears
When a naked service provider stops and says, ‘‘Hey,
does anyone else smell that?’’ the consultant usually becomes
a hero. Clients come to see them as having courage and
integrity—qualities that are disarming, attractive, and often
rare. And so ‘‘dangerous’’ situations become opportunities for
adding value and building trust.
This tactic can look similar to telling the kind truth, but
it is different because it is done in a group setting in the
midst of a potentially difﬁcult moment. A friend of mine
was working with a senior executive who went off on a
typical, somewhat abusive tirade in front of his team. When
he ﬁnished, the room went silent and, as usual, everyone
just waited for the moment to pass. My friend didn’t let that
happen, but instead said, ‘‘Okay, I think it would be a good
idea to talk about the impact that these situations have on
the team.’’ For the ﬁrst time, they discussed it and were able
to help the executive admit what he needed to work on and
how it could help the team.
I once worked with the leadership team of a software
company, a group of extremely intelligent and driven people.
After watching them struggle with the issue of lead generation
and marketing, I sensed that others in the room shared
my confusion about the company’s basic customer promise.
I spoke up and said, ‘‘I’m sorry, but I just don’t understand
your value proposition. Am I the only one, or is this confusing
to you guys too?’’ At ﬁrst, a few of the executives looked at me
like I was a moron. Just as I was ready to admit my mistake,
the head of customer service said, ‘‘I don’t get it either,’’
followed by a handful of other key executives who admitted
their confusion too. This was an example of two principles
205

Getting Naked
of naked consulting—entering the danger and asking dumb
questions, which I’ll describe next.
ASK DUMB QUESTIONS
(Fear of Being Embarrassed)
Naked service providers are the ones who ask the questions
that others in the room are afraid to ask out of fear that
they would embarrass themselves. They realize that if they
ask ﬁve questions and three of them could be considered
‘‘dumb,’’ the potential beneﬁt that comes from the other two
makes it worthwhile.
Most of us wouldn’t think a 40-percent hit rate would
justify the potential humiliation of being perceived as unpre-
pared or intellectually deﬁcient. But clients love it. They’re
almost always going to remember the great question we
asked and forget about the others, especially when we can
quickly and humbly acknowledge the questions that turn out
to be poor.
Think about the times you’ve been in a room and had a
question that you thought might be too obvious to ask. And
then someone else asks it, and you look at them with a sense
of gratitude and respect. That’s how clients see us, if we have
the courage to ask.
Once I was in a relatively tedious meeting with an exec-
utive team that was reviewing their budget for the year.
As I looked over the spreadsheet that they were reviewing,
I noticed that in the marketing area there was no line item
for advertising. Because the company had just gone public, it
seemed strange that they wouldn’t be doing any advertising,
so I raised my hand and asked about it. A new colleague
206

Shedding the Three Fears
of mine who was also in the room at the time later told me
that he was mortiﬁed by my question. He thought to himself,
‘‘Come on, of course these people thought about advertising.
It’s probably just buried within one of the other marketing
categories.’’
He was as surprised as I was when the CEO responded
to my question by turning to the marketing VP for an answer.
The head of marketing looked a little stunned and said ‘‘Well,
I wasn’t sure if you wanted us to do any advertising this
year . . . ’’ And so they clariﬁed the situation and moved funds
into that part of the budget. The executive team thanked me
for helping them see something they had missed. Still, I had
been completely prepared for them to say ‘‘You knuckle-
head, of course we thought about advertising. It’s right here
under . . . ’’ It was only through my being okay with that po-
tential reaction that I was able to help them.
MAKE DUMB SUGGESTIONS
(Fear of Being Embarrassed)
Naked service providers go beyond merely asking questions
that others shy away from; they make suggestions that they
aren’t sure of, knowing that they are putting themselves in a
position to be even more embarrassed.
But as is true for the dumb questions, a client is going to
remember that one great idea a consultant proposes far more
than the not-so-great ones. And if that client thought we were
holding back our ideas out of fear of being humiliated, they
would—and should—feel cheated. After all, they’re bringing
us in and paying us for the objectivity of our thinking, so they
expect that some of our suggestions will be less informed
207

Getting Naked
than theirs. If we’re not putting ourselves on the line and
offering everything we have, they would be unwise to trust
us or feel loyal to us.
Once we were with a CEO and his CFO at a client site,
and they were talking about the next stages in the company’s
development. As I knew frighteningly little about ﬁnance and
public markets, I decided that it couldn’t hurt to make a
suggestion. ‘‘What about going public?’’ I asked. ‘‘It seems
like other companies usually do that when they reach this
point in their growth.’’ I was as shocked as anyone else when
the executives looked at each other and said, ‘‘Why don’t we
go public?’’ Later that year, they did their IPO.
Keep in mind, for every seemingly dumb suggestion that
turns out to be insightful, there are plenty that are in fact
dumb. But without taking the risk of putting an idea out
there, the good ideas will never see the light of day.
CELEBRATE YOUR MISTAKES
(Fear of Being Embarrassed)
Naked service providers don’t enjoy being wrong; they just
realize that it is an inevitability. And rather than attempting to
hide or downplay their errors, they readily call them out and
take responsibility for them. Though this may seem counter-
intuitive, it actually increases the client’s level of trust and loy-
alty. Clients don’t expect perfection from the service providers
they hire, but they do expect honesty and transparency. There
is no better way to demonstrate this than by acknowledging
when a mistake has been made and humbly apologizing for it.
208

Shedding the Three Fears
TAKE A BULLET FOR THE CLIENT
(Fear of Feeling Inferior)
This is perhaps the most difﬁcult principle to explain, as it is
easily misunderstood and largely counter to what our culture
instills in us.
First, the misunderstood part. Taking a bullet does not
mean enabling a client to do the wrong thing by blindly
and obsequiously absorbing blame for them. It is about
ﬁnding those moments when we can humble ourselves and
sacriﬁcially take some of the burden off of a client in a
difﬁcult situation, and then—and this is critical—confront
them with the kind truth. Without that confrontation, taking
a bullet would indeed be enablement. But there are those
moments when a service provider is in a rare position to
accept responsibility for something that may or may not have
been their fault. And of course, when there is any doubt,
taking a bullet means that the consultant always errs on the
side of accepting responsibility.
Taking a bullet is countercultural because we are encour-
aged in life to deﬂect responsibility for problems, especially
if we are not sure that we have done anything to warrant
blame. Whether we’re siblings ﬁghting over our LEGO sets or
plaintiffs in a legal battle, we generally seek to avoid direct
or collateral damage in difﬁcult situations. Naked service
providers ‘‘throw themselves on grenades’’ for their clients,
knowing that the grenades encountered in a business set-
ting are usually not lethal, and that the act of doing so
builds extraordinary trust and loyalty. Of course, occasionally
209

Getting Naked
grenades are ‘‘lethal’’ in that they destroy the account, but
even that is something a naked consultant will accept.
I once worked with a large international client, helping
them plan worldwide leadership and strategy conferences. My
responsibility included setting the agendas, creating content,
and organizing the various activities for the hundred or so
executives who attended. During one event, my client became
concerned that the event was falling behind schedule and
implored me to interrupt the presenters and push them to
wrap up their talks. Finally, he poked me in the ribs and said,
‘‘Tell him to hurry up!’’ I turned on the microphone I was
carrying and very kindly asked the presenter to ﬁnish up in
the next ﬁve minutes, only to have that presenter unleash on
me a few angry and insulting comments in front of a hundred
senior executives. I turned to see what my client would say,
only to see him disappear out the door to the conference
center, leaving me alone to absorb the heat. (I promise you,
I couldn’t make this up.)
Later, that client acknowledged the uncomfortable sit-
uation, although he didn’t come right out and apologize.
However, he demonstrated his gratitude through his loyalty
to me and my ﬁrm and his general level of appreciation for
everything we did for him. And as awful as that moment
was, I came to the conclusion that we had helped him by
mitigating a potentially damaging situation for him.
MAKE EVERYTHING ABOUT THE CLIENT
(Fear of Feeling Inferior)
This is another tactic that seems simple and obvious, but it is
harder than it seems—and also more powerful. Naked service
210

Shedding the Three Fears
providers throw their full attention into the world of the client.
They do not try to shift attention to themselves and their level
of experience or knowledge; rather, they make it clear that
their focus is on understanding, honoring, and supporting the
business of the client. As a result, naked service providers
often downplay their own accomplishments, allowing clients
to discover them for themselves. There isn’t much more to
say about this one, which is as important and difﬁcult as it
is simple.
HONOR THE CLIENT’S WORK
(Fear of Feeling Inferior)
Okay, this one sounds a little like the previous one, not to
mention motherhood and apple pie, but it’s bigger than that.
Naked service providers honor the client by taking an active
interest in their business and by appreciating the importance
of that business to the client and the client’s customers.
And this can’t be faked. Even when a client’s business isn’t
something that a service provider is naturally passionate
about, they will ﬁnd a way to develop and demonstrate an
interest out of respect for the client’s livelihood.
This begs the question, ‘‘What if a potential client is
involved in a business that we don’t respect?’’ Not being able
to honor that business is a good indication that we shouldn’t
be doing that work. My ﬁrm has been approached by compa-
nies involved in a legal business that we nevertheless cannot
support from a moral or ethical perspective, and we don’t
hesitate to kindly pass on those business opportunities. Not
only would we be contributing to something we don’t want
to support, but we would be unable to honor their business.
211

Getting Naked
DO THE DIRTY WORK
(Fear of Feeling Inferior)
Naked service providers are willing to take on whatever a
client needs them to do within the context of their services.
Sometimes what a client needs isn’t as attractive or exciting
as we would like. It might cause us to be perceived as lower
than the client, or perhaps just lower than we would like to be
perceived. But because we are humble and more concerned
about our clients than we are about ourselves, we’ll do what
they need. In doing so, we’ll earn their loyalty and gratitude.
A colleague and I once worked with a large international
company to help them improve the health of their organi-
zation and the capacity of their leaders. Part of that work
involved organizing a leadership development conference. In
addition to designing curriculum and working with the CEO
and other senior executives to help them better inspire lead-
ers, we found ourselves planning dinner menus and running
microphones around the room during Q&A sessions.
I remember someone telling me that we shouldn’t be
doing that because it was beneath us; it made us look like
support staff instead of expert advisors. And though that
may have been the case in the eyes of the attendees at
the conference, we knew that the executives who hired us
and worked most closely with us saw it as our complete
dedication to them and their organization.
ADMIT YOUR WEAKNESSES AND LIMITATIONS
This
principle
is
perhaps
the
most
general
and
all-
encompassing. It also sounds a lot like celebrating your
mistakes, but it differs in a few important ways. First, it is one
212

Shedding the Three Fears
thing to be honest about a single mistake, and quite another
to admit a general weakness. But the fact is, we all have
weaknesses, and if we try to cover them up we’ll probably
put ourselves in a situation of having to do more and more
of what we aren’t good at. We’ll also wear ourselves out
by trying to be something we’re not, which not only is
exhausting but also prevents us from doing our best in the
areas in which we can thrive.
213

BROADER
APPLICATIONS
OF NAKEDNESS
T
he principles in this book apply most directly and compre-
hensively to businesses like management consulting, ﬁnancial
advising, public relations, technical services, and internal cor-
porate support services. However, they can be applied to a
variety of other service businesses involving ongoing rela-
tionships with clients.
This could certainly include family practice doctors,
retained lawyers, sales account managers, life coaches, build-
ing contractors, insurance agents, and even personal trainers.
And although every principle of naked service may not apply
to each of these ﬁelds, I think that most of them do, and they
can help any service provider inspire loyalty and trust with
clients.
Even beyond the world of clients, being naked has its
beneﬁts and advantages. When we can demonstrate vulnera-
bility to the people we live and work with, we build stronger
relationships, afﬁrm our trust in them, and inspire them to
become more vulnerable themselves. And that is certainly
worth getting naked for.
214

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
F
irst, I want to thank the many clients I’ve worked with over
the years who have allowed me—and our ﬁrm—to be naked.
I especially want to thank our earliest clients who helped
us practice and get comfortable with the concept of vulner-
ability. That includes terriﬁc people like Jennifer K. and a
bunch of nice folks in Utah; Mark T., Kristen W., Tom C.,
and others in San Francisco and New York; Alan A. and his
team from the East Bay; Jean K. and her crew in the Valley;
Ruann E. and her team in the city; and Mark W., Kris H.,
Gary B., and a long list of others spread here and there. We
won’t forget the experiences we had with you or the lessons
we learned from you.
Of course, I want to thank my ‘‘partners in nakedness,’’
my colleagues at The Table Group. Because we try to eat the
food we cook, we have had a long history of vulnerability
with one another. You are part of my family, something
that I don’t say easily but mean wholeheartedly. And special
gratitude for Tracy and your truly extraordinary dedication to
and counsel around this book.
I’m also thankful for the two dozen consulting partners
of our ﬁrm, people spread around the globe who are nakedly
215

Acknowledgments
helping organizations become healthier and teams become
more cohesive. You have breathed new life into our world
at The Table Group, and we appreciate the trust you have
placed in us.
I want to give a special thanks to two of our slightly more
recent clients and corporate friends—Southwest Airlines and
Chick-ﬁl-A—both of whom have made us feel like part of
their families and reminded us that work is more than work.
Much thanks go to Jim, my agent, whose willingness to be
naked with us has been so important to our ﬁrm. And to Rita
for your fabulous PR support.
I have to give big thanks to the many wonderful people
at Jossey-Bass/Wiley in San Francisco, Hoboken, and Port-
land, who work so hard to make my little books successful,
and who have been with us from the beginning. Special
thanks to Susan for your latitude, support, patience, and
humor over the years.
I am so thankful for the many people who I’ve met
through my work and church life who have become such
dear advisors, mentors, and friends over these past years,
Matthew K., Daniel H., Alan H., Randy H., Tom L., John B.,
and Ken B. I wish I could spend a lot more time with you, and
I cherish the minutes we do have together.
I’m grateful for my friends near and far, and the com-
munities that have been or are a part of my life and my
formation: St. Isidore parish and school, Garces High School,
and Our Lady of Perpetual Help parish and school.
I’m certainly very grateful for my mom and my extended
family in California, Mexico, and Colorado, who remain
216

Acknowledgments
patient with my busy schedule and inability to visit more
often. And for my dad, who I miss a lot.
And of course, I reserve so much thanks for my passionate
and always supportive wife, Laura, and our sweet and noisy
boys, Michael, Casey, Connor, and Matthew. I love you all
more than I can say. And yes, I know I say it a lot, but it’s
still not enough.
Finally, I give thanks for everything and I give all praise
and glory to my Lord, God, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. I
humbly pray that I may use what has been given me to serve
You and my neighbor, as You commanded.
217


ABOUT THE AUTHOR
P
atrick Lencioni is founder and president of The Table Group,
a ﬁrm dedicated to providing organizations with ideas,
products, and services that improve teamwork, clarity, and
employee engagement.
Lencioni’s passion for organizations and teams is reﬂected
in his consulting, speaking, and writing. He is the author of
several best-selling books. After eight years in print, his book
The Five Dysfunctions of a Team continues to be a weekly
ﬁxture on national best-seller lists.
When Lencioni is not writing, he consults to CEOs and
their executive teams, helping them to become more cohesive
within the context of their business strategy. The widespread
appeal of Lencioni’s leadership models has yielded a diverse
base of clients, including a mix of Fortune 500 companies,
professional sports organizations, the military, non-proﬁts,
universities, and churches.
In addition, Lencioni speaks to thousands of leaders each
year at world-class organizations and national conferences.
He was cited in the Wall Street Journal as one of the most
sought-after business speakers in the nation.
219

About the Author
Prior to founding his ﬁrm, he worked as a corporate
executive for Sybase and Oracle and began his career as a
management consultant at Bain & Company. He also served
on the National Board of Directors for the Make-A-Wish
Foundation of America.
Patrick lives in the San Francisco Bay Area with his wife,
Laura, and their four sons, Matthew, Connor, Casey, and
Michael.
To learn more about Patrick and The Table Group, please
visit www.tablegroup.com.
220


$24.95 U.S. | $29.95 Canada
www.josseybass.com
L E A D E R S H I P
Jacket design by Adrian Morgan
Cover photo by Kelly Neves Photography
Praise for Getting Naked
“I’ve experienced the ‘naked’ approach ﬁ rsthand and can say with
conﬁ dence that this book will transform the way we view client service. 
I wish every one of my vendors would read it and follow its advice.”
—J. MILES REITER, chairman and CEO, Driscoll’s
“Lencioni has written the deﬁ nitive primer on how to build relationships 
in business (and in life) that are at once authentic, fruitful, and lasting. 
Getting Naked is a must-read.”
—ANDY LORENZEN, senior manager, organizational talent strategy, 
Chick-ﬁ l-A, Inc.
“Lencioni’s message on vulnerability really hits home.  I can’t imagine a 
service provider who wouldn’t beneﬁ t greatly from the lessons in this 
insightful book.”
—TONY BINGHAM, president and CEO,  American Society for 
Training & Development (ASTD)
“I couldn’t put it down.  Another page-turner with a quietly powerful 
message from Lencioni.”
—MIKE FAITH, president and CEO, Headsets.com, Inc.
“Put your feet up, check your ego at the door, and read Getting Naked. 
It’s such an enjoyable read, you may ﬁ nish the book in one sitting, but 
you will remember its message forever.”
—KEN BLANCHARD, coauthor of The One Minute Manager® and 
Helping People Win at Work 

