www.allitebooks.com

Getting Started with 
nopCommerce
An in-depth, practical guide to getting your first 
e-commerce website up and running using 
nopCommerce
Brandon Atkinson
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
www.allitebooks.com

Getting Started with nopCommerce
Copyright © 2013 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: June 2013
Production Reference: 1280513
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78216-644-3
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Jarek Blaminsky (milak6@wp.pl)
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Author
Brandon Atkinson
Reviewers
Nicholas Cipollina
Jennie Cook
Chris Stout
Acquisition Editor
Andrew Duckworth
Comissioning Editor
Neha Nagwekar
Technical Editors
Vrinda Nitesh Bhosale
Dominic Pereira
Project Coordinator
Amey Sawant
Proofreader
Paul Hindle
Indexer
Monica Ajmera Mehta
Production Coordinator
Shantanu Zagade
Cover Work
Shantanu Zagade
www.allitebooks.com

About the Author
Brandon Atkinson is an architect and developer for CapTech Consulting in 
Richmond, VA. He specializes in Microsoft technologies including ASP.NET and 
SharePoint, regularly contributing to the SharePoint forums on TechNet. Brandon 
has owned and operated several online stores over the years, and he has also helped 
many others with their e-commerce efforts. When he is not writing code, Brandon 
enjoys playing music, reading, and spending time with his wife.
This book is dedicated to my dad, Mike Atkinson. I'm sure he would 
be proud to see how far I've come and I miss him every day. 
I thank my wife, Jennie Cook, who has always supported me in 
everything I do and has never told me any idea was too crazy to try; 
I love you.
Thanks to my brother, Brian Atkinson, who was my Sherpa guide 
for writing a book.
And thanks to my mom, Brenda Michaels, who taught me to have a 
firm hand shake, be polite, look people in the eye, and always hold 
doors for strangers. These skills have proven more valuable in my 
career than any bit of technical knowledge I can fit into my head.
www.allitebooks.com

About the Reviewers
Nicholas Cipollina is a Senior Software Engineer with expertise in .NET 
development and iOS development. He has over 12 years of software development 
experience including developing large-scale n-tier web applications and iOS mobile 
applications. Nicholas received his Bachelor of Science degree in Management 
Information Systems from Liberty University in Lynchburg, VA. He currently lives 
in Mechanicsville, VA, with his beautiful wife, Dawn, and his two little girls, Isabella 
and Hannah.
Jennie Cook received her Bachelor of Arts degree in Fashion Merchandising from 
Virginia Commonwealth University in 2004. She is a business consultant specializing 
in merchandising and marketing of e-commerce retail businesses and enjoys working 
with start-up businesses in particular.
With over 10 years of experience, Jennie amassed a wealth of knowledge that she 
now shares with her students as an adjunct professor in the Fashion Merchandising 
department at her alma mater.
Currently, Jennie is working on her own online venture using nopCommcerce. 
Revelry Row, a website specializing in women's jewelry and accessories, 
was launched in 2012.
Chris Stout is a manager at CapTech Consulting, and has spent over 15 years 
working on a variety of web-related technologies. He is currently working in 
mobile security with a financial services client, and has interest in Windows Phone 
development and cloud computing. When not at work, Chris enjoys woodworking, 
scuba diving, and hanging with his wife and daughter.
www.allitebooks.com

www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and downloads related 
to your book. 
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF 
and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.
com and as a print book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. 
Get in touch with us at service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign 
up for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt 
books and eBooks.
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital 
book library. Here, you can access, read and search across Packt's entire library 
of books. 
Why Subscribe?
•	
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
•	
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
•	
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free Access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access 
PacktLib today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials 
for immediate access.
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
Preface	
1
Chapter 1: Downloading and Installing nopCommerce	
7
Prerequisites and requirements	
7
Hosting providers	
8
Setting up a basic development environment	
9
Installing Internet Information Services (IIS)	
10
Installing SQL Server and Visual Studio	
11
Downloading nopCommerce	
11
Uploading and installing	
14
Web (no source)	
15
Source code	
16
Installation	
18
Setting up file permissions	
20
Summary	
21
Chapter 2: The Public-facing Storefront	
23
General site layout and overview	
24
Category and manufacturer pages	
27
Product pages	
30
Searching for products	
34
Shopping cart	
35
Checkout and order details	
38
Summary	
43
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Chapter 3: The Administration Site	
45
How to access and overview	
45
Creating and managing categories	
49
Creating and managing manufacturers	
53
Creating and managing products	
53
Creating and managing attributes	
64
Summary	
69
Chapter 4: Configuring the Store	
71
General store settings	
72
Payment methods	
74
Shipping	
77
Shipping methods	
77
Shipping method restrictions	
78
Shipping rate computation methods	
79
Shipping by weight	
80
Fixed rate shipping	
81
Taxes	
82
Tax categories	
83
Tax providers	
84
Content management	
86
Topics (Pages)	
87
Email accounts	
89
Message templates	
91
Plugins	
93
Security (SSL)	
95
Summary	
96
Chapter 5: Processing Orders	
97
Processing orders	
97
Viewing and editing order information	
100
Viewing and editing order billing information	
100
Viewing and editing order shipping information	
101
Viewing and editing ordered products	
104
Adding and deleting order notes	
106
Processing returns	
107
Viewing current shopping carts and wishlists	
110
Impersonating a customer	
112
Summary	
113
Index	
115
www.allitebooks.com

Preface
You're reading this book because you've decided to open an online store and 
you've chosen nopCommerce as your e-commerce engine. Congratulations! 
Opening an e-commerce storefront is an exciting adventure and nopCommerce 
is a top-shelf product that will serve you well. nopCommerce is an open source 
e-commerce engine built with Microsoft's ASP.NET MVC framework and which 
uses Microsoft's SQL Server database. This engine is a complete solution that 
includes everything you need.
nopCommerce consists of two major areas:
•	
Public-facing storefront: This is where customers will browse your site, 
look at products, and place orders. It consists of product, category, and 
topic pages, as well as the shopping cart and checkout pages.
•	
Administration site: This is where you will manage all aspects of your 
storefront. This includes creating categories, adding/managing products, 
and creating/editing topic pages. You will also manage shipping options, 
tax settings, payment providers, and so on.
There are other areas in nopCommerce, including a blog and forums. However, 
these areas are outside the scope of this book, but you should be aware there is 
more to nopCommerce than just the e-commerce engine.
Real world
In most installations, you may not use the built-in blog and forums 
provided. There are many products on the market that are solely built 
for these purposes, such as WordPress for blogging. Sometimes, it makes 
sense to use nopCommerce solely as your e-commerce engine and use 
other products for blogging and forums.
www.allitebooks.com

Preface
[ 2 ]
nopCommerce is licensed under the nopCommerce Public License v3. This 
license is the GPLv3 license with the additional requirement of having Powered 
by nopCommerce text on the bottom of each page. The GPLv3 license states that 
the software is free to use, change, share, and also that you are free to share your 
code changes with other users. Visit the GNU website (http://www.gnu.org/) 
for detailed information on the GPLv3 license.
The text requirement under the nopCommerce Public License v3 can be 
removed by purchasing a "nopCommerce copyright removal key" from 
the nopCommerce website.
This book was written using nopCommerce 2.80. All of the screenshots are from this 
version, which introduced a new theme that was not available in previous versions. 
However, the majority of the content is applicable to all versions of nopCommerce 
from 2.00 and above. To view all the versions of nopCommerce and to obtain details 
of the differences, visit the nopCommerce website.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Downloading and Installing nopCommerce, will explain the various flavors of 
nopCommerce and will show you how to download and install the engine to your 
hosting provider or development environment.
Chapter 2, The Public-facing Storefront, will guide you through the storefront your 
customers will be using, explaining the various components along the way.
Chapter 3, The Administration Site, will guide you through the backend of 
nopCommerce and will highlight key areas where you'll be building your store.
Chapter 4, Configuring the Store, gives you a walkthrough of how to configure the 
most important areas of your store to get up and running fast.
Chapter 5, Processing Orders, will explain how to process orders you receive via your 
storefront as well as how to manage shipments and impersonate your customers.
What you need for this book
nopCommerce has several requirements needed before you begin working with 
it. These requirements and pre-requisites are different if you plan on performing 
custom development versus installing and using nopCommerce out of the box. 
The following list applies to versions of nopCommerce 2.0 through 2.8.

Preface
[ 3 ]
The following base components are required:
•	
Supported Operating Systems – Windows 7, Windows 8, Windows Server 
2008, Windows Server 2012 (all with Internet Information Services (IIS) 7.0 
or above installed).
•	
Supported Databases – Microsoft SQL Server 2005 or above, Microsoft SQL 
Server Compact 4.0 or above.
•	
ASP.NET 4.5 with MVC 4.
•	
Supported Browsers – Microsoft Internet Explorer 6.0 or above, Mozilla 
Firefox 2.0 or above, Google Chrome 1.0 or above, Apple Safari 2.0 or above.
•	
FileZilla (or other FTP software) – In order to upload your files to your 
hosting provider, you will need an FTP program to facilitate the transfer.  
You can download FileZilla from http://filezilla-project.org/.
•	
7-Zip (or other file archive software) – When you download nopCommerce 
it will be in a compressed archive that will need to be extracted.  You can 
download 7-Zip from http://7-zip.org/.
If you plan to write custom code or modify the code you will also need to 
the following:
•	
Microsoft Visual Studio 2012 or above
•	
Microsoft SQL Server 2005 or above
Who this book is for
This book is for anyone who wants to build an e-commerce website using 
nopCommerce. No development experience is required to use nopCommerce or for 
this book. If you would like to perform custom development with nopCommerce, 
you should have experience using Visual Studio as well as ASP.NET MVC, C#, 
and jQuery.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file extensions, 
pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles are shown as follows: 
"Using your FTP program, connect to your hosting provider and upload all the files 
from the nopCommerce_2.80_NoSource folder."

Preface
[ 4 ]
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on 
the screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: 
"Navigate to Start | Control Panel | Programs".
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for 
us to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission 
form link, and entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, 
your submission will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our 
website, or added to any list of existing errata, under the Errata section of 
that title. Any existing errata can be viewed by selecting your title from 
http://www.packtpub.com/support.

Preface
[ 5 ]
Piracy
Piracy of copyrighted material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all 
media. At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. 
If you come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, 
please provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that 
we can pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected 
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with 
any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.


Downloading and Installing 
nopCommerce
nopCommerce is easy to obtain and easy to install. Whether you are a talented 
developer looking forward to highly customize your site, or you're a business owner 
who would just like to get their online store up and running fast, you'll find a flavor 
for you. nopCommerce can be downloaded as a ready to install e-commerce engine 
or as full source code ready to be modified. No matter which path you take, the 
end result is the same—a fully-featured e-commerce engine that will allow you to 
sell your products online and make money. This chapter will cover everything you 
need to know for downloading and installing nopCommerce. If you are interested 
in developing custom code, we'll also cover what prerequisites you will need and 
how to set up your development environment.
Prerequisites and requirements
nopCommerce has several requirements needed before you begin working with 
it. These requirements and prerequisites are different if you plan on performing 
custom development versus installing and using nopCommerce out of the box. 
The following list applies to versions of nopCommerce 2.0 through 2.8.
The following base components are required:
•	
Supported operating systems: Windows 7, Windows 8, Windows Server 
2008, and Windows Server 2012 (all with Internet Information Services (IIS) 
7.0 or above installed).
•	
Supported databases: Microsoft SQL Server 2005 or above, and Microsoft 
SQL Server Compact 4.0 or above.
•	
ASP.NET 4.5 with MVC 4.

Downloading and Installing nopCommerce
[ 8 ]
•	
Supported browsers: Microsoft Internet Explorer 6.0 or above, Mozilla Firefox 
2.0 or above, Google Chrome 1.0 or above, and Apple Safari 2.0 or above.
•	
FileZilla (or other FTP software): In order to upload your files to your 
hosting provider, you will need an FTP program to facilitate the transfer. 
You can download FileZilla from http://filezilla-project.org/.
•	
7-Zip (or other file archive software): When you download nopCommerce, 
it will be in a compressed archive that will need to be extracted. You can 
download 7-Zip at http://7-zip.org/.
If you plan to write custom code or modify the existing code, you will also need to 
install the following:
•	
Microsoft Visual Studio 2012 or above
•	
Microsoft SQL Server 2005 or above
Hosting providers
Whether you intend to use nopCommerce out of the box or you want to make 
changes to the code, eventually you will need to host your website so that the 
public can visit your site and buy your products! Hosting providers literally host 
your website and provide a way for users to get to your site. nopCommerce can be 
hosted with almost any provider that uses Windows-based servers.
Choosing a hosting provider is an important decision. There are a lot of factors that 
should be considered before selecting a provider. First and foremost, you'll need to 
ensure your provider offers Windows hosting and one of the supported operating 
systems and databases, and has ASP.NET 4.5 with MVC 4. In addition, the following 
factors should be considered:
•	
Uptime: A good provider should guarantee 99.9 percent uptime. Uptime 
simply means that your site will be up and running and available for 
users. If your site is consistently down or not available, you won't sell 
many products.
•	
Support: Look for providers who offer 24/7 technical support. Ideally, you 
want 24/7 phone support, but sometimes this can be hard to find. Look for 
a provider who offers phone, e-mail, and live chat support.
•	
Cost: For the most part, Windows hosting is relatively inexpensive. Choose 
a provider who offers annual or semi-annual discounts.
•	
Dedicated IP address: Most nopCommerce installations will require an SSL 
certificate as you will be processing credit cards. Check with your provider 
about the cost of a dedicated IP address for your domain, as it should not be 
a very high cost.

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
•	
Backups: Ensure your provider offers backups of your installation and 
database. This can either be automated backups or manual, but you will 
feel safer knowing your data has been backed up.
•	
Growth options: As your site gets more users and you make more sales, 
your site will need to grow as well. A good provider will offer options 
for growing your site, from more disk space to more database space. This 
would also include moving from a shared server to a dedicated server.
You can visit the nopCommerce website to view their list of Premium Partners. 
These are recommended hosting providers, all of which guarantee that 
nopCommerce can be installed and run on their servers.
Real world
Most providers offer shared hosting options at around 
the same price with 99.9 percent uptime. Because of this, 
support and growth options play a very important role in 
your decision. If your site goes down, you'll want to make 
sure that you can contact your provider immediately and 
get a response. Also, as your site grows you don't want to 
be locked into expensive upgrade options.
Setting up a basic development 
environment
A development environment is an area away from your public store where you 
can test out changes to your site. This is always a good idea if you are making user 
interface changes, code changes, or critical configuration changes. You can make 
these in your development environment without fear of affecting your public store 
or impacting users on your site. Once you are satisfied with the changes, you can 
then apply them to your public store.
A development environment is not needed to work with nopCommerce. You can 
instead opt to upload the files to your hosting provider and start using your site 
immediately. However, this is not recommended. There are a lot of settings and 
changes you will want to test before applying them to your public/production site.

Downloading and Installing nopCommerce
[ 10 ]
Installing Internet Information Services (IIS)
Your development system can utilize any of the supported operating systems. 
However, you will most likely need to install the Internet Information Services (IIS). 
IIS is a web server that is used by hosting providers to run websites. It is part of 
Windows and you can use it to run your nopCommerce website on your PC to 
help develop and customize it away from your public storefront.
To install IIS, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Start | Control Panel | Programs.
2.	 Click on Turn Windows features on or off.

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
3.	 Check the Internet Information Services checkbox. This will automatically 
check Web Management Tools and World Wide Web Services.
4.	 Click on OK. This will install IIS, after which you will need to restart 
your system.
Installing SQL Server and Visual Studio
nopCommerce requires Microsoft SQL Server, and if you plan to perform custom 
development, you will also need Visual Studio. Fortunately, Microsoft provides free 
Express versions of this software. These versions are not as feature-packed as some 
of their higher-end counter parts, but they are still very powerful products and will 
allow you to run and modify nopCommerce in your development environment.
•	
SQL Server Express 2012: This version of SQL Server is ideal for developing 
and powering web and small server applications. You can download this 
version of SQL Server from http://www.microsoft.com/sql.
•	
Visual Studio 2012 Express for Web: This version of Visual Studio is made for 
building web applications with the latest standards. You can download this 
version of Visual Studio from http://www.microsoft.com/visualstudio.
After downloading each of these products, run their installers, starting with 
SQL Server. After SQL Server is installed, install Visual Studio to complete 
your development environment.
These two products will also install the other pre-requisites needed for 
nopCommerce, namely ASP.NET 4.5 and MVC 4.
Downloading nopCommerce
You can download nopCommerce from the official site at 
http://www.nopcommerce.com. There are several options available 
when downloading nopCommerce. In order to determine which option to 
download, you need to decide how you will use it. The following options 
are available:
•	
Web (no source): This option is available for users who do not wish/need to 
develop any custom code. This is a pre-compiled version of nopCommerce 
that can simply be uploaded to your hosting provider and used immediately. 
With this option, users can still modify the look and feel or user interface 
(UI) of their site to suit their needs, but they do not have to worry 
about development.
www.allitebooks.com

Downloading and Installing nopCommerce
[ 12 ]
•	
Source code: This option contains a full Visual Studio solution. It is for users 
who wish to customize the code within nopCommerce. It contains all the 
source code used to develop nopCommerce and must be opened in Visual 
Studio. It also includes scripts to build and compile the solution to upload 
to your hosting provider.
•	
Upgrade script: The upgrade script option is for users who have a 
nopCommerce installation already in place. The script will upgrade your 
current installation to the latest version.
•	
Microsoft Web Platform Installer: The Web PI is a free tool from Microsoft 
that allows users to download software. It's a one-stop source for a wide 
variety of products, including nopCommerce, SQL Server Express, and 
Visual Studio Express. You can download nopCommerce using the 
Web PI directly from the nopCommerce site.
As you can see, nopCommerce can be deployed by a wide range of users with 
various skill sets. With each of these options, excluding the upgrade script, you can 
deploy nopCommerce to your development environment and your hosting provider.
Choose the option that you would like to download and click on the appropriate 
download link to begin your download. It is recommended that you create a new 
folder on your desktop to store your downloaded files for easy access.
nopCommerce will be downloaded in a compressed archive that will need to be 
extracted. At the time of writing, the archive is using RAR compression. If you have 
7-Zip or other file archive software, you can simply right-click on the file and choose 
to extract the files.

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
Real world
7-Zip can open many other types of file archives including ZIP, RAR, 
GZIP, and TAR. It's free to download and use.

Downloading and Installing nopCommerce
[ 14 ]
It is recommended that you choose the option that will create a new folder for 
you. In the case of 7-Zip, this is titled Extract to ''nopCommerce_2.80_NoSource''. 
Choosing this option creates a new folder alongside the downloaded archive.
No matter which version you download, you should now have a folder that contains 
all the files you'll be working on.
Uploading and installing
How to install nopCommerce will depend on which version you've downloaded. In 
each version, the steps are very similar, but we'll look at each one separately. We'll 
only be looking at two of the available options, namely Web (no source) and source 
code. The upgrade script option is outside the scope of this book, as it implies you 
already have a previous version of nopCommerce installed. Using the Web Platform 
Installer is a "point and click" guided installation that is self explanatory.
In most cases, you are going to use one of the two options we'll be looking at next.
For this book, I'll be using the local IIS server in my development environment for 
all the examples. This means you can simply copy and paste all the files needed to 
the local IIS folder located at C:\inetpub\wwwroot. If you are using a development 
environment, you can do the same. If you chose to deploy directly to your hosting 
provider, you can upload your files via FTP. Once you have your hosting provider 
set up, you can create an FTP login and password to access your provider with.
Before uploading, you will need to create your database. Work with your hosting 
provider to create your database and user account. You will need to supply this 
information when installing nopCommerce.

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
Web (no source)
Deploying the Web (no source) version of nopCommerce is fairly straightforward. 
Your hosting account should have a root folder where all your web application files 
will be uploaded. Using your FTP program, connect to your hosting provider and 
upload all the files from the nopCommerce_2.80_NoSource folder. If you are using 
a development environment, simply copy all of the files and paste them to your IIS 
folder located at C:\inetpub\wwwroot (choose Copy and Replace if existing files 
are present; this will ensure the new files are copied in but existing file permissions 
stay intact).
Once all the files are uploaded, open a web browser and navigate to the following 
URL: http://www.YOURDOMAINNAME.com/install (where YOURDOMAINNAME is the 
domain name you selected and attached to your hosting account). If you are using a 
development environment, navigate to http://localhost/install.

Downloading and Installing nopCommerce
[ 16 ]
Source code
The Source code version of nopCommerce comes with a complete Visual Studio 
solution as well as scripts to build and package the website for deployment. Once 
you have extracted all the source files, you can run the included Deploy.bat file.
Double-click on the Deploy.bat file to start the process. This file will build the 
website and create a new folder called Deployable, which is located in the same 
location. Inside this new folder will be a folder titled nop_2.80, which will contain 
all the files to upload.
Visual Studio is required to run the Deploy.bat file. Visual 
Studio is also needed to build and compile the source code into 
a deployable format.
Your hosting account should have a root folder where all your web application 
files will be uploaded. Using your FTP program, connect to your hosting provider 
and upload all the files from the Deployable/nop_2.80 folder. If you are using a 
development environment, simply copy all of the files and paste them to your IIS folder 
located at C:\inetpub\wwwroot (choose Copy and Replace if existing files are present; 
this will ensure the new files are copied in but existing file permissions stay intact).

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
Once all the files are uploaded, open a web browser and navigate to the 
following URL:
http://www.YOURDOMAINNAME.com/install
Here, YOURDOMAINNAME is the domain name you chose and attached to your 
hosting account. If you are using a development environment, navigate to 
http://localhost/install.
Real world
When uploading your site to your hosting provider, there are some 
folders you may not want to upload. For instance, the Content 
folder holds all the product images that nopCommerce displays to 
users. These images are generated by the system and may be held 
in the Content folder. If you upload your local copy, you may 
overwrite images you don't mean to.

Downloading and Installing nopCommerce
[ 18 ]
Installation
Navigating to the installation page of your nopCommerce site will launch the 
installation process. This is a guided installation, and you will need to provide 
some information for the install to successfully complete.
You'll need to enter the following details:
•	
Admin user e-mail: This is the e-mail address for the first admin of the site.
•	
Admin password: You will need to supply a password for the admin account.

Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
•	
Create sample data: Check this box if you would like sample products to be 
created. This is recommended so you can start working with your site before 
adding any of your own products. You can always delete these items later, or 
unpublish them so they no longer appear on your site.
•	
Database Information: Here you can select either SQL Server Compact or 
SQL Server. It is recommended to use a full SQL Server product, not the 
Compact edition.
•	
Create database if doesn't exist: It is recommended that you create your 
database and database user beforehand to ensure a successful installation. 
Simply create a database instance and add the database user to it. The 
installation process will create all the tables, stored procedures, and so on.
•	
SQL Server name: This is the IP, URL, or server name for your database. 
You will get your SQL Server name from your hosting provider.
•	
Database name: This is the name of the database used by nopCommerce. 
If you opted to create your database ahead of time, use the name you gave 
your database here.
•	
Use SQL Server account/Use integrated Windows authentication: If you 
are installing at a hosting provider, you can use your SQL Server account 
and supply the credentials you created with your database. If you are using 
a development environment, you can select Windows authentication. If you 
are using Windows authentication, the account hosting the application pool 
in IIS must be a user in the database.
•	
Specify Custom SQL Server collation: This is an advanced setting and 
should be left unchecked.
After all the required information has been provided, click on Install. You will be 
presented with the installation progress screen.

Downloading and Installing nopCommerce
[ 20 ]
Once the installation is complete, you will be presented with the homepage of your 
new storefront.
Setting up file permissions
nopCommerce requires write permissions for various files and folders. Write 
permissions allow nopCommerce to modify these files as you make changes to the 
environment. During the installation process, permissions will be validated for these 
items. If you do not have appropriate permissions set up, a warning message will be 
displayed with items that need to be configured.
The following folders and files need write permissions:
•	
Folders:
°°
App_Data
°°
Bin
°°
Content (all child folders as well)
°°
Plugins
°°
Plugins\Bin

Chapter 1
[ 21 ]
•	
Files:
°°
Global.asax
°°
Web.config
If you find that you need permissions modified, please check with your hosting 
provider to help you modify these folders and files. Some providers allow you 
to modify permissions from your hosting control panel, while others will require 
technical support in order to modify these for you.
If you are deploying to a development environment, this should not be an issue, 
as you should already have appropriate permissions.
Summary
In this chapter, you were introduced to the various download options for 
nopCommerce as well as its prerequisites and requirements. You also learned about 
how to set up your development environment if you wanted to perform any custom 
development. You then learned how to install nopCommerce and how to set the 
necessary permissions. In the next chapter, you'll explore the storefront and dig 
into the customer experience.
www.allitebooks.com


The Public-facing Storefront
The public-facing storefront of nopCommerce is your e-commerce store. It is the 
site where customers will come from the Web to learn about your company, browse 
your products, place items in the shopping cart, and if all goes well, buy stuff! 
The storefront is made up of many components. This chapter will cover the most 
important parts and, generally speaking, the most frequently used parts of your 
website. With any e-commerce site, there are certain pages and areas where 
customers will spend the majority of their time, namely product pages, the shopping 
cart, and the checkout. However, there are a lot of other pages that customers will 
use, and it's important that you, the store owner, are very familiar with all the pages 
in your site. Just as a ship captain will know every bolt and weld of their ship, you 
should know every page your customers may visit. Even though we may only be 
covering the most viewed pages in this chapter, you should plan to take the time to 
thoroughly navigate your site just as any customer would.
All examples in this chapter are taken from a base nopCommerce 
installation that used the Create sample data option during the 
install process.

The Public-facing Storefront
[ 24 ]
General site layout and overview
When customers navigate to your store, they will be presented with the homepage. 
The homepage is where we'll begin to review the site layout and structure.
1.	 Logo: This is your store logo. As with just about every e-commerce site, 
this serves as a link back to your homepage.

Chapter 2
[ 25 ]
2.	 Header links: The toolbar holds some of the most frequently used links, 
such as Shopping cart, Wishlist, and Account. These links are very customer 
focused, as this area will also show the customer's logged in status once they 
are registered with your site.
3.	 Header menu: The menu holds various links to other important pages, 
such as New products, Search, and Contact us. It also contains the link 
to the built-in blog site.
4.	 Left-side menu: The left-side menu serves as a primary navigation area. It 
contains the Categories and Manufacturers links as well as Tags and Polls.
5.	 Center: This area is the main content of the site. It will hold category and 
product information, as well as the main content of the homepage.
6.	 Right-side menu: The right-side menu holds links to other ancillary pages 
in your site, such as Contact us, About us, and News. It also holds the 
Newsletter signup widget.
7.	 Footer: The footer holds the copyright information and the Powered by 
nopCommerce license tag.
The naming conventions used for these areas are driven by the 
Cascading Style Sheet (CSS) definitions. For instance, if you look 
at the CSS for the Header links area, you will see a definition of 
header-links.
nopCommerce uses layouts to define the overall site structure. A layout is a type 
of page used in ASP.NET MVC to define a common site template, which is then 
inherited across all the other pages on your site. In nopCommerce, there are several 
different layout pages used throughout the site. There are two main layout pages 
that define the core structure:
•	
Root head: This is the base layout page. It contains the header of the HTML 
that is generated and is responsible for loading all the CSS and JavaScript 
files needed for the site.
•	
Root: This layout is responsible for loading the header, footer, and contains 
the Master Wrapper, which contains all the other content of the page.

The Public-facing Storefront
[ 26 ]
These two layouts are common for all pages within nopCommerce, which means 
every page in the site will display the logo, header links, header menu, and footer. 
They form the foundation of the site structure. The site pages themselves will utilize 
one of three other layouts that determine the structure inside the Master Wrapper:
•	
Three-column: The three-column layout is what the nopCommerce 
homepage utilizes. It includes the right side, left side, and center areas. 
This layout is used primarily on the homepage.
•	
Two-column: This is the most common layout that customers will encounter. 
It includes the left side and center areas. This layout is used on all category 
and product pages as well as all the ancillary pages.
•	
One-column: This layout is used in the shopping cart and checkout pages. 
It includes the center area only.
Changing the layout page used by certain pages requires changing the code. For 
instance, if we open the product page in Visual Studio, we can see the layout page 
being used:
As you can see, the layout defined for this page is _ColumnsTwo.cshtml, the 
two-column layout. You can change the layout used by updating this property, 
for instance, to _ColumnsThree.cshtml, to use the three-column layout.

Chapter 2
[ 27 ]
Category and manufacturer pages
When adding new products to the site, you can specify their category and 
manufacturer. These groupings allow customers to search for products on 
your site more easily.
Category pages display a collection of products that you have grouped under 
that category. For instance, all books are grouped under the category Books. 
A customer can navigate to any category located in the left-side area. Once a 
customer navigates to a particular category, that category link will become bold to 
indicate to the customer where they currently are. The breadcrumb will also update 
with the current location.

The Public-facing Storefront
[ 28 ]
Categories may also have subcategories to further group your products. For 
instance, a Computers category may have subcategories that include Desktops, 
Laptops, and Accessories. If a category has subcategories, the customer will be 
presented with a page displaying the subcategories. In addition, the left-side 
area will expand to show the subcategories under the parent category.
Clicking on a subcategory on this page will take the customer to a page displaying 
all the products for that particular subcategory. The breadcrumb will also update to 
reflect that the customer is in a subcategory.

Chapter 2
[ 29 ]
Manufacturer pages behave similarly. All products grouped under a certain 
manufacturer can be displayed together. Customers can navigate to a manufacturer 
page from the left-side area. Clicking on a particular manufacturer name will display 
all the products for that manufacturer. As with the category pages, the link will 
become bold, but there is no breadcrumb on these pages. This is replaced with the 
manufacturer name instead.

The Public-facing Storefront
[ 30 ]
Product pages
Product pages are the heart and soul of your site. This is where the majority of a 
customer's time is spent. Your site will typically have more product pages than any 
other type of page. Because of this, product pages have a lot of components to them.
1.	 Product pictures: Product pictures make up a good portion of the product 
page. You can add multiple pictures to products, which show up as 
thumbnail images under the main picture. Clicking the thumbnail image 
will open a modal window allowing the customer to scroll through all the 
available images.
2.	 Product name: This is the name of the product and it is displayed on the 
product page, category pages, search results, and so on. It will be shown 
anywhere the product is referenced in the site.

Chapter 2
[ 31 ]
3.	 Short description: The product short description is shown on the product 
page directly underneath the product name. It's meant to be a quick 
description of the product that gives the most important information.
4.	 Display stock availability: You have the option to display stock availability 
of products when tracking their inventory, by their general availability or the 
actual stock count. You can also choose not to show this at all, for instance, 
for drop ship items. These settings can be managed in the administration site.
5.	 Review and rate link: Customers can review products on your site by 
clicking on this link. Customers will be directed to a review page where a 
written review and a rating can be given. The ratings range from 1 to 5 stars. 
By default, all reviews must be approved by a site administrator before 
they will appear on the product page. This can be changed in the 
administration site.
6.	 Price: This is the product price. You can also define sale prices for your 
products. If you give a product a sale price, the old price will be shown 
in red with a strike through and the sale price will be displayed.
7.	 Quantity: Customers can enter the product quantity they wish to purchase 
using this textbox. The default value is 1. If the customer requests more 
quantity than is currently available, they will be notified that the quantity 
exceeds the on-hand count, which will be displayed to them.
www.allitebooks.com

The Public-facing Storefront
[ 32 ]
8.	 Add to cart: Clicking on this button will add the product to the customer's 
shopping cart. Once customers click on the Add to Cart button, they will be 
presented with a spinning wheel notification, after which they are notified 
if the item was successfully added to their cart via the notification bar that 
appears at the top of the product page.
9.	 Add to wishlist: Customers can add products to their wishlist by clicking on 
this button. The wishlist is simply a set of items the customer would like to 
keep track of but not purchased right away. Once products are placed in the 
wishlist, a customer can navigate to the Wishlist page by clicking the link in 
the Header Links area at the top of the page. The Wishlist page also includes 
the Email a friend functionality, as well as a public URL you can share 
with friends.
10.	 Email a Friend: Customers can e-mail a friend a link to any product on 
your site. Clicking on this button will direct customers to the Email a friend 
page where they can provide an e-mail address for their friend as well as a 
personal message. By default, only registered customers are allowed to use 
this feature. This can be changed in the administration site.

Chapter 2
[ 33 ]
11.	 Add to compare list: Clicking on this button will add the current product 
to the Compare products list and will then direct customers to that page. 
This allows customers to compare various attributes of products on a single 
page. To compare multiple products, customers must navigate to each 
product page and click on the Add to compare list button. Customers can 
also navigate directly to the Compare products page from the homepage by 
clicking on the Compare product list link in the information area.
12.	 Add this: This area allows customers to share the product page with 
customers via social media channels, such as Facebook, Twitter, and 
LinkedIn. This is powered by the Add this widget (http://www.addthis.
com). This widget can be modified in the administration site, as well as 
replaced with other social media widgets from other companies.
13.	 Full description: This is the full and complete product description. This 
description is generally longer and much more detailed. This area supports 
full HTML when editing in the administration site so that you can include 
styling such as bulleted lists using a WYSIWYG editor.

The Public-facing Storefront
[ 34 ]
14.	 Product tags: Each product can have tags associated with it. These tags show 
up on each product as well as in the Popular Tags area on the homepage. 
It's a way to further group certain products together based on their tags. 
For instance, you could group laptops together based on whether they offer 
a backlit keyboard. This feature is not enough to warrant a category or 
subcategory, but may be important to your customers. This way they could 
click on a backlit keyboard tag to see all the products that have been tagged 
with this word.
15.	 Related products: Related products could be considered as cross sells. 
However, do not confuse the two. Related products are specific products 
that you want to show with a particular product. You can add and edit these 
by product in the administration site. You can also add cross sells, but these 
products will show up in the shopping cart rather than on the product page.
The naming conventions used for these areas are driven by how 
these areas are defined in the administration site. For instance, 
when adding or editing a product, you will see the same naming 
conventions used, such as Short Description, Full Description, 
and so on.
Searching for products
Customers can search your site in two ways—by either clicking the Search link in the 
header menu or by using the search textbox under the Header Links area.
The Search textbox features an auto-complete function, which will show up the 
product names that match with what the customer is typing. For instance, if we type 
canon into the search box, a list of product names that match canon will be shown in 
the drop-down list.

Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
Clicking on any of the results in the drop-down list will take you directly to the 
product page. Alternatively, the customer can click the Search button and will 
be directed to a search results page that will display more information about 
each product.
On the search results page, there is an Advanced Search checkbox. By clicking on 
this, the customer will be presented with further options to refine their search, such 
as Category, Manufacturer, Price Range, as well as the ability to search product 
descriptions in addition to the product names.
Shopping cart
When a customer clicks on the Add to cart button on the product page, the site 
will add that product in the quantity selected to the shopping cart. nopCommerce 
technically has two shopping carts, namely the mini shopping cart and the 
shopping cart.

The Public-facing Storefront
[ 36 ]
The mini shopping cart is visible when a customer hovers over the Shopping cart 
link located in the Header Links area. It shows the customer items that are currently 
in the shopping cart, as well as the sub-total cost for those items. You can configure 
how many items to display in the mini shopping cart in the administration site. From 
the mini shopping cart, the customer can go to the shopping cart page or begin the 
checkout process.
The shopping cart on the other hand is a full page that basically kicks off the 
checkout process. As you'll see, it has quite a few more features than the mini 
shopping cart.

Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
1.	 Checkout progress: This progress bar indicates to the customer where they 
are in the checkout process.
2.	 Cart items: All the items in the shopping cart will be listed in this area 
along with the quantity placed in the cart, the product price, and a total for 
each line item. Customers can remove items from the cart by checking the 
checkbox next to the item and clicking on the Update shopping cart button. 
Customers can also update the quantities in the same way, by changing the 
number in the Qty textbox.

The Public-facing Storefront
[ 38 ]
3.	 Update shopping cart: Clicking on this button will update the shopping cart 
with any changes entered in the Cart items area.
4.	 Continue shopping: Clicking on this button will direct customers back to the 
homepage of your site.
5.	 Discount Code: This is where customers can enter a coupon or discount 
codes that you have set up for your store.
6.	 Gift Cards: Gift cards can be redeemed in this area.
7.	 Estimate Shipping: Customers can get estimated shipping rates using this 
area. By default, this option is enabled, but this widget may not always show 
in the shopping cart. For instance, if you choose Fixed Rate shipping, the 
Estimate Shipping area will not display.
8.	 Cross sells: Individual products can have cross sells attached to them. If a 
product in the shopping cart has cross-sell products attached, they will be 
displayed here.
Checkout and order details
By default, nopCommerce utilizes a one-page checkout process. Basically, this means 
the customer will not leave the page during checkout, and the various sections of the 
checkout page will update as the customer completes them. This is a more modern 
checkout process, and nopCommerce handles it well.

Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
The Billing Address and Shipping Address sections in these 
examples show a drop-down list with addresses pre-filled. This is 
because this checkout is taking place with a registered customer 
who is logged in to the site. If no addresses exist for the current 
customer checking out, then the appropriate form fields will be 
displayed to capture address information.
If you prefer, you can change this in the administration site, and instead make the 
site use an individual page for each checkout step. However, this book will only 
cover the one page checkout process.
The checkout process is split into the following six sections:
•	
Billing Address: This is the billing address for the customer. This is typically 
the billing address for a credit card if one is being used during checkout.
•	
Shipping Address: This is the delivery address for the customer.

The Public-facing Storefront
[ 40 ]
•	
Shipping Method: Here customers can select the shipping method they wish 
to use. These methods are configurable in the administration site, including 
the methods you wish to offer and how much you wish to charge.
•	
Payment Method: Customers can select their preferred payment method 
in this step. By default, several payment options are available, but these are 
configurable in the administration site. In most cases, your site will offer 
credit card as the only payment option.
•	
Payment Information: This section is where your customer will enter their 
payment information. This section will change based on which payment 
method the customer chose. For instance, credit card fields will be displayed 
for a credit card payment method, whereas Purchase Order will show a 
textbox to capture a single PO number.

Chapter 2
[ 41 ]
•	
Confirm Order: This section will display all the order details to the customer, 
including displaying the items they are ordering, shipping and billing 
information, and totals. At the bottom of this section is the Confirm button. 
The order is processed after the customer clicks on the Confirm button.
www.allitebooks.com

The Public-facing Storefront
[ 42 ]
•	
Order Details: Once the customer confirms the order, it is processed by the 
site and the order details page is displayed.
•	
Order information: This is a very basic page that displays a confirmation to 
the customer that the order was successfully processed. It also displays a link 
to view the order details, where the customer can also print a copy of their 
receipt. An e-mail receipt is also generated at this point and mailed to 
the customer.
When beginning the checkout process, the customer has the option to create an 
account or check out as a guest. If they create an account, customers can view all 
their past orders by logging in to your store.

Chapter 2
[ 43 ]
Summary
In this chapter, you took a deep dive into the storefront and the customer experience. 
You got an overview of the general store layouts and how they are used throughout 
the site. You learned about category and manufacturer pages and got an in-depth 
view of the product pages. You also saw how customers will search for products 
on your site, as well as how they can add them to the shopping cart. Finally, you 
learned how the one-page checkout process works in nopCommerce and saw the 
order confirmation details your customers will receive.
In the next chapter you'll learn about the administration site, where you'll configure 
your store and set up products.


The Administration Site
The administration site is where you, the storeowner, will spend the majority of 
your time. Just about every aspect of your store can be managed from this site. This 
is where you will create and manage your products, process orders, and update 
settings throughout the store. There are hundreds of settings in the administration 
site, and at first it can seem a little overwhelming. As with the public-facing 
storefront, you should take the time to educate yourself and investigate everything 
in the administration site. This chapter will cover some of the more important areas 
of the site, mostly those related to selling products!
All examples in this chapter are taken from a base nopCommerce 
installation that used the Create sample data option during the 
installation process. This can be an invaluable tool for experimenting with 
your site, as the sample products demonstrate many different product 
types and configurations. I always recommend using this feature as these 
sample products can easily be deleted after you have created your site.
How to access and overview
Accessing the administration site is something that only administrators can do. 
When you install nopCommerce, you are required to create the first administrator 
account. By default, this account is admin@yourstore.com, which is prefilled when 
you run the installation process. However, no matter which account you set up 
during installation, there will be a single administrator account when you are done.

The Administration Site
[ 46 ]
You can add as many administrator accounts as you like; however, it's best practice 
to keep the number of administrators small to help control your site. Once someone 
is added to the administrator list, they can access the administration site by simply 
logging in to the site. Once you are logged in, if you are an administrator, you will 
be having a link at the very top of the screen titled Administration, as shown here:
Clicking this link will take you to the administration site and the homepage. 
Let's review the components of the administration site:
•	
Public store (1): Clicking this link will simply open the public storefront.
•	
Clear cache (2): When nopCommerce launches for the first time, it will cache 
a lot of content from the database to increase site performance. A cache stores 
recently-used information in a place where it can be accessed extremely 
quickly, without accessing the database each time. There are some settings 
that you can change in the administration site that are cached. If you make a 
change and it does not appear immediately, then you may need to clear the 
cache. Clicking this link will clear the cache for the site.
•	
Restart application (3): Clicking this link will restart nopCommerce. It 
will clear the cache and recycle the application pool in IIS. There may be 
instances where new code is deployed, perhaps a plugin, after which you 
may be required to restart the application. Please note, this will interrupt the 
service of the site and customers may experience some downtime during this 
operation, usually lasting only a few minutes.

Chapter 3
[ 47 ]
•	
The menu bar (4): The menu in the administration site gives you access to all 
of the areas needed to manage the site:
°°
Dashboard (a): This is a link back to the dashboard home page in the 
administration site.
°°
Catalog (b): This area allows you to manage categories, 
manufacturers, products, and product attributes. This is where you 
will essentially define the structure of your site with categories and 
where you'll load new products for sale on the site.
°°
Sales (c): The Sales area allows you to manage orders, shipping, gift 
cards, current shopping carts, and more. Once orders are placed, this 
is where you will go to process and ship them.
°°
Customers (d): You can manage your customers via this area. This 
includes adding and reporting customers, as well as maintaining 
your administrator list.
°°
Promotions (e): Under Promotions you can manage your site's 
discounts, affiliates, and newsletter subscriptions. Site discounts 
include promotion codes as well as global discounts that do not 
require codes.
°°
Content Management (f): This area is where you can manage 
the built-in blog and forums, as well as the topics (pages) and 
message templates. The two main areas here are topics and message 
templates. Topics are the ancillary pages on your site such as About 
Us or Contact Us. Message templates are the outbound e-mails that 
are generated by the site.
°°
Configuration (g): This is quite a large area, and will be covered in 
more detail in Chapter 4, Configuring the Store. This area allows you to 
configure most aspects of your site, including the store name, URL, 
themes, payment methods, shipping methods, tax settings, and so on. 
These settings make up the bulk of configuring your site. You should 
plan to spend a lot of time exploring this area to learn all about your 
available configuration options.
°°
System (h): This area holds information about the site, the server 
hosting the site, logs, scheduled tasks, and the message queue. The 
log is an important area to keep your eye on because it will display 
any site errors as they occur.
°°
Help (i): This menu option contains links back to the nopCommerce 
site, including a link to the forums where you can ask questions to 
other nopCommerce users.

The Administration Site
[ 48 ]
The home page of the administration site is the dashboard. This page displays the 
current store statistics, including a summary of orders, registered customers, and 
best-selling products. The dashboard, shown in the following screenshot, is a page 
you'll look forward to viewing each day as your site grows:
Follow along to know more about the dashboard:
•	
Order totals: This grid is a summary of all the orders customers have placed 
on your site. It includes numbers from the current day, the current week, the 
current month, the current year, and all time. It also breaks the orders out 
by their status, including Pending, Processing, Complete, and Cancelled. 
Depending on how you have your site configured, you may not have data 
for some of these statuses. For instance, if you are processing orders 
using credit cards and have the payment method set up to authorize and 
capture at the same time, you would only have data in the Complete and 
Cancelled statuses.
•	
Incomplete orders: This grid shows all the orders that are incomplete. This 
may include unpaid, not yet shipped, or incomplete orders. As with Order 
totals, the data that is displayed here will be determined by how your site 
is configured.

Chapter 3
[ 49 ]
•	
Registered customers: This grid shows the count of all the customers who 
have registered on your site. This includes counts for the last 7 days, the 
last 14 days, the last month, and the last year. In your initial installation, 
you will see a single user that has registered; this is the base administrator 
account. These numbers will only be for registered customers, so if you 
have Anonymous Checkout enabled, those customers will not show up 
in these counts.
•	
Bestsellers by quantity: This grid will list the products that are your 
bestsellers by how many units you've sold.
•	
Bestsellers by amount: This grid will list the products that are your 
bestsellers by the total amount of dollars.
As you can see, the dashboard has a lot of great information that provides a quick 
overview of how your store is performing.
Creating and managing categories
Before you create any products, you'll want to create some categories for those 
products to be grouped under. To view your current categories, you can navigate to 
the Categories section from the menu bar (Catalog | Categories | List or Catalog | 
Categories | Tree View).
There are two options available to view your current categories:
•	
List: This view will display all the categories you have set up as well as all 
the subcategories in the default view. This grid also displays whether the 
category is published and its display order. You can edit any category in 
the list by clicking on the Edit link, as shown in the following screenshot:

The Administration Site
[ 50 ]
•	
Tree View: This gives you a hierarchal look at your current categories. 
Each main category is listed, and if subcategories are present, an arrow 
icon is shown. Clicking on the arrow will expand the list and show the 
subcategories. This can be a helpful view if you are building out new 
categories that are not yet published, as it will it show you how the 
navigation on the site will be laid out. Clicking on any of the categories 
will bring up the edit screen.
To create new categories, simply click on the Add New button, which is located on 
either view in the upper-right corner of the screen. This will bring you to the Add a 
New Category page:

Chapter 3
[ 51 ]
Here is a detailed explanation of this page:
•	
Name: The category name will appear in the navigation as well as in other 
places throughout the site. It should be short and descriptive of the category.
•	
Description: This is a full description of the category and can include HTML 
content. This content will be shown at the top of the category page before 
any products. If you do not wish to show any content here, you can leave 
the description blank.
•	
Category template: The base installation of nopCommerce only includes 
one category template. But if you install or develop more templates, you 
can choose them here.
•	
Picture: This is a picture for the category. If this category is marked as 
Show on home page, this image will be used. When you have subcategories, 
navigating to the main or parent category will display a page with all the 
subcategories listed along with the image that is uploaded here. For instance, 
in the following screenshot, the Computers category will display images for 
all the subcategories grouped within it:
•	
Parent category: If the category you are creating is a subcategory, you can 
select the parent category here.
www.allitebooks.com

The Administration Site
[ 52 ]
•	
Price ranges: To show a price range filter on the category page, you can 
supply values here. Values must be separated by semicolons and must 
include a dash to specify the range. A dash with no value in front of it 
produces an Under option, and a dash with no value after it produces an 
Over option. For instance, -25;25-50;50-; will produce the options shown in 
the following screenshot:
•	
Show on home page: Checking this box will make the category appear on 
the home page. The category picture will be used as a link to the category.
•	
Published: Published indicates if this category should appear on the site. If 
this is checked, the category will appear in the navigation. You can uncheck 
this to effectively hide it from customers. This can be useful when creating 
new categories or if you have seasonal categories that should not appear all 
year long.
•	
Display order: This is the order in which the categories will appear in 
the navigation.
There are also other tabs on this page that allow you to control other aspects of 
the category:
•	
SEO: You can specify metadata information for the category page, which 
is used by search engines. You can also set the page size for the category 
pages here.
•	
Products: From here you can manage which products appear under a certain 
category. You can also place products into categories from the product 
administration screens, but this tab will display a grid of all the products 
currently grouped under the category.
•	
Discounts: If you have discounts set up that apply to categories, you can 
map them here. Before any discounts show up in this tab, they first must be 
created and scoped to apply to categories.
•	
ACL: The Access Control List (ACL) allows you to specify if this category 
should display to everyone who visits the site, or instead just to specific 
groups. For instance, you could specify a category-only display for 
administrators, effectively hiding it from other customers on your site.

Chapter 3
[ 53 ]
Creating and managing manufacturers
You can also group products by manufacturers, allowing your customers to view 
all the products by certain brands. To view your current manufacturers, you can 
navigate to Catalog | Manufacturers from the menu bar:
This grid will display all the current manufacturers. The grid also displays whether 
the manufacturer is published and its display order. You can edit any category in the 
list by clicking on the Edit link.
To add a new manufacturer, click on the Add New button at the top-right corner of 
the page. This will bring up the Add a New Manufacturer page.
The layout of the manufacturer's page is identical to the Category page. All the 
same options appear and you will manage manufacturers in the exact same way. 
The only difference between these two is how they are displayed to the customer 
on the storefront.
Creating and managing products
Managing your products is a big part of running your storefront. Products have a 
lot of properties to configure and how you set them up will depend on a number of 
things. Before we begin, we need to explore the concept of product variants.
Every product you set up to sell will have at least one product variant. You can 
think of these in the terms of parent and child relationships. Each product will have 
a number of base properties that are needed to list the item for sale. These include 
things such as name, description, category, manufacturer, and so on. Product 
variants are different variations of the base product that include more detailed 
properties such as images, cost, price, and so on.

The Administration Site
[ 54 ]
The easiest way to think about products and product variants is with an example. 
Let's say you have a t-shirt you want to sell. The t-shirt comes in many different 
colors, and perhaps some of those colors cost more to manufacture. In this scenario, 
you can set up a base t-shirt product with properties that are the same for all the 
t-shirts regardless of the color. Then you would create a product variant for each 
t-shirt color under the parent item. On the site, the customer would see the base 
parent product and underneath would be the product variants to choose from.
You do not have to have multiple product variants. If you are creating a product 
with no variants, it will still have one variant. This is called a single product variant, 
as all products must have at least one product and one product variant. Looking 
back at the t-shirt example, you could be selling band t-shirts, in which case you 
would only need one product variant as the logo and colors would be different for 
each shirt.
You have several options to help you manage your products. To view these options, 
you can navigate to the category's section from Catalog | Products. Under the 
products' fly-out menu, you have the following options:
•	
Manage Products: This page will display all the products you have set up on 
your site. You can filter these by category, manufacturer, product name, and 
so on. Clicking on the Edit link takes you to the edit product page.
•	
Bulk Edit Product Variants: You can perform bulk edits on your product 
variants from this page. All your product variants are listed in the grid and 
you can click into the grid to make edits.
•	
Product Reviews: This page will display all the product reviews that have 
been submitted via your product pages. From here you can approve, edit, or 
disapprove any reviews you had previously approved.
•	
Product Tags: This page will display a grid of all the current product tags 
that are available to tag with. It will also display the number of products that 
are currently tagged with each tag and allow you to edit the tag or delete it.
•	
Low Stock Report: If you are tracking inventory on your products, this grid 
will list any items that have reached a zero stock quantity. You can also 
configure the product to e-mail the site administrator if stock gets below a 
certain amount.
To add new products, navigate to Catalog | Products | Manage Products. On the 
Manage Products page, click on the Add New button. This will bring you to the Add 
a New Product page:

Chapter 3
[ 55 ]
Read on to learn more about the different tabs in this page:
•	
Product name: This is the product name and will display whenever the 
product is shown, such as product page, category page, search results, 
shopping cart, and so on.
•	
Short description: The product short description is shown on the product 
page directly underneath the product name. It's meant to be a quick 
description of the product that gives the most important information. 
The short description is also sent as part of the Email a Friend message.

The Administration Site
[ 56 ]
•	
Full description: This is the full and complete product description. This 
description is generally longer and much more detailed. This area supports 
full HTML when editing in the administration site, so you can include 
styling, such as bulleted lists, using the WYSIWYG editor.
•	
Admin comment: This is simply a comment you may want to attach to this 
product. It will not be displayed to the customer and is for internal use only.
•	
Product template: These are the following two options for the 
product template:
°°
Variants in Grid: If your product has multiple variants, this template 
should be selected. Variants will display under the product's full 
description in a list, and this is where customers will add the product 
to their cart.
°°
Single Product Variant: If you only have a single variant, this 
template will display an Add to Cart button and no other variants 
will be displayed.
•	
Show on home page: Check this box to have this product displayed on the 
home page of the site.
•	
Published: Published indicates if this product should appear on the site. 
You can uncheck this to effectively hide it from customers. This should be 
unchecked when creating new products until you have all your product 
information loaded and it is ready to sell.
•	
Allow customer reviews: You can decide to allow customer reviews at the 
product level. Check this box if you want to allow reviews to be submitted 
for this product.
•	
Product tags: Each product can have tags associated with it. These tags 
show up on each product as well as in the Popular Tags area on the home 
page. It's a way to further group certain products together based on their 
tags. For instance, you could group laptops together based on whether they 
offer a backlit keyboard. This feature is not enough to warrant a category or 
subcategory, but may be important to your customers. This way, they could 
click a backlit keyboard tag to see all the products that have been tagged 
with this word.

Chapter 3
[ 57 ]
There are also other tabs on this page that allow you to control other aspects of 
the product:
•	
SEO: You can specify metadata information for the product page, which is 
used by search engines. The most important property here is Search Engine 
Friendly Page Name. With this property you can control how your product 
page URL is crafted. So, rather than a cryptic URL with pid=123, where PID 
is the product number, you can craft human-readable URLs with product 
information in them. This also helps with search engine results, as the URL 
has relevant information in it.
•	
Default product variant info: When you create a new product, you are 
required to create the first default product variant for this new product. This 
first product variant will need more setup after you create the product, but 
the majority of the information can be supplied here. This will be discussed 
in further detail shortly.
•	
Category mappings: You can map this product to one or many categories in 
this tab.
•	
Manufacturer mappings: You can map this product to one or many 
manufacturers in this tab, although it will most likely only have one 
manufacturer.
•	
Related products: You can assign related products to this product here. 
These related items will display on the product page under the Related 
Products heading.
•	
Cross sells: Cross sells appear in the shopping cart under the Based on your 
selection, you may be interested in the following items heading. Choose 
these items carefully, as you do not want to clutter the shopping cart with a 
lot of extra items.
•	
Pictures: You can add multiple images to each product. This tab allows you 
to manage all the images you have uploaded for this product, including the 
order in which they appear.
•	
Specification attributes: You can set up and use product specification 
attributes for products. These are usually property descriptions about the 
product, for example: CPU type, memory size, hard drive capacity, and so 
on. If you apply these to a product, they will display as a grid under the full 
description on the product page.

The Administration Site
[ 58 ]
•	
ACL: This tab allows you to specify if this product should display to 
everyone who visits the site or just to specific groups. For instance, you could 
specify a product-only display for administrators, effectively hiding it from 
other customers on your site.
The majority of the settings under the tabs cannot be used until you save 
the product for the first time. This is because the product must be created 
before you can assign additional properties to it, such as category and 
manufacturer. You can click on the Save and Continue Edit button at any 
time to save the product and keep working on it.
When creating a new product, don't worry too much about filling out the default 
product variant. After you save the product, the Default product variant info tab 
becomes the Product variants tab. Under this tab is a grid that lists all your variants. 
You can edit any variant here or add new ones. You also get more properties after 
you have a default variant saved.
Clicking on the Edit link in the grid will bring up the Edit Product Variant For 
Product page. If you would like to add a new variant, simply click on the Add 
a New Product Variant button.
The Add New/Edit Product Variant For Product page is quite large and has many 
components. Let's take a look at this page in parts to make it easier to cover.
Other properties may appear here depending on your product setup. 
The most common properties are covered in this chapter.

Chapter 3
[ 59 ]
•	
ID: This is the system-generated variant ID.
•	
Name: This is the name of the variant. If you are using single product 
variants, you do not need to fill this out. It's more important when you have 
multiple variants. Single product variants will use the parent product name.
•	
Description: This is the description of the variant.
•	
Sku: The SKU is an internal tracking number for this product. If you require 
SKUs for your product management, input it here.
•	
Picture: You can upload a picture that is unique to this variant. The parent 
product will have its own pictures, and you can use this picture to show 
differences in the variant. It will display in the variant grid if the product 
has multiple variants.
•	
Admin comment: This is simply a comment you may want to attach to this 
product. It will not be displayed to the customer and is for internal use only.
•	
Manufacturer part number: If this product has a manufacturer part number, 
you can input it here.

The Administration Site
[ 60 ]
•	
GITN: This is where you would input a UPC, ISBN, EAN, JAN, and so on.
•	
Price: This is the retail price of the product.
•	
Old price: Using the Old price property, you can put products on sale. 
You can enter the sale price into the Price textbox and the original price into 
the Old Price textbox. This will cause the site to render the old price with a 
strikethrough and the price in red.
•	
Product cost: This is your cost to purchase the product. It is for internal use 
only and is not shown to the customer.
•	
Special price: You can enter special prices for products. This is different 
from a sale price as it's not rendered in red along with the original price. 
It will render as a normal price, but you can attach dates to it and allow 
the site to manage the pricing displayed.
•	
Special price start date and Special price end date: This is the start and end 
date during which your special price should be displayed.
•	
Disable buy button: You may wish to list products but not allow them to 
be purchased via the site. You can check this box to show a product but not 
show an Add to Cart button.
•	
Available for pre-order: If you wish to sell items before you have them in 
stock to ship, you can check this box. It will render the Add to Cart button 
as a Pre-Order button instead.
•	
Call for price: You can check this box to show Call for price instead of an 
actual retail price.

Chapter 3
[ 61 ]
•	
Customer enters price: You may allow customers to enter prices on 
products. This is useful for donations or other items where you do 
not need to control the price collected for items.
•	
Available start date and Available end date: You can manage when 
products display on your site by giving them available start and end dates.
•	
Downloadable product: If the product is not a physical item, but can be 
downloaded, you can check this box. Customers can download their item 
from their order details screen.
•	
Recurring product: Check this box if the product is a recurring item. 
A recurring product is one that will generate automatic orders on a set 
period of time, such as a book of the month or diabetic test strips. Checking 
this box opens options to define the recurring cycle, which can be days, 
weeks, months, or years. The site will use the payment method used on 
the first order to create a new order at each cycle.
•	
Shipping enabled and Free shipping: You can specify if the product 
requires shipping. For instance, downloadable products would not need 
any shipping. You can also specify if this product has free shipping attached.
•	
Additional shipping charge: If this product requires additional shipping 
charges, enter them here. This is useful for large or heavy items.
•	
Weight, Length, Width, and Height: When using shipping estimations based 
on product dimensions, these measurements will need to be entered.
•	
Tax exempt and Tax category: You can manage tax classifications on your 
site. You can specify if this product should be subject to taxes and what tax 
category should apply.
www.allitebooks.com

The Administration Site
[ 62 ]
You have several options when it comes to managing inventory on your site: Don't 
track inventory, Track inventory, and Track inventory by product attributes. You 
select which method you would like to use from the Manage inventory method 
drop-down list. The first and last methods have the same settings on this tab. The 
Track inventory by product attributes method uses Product Attributes to manage 
the inventory. Product Attributes is covered later in this chapter.
•	
Minimum cart quantity and Maximum cart quantity: You can specify the 
minimum and maximum quantity a customer can enter for each product. By 
default, these are 1 and 10,000.
•	
Allowed quantities: By default, the product page displays a textbox allowing 
the customer to enter the quantity they wish to purchase. Entering values 
here will display a drop-down list of values instead. The values here should 
be comma separated, that is, 1,2,3,4,5.
•	
Stock quantity: This is the quantity you have in stock for this variant.
•	
Display stock availability and Display stock quantity: Display stock 
availability will show an In/Out of stock message on the product page. 
Display stock quantity will display the number of units from the stock 
quantity on the product page.

Chapter 3
[ 63 ]
•	
Minimum stock quantity: This allows you to trigger various actions once the 
stock quantity reaches this number.
•	
Low stock activity: This drop-down allows you to specify what the site will 
do with a product that reaches the Minimum stock quantity number. The 
options are: Nothing, Disable buy button, and Unpublish.
•	
Notify admin for quantity below: You can set a number here at which point 
if the inventory for the variant falls below it, the administrator for the site 
will be notified via e-mail.
•	
Backorders and Allow back in stock subscriptions: You can set how the 
site will treat backorder scenarios. The available options are: No backorders, 
Allow qty below 0, and Allow qty below 0 and notify customer. If you 
choose No backorders, you can opt to allow customers to sign up for 
notifications for when a product is back in stock.
•	
Published: You can check this to unpublish the variant, effectively hiding it 
from customers on the site. This is useful if you need more time to update 
your variant.
•	
Display order: This is the display order of the variants.
There are also other tabs on this page that allow you to control other aspects of the 
product variant:
•	
Tier prices: You can opt to give discounts based on the quantity a customer 
purchases of an item. For instance, you can specify that an item that is $10 
may only be $9 if the customer purchases 5 or more. Under this tab you can 
set up the tier pricing for the variant.
•	
Product variant attributes: Product variant attributes let you specify things 
such as color, size, and so on. You can track inventory by these attributes as 
well as specify if a customer needs to select an attribute before the item can 
be added to the cart.
•	
Discounts: If you have discounts set up that apply to products, you can 
attach them to the variant under this tab.

The Administration Site
[ 64 ]
Creating and managing attributes
nopCommerce has three types of attributes that you can utilize to help the customer 
experience on your site. You can navigate to these via the menu bar at Catalog | 
Attributes. These include:
•	
Product Attributes: These attributes are descriptive of the product you are 
selling. For instance, they could include color, size, and so on. Once you 
create new product attributes, they can be attached to the variants of your 
products and also used for inventory tracking.
•	
Specification Attributes: These attributes are used purely for informational 
purposes. When attached to a product, they are displayed on the product 
page under the full description. They can also be used as filters on the 
category pages.
•	
Checkout Attributes: Checkout attributes are displayed in the shopping 
cart and give you, the storeowner, options to offer more services to your 
customers before they checkout. These could include offering gift wrapping 
or ensuring a customer has reviewed your terms of use before placing 
their order.
As you can see, attributes are very powerful tools to help maximize your site.
To create new product attributes, navigate to Catalog | Attributes | Product 
Attributes. In our base installation we already have some attributes present. 
The grid displayed shows all the current product attributes you have set up:

Chapter 3
[ 65 ]
When adding or editing a product attribute, you only have two properties to update: 
Name and Description. There aren't many properties here since the values used here 
are product specific. So if you wanted to use Size as a product attribute on a variant, 
you would edit your product variant, and under the Product variant attributes tab, 
you would add the Size product attribute to the variant.
Clicking on the View/Edit value link on this grid row opens a new window with all 
the combinations that will be presented to the customer when viewing this product:
You can also specify a price adjustment for each value. For instance, if you are selling 
clothing that comes in XXXL, which costs you more, you can add an up-charge to the 
customer for those more expensive sizes.

The Administration Site
[ 66 ]
If you have selected the Track inventory by product attributes inventory method 
for your product, you can now enter the inventory you have for each attribute value. 
For instance, if you are using Size, you can enter the inventory numbers you have 
for each size value. These combinations can be added under the Product variant 
attributes tab in the Attribute combinations tab.
Clicking on the Add Combination button brings up a new window where you can 
add the inventory for each size value.
To create new specification attributes, navigate to Catalog | Attributes | 
Specification Attributes. The grid displayed will show all your current 
specification attributes:
When adding or editing a specification attribute, you have more properties than a 
product attribute. This is because the values of a specification attribute are held on 
the attribute, not on the product. There are two tabs on the Add New/Edit page: 
Attribute info and Options.

Chapter 3
[ 67 ]
Under the Options tab, you can enter all the specifications for this attribute:
When you are adding or editing a product, you can add specifications under the 
Specifications attributes tab:
Once added to a product, specification attributes are displayed on the product page 
under the full description.

The Administration Site
[ 68 ]
To create new checkout attributes, navigate to Catalog | Attributes | Checkout 
Attributes. The grid displayed will show all your current specification attributes. In 
the base installation there are no checkout attributes present. In this example, I have 
created two attributes called Read License Agreement and Super Express Packing. 
The former is a simple checkbox that is required and is used to ensure the customer 
has read a license agreement that theoretically exists on the site. The latter allows the 
customer to opt in for expedited packing for same day shipping. This option includes 
an up-charge for the service.
Clicking on the Edit link on the grid will display the attribute options:
The Text Prompt option will be displayed to the customer in the shopping cart. You 
can choose the control type that the attribute will use, in this case a radio button. 
Under the Attribute values tab, you can specify the options to show the customer:

Chapter 3
[ 69 ]
In the preceding example, we have a Yes and No option. If the customer chooses 
same day processing by checking Yes, then they will be charged an extra $10 as 
per the price adjustment setting.
The checkout attributes will be displayed directly under the shopping cart line 
items grid.
You can have as many attributes display here as you like, but take care not to 
overwhelm your customers here with too many options. These options will 
also be displayed on the order details page when you are processing your 
orders for shipping.
Summary
This chapter provided an overview of the administration site in nopCommerce. 
You learned how to access the administration site and got a detailed look at 
the navigation and dashboard. You walked through creating categories and 
manufacturers and saw the various options for configuring these pages. You 
learned how to add new products for your store as well as adding product variants. 
You saw how to set up product attributes and apply those to product variants. You 
also learned about checkout attributes and how those are displayed to customers in 
the shopping cart.
In the next chapter, you'll learn more about configuring the store and setting up 
payment and shipping methods.


Configuring the Store
nopCommerce is a fully functional e-commerce engine, and because of this there 
are a lot of configuration settings you can tweak. This chapter will cover some of the 
more important settings, or the settings you'll need to modify immediately to get 
your site set up correctly. Don't get overwhelmed as a lot of these settings can be 
left at their default state.
You can find all your store settings under the Configuration menu option in the 
administration site.
From this fly-out menu you can configure settings for all aspects of your site. 
The menu options with an arrow will display even more options when you 
hover over them. As you can see, a lot of configuration goes into a typical 
nopCommerce installation.
Just like the other areas of nopCommerce, you should plan to spend some 
time exploring all the settings in the site. Plan to go through each area of the 
Configuration section in the administration site to ensure you know all you can 
about your site. Sometimes there are things you didn't know were possible to 
achieve until you thoroughly explore the administration site!

Configuring the Store
[ 72 ]
General store settings
General store settings include things such as the base URL for your site and its name. 
Depending on your point of view, these may be some of the most important settings, 
as it effects how customers reach your site. You can view these settings by navigating 
to Configuration | Settings | General and Miscellaneous Settings. This will 
display the General and Miscellaneous Settings page:
Under the Store information tab are the general store settings:
•	
Store name: This is the friendly name of your store. This will be used in page 
titles, e-mails, and anywhere your store name is displayed.
•	
Store URL: This is the URL to the home page of your store. This URL is used 
for the link on the store logo, e-mails, and anywhere a link is provided for your 
store. It should be a base URL and should direct users to your home page.
•	
Store closed: Checking this box will display a Store Closed message 
to customers. You have the option to allow administrators to view the 
store as normal. This allows you to close the store to customers but allow 
administrators to make configuration changes to see how they would 
affect the store before letting customers back on the site.
•	
Desktop store theme: You can choose the store theme with this drop-down. 
In nopCommerce 2.8, there is only one theme to choose from, namely 
Default clean. In previous, versions there were multiple themes to choose 
from and you can always develop your own theme or download new ones 
from third-party vendors. If you have multiple themes available, you can 
choose one from this drop-down menu.

Chapter 4
[ 73 ]
•	
Allow customers to select a theme: If multiple themes are available, you can 
allow users to choose a theme for the site. This theme would be specific to 
that user, so they would not be changing the theme for all users. This is on by 
default, but in practice it's a good idea to turn this option off so you can give 
your customers a consistent experience on your store.
•	
Mobile devices supported: The default nopCommerce theme includes 
mobile device support. Checking this box will force the site to use the mobile 
themes provided, which are optimized for smaller screens. Without this 
box checked, customers will see the default site no matter what device they 
are using. It's important to note that if you install a new theme, ensure it is 
mobile-compatible before using this option.
•	
Display EU cookie law warning: Clicking this checkbox will notify users 
about the use of cookies on your site. The EU Cookie Law went into action in 
May of 2011, and means you must obtain informed consent from customers 
before placing a cookie on their machine. This is for companies based in 
the UK only. Checking this box will display a modal window informing 
customers about the use of cookies on your site. They can click OK and the 
modal will not be shown to them again.
There are also other tabs on this page that allow you to control other general settings:
•	
SEO settings: You can configure some global SEO settings under this tab. 
You can change the Page Title Separator as well as the Page Title SEO 
Adjustment. This setting defines whether your store name appears before 
or after the page title. You can also control the default title for pages within 
your site.
•	
Security settings: Under this tab you can change the default encryption 
private key. This key is used to encrypt sensitive data in your database. It is 
randomly generated when you install the site, so you can leave this alone. 
You can also mange which administration menus are displayed to users via 
the ACL. Whether or not to use SSL is also under this tab. We'll cover SSL 
later in this chapter.

Configuring the Store
[ 74 ]
•	
PDF settings: You can manage PDF settings under this tab. PDFs are 
generated by the site in several locations for both internal uses as well 
as for customers. For instance, receipts, packing lists, invoices, and so on.
•	
Localization settings: If your site will utilize multiple languages, you can 
manage the settings for those here. You can choose to show images for 
language selections as well as whether to use SEO friendly URLs.
•	
Full-Text settings: If your database supports it, you can choose to enable 
full-text queries. Full-text searches can include simple words or more 
complex queries that include phrases. Once you enable full-text, you 
can choose the Search Mode from a drop-down list that is provided.
Payment methods
Payment methods represent the options customers have to pay you for their orders. 
These can include credit card payments, a check or money order, cash on delivery, 
and so on. nopCommerce supports both online and offline transactions, so you 
have a wide range of options available for accepting payments through your site.
nopCommerce also supports integration with third-party payment providers such 
as PayPal, Authorize.net, and Google Checkout. If you need to integrate with a 
third-party processor that is not currently built into nopCommerce, you can easily 
develop or install these into the store.
To view the current payment methods in your store, navigate to Configuration | 
Payment Methods.

Chapter 4
[ 75 ]
The Payment methods grid lists all the payment methods installed on the site. Each 
payment method will display its current configuration as well as what transaction 
modes it supports.
•	
Pending: A transaction is pending.
•	
Authorize: This mode will authorize the card for the amount of the order. 
This means the credit card company is being notified that you intend to 
charge (capture) an amount. The site will receive a notification if the amount 
is available and if so, the order will be placed. You will need to capture the 
funds later on the order screen.
•	
Authorize and Capture: This will authorize and capture (charge) the amount 
of the order at the time the order is placed.
•	
Void: You can void any authorized payments that have not yet been captured.
•	
Refund: You can refund any order once it has been paid.
•	
Partial Refund: If the payment method supports it, you can partially refund 
an order once it has been paid.
•	
Capture: Capture is the actual charge placed on a credit card.
Not all of the payment methods shown support all of these transaction 
modes. Each payment method is different and may support some or all 
of the modes. You can see which modes are supported by configuring the 
payment method and inspecting its properties.
How you use these transaction modes will depend on how you operate your 
business. For instance, you may not want to capture (charge) a credit card until you 
have the order ready for shipment or the customer has picked it up. On the other 
hand, you may want to authorize and capture immediately before shipping to 
ensure the funds have been transferred to your bank account.
To configure a payment method, you can click on the Configure link in the grid. 
Depending on the payment method's configuration, you will have different options 
for each method.

Configuring the Store
[ 76 ]
For instance, configuring the PayPal payment method displays several options for 
using PayPal as well as instructions on how to set up the method:
However, the purchase order payment method only has two options for 
its configuration:
Each payment method will have different configuration options based on its needs. 
All of the payment methods that are preinstalled with nopCommerce will include 
instructions for how to set them up. The following payment methods are preinstalled:
•	
Manual processing (Credit Cards)
•	
Authorize.net
•	
PayPal Standard

Chapter 4
[ 77 ]
•	
PayPal Direct (PayPal Pro)
•	
Cash on Delivery
•	
Purchase Order
•	
Google Checkout
Shipping
Shipping plays a big role in any e-commerce store that sells shippable products. 
How you decide to ship your products is based on your business needs, but 
customers today expect to have different shipping options available to them. 
These include ground, priority, and express. nopCommerce gives you excellent 
control over how to set up shipping on your site and manage its features and pricing.
Shipping Methods
Shipping methods represent the levels of shipping a customer can choose from 
when checking out, that is, ground, priority, express, and so on. You can view the 
current shipping methods for your site by navigating to Configuration | Shipping | 
Shipping Methods:
You can edit a shipping method by clicking on the Edit link in the grid. You can also 
add new methods by clicking on the Add New button. The Name property is shown 
to the customer when selecting their shipping level. The shipping methods grid only 
allows you to specify your shipping levels. You can specify the rate charged for these 
methods under Shipping Rate Computation Methods.

Configuring the Store
[ 78 ]
These methods are considered "offline" shipping methods. If you are 
using a real time shipping rate such as UPS, USPS, FedEx, and so on, 
these methods will not apply and will not be shown to the user. This is 
not to say you cannot use a service such as UPS with these methods, but 
the pricing would be fixed or by weight rather than real time.
Shipping method restrictions
You can also restrict which methods are allowed to ship where. For instance, if you 
ship to the U.S. and Canada, but do not want to allow air shipments to Canada, you 
can restrict that method for that area. To view your shipping method restrictions, 
navigate to Configuration | Shipping | Shipping Method Restrictions:
In the Shipping Method Restrictions grid, you can check the countries and shipping 
methods you want to restrict.

Chapter 4
[ 79 ]
Shipping rate computation methods
Shipping rate computation methods are how you define how much to charge 
for each shipping method. This area is also where you can view all the shipping 
providers that are installed on your site. To view these, navigate to Configuration | 
Shipping | Shipping Rate Computation Methods:
nopCommerce has two different kinds of shipping providers: Offline and Real 
Time. Offline providers include Fixed Rate Shipping and Shipping by Weight. 
These are offline in the sense that they will use settings found within your site to 
determine what to charge a customer for their shipping. Real Time providers include 
UPS, USPS, FedEx, and so on. These are "real time" since they will communicate with 
the provider's servers to determine a current rate to charge the customer.
Only one "offline" shipping provider should be active at any given time. 
If you mark one as Is Active, ensure you mark the others as not active to 
avoid issues for your customers when checking out.

Configuring the Store
[ 80 ]
Shipping by weight
If you would like to calculate shipping charges based on the weight of the shipment, 
choose this provider. This is useful if you sell heavy products that can be expensive 
to ship. To set up shipping by weight, edit the provider in the Shipping Rate 
Computation Methods grid and mark it as Is Active. You can then configure the 
provider by clicking the Configure link.
The Limit shipping methods to configured ones checkbox allows you to limit 
shipping options to only those configured here. Otherwise, customers will be 
able to choose any existing shipping options even if they are not configured here.
Click on the Add Record button to add a new shipping by weight row:

Chapter 4
[ 81 ]
•	
Country: Select the country from the drop-down list. Selecting * will make 
the rate apply to all countries.
•	
State/Province: Select the state/province from the drop-down list. Selecting * 
will make the rate apply to all states/provinces for the selected country.
•	
Zip: Enter the zip/postal code. You can leave this blank and the rate will 
apply to all codes under that state/province.
•	
Shipping method: Select the shipping method from the drop-down list. 
These are the shipping methods that were defined earlier.
•	
Order weight from and Order weight to: Enter the weight range you would 
like this rate to apply to.
•	
Additional fixed cost: You can opt to charge an additional fee for a certain 
rate. For instance, if the weight range is the heaviest you offer to ship, you 
may need to charge a little extra to cover your costs.
•	
Lower weight limit: You can enter a lower weight limit here. This value will 
be used for "per extra weight limit scenarios".
•	
Rate per weight unit: This is the rate charged per unit of weight.
•	
Charge percentage of subtotal: This value will be used to charge a 
percentage of the subtotal.
All these values are used in the following calculation:
[additional fixed cost] + ([order total weight] - [lower weight limit]) * [rate per weight 
unit] + [order subtotal] * [charge percentage].
This formula is used to calculate the shipping charge when using the shipping by 
weight method.
Fixed rate shipping
If you would like to calculate shipping charges based on fixed rates by shipping 
method, choose this provider. This is the easiest shipping provider as you simply 
give a fixed rate to each shipping level. To set up fixed rate shipping, edit the 
provider in the Shipping Rate Computation Methods grid and mark it as Is 
Active. You can then configure the provider by clicking on the Configure link:

Configuring the Store
[ 82 ]
The shipping methods displayed in the grid are the methods that were configured 
in the Shipping Methods area. You can click on the Edit button in the row and then 
modify the Rate. You can enter in a dollar amount for the shipping method.
Real world: A large majority of e-commerce sites utilize fixed rate 
shipping. This can be for a lot of reasons, but by far it will make managing 
your shipping options easy. Take some time to explore all the options 
available to you and make sure you are choosing a shipping provider that 
provides ease of use as well as cost savings. These need to be balanced 
when making this decision.
In addition to offline shipping providers, nopCommerce comes with several real 
time shipping rate providers out of the box. These include: USPS, UPS, FedEx, 
Canada Post, and Australia Post.
This book will not cover how to set up each one of these providers, but they all have 
several things in common:
•	
API Account: In order to communicate with their servers to obtain real time 
rate information, you will need to obtain an API account with the provider. 
For instance, with UPS you will be given a URL to access the service, an 
access key, a username, and a password. This information will be needed 
to properly configure the UPS shipping provider. No matter which real 
time provider you use, similar information will be required that can only 
be obtained by creating an account with the provider.
•	
Shipping Methods: Each provider has a selection of shipping levels that you 
can offer. You will need to select which shipping methods from the provider 
you wish to offer your customers.
Taxes
If your business is e-commerce only, you will most likely need to collect some 
taxes. Depending on where your business is located, your tax laws may vary, 
but nopCommerce gives you all the tools necessary to properly collect taxes 
on your sales.

Chapter 4
[ 83 ]
Real world: It's very important that you stay informed with tax collection. 
E-commerce laws are changing with regards to when and where 
taxes must be collected. Gone are the days of being able to run your 
e-commerce site without worrying about paying taxes on sales. If your 
business is US-based, you will at the very least need to collect taxes for 
the state you are located in. Check your local, state, and federal tax laws 
to ensure you are complying with them.
nopCommerce gives you the ability to configure taxes by categories and/or by 
locations. With this ability you can tax orders shipped to certain areas by their 
location as well as by the type of product. This gives you the ability to collect the 
correct amount of tax on all of your orders.
Tax categories
Tax categories can be created and then assigned to products, shipping, and so on. 
This will later allow you to charge additional taxes if needed. You can view all your 
current tax categories by navigating to Configuration | Tax | Tax Categories:
This page allows you to add or edit tax categories only. The actual tax rates that 
apply to these categories are set up under the Tax Providers area. You can add a new 
tax category by clicking on the Add New Record button. Editing current categories is 
done inline in the grid.

Configuring the Store
[ 84 ]
Tax providers
nopCommerce comes with two tax providers out of the box: Fixed Rate Tax and Tax 
by Country & State & Zip. You can view the current tax providers by navigating to 
Configuration | Tax | Tax Providers:
Only one tax provider may be active at any given time. Make sure you 
choose the one that best suits your needs. You can change the current 
provider by clicking on the Mark as primary provider button in the grid.
The Fixed Rate Tax provider utilizes the categories that are set up under Tax 
Categories. This allows you to tax products using a flat tax based on the category of 
the product. When configuring your products, you can specify which tax category 
applies to them, and this is the rate at which they will be taxed. To specify the rates, 
click on the Configure link for the Fixed Rate Tax Provider:
The grid that displays contains all the tax categories that were set up previously. 
You can click on the Edit button in the row to update the tax rate for the category.
Tax by Country & State & Zip is used to calculate taxes by the country, state, and 
zip code of where the order is shipping. To view the current regions set up for this 
provider, click on the Configure link in the grid:

Chapter 4
[ 85 ]
In a default installation of nopCommerce, no regions are set up yet for this provider. 
To add a new region, fill out the information below the grid and click on the Add tax 
rate button.
•	
Country: Select the country for the region.
•	
State/province: Select the state or province the tax rate applies to. Selecting * 
will make the rate apply to all states/provinces for the selected country.
•	
Zip: Enter the zip/postal code for the region. You can leave this blank and 
the rate will apply to all codes under that state/province.
•	
Tax category: Select the tax category.
•	
Percentage: Enter the percentage applied for this region.
Real world: If your site is based in the U.S., you most likely will just have 
one region defined here, the state in which you are running the business. 
Most small e-commerce sites generally only have their online store or 
maybe some brick and mortar locations in the same state, and thus only 
need to collect taxes for their state. Check your local, state, and federal tax 
laws to ensure you are complying with all tax laws.
You can also add third-party tax rate providers to your site. Additional tax rate 
providers can be downloaded from the nopCommerce site and include Strike Iron 
and Avalara.

Configuring the Store
[ 86 ]
Content management
Content management in nopCommerce includes several different areas in your 
store. These areas include blogs, polls, forums, widgets, news, topics, and message 
templates. In this section, we'll be going into detail on the Topics, Email Accounts, 
and Message Templates areas. These areas of content management are the ones 
you'll be using most often, but it's worth reviewing the other areas:
•	
Blog: nopCommerce comes with a built-in blog engine. To edit or add new 
posts, you can navigate to Content Management | Blog | Blog Posts. This 
will display a grid with all your current posts.
You can edit posts here by clicking on the Edit link or add new posts by 
clicking on the Add New button. You can also view any comments on your 
blog posts by navigating to Content Management | Blog | Blog Comments. 
To view the blog, you can navigate to http://www.yourdomain.com/blog.
By default, the blog is enabled. You can turn off the blog by navigating 
to Configuration | Settings | Blog Settings and un-checking the Blog 
Enabled setting.
Real world: The blog engine in nopCommerce is great 
and can definitely serve the blogging needs of your 
site. However, if you plan on heavily using a blog as a 
marketing tool, you may consider a third-party engine 
such as WordPress.
•	
Polls: You can set up and manage polls to interact with your users. You 
can view the current polls you have set up by navigating to Content 
Management | Polls. This will display a grid with all the polls on your site. 
Polls will appear in the left-hand side area of the site, under the navigation. 
You can also specify if you want the poll to show up on the home page of 
the site.
•	
Forums: Forums allow you to interact with your customers and allow them 
to interact with each other. nopCommerce comes with a built-in forums 
engine. By default, the forums are disabled, but you can turn them on by 
navigating to Configuration | Settings | Forum Settings and checking the 
Forums Enabled setting. After this you can view your forums by navigating 
to http://www.yourdomain.com/boards.

Chapter 4
[ 87 ]
•	
Widgets: Widgets provide a way to insert new functionality into your site 
without changing the code. A default installation of nopCommerce includes 
two widgets: Google Analytics and Nivo Slider. You can view these by 
navigating to Content Management | Widgets. This will display all the 
widgets currently installed on your site. Widgets can be placed in predefined 
zones in your Layout pages, for instance, the left or right column. They can 
also be non-visible aspects of your site such as the Google Analytics widget. 
You can also download third-party widgets or develop your own to enhance 
your site.
•	
News: News acts like a scaled down blog and has a similar appearance to 
a blog, but is quite different. Users can view news for the store by clicking 
on the News link on the home page. The news displays a short snippet of 
information and the customer can click on the Details link to view the full 
article. When viewing the full news article, there is a section that allows for 
comments to be placed.
You can manage all your news content by navigating to Content 
Management | News | News Items. This will display a grid of all the news 
items you currently have on the site. If you have opted to allow comments 
on your news items, you can view any that have been left by navigating to 
Content Management | News | News Comments. This will display a grid 
of all the current news comments. You can delete comments here to remove 
them from news items.
Topics (Pages)
Topics (Pages) are ancillary pages that you can use to show content other than 
products. Common pages include About Us, Contact Us, Shipping Information, 
and so on. You can add as many topics as you like, and you have complete control 
over the content displayed there.
Topics can be either full pages that you access via a URL, or they can be used to 
display content embedded within other pages using code. These are great for 
quickly adding new content to your site without needing to develop new pages.

Configuring the Store
[ 88 ]
To view all the current topics in your site, navigate to Content Management | 
Topics (Pages). This will display a grid of all the topics:
Topics have a uniform URL that you access them with, http://www.yourdomain.
com/t/systemname. To reach the About Us page, your URL would be http://www.
yourdomain.com/t/aboutus, since the About Us page has a system name of AboutUs. 
You can add a new topic by clicking on the Add New button in the top-right:

Chapter 4
[ 89 ]
•	
System name: This is the name the site uses to figure out which topic 
to display. It will be part of the URL and cannot contain any spaces or 
special characters.
•	
Password protected: You can opt to password protect any topic page. This 
is useful if you have a certain group of users that you want to show special 
information too, but keep out of sight to everyone else. Checking this box 
will display a Password textbox so you can supply a password for this page.
•	
Include in sitemap: Check this box if you would like to include this page in 
the sitemap.
•	
Title: This is the title of the topic that will be displayed to the user.
•	
Body: This is a full HTML editor where you can put the content of your 
topic. This is the main content of the page and will be displayed below 
the topic title.
Email accounts
Email accounts are used to send e-mails from the site to customers and you, the 
store owner. You can add as many e-mail accounts as you like, and these are used 
in conjunction with the message templates to send mail, as described below in 
Content Management.
To view the e-mail addresses you have added, navigate to Content Management | 
Email Accounts:
One e-mail account will always be marked as the default account. This account 
will be used if no other account is specified when sending e-mails. You can change 
which address is the default account by clicking on the Mark as default email 
account button.

Configuring the Store
[ 90 ]
You can add a new e-mail account by clicking on the Add New button:
•	
Email address: This is the e-mail address the account should use for outgoing 
e-mails, for example, customerservice@yourdomain.com.
•	
Email display name: The display name is the name that will display as the 
From field in the e-mail.
•	
Host and Port: This is the IP or hostname of your e-mail server. You can 
work with your hosting provider for this information, but typically it 
looks like email.yourdomain.com. Port is the SMTP port number of 
the e-mail server.
•	
User and Password: This is the username and password for the e-mail 
account on your e-mail server.
•	
SSL: Check this box to enable SSL and encrypt the SMTP connection. 
Check with your hosting provider if this is required.
•	
Use default credentials: Check this if you need to authenticate using the 
default credentials of the currently logged-on user. Typically this should 
not be checked.
Once you have saved the new account, you will see a new section from where you 
can send a test e-mail. This allows you to test the new account to ensure it was set 
up properly:

Chapter 4
[ 91 ]
Enter a valid e-mail address and click on the Send test email button. The site will 
generate a test e-mail that simply states that the e-mail functionality is working.
Message templates
Message templates represent e-mails that are generated by the site. These e-mails 
can either be directed to your customers or to you as the storeowner. They include 
messages such as Order Confirmation, New Customer Notification, Email a Friend, 
News Comment, and so on. When the site sends a new e-mail, it will generate the 
content based on the message template. The templates contain static text as well as 
variables for content, for instance, the new order notification contains a variable to 
display all the order line items.
Real world: You should take the time to get familiar with all the messages 
your site generates as well as customize the templates. E-mails are a great 
way to market to your customers. Order notifications, email a friend, and 
so on, are e-mails that customers are generally happy to receive and will 
open without hesitation. Adding logos, contact information, marketing 
banners, and so on to your e-mails will go a long way to keep you site in 
the minds of current and prospective customers.
You can view all the message templates in your site by navigating to Content 
Management | Message Templates:

Configuring the Store
[ 92 ]
There are quite a few message templates built into nopCommerce. The grid that is 
shown in the preceding screenshot gives you some quick information about each 
template, most importantly the e-mail's subject line and shows if it is active. 
You can edit any template by clicking on the Edit link in the grid.
•	
Allowed message tokens: Message tokens are the variables used in the 
e-mail message. They have a uniform format of %TokenName% and will be 
replaced by the site when the e-mail is generated. For instance, the %Order.
Product(s)% token will render all the line items for a customer's order in a 
table format. Not all tokens are available for all message templates. If the site 
generates a new blog comment e-mail, then all of the order tokens will not 
have data in them. Keep this in mind when modifying your templates.
•	
Name: This is the system name of the message template and is used by the 
site to use the proper template when generating e-mails.
•	
Is Active: You can disable templates and e-mails from being generated by 
unchecking this box.
•	
BCC: You can blind carbon copy an e-mail that is sent from the site by 
providing an address in this field. This is very useful for e-mails such 
as Email a Friend, as you may want to keep track of what people of 
recommending to their friends.

Chapter 4
[ 93 ]
•	
Subject: This is the subject line of the e-mail. The subject line can include 
tokens and/or static text. When using tokens, be careful not to use a token 
that generates more than a single line of text.
•	
Body: This is a full HTML editor where you can craft the e-mail body. You 
will use tokens heavily in here. This is also where you can add in your logo 
or other information you want to appear in your e-mails. When working with 
the message templates, it's a good idea to open all your templates and review 
their structure, as this will help enormously when modifying your templates.
•	
Email account: This drop-down lists all the e-mail accounts you have set up 
on your site. You can choose which e-mail account to use when sending an 
e-mail based on this template.
When you open the Message Templates page, you will notice there is no way to 
add a new template from the administration site. You can add new templates to 
the site but only by inserting them into the database directly. In addition, once 
you have a new template loaded, you will need to develop custom code to be able 
to send e-mails using the new template. However, the templates that come with 
nopCommerce represent everything you will need to get started.
Real world: Most likely you will not need a new message template 
for your site. The templates that come with a base installation are 
comprehensive and generally more than what a typical site needs. If you 
do find you need another template, adding one is not difficult, but will 
require a developer to modify the code.
Plugins
You can extend the functionality of nopCommerce by installing and configuring 
plugins. Plugins include things such as discounts, shipping methods, tax providers, 
and widgets. You can download third-party plugins and install them to your site 
without the need for custom code. You can also develop your own plugins if the 
need arises. For instance, imagine you need to accept your own in-house credit card 
for payments. You can develop your own payment method plugin, install it on your 
site, and make it available as a payment option on your site. This framework opens 
up a lot of possibilities for your site.

Configuring the Store
[ 94 ]
The base installation of nopCommerce comes with a wide range of plugins that are 
ready to use. These include payment methods such as PayPal and Google Checkout, 
as well as shipping methods such as FedEx and UPS. To view all the plugins that are 
currently installed, navigate to Configuration | Plugins:
The Group column is important as it tells you what type of plugin this is. The grid 
will also list whether the plugin is currently installed.
Installing new plugins is quite easy, just follow these steps:
1.	 Once you have developed or downloaded a new plugin, upload it to the 
/Plugins folder, which is located in the root of your site. You will see 
folders for all the plugins you currently have installed:

Chapter 4
[ 95 ]
2.	 Once you have uploaded the plugin, return to the plugins page in the 
administration site and click on the Reload List of Plugins button at 
the top-right.
3.	 Locate the plugin in the grid and click on the Install link.
4.	 If the plugin supports configuration, you can then click on the 
Configure link.
Once you have installed a plugin, you can easily uninstall it by clicking on the 
Uninstall link in the grid.
Security (SSL)
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) is an industry-standard security technology that encrypts 
data passing between a web server and a browser. You know you're using a secured 
site with SSL when the URL contains https. Just about every e-commerce site on the 
Internet utilizes SSL communications to ensure credit card information is passed in 
a secured way. Your site is no different. If you plan on taking credit card payments, 
you must ensure you have SSL set up and configured to protect your customers 
and yourself.
Before you can enable SSL on your site, you will need to obtain an SSL certificate. 
These can be purchased from a variety of vendors such as GoDaddy.com or your 
hosting provider. I won't go into detail about how to purchase and set up a certificate 
in this book, but you will have to work with your hosting provider to install the 
certificate once you have purchased one.
You can enable SSL on your site in two ways:
•	
Enable via the administration site: In the administration site, navigate to 
Configuration | Settings | General and Miscellaneous Settings. Under the 
Security settings tab, check the box titled Use SSL. This will update the site's 
web.config file for you to enable SSL:

Configuring the Store
[ 96 ]
If you are using a shared SSL certificate, you will need to enter that 
information. Shared SSL gives you get the benefits of SSL without the costs 
that are usually associated with setting up an SSL server. With this option 
you use your hosting provider's SSL certificate and typically get a secure 
URL such as https://secure.yourdomain.com. The non-secured URL is 
typically your domain name, for example, http://www.yourdomain.com.
•	
Manually enable via the web.config file: You can also enable SSL by 
updating your web.config file. The SSL settings can be found in the 
AppSettings section.
It's important to remember that enabling SSL in the administration site is 
updating the web.config file. The reason this is important is if you are 
doing any custom development. If the web.config you are uploading to 
the site does not have the correct settings, you will effectively turn off SSL 
inadvertently. Make sure your web.config file used in development is 
configured properly before uploading any site changes.
Once you've enabled SSL any pages that require a secure connection will begin using 
the https protocol.
Summary
This chapter covered a lot of material. nopCommerce has many settings, so you 
can configure your store to meet your exact needs. You learned about general store 
settings which are used throughout the entire storefront. You also learned about 
payment methods and how to configure the out-of-the-box providers. You looked at 
how shipping is configured in nopCommerce and learned how to configure shipping 
to meet your needs. You learned about collecting taxes and content management. 
You saw the plugins framework and learned how it can help extend your store 
without writing custom code.
In the next chapter, you'll learn how to process and manage the orders customers 
place on your site.

Processing Orders
Your storefront is set up and now the orders are rolling in! Well, that's at least what 
the goal is, but once you start receiving orders, you'll need to process them to get the 
products out to your customers. nopCommerce makes processing orders relatively 
simple and gives you all the tools you need. We've already covered the Dashboard 
page in the How to access and overview section of Chapter 3, The Administration Site, 
which gives you a quick overview of the orders you've received. Now we'll dig 
deeper into the sales area where you will be working to process all your orders.
Processing orders
You can view all of your orders by navigating to Sales | Orders:

Processing Orders
[ 98 ]
The orders page displays all the orders in a paged grid. There is a Summary section 
under the grid that displays totals for all your orders. These totals include:
•	
Profit: This total is the difference between the gross total and the total cost 
of products sold without tax included. It's important to note that this is 
a high-level profit total, since it simply looks at the cost entered for your 
products. Depending on how you account for product cost (shipping, 
marketing, holding costs, and so on), this profit total may not represent 
a true number for your business.
•	
Tax: This is a total of all the tax collected for all your orders.
•	
Total: This is a gross total of all your orders without tax included.
This grid will display all orders regardless of their status. You can use the filters 
above the grid to search for specific orders:
•	
Start date and End date: Enter a start and end date to search for orders 
within a certain date range.
•	
Billing email address: Enter the customer's billing e-mail address to search 
for orders by a certain user.
•	
Order status: Select an order status from the drop-down list. Order statuses 
include All, Pending, Processing, Complete, and Cancelled.
•	
Payment status: Select a payment status from the drop-down list. Payment 
statuses include All, Pending, Authorized, Paid, Refunded, Partially 
refunded, and Voided.
•	
Shipping status: Select a shipping status from the drop-down list. Shipping 
statuses include All, Shipping not required, Not yet shipped, Partially 
shipped, Shipped, and Delivered.
•	
Order GUID: You can search by entering the order's Global Unique 
Identifier (GUID) or a partial GUID. This is an internal ID, not the order 
number the customer sees.
•	
Go directly to order number: Technically, this is not a search option, 
as you are going straight to a particular order number. You can enter an 
order number here and click Go. This will take you directly to the order 
details page.

Chapter 5
[ 99 ]
You can click on the View link in the grid to view a particular order's details:
The preceding screenshot shows an order that was placed using 
the Manual Credit Card provider. This provider stores credit card 
information in the database and allows you to update the credit card 
number the customer provided. If you use another credit card provider, 
such as PayPal, this option will not be available.
On the orders details page, you can view all aspects of the order under the 
various tabs.

Processing Orders
[ 100 ]
Viewing and editing order information
In the order status area, you can view the status, order ID, and GUID. You can cancel 
an order here by clicking on the Cancel Order button. You will get a confirmation 
prompt to ensure you really want to cancel the order.
In the order totals area, you can view the total, subtotal, tax, and shipping amounts 
for the order. You can update these totals by clicking on the Edit order totals button. 
You can also view the customer by clicking on the View link.
In the payment area, you can view information about the payment method used. 
The information displayed here will vary based on the payment method used. 
The payment status field will display the current payment status. Depending on 
the payment method used, you may have additional action buttons here, such as 
Refund, Capture, and Void. If it's displayed, you click the Mark as paid button to 
set the order as Paid.
Viewing and editing order billing information
The Billing info tab will display the address the customer entered as their 
billing address. You can click on the Edit button to update the billing address 
for this customer:

Chapter 5
[ 101 ]
Viewing and editing order shipping 
information
The Shipping info tab will display the address the customer entered as their 
shipping address. You can click on the Edit button to update the shipping address 
for this customer:
This tab will also display the shipping method selected by the customer as well as 
the shipping status for the order. You can click on the View address on Google 
Maps link to open a new window that will display the address on a map.

Processing Orders
[ 102 ]
You can also manage shipments for the order from under this tab. Click on the Add 
shipment button to launch the Add a New Shipment to Order page:
On this page, you can enter a tracking number and specify the quantities of the 
product in this shipment. nopCommerce supports multiple shipments, so if your 
shipment does not contain all the products in the order, you will be able to add 
shipments until all the products are shipped. Once you have shipped all the 
products, the Add shipment button will no longer be displayed.
Once a shipment has been entered, the shipping status of the order is updated. If you 
do not ship all the products in one shipment, the status will be updated to Partially 
shipped. Once all the items have been shipped, the status will change to Shipped.

Chapter 5
[ 103 ]
Once shipments have been added to an order, you can click on the View link in the 
Shipments grid to view/update the shipping information:
You can print a packing slip by clicking on the Print packing slip button. This is a 
very minimal document that contains the shipping address, shipping method, and a 
grid with all the items that are included with the shipment. If you need to update the 
tracking number, you can enter the new number here and click Set tracking number.
Before the customer will be notified of a shipment, you will need to click the 
Set as shipped button. This will update the shipping status on the order as well 
as generate an e-mail to notify the customer. You can see these updates under the 
Order notes tab.
In addition to working with shipments via the customer's order, you can also view 
all the shipments you have entered by navigating to Sales | Shipments:
You can narrow the results displayed in the grid by specifying a start and end date 
above and clicking on the Search button. Just like in the Shipping tab, you can click 
on the View link to view the details of any shipment.

Processing Orders
[ 104 ]
Viewing and editing ordered products
This tab displays a grid that contains all the products the customer ordered:
Any checkout attributes you have set up for your store will display in 
this tab. These attributes will display directly below the products grid. 
If you do not have any checkout attributes defined, you will not see any 
information here.
You can click the product name in the grid to be taken to the product variant page 
in the administration site. If the item is a downloadable product, you will have some 
additional options listed here:
•	
Activate: If the product is manually downloaded by the customer, you will 
have the option to activate or deactivate the download
•	
License file: This is an optional field; you can upload a license file for the 
downloadable product by clicking on Upload License File
In the products grid, each line item will display Edit and Delete buttons. You can 
edit the details of the product including price, quantity, and total. Clicking Delete 
will remove the product from the order.

Chapter 5
[ 105 ]
You can also add products to an existing order via the Products tab. Click on the 
Add product button to display the Add a New Product to Order screen:
You can search for the product you want to add using the options above the grid. 
Once you locate the product, click the product in the grid; this will launch the add 
product window:
Fill out the required information and click Add product.

Processing Orders
[ 106 ]
Adding and deleting order notes
You can add notes to any order in the store and view these under the Order notes 
tab. These notes can be for anything, and some are auto-generated by the store and 
added for you:
The notes grid will display all the current notes attached to the order. You can delete 
a note at any time by clicking on the Delete button. You can add new notes by filling 
out the information below the grid:
•	
Message: Enter any information you would like to attach to this order.
•	
Display to customer: Check this box if you would like the note to be 
displayed to the customer. Customers can view order notes via the order 
details page in their account. The grid also displays if the note is available 
for the customer to view.
Click on Add order note to add the new note.

Chapter 5
[ 107 ]
Processing returns
nopCommerce allows customers to submit return requests on orders. This is a very 
useful feature in that it allows customers to submit and view the process of their 
returns without needing to contact you—the storeowner—for support. Return 
requests are only available for orders that are marked Completed. Only after this 
status is assigned to the order will the customer be able to submit a request.
Return requests are enabled by default, but you can turn this feature off via the 
administration site. You can also manage other settings as well. To view the return 
request settings, navigate to Configuration | Settings | Order Settings. On the 
Order settings page, click on the Return request settings tab:
•	
Enable Returns System: Check this box to enable return requests. This is 
enabled by default.
•	
Number of days that the return request is available: Set the number of 
days from the order date that returns will be accepted. For instance, if you 
have a 14 day return policy, set this value to 14. After 14 days from the order 
date, the customer will no longer see a return button when viewing their 
order details.
•	
Return reasons: This is a list of reasons the customer may be returning their 
order. These reasons will be presented to the customer as a drop-down list 
when filling out the request. Reasons must be separated by commas.
•	
Return action: This is a list of actions the customer may request for the 
return, that is, Replace, Credit, Exchange, and so on. These actions will be 
presented to the customer as a drop-down list when filling out the request. 
Actions must be separated by commas.

Processing Orders
[ 108 ]
Once the customer's order status has been set to Completed, they will have the 
option to request a return by clicking on the Return item(s) button when viewing 
orders in their account:
Clicking on the Return item(s) button will launch the Return item(s) from 
order page:
The customer can choose the quantity they are returning and pick Return reason and 
Return action from the options you have defined in the administration site. They can 
also provide comments about the return. Once the customer clicks on the Submit 
return request button, the request is submitted. Customers can track their requests 
in their account under the Return requests section:

Chapter 5
[ 109 ]
To view all the return requests that customers have submitted, navigate to 
Sales | Return Requests in the administration site:
From this grid, you can view the customer and/or order related to the request. 
To view and process the return, click on the Edit link for the request. This will 
launch the Edit Return Request Details page:

Processing Orders
[ 110 ]
•	
ID: This is simply the internal ID for the return request.
•	
Product: You can click this link to go to the product variant for the 
returned product.
•	
Quantity: This is the quantity the customer entered for the request.
•	
Order and Customer: These links will take you to the order and customer 
pages if you need to view any additional details.
•	
Return request status: You can change the status of the request with this 
drop-down. The available options include: Pending, Received, Return 
Authorized, Item(s) Repaired, Item(s) Refunded, Request Rejected, and 
Cancelled. These statuses will be displayed to the customer in their account 
when viewing their return requests.
•	
Reason for return and Request action: These are the options the customer 
chose when submitting the request.
•	
Customer comments: These are the comments the customer entered. Any 
changes you make here will show up on the return request the customer 
views in their account.
•	
Staff notes: These are internal notes for staff. These will not be displayed to 
the customer.
•	
Date: This is the timestamp the return request was submitted by 
the customer.
Any updates/edits you make on this page will not automatically notify the 
customer. You can click on the Notify customer about status change button on the 
top-right of the page to do this. This will generate an e-mail to the customer that 
simply states that the status of the request has been changed. The e-mail will not 
include any other information; the customer will need to log in to their account to 
view the updated status.
If the outcome of the return is a refund, you will need to update the order and 
perform a refund. The return request pages do not make any changes to orders; 
these actions will need to be performed manually.
Viewing current shopping carts and 
wishlists
nopCommerce gives you the ability to view all the current shopping carts and 
wishlists for your store. This will show you the items that customers have added 
to these areas but have not yet purchased.

Chapter 5
[ 111 ]
To view the current shopping carts, navigate to Sales | Current Shopping Carts:
The grid will display a list of all the customers who have a current shopping cart. 
You can click the arrow next to the customer e-mail to expand the cart and see its 
contents. You can see each product in the cart as well as the quantity the customer 
entered. The Updated on column will display the last activity date for the cart. The 
current wishlist page has the exact same format, and information and can be viewed 
by navigating to Sales | Current Wishlists.
Real world: You may ask yourself why this information is important. 
This information can be used in many different ways. From a marketing 
perspective, you could develop some code that would e-mail customers 
with a coupon code to complete their order if their shopping cart does 
not update after X number of days. You may also get some insight into 
your customer's behavior as well. If, for instance, you saw a lot of people 
adding a particular product but never buying it, you may look into 
changing its product description, lowering its price, or running a sale.

Processing Orders
[ 112 ]
Impersonating a customer
If you intend to have a phone number for your site and interact with customers 
via the phone, you may find yourself in a position to place an order for a customer. 
Luckily, nopCommerce has this ability built-in. If your customer has an account, you 
can impersonate them and place an order for them. This allows you to act on behalf 
of the customer without the need of their password.
To impersonate a customer, navigate to Customers | Customers. Locate the 
customer you would like to impersonate and click on the Edit link in the grid. 
On the Edit Customer Details page, click on the Place order (Impersonate) tab:
Click on the Place order button to begin impersonating the customer. You will 
be taken to the home page of your store with a header that indicates you are 
impersonating a customer, as shown here:

Chapter 5
[ 113 ]
While in impersonation mode, you can use the site just as a normal customer 
would. The only difference during this time is the header. You can add products 
and checkout through the usual process. When you are finished, click on the finish 
impersonated session link in the header. This will take you back to the customer 
details screen where you were prior.
Summary
In this chapter, you learned how to process orders. You got an overview of all the 
components of a customer's order, from the billing and shipping details down to the 
products ordered. You learned how to manipulate orders and add notes for future 
reference. You saw how to process returns, as well as how to view current shopping 
carts and place orders for customers.
You now have a solid grasp on setting up and running your own storefront using 
nopCommerce. You've seen how to download and install, set up your store, and 
manage orders. You are now ready to start running your own storefront and make 
money using nopCommerce.


Index
Symbols
7-Zip
about  14
URL  8
A
Access Control List (ACL), categories  52
Access Control List (ACL), product  58
Activate field  104
Add a New Product page, options
ACL  58
Admin comment  56
Allow customer reviews  56
Category mappings  57
Cross sells  57
Default product variant info  57
Full description  56
Manufacturer mappings  57
Pictures  57
Product name  55
Product tags  56
Product template  56
Published  56
Related products  57
SEO  57
Short description  55
Show on home page  56
Specification attributes  57
Add a New Product to Order screen  105
Add a New Product Variant button. See  Edit 
Product Variant For Product page, 
options
Additional fixed cost  81
Additional shipping charge, product  61
Add Record button, options
about  80
Additional fixed cost  81
Charge percentage of subtotal  81
Country  81
Lower weight limit  81
Order weight from and Order weight to  81
Rate per weight unit  81
shipping by weight  81
State/Province  81
Zip  81
Add tax rate button, options
Country  85
Percentage  85
State/province  85
tax category  85
Zip  85
add this, product pages
URL  33
add to cart, product pages  32
add to compare list, product pages  33
add to wishlist, product pages  32
Admin comment, product  56, 59
administration site
about  45
accessing  45-49
Clear cache  46
components  46
home page  48
menu bar  47
Public store  46
Restart application  46
The menu bar (4)  47
Allow customer reviews, product  56
Allow customers to select a theme  73
Allowed quantities, product  62

[ 116 ]
API Account  82
attributes
checkout attributes  64
creating  64-69
managing  64-69
product attributes  64
specification attributes  64
authorize and capture, payment methods  75
authorize, payment methods  75
Available for pre-order, product  60
Available start date and Available end date, 
product  61
B
Backorders and Allow back in stock 
subscriptions, product  63
BCC, message templates  92
Bestsellers by amount, dashboard  49
Bestsellers by quantity, dashboard  49
billing address, checkout process  39
billing email address  98
billing info tab  100
blog, content management  86
body, message templates  93
body, Topics (Pages)  89
Bulk Edit Product Variants, products  54
C
Call for price, product  60
Cancel Order button  100
capture, payment methods  75
cart items, Shopping cart link  37
catalog  47
categories
Access Control List (ACL)  52
Category template  51
creating  50
creating, for products  49
Description  51
Discounts  52
Display order  52
List View  49
Name  51
Parent category  51
Picture  51
Price ranges  52
Products  52
Published  52
SEO  52
Show on home page  52
Tree View  50
Category mappings, product  57
Category pages  27, 28
Category template  51
center  25
Charge percentage of subtotal  81
checkout attributes
about  64
new checkout attributes, creating  68, 69
checkout process
about  37-39
billing address  39
confirm order  41
order details  42
order information  42
payment information  40
payment method  40
shipping address  39
shipping method  40
checkout progress, Shopping cart link  37
Clear cache, administration site  46
configuration area  47
confirm order, checkout process  41
content management
about  47, 86
blog  86
email accounts  89, 90
forums  86
message templates  91-93
news  87
polls  86
Topics (Pages)  87, 89
widgets  87
continue shopping, Shopping cart link  38
Create sample data option  23, 45
cross sells, product  57
cross sells, Shopping cart link  38
current shopping carts
viewing  110, 111
customer
about  47
impersonating  112, 113
Customer enters price, product  61

[ 117 ]
D
dashboard  
about  47
Bestsellers by amount  49
Bestsellers by quantity  49
incomplete orders  48
order totals  48
registered customers  49
Default product variant info, product  57
Description, categories  51
Desktop store theme  72
development environment  9
Disable buy button, product  60
discount code, Shopping cart link  38
discounts, categories  52
discounts, product  63
Display EU cookie law warning  73
Display order, categories  52
Display order, product  63
Display stock availability and Display stock 
quantity, product  62
Display stock availability, product pages  31
Display to customer  106
Downloadable product  61
E
Edit order totals button  100
Edit Product Variant For Product page, 
options
about  58
Additional shipping charge  61
Admin comment  59
Available for pre-order  60
Available start date and Available end date  
61
Call for price  60
Customer enters price  61
Description  59
Disable buy button  60
Downloadable product  61
GITN  60
ID  59
Manufacturer part number  59
Name  59
Old price property  60
Picture  59
Price  60
Product cost  60
Recurring product  61
Shipping enabled and Free shipping  61
Sku  59
Special price  60
Special price start date and Special price 
end date  60
Tax exempt and Tax category  61
Weight, Length, Width, and Height  61
Edit Return Request Details page
about  109
customer comments  110
date  110
ID  110
product  110
quantity  110
reason for return and Request action  110
return request status  110
staff notes  110
Email account, message templates  93
Email accounts
about  89
Email address  90
Email display name  90
Host  90
Password  90
Port  90
SSL  90
Use default credentials  90
User  90
Email address, email accounts  90
Email a friend, product pages  32
Email display name, email accounts  90
estimate shipping, Shopping cart link  38
F
file permissions
setting up  20, 21
FileZilla
URL  8
fixed rate shipping  81, 82
Fixed Rate Tax provider  84
footer  25
forums, content management  86
Full description, product  56

[ 118 ]
Full description, product pages  33
Full-Text settings  74
G
general store settings
about  72
Full-Text settings  74
Localization settings  74
other general settings  73
PDF settings  74
Security settings  73
SEO settings  73
store information tab  72
gift cards, Shopping cart link  38
GITN  60
Global Unique Identifier (GUID)  98
Go directly to order number option  98
H
header links  25
header menu  25
help  47
Host, email accounts  90
hosting provider
selection, considerations for  8, 9
I
Include in sitemap, Topics (Pages)  89
incomplete orders, dashboard  48
installation
Internet Information Services (IIS)  10, 11
nopCommerce  18, 19
SQL Server  11
Visual Studio  11
Internet Information Services (IIS)
installing  10, 11
Is Active, message templates  92
L
left-side menu  25
License file field  104
Limit shipping methods to configured ones 
checkbox  80
List View  49
Localization settings  74
logo  24
Lower weight limit  81
Low stock activity, product  63
Low stock report, products  54
M
Manage inventory method drop-down  62
Manufacturer mappings, product  57
manufacturer pages  29
Manufacturer part number  59
manufacturers
adding  53
creating  53
Mark as paid button  100
menu bar, administration site
about  47
catalog  47
configuration area  47
content management  47
customers  47
dashboard  47
help  47
promotions  47
sales  47
system  47
message templates
about  91
Allowed message tokens  92
BCC  92
body  93
Email account  93
Is Active  92
name  92
Subject  93
message tokens, message templates
allowed  92
Microsoft Web Platform Installer option  12
Minimum cart quantity and Maximum cart 
quantity, product  62
Minimum stock quantity, product  63
Mobile devices supported  73
N
Name, categories  51
name, message templates  92

[ 119 ]
news, content management  87
nopCommerce
about  7
attributes  64
components  7, 8
content management  86
downloading  11-14
file permissions, setting up  20
installing  14, 18-20
payment methods  74
plugins  93
pre-requisites  7
public-facing storefront  23
requisites  7
shipping  77
source code option  16, 17
tax  82
URL, for downloading  11
Web (no source) option, deploying  15
Notify admin for quantity below, product  
63
Notify customer about status change button  
110
O
offline provider  79
Old price property  60
one-column layout  26
order
Billing email address  98
billing information, viewing  100
Cancel Order button  100
Edit order totals button  100
Go directly to order number option  98
information, editing  100
information, viewing  100
Mark as paid button  100
notes, adding  106
notes, deleting  106
Order GUID  98
payment status  98
processing  97
products, editing  104, 105
products, viewing  104, 105
profit  98
return requests, processing  107-110
shipping information, editing  101-103
shipping information, viewing  101-103
shipping status  98
Start date and End date  98
status  98
tax, total  98
total  98
order details, checkout process  42
Order GUID  98
order information, checkout process  42
order notes
about  106
Display to customer  106
message  106
order totals, dashboard  48
Order weight from and Order weight to  81
P
Parent category  51
partial refund, payment methods  75
Password, email accounts  90
Password protected, Topics (Pages)  89
payment information, checkout process  40
payment method, checkout process  40
payment methods
about  74, 75
authorize  75
authorize and capture  75
capture  75
configuration options  76
configuring  75
partial refund  75
PayPal payment method, configuring  76
pending  75
purchase order payment method, 
configuring  76
refund  75
void  75
payment status  98
PayPal payment method
configuring  76
PDF settings  74
pending, payment methods  75
picture, categories  51
picture, product  57

[ 120 ]
plugins
about  93
installing, steps for  94, 95
polls, content management  86
port, email accounts  90
price, product  60
price, product pages  31
price ranges, categories  52
print packing slip button  103
product attributes
about  64
new product attributes, creating  64, 65
product cost  60
product name  30, 55
product pages
about  30-34
add this  33
add to cart  32
add to compare list  33
add to wishlist  32
display stock availability  31
email a friend  32
full description  33
price  31
product name  30
product pictures  30
product tags  34
quantity  31
related products  34
review and rate link  31
short description  31
product pictures  30
product reviews  54
products
about  53
Bulk Edit Product Variants  54
categories, creating  49
categories  52
Low Stock Report  54
Manage Products  54
new products, adding  54
Product Reviews  54
Product Tags  54
searching for  34, 35
product tags  54-56
product tags, product pages  34
Product template, product  56
product variant
attributes  63
discounts  63
Product variant attributes  63
Tier prices  63
promotions  47
public-facing storefront
about  23
category pages  27, 28
checkout process  38-42
manufacturer pages  27-29
product pages  30-34
products, searching for  34, 35
shopping cart  35-38
site, layout  24-26
site, structure  24-26
Public store, administration site  46
Published, categories  52
Published, product  56, 63
purchase order payment method
configuring  76
Q
quantity, product pages  31
R
rate computation methods  79
rate computation methods, shipping  79
Rate per weight unit  81
real time provider  79
Recurring product  61
refund, payment methods  75
registered customers, dashboard  49
related products, product  57
related products, product pages  34
Restart application, administration site  46
return requests
about  107
Edit Return Request Details page  109
Enable Returns System  107
Number of days that the return request is 
available  107
Return action  107, 108
Return reasons  107

[ 121 ]
review and rate link, product pages  31
right-side menu  25
root  25
root head  25
S
sales  47
Search link  34, 35
Secure Sockets Layer. See  SSL
security. See  SSL
Security settings  73
SEO, categories  52
SEO, product  57
SEO settings  73
Set as shipped button  103
shipments grid  103
shipping
about  77
by weight  80, 81
fixed rate shipping  81, 82
method, restrictions  78
methods  77, 82
offline provider  79
rate computation methods  79
real time provider  79
shipping address, checkout process  39
Shipping enabled and Free shipping, 
product  61
shipping info tab  101, 102
shipping method, checkout process  40
Shipping Rate Computation Methods grid  
80
shipping status  98
Shopping cart link
about  36
cart items  37
checkout progress  37
continue shopping  38
cross sells  38
current shopping carts, viewing  110, 111
discount code  38
estimate shipping  38
gift cards  38
Short description, product  55
Short description, product pages  31
Show on home page, categories  52
Show on home page, product  56
site
layout  24-26
structure  24-26
Sku  59
source code option  12, 16, 17
Special price, product  60
Special price start date and Special price 
end date, product  60
specification attributes
about  64
new specification attributes, creating  66, 67
Specification attributes, product  57
SQL Server
installing  11
SSL
about  95
enabling, ways  95, 96
SSL, email accounts  90
Stock quantity, product  62
Store closed  72
store information tab, general store settings
about  72
Allow customers to select a theme  73
Desktop store theme  72
Display EU cookie law warning  73
Mobile devices supported  73
Store closed  72
Store name  72
Store URL  72
Store name  72
Store URL  72
Subject, message templates  93
System name, Topics (Pages)  89
system, menu bar, administration site  47
T
Tax by Country & State & Zip  84
tax categories  83
Tax exempt and Tax category, product  61
tax providers  84, 85
Text Prompt option  68
three-column layout  26
Tier prices  63
Title, Topics (Pages)  89

[ 122 ]
Topics (Pages)
about  87, 88
body  89
Include in sitemap  89
Password protected  89
System name  89
Title  89
URL  88
Tree View  50
two-column layout  26
U
update shopping cart, Shopping cart link  38
upgrade script option  12
Upgrade Script option  14
Use default credentials, email accounts  90
User, email accounts  90
V
Visual Studio
installing  11
void, payment methods  75
W
Web (no source) option  11, 15
Weight, Length, Width, and Height, 
product  61
widgets, content management  87

Thank you for buying 
Getting Started with nopCommerce
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books 
give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using 
to get the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have 
seen in the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, 
giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality, 
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. For 
more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Open Source
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Open Source and Packt Enterprise, in order to 
continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Open Source brand, home 
to books published on software built around Open Source licences, and offering information 
to anybody from advanced developers to budding web designers. The Open Source brand 
also runs Packt's Open Source Royalty Scheme, by which Packt gives a royalty to each Open 
Source project about whose software a book is sold.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals 
should be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you 
would like to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our 
commissioning editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

Instant Magento Shipping How-To 
ISBN: 978-1-78216-540-8             Paperback: 53 pages
Making Magento shipping settings work for 
your business
1.	
Learn something new in an Instant! 
A short, fast, focused guide delivering 
immediate results 
2.	
Set up popular shipping methods such as 
Table Rates
3.	
Easily manage orders with reports and tools 
4.	
Order through the shipment phase
Instant E-commerce with 
OpenCart: Build a Shop
ISBN: 978-1-78216-968-0            Paperback: 70 pages
A fast-paced, practical guide to setting up your own 
shop with OpenCart
1.	
Learn something new in an Instant! 
A short, fast, focused guide delivering 
immediate results
2.	
Install and configure OpenCart correctly
3.	
Tackle difficult tasks such as payment 
gateways, shipping options, product attributes, 
and managing orders
4.	
Boost your sales by offering discounts, 
coupons, and voucher codes for your customers
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

Instant E-Commerce with 
Magento: Build a Shop
ISBN: 978-1-78216-486-9            Paperback: 52 pages
A fast-paced, practical guide to building your own 
shop with Magento
1.	
Learn something new in an Instant! 
A short, fast, focused guide delivering 
immediate results.
2.	
Learn how to install and configure an online 
shop with Magento 
3.	
Tackle difficult tasks like payment gateways, 
shipping options, and custom theming
4.	
Full of clear screenshots and step-by-step 
instructions 
Magento PHP Developer’s Guide
ISBN: 978-1-78216-306-0            Paperback: 256 pages
Get started with the flexible and powerful 
e-commerce framework, Magento
1.	
Build your first Magento extension, step by step
2.	
Extend core Magento functionality, such as 
the API
3.	
Learn how to test your Magento code

Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

