Whitehat Copycat
    Getting Online Faster!
Tim Bekker introducing Copycat Sites...
               BONUS
  1
Special Early Bird Report for Fellow Warriors
This report describes the essentials and features of Tim Bekker new IM 
Product Whitehat Copycat launching Tuesday January 26
 
 th   (with 
prelaunch starting at Tuesday January 19th). This information is not meant 
for the public and we ask you to not redistribute this report. Thanks!
1

2

Index
Index
 
                                                                                                                                     
 
 
....................................................................................................................................
 
 3  
Introduction
 
                                                                                                                           
 
 
..........................................................................................................................
 
 4  
The Godaddy All-in-One System
 
                                                                                         
 
 
........................................................................................
 
 7  
3

Introduction
Placing your website online is actually a quite straight forward and 
simple process. People usually get frightened by some scary words 
that are used when this topic is discussed. 
As I said, it’s a very simple process, but once again I have found a 
solution for you guys that even makes live easier.
The option I have found is an all-in-one service. You don’t have to 
mess around with settings you actually don’t have to enter any scary 
stuff yourself. It just works with a simple user interface.
However…I guess some of you rather do it the hard way so I will give 
a brief summary of the steps that should be taken to get your files 
online.
1. Sign up for a hosting account
 
 . Meaning nothing more then 
buying some space on a computer (server) somewhere that is 
connected to the internet. The more space you buy and the 
better the connection (speed) you choose the more you pay. 
Most companies have cheap starter packages. You don’t need 
anymore in the beginning.
2. buy a domain name
 
 . For which domain do you want your 
website to be found. I have purchased 
http://www.whitehatcopycat.com for this project. Usually 
4

domains can be bought in a price rane from $8-$2o depending 
on the company where you buy your domain.
3. Log in to your hosting account
 
  and simply upload your website 
files to your hosting account. (uploading means something like 
copy/paste to another folder, but then different. ON your own 
pc you move files from one folder to another. Now you move 
files form one pc to another pc).
4. Point your domain name to your hosting account
 
 . This might 
be the hardest part for you to understand right now. But with 
the option I found for you guys you don’t have to understand 
this because they do it for you. Automatically.
If you choose for another option and buy your domain and 
hosting at different companies then you have to tell the 
company where you bought your domain where it can find your 
files. With other words you have to add some information to 
your domain so the domain company knows where in the world 
you have uploaded your website files (where in the world your 
hosting account is). 
Once you have added this information your domain can enter 
your files and will your website will come up.
The information that should be added to your domain is called name 
servers and is abbreviated with ns1… and ns2…..
5

When you buy your hosting account the company will give you this 
information.
It will look like for example:
ns1.domaincompany.com
ns2.domaincompany.com
All you have to is login to your domain account and add this 
information somewhere under the tab “nameservers”.
Please see the figure below for an overview 
I can imagine this sounds very difficult, but it really isn’t. However as I 
said with the option I am going to tell you about right now you can 
forget about all this immediately.
6

The Godaddy All-in-One System
The site Godaddy is not only a domain registrar company, but is 
also offering reliable webhosting packages. Because it combines both 
services you will have everything in one place and you don’t have to 
switch between your domain and hosting account all the time.
Even better they have developed a complete user interface that 
makes uploading a website a piece of cake.
The first step would be surfing to Godaddy 
http://www.WhitehatCopycat.com/godaddy 
7

On the homepage you will find a search field where you can check if 
the domain you want to purchase is still available. Search for a good 
domain until you found one.
After you have found a nice domain you can click on the hosting tab. 
A page will open with hosting packages. Choose your hosting 
package (the cheapest will do for now) and proceed to checkout.
Sign up for an account and checkout 
8

If you are not yet logged in to your account log in to your account and 
place your mouse on the hosting tab. A menu will come down, 
choose “my hosting account” 
9

You will get to the next screen 
Click “Setup account” and Godaddy will automatically setup your 
hosting account. This can take a while (I guess up to a few hours or 
so)
When you return after a while and your hosting account has been 
setup, the setup account text is changed in “Manage Account”
Click on “Manage Account”
10

You will be forwarded to your hosting account control panel. Watch 
the next screenshot.
11

Click on the button “Your Domains”. The next screen opens 
If you click on the button “add domain” you can add as many 
domains as you want to your hosting account. (This is the part where 
you normally would have given the name server information, but with 
this solution you don’t have to).
12

Simply add your domain and add a folder name (name of the site for 
instance. It doesn’t really matter what you add there. I would name 
the folder after the project).
When you have done this you are ready for the final step: Uploading 
your files to your hosting account.
13

Place your mouse on the “content” menu item on top. A menu falls 
down, select ftp client 
14

A small java application will open showing the next screen 
The left panel shows your local system (folders on your own pc) and 
right panel the folders of your hosting account. 
Now simply open the folder in your local system that contains your 
website pages.
Click on the folder in the right panel where you want to upload your 
file (the folder you just created when adding your domain, in my 
example projectkk). The folder opens and is still empty (of course). 
15

Select the files from your local system that you want to upload, and 
click the arrow that points to the right 
The ftp program will start uploading or copying the files from your 
local system to you hosting account 
16

That’s all. Now open your browser (Mozilla or Internet Explorer) and 
type your own domain name in the address field.
If you have done everything right your new site will open. You have 
just successfully created your own first site! Congrats.
If your site doesn’t open you must have gone wrong somewhere on 
the way. I recommend going through the steps above again before 
you start to panic.
17

