LOTTERIES LOOK FOR 
A WAY FORWARD
  
  •  OCT-DEC 2017 •  ISSUE 31                                  
A GAMING INTELLIGENCE PUBLICATION
G A M I N G  I N T E L L I G E N C E  Q U A R T E R L Y
Oct - Dec 2017 
Q3 REVIEW
Lotto Hamburg | Camelot | Ithuba | Svenska Spel | IGT | Scientiﬁc Games and more
Lottoland
CEO discusses  
its rise - and  
resulting  
backlash

CONTACT US AT SALES@NETENT.COM

ANALYSIS & OPINION
4 Snapshot Top stories, top quotes,  
top deals and Matt Davey on Scientiﬁc  
Games’ NYX acquisition
6 Thought Leadership Scientiﬁc Games, Pragmatic 
Play and SBTech
14 People The Stars Group’s new chief customer ofﬁcer 
Christopher Coyne
17 Technology & New Products  
Sportradar seals eSports deal, Superbet partners 
ioSport and more
19 Lottery New Hampshire goes online, 
Lottoland launches instant win games  
and more
20 Games The launches that caught GIQ’s 
eye in Q3
22 Social Gaming Intelligence LottoInteractive on 
why social is key to the future of lotteries
26 Legal & Regulatory The latest regulatory 
updates from around the world
32 Marketing How lotteries look to  
balance attracting players with highlighting  
their role in society
FEATURES
35 State of Play: The Lottery Industry  
Gaming Intelligence looks at the key issues  
facing state lotteries around the world
60 Lottoland Takes on Lottery Giants   
Nigel Birrell discusses the lottery betting operator’s  
rapid rise – and the resulting backlash
FINANCE – H1 2017
67 Finance M&A key to growth as Cherry, 
GIG and NYX secure top spot in the GIQ20
AND ANOTHER THING…
78 GIQ editor Robin Harrison on the negative 
publicity faced by UK iGaming operators
CONTENTS
3
GIQ Q3 REVIEW
TIME FOR LOTTERIES 
TO GET CREATIVE 
L
OTTERIES MAY SEEM 
set apart from the rest of 
the gaming industry, but 
many of the issues they face are 
the same as those confronting pri-
vate operators. There are con-
cerns over regulatory change and 
product development and innova-
tion is a focus, as operators look to 
bring in a younger clientele. 
Increased competition from small, 
but rapidly-growing competitors 
is also a worry.
Operators need to look 
at new ways to remain rel-
evant and attractive to cus-
tomers at a time when there 
is greater competition for wal-
let share than ever before.
Lotteries have the built-in 
advantage of vast distribution 
networks. Customers can buy a 
ticket or scratchcard on impulse 
when making other purchases. 
For private operators retail may 
be an increasingly difﬁcult chan-
nel, but it is still responsible for 
the bulk of lottery sales. 
Despite companies’ 
complaints (see page 
36) online competi-
tion is not diminish-
ing retail sales.
T hat doesn’t 
mean that online 
can be disregarded, 
and lotteries need to 
get creative if they are going to 
increase interest in their wares 
among younger, more tech-savvy 
consumers (see page 22).
This will necessitate difﬁcult 
conversations with retailers, many 
of whom are resistant to the lotter-
ies increasing their online pres-
ence (see page 44). It may also force 
them to learn from, rather than try 
to ban, new market entrants such 
as Lottoland (see page 56).
Lottoland is a bookmaker that 
offers a new product on which 
customers can bet (see page 60). It 
embodies lotteries’ worst fears of 
private operators drinking their 
milkshake, rather than a genu-
inely new threat. It has also made 
lotteries seem engaging and new.
Beyond the intense competi-
tion that exists today in many 
jurisdictions for a share of con-
sumers’ gaming spend, operators 
must also compete with a never 
ending range of alternative enter-
tainment options vying for a share 
of the consumer’s wallet. This is 
seeing once separate sectors begin 
to encroach into one another’s ter-
ritory, as they expand their prod-
uct offerings to give consumers 
the range of choice that they now 
demand. For lotteries in particu-
lar, this might mean re-evaluating 
the role they play in their domestic 
gaming market. n
Robin Harrison
EDITOR
LEADER
Q3 REVIEW
EDITOR IN CHIEF 
Bobby Mamudi 
bmm@gamingintelligence.com
EDITOR  
Robin Harrison 
rhm@gamingintelligence.com
SUB-EDITOR 
Camilla Cary-Elwes 
info@thecopyeditor.co.uk
ART EDITOR 
Alan Bingle 
alan@forty6design.com
DEPUTY EDITOR 
Kio Dawson 
k.dawson@gamingintelligence.com
FEATURES WRITER  
Steve Hoare 
sah@gamingintelligence.com
CONTRIBUTORS  
Caroline Parry
ADVERTISING & SUBSCRIPTIONS 
Omer Uziely 
omer@gamingintelligence.com
www.GamingIntelligence.com
Published by 
Gaming Intelligence Services Ltd 
Studio 15, Riverside Building 
55 Trinity Buoy Wharf 
London E14 0FP 
support@gamingintelligence.com 
T. +44 (0)845 052 3816
 
GamingIntelligence, Gaming Intelligence 
Quarterly and GIQ are trademarks  
of Gaming Intelligence Services 
Limited. All rights reserved. No part 
of this publication may be reproduced 
or transmitted in any form or by any 
means, or stored in a retrieval system 
of any nature without prior written 
permission. Application for permission 
must be made in writing to the publisher. 
Copyright © 2017 Gaming Intelligence.  
All rights reserved.

GIQ
Q3 2017
Snapshot
4
Blog: A reality check for the UK 
gambling industry
Scientiﬁc Games acquires NYX 
Gaming Group for CAD$775m
Aristocrat begins search for new Las 
Vegas-based ﬁnance chief 
London-listed Paysafe Group at the 
centre of M&A activity
GameCo partners Bandai Namco on 
Soulcalibur video gambling game
Blog: Breon Corcoran leaves to hero 
fanfare but what of the inheritance?
Camelot outlines plan for private 
management of Illinois Lottery
Scientiﬁc Games appoints Leigh 
Nissim to lead interactive B2B 
division
Mr Green brings in Mattias Wedar 
as permanent CEO of tech division
Gamblit Gaming to develop skill-
based PAC-MAN game for casinos 
Quote of the Quarter
We’re probably 
experiencing some 
of those issues of a maturing 
company right now with the 
regulatory headwinds, but 
it’s kind of a testament to 
our success
Nigel Birrell, see page 60
most popular news stories 
on GamingIntelligence.com
THE QUARTER’S DEALS IN 60 SECONDS
Scientiﬁc Games’ acquisition of NYX Gaming 
Group may have been the supplier’s most eye-
catching deal of Q3, but the company also found 
time to snap up Red7Mobile and Lapis Soft-
ware. Red7Mobile is a studio developing casino 
and sports betting products, based in the UK. 
Lapis, meanwhile, is a long-term partner of SciG-
ames. The New Jersey-based business develops 
lottery and retail sales performance applications. 
In Austria, the country’s Federal Compe-
tition Authority (BWB) has approved Sazka 
Group’s acquisition of a majority sharehold-
ing in Casinos Austria. The BWB expressed no 
opposition to the acquisition and said that it saw 
no need to launch an in-depth investigation into 
Sazka’s bid, given that the Czech gaming opera-
tor currently has zero market share in Austria.
Playtech has completed the acquisition of 
technology, intellectual property and certain 
customer assets from ACM Group (Alpha), 
strengthening its newly-rebranded TradeTech 
Group ﬁnancial trading division. It will pay up 
to $150m for the assets.
Moving to the Caribbean, Intralot has raised 
$40m through the sale of its stake in Jamaican 
lottery and sportsbook operator Supreme  
SCIENTIFIC GAMES DID not buy NYX for 
its lottery or bingo product. It will beneﬁt from 
its casino platform and games, but the real  
reason why SciGames bought NYX is because  
of OpenBet.
While NYX CEO Matt Davey denies his com-
pany was actively searching a buyer, he believes 
the deal “makes a ton of sense” for all involved.
“We were around six months into a three-
year strategic plan I had devised,” he tells Gam-
ing Intelligence. “We’d completed the acquisition 
of OpenBet and were reorienting our customer 
focus, and there were signs it was working.”
In Q2 the company reduced its net loss, 
increased EBITDA and completed a debt refi-
nancing transaction. Things were settling down 
for the supplier following a frantic few years of 
M&A, but under the Scientific Games banner 
Davey believes that all the elements are in place 
to accelerate its strategy. “It allows us to push 
forward faster with our strategic plan, without 
changing it fundamentally to create a global 
digital gaming powerhouse.”
NYX’s gaming business will be bolstered 
by around 300 SciGames employees, creating a 
1,500-strong team, allowing it to speed up devel-
opment of proprietary games to complement the 
third-party content offered via its OGS solution.
“The industry’s speeding up, not slowing 
down, so we’re going to have to keep up with 
Scientiﬁc Games acquires  
SciGames’ $775m deal for the OpenBet owner 
positions it as a frontrunner in a regulated US 
sports betting market
DEAL 
OF THE 
QUARTER

GIQ
Q3 2017
5
GIQ Q3 REVIEW
Get the latest news from our website 
GamingIntelligence.com
FINANCE
US$17.9m 
First-half net loss for 888
CAD$119.9m 
NYX Gaming revenue in H1 2017
US$203.1m 
Scientiﬁc Games interactive 
revenue in H1 2017
M&A
CAD$775m 
Scientiﬁc Games deal to acquire 
NYX Gaming
$150m 
Playtech deal for ﬁnancials trader 
ACM Group
REGULATORY
£7.8m 
888 settlement for social 
responsibility failings
LOTTERY
8 
New Hampshire the 8th US state  
to approve iLottery 
€500m 
Annual turnover of unlicensed 
lottery operators in Germany, 
according to DLTB (see page 36)
€300m 
Revenue generated by Lottoland in 
2016 (see page 60)
The quarter 
in numbers
NYX Gaming Group
Ventures. Trinidad-based Zodiac International 
has bought the company’s 50.05 per cent holding 
in Intralot Caribbean Ventures, which in turn 
owned a 49.9 per cent share in Supreme Ventures.
The quarter saw significant upheaval in  
the payment sector, with Worldpay and  
Vantiv agreeing terms on a $9.3bn merger, 
and Paysafe Group’s board recommending a  
£2.96bn offer from the business by a private 
equity consortium. 
Scandinavia-focused operator and supplier 
Gaming Innovation Group boosted its afﬁliate 
business with the acquisition of Denmark’s Red 
Penguin and fellow Nordic afﬁliate Stk Market-
ing, for fees of €13m and€25.6m respectively. 
SportPesa has moved into the Italian market 
after purchasing RCS Gaming, the iGaming arm 
of Milan-listed media giant RCS MediaGroup. In 
a similar deal, Gauselmann Group’s Cashpoint 
subsidiary has snapped up the Danish assets of 
rival operator Tipico. 
Finally, we end in the US, where DraftKings 
and FanDuel have scrapped plans to merge into  
a DFS behemoth. The Federal Trade Com-
mission had filed an injunction to stop the  
deal going ahead. n
that,” he says. “The acquisition gives me access 
to a number of the tools that I would otherwise 
have to go out and buy a few years down the  
line as well.”
This may help SciGames close 
the gap on the industry-leading 
iGaming suppliers, but it is the 
plans for OpenBet that have gen-
erated the most interest. After all, 
despite several years of predictions 
about its imminent demise, Open-
Bet remains the world’s leading 
sportsbook supplier. 
It can become even stronger 
if the US Supreme Court rules in 
New Jersey’s favour in its chal-
lenge against the Professional and 
Amateur Sports Protection Act. 
Development on modernis-
ing the underlying technology for 
the core OpenBet platform will 
be sped up, as will development 
of a “lighter” version for compa-
nies that find the main bespoke 
product too expensive or not fit-
ting their needs. This will bol-
ster its existing business around 
the world, but the US remains  
the focus. 
“Scientiﬁc Games is licensed in every state. 
This means we can rapidly roll out a solution for 
clients, rather than spending years going through 
the licensing process,” Davey notes. 
Some may see this as a very early move by 
SciGames, given the unpredictability of Supreme 
Court outcomes and the snail’s pace of US legisla-
tion. Yet the announcement of the deal has many 
thinking that legal US sports betting is a question 
of when, not if. 
Davey admits that this had a 
bearing on the deal, saying his 
new parent company is “clearly” 
positioning itself for the opening 
of the US sportsbook market. 
“If sports betting is to be legal-
ised beyond the four states where 
it’s currently allowed, companies 
need not only a product, but also 
high-quality trading and pricing 
services. It’s time for the industry 
to get its house in order.”
This puts the onus on SciG-
ames’ competitors to make a simi-
lar move, and a new wave of M&A 
seems likely. The likes of Amelco, 
SBTech, Genius Sports and Kambi 
Group will all find themselves 
ﬁelding interest from US gaming 
giants – if they are not already. 
The NYX deal is a canny move 
by SciGames. Recent history 
shows that it does not make bad 
acquisitions. In acquiring Bally, Shufﬂemaster 
and WMS, it has created an almighty supplier. If 
sports betting really is the next frontier then the 
$775m acquisition price will look as small as the 
$80m pittance that Caesars acquired Playtika for, 
before selling the company for $4.4bn. n
“The acquisition 
gives me access 
to a number of 
the tools I would 
otherwise have 
to go out and 
buy a few years 
down the line” 
Matt Davey, NYX

6
 SPONSORED EDITORIAL
SCIENTIFIC GAMES LOTTERY
THESE DAYS, YOU’D be hard-pressed to ﬁnd 
a consumer product or service that doesn’t 
offer some sort of loyalty rewards programme. 
Retail outlets, from health food to hardware, 
use them to drive trafﬁc. Products, from shoes 
to shampoo, use the programmes to stand out 
from the competition and drive sales.
In fact, according to a Harris Interactive 
poll performed for Transera, there are more 
than 3.3 billion loyalty programme member-
ships in the US. That’s approximately 29 pro-
grammes per household (how many bar-coded 
loyalty cards do you have on your key ring?). 
The psychology behind successful loyalty 
rewards programmes is fascinating and well 
beyond the scope of this article. But it essen-
tially boils down to motivation. Are your cus-
tomers sufﬁciently motivated to engage in your 
programme on a regular and on-going basis? 
Or do they become bored over time? 
Over the past decade, the lottery industry 
has slowly embraced the concept of engaging 
customers beyond just the moment of pur-
chase. Most lotteries offer some version of a 
‘players’ club’ that enables players to receive 
news and notiﬁcations. Some lotteries go a bit 
further and let their players use non-winning 
tickets as entries to second-chance draws. 
These second-chance draw programmes can 
be a valuable component in a lottery’s overall 
marketing effort, but are usually short-term, 
since they are typically associated with a spe-
ciﬁc and ﬁnite promotional period. A loyalty 
rewards programme, by contrast, is an ongo-
ing effort that contributes to a lottery’s long-
term strategic goals. 
Scientiﬁc Games has been creating loyalty 
rewards programmes for the lottery indus-
try since 2009. In those eight years, we have 
learned a great deal about what motivates 
players to sign up, stay engaged and keep com-
ing back. But when we set out to develop our 
latest loyalty rewards programme, we looked 
beyond just the lottery space to the broader 
world of gaming to see if there were lessons to 
be learned. And there were several. 
The next generation 
of lottery loyalty
“We realised that earning points only goes 
so far when motivating players,” said Amy 
Hill, vice president, Digital Content Studio at 
Scientiﬁc Games. “There needed to be a more 
active component to the programme that 
excites players beyond just watching their 
points balance grow. We also needed a way to 
modify a programme’s rewards on-the-ﬂy so 
we are able to quickly make adjustments that 
inﬂuence player behaviour in a way that aligns 
with a lottery’s business objectives.”
Adam Faust, Scientiﬁc Games’ director of 
product management, explained: “When we 
looked at what Bally (acquired by Scientiﬁc 
Games in 2014) was doing with their rewards 
programme, we saw that their members were 
far more engaged because they weren’t just 
taking their points and banking them – they 
were using their points to play additional 
games or participate in some activity in order 
to win even more points. Essentially, they had 
moved from earning points to winning points, 
which is a lot more active and a lot more fun. 
And that translates to significantly higher 
engagement rates.”
Bonusing
So how do you move from an environment 
where members are focused on earning points 
to an environment where members are focused 
on winning points? That’s where bonusing 
comes in. ‘Bonusing’ is a gaming industry 
term that describes the process of letting play-
ers use their points at various intervals to play 
for even more points, by engaging in certain 
activities like playing a game on their mobile 
device or entering a draw. 
An important component of bonusing is the 
use of achievement-based thresholds which 
can be customised to encourage certain behav-
iours (more on this later). These thresholds are 
typically easy to reach and offer members the 
opportunity to engage in some desirable activ-
ity like spinning a wheel for the chance to win 
extra points. What makes these achievement-
based thresholds so important is that they keep 
“When we looked at Bally’s 
rewards programme, we saw 
their members were far more 
engaged because they weren’t 
just taking their points and 
banking them – they were 
using them to play additional 
games or participate in some 
activity in order to win even 
more points” 
Adam Faust, Scientiﬁc Games

7
GIQ Q3 REVIEW
 SPONSORED EDITORIAL
SCIENTIFIC GAMES LOTTERY
members engaged with the programme on an 
on-going basis, versus simply watching 
their points balance grow over time. 
Players aren’t just rewarded once 
after accumulating and exchanging a 
large number of points, but are being 
constantly rewarded and motivated at 
all levels of participation.
This combination of thresholds and 
bonuses becomes a powerful tool for 
affecting buying behaviour in a way 
that supports a lottery’s business objec-
tives. Say, for example, a lottery wants to 
drive sales of its lower-price-point instant 
games. They would simply make $1 and $2 
instant games the entry vehicle for these 
more focused activities, thus driving sales 
of the $1 and $2 games. 
Even more exciting, from a marketing 
perspective, is that all of this member activ-
ity can be aggregated and tracked in a way 
that provides enormously valuable insights, 
which can then be used to further support 
the lottery’s business objectives. Does the 
data show that female members between the  
ages of 35 and 44 respond especially well to a 
certain offer, or entering a particular game at 
a higher rate? That information can be used 
to develop messaging and create content that 
drives this demographic to retail. Are males 
between the ages of 25 and 34 entering a draw 
for a particular event prize (e.g. a concert or 
sporting event) at a higher rate? Why not cre-
ate a game that features a similar theme to 
drive sales among that demographic? 
Demographic segmentation is just the 
beginning. Scientiﬁc Games’ ONE™ segmen-
tation enables loyalty programme members to 
be grouped by motivation as well. That means 
we not only know who is buying our products, 
but why. The Acquaintance segment, for exam-
ple, has an afﬁnity for instant games but tends 
to prefer lower price points and seasonal/holi-
day tickets. Knowing this, a lottery might offer 
a special loyalty rewards programme around 
$1 and $2 holiday games to see if the number of 
Acquaintance members grows 
as a result of the programme, 
and whether there is an increase 
in participation among existing 
Acquaintance members. Motivational 
segmentation goes beyond demographic seg-
mentation, enabling lotteries to develop far 
deeper relationships with their players. 
“That’s what is so exciting about our lat-
est loyalty rewards platform,” says Jessica 
Diorio, Scientific Games’ senior director of 
planning and customer engagement. “It’s not 
a one-size-ﬁts-all programme – we designed 
it to be ﬂexible and customisable so that any 
promotion a lottery may run aligns exactly 
with their business objectives. A single lot-
tery might have two, ﬁve, 10 different loyalty 
rewards promotions running at any one time 
depending on their business objectives, and 
our platform supports that.”
It’s all about options
Lotteries with successful loyalty rewards 
programmes achieve consistently high 
engagement rates by offering their members 
a wide variety of options. The 
Missouri Lottery’s My Lottery 
programme, for example, has 
two different types of points (prize 
points and draw points) and a number 
of exciting ways for members to spend those 
points. Prize Points can be spent on digital 
downloads, including music, eBooks, audio 
books and software. Prize points can also be 
used to get coupons for discounted lottery 
products and gift cards for popular products 
and services, such as Land’s End, Uber and 
Applebee’s. Draw points can be used to enter 
draws for concerts, sporting events, high-end 
merchandise, vacations, automobiles, and yes, 
everyone’s favourite – cash. 
Remember – every ticket entered, every 
point redeemed, every draw entered, and 
every game played means a database that 
grows more robust over time. This database 
provides an enormous wealth of information 
and insights into player behaviour and moti-
vation. This can be used to increase member 
engagement, provide a better experience for 
players, and – ultimately – grow sales.  n

8
 SPONSORED EDITORIAL
PRAGMATIC PLAY
New gaming content 
suppliers must ensure  
they can sign up 
customers while 
expanding their product 
range if they are to gain a 
foothold in the industry, 
says Pragmatic Play head 
of business development, 
Yossi Barzely
READERS OF THIS magazine won’t need me 
to tell them that the world of iGaming moves at 
quite a pace. For any relatively young company 
trying to enter an industry like ours – one that 
is lightning fast and packed to the rafters with 
established names – it can feel like sidling up 
to the autobahn in a pedal car. Getting up to 
speed can be challenging, but it is the agile and 
prepared that will ﬁnd success.
It is worth pointing out that younger compa-
nies should, by their nature, be well-equipped 
to react efﬁciently to developments and take 
vital business decisions quickly. Smaller,  
more dynamic teams will not be as bound by 
pre-existing commercial structures when 
releasing new products and services. However, 
the costs associated with changing direction 
must be factored in. 
Younger providers must be wary of fall-
ing victim to a tendency to underestimate the 
importance of speed to market. There is limited 
sense in having a stable of expertly modelled, 
top-of-the-line games if your business has not 
built up the commercial capacity to realise 
the potential of those titles through integra-
tions with operators and platform providers. 
Equally, employing a team of talented sales peo-
ple will not reap all the rewards its potential 
might promise, if there is not enough meat on 
the bones on the technological side.
Becoming an established supplier to the reg-
ulated gambling industry is no mean feat, given 
the importance of regulatory compliance and 
the increasing quality of the competition. As 
such, a key measure of success for more fresh-
faced slot developers is to build and maintain 
momentum in their development processes and 
technical integrations – put simply, the greater 
the number of integrations that iGaming pro-
viders can put in place, the more they will be 
able to capitalise on their initial investment in 
their games and technical infrastructure.
Don’t get left behind
Building up your distribution and doing so 
quickly, all while having a growing range 
of titles to match, is becoming ever more  
important as the multitude of providers releas-
ing their games with dozens of partners at once 
increases. Striking the right balance between 
the push on integrations and product releases 
is critical. 
Quality and efﬁciency: 
Striking the right balance
Velocity is something we at Pragmatic 
Play have needed to show a great deal of  
commitment to. While finding a foothold in 
this industry has never been a simple task, 
making good on our momentum in both game 
development and technical integrations, with-
out sacriﬁcing quality, has always been a key 
priority. We have since expanded our portfolio 
via GVC’s impressive stable of online gaming 
brands, while our recent tie-up with leading 
platform solutions supplier GAMEIOM was 
fully executed within less than two months of 
our ﬁrst meeting. 
Delivering on these integrations with a 
high development speed must also be at the 
forefront of a provider’s strategy, and is cer-
tainly an element that we have had front of 
mind as we continue to make headway as one 
of the industry’s fastest growing game develop-
ers. We release two new games a month, and 
our speed to market (while maintaining excel-
lent performance) continues to be an important 
string to our bow. 
A world of opportunity
The door for iGaming companies is also begin-
ning to widen with regards to regulation. The 
market is expanding. Not just in the traditional 
territories of Europe, but also in regions includ-
ing Latin America. Colombia is leading by issu-
ing its ﬁrst licences as part of its robust new 
regulatory framework. Being aware of these 
trends and ready to enter those markets when 
the time is right is a critical factor in success. 
Also, capitalising by gaining the appropriate 
licences, while tailoring your offering to suit 
the needs of each speciﬁc market, is becoming 
a factor that sets companies apart. 
Having recently entered Portugal and Den-
mark, with the latter going live in August 2017 
with Vera&John, the development of global 
iGaming regulation is a trend not lost on 
Pragmatic Play. A ﬁrm, considered and swift 
approach to commercial, technical and regula-
tory considerations is important for all young 
companies if they are to ﬁnd their feet in an 
increasingly fast-paced business. n
Yossi Barzely is head of business development at 
Pragmatic Play. He is responsible for driving the 
company’s growth, as well as providing support 
to its operating partners. 
“While ﬁnding a foothold in 
this industry has never been a 
simple task, making good on 
our momentum in both game 
development and technical 
integrations, without 
sacriﬁcing quality, has  
always been a key priority” 
Yossi Barzely, Pragmatic Play

Premium Live Casino 
Supplier
diversifying your 
live casino?

ExCeL, London
6-8 February 2018
A passport to
For more information on gaming’s utopia visit: 
icetotallygaming.com
#passporttoparadice

The US Supreme Court 
hearing of New Jersey’s 
legal challenge to PASPA 
could pave the way for 
sports betting regulation 
in the US. Although 
many issues still need 
addressing, Richard 
Carter, chief executive of 
SBTech, says it could be 
a momentous event, for 
which SBTech is ready     
THE US SUPREME Court’s hearing of New 
Jersey’s case against PASPA this winter opens 
up the possibility of seeing sports betting regu-
lated across the US. 
This is an exciting prospect for the  
industry and one that was hotly debated during 
the recent G2E congress in Las Vegas; whether 
by operators, sportsbook suppliers or other 
business service providers. The size of the 
market is one obvious reason, the other being 
that not so long ago it seemed very unlikely  
that the industry would even get the oppor-
tunity to argue its case in front of America’s 
highest court. 
This is testimony to the legal efforts of New 
Jersey, the growing pro-state lobby and anti-
federal government interference movement, 
and the educational work undertaken by the 
American Gaming Association’s betting task-
force (of which SBTech is a member). This 
means that now, the industry has reached the 
stage where there is an increasing consensus 
among many stakeholders that regulation of 
sports betting in the US is a desirable and wel-
come scenario. Compare this to the aftermath 
of UIGEA in 2006 and the contrast is striking; 
10 years on there is an acceptance that a sports 
betting regulatory framework is a viable option 
in the US. 
The prospect  
of US regulation
though estimates vary considerably, they still  
range from US$10bn to US$150bn). The  
rise of daily fantasy sports betting in the past 
five years has also spurred regulators and 
sports leagues to acknowledge the fact that a 
regulatory framework for US sports betting  
is necessary.
Interestingly, should sports betting become 
regulated in the US, it could well be the ﬁrst 
truly omnichannel market for iGaming. The 
rates of mobile commerce, scale and acceptance 
of the channel, in 2016 close to US$350bn was 
spent via apps in the US; mean older consumers 
are already familiar with land-based, mobile 
or desktop platforms, while for younger play-
ers online may actually be the ﬁrst and only 
medium through which they wager. 
As far as SBTech is concerned, we are com-
mitted and prepared for a potential regulated 
US sports betting market and have the product 
offering to address either a retail-only market, 
online-only or omnichannel. We have already 
announced the opening of a US ofﬁce in early 
2018 and will continue to assist the American 
Gaming Association and all stakeholders in 
any way we can. Talks with US contacts and 
prospects are ongoing and we have every inten-
tion of being ready should such a momentous 
event occur.  n
There is an increasing 
consensus among stakeholders 
that regulation of sports 
betting in the US is a desirable 
and welcome scenario
11
GIQ Q3 REVIEW
 SPONSORED EDITORIAL
SBTECH
Nonetheless, some caveats are necessary: 
l  Even if the Supreme Court rules in favour of 
New Jersey and clears the path for US states 
to move towards regulating sports betting, 
the framework will still require much work 
and will be the focus of intense lobbying. 
l  Would regulation include all channels: 
online, mobile, land-based? Would betting be 
allowed across all of those or only in casinos? 
And what about retail outlets? 
l  And would licences only be available to casi-
nos and/or state lotteries? What about tribal 
casinos and racetracks? Will afﬁliates (as in 
the case of New Jersey) require licences?
Market make-up 
It is beyond doubt that considerable con-
sumer demand for betting products is there 
Stateside. The estimated size of the black 
market alone demonstrates the point (even 



14
THE STARS GROUP chief executive Rafi 
Ashkenazi has been building a formidable 
executive management team around him since 
taking full charge of the company in August 
last year.
Former Crown Resorts chief marketing 
officer Christopher Coyne is the latest to  
join the team as chief customer ofﬁcer. Coyne 
joins GTS co-founder and former SciGames 
CTO Jerry Bowskill, who joined as chief tech-
nology officer, Robin Chhabra was nabbed 
from William Hill to become chief commer-
cial development officer, and Brian Kyle, 
who joins from Pivot Technology as chief  
ﬁnancial ofﬁcer.
The C-level executives complement the 
other new recruits: Bo Wänghammar, for-
merly of bwin and Mr Green, who has been 
brought in as managing director of the Stars 
casino; and Zeno Ossko, the former mybet 
CEO who takes charge of BetStars. Together 
with Ashkenazi’s trusted lieutenants, chief 
operating ofﬁcer Guy Templer and corporate 
communications VP Eric Hollreiser, it is an 
experienced team. 
Coyne is thrilled to be joining the team. He 
likens it to his time at Paddy Power, working 
under Breon Corcoran and Patrick Kennedy, 
when the Irish bookmaker was making its ﬁrst 
foray into online gaming.
“It was electric,” says Coyne. “It was an 
amazing place to be and this feels similar.”
While that experience clearly 
stands out, Coyne enthuses about 
all the companies he has worked 
at, from Crown Resorts to pre-
industry roles at BT, John Lewis 
and GE Capital. After ﬁnishing at 
Crown Resorts in March, Coyne 
was adamant that he wanted to 
join a company of similar standing.
Ashkenazi had known Coyne 
for a number of years and when 
the latter became available, he 
was keen to exploit that experi-
ence. The pair met up and creat-
ed the chief customer ofﬁcer posi-
tion that gives him a crucial role 
in shaping Stars’ aim to become 
“the world’s favourite iGaming 
destination”.
“Great businesses in all sec-
tors are typically very good at the customer 
piece,” says Coyne.
He offers the example of his former employer 
John Lewis, a 150-year-old company that is con-
tinually ranked as the UK’s favourite brand in 
retail. 
“There is something in the DNA of the com-
pany. When you join John Lewis as a partner 
[all of the shop’s employees are shareholders] 
you become exceptionally customer-centric 
One more for the 
Stars dream team
Christopher Coyne  
returns to the UK as  
chief customer ofﬁcer  
of The Stars Group after  
a successful stint Down  
Under at Crown Resorts
and almost obsessive in your commitment to 
providing the best product and service.”
That commitment to customer service 
runs deep inside PokerStars’ DNA as well.  
If it was lost slightly during the Amaya  
years, it is a value that the Scheinbergs 
espoused vigorously.
“Stars has been doing this for years,” says 
Coyne. “My job is to take it to the next level.”
Coyne’s role will involve the complex task 
of ensuring some consistency of 
customer experience and ser-
vice across products and juris-
dictions, while also optimising 
it for each vertical or country. 
While Stars has years of experi-
ence in poker, what works for the 
poker player does not necessarily 
work for the casino player or the 
sports bettor.
He will work with the execu-
tive management team, the MDs 
of each vertical, the marketing 
team, developers and data ana-
lysts to make this happen. 
Given his role, it is perhaps 
no surprise that Coyne also 
mentions working with director 
of social gaming Lloyd Melnick, 
another industry heavy hitter 
who has been at Stars a bit longer than the new 
arrivals but joined from market leader Zynga. 
Social gaming has been something of a slow 
burner for Stars, but Coyne sees it as a vital 
part of the Stars universe. Coyne talks about 
contributing to Melnick’s social vision and it is 
clear that this is another area that will receive 
fresh impetus.
“It’s an all-star team,” says Coyne, “and to 
be part of that is very exciting.” n
COLUMN
Steve Hoare
“It’s an all-star  
team, and to be  
part of that is  
very exciting”
Christopher Coyne,  
The Stars Group

PADDY POWER TAPS BOARD FOR 
NEW CEO
PADDY POWER BET-
FAIR named its non-
executive director Peter 
Jackson as its next group 
chief executive, replacing 
Breon Corcoran, who will 
step down after 16 years at 
Paddy Power, then Betfair, 
then Paddy Power Betfair.
Jackson will join the 
business from payment processor WorldPay, 
where he has served as UK CEO since March of 
this year. He has served on the board of Paddy 
Power Betfair since 2016, and the board of Bet-
fair Group prior to that.
Jackson has a post-merger challenge on 
his hands to arrest the decline of the share 
price, which has declined from a peak of £10.80 
to £7.27. Furthermore, the company’s prod-
uct development has effectively been on hold 
while the merger has been completed, gaming 
revenue has stagnated since 2016 and during 
Q2 total online revenue sank 12 per cent. That 
adds up to a tricky inheritance.
DAVID FLYNN BECOMES 
VERA&JOHN CEO
JACKPOTJOY GROUP 
HAS appointed former 
NYX CEO David Flynn 
as chief executive of its 
Vera&John division.
It’s the company’s first 
appointment since the 
departure of founders Dan 
Andersson and Jörgen 
Nordlund in September.
Flynn replaces Johan Königslehner, who 
remained with the group at the time of going 
to press, but whose stewardship was linked to 
the Andersson-Nordlund partnership. Flynn 
joins Irina Cornides at the company, who was 
appointed CEO of the Jackpotjoy division in 
June. The pair will be charged with taking 
their respective divisions into a new era, inde-
pendently of their dynamic founders.
Vera&John revenue rose 30 per cent dur-
ing H1, so Flynn is not taking over an operator 
on the wane. His challenge will be to maintain 
that momentum and the team dynamic fos-
tered by Andersson and Nordlund. 
BETSSON CHIEF EXECUTIVE 
ULRIK BENGTSSON DEPARTS
BETSSON PRESIDENT 
AND chief executive 
Ulrik Bengtsson left the 
company “with immedi-
ate effect” in September.
The sudden departure 
of the respected chief 
executive suggested a stra-
tegic disagreement, with 
sources claiming that the 
company’s Turkish business was at the centre 
of the dispute.
A rival operator is looking to offload its 
Turkish business as it looks to focus efforts on 
regulated markets. Betsson, which is also pre-
sent in the Turkish market, has been mooted as 
a possible buyer. However, Bengtsson is said to 
have favoured increasing Betsson’s exposure to 
regulated markets, not decreasing it.
He is succeeded on an interim basis by chair-
man and former CEO Pontus Lindwall. With 
Lindwall temporarily returning to his previ-
ous role, the operator has named director Pat-
rick Svensk as its chairman until further notice.
MR GREEN NAMES NEW CEO OF TECH DIVISION
MR GREEN & Co has named Mattias Wedar 
as chief executive ofﬁcer of its development sub-
sidiary Mr Green & Technology. Wedar took 
over as chief executive in September, replacing 
Stefan Gustafsson, who had held the position on 
an interim basis since the departure of former 
CEO Niclas Enhörning in December 2016.
Wedar takes the helm at an exciting time 
for the Swedish operator, which is embarking 
on a new strategy it has dubbed Mr Green 2.0. 
He aims to continue recent innovation, which 
has seen the operator launch a new responsi-
ble gaming tool and refresh its sportsbook and 
secondary brand Garbo.com. This is a good gig 
for Wedar, as he joins a dynamic and hungry 
executive team at just the right time.
Ulrik Bengtsson
Betsson
David Flynn
Jackpotjoy
Peter Jackson
Paddy Power
Gaming executives 
who have been making 
headlines and what’s in 
their inbox
IN THE 
NEWS
SPORTECH CEO AND CFO RESIGN
SPORTECH’S LONG-SERVING CEO Ian 
Penrose and CFO Mickey Khalifa resigned 
from the company during Q3.
The pair have been responsible for a huge 
turnaround at the company that used to be 
known for running the UK’s football pools. 
Now it is an international organisation with 
the majority of its operations in the US and a 
ﬂedgling business in Asia. With the football 
pools sold, this leaves Sportech as a UK-based 
company with little or no UK assets. The stra-
tegic review initiated by Penrose will look to 
address this situation and his successor will 
inherit an organisation that is unrecognisable 
from the one Penrose took over in 2005. He or 
she will hope to inherit a business looking  
forward to a regulated US sports betting mar-
ket –  wherever the new CEO might be based. 
15
GIQ Q3 REVIEW
PEOPLE
Q3 MOVES


17
GIQ Q3 REVIEW
 TECH
Q3 LAUNCHES
Five of the quarter’s major 
product launches and 
what they mean for  
those involved
BIG 
LAUNCHES
SPORTRADAR EXPANDS ESPORTS OFFERING 
Sportradar has secured the rights to distribute 
audio-visual streams and data from all compe-
titions hosted by PvPRO, an eSports platform 
powering CS:GO tournaments and leagues.
What’s the big idea? The deal covers the 
global betting market, while data distribution 
will be handled exclusively by Sportradar for 
both betting and non-gaming sectors. PvPRO’s 
first Electronic Sports Global Tour (ESG 
Tour) event took place on the Greek island 
of Mykonos in September, with the tourna-
ment sponsored by iGaming operator Bet-
way. Sportradar’s Integrity Services division 
will also deploy its Fraud Detection System to 
monitor betting patterns to identify any suspi-
cious activity relating to tournaments hosted  
on the platform. 
“Securing Sportradar’s support and exper-
tise was really important to the credibility 
and distribution of the Tour and as we start 
this journey, we could not be happier to have 
Sportradar by our side,” said PvPRO chief 
executive Stamos Venios
SUPERBET IN DEVELOPMENT 
DEAL WITH IOSPORT
Romanian betting and gaming operator Super-
bet has entered into a new development partner-
ship with automated trading specialist ioSport. 
What’s the big idea? The operator, which 
is growing its iGaming team in Gibraltar, will 
work with ioSport on a range of ‘next-genera-
tion’ betting solutions, leveraging ioSports’ 
automated pricing and machine-learning tools.
“The world is changing rapidly, driven by 
advances in our use of technology,” Superbet 
group director of eCommerce Jamie Hart said. 
“The betting industry has been stagnant but we 
intend to build an enhanced betting experience 
that embraces those advances, and the guys at 
ioSport think in the same way we do.”
MR GREEN REVAMPS ONLINE 
SPORTSBOOK 
Mr Green has launched an enhanced version of 
its sportsbook, developed in partnership with 
analytics specialist Bettorlogic. 
What’s the big idea? The Kambi-powered 
Sportsbook 2.0 leverages Bettorlogic’s analyt-
ics and modelling solutions to offer custom-
ers bespoke bet types tailored to individual 
preferences. The operator can offer more 
than 15,000 prompts to customers each week, 
presenting bets on football, tennis and other 
major sporting events. 
The upgrade also includes a new Football 
Combi Spin feature, which allows players to 
set their odds, then spin reels to ﬁnd preferred 
selections that can generate big wins. 
ENDEMOL AND BLACK COW 
LAUNCH B2B PLATFORM
Production company Endemol Shine Gaming 
has formed a joint venture with Black Cow Tech-
nology to launch a new B2B gaming platform. 
What’s the big idea? The Playzido content 
distribution platform will feature exclusive 
branded games from Endemol Shine Gam-
ing’s IP catalogue, including games based on 
the TV hit gameshow Deal or No Deal, for use 
in both real-money and social casino sectors. 
London-based Playzido will be headed up by 
Stuart Banks, who has held senior manage-
ment roles in gaming at both Paddy Power 
and Betfair. The company’s board will be 
comprised of directors from Endemol Shine 
Gaming, Black Cow Technology and others.
ASPIRE GLOBAL PARTNERS COFINA FOR PORTUGAL LAUNCH
Aspire Global entered the regulated Portu-
guese iGaming market through a partnership 
with leading media group Coﬁna, which owns 
Portugal’s leading daily newspaper Correio da 
Manhã among others. 
What’s the big idea? Coﬁna launched its 
new Aspire Global-powered iGaming offering 
under the Nossa Aposta brand, offering players 
a selection of online slots with plans to launch 
casino games and sports betting in the future. 
“We are excited to start operating in the Por-
tuguese online market together with Aspire 
Global,” said Fernando Paes Afonso, CEO of 
Nossa Aposta. “Combining our own media 
knowledge with their wide experience from 
online gambling, enables a unique and attrac-
tive offering for our players.”

Venetian Macao
14-16 November 2017
Smart City
Innovation & Interactive 
Book your place
+853 6363 0053
+852 5506 1230
+86 153 6355 8924
Email:
enquiry@mgsentertainmentshow.com
Website:
mgsentertainmentshow.com

19
GIQ Q3 REVIEW
LOTTERY
Q3 NEWS
This quarter’s 
lottery lowdown
BIG LOTTERY 
STORIES
ILLINOIS APPROVES CAMELOT 
PRIVATE MANAGEMENT DEAL
THE US STATE of Illinois has officially 
approved Camelot as the private manager of its 
lottery after the selection was formalised by the 
state’s Chief Procurement Ofﬁce.
The Illinois Lottery said that the 10-year 
private management contract with Camelot 
aligns financial incentives and includes 
new permanent points-of-sale at retailers, 
new games, and a next-generation iLot-
tery platform that supports omni-channel 
lottery participation. Camelot Illinois 
will work with Intralot for draw game ser-
vices and Scientific Games for instant  
ticket services.
“The lottery and Camelot Illinois have 
common goals to responsibly grow the Lot-
tery’s player base, align incentives, eliminate 
conﬂicts of interest, introduce new technology 
and innovation, and ensure responsiveness to 
public needs and concerns,” said Illinois’ acting 
lottery director Greg Smith.
NEW HAMPSHIRE MOVES TO 
SELL LOTTERY TICKETS ONLINE 
NEW HAMPSHIRE WILL allow lottery 
tickets to be sold online after Governor Chris 
Sununu (pictured) signed legislation into law 
in July.
The state lottery could be online as early 
as next year, following in the footsteps of Geor-
gia, Illinois, Michigan, North Carolina, North  
Dakota, Kentucky and Virginia.
The amendment to existing regulations  
of the sale of lottery tickets was included  
in HB517. It permits lottery sales via mobile 
applications or over the internet, with the  
New Hampshire Lottery Commission to intro-
duce a number of player protection controls. 
These controls include age veriﬁcation tools 
and geolocation technology to ensure all trans-
actions are initiated and completed within the 
state’s borders.
LOTTOLAND TO OFFER MULTI-
MILLION INSTANT-WIN PRIZES
LOTTOLAND IS COMBINING its prize 
Insurance Linked Security (ILS) infrastruc-
ture with a random number generator to cre-
ate new instant-win games, offering prizes of 
up to €100m.
The Random and Insured Number Gen-
erator (RiNG) has allowed Lottoland.com to 
launch games such as KeNow Play, which 
is offering a €5m top prize, as well as a €10m 
scratchcard. The products will also be made 
available for B2B clients via Lottoland Solu-
tions and partners Glück Games and Gamevy.
“We look forward to sharing this break-
through combination of technology and insur-
ance,” Lottoland chief executive Nigel Birrell 
said. “It will enable the instant-win gaming and 
younger generation lottery players to get access 
to high jackpot instant-win games, while opera-
tors can freely decide which prizes they want 
to offer – we will provide the insurance.” (See 
page 60 for more.)
IGT TAKES RHODE ISLAND 
LOTTERY MOBILE…
INTERNATIONAL GAME TECHNOL-
OGY (IGT) has launched its PlaySpot mobile 
platform with the Rhode Island Lottery, 
allowing players to purchase tickets via their 
mobile device but only within a licensed retail  
lottery location.
The launch follows a successful nine-month 
pilot test that included several retail locations 
throughout Rhode Island. The PlaySpot app 
allows lottery customers to play live iKeno and 
instant-win games, as well as check and collect 
winnings in a licensed retail location, while con-
nected via Bluetooth to the lottery network.
“The Rhode Island Lottery is proud to be the 
ﬁrst, and currently the only lottery in the world, 
to have IGT’s PlaySpot solution,” said Rhode 
Island Lottery director Gerald Aubin. “We have 
long been advocates for ﬁnding new strategies  
for growth, and are pleased to partner with  
IGT on this innovative solution for our players.”
... AND SEALS RIGHTS FOR THE 
VOICE LOTTERY GAMES 
IN A BUSY quarter for the supplier, IGT  
also secured the exclusive rights to develop 
games based on the international reality TV 
singing contest The Voice. The supplier will 
develop and distribute The Voice-branded lot-
tery games globally, including instant scratch, 
traditional and instant online games, interac-
tive games, as well as mobile games.
“We are committed to creating a robust,  
multi-channel and multi-jurisdictional pro-
gramme for the lottery community by extending 
this compelling and iconic brand across all avail-
able platforms and territories,” said Michael 
Chambrello, IGT CEO, North America Lottery.
Premiering in Holland in 2010, The Voice 
has gone on to become a global sensation with  
65 versions of the show airing in over 180 coun-
tries to date.

20
GIQ games 
round-up
New games that caught GIQ’s eye in Q3
NOVOMATIC TO DEVELOP FROM 
DUSK TILL DAWN SLOT
Novomatic has signed a licensing agreement 
with Miramax for the rights to develop online 
and land-based casino games based on cult ﬁlm 
From Dusk Till Dawn. A demo of the game was 
unveiled at G2E Las Vegas in early October, 
featuring George Clooney, Quentin Tarantino, 
Salma Hayek, Juliette Lewis and Danny Trejo 
(pictured above with Gaming Intelligence’s Kio 
Dawson) in footage from the ﬁlm. 
“From Dusk Till Dawn is a cult ﬁlm that has 
regained attention due to its 20-year anniver-
sary,” said Novomatic’s CTO Thomas Graf. “We 
are excited to combine our world-class technol-
ogy with this distinguished ﬁlm and bring it to 
casino players around the world.”
GREENTUBE DEBUTS 
OKTOBERFEST FREIBIER! SLOT
Novomatic’s interactive subsidiary Green-
tube has launched a new slot for its B2B  
partners, based on Munich’s annual Oktober-
fest beer festival.
In celebration of the Bavarian culture, 
the Freibier! slot will appeal to lovers of pork 
knuckles, pretzels, gingerbread hearts and 
flagons of beer frothing over the sides. It is 
a ﬁve-reel slot with up to 40 win lines, with a 
beer mug acting as the Wild symbol. Matching 
all symbols of the slot except for the Scatter 
increases the chances of winning on reels two, 
three and four.
MICROGAMING TO DEVELOP 
HIGHLANDER SLOT
Microgaming signed a licensing agreement 
with French production giant StudioCanal 
to develop a new slot game based on the 1980s 
action film Highlander. A number of iconic 
characters from the film are featured in the 
slot, including Christopher Lambert as Connor 
MacLeod and Roxanne Hart as Brenda Wyatt.
“Highlander is one of the cult hits of the 80s,” 
Microgaming games publisher David Reynolds 
commented. “With its action-packed storyline 
and hefty rock composition, it is a fantastic 
brand for an online slot. The game’s features 
will incorporate the Scottish Highlands and 
gritty New York City, with a classic movie 
poster-art style and blistering guitar tracks.”
SG GAMES INTRODUCES NEW 
OMNI-CHANNEL GAMES
Scientific Games has released a two new 
omni-channel games through its UK division 
SG Gaming, including a new Hasbro-licensed 
MONOPOLY Bring the House Down slot game 
which will be launched for the retail and online 
sectors through SG Interactive. SG Gaming has 
also released Pig Money, a £100 jackpot Catego-
ry C game from the Barcrest brand, exclusively 
for its arcade and bingo operator partners. 
“The SG Gaming and SG Interactive teams 
have worked together again to provide an offer-
ing that is important to many of our customers’ 
business strategies and ultimately helps to drive 
cashbox performance,” said Rick Mountney, UK 
director of content development at SG Gaming.

21
GIQ Q3 REVIEW
 GAMES
Q3 RELEASES
NETENT RELEASES 
EMOJIPLANET SLOT 
NetEnt launched its new Emoji Planet slot 
game following a partnership with the Emoji 
Company & Global Merchandising Services, 
owner of the official emoji trademark. The 
ﬁve-reel, six-row video slot uses the supplier’s 
Cluster Pays mechanics, and sends players into 
the midst of an Avalanche, with playful music 
setting the scene as emojis cascade down.
“The emoji has become a worldwide phe-
nomenon, so we’re pleased to be able to give 
players the chance to enter their world,” said 
NetEnt chief product ofﬁcer Simon Hammon. 
“Emoji Planet was made to bring fun to the 
gaming experience and we’re conﬁdent play-
ers will love everything it offers.”
GLÜCK AND LOTTOINTERACTIVE 
LAUNCH INSTANT WIN GAME 
Instant-win games developers Glück Games 
and LottoInteractive have teamed up to launch 
a new game for operator Lottoland. Star Match 
is described as a first-of-its-kind crossover 
experience, where players try to match three 
or more Hollywood icons to collect as many 
stars as possible, gaining points and bonuses 
along the way until the lottery cash prize  
is revealed.
“As an iGaming developer with a focus 
upon the ‘casual real-money gaming’ crosso-
ver, we are very excited to introduce the skill-
based playing experience that Star Match pro-
vides to our ever-increasing player base,” said 
Glück Games CEO Robert Lenzhofer.
GAMBLIT BRINGS DEAL OR NO 
DEAL POKER TO THE CASINO
Skill games developer Gamblit Gaming  
has partnered Endemol Shine Gaming to 
develop land-based casino games based on  
the hit TV gameshow Deal or No Deal. New 
branded games will be rolled out in 2018 
on Gamblit’s Model G interactive gaming 
tables and TriStation terminals, includ-
ing multiplayer title Deal or No Deal Poker  
Special, as well as a single-player Deal or No 
Deal Poker game.
“I’ve loved Deal or No Deal ever since 
I watched the first episode with my fam-
ily,” Gamblit chief marketing ofﬁcer Darion 
Lowenstein said. “Now being able to recre-
ate the excitement, intensity and pure fun of 
the massive global hit show with friends or 
as a single player in the modern arcade – the 
casino – is both a personal and career high.”
PLAYTECH RELEASES AGE OF 
THE GODS LIVE ROULETTE
Playtech has launched Age of the Gods Live 
Roulette, a game which combines live dealer 
roulette with the supplier’s popular Age of the 
Gods online slot and progressive jackpot. While 
playing live roulette, a small percentage of play-
ers’ stake goes towards the four-tier progres-
sive Age of the Gods Mystery Jackpot. 
“The innovative and market-ﬁrst launch of 
our new Age of the Gods Live Roulette linked to 
a four-tier progressive jackpot that offers mas-
sive cash prizes, will signiﬁcantly increase the 
cross-sell of the product for our licensees across 
both channels and enhance the gaming expe-
rience for players,” said Shimon Akad, chief 
operating ofﬁcer at Playtech.
YGGDRASIL LAUNCHES JUNGLE 
BOOKS GAME
Yggdrasil Gaming has released its biggest 
game production to date with the launch of 
Jungle Books. The slot game takes players 
on a journey through the jungle, inspired by  
Rudyard Kipling’s classic novel. It features 
three different reel sets, ﬁve different charac-
ters and 10 different features, which can create 
up to 45 possible feature combinations – the big-
gest in Yggdrasil’s history.
“Jungle Books is by far our biggest produc-
tion to date and throughout development we’ve 
been testing the boundaries of slot technology,” 
said Yggdrasil Gaming’s head of slots Jonas 
Strandman. “The outcome is something we 
couldn’t be happier with. Thanks to the new 
Fusion Realms mechanism, we’ve managed to 
combine ﬁve worlds into this one microcosm, 
a lush extravaganza of features and graphics.”
NEXTGEN’S EXCLUSIVE GAME 
FOR GOLDEN NUGGET 
NextGen Gaming, NYX Gaming Group’s 
game development studio, has launched  
its Wild Play SuperBet slot game in New  
Jersey with Golden Nugget. It is the first in 
a series of bespoke slots to be released under 
the partnership. The game will be available 
exclusively to Golden Nugget for one year, 
before a wider roll-out to operators outside of  
New Jersey. 
“Working in partnership from the ini-
tial stages of game design provided NextGen 
with insight directly from local players,” said 
NextGen’s chief commercial officer David 
Johnson. “The knowledge shared during the 
development of the game has proven beneﬁcial 
for both parties, while enhancing the SuperBet  
innovation further will prove attractive to play-
ers and operators alike.”

ON THE FOLLOWING PAGE
26  Zynga, GAN, PokerStars and more
WHEN IT COMES to attracting young  
players to play lotteries, instant-win games 
are seen as a potentially key product. The 
reasoning is that young people want instant 
gratiﬁcation, something offering a quick jolt 
of excitement.
Evidence from the UK Gambling Commis-
sion certainly suggests that younger players 
prefer instant-win titles to draw-based games. 
But hoping that traditional scratchcards 
will draw in younger customers may not be 
enough. With more competition for customer 
wallet share than ever before, the onus is on 
games developers to create products that are 
immediately familiar to this demographic.
This is where LottoInteractive comes in. 
The supplier aims to address the lack of mil-
lennial interest in lotteries by offering them 
something familiar and engaging. It aims to 
develop products that mimic gameplay found 
in popular mobile social titles. Instead of offer-
ing an experience that is over in seconds, it 
looks to stretch out the instant-win experience 
by up to two minutes. 
“We set off with the strategy of taking the 
most popular mobile gaming features and 
translating them for real-money gaming,” 
allow online lottery sales, and Ward believe 
there is a general unwillingness among US  
lotteries to innovate. This, he says, is some-
thing a start-up will struggle to change.
 “As a start-up we can’t spend 10 years devel-
oping the market. We have a limited amount 
of runway,” he says. “I think there is not as 
much incentive for lotteries to innovate in this 
space as we initially thought. 
Lotteries are growing at 
between 1.5 to two per cent a 
year, and that’s perfectly sat-
isfactory – if they were grow-
ing 10 to 15 per cent it would 
attract a lot more attention 
and scrutiny.”
This has shifted LottoIn-
teractive’s focus to Europe, 
where almost all national 
lotteries are available 
online. As we discuss on 
page 36, many European lot-
teries blame private iGam-
ing operators for ‘stealing’ 
their players. In reality 
is this more a case of lot-
teries’ offerings failing to 
attract the sort of younger 
customer that will place a 
bet or play casino online.
Ward believes LottoIn-
teractive can help address 
this issue, as well as 
increasing expectations of 
what lotteries can offer.
“From my non-gambling perspective, real-
money gaming feels like a huge market with 
a limited number of genres and verticals,” 
he says. “For me that’s like walking into a  
bookstore and only seeing romance novels and 
autobiographies for sale.
“There just seems to be so much opportuni-
ty to do something new, interesting and inter-
active, and I believe we can bring some innova-
tive features and genres to this space.” n
Lottery’s social opportunity
Lotteries can look to mobile 
social gaming as they push 
to attract younger players, 
says LottoInteractive CEO 
Brian Ward
COLUMN
Robin  
Harrison
LottoInteractive founder and CEO Brian Ward 
explains. “We took the gameplay, removed the 
skill-based element, then added the real-money 
gaming element.”
As a 20-year veteran of the console 
gaming industry, Ward is ideally placed 
to develop games targeting younger play-
ers. He has worked for some of the leading 
companies in the sector, 
including Electronic Arts,  
Activision and Microsoft 
Xbox.
“I wanted to tackle the 
problem of how to make lot-
tery products attractive to 
younger players, especially 
as the target demographic 
makes up the core video 
game audience,” he explains.
“My premise was that 
we could bring new players 
to lotteries by offering inter-
active, long-playing, immer-
sive products, similar to 
ones they were already 
playing.”
Star Match, for example, 
combines the match-three 
mechanics of King’s Candy 
Crush with the small-stakes 
bet of a standard instant-
win game. Players look 
to match stars, similar to 
matching sweets in Candy 
Crush, then scratch off their stars to win priz-
es that are determined by a random-number 
generator. It’s a simple concept, but is already 
proving successful where live.
“We are live with operators including Lot-
toland, the Georgia Lottery and Tipp24, and 
our games are among the best-performing 
instant-win titles for each,” Ward says. 
Despite this early success Ward admits that 
progress has been slow in the US, his original 
target market. Just seven states currently 
22
“From my perspective, 
real-money gaming 
feels like a huge 
market with a limited 
number of genres and 
verticals” 
Brian Ward, LottoInteractive
THE BIGGEST 
SOCIAL CASINO 
NEWS OF THE 
QUARTER


TWO MARKET-LEADING SOCIAL casino 
operators are to move into casual and mid-core 
gaming through new acquisitions. Playtika has 
moved to acquire casual games business Jelly 
Button for an undisclosed sum, while Aristo-
crat Technologies has agreed a $500m deal for 
strategy gaming specialist Plarium. 
Jelly Button, founded in 2011, has been 
snapped up as part of Playtika’s long-term 
strategy to become the world’s leading mobile 
gaming business. It aims to achieve this by 
diversifying into new genres though M&A. 
“Since our ﬁrst acquisition in 2012, Playtika 
has been successful at identifying promising 
products and teams, and leveraging our mar-
keting, monetisation and analytics capabilities 
to grow our acquired businesses,” Playtika 
co-founder and chief executive Robert Antokol 
explained. “Jelly Button has exactly that – a great 
team and great products – and we are excited to 
take Jelly Button’s games to the next level.”
Plarium, meanwhile, has offices in Israel, 
Russia, the Ukraine, the UK and US, and is a lead-
ing developer of multiplayer online and mobile 
strategy games, such as Soldiers Inc (pictured). 
The deal is expected to boost the revenue contri-
bution from Aristocrat’s Digital division.
Aristocrat CEO and managing director  
Trevor Croker said: “The acquisition of Pla-
rium allows Aristocrat to expand our address-
able market into logical adjacent segments in 
the fast-growing mobile gaming market.”
“PokerStars Play is unique, 
taking the best of real-money 
gaming and merging it with 
the features players expect 
from mobile games”
Lloyd Melnick, PokerStars
24
IN BRIEF
KamaGames
KamaGames has strengthened its presence in Russia with 
the launch of its ﬂagship Pokerist title on the new Direct 
Games platform of Russian social network VK.com. Direct 
Games is a new HTML5 platform that allows studios to 
incorporate their games into VK’s iOS and Android apps, 
making them immediately available to players without ad-
ditional download, install or sign in. KamaGames will also 
roll out a new branded app for Poker Night in America, a 
CBS Sports Network show created by Rush Street Produc-
tions, through a new partnership.
Zynga
Zynga has appointed Phuong Phillips as the company’s 
new chief legal ofﬁcer. In the role, Phillips will oversee all 
legal affairs and government relations for the company,  
reporting directly to CEO Frank Gibeau. Phillips brings 15 
years of technology and clean-energy legal experience 
to the business. Prior to joining Zynga she served as 
associate general counsel for Tesla, where she managed 
the post-acquisition integrations of SolarCity Corp and 
Grohmann Engineering.
Novomatic
Novomatic’s interactive subsidiary Greentube is aim-
ing to attract more male players to its social offering 
with the addition of Leap Gaming’s virtual sports titles. 
Through a new partnership, Leap Gaming will deploy its 
turnkey virtual sports product to the Greentube Pro 
social casino platform, which is marketed to US land-
based casino operators seeking a legal online presence.
PokerStars 
relaunches ﬂagship 
social casino product
POKERSTARS HAS RESURRECTED its 
free-to-play app PokerStars Play, with the new 
iteration currently being released through a 
phased roll-out.
PokerStars Play offers a range of poker  
variants, including Texas Hold’em, Spin and 
Go, and Omaha, alongside casino-style slots.
It allows users to compete against poker pros, 
collect trophies and climb weekly leaderboards, 
as well as entering fast-paced tournaments.
“PokerStars Play is the next phase in our 
progress towards being a leader in social casi-
no,” PokerStars director of social gaming Lloyd 
Melnick said. “PokerStars Play is a unique 
product, taking the best of real-money gaming 
and merging it with the features players expect 
from mobile games.”
SGI
Q3 NEWS 
Social casino giants 
diversify into new genres


26
LEGAL
US REGULATION
US regulatory update
New Jersey
The governors of New Jersey, 
Nevada and Delaware, the 
three US states with a regulat-
ed online gaming market, have 
reached an agreement to pool their online poker 
liquidity. This will allow New Jersey poker play-
ers to compete online against players in Nevada 
and Delaware for the ﬁrst time.
“New Jersey has been a pioneer in the devel-
opment of  authorised, regulated online gam-
ing, which has been a budding success since its 
launch in late 2013,” New Jersey Governor Chris 
Christie said. “Pooling players with Nevada and 
Delaware will enhance annual revenue growth, 
attract new consumers and create opportunities 
for players and internet gaming operators.”
New Jersey has also become the 16th US 
state to regulate daily fantasy sports (DFS) after 
Christie signed the legislation into law. A3532 
introduces measures to regulate and tax DFS 
contests. The bill will require DFS operators to 
pay a licence fee – which is yet to be determined 
– as well as a quarterly operations fee of 10.5 per 
cent of quarterly gross revenue.
Finally, Christie has also looked to prevent 
President Donald Trump from enacting a ban 
on iGaming. He has signed a joint resolution 
brought forward by the Senate and General 
Assembly. This asks the Trump administration 
to clarify its position regarding online gambling, 
with some lawmakers in Washington pushing to 
‘restore’ the Wire Act and overturn the Depart-
ment of Justice’s 2011 interpretation that the act 
applies only to sports betting.
Washington DC
The US Supreme Court has 
confirmed that it will hear 
arguments in New Jersey’s 
attempt to overturn the federal 
ban on sports betting in December. The Supreme 
Court has consolidated and scheduled two relat-
ed cases – Christie v National Collegiate Athlet-
ics Association (NCAA) and NJ Thoroughbred 
Horsemens Association v NCAA – on Monday 
4 December. This could see the Professional and 
Amateur Sports Protection Act (PASPA) scrapped 
if the state prevails in its appeal.
Alabama
Alabama Attorney General 
Steve Marshall has ﬁled suit 
against casinos in ﬁve coun-
ties that have continued to 
operate illegal slot machines in defiance of  
state law. The state has repeatedly determined 
that the game of  bingo cannot be played on 
electronic devices, and that slot machines are 
clearly illegal, though a number of venues con-
tinue to offer these games.
Michigan
Michigan Representative 
Brandt Iden introduced new 
legislation to establish the 
Lawful Internet Gaming Act. 
The proposed legislation, HB4926, would create 
the Division of Internet Gaming and authorise 
the body to licence and regulate online gam-
bling in the state. Sports betting would be per-
mitted alongside other games of  skill, which 
must include poker, and only casino licence 
holders will be eligible for online approval.
Indiana
The state has awarded its 
ﬁrst DFS licences following 
the passage of  legislation 
in March this year. Industry 
giants DraftKings and FanDuel were among 
the ﬁrst two licensees, alongside FantasyDraft.
New Hampshire
New Hampshire Governor 
Chris Sununu has signed into 
law legislation allowing lot-
tery tickets to be sold online 
and via mobile devices. The amendment to 
existing regulations of  the sale of  lottery tick-
ets was included in H517, an omnibus bill passed 
by both houses of the state legislature late last 
month. It permits the sale of lottery tickets via 
mobile applications or over the internet, to 
players aged 18 and over. Sununu also legalised 
fantasy sports by signing HB580 into law in 
July, though the ﬁnal legislation had the $10,000 
licence fee and ﬁve per cent gross revenue tax 
removed.
Kentucky
Kentucky Senator Julian Car-
roll has introduced BR155, a 
bill to legalise sports betting. 
Operators would be required 
to pay a licence fee of $250,000, as well as a 20 per 
cent tax on amounts wagered.
Connecticut
Connecticut Governor Dan-
nel Malloy has signed a bill 
authorising the state to devel-
op sports betting regulations 
and to increase the number of off-track betting 
facilities. The Regional Economic Development 
Plan authorises the state Commissioner on Con-
sumer Protection to adopt sports betting regula-
tions to regulate “wagering on sporting events 
to the extent permitted by state and federal law”. 
It also increases the number of off-track betting 
facilities in the state from 18 to 24.
California
Assemblyman Adam Gray 
has proposed a constitutional 
amendment to allow legal 
sports betting in California. 
This would amend Section 19 of  Article IV of  
the California State Constitution to allow for 
detailed sports betting regulations, subject to the 
repeal of the Professional and Amateur Sports 
Protection Act (PASPA). 
Maine
Maine was another US state to 
regulate DFS after Governor 
Paul LePage allowed legisla-
tion to pass into law without 
his signature. Senator Roger Katz introduced 
SP0449 in April of  this year, securing House 
approval in June and Senate approval in July.
Massachusetts
DFS operators have suffered 
a setback after a Massachu-
setts report ruled their games 
were a form of gambling. The 
report, put together by a bipartisan special 
commission formed by the state legislature, rec-
ommended that DFS be legalised in Massachu-
setts  as a sub-set of online gaming. The report 
has been adopted after it was approved by ﬁve 
committee members, with three voting against 
enforcing it and one member abstaining.
The most signiﬁcant regulatory events to  
take place in the US over the past quarter

www.intralot.com
MARKETING
TOOLS
RISK, FRAUD  
  & PAYMENTS
    PLAYER ACCOUNT 
MANAGEMENT
REPORTING
UNLOCK YOUR FULL POTENTIAL
INTRALOT Player Pulse is an advanced gaming CRM product that bridges online 
gaming with land-based experiences, enabling true understanding and connection 
with new and existing players. It is an end-to-end solution that unlocks the full 
potential of your operation's gaming ecosystem with a single login.
Certified by WLA for its Responsible Gaming program, INTRALOT is commited to the principles of responsible gaming incorporating them at its best-in-class product solutions and global operations. 


World regulatory update
UK
Gambling has faced a ﬂurry of nega-
tive publicity in the UK after 888 paid 
a £7.8m settlement for ﬂaws in its social respon-
sibility controls. A technical ﬂaw saw 7,000 cus-
tomers that had self-excluded able to gamble, with 
one turning to crime to fund their habit. The UK 
Labour Party has urged measures to limit the 
industry, such as banning sponsorship of sports 
teams, and has told operators to increase contri-
butions to problem-gambling support services.
Belgium
The Belgian government has intro-
duced advertising restrictions for 
gambling, with sports betting ads only permit-
ted after 8pm unless shown around a sporting 
broadcast. The number of  betting shops will 
also be reduced to 600, and controls for gaming 
machines in drinking establishments are to be 
enforced. Virtual sports will also be treated as a 
form of ‘automatic gambling’, requiring a Class 
E slot machine licence.
Denmark
Denmark has set out regulations for 
online bingo ahead of its legalisation 
in January 2018. It can be offered by online casino 
licence holders, and only allowed in 75- and 90-ball 
formats. TV bingo will also be permitted, and sub-
ject to less stringent ID veriﬁcation controls. 
Latvia
Live casino providers Playtech and 
Evolution Gaming could be hit by the 
introduction of fees for live dealer games broad-
cast from Latvia. The country, which houses each 
provider’s main live dealer studio, is looking to 
charge unspecified fees per table. While these 
plans have been approved by the country’s parlia-
ment, they do not have the support of the Cabinet 
of Ministers.
Germany
The ruling coalition government of the 
German state of  Schleswig-Holstein 
has said that it will only support the country’s new 
State Treaty on Gambling if it provides protection 
to all gamblers. As the CDU, FDP and Green party 
group believe this can only be achieved through 
legalising online poker and casino, it appears the 
state may again break away from the Treaty and 
pursue its own regulatory regime.
Switzerland
Switzerland’s new gambling legisla-
tion is set for a ﬁnal vote after lawmak-
ers compromised on tax rates. Both the National 
Council and Council of  State have agreed to 
leave sports betting, online gaming and lottery 
winnings of less than CHF1.0m tax-exempt. This 
paves the way for online gambling to be legalised 
in Switzerland.
The Netherlands
The Netherlands’ ban on iGaming will 
remain in place until its new Gambling 
Act comes into force, a Hague court has ruled. 
The court rejected a challenge from Betsson ask-
ing for the ban to be lifted over the delays. With a 
coalition government now in place, the market is 
not expected to open until 2019.
Malta
The Malta Gaming Authority (MGA) 
is looking to devise a new regulatory 
framework. This may see only two types of licence 
available, with taxation also streamlined. B2B 
licensees would be exempt from gaming tax, in 
a bid to make Malta more attractive to suppliers. 
This would be accompanied by a switch from a 
prescriptive regulatory approach to an objective-
based one, allowing companies to comply with 
the terms of their licence in any way they see ﬁt.
Italy
Gambling regulators in France, Portu-
gal, Spain and Italy have signed a cross-
border liquidity pooling agreement for online 
poker, enabling players in the four nations to  
compete against one another for the ﬁrst time 
since the introduction of  ring-fenced national 
poker networks. The ofﬁcial agreement, signed 
in Rome, sets out the framework for coopera-
tion between the different jurisdictions, cover-
ing information-sharing agreements, the ﬁght 
against illegal operators and player protection. 
Spain
Spain’s gambling regulator has submit-
ted a request to the Ministry of Finance 
to open a new licensing round for operators. Reg-
ulatory authority La Dirección General de Orde-
nación del Juego (DGOJ) has requested that the 
government approve a new year-long licensing 
window to enable as many operators as possible 
to apply. Meanwhile, Andalucia has adopted new 
online and land-based sports betting regulations, 
ending its status as the only Spanish community 
not to authorise the activity.
Slovakia
The Finance Ministry of Slovakia has 
published a blacklist of  10 operators 
which it says illegally target players in the coun-
try. They include some of the biggest names in the 
iGaming industry, including GVC’s bwin brand, 
William Hill, bet365, 888 and bet-at-home.com.
Isle of Man
eSports betting and fantasy league oper-
ator eSportsPools has been licensed by 
the Isle of Man government to allow gambling 
using virtual goods. eSportsPools will look to 
legitimise the sector – commonly known as skin 
betting – by working under a licence from the Isle 
of Man Gambling Supervision Commission.
Australia
Australia has tightened its gambling 
laws with the introduction of the Inter-
active Gambling Amendment Bill. This enforces 
a ban on online casino and poker, and removes 
the ‘click-to-call’ loophole used by operators to 
circumvent the country’s in-play betting ban. 
Senator David Leyonhjelm revealed he received 
a letter from Communications Minister Mitch 
Fifield stating that his department would do 
“some preliminary work” examining the feasibil-
ity of licensing Australian online poker operators.
The Australian states of New South Wales, 
Tasmania and Victoria have all pledged to push 
for a ban on lottery betting in a concerted effort 
to force Lottoland from the country (see pages 
56 and 60 for more). Tasmania may also move 
to restrict or reduce the number of  gaming 
machines in operation in the state. Western Aus-
tralia has conﬁrmed plans to introduce a point of  
consumption wagering tax from the start of 2019. 
This will apply to all online betting operators and 
is consistent with the model implemented by 
South Australia in July.
New Zealand
The government of New Zealand has 
unveiled the Racing Amendment Bill 
which aims to introduce a point of consumption 
tax for racing and sports betting. The bill is based 
on recommendations put forward by the Offshore 
Racing and Sports Betting Working Group.
Gaming Intelligence outlines the latest legal developments from around the globe
29
GIQ Q3 REVIEW
 FINANCE
WORLD REGULATION



 FINANCE
GIQ20 Q3 2012 
FROM TALES OF epic adventure and stories 
of enduring friendship and love, through to 
highlighting major sporting achievements,  
lottery advertising sits in a class of its own, 
apart from the brash calls to action typical 
across the rest of the betting and gaming sector.
Some lotteries, such New Zealand’s Lotto 
and Spain’s Christmas Lottery El Gordo, cre-
ate mini ﬁlms which take the viewer on an emo-
tional journey. The New York State Lottery, one 
of the oldest in the US, has a history of snappy, 
lighthearted ads based around its ‘Hey, You 
Never Know’ strapline.
While core betting and gaming advertis-
ing tends to be focused on the key consumer 
segment, both in content and media channel, 
the challenge for lottery advertising and their  
agencies is to create compelling work that 
appeals to a far broader section of society. 
“NZ Lotto is based on maximising the  
contribution we give back to the community,” 
explains Guy Cousins, NZ Lotto chief market-
ing director. “In marketing terms, this means 
reaching out to the many, not the few.”
The core insight ‘What if I won…’ tends to be 
at the heart of many of the lottery campaigns. 
siblings meet at the request of their recently 
deceased mother to dig up a long-buried time 
capsule. Instead, they ﬁnd an old photo of their 
mother brandishing a winning ticket, and a 
haul of gold bars.
“We have found a heartfelt space that is reso-
nating with people,” adds Cousins. “We aim to 
make an authentic, emotional connection with 
our players. They’re essentially family tales of 
love and freedom, with a fantastical dimension.”
The UK’s National Lottery has become one 
of the country’s best-known brands since its 
launch in November 1994. Originally using the 
strapline ‘It Could Be You’, its advertising has 
moved through other iterations of that senti-
ment, including ‘Maybe, Just Maybe’ through to 
‘What Would You Do…’ and today’s ‘Who Wins 
if You Win?’.
According to an agency insider, these later 
straplines aim to embody the spirit of generosity. 
“‘What Would You Do’ allowed us to show more 
of the generous side of winning,” says the insider. 
Camelot, however, does not enjoy some of 
the same freedoms as its overseas counter-
parts when it comes to advertising, according 
to the insider, a former creative director on the 
account. Much of what it does, he explains, is dic-
What makes each lottery’s advertising different, 
says Charlotte Burlin, marketing manager of 
games of chance and lotteries at Swedish opera-
tor Svenska Spel, is how they tailor that insight 
to their own brand.
“What makes us different is, of course, our 
way of telling the stories and making them true 
to our core values and target audience,” she 
explains. “Humour and recognition is very 
important in our advertising.”
Svenska Spel is currently focused on its new 
Lotto concept Miljonärsfabriken – or Million-
aire Factory – and how it makes many million-
aires and multi-millionaires every year. At NZ 
Lotto, the strategy is to inspire people to dream 
about what they would do with a big win. 
“Over the years the themes have evolved in 
line with consumer sentiment,” says Cousins. 
“It’s less about big material things, and more 
about being able to share with people you care 
about in life – and not just sharing money, but 
sharing time and dreams.” 
Executions have included a grandfather’s 
win that allows his grown-up son to stop work-
ing on ﬁshing boats and spend more time with 
his own son. They arrive in a pirate ship when 
they break the news. In another, a group of 
Selling the dream
How lotteries balance 
promoting the prospect of 
winning vast riches with 
raising awareness of the 
social projects that ticket 
sales help support
COLUMN
MARKETING
Caroline 
Parry
32

33
GIQ Q3 REVIEW
state education funding to local school dis-
tricts. Yet, no mention of this is made in  
its advertising.
Both the National Lottery and NZ Lotto, on 
the other hand, have made 
their support of good causes 
a key strand of their overall 
advertising strategy. The 
National Lottery says it has 
funded 510,000 projects since 
its launch, including sports, 
arts and heritage. 
Ads have highlighted 
its association with British 
Athletics, at the London 2012 
Olympics and beyond. Last 
year, for its Christmas ad, 
Abbott Mead Vickers BBDO 
created an animated ﬁlm showing a lottery ticket 
blowing through the country, ﬁlling run-down 
areas with colour and activity. It aimed to show 
the transformative effect of lottery money and 
ended by thanking people for their contribution.
Lotto NZ is not obliged to highlight its fund-
ing to good causes but is increasingly doing so, 
says Cousins. “Our players like to hear stories 
of the positive impact on communities, thanks 
to lottery funding.” 
This is seen in its latest work, called Love 
Sport, about community funding. This tells the 
story of unlikely football hero Dylan. On ﬁnding 
the ball at his feet, Dylan manages to right-foot 
it to a female team mate who goes on to score. 
It changes everything, signiﬁcantly improving 
his standing in the school.
“It’s a story that celebrates the underdog. The 
main character is someone we all might know,” 
explains Cousins. “It aims to 
highlight that lottery funding 
can be ‘life-changing’ in many 
small, incalculable ways – and 
helps build and support the 
New Zealand way of life.”
Camelot tends to shy away 
from big, glamorous ads that 
would impress the ad indus-
try itself, says our source. 
“It would worry them that 
it would look too flash. They 
don’t want to be accused of 
wasting public money, even 
though it’s funded by them.”
For that reason, they admit to being “envi-
ous” of the freedoms enjoyed by other agencies 
working on lotteries. “There is a simple joy or 
epic nature to a lot of the work you see elsewhere 
around the world.”
Svenska Spel’s Burlin says its players expect 
its advertising to be “relevant, surprising and 
maybe create a laugh or two”, while Cousins 
says people like their work because they don’t 
feel like ads. “They are big, heart-warming sto-
ries. This helps us stand out from the advertis-
ing clutter. We like to share stories that reﬂect 
what we hear from our winners. The advertising 
is about people and generosity of spirit.” n
tated around the licensing cycle, as should it lose 
that licence, Camelot ceases to exist overnight.
For that reason its advertising (done by Abbott 
Mead Vickers BBDO since 2004), is split into two 
distinct categories – pre-bid and post-bid. 
“There are two phases of advertising pro-
duced for Camelot,” he says. “Coming up to the 
licence bid, Camelot tends to focus on all the good 
causes that it funds, such as arts and heritage 
projects and sporting triumphs, so it is seen as a 
force for good. This tends to be quite straightfor-
ward advertising, saying here’s what it does for 
you, the nation. It tells players that even if they 
don’t win they are doing a really good thing. 
“There is also retail-based advertising  
that promotes new games and products. The 
government wants to know that the National 
Lottery is being run efficiently and that its 
future is in safe hands. Also that the operator 
is forward-thinking and innovative, so it will 
grow revenue.Players try out new games as 
well continuing to buy their Saturday ticket, 
but after a while they get tired of the games 
and revert to their usual ticket. This creates a  
short-term spike in sales.” The source adds: 
“Camelot tends to time these to coincide with 
the licensing bid period, as it can point to the 
revenue growth created.”
Only when the licence has been secured and 
the pressure is off slightly, does the Camelot 
marketing team consider doing any brand 
advertising. “That’s when they do the soft, warm 
and feel-good stuff that isn’t telling you why you 
should play.”
Even then, he adds, Camelot’s marketing 
team tends to keep its simple and straightfor-
ward. “The people commissioning adverts 
inside Camelot are cautious. They don’t take 
risks.” Camelot declined to be interviewed by 
Gaming Intelligence for this piece.
All national and state lotteries contribute to 
the public good or to good causes in some way. 
Svenska Spel contributes the turnover from 
every game it operates, including Lotto, to the 
Swedish state budget. However, Burlin says, it is 
not able to say exactly what it is spent on.
Similarly, money from the New York 
State Lottery is used for public education. 
Indeed, according to its website, it contrib-
uted £3.27 billion in the 2016/17 fiscal year. 
This accounts for 14 per cent of the total 
“Our ads are big, 
heart-warming 
stories. This helps us 
stand out from the 
advertising clutter. 
We share stories that 
reﬂect what we hear 
from our winners”
Charlotte Burlin, Svenska Spel 


GIQ Q3 REVIEW
35
LOTTERIES
GLOBAL
THE GLOBAL LOTTERY industry remains 
a wildly profitable sector. Companies  
generate billions in sales, and prop up a range 
of important social and civic causes in a  
number of countries around the world.  
However, there are early signs that life for lot-
teries is not as easy as it once was. While these 
companies retain staunch backing from gov-
ernments and retailers, progress in the form 
of regulation and technological advances are 
increasingly hard to ignore. 
Customers want more than weekly 
draws and instant win games. Lotteries are  
ﬁnding that simply launching these products 
online is not enough to retain players and 
attract a younger generation. Online game  
revenue may be dwarfed by lotteries, but  
iGaming continues to grow much faster, with 
new opportunities for further growth on  
the horizon. The first cracks are starting to 
appear in lotteries’ solid foundation around 
the world. 
The biggest problem is that there is little 
sign that the lotteries know exactly what to 
do to address these issues. Over the next few  
pages we run down the issues facing the world’s 
largest lottery markets. 
Lotteries  
look for a way 
forward

36
LOTTERIES
EUROPE
FIGURES FROM THE World Lottery Associa-
tion revealed a 0.9 per cent decline in Europe-
an sales for the ﬁrst quarter of 2017. At a time 
when the re-regulation of markets across the 
continent has led to increased competition, the 
industry is thinking long and hard about how 
it responds.
And although many state lotteries have 
been quick to identify private (or publicly-
owned) gaming operators as a threat to their 
model, competition is more widespread. In 
2015, European Lotteries members are estimat-
ed to have generated total sales of €86.4bn, and 
gross gaming revenue of €38.8bn. Online GGR 
for European Lotteries members was €2.5bn.
They see billions of euros in revenue gen-
erated online that didn’t come from lotteries, 
and believe that they could have had a share 
of this if not for private competition. Svenska 
Spel chief executive Lenart Käll points out that 
unlicensed operators have built up a 25 per cent 
share of Sweden’s gambling market since enter-
ing the country in around 2005.
“Given the lack of controls introduced by 
the Swedish authorities, coupled with the strict 
regulations governing Svenska Spel or AB Tra-
voch Galopp, the evidence is clear: they have 
taken market share from us,” he says. “Our 
market share has fallen from 55 per cent in 2007 
to around 40 per cent today.” 
Michael Heinrich, co-CEO of Lotto Hamburg 
and Germany’s powerful state lottery associa-
tion the Deutsche Lotto und Totoblock (DLTB), 
claims that unlicensed companies offering lot-
tery products in the country turn over “around 
€500m per year”. These ﬁgures are the DLTB’s 
own, based on members’ revenue.
“Many of these private companies oper-
ate from the gambling tax havens, Malta and 
Gibraltar, where they pay almost no taxes,” he 
says. “The activities of these ‘black’ lotteries 
are not a competition issue,” Heinrich con-
tinues. “They are a public order issue, as they 
are illegal and undermine our lottery system, 
which is oriented towards the common good.”
Reality bites
Of course, the uneasy relationship between  
lotteries and private operators in Germany  
and Sweden is down to legislation which is 
incompatible with European Union law. This  
is certainly true in Germany, which is attempt-
ing to pass its latest, already-discredited  
iteration of the State Treaty on Gambling. In 
Sweden the looming threat of infringement  
proceedings has forced the government  
towards reregulation.
Existing laws give these state-owned opera-
The European lottery 
industry seems to 
understand that 
things must change if 
it is to safeguard its 
long-term future. It 
just can’t quite decide 
who is to blame for its 
predicament, or what 
changes are needed.
By Robin Harrison 
and Bobby Mamudi
European lotteries 
at a crossroads

LOTTERIES
EUROPE
37
GIQ Q3 REVIEW
tors a degree of protection, with the products 
they offer the only ‘legal’ ones in the market – 
albeit under an illegal regulatory framework. 
In Sweden, little has been done to stem 
the ﬂow of unlicensed competition due to the 
country’s outdated legislation. In Germany 
the federal government seems content to take 
tax revenue from unlicensed (or Schleswig-
Holstein-licensed) operators, despite the  
DLTB’s protests. 
Private competition is increasingly a fact  
of life for state lotteries. This is especially true 
of the hyper-competitive UK market, where the 
National Lottery has competed with private 
operators since its inception.
“To be clear, we have never had a problem 
with competition, as long as the competition 
is fair,” says Camelot Group head of policy and 
public affairs, Richard Hickson. “For a start, 
there is rigorous public competition for the 
National Lottery licence – and we’ve bid for and 
won three such competitions.
“More widely, we’ve always operated in the 
intensely competitive fast-moving consumer 
goods market, vying for consumers’ discretion-
ary spend.”
But, Hickson argues, there are other fac-
tors at play which have “muddied the waters” 
for Camelot. 
Society lotteries
“We’ve seen the emergence of larger, umbrella-
style lotteries that have positioned themselves 
as national competitors to the National Lot-
tery – therefore directly challenging the policy 
principle that there should be only one national 
lottery,” Hickson says.
“There is clear evidence that this devel-
opment is causing consumer confusion and 
diverting money from good causes. The single-
operator model maximises player interest and 
participation.”
The National Lottery was established as a 
single entity in order to maximise returns to 
good causes and society, as well as ensuring a 
high level of player protection. This does not 
amount to a licence to print money, Hickson is 
quick to add.
“As a monopoly operator, our competition  
is limited, but so are our profits – our profit  
after tax is only around one per cent of total 
revenue, while around 95 per cent goes back to 
winners and society.
“But we knew that when we bid for each of 
our licences and we’ve invested huge amounts 
in the National Lottery brand over that last 23 
years in the expectation that we would continue 
to be protected against unfair competition.” 
“We’ve seen the emergence  
of larger, umbrella-style 
lotteries that have  
positioned themselves  
as national competitors  
to the National Lottery”
Richard Hickson, Camelot
With other lottery operators muscling in 
on the National Lottery’s patch, this all breaks 
down, Hickson argues.
“Research by Frontier Economics found 
that multiple operators would end up develop-
ing similar products and competing for market 
share, leading to signiﬁcantly lower sales and 
less money for society,” he explains.
“Frontier’s analysis shows that increased 
competition reduced cumulative National Lot-
tery sales by £738m between 2011 and 2016,” 
Hickson says. “This resulted in National Lot-
tery returns to society falling by £258m – £169m 
for good causes and £89m for lottery duty – com-
pared with what would have happened in the 
absence of competition.”
Since its launch in 1994, he says, the Nation-
al Lottery has delivered £37bn for good causes, 
“far exceeding all predictions”; awarded 510,000 
individual grants; paid out £63bn in prize 
money and handed over £14bn in lottery duty 
to the taxman.
In Germany, state lotteries give around 40 
per cent of turnover to the German state and 
good causes, such as supporting the ﬁnancing 
of sports, arts, cultural heritage and social and 
charity projects.
“If the unfair encroachment that we’ve 
seen in recent years is allowed to continue 
unchecked, we strongly believe that the abil-
ity of both the National Lottery and smaller 
society lotteries to deliver social good will be 
signiﬁcantly hampered,” Hickson says.
The Health Lottery is the ﬁrst society lot-
tery with a national profile to emerge in the 
UK. Total proceeds from large society lotteries  
have soared from £178.7m in the 12 months 
to April 2009, to £531.6m in the 12 months to  
September 2016.
Society lotteries are a common feature 
of European gambling markets. Käll admits 
that Svenska Spel’s declining lottery sales are 
in part due to the strength of society lotteries, 
such as postcode lottery Svenska Postkodföre-
ningen. They are “really strong” in Sweden, he 
says. With H1 turnover of SEK1.2bn, Svenska 
Postkodföreningen is Sweden’s third-largest 
gambling operator.

38
Healthy competition
Chris Lunn, communications manager for the 
51 health-related community interest compa-
nies (CICs) that operate under the UK Health 
Lottery scheme, argues that society lotter-
ies should be seen as complementary to the 
National Lottery. 
“So far, more than £93m has been raised by 
the 51 Health CICs through The Health Lottery 
scheme. This important funding has supported 
over 2,500 local projects of all shapes and sizes 
and helped more than 436,000 people across 
Great Britain.”
He argues that when the Health Lottery 
scheme launched in 2011, it had a “catalytic” 
effect on the UK lottery sector. Rather than 
resulting in the National Lottery taking a 
hit, he points to UKGC statistics that show 
an increase in the sums raised for good 
causes from £103m to £155m between 2011  
and 2013.
What the Health Lottery scheme has done, 
he says, is simply raise awareness of the use of 
society lotteries as a fundraising tool.
“The success of the Health Lottery’s launch 
was perhaps a matter of reminding the public 
that there is a wide range of lotteries and not 
just ‘the Lottery’,” he adds.
Problems with products
Hickson admits the main issue facing Camel-
ot is the poor performance of the draw-based 
games. This has not been helped by ‘fragile’ 
player conﬁdence following the changes, which 
saw more numbers added to the draw, lengthen-
ing the odds of winning the jackpot.
There have been more jackpot rollovers 
than ever before, but consumers understand 
that’s because it’s harder to win.
“There’s clearly work to be done to re-
engage players and address the performance 
of our draw-based games,” he says.
This is reflected in the UK participation 
ﬁgures. Only 25 per cent of young people aged 
16 to 24 buy lottery tickets, compared to almost 
60 per cent of those aged 35 to 44.
It could be argued that state lotteries are 
hamstrung by a lack of product diversity. This 
issue has plagued Svenska Spel for years, Käll 
says. The operator has long lobbied the Swed-
ish government for approval to launch casino 
games. All requests to date have been rejected.
Online casino is the fastest-growing gam-
ing vertical in Sweden, generating around 
SEK3.2bn in gross gaming revenue from just 
200,000 players, he explains. The re-regulation 
of the market will ﬁnally allow Svenska Spel 
to roll out slots and table games, but likely 
through a spun-off private arm.
“We applied for casino licence in 2014 – it’s 
difﬁcult to understand why we have to watch 
these offshore businesses taking market share, 
growing and advertising, when they are not 
complying with the regulations,” Käll says. 
He also acknowledges that the Swedish 
government views slot games as particularly 
addictive products.
“It’s the product that the government 
has the most problem with, in terms of kids 
between 20 and 30 gambling,” he admits. “We 
have problems with gambling addiction among 
younger, male players when it comes 
to online casino.”
Despite this, he believes 
there is demand for new 
products among younger 
players. 
“[Young people] 
want quick results, a  
short period between 
betting and the result, 
and generally for eve-
rything to be more dra-
matic. We must understand 
“The activities of these ‘black’ 
lotteries are not a competition 
issue. They are a public order 
issue, as they are illegal and 
undermine our lottery system, 
which is oriented towards the 
common good”
Michael Heinrich, Lotto Hamburg & DLTB
the experience the younger audience has from 
casual gaming, and how we can combine these 
unique positions and be more able to offer 
real money prizes,” he says. “Millennials are 
diverse and ﬁckle, who live lives that are con-
stantly changing.”
Camelot is also looking to address this 
issue as part of the strategy review that came 
out of the sharp revenue decline in 2016. It is 
understood to be considering lobbying for an 
expanded product range, rivalling the public 
sector, but this is complicated by the licensing 
arrangement.
The UK Gambling Commission granted 
Camelot its latest licence to operate the Nation-
al Lottery in 2009. This contract runs until 
2023, so any changes to its licensing conditions 
are unlikely before then.
Another crucial part of 
the strategic review is the 
acknowledgement that 
the National Lottery has 
a duty to be the most 
responsible operator in 
the market. In a political 
and media environment 
that is increasingly toxic 
for private gambling 
companies, this can be a 
real USP.

www.nyxgaminggroup.com

40
LOTTERIES
EUROPE
Risky business
The challenge is to create games that offer  
a quick and easy reward to players while  
ensuring customers are gambling safely. 
Instant-win games, such as scratchcards, 
seem an obvious route. However, the fast-paced 
nature of instant win could pose problems for 
lotteries looking to maintain a high level of con-
sumer protection.
Svenska Spel has been a pioneer in respon-
sible gambling. In 2014 the company launched a 
number of new consumer protection controls. It 
introduced a mandatory customer registration 
policy for online and retail customers, requir-
ing them to show a driving licence or player 
card before gambling. All bonus promotions 
were also banned. This led to an SEK800m 
drop in revenue and SEK500m decline in proﬁt.
“We showed the rest of the market that 
customer protection is more important than 
proﬁt,” Käll says.
This is reflected in its 
instant win portfolio. Svenska 
Spel currently only offers four 
online scratch games, all with 
soft themes such as Scratch 
Crossword and Scratch 
Bingo. Loto-Hamburg offers 
no scratch games online.
Heinrich of Lotto Hamburg 
believes that lotteries should 
focus on developing existing 
draw-based products, rather 
than moving into new verti-
cals to generate growth. He 
argues that German state 
governments have effective-
ly handed responsibility for 
channelling players to “legal, 
strictly regulated and con-
trolled gambling products”.
He admits, however, that 
such a channelling policy 
only works if the products 
remain attractive. “This 
requires a combination of 
good traditional games and 
innovation. LOTTO 6aus49 is a successful 
traditional product. Eurojackpot, which we 
launched with our European partners in 2012, 
has strong growth rates and attracts more peo-
ple in the younger generation.
“To this end we’ve also adapted to players’ 
expectations by creating an attractive online 
offer, continuing to develop innovative instant 
tickets, setting up self-service terminals in 
shops, and more.”
Adapting to players’ expectations, particu-
larly around the use of technology, is one simple 
At the same time, the competition that 
exists in gaming is also present in charitable 
giving, with no shortage of appeals for dona-
tions. Does the fact that lottery proceeds go 
towards social causes still resonate strongly 
with consumers?
According to the Charities Aid Foundation 
(CAF) World Giving Index 2017, every western 
country in the top 20 most charitable index 
saw a decline in giving in 2016. New Zealand, 
the United States, Australia, Canada, Ireland, 
the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, Malta, 
Iceland, Germany and Norway have each 
seen a decrease in their CAF World Giving 
Index score of between one and ﬁve percent-
age points. 
The index also shows that older people are 
more likely to give to good causes than younger 
generations, partly due to their greater wealth 
and partly due to their view of the world, 
although fewer did so last year.
All of this puts lotteries in a difﬁcult posi-
tion. How do you make the product offering 
more attractive and competitive versus private 
operators while maintaining the highest level 
of consumer protection? How much emphasis 
should be placed on the social causes that lot-
teries support, versus the opportunities for 
players to win life-changing prizes? 
The European gaming landscape has 
changed beyond recognition in the past ten 
years and lotteries need to deﬁne their place 
in this new, competitive, yet highly 
regulated market. This requires 
acceptance of the fact that the 
state lottery today is one 
of a number of licensed 
gambling operators in a 
market. This may have 
deprived them of their 
special monopoly status, 
but not the important role 
they play in society.  n
way of attracting a new generation of lottery 
players. “When we launched traditional lottery 
games online we saw the average age of our reg-
istered players decline,” Käll says. “When we 
launched on mobile the aver-
age age dropped further.”
Casual competition
As Hickson says, lotteries 
are “vying for consumers’ 
discretionary spend”. And 
there has never been more 
competition for a share  
of the consumer wallet, from 
Netﬂix and Spotify subscrip-
tions to an endless stream of 
casual games.
Few would immediately 
identify casual mobile games 
as a competitor to lotter-
ies, but in the US last year 
they were more popular 
than streaming sites such 
as YouTube, Hulu and Netf-
lix, according to SuperData 
Research. In 2016 around 56 
per cent of the US population 
played mobile games. It is 
estimated that 57 per cent of 
Americans play the lottery.
Mobile games also appeal 
to the lottery’s core demographic – over for-
ties – and the target demographic – the 
18 to 35-year-olds. Candy Crush 
may be more dangerous than 
online slots. These games pro-
vide entertainment for little 
spend and offer players the 
“reward” of winning and 
progressing through levels, 
even if not the prospect of 
real money offered by lottery 
products.
“it’s difﬁcult to 
understand why we 
have to watch these 
offshore businesses 
taking market share 
when they are not 
complying with the 
regulation”
Lennart Käll, Svenska Spel 


Thanks to Lotto Warehouse, the world’s only MGA/
UKGC Class 4 Platform licensed lottery betting provider, 
operators can now unlock the huge potential of the 
world’s biggest jackpots.
Add Gaming’s Fastest 
Growing Vertical To Your 
Platform
Get in touch!
Send us a message today at
 
INFO@LOTTOWAREHOUSE.COM

W H AT  I S  L O T T E R Y  B E T T I N G ?
Lottery Betting is betting on the outcome of lottery draws in order to win the same prizes, 
including the jackpot. It’s having a huge impact in the gaming world.
W H AT ’ S  O N  O F F E R ?
11 lottery products are available with our solution, including Powerball, Mega Millions, 
EuroMillions and EuroJackpot - the world’s 4 biggest lotteries. 
F U L L  PAY O U T  P R O T E C T I O N
You offer your players the world’s biggest jackpots - we pay them if they win. All higher tier 
payouts are protected by our jackpot coverage model, approved by the UKGC and the MGA.
Your Gateway To The World’s 
Biggest Jackpots
W H Y  C H O O S E  L O T T E R Y  B E T T I N G ?
Advertising the world’s biggest jackpots will help you attract new customers and also prove 
a powerful cross-sell vehicle for existing players. Lottery has been and always will be hugely 
popular. The industry is worth more than sports betting and gaming combined.
S I M P L E  I N T E R G R AT I O N
Our simple API integration takes no time at all. It can also be tailored to relect the look 
and feel of your platform and, as an additional plus, it’s very eficient and requires minimal 
management and resource internally.
If you think lottery betting would be a great addition to your platform 
then get in touch with us to ind out more about our zero risk, simple to 
integrate solution. We look forward to hearing from you and will be back 
in touch straight away.
www.lottowarehouse.com

44
LOTTERIES
UNITED STATES
THERE ARE SEVEN US states that cur-
rently allow online lottery sales – just three of 
which include online instant games – and there 
remains an appetite among lawmakers in other 
states to continue to discuss iLottery (sale of 
games via mobile and internet) as a means to 
increase sales. 
So far, the appetite among players has been 
muted and the results disappointing. The Michi-
gan Lottery has been rightly celebrated for push-
ing the cause as the most interactive lottery in the 
US, but games sold online account for just three 
per cent of total sales there. In other states such 
as Kentucky, it’s more like one per cent of sales.
According to La Fleur’s, online sales from 
lottery and eInstant games grew 54 per cent to 
Retailers’ priorities 
across the United 
States are focused on 
instant lottery games, 
which have become  
the leading product  
in the industry, writes 
Kio Dawson
just over $143m in the 2017 ﬁscal year. At the 
same time, instant lottery games have grown 
to become a $45bn a year market. They now rep-
resent 63 per cent of US lotteries total sales. And 
retailers are an essential distribution network 
for the lotteries.
Industry trade association National Asso-
ciation of Convenience Stores (NACS), which 
represents more than 2,100 retail members 
across America, estimates that its industry was 
responsible for more than $50bn in lottery sales 
last year, equivalent to nearly two-thirds of the 
2016 total. The association, which is opposed to 
online lottery sales, said that on average a con-
venience retailer earned a commission of 5.5 per 
cent of sales on lottery. 
Retailers hold the key as 
instant games dominate
44

OFFICIAL DATA  
PROVIDED BY
BETTING MARKETS  
COMPILED IN 
COOPERATION WITH 
LIVE STREAMING
 
➔Fastest streams available
 
➔1,500+ live events per year
 
➔All major ESL events
CONTENT SOLUTIONS
 
➔Comprehensive match  
and player statistics
 
➔Official live scores  
provided in real time
 
➔Directly delivered  
from game engine
BETTING SOLUTIONS
 
➔7,500+ eSports matches per year
 
➔90+ betting markets
 
➔All popular titles
Live
OPEN UP NEW MARKETS
WITH BETRADAR
ESPORTS BETTING
Visit us at www.betradar.com 
or contact us at sales@betradar.com
MEET US AT:
STAND 304
EIG BERLIN

46
LOTTERIES
UNITED STATES
“Commissions earned on lottery sales are 
just under one per cent of inside sales for a con-
venience retailer, so it’s not signiﬁcant from a 
sales contribution perspective,” explained Lyle 
Beckwith, NACS’ senior vice president of gov-
ernment relations. 
“However, the reason most operators have 
it is because of the foot trafﬁc it can generate. 
We estimate that lottery is the main reason just 
under seven per cent of shoppers go into a con-
venience store, and the category is consistently 
in the top three for impulse sales (meaning a 
category a shopper didn’t go into a store to buy, 
but saw it while there and decided to add it to 
their basket).”
Beckwith points out that 
despite the trafﬁc and excite-
ment generated by the 
record $1.6bn Powerball 
jackpot in Q1 2016, lot-
tery sales for conveni-
ence stores were ﬁve per 
cent less in 2016 than the 
previous year.
In Massachusetts, 
the legislature is weigh-
ing up a move to allow the 
lottery to go online. The 
Massachusetts Lottery 
“We are very bullish on 
interactive. But the other  
road is making sure that  
the retailers – the people 
who are the backbone of the 
lottery industry – are well 
taken care of”
Jim Kennedy, Scientific Games
says that it needs to position itself where the 
customers are (i.e. online and mobile), and that 
it needs the extra sales to continue to survive 
and generate funds for local aid. The retailers 
say that passing the bill (H 26) would decimate 
their business.
A coalition of six retail associations in the 
state, Save Our Neighborhood Stores, argue 
that online lottery ticket sales would “greatly 
decrease” foot trafﬁc to stores and be another 
challenge to already struggling business own-
ers who haven’t seen lottery agent commission 
rates increase in over 40 years.
The association claims that 80 per cent of 
Massachusetts residents think there is “enough 
access” to the lottery, and that “most” Massa-
chusetts residents oppose expansion of the Mas-
sachusetts Lottery to the internet, describing it 
as an “unproven and risky proposition”. 
“An online lottery would only hurt the small 
businesses, leading to a loss in excise tax revenue 
for communities,” says the association, which 
includes the New England Store and Energy 
Marketers Association (NECSEMA) and the 
Retailers Association of Massachusetts (RAM) 
among its members. “If it isn’t broken, don’t ﬁx 
it, at the expense of local neighborhood stores.”
For retailers, they see no beneﬁt from play-
ers going online to play the lottery, and any 

LOTTERIES
UNITED STATES
47
GIQ Q3 REVIEW
“Consumers like the games, 
the ﬂexibility of the games 
drives content, and the 
retailers recognise the 
economic beneﬁt of lottery, 
so they have become much 
more supportive”
Jim Kennedy, Scientific Games
games were the only major lottery category to  
achieve year-on-year growth last year, accord-
ing to ﬁgures released by La Fleur’s in its 2017 
World Lottery Almanac, with declines across 
lotto, keno, numbers, passive and toto games.
Excluding video lottery terminals (VLTs), 
worldwide lottery sales fell marginally by 0.5 
per cent to US$274.9bn – the second consecu-
tive year it has declined. Sales from instant-win 
games topped $80.5bn, representing nearly a 
third of total worldwide lottery sales.
In the North America region, this figure 
rises to 58 per cent ($47.3bn out of $82.3bn), 
revealing just how important instant games 
are to the market. 
Across the 44 US states which offer instant 
game products, sales were up three per cent 
in FY 2017 to $45.1bn according to La Fleur’s, 
representing 63 per cent of US lotteries total 
sales. At the same time, sales of draw games 
have stalled, with Powerball in particular see-
ing sales drop 31 per cent following the record 
$1.58bn jackpot in FY 2016.
“If you view the longer trend, you would 
certainly see the fact that the instant game con-
tinues to dominate compound annual growth,” 
says Kennedy. “Over the past seven years, the 
instant games business has grown over $15.6bn, 
and if you look at the draw game category, it’s 
been relatively ﬂat. The story continues to be 
the growth of the instant game business.
“One of the side beneﬁts of this is that it has 
really driven the retail economics in a way that 
I don’t think anybody ever expected.”
Kennedy believes that we are seeing a “shift 
in the centre of gravity” for lottery retailers 
who have previously prioritised draw games 
but now prefer instant games. “It’s close to a 
30-70 split. We’re certainly heading 
in that direction.”
One of the reasons instant 
games are so popular is because 
there is a constant stream of new 
products being launched weekly, 
covering a whole range of brands.
“Most lotteries are launching 
50-something games a year, so when 
you’re actively making and launch-
ing a new product, you have 
got this great content 
pipeline,” says Kennedy. 
“It’s a combination of 
more exciting games and 
higher price points. The 
retailers are making money 
and they are getting behind 
instant games and lottery as  
a category. 
“So you’re in a virtuous cycle 
right now, where consumers like 
the games, the flexibility of the 
games drives content, and the retailers 
now recognise the economic beneﬁt of lottery, 
so they have become much more supportive.”
Part of this stems from the sheer number 
of products on display. The average US lottery 
retailer now has 30 instant games on their 
counter-top. In comparison, UK retailers have 
around 16.
“It’s that variety of choice that is part of the 
stimulus here,” says Kennedy. 
Willy Wonka Golden Ticket
Scientiﬁc Games has been doing its bit, too, and 
has enjoyed spectacular success this year with 
a new multi-state instant-linked game, Willy 
Wonka Golden Ticket – the company’s most 
successful linked instant game yet. The game 
features a unique bonus online second-chance 
opportunity, where players get a chance to 
take part in the Billion Dollar Challenge event  
in April 2018.
loss of commissions would 
“add insult to injury” to busi-
nesses already struggling with 
increased costs from wages, 
healthcare, energy and tobacco 
taxes.
It puts leading suppliers such as 
Scientific Games in an interesting 
position. While the company’s games and tech-
nology are ready to serve US lottery customers 
in a digitalised world, its relationships with 
retailers are equally as important.
“We are very bullish on interactive, in fact 
we see that as one of the major roads ahead,” 
explains Jim Kennedy, lottery industry stal-
wart and group chief executive of lottery for 
Scientiﬁc Games. “But the other road is mak-
ing sure that the retailers – the people who are 
the backbone of the lottery industry – are well 
taken care of.”
The rise of instant games
In the US and across the world, instant games 
(or scratchcards/scratch-offs/scratchies/
scratch-its, depending on where you are) have 
become the most important product in a lot-
tery’s portfolio.
Draw games may take the limelight when 
there is a big jackpot to be won, but instant 

48
ﬁnalising plans to join the game by the end of 
the year. It is currently the highest-indexing $10 
game this year in Arizona, Colorado, Georgia, 
Maine, New Mexico and New York, and the 
highest indexing $20 game in Ohio. The game 
is also generating nearly two million second-
chance entries across seven loyalty clubs.
Next April’s Billion Dollar Challenge event 
will be the ﬁrst time US players have had an 
opportunity win up to $1bn in cash prizes on 
a second-chance offer, which sees eligible  
non-winning tickets entered into an online 
drawing for a chance to win a trip to Las Vegas 
to attend the event.
Scientiﬁc Games has already announced 
that it will hold another Billion Dollar Chal-
lenge event in 2019. These second-chance  
opportunities are a good way for the  
company to showcase its interac-
tive capabilities. 
The supplier is working 
on 40 second-chance web-
sites right now, and has 
developed 625 sites for 
lotteries over the years. 
It also developed 16 lot-
tery mobile apps and 14 
loyalty programmes. 
Together, these are 
helping lotteries better 
connect with their play-
ers, in a similar way to 
Willy Wonka is one of Scientiﬁc Games’ top 
three casino licensed properties, of course, but 
there is genuine excitement over the multi-state 
potential that it is opening up by bringing the 
scaling power of multiple jurisdictions together 
around a single game.
“We are very proficient at determining 
when it comes to what works, and what doesn’t 
work,” says Kennedy. “What works in juris-
diction A, may not work in jurisdiction B, and 
contrary to the myth out there, there is a tre-
mendous amount of innovation that goes on 
when you’re producing 3,000 pieces of unique 
content every year.
“You learn a lot about where the market 
is, so I think we do a really good job of recog-
nising the instant game as a category in rela-
tion to gaming consumers. You put on top 
of that these interactive layers that 
we’ve been driving in the last 
five years, and that gives us 
a whole new dimension to 
better understand what’s 
working and what’s not.” 
Kennedy revealed 
that the Willy Wonka 
Golden Ticket  game has 
already launched in 12 
states at the time GIQ went 
to press, with two more 
launching shortly thereafter 
and at least another two 
what social casinos have done for land-based 
casinos – another sector that has struggled to 
increase sales in recent years.
“It’s a matter of distinction,” says Kenne-
dy. “I would say most US lotteries are online.  
They have an internet presence, or even a 
mobile presence. When you look at general con-
sumer participation rates, which are in the two 
per cent range, second-chance lottery draws 
have been very successful. Second-chance pro-
motions in the lottery sector are higher. They 
are generally in the 10-15 per cent range, some-
times as high as 40 per cent for special games. 
Those are unheard-of numbers.”
“There’s no substitute for experience. We’ve 
surpassed the $5bn mark in terms of retail 
value of actual entries into our systems. So 
that learning really goes into the construction 
of the consumer experience, and in the reliabil-
ity of that experience when we plug one of these 
programmes together like the second-chance 
feature of Willy Wonka Golden Ticket.”
There may not be many US lotteries  selling 
their games online, but the digitisation of these 
lotteries is gathering pace. Retail instant games 
may be the immediate future for the US lottery 
industry, but second-chance draws are helping 
to bridge the retail and online divide. n
WILLY WONKA & THE CHOCOLATE  
FACTORY and all related characters and ele-
ments © and ™ Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc. 


50
LOTTERIES
CHINA
China will use mind sports as a gateway to the 
international sporting arena.”
Consequences of a crackdown
Mind sports is an important new avenue for 
AGTech and potentially for other suppliers. 
The Chinese government has ﬂirted with the 
regulation of interactive gaming and lottery 
for years but recent crackdowns have left this 
avenue closed for now. 
As far back as October 2009, the Chinese 
Ministry of Finance issued the Interim Meas-
ures for the Administration of Internet Lot-
tery and Telephone Lottery Sales. Before that 
it had tacitly allowed the sale of retail lottery 
tickets on the internet before the emergence 
of a plethora of fraudulent websites prompted  
a crackdown.
Since then, a new generation of interac-
tive lottery resellers have sprung up. Mostly 
based out of Hong Kong, the likes of Success  
Universe Group and 500.com surged ahead 
before another government suspension in 
January 2015 halted the gravy train.
Hong Kong-listed Success Universe Group 
sold its Chinese lottery subsidiary Honour 
Rich, citing the ongoing uncertainty in the  
Chinese lottery market. Honour Rich had 
served as an official lottery sales agent in a 
number of Chinese provinces prior to the sus-
pension of online lottery sales.
In the year prior to the suspension, the com-
pany recorded lottery turnover of HK$201m 
Lottery suppliers to the 
Chinese market are 
diversifying because of 
a two-year suspension of 
interactive lottery sales 
but there are signs that 
the ban could be lifted.  
By Steve Hoare
China in suspense
THE TAKEOVER OF AGTech by Alibaba 
has subtly but fundamentally changed the 
nature of the company. For over a decade it has  
provided technology products for China’s Wel-
fare and Sports lotteries and that continues to 
be the core business – for now.
Alibaba’s inﬂuence has made itself appar-
ent immediately. During the first half of  
the year, AGTech’s new Games and Entertain-
ment business generated revenue of $17.1m, 
equivalent to nearly a third of the company’s 
total during the period. That represents pretty 
amazing growth for what is essentially a start-
up, albeit one with huge backing. 
This followed the roll out of casual and 
social games for mobile, including non-lottery 
play-for-fun and mind sports (skill) games, 
such as the Two-on-One competition poker 
game, which is not subject to lottery laws and 
regulations in China. These have been distrib-
uted across parent company Alibaba Group’s 
Taobao channel. The addition of mind sports 
to the AGTech portfolio is the ﬁrst step towards 
the lottery supplier becoming a much more 
rounded business.
Global Poker League’s Alex Dreyfus, who 
launched GPL China at the end of 2016, told 
us recently: “It is early days, but the Chinese 
government wants to promote sports and com-
petition and has encouraged investment in foot-
ball and the NBA. There will never be lots of 
Chinese NBA players for physical reasons. But 
with mind sports, we all have the same brain. 

LOTTERIES
CHINA
51
GIQ Q3 REVIEW
(US$25.74m) and a proﬁt of $24.5m, falling to a 
loss of $20.8m in 2016 on revenue of just $8.3m.
Success Universe sold its 80 per cent stake 
in Honour Rich to British Virgin Islands- 
incorporated Wide Fortune Group for HK$12m 
earlier this year.
500.com was operating in similar circum-
stances. The Ministry of Finance approved 
its contract to develop interactive sales for the 
China Sports Lottery Administration Centre 
before halting such sales. 
Revenue dropped a devastating 82.8 per 
cent during 2015 from RMB579m ($87.25m) 
to RMB99.5m and then it lost 89 per cent dur-
ing 2016. 500.com also turned to poker with 
the acquisition of a controlling interest in 
Qufan Internet Technology and its subsidiary  
Shenzen Qufan Internet Technology, which 
offers free-to-play mobile poker. This puts it 
head-to-head with the likes of Tencent Poker, 
which is the country’s most popular social 
poker product.
500.com then acquired Malta-based The 
Multi Group, operator of the Multilotto brand, 
for €49.8m. Multilotto allows players to bet on 
the outcomes of 11 of the world’s largest lot-
teries, making it a competitor to the industry 
leader Lottoland, which hired former AGTech 
executive Geaspar Byrne to spearhead its own 
push into Asia earlier this year.
500.com was not ﬁnished there. It returned 
to traditional Chinese lottery products with the 
acquisition of MelcoLot, which manufactures 
point-of-sale lottery terminals, as well as distrib-
uting scratchcards for the Chinese Sports and 
Welfare Lotteries. It also manages the Lucky 
Pool retail network that provides the Sports 
Lottery with ticket and skill-based games.
The sum total of these three purchases 
suggests a belief that online lottery sales are 
unlikely to return in China any time soon, 
despite its insistence that its Ministry of 
Finance authorisation remains valid.
Signs of life
But some continue to hold out hope. New 
York-listed gaming and lottery suppli-
er International Game Technology 
(IGT) announced a joint venture 
with Chinese mobile phone resell-
er and lottery supplier Telling 
Telecommunication in July 2017.
Telling will hold a 51 per cent 
stake in the Chinese joint venture, 
which aims to provide innovative  
lottery products to the regulated  
lottery market.
“A number of market dynamics certainly 
inﬂuenced our joint venture,” IGT head of inter-
national Walter Bugno tells Gaming Intelligence. 
“They included the expectation that interactive 
lottery will soon be regulated in China, as well 
as our assessment that the instant ticket mar-
ket is underdeveloped and constrained by game 
types and current regulations.” 
Telling has more than three decades of 
experience working with world-class technol-
ogy companies, from Motorola to Apple. They 
know how to effectively and efﬁciently package 
and distribute technology in China, and IGT 
believes that expertise can be put to good use 
in the lottery market – regulations allowing.
“If and when regulations related to mobile 
lottery change, Telling is a core member of 
China’s mobile ecosystem and is in an excel-
lent position to distribute interactive lottery 
products and services,” continues Bugno.  
“As opportunities arise, we can also form 
additional partnerships for developing new  
ways to play.” 
Bugno accepts that he can do little but wait 
for a government announcement, however, he 
will have been emboldened by news from rival 
supplier AGTech. If anyone can be expected 
to understand or know the mind of the gov-
ernment it is Jack Ma, the founder of AGTech 
owner Alibaba.
A new lottery model
In March this year, AGTech announced a deal 
to launch a new lottery channel on the online 
platform of Alipay, Alibaba’s Chinese online 
payment processor. AGTech said that the 50:50 
joint venture operation of the Alipay Lottery 
Channel will enable it to tap into the online lot-
tery sector ahead of any potential reopening of 
the Chinese market.
Alipay boasts more than 450 million active 
users in China and worldwide. It is the most 
popular online and mobile payment tool in 
China, evolving into a ‘lifestyle enabler’ that 
allows users to hail taxis, book hotels, pay util-
ity bills or book movie tickets.
While AGTech acknowledged that there is 
“uncertainty as to the timing of the potential 
re-opening of the online distribution market  
of lottery products under the applicable PRC 
laws and regulations”, one senses the deal 
would not have been struck without some 
inside knowledge.
From the beginning of the interactive sus-
pension in 2015 until May 2017, the Chinese 
government conducted a two-year trial of 
mobile lottery sales in Jiangsu. Since then the 
government has authorised a number of other 
provincial mobile sales trials.
According to China’s Ministry of Finance, 
the strict implementation of regulations gov-
erning the pilot programme resulted in a 
smooth and standardised process which identi-
ﬁed no signiﬁcant risk associated with the use 
of mobile phones as a sales channel.
“The mobile lottery sales trial demonstrat-
ed that the government is still considering and 
evaluating new forms of gaming,” comments 
Bugno. “The government’s willingness to  
consider new ideas is good for the industry in 
the long term. The feedback from the market 
was positive, and we hope to see more prov-
inces participating.” 
During 2016 China’s lottery market saw 
total sales increase by seven per cent to 
RMB394.64bn (€53.6bn), with Sports Lot-
tery sales up 13 per cent to RMB188.15bn and 
Welfare Lottery sales climbing 2.5 per cent to 
RMB206.49bn.
The addition of mobile and interactive 
lottery is a tantalisingly prospect. IGT and 
AGTech are positioning themselves, but the 
wait goes on. n
“If and when regulations related 
to mobile lottery change, Telling 
is a core member of China’s 
mobile ecosystem and in an 
excellent position to distribute 
interactive lottery products  
and services”
Walter Bugno, IGT

52
LOTTERIES
SINGAPORE
SINGAPORE POOLS WAS established by the 
Singapore government in 1968 to provide a safe 
outlet for gamblers away from the gambling 
parlours run by Triads. In 2016, the Pools took 
a step into the 21st century with the launch of 
its online gaming website to counter the per-
ceived threat from organised crime operating 
on the internet.
The launch of the website was accompanied 
by the new Remote Gambling Act, which was 
introduced by the Singapore government in 
2014 to combat illegal online gaming.
“It was in response to this impending leg-
islative change that Singapore Pools sought 
expressions of interest in providing an online 
betting platform. We envisaged that we stood 
a good chance given our excellent track record 
in Singapore and internationally, especially for 
responsible conduct,” says Singapore Pools 
chief executive ofﬁcer Seah Chin Siong.
The aim of the Singapore government was to 
institute the same regime online as it did ofﬂine. 
That meant gambling was prohibited  
with all except licensed operators. 
And licensed operators meant  
the Singapore Pools and Singa-
pore Turf Club.
“This is not about trying to 
create a new channel for gam-
ing online,” said Singapore’s 
minister for trade and indus-
try, S Iswaran, at the time. 
Casino games and online poker would be 
banned, but the Singapore Pools was allowed 
to seek an exemption from the 
general ban that would allow it 
to offer the same games online 
as it does in retail outlets and 
over the telephone. The prod-
uct portfolio consists of the lotto 
game TOTO, pre-printed lottery 
game Singapore Sweep, num-
bers game 4D, as well as betting.
During 2014 and 2015, the 
Pools conducted a tender pro-
cess to audition its technology 
providers. A hard-fought battle 
was won by UK supplier Open-
Bet, which provides a sports betting platform 
to many of the UK’s leading bookmakers, such 
as William Hill, Paddy Power and Sky Betting 
& Gaming. It has broadened its client base in 
recent years to include WLA members such as 
Canada’s British Columbia Lottery Corpora-
tion, France’s Pari Mutuel Urbain and 
Denmark’s Danske Spil.
OpenBet (soon to be part 
of Scientific Games) was 
awarded a seven-year con-
tract and the online service 
was launched successfully 
in October 2016. It included 
all the ofﬂine products and 
in-play or live betting. “The 
launch was relatively smooth,” says Seah. 
“There were the usual initial minor system 
bugs but they have been mostly ﬁxed. We con-
tinue to make system improvements.”
Seah says they have put in place strong KYC 
(know your customer) and customer due dili-
gence and screening, which is “not too different 
from the ﬁnancial sector”.
Casino-style games and poker continue to 
be banned in Singapore. Would Seah like the 
Singapore Pools to be granted an exemption to 
offer these games or are there any other game 
types that he would like to offer? Seah gives 
little away with his response: “We will work 
closely with our regulators to determine what 
game types to offer in relation to our mission 
to help counter illegal gambling activities  
in Singapore.”
One senses he would like to say “yes” or 
at the very least “never say never”. However, 
when the Remote Gambling Act was passed 
the government made a point that it wanted  
to “curtail the options” available to  
Singapore’s citizens. 
In addition to banning all unlicensed 
operators, the act criminalised individual 
gamblers, facilitators, agents and runners.  
It also introduced payment transaction-
blocking measures, as well as advertising 
bans and a public health edu-
cation programme. So, has it  
been effective?
“As we have operated the 
channel for nearly a year, it is 
still premature to conclude its 
effectiveness against illegal 
online gaming here in Singa-
pore,” says Seah.   
He says the online contribu-
tion to revenue and customer 
numbers lived up to expec-
tations, without wishing to 
divulge detailed numbers. 
“We do not expect revenue from our online 
channel to surpass terrestrial sales in the near 
term,” says Seah. “Online sports sales though 
may increase more than online lottery sales.”
He says it is too early to analyse wheth-
er the operator is reaching out to a new,  
younger demographic, but sports betting is 
such a natural product to be reproduced online 
that Seah’s conﬁdence is not misguided.
The Pools is just at the beginning of its  
journey but it has already travelled much  
further than many of its WLA peers. The 
launch has clearly been a success. Now, the 
analysis will need to be done to ascertain 
whether it has been an effective tool to counter 
unlicensed operators. n
CASE STUDY
Singapore Pools go online
Gaming Intelligence speaks to Singapore Pools chief 
executive ofﬁcer Chin Siong Seah about the company’s 
journey from legislation to online launch. By Steve Hoare


To register:
Call +852 2219 0111  |  Email: info@beaconevents.com|  Website: taiwan.asiagamingsummit.com
8-10 November 2017 • W Taipei, Taiwan
Asia Gaming Summit event will cover the latest 
regulatory updates, latest developments, trends 
and innovations in gaming/igaming, online casino, 
sports betting, eSports and lottery in Asia. Join us 
for the ﬁrst annual event in Taiwan where you will 
meet online and land-based operators, 
government, solution providers, payment 
companies, and many more. We look forward to 
seeing you in November.
  SUMMIT TAIWAN
ASIA
GIQ readers and friends enjoy a 10% discount upon registration. 
Quote promo code is BW797GI

LOTTERIES
AFRICA
WHILE IT HAS only been active since 2015, 
Ithuba Holdings, the gaming business created 
by the Zamani Equity Fund, has ﬁrmly estab-
lished itself as a key player in the South African 
lottery market.
The company won the tender for the coun-
try’s third national lottery licence in June 2015. 
This process was not without its hiccups, with 
the IGT-powered supplier challenged in court 
by former licence holder Gidani.
This type of dispute is not unusual in South 
Africa and the challenge was unsuccessful. 
Ithuba has launched two new draw games 
since it took over the lottery, Rafﬂe and Pick 3, 
as well as a range of instant-win products based 
on traditional African games and marketed as 
EAZiWIN.
Its inaugural Christmas 2016 rafﬂe sold two 
million tickets, something Ithuba claims has 
only been achieved by a “handful” of its peers.
“For Ithuba, being awarded the operating 
licence presented an opportunity to modern-
ise and grow the National Lottery, foster conﬁ-
dence and pride in the National Lottery brand, 
and introduce a higher level of service to local 
communities than ever before,” says Char-
maine Mabuza, managing director of Ithuba.
Last year, the lottery turned over ZAR6bn 
(€374.6m), a 65 per cent improvement on the 
first year of operation. A total of ZAR1.2bn 
was paid to the National Lottery Distribution 
Trust Fund and ZAR2.5bn was paid out in prize 
money. Growth has been aided by changes to 
existing lottery games that the operator inher-
ited, Lotto and Lotto Plus, which now offer 
larger jackpots, ﬁxed lower-tier prizes and a 
rolling jackpot for Lotto Plus.
TV draws have also been revamped, with 
ball machines scrapped in favour of a new ran-
South Africa’s Department of Trade and 
Industry (DTI) is strengthening controls from 
the top down, replacing the current National 
Gambling Board with the National Gambling 
Regulator, which it hopes will play a more effec-
tive role in policing the sector. It will also close 
a loophole that has seen provincial licensing 
authorities approve operators that run private lot-
teries or offer bets on the National Lottery. This 
also extends to players, who now face conﬁscation 
of illegal gambling winnings and prosecution.
Under a secure regulatory framework, 
Mabuza is conﬁdent that Ithuba can not only 
increase its contributions to society, but also 
set the benchmark for lottery operations across 
the African continent. n
Ithuba leads the charge 
for online African lotteries
dom-number generator and dynamic graphics. 
The show also features video segments on lot-
tery winners and highlights the good causes 
that receive funding from lottery money. 
One of the most important developments has 
been the lottery’s expansion into internet and 
mobile sales. The interactive offering was only 
launched last year, and Mabuza says it has 
grown “considerably” since then. 
“We have diversiﬁed our access channels 
into Unstructured Supplementary Service 
Data [or SMS gateways], which addresses 
the largest market in South Africa, as well as 
mobile and web,” she says. “We have had more 
than 300,000 player registrations since the 
launches, in less than 18 months.”
Mabuza is the founder of parent company 
Zamani and one of South Africa’s leading 
female entrepreneurs. She was one of the ﬁrst 
directors of Women’s Investment Portfolio 
Holdings (Wiphold), a black female-owned 
investment vehicle that became the ﬁrst wom-
en’s group to list on the Johannesburg Stock 
Exchange. She was also the founder of Empil-
weni Payout Services, a distributor of social 
grants in South Africa.
Ithuba, in some ways, continues this work. 
Grants are awarded to a range of beneﬁciar-
ies, from charities and public beneﬁt trusts, 
to sporting clubs, educational institutions and 
cultural bodies.
Despite the positive improvements, Mabuza 
claims that Ithuba’s business has been harmed 
by unlicensed competition, reducing its reve-
nue and the money generated for good causes.
“Ithuba is not under threat per se,” she 
explains. “However it is engaging with the 
authorities to deal with any threat posed by 
illegal operators.”
“Ithuba is not under threat 
per se. However it is engaging 
with the authorities to deal 
with any threat posed by 
illegal operators”
Charmaine Mabuza, Ithuba
South Africa’s national lottery operator is moving its services 
online while maintaining its charitable commitments
55
GIQ Q3 REVIEW

56
LOTTERIES
AUSTRALIA
LOTTOLAND’S EXPLOSION ONTO the 
scene has led to grumbling from a number of 
national lottery operators in various markets, 
with some regulators even looking at the legal-
ity of its business model. In Australia, however, 
the backlash has been fast and brutal. 
At the time of writing, South Australia 
had banned placing bets on lottery outcomes. 
Now Western Australia, Victoria, New South 
Wales and Tasmania are all looking to follow 
suit. Each state has described the target of its 
new legislation differently, using terms such as 
“lottery outcome betting”, “synthetic lotteries” 
or even “fake lotteries”. But, as Lottoland CEO 
Nigel Birrell says on page 60, it’s perfectly clear 
which company is being targeted. 
The rationale behind the ban is normally 
that Lottoland is misleading consumers, 
siphoning players away from the state lotteries. 
Australia has shown a tendency to act swift-
ly when it comes to controversial forms of gam-
bling. The move to close the click-to-call  (a form 
of in-play betting) loophole exploited by book-
makers certainly suggests this to be the case. 
Yet while the click-to-call loophole was 
there to be closed, Lottoland appears to be in a 
stronger position. It is licensed in the Northern 
Territory – making claims that it offers “illegal 
online gambling” false. As it is keen to reiter-
ate to anyone and everyone, it pays Australian 
corporate and income tax, and has paid goods 
and services tax as of July 2017. 
In territories where legislators are looking 
to ban lottery betting, there tends to have been 
members, should Lottoland take them to court 
over their efforts to hinder the lottery betting 
operator’s growth. 
This is a particularly aggressive approach 
for a lottery giant to take. As we have seen in 
Europe, the US and Asia, the largest lotteries 
are traditionally heavily restricted in terms of 
the products they can offer. Tatts does not have 
this problem – yes, it is blocked from offering 
online casino or poker per Australian law, but 
it can compete against the private sportsbooks 
with its UBet brand, and in the land-based sec-
tor with poker machines. It is in a stronger posi-
tion than many of its contemporaries. 
This position could get even stronger, 
should its acquisition by Tabcorp Holdings be 
ﬁnalised. At the time of writing the deal was 
in the balance, with the Aus-
tralian Consumer Tribunal 
ordered to revise its decision to 
ratify the merger by the coun-
try’s federal court. 
The combined Tatts-Tab-
corp business would be capa-
ble of dominating all legal 
gambling in Australia. Hence 
why the deal has raised con-
cerns from the Australian 
Competition and Consumer 
Commission and CrownBet. 
Creating a bogeyman in the 
form of Lottoland may offer a 
convenient distraction, using a fear of the new 
to shift attention from the very real prospect of 
competition being signiﬁcantly lessened. 
While Tatts is a private business working 
alongside the state, its attacks on Lottoland act 
as an interesting contribution to the debate on 
whether state lotteries should be privatised. It 
may lack the state protection afforded to the lot-
to-only operators in other countries, and have 
the beneﬁt of an expanded product range. Yet it 
still rails against private competition. If lotter-
ies are to be privatised, are the buyers or opera-
tors only buying these businesses because they 
believe they are buying a monopoly? n
Regulators and retailers 
lead Lottoland backlash
a recent decline in revenue. Western Austral-
ia’s Lotterywest failed to meet its budget con-
tribution for its 2016-17 ﬁnancial year – the ﬁrst 
time this ever happened – with its community 
contribution falling AUS$5.7m to $265m.
Tatts Group also posted 
a decline for its 2017 ﬁnan-
cial year, with lottery sales 
down to $2.01bn. It holds 
a near-monopoly across 
Australia. It is licensed in 
Victoria, Tasmania and 
the Northern Territory 
under the Tatts brand; as 
Golden Casket in Queens-
land; as NSW Lotteries in 
New South Wales and the 
Australian Capital Terri-
tory, and as SA Lotteries 
in South Australia.
Lotteries post decline, then ﬁnd a scapegoat 
for their struggles. Followers of the European 
lottery sector may have heard this one before.
Tatts is currently backing a new campaign 
organised by the Australian Lottery and 
Newsagents Association (ALNA). Eschewing 
subtlety in favour of getting its message across, 
this campaign is centred around the slogan  
“Lottoland’s gotta go!” Never mind that Lotto-
land generates a fraction of the market-leader’s 
lottery revenue, Tatts believes it poses a sufﬁ-
cient a threat to tackle it head-on. 
Tatts has even pledged to cover any legal 
costs accrued by the ALNA’s near-4,000  
While Tatts is a 
private business 
working alongside 
the state, its attacks 
on Lottoland act as 
a contribution to the 
debate on whether 
state lotteries  
should be privatised
Lottoland may be feeling the heat in a number of 
jurisdictions but the Australian campaign against  
the lottery betting specialist is by far the ﬁercest


58
LOTTERIES
BRAZIL
However, the federal government’s business 
model based on exclusivity may be in danger. 
States are questioning the federal govern-
ment’s sole authority to operate lotteries and 
have resorted to Brazil’s Supreme Court in an 
effort to preserve their purported right to state-
run lotteries. 
Therefore, in practice, the win-
ner of the bid may not hold the exclu-
sivity to the instant lottery market, 
which would certainly make the 
concession less attractive to poten-
tial investors. 
While it is unlikely that the 
Supreme Court will have given a 
definitive position on this matter 
before the tender process has been 
finalised, it is worth noting that 
state-run scratch-card lotteries 
should, in principle, not be signiﬁ-
cant competitors to a well-organised 
and experienced provider.
A further complication has been 
thrown up by the fact that Brazil’s 
government-owned bank Caixa Econômi-
ca Federal may also be privatised. Caixa  
currently operates the country’s national 
lottery, including online sales, and its 12,000 
points of sale are a crucial part of the LOTEX 
distribution network. 
This creates a degree of uncertainty. Would 
the banking and lottery business be sold sepa-
rately? Or would a single buyer acquire the 
whole thing, then run a second tender to select a 
lottery supplier? Could this potential buyer look 
to sell off the lottery arm at a later date? Such 
uncertainty harms the value of the LOTEX 
stake. This may cause companies interested in 
LOTEX to shy away from a deal at this stage. n
Privatisation could provide  
route into Brazilian market
THE BRAZILIAN FEDERAL government is 
moving ahead swiftly with its plans to privatise 
LOTEX, its instant lottery with themes based 
on football, cultural references, holidays and 
events of public appeal.
LOTEX is currently run by a governmental 
bank and is one of the few forms of legalised bet-
ting in the country. The invitation 
to bid is expected to be published in 
October and to take place by the end 
of the year.
While this privatisation had 
ofﬁcially been in the government’s 
plans since the beginning of 2016, 
the plans are now being put into 
motion: draft bid documents have 
been made publicly available, 
a public hearing was held on 26 
September and the government is 
accepting feedback from the public. 
A road show for potential investors 
is visiting London, Las Vegas and 
Rio de Janeiro. 
The concession will be granted 
by public bid. The term of the concession will be 
25 years and will be granted to whoever offers 
the Federal Union the highest remuneration, in 
a ﬁxed single instalment, which must be of at 
least BRL916.6m (€246.4m). The concessionaire 
will be entitled to 18.3 per cent of the gross rev-
enue of the sales of LOTEX, which is currently 
estimated at approximately BRL56m for the 
full term of the concession.
Bids may be submitted individually or 
under a consortium, and foreign companies 
are free to bid. In fact, it has been reported in 
the media that International Game Technol-
ogy, Intralot and Scientiﬁc Games all attended 
the public hearing held in September.
States are questioning the 
federal government’s sole 
authority to operate lotteries 
and have resorted to Brazil’s 
Supreme Court in an effort  
to preserve their purported 
right to state-run lotteries
The privatisation of 
Brazil’s state-owned 
instant-win games 
business LOTEX could 
offer international 
operators a way into the 
country’s lottery market. 
However, the process 
is already running 
into difﬁculty, Neil 
Montgomery and Helena 
Calderano of Montgomery 
& Associados explain


60
FEATURE
LOTTOLAND
HAVING DOUBLED REVENUE every year 
since its inception, Lottoland has become the 
spearhead for the growing bet-on-lotteries 
sector. This follows an aggressive marketing 
campaign in the UK and Australia, which has 
brought the product to a wider audience. But 
one of the problems with making a big noise 
when entering a new market is that it makes 
you a target. 
“I would rather we weren’t the ones getting 
all the attention,” says chief executive Nigel 
Birrell. “We have been a bit unfortunate in that 
we’ve copped a lot of the stick, when there’s all 
these other companies riding on the back of us. 
As my old boss used to say – it’s the pioneers 
that get the arrows in the chest.”
It’s easy to forget that Lottoland has only 
been around since 2013. Others have been in the 
business for longer, such as ZEAL Network’s 
mylotto24 and Annexio-powered World Lot-
tery Club, but none have quite made the splash 
that Lottoland has made in such a short space 
of time.
“We’ve entered a market which is sophisti-
cated and competitive in the UK, not so much 
in my subsector, but competitive in terms of get-
ting noticed among the giants like Ladbrokes 
Coral, William Hill, bet365 or Paddy Power Bet-
could destroy our business’; ‘Lottoland does 
not support local schools, hospitals or roads’; 
and ‘Lottoland. It’s not a real lotto.’ 
“I can’t remember in 12 years of gaming 
someone targeting another company with an 
advertising campaign and mentioning a com-
pany in a non-factual way,” says Birrell. 
Tatts’ actions may be having the desired 
effect however, with the Australian states of 
New South Wales, Victoria and Western Aus-
tralia all announcing moves to restrict lottery 
betting (see page 56). For now, Lottoland – 
which is licensed in the Northern Territory – is 
making the most of the limelight and saw new 
customers in Australia soar over 70 per cent in 
Lottoland’s rise has been nothing short of spectacular. But 
having rufﬂed a few feathers along the way it now faces a 
backlash in the UK and Australia, writes Kio Dawson
Lottoland 
takes on 
lottery 
giants
fair, and all the huge advertising that goes on,” 
says Birrell. “Advertising is very expensive but 
we need TV advertising to get ourselves above  
the clutter.”
Inevitably, this has led to several run-ins 
with UK National Lottery operator Camelot, 
which has attacked it for diverting money away 
from good causes. More recently it has found 
itself a target of Australia’s Tatts Group, which 
backed an ad campaign in September in sup-
port of itself and lottery retailers against Lot-
toland.
Lottery operators in other markets have 
also railed against Lottoland. Michael Hein-
rich, co-CEO of Lotto Hamburg and co-chair 
of Germany’s state lottery body the DLTB, 
accuses the business of “plagiarism and prod-
uct piracy”. 
Yet Tatts’ campaign was unprecedented in 
its vitriol. The ‘Lottoland’s Gotta Go’ ad cam-
paign is said to have cost around AUD$5m 
and proclaims that Lottoland is “not a real 
lottery” and “bad news for Australia’s family-
run newsagencies, real lottery agents and our  
local communities”. Tatts also issued a call to 
action to its retail network partners by deliver-
ing a full toolkit of materials to be used at point-
of-sale, with posters proclaiming: ‘Lottoland 

61
GIQ Q3 REVIEW
the weeks following Tatts’ campaign launch.
“If you weren’t worried, you wouldn’t both-
er with it, would you?” says Birrell. “And why 
worry about someone like us? They are obvi-
ously worried. The numbers and evidence 
doesn’t justify it to be honest.”
Birrell’s not wrong. Camelot and Tatts have 
both seen lottery sales decline in the past year, 
but they are still giants in comparison. But they 
also have their own issues to deal with. 
Tatts is still waiting to merge with Tabcorp 
after a year of talks and delays, and Camelot 
initiated a strategic review after lottery sales 
fell by nine per cent to £6.93bn for its 2017 ﬁnan-
cial year – though this was still the fourth-best 
sales performance since the National Lot-
tery’s launch in 1994. Total digital (interactive 
and subscription) sales fell by four per cent to 
£1.52bn, but have grown nearly 30 per cent in 
the past three years (FY 2014; £1.18bn) since 
Lottoland emerged on the scene.
“You look at Camelot’s online revenue, for 
instance – its gone up since we’ve been around,” 
argues Birrell. “Maybe they could say that 
online could have grown more, but I think its 
much more affected by the level of their market-
ing, by their changing of the game rules, and by 
the level of jackpots.”
It’s a similar story with Tatts. Lottery sales 
fell by six per cent to AUD$2.01bn in FY 2017, 
“We’ve copped a lot of  
the stick, when there’s all 
these other companies riding 
on the back of us. As my old 
boss used to say – it’s the 
pioneers that get the arrows 
in the chest”
Nigel Birrell, Lottoland

62
FEATURE
LOTTOLAND
but the operator’s digital initiatives improved, 
with online sales comprising 14.5 per cent of the 
total (approximately $290m), up from 13.5 per 
cent the previous year.
Birrell says this is something Tatts seems 
to fail to make much noise about when enlist-
ing the help of the newsagents. In compari-
son, both Camelot and Tatts dwarf Lottoland, 
which made €300m in revenue last year across 
all of its markets, of which Australia, UK and 
Germany are the biggest. 
“We’re having no effect on them whatso-
ever, but just in case in five years’ time we 
become the size of Facebook or something, 
they want to obliterate us before we get there,” 
says Birrell. “So, for the betting-on-lottery 
industry, read Lottoland, so it’s like they are 
going after the whole industry… but it’s always 
Lottoland.”
At the moment Lottoland may be ﬁghting 
these battles alone, but having worked with 
some of its competitors such as World Lottery 
Club and Multilotto to respond to a recent con-
sultation in the UK, there is now a more uni-
ﬁed group of companies looking to establish 
the bet-on-lotteries concept as a more main-
stream business.
“One of the things we’re keen to do is to 
create a lobby group for betting on lotteries,” 
explains Birrell. “So we’ve got a couple of com-
panies that are interested in doing that, and 
that way we can get our voice heard as a group 
rather than just Lottoland.”
The industry body would maintain certain 
minimum standards, including full security 
on payouts, and would also place restrictions 
on how operators can advertise so that they are 
properly differentiated from the lottery. 
“That’s obviously one of the criticisms that 
Tatts are alleging towards us,” says Birrell, 
“and inevitably there is some confusion, but 
our own and third-party research has shown 
that the percentage of people confused has mas-
sively dropped as people become more aware 
that you have this ability to bet on lottery.”
Lottoland is keen to ensure its products  
are not marketed as a lottery of any kind. It 
learned this the hard way after the UK Gam-
bling Commission ﬁned the operator in June  
for using ambiguous terminology in its  
advertising, which failed to make clear players 
were betting on the outcome of lotteries. The 
company was ordered to pay £150,000 to social-
ly responsible causes by the Commission.
“The Gambling Commission is keen to  
make sure we adhere to those principles, 
and that everything is a bet on lottery – you 
don’t buy a ticket,” says Birrell. “We’ve had to  
adjust accordingly.”
Lottery education
What distinguishes Lottoland is the range of 
new products it is bringing to the market. It is 
being innovative in a market that has not seen 
much innovation for years. The state monopo-
lies have previously held all the power, but sud-
denly there is someone new buzzing around 
and they are not happy about it.
For Lottoland, the EuroMillions game is 
its most important product in the UK, and the 
Gambling Commission could be about to close 
a loophole which would ban the company from 
offering any form of betting on EuroMillions to 
UK customers. Under the terms of Lottoland’s 
UK licence, it is blocked from offering odds 
on any National Lottery draws, including 
EuroMillions, in the UK. However, it can cir-
cumvent this by offering players odds on a draw 
that actually takes place in Paris, for example. 
The company fears that changes to legis-
lation could see it banned from offering any 
form of bet on EuroMillions to UK customers, 
and has argued that the game shouldn’t come 
under the National Lottery’s purview as it is co-
owned by eight other lottery operators, includ-
ing France, Spain and Switzerland. 
“What Camelot has been saying to the gov-
ernment is that Lottoland is affecting good 
causes, and the government needs to close this 
loophole because it goes against the spirit of 
the Gambling Act 2005,” says Birrell. “What 
I’m saying is that the 2005 Act was written long 
before betting on lottery came up as a concept, 
so we are showing you evidence that there is no 
diminishment to good causes. 
“We’re showing you evidence that we’re 
“The 2005 Act was written 
long before betting on lottery 
came up as a concept, so we 
are showing you evidence that 
there is no diminishment to 
good causes”
Nigel Birrell

Because Real Counts
© 2017 Scientiﬁc Games Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Because Real Counts
© 2017 Scientiﬁc Games Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
Scientiﬁc Games’ Loyalty Plus™ program was ﬁrst launched by the
Arkansas Scholarship Lottery in 2009. 
Since then, the program has expanded to 14 diﬀerent lotteries with a total of 1.7 million members 
who have entered an astounding $5.4 billion worth of tickets. Even better – all those entries become 
a wealth of back-end data that can be used to further drive sales. And that’s a real plus.
BILLION
LOYALTY DOLLARS

64
FEATURE
LOTTOLAND
growing the market, we’re deﬁnitely showing 
you evidence that we’re providing consumer 
choice, and we are also showing by the number 
of people that have signed up to us – now more 
than six million worldwide – that people want 
what we offer.”
The company has called for a two-year 
moratorium before any ﬁnal regulatory or leg-
islative changes are made. “Let’s run research, 
jointly-funded, over the next few years to prove 
or disprove that we’re affecting good causes. 
Let’s have decisions made based on proper evi-
dence, not knee-jerk reactions,” says Birrell.
“We’re not taking money away from good 
causes as we’re not actually diminishing the 
turnover of these lotteries. We have a different 
customer base and we’re 85 per cent mobile in 
the UK and would argue we’re actually grow-
ing the market through our marketing, bring-
ing more people into the sector.”
The loss of EuroMillions would be a mas-
sive setback for the company as it is the most 
recognisable underlying lottery game for UK 
players, and offers bigger jackpots than most 
other games. It also features on a lot of Lotto-
land’s marketing across the country, with the 
added benefit that once a player has signed 
up, the company can then cross-sell its other 
lottery-betting products such as Powerball and 
MegaMillions.
“One of the challenges we’ve got is to try and 
educate people in terms of there being other lot-
teries out there to bet on,” says Birrell. “The 
Powerball was very useful in that respect when 
it has those big jackpots, but if you did a straw-
poll of Brits asking what is the Powerball, they 
wouldn’t have a clue.”
While last year’s record US$1.6bn Power-
ball jackpot helped to drive growth for Lotto-
land, particularly in Australia, the company 
is looking at ways to expand even further. This 
includes the launch of its ﬁrst B2B partners, 
unique jackpot features such as DoubleJack-
pot and NumberShield, the introduction of  
its WorldMillions game, and new instant  
Alongside the company’s IP portfolio, it is 
the Insurance Linked Security (ILS) jackpot 
insurance which provides the backbone to 
Lottoland’s operation. Describing the compa-
ny’s risk-management strategy, Birrell says to  
imagine a tower. 
“The ﬁrst couple of ﬂoors is our own excess, 
then we have the possibility to decide whether 
to go to the ILS or to use insurance contracts, 
and then, when it gets really high above a cer-
tain threshold, where all these three don’t add 
up anymore, which rarely happens, the fourth 
one comes into play, which we call physical 
hedging,” he explains.
This is where Lottoland actually buys a 
physical lottery ticket and stores it, and in the 
event of a win, cashes the ticket to safeguard 
the company against mega jackpots in the 
region of €500m, €600m or €700m. This strategy 
has helped Lottoland develop into an insurance 
company with risk management at its core. 
“It is our key differentiator because it is dis-
connected to gambling,” says Birrell. “That is 
also the reason why many other operators say 
it is great to partner up with Lottoland rather 
than try to go to develop risk-management 
expertise on their own, which is outside the 
normal gambling operations of any big player.”
Next up, the company is looking to bring 
its unique insurance facility to online instant-
win games. Lottoland is promising players the 
largest prizes in the industry for instant-win 
games through a new solution combining its 
prize insurance infrastructure with a random 
number generator.
The Random & insured Number Genera-
tor (RiNG) allows it to offer players the chance 
to win millions, with a €5m and €10m game 
already live on Lottoland.com, and further 
scratchcards with top prizes of €2.5m, €5m  
and €7.5m to come. In the midst of all this,  
Lottoland has also been granted an insurance  
licence by the Financial Services Commission 
(FSC) in Gibraltar. The company described 
the approval as a “historic milestone”,  
which would transform its risk management 
into its own fully authorised and licensed  
insurance company.
“There’s an awful lot to go after yet,” adds 
Birrell. “We’re probably experiencing some of 
those issues of a maturing company right now 
with the regulatory headwinds, but it’s kind of 
a testament to our success.”
Lottoland’s innovations in lotto may be 
what is driving the company’s growth, but  
its risk management strategy is what under-
pins its continued success. Despite Camelot and 
Tatts’ efforts, Lottoland is likely to continue its 
growth story. n
games which combine Lottoland’s prize 
insurance infrastructure with a random  
number generator.
“We’re upping their game, to be honest, so 
from a consumer perspective we’re providing 
choice and value, we’re bringing new products, 
and they then provide more choice and get bet-
ter online,” says Birrell. “We are growing the 
market because the type of customer that we 
bring in is a totally different customer. 
“Those players are looking for interna-
tional lotteries to bet on. Do they bet on the 
EuroMillions a bit? Absolutely, but really 
that’s not the person we are appealing to. We’re 
appealing to people who are young and inter-
net savvy.”
Intellectual property
One of Lottoland’s strengths is the intellec-
tual property (IP) that it owns. The company 
currently has over 70 registered trademarks 
within its IP portfolio and more at the applica-
tion stage. “We are careful not to infringe any-
one else’s trademarks,” says Birrell. “We can’t 
directly use someone else’s IP in a jurisdiction 
where they have that trademark, so we try to 
use our IP and we have a huge portfolio of them 
ourselves.
“One of our USPs at Lottoland, certainly 
relative to the other bet-on-lottery compa-
nies entering the market, is our IP portfolio, 
because we were one of the ﬁrst out there. And 
the guys spent a lot of time and effort to make 
sure they registered a lot of useful names.”
“One of our USPs at 
Lottoland, relative to the other 
bet-on-lottery companies 
entering the market, is our IP 
portfolio, because we were 
one of the ﬁrst out there”
Nigel Birrell


bit8 www.bit8.com
NETENT www.netent.com
LIVE BETTING
SOLUTIONS FROM THE
MARKET LEADER
WWW.BETRADAR.COM
www.greentube.com
INTERACTIVE ONLINE ENTERTAINMENT
SBTech www.sbtech.com
Playtech www.playtech.com
Betradar www.betradar.com
Greentube www.greentube.com
Intralot www.intralot.com
Scientiﬁc Games Interactive  
www.sginteractive.com/

67
GIQ Q3 REVIEW
 FINANCE
GIQ20 H1 2017
The GIQ20 H1 2017
SCIENTIFIC GAMES’ ACQUISITION of 
NYX Gaming could see the US supplier soar to 
the top of the GIQ20 chart next year, once the 
results of the two businesses are combined. 
For the moment though, that top honour goes 
to Cherry after an exceptional period of growth 
from its iGaming activities during the ﬁrst half 
of 2017.
Revenue growth at the top end of the GIQ20 
chart was mostly driven by M&A, which posi-
tively skewed results, most notably for NYX with 
OpenBet and Gaming Innovation Group with 
Betit Group. Together with Cherry, these three 
companies all recorded triple-digit improve-
ments versus a year ago.
Scientiﬁc Games’ interactive division has 
consistently delivered strong growth in recent 
years, generating revenue of more than $200m 
in H1. This will be only be enhanced by the 
inclusion of NYX and its OpenBet sportsbook, 
creating a giant capable of rivalling Playtech’s 
iGaming dominance.
The battle of the British bookies was won by 
Ladbrokes Coral as its online resurgence gath-
ered pace, with Paddy Power Betfair missing out 
altogether from the GIQ20 chart after a ﬁrst half 
to forget. William Hill was one of four compa-
nies that recorded single-digit revenue growth 
– alongside ZEAL Network, Kambi Group and 
888 Holdings – although this wasn’t enough to 
secure a place in the chart.
H1 2017
The GIQ
COMPANY
ONLINE H1 
2016
ONLINE H1 
2017
% 
CHANGE
1
CHERRY (EXCL. LAND-BASED)
SEK294.3m
SEK1,003.0m
241%
2
GAMING INNOVATION GROUP
€17.6m
€49.7m
182%
3
NYX GAMING GROUP
CAD$54.9m
CAD$119.9m
118%
4
CATENA MEDIA
€17.0m
€30.3m
78%
5
EVOLUTION GAMING
€51.9m
€82.0m
58%
6
LEOVEGAS
€60.5m
€93.6m
55%
7
LOTTO24
€9.2m
€13.0m
41%
8
FORTUNA ENTERTAINMENT
€50.2m
€67.2m
34%
9
MR GREEN & CO
SEK429.7m
SEK563.9m
31%
10
SCIENTIFIC GAMES 
US$156.0m
US$203.1m
30%
11
KINDRED GROUP
£249.0m
£319.8m
28%
12
PLAYTECH
€337.7m
€421.6m
25%
13
BETSSON
SEK1,935.5m
SEK2,279.4m
18%
14
LADBROKES CORAL GROUP
£320.0m
£374.5m
17%
15
BET-AT-HOME.COM
€53.1m
€61.5m
16%
16
NETENT
SEK697m
SEK805m
15%
17
JACKPOTJOY 
£129.7m
£146.6m
13%
18
GVC HOLDINGS
€441.8m
€486.2m
10%
19
ASPIRE GLOBAL
€30.6m
€33.4m
9%
20
THE STARS GROUP
US$574.3m
US$622.6m
8%
ON THE FOLLOWING PAGES
61   GIQ20 H1 2017 results and analysis

 FINANCE
GIQ20 H1 2017
CHERRY 
 
 
241% 
 
 
Net revenue (SEK) 
H1 2016
H1 2017
Change
Online Gaming, 
ComeOn!
246.9m
889.8m
260%
Afﬁliation,  
Game Lounge
22.3m
62.7m
181%
Game Development, 
Yggdrasil Gaming
34.1m
73.8m
116%
Gaming Technology, 
Xcaliber
n/a
18.4m
n/a
Eliminations
(9.0m)
(41.7m)
363%
TOTAL
294.3m
1,003.0m
241%
Sweden’s Cherry once again topped the GIQ20 
chart as the company saw group revenue soar 
192 per cent to SEK1.08bn during the ﬁrst half of 
2017. Its growing iGaming business represented 
93 per cent of the total. 
While all of its B2B divisions performed 
strongly in H1, Cherry’s B2C division saw the 
biggest growth despite the slower than expected 
integration of the ComeOn! business. Overall, 
Cherry was able to nearly double its net proﬁt 
to SEK51m for the period.
“We continue to be a proﬁtable, fast-growing 
company, even if the integration of ComeOn! 
has not yet reached full positive effect,” said 
chief executive Anders Holmgren.
Holmgren explained that rapidly merging 
the ComeOn! business had shifted attention 
from growth to integration, and that market-
ing efforts have not yet had the expected effect, 
although the online gaming business continued 
to develop positively.
“At the same time, there is a high level of 
activity with a variety of initiatives that 
strengthen both the business area’s organi-
sation and the offering as a whole,” he added. 
“We assess that the future of ComeOn! looks  
Cherry, Gaming 
Innovation Group and 
NYX ﬂy high in H1 2017
Paddy Power Betfair slips off the GIQ20 chart for the ﬁrst time as 
Cherry continues Nordic dominance, writes Kio Dawson
“We continue to be  
a proﬁtable, fast-growing 
company, even if the 
integration of ComeOn! 
has not yet reached full 
positive effect” 
Anders Holmgren

69
GIQ Q3 REVIEW
 FINANCE
GIQ20 H1 2017
bright, but that integration will take a little 
longer than initially anticipated.”
As a result of the slower integration, Cherry 
has reduced its full-year guidance and now 
expects to generate total group revenue in 
the region of SEK2.5bn in 2017, down from its 
previous guidance of between SEK2.6bn and 
SEK2.7bn.
GAMING INNOVATION GROUP
182% 
 
 
Net revenue (€) 
H1 2016
H1 2017
Change
B2C
13.1m
38.7m
195%
B2B
6.2m
14.8m
139%
Eliminations
(1.7m)
(3.9m)
159%
TOTAL
17.6m
49.7m
182%
Oslo-listed Gaming Innovation Group (GIG)  
also impressed in the ﬁrst half, and enjoyed a 
record second quarter which boosted ﬁrst-half  
revenue by 182 per cent to €49.7m. The Q2  
performance beat GIG’s previous record high, 
set the previous quarter.
The company’s B2C brands contributed 
revenue of €38.7m during the six-month period, 
with B2B revenue from the afﬁliate marketing 
division and the iGaming Cloud platform grow-
ing to €14.8m.
GIG believes that its affiliate business is 
well on its way to becoming the largest afﬁliate 
in iGaming, having already achieved the larg-
est presence in casino-related search results in 
the Nordic market. It was bolstered further by 
a trio of afﬁliate acquisitions completed during 
Q2, followed by a €25.6m deal for Stk Market-
ing in July and Danish afﬁliate Rebel Penguin  
in September.
“We continue to expand our business at a 
rapid pace,” chief executive Robin Reed said. 
“We have made important affiliate acqui-
sitions during 2017 which will strengthen 
our traffic-driving capability and increase 
activities and volumes for all stakeholders in  
GIG’s eco-system. 
“In parallel with launching innovative 
iGaming services, we are progressing towards 
our goal of becoming the leading iGaming com-
pany from the Nordics.”
NYX GAMING GROUP
118% 
 
 
Net revenue (CAD$) 
H1 2016
H1 2017
Change
Royalty and licences
38.2
62.8m
64%
Professional services
13.3m
56.5m
325%
Social gaming
3.3m
0.6m
-82%
TOTAL
54.9m
119.9m
118%
Toronto-listed supplier NYX Gaming Group will 
soon begin life as a Scientiﬁc Games company,  
following its CAD$775m acquisition by the US 
supplier in September. Its price tag may have 
raised eyebrows, but NYX has been a strong 
performer in the GIQ20 chart for a while now.
The ﬁrst-half period was no different, as reve-
nue climbed 118 per cent to $119.9m, mostly attrib-
utable to the results of OpenBet, as well as new 
customer launches and development projects. 
This helped NYX reduce its net loss for the period 
to $18.5m. A full quarter’s results from OpenBet 
provided revenue of $32.9m in Q2, a period which 
saw NYX sign 18 new agreements across its  
platforms and successfully launch content across 
13 new client sites including SoftSwiss, JAXX, 
Sekabet, Casino Gran Madrid and Goldbet. 
NYX has a long list of operators waiting in 
the wings, with deals agreed with 36 customers 
that have not yet launched.
“Our development pipeline remains strong 
and we continue to sign new customers at a 
steady rate, as our sportsbook, gaming and 
content offerings are resonating with custom-
ers and driving scale and operating leverage in 
our business,” said chief executive Matt Davey.
Robin Reed,  
CEO, Gaming  
Innovation  
Group

CATENA MEDIA  
 
78% 
 
 
Net revenue (€) 
H1 2016
H1 2017
Change
Search
12.8m
22.5 m
76%
Paid
4.3m
6.8m
58%
Other
n/a
1.1m
n/a
TOTAL
17.0m
30.3m
78%
With its shares recently upgraded to Nasdaq 
Stockholm’s main market, Catena Media is on 
course for another stellar year after seeing ﬁrst-
half revenue increase 78 per cent to €30.3m.
The affiliate marketing specialist contin-
ued on its M&A splurge in Q2, snapping up 
Online Media, Newcasinos.com, as well as two  
German-facing casino afﬁliates. This was fol-
lowed by the July acquisition of sports afﬁliate 
Bettingpro.com and September’s purchase of  
an unnamedJapanese afﬁliate.
“Through both organic and acquired 
growth, Catena Media’s vision is to become 
the world’s number-one provider of high-value 
iGaming leads,” said CEO Robert Andersson, 
in his last trading update before stepping down 
in early October. “We remain optimistic on our 
strategic, operational and financial develop-
ment, and are conﬁdent that we will continue to 
grow in the same successful way, both through 
organic growth and through acquisitions across 
existing and new geographic markets.”
In October, Andersson was replaced as CEO, 
with former Betsafe CEO and Catena director 
Henrik Persson Ekdahl assuming his respon-
sibilities on an interim basis.
 
EVOLUTION GAMING
 58% 
 
 
Net revenue (€) 
H1 2016
H1 2017
Change
TOTAL
51.9m
82.0m
58%
Stockholm-listed live casino specialist Evolu-
tion Gaming posted an impressive 15th con-
secutive quarter of growth during Q2, pushing 
ﬁrst-half revenue up 58 per cent to €82m.
The strong growth was primarily attributed 
to increased commission income from existing 
and new customers, with demand for live casino 
games “generally high” over the quarter as the 
number of bet spots from end users increased by 
83 per cent to 2.2 billion.
Revenue generated from mobile devices 
70
 FINANCE
GIQ20 H1 2017
“Through both organic and 
acquired growth, Catena 
Media’s vision is to become 
the world’s number-one 
provider of high-value 
iGaming leads” 
Robert Andersson, former CEO,  
Catena Media

exceeded 50 per cent for the ﬁrst time during 
the quarter. Boosted by the strong revenue 
growth, Evolution’s profit for the first-half  
period increased by 79 per cent to €27.4m.
“I am very pleased to be able to sum up an 
eventful quarter with positive development 
in several areas,” chief executive Martin  
Carlesund said. “The favourable momentum 
of the past quarters continued into this period, 
with a strong and steady growth for all prod-
ucts. Operators’ live offerings are undergoing 
constant development and we are working hard 
to optimise their environments to optimally 
reﬂect each brand and various player proﬁles.”
LEOVEGAS 
55% 
 
 
Net revenue (€) 
H1 2016
H1 2017
Change
TOTAL
60.5m
93.6m
55%
LeoVegas was another Stockholm-listed com-
pany making shareholders happy in H1, and 
became the ﬁrst gaming operator to reveal how 
much of its revenue was generated in Sweden.
More than a third of LeoVegas’ Q2 revenue 
(around €18m) was generated in the country, 
having seen growth of 23 per cent year-on-year. 
Other Nordic countries, including Denmark, 
represented a further 20 per cent. 
LeoVegas said that having launched ﬁrst in 
the Nordic region, it was natural that these mar-
kets accounted for a large share of its business.
“Sweden alone accounted for 37 per cent of 
our revenue during the second quarter – some-
thing we are very proud of,” said group CEO 
and co-founder Gustaf Hagman. “More 
than five years have now passed 
since we launched the mobile gam-
ing company LeoVegas. The vision 
we laid out then is more relevant 
than ever before – that LeoVegas 
will lead the industry into the  
mobile future.”
Revenue from regulated mar-
kets accounted for 25 per cent of 
the quarterly total, almost dou-
bling year-on-year. Mobile remains 
LeoVegas’ most important channel, 
contributing 67 per cent of total cus-
tomers deposits, which in turn grew 
67 per cent to €167.9m.
LOTTO24
41% 
 
 
Net revenue (€) 
H1 2016
H1 2017
Change
TOTAL
9.2m
13.0m
41%
German online lottery broker Lotto24 recorded 
a maiden net proﬁt during the ﬁrst half of 2017 
after beneﬁting from a 41 per cent improvement 
in revenue versus a year ago.
The company, which sells lottery tickets via 
the internet, saw billings from its Lotto24.
de offering increase by 33 per cent 
to €112.8m, despite increased 
market competition. There 
were 161,000 new customers 
added during the period, 
with total registered cus-
tomers up 36 per cent to 
more than 1.4m.
The strong revenue 
growth, combined with a 
20 per cent reduction in mar-
keting expenses to €4m, led the 
company to its ﬁrst positive ﬁg-
ures for both EBIT and net proﬁt, 
which reached €0.4m and 
€0.6m respectively.
71
 FINANCE
GIQ20 H1 2017
“Sweden alone accounted  
for 37 per cent of our revenue 
during the second quarter  
– something we are very 
proud of” 
Gustaf Hagman, LeoVegas
Gustaf Hagman, 
CEO, LeoVegas
Lotto24 revenue 
rose to €13m in H1

72
 FINANCE
GIQ20 H1 2017
Lotto24 said that it will look to continue its 
growth in Germany by using targeted mar-
keting measures to win new customers, while 
expanding its product portfolio. In addition 
to the lotteries already offered such as Lotto 
6aus49 and EuroJackpot, Lotto24 aims to intro-
duce other state-licensed games of chance in 
the medium term “whereby [it] will continue to 
focus on the German lottery market”.
FORTUNA ENTERTAINMENT 
GROUP 
34% 
 
 
Gross win (€) 
H1 2016
H1 2017
Change
Online sports 
betting and gaming
50.2m
67.2m
34%
Retail sports betting
26.2m
30.7m
17%
TOTAL
76.4m
97.9m
28%
The acquisition of Hattrick Sports helped  
Fortuna Entertainment post a 28 per cent 
increase in gross win to €97.9m for the ﬁrst-half, 
of which more than two-thirds was derived from 
its growing online business.
Online sports betting and gaming gross 
win climbed 34 per cent to €67.2m, with growth 
credited largely to the continued expansion of its 
sportsbook, the launch of online casino opera-
tions in the Czech Republic, as well as the ﬁrst 
contributions from Hattrick.
For the six-week period since its acquisi-
tion, the Hattrick business generated gross win 
of €6.2m, split across retail and online, with 
the Romanian business predominantly retail-
focused and Croatian operations covering 
online betting and casino.
“This strong growth was the result of  
solid performances in all traditional markets 
where Fortuna operates,” said chief executive 
Per Widerström. 
Fortuna’s retail business also saw growth 
in H1 and will soon include results from more 
recently acquired Romanian operations, which 
includes 787 retail betting stores across the Bet 
Active Concept, Bet Zone, Public Slots and Slot 
Arena brands.
MR GREEN & CO
31% 
 
 
Net revenue (SEK) 
 Q1 2016
Q1 2017
Change
TOTAL
429.7m
563.9m
31%
Stockholm-listed operator Mr Green & Co 
also enjoyed a successful ﬁrst half, as revenue 
increased by 31 per cent to SEK563.9m following 
a third consecutive quarter of growth above its 
20 per cent target.
Q2 revenue grew by 36 per cent following the 
launch of new products, including sportsbook, 
live casino and Reel Thrill slot tournaments. 
This helped the company to a proﬁt for the peri-
od of SEK33m, compared to a loss of SEK4.7m  
a year ago.
“During the spring, we maintained a high 
tempo in our activities relating to new product 
launches, integrating the acquisition of Dansk 
Underholdning and, in particular, taking 
good care of all our 116,700 new and existing 
customers,” said CEO Per Norman. “We are 
not decreasing our pace and will continue to  
maintain a high tempo to deliver on our  
Mr Green 2.0 strategy.”
A new responsible gaming tool, Green Gam-
ing, was unveiled in September to offer players 
deeper insight into their gambling behaviour. 
The solution will initially be deployed in the UK, 
analysing customers’ online behaviour in order 
to detect early signs of problem gambling.
SCIENTIFIC GAMES
30% 
 
 
Net revenue (US$) 
H1 2016
H1 2017
Change
Social gaming B2C
129.2m
171.3m
33%
Other
26.8m
31.8m
19%
TOTAL
156.0m
203.1m
30%
The New York-listed supplier surprised the 
industry with its move for NYX, leaving  
Scientiﬁc Games well positioned to signiﬁcantly 
expand its Interactive division. 
In H1, revenue from Interactive grew 30 per 
cent to $203.1m, although this equated to just 14 
“This strong growth was the 
result of solid performances 
in all traditional markets 
where Fortuna operates” 
Per Widerström, Fortuna

per cent of Scientiﬁc Games’ total revenue in 
the period. The NYX deal will substantially 
change this in future, particularly in B2B 
which contributed just $31.8m to H1 revenue.
President and CEO Kevin Sheehan said 
that the NYX transaction would create a global 
gaming and lottery powerhouse.
“Scientiﬁc Games will be a stronger indus-
try leader offering one of the broadest end-to-
end portfolios of engaging content, innovative 
technologies and digital products and services 
across gaming and lottery,” he said.
Social gaming B2C revenue was up 33 per 
cent to $171.3m, beneﬁting from the continued 
popularity of social casino app Jackpot Party 
Social Casino, the launch of 88 Fortunes, and 
the acquisition of Spicerack Media and its 
Bingo Showdown app in April. Average daily 
active users (DAUs) remained constant at 2.5 
million, with mobile penetration now up to 72 
per cent, compared to 67 per cent a year ago.
KINDRED GROUP
28% 
 
 
Net revenue (£)
H1 2016
H1 2017
Change
Sports Betting
110.3m
139.6m
27%
Casino and Games
126.0m
161.7m
28%
Poker
5.8m
7.6m
31%
Other
6.9m
10.9m
58%
TOTAL
249.0m
319.8m
28%
Kindred Group attributed its record rev-
enue high in Q2 to its investment in market-
ing in previous quarters, as well as the first 
contributions from 32Red. The operator was 
acquired on 6 June and generated revenue  
of £4.7m.
Q2 revenue grew 32 per cent to £166.6m fol-
lowing growth across all product segments, 
with first-half revenue up 28 per cent to 
£319.8m. Net proﬁt for the six-month period rose  
10 per cent to £36.7m. Total active customers by 
the end of Q2 were up three per cent to 1,171,166, 
including 39,268 from 32Red, from a total regis-
tered customer base of more than 20.2 million.
“Taking into consideration the lack of major 
tournaments this year, we are conﬁdent that 
we have continued to outpace market growth 
and have continued to take market share,” 
said chief executive Henrik Tjärnström. 
“The acquisition of 32Red will significantly  
accelerate our development and profitability 
in the world’s largest locally regulated 
market.”
“The acquisition of 32Red will signiﬁcantly accelerate our 
development and proﬁtability in the world’s largest locally 
regulated market” 
Henrik Tjärnström, Kindred
73
GIQ Q3 REVIEW
 FINANCE
GIQ20 H1 2017

74
 FINANCE
GIQ20 H1 2017
PLAYTECH 
 
 
5% 
 
 
Net revenue (€) 
H1 2016
H1 2017
Change
Casino
186.7m
225.9m
21%
Services
76.5m
69.0m
-10%
Sport
19.0m
37.7m
98%
Bingo
9.0m
14.0m
56%
Poker
5.0m
4.7m
-6%
Other
10.3m
25.3m
146%
Gaming division
306.5m
376.5m
23%
Financials division
31.3m
45.1m
44%
TOTAL
337.7m
421.6m
25%
London-listed Playtech posted strong revenue 
in the ﬁrst half of 2017, with its Sports division 
seeing revenue nearly double following the 
acquisition of BGT. 
Casino remains the company’s biggest 
product vertical as revenue climbed 21 per 
cent to €225.9m, equivalent to more than half 
of Playtech’s total and 60 per cent of the Gam-
ing division’s €376.5m total. The Financials 
division (since rebranded as TradeTech Group) 
contributed a further €45.1m in revenue, up  
44 per cent year-on-year.
“The proven strength of the Playtech model 
was once again demonstrated, with a strong 
H1 performance driven by both underlying 
growth and recent acquisitions,” chairman 
Alan Jackson said. “Taken all together, this 
proven platform for growth across the business 
has again delivered a strong performance and 
management remain conﬁdent of further stra-
tegic progress in the second half of 2017.”
Regulated markets generated half of Play-
tech’s revenue during the period, supported by 
recent acquisitions and organic growth from 
customers in the UK, Italy, Spain, Finland, 
Denmark, Mexico and Romania.
“The proven strength of the 
Playtech model was once 
again demonstrated, with 
a strong H1 performance, 
driven by underlying growth 
and recent acquisitions” 
Alan Jackson, Playtech

BETSSON
18% 
 
 
Net revenue (€) 
H1 2016
H1 2017
Change
Casino
1,352.3m
1,699.5m
26%
Sportsbook
515.8m
505.9m
-2%
Other
67.4m
74.1m
10%
TOTAL
1,935.5m
2,279.4m
18%
Betsson lost its president and CEO Ulrik 
Bengtsson in early September, but the company 
remains in good hands under the leadership of 
Pontus Lindwall who has temporarily returned 
to his previous role.
The company had a decent first half as 
revenue rose 18 per cent SEK2.28bn, driven by 
continued growth in casino and a record per-
formance in the Nordic region during Q2. Net 
income for the six-month period rose ﬁve per 
cent to SEK400.5m.
“Betsson continues to gain market share, 
both in the highly competitive Nordic region 
and in Western Europe,” said Bengtsson in 
his ﬁnal interim report prior to his departure. 
“The continuous product development is clearly 
paying off as both casino and sportsbook have  
developed strongly.”
Revenue from locally licensed and taxed 
markets accounted for 24 per cent of Betsson’s 
Q2 total, up from a 19 per cent share a year ago. 
At the end of Q2 the company had 551,000 active 
customers, down two per cent year-on-year due 
to strong comparables last year, from a total reg-
istered customer base of 12.4m.
LADBROKES CORAL GROUP
17% 
 
 
Net revenue (£) Pro Forma
H1 2016
H1 2017
Change
Sportsbook
145.1m
180.7m
25%
Gaming
174.9m
193.8m
11%
TOTAL
320.0m
374.5m
17%
Ladbrokes Coral struggled for growth in the 
ﬁrst half of 2017 as group revenue climbed one 
per cent to £1.2bn. This was down to decline in 
the operator’s retail business, and there was con-
tinued momentum from digital. On a pro forma 
basis, digital revenue was up 17 per cent year-on-
year, offsetting declines from the operator’s UK 
retail and European retail businesses, and rep-
resented nearly a third of the company’s total.
Online sportsbook revenue was 25 per cent 
ahead of last year at £180.7m, with amounts staked 
up by 23 per cent to £2.8bn, following growth in 
all non-UK brands including Australia. Revenue 
from gaming grew 11 per cent to £193.8m, with 
sportsbook-led brands up 15 per cent. 
“Ladbrokes Coral continues to make good 
progress,” said chief executive Jim Mullen. 
“We entered the year with targets for the ﬁrst 
half to complete the integration of our teams 
and migrate UK digital to a single platform. We 
delivered on both fronts and at the same time 
kept the business moving forward. It is pleasing 
to report strong digital growth, ongoing momen-
tum in Australia, and in spite of adverse sport-
ing results, market gains in Italy.”
“The continuous product 
development is clearly  
paying off, as both casino  
and sportsbook have 
developed strongly” 
Ulrik Bengtsson, Betsson
“It is pleasing to report 
strong digital growth, ongoing 
momentum in Australia, and 
in spite of adverse sporting 
results, market gains in Italy” 
Jim Mullen, Ladbrokes Coral
BET-AT-HOME.COM 
 
16% 
 
 
Net revenue (€) 
H1 2016
H1 2017
Change
TOTAL
53.1m
61.5m
16%
Frankfurt-listed operator bet-at-home.com was 
another to enjoy a record performance in Q2 as 
ﬁrst-half net gaming revenue increased by 16 per 
cent to €61.5m. The Betclic Everest subsidiary 
saw total betting and gaming stakes rise 23 per 
cent to €1.69bn in the second quarter, generat-
ing gross revenue of €76.8m, an increase of 17.5 
per cent versus a year ago. This included a new 
quarterly high of €39.6m generated during Q2.
Following a reduction in marketing costs 
due to the absence of any major football events 
this year, bet-at-home.com was able to nearly 
double EBITDA to €17.4m during H1, including 
a record high during Q2.
bet-at-home.com’s management board has 
reafﬁrmed its guidance for the full year, with 
gross revenue expected to reach €144m and 
EBITDA between €34m and €38m.
75
GIQ Q3 REVIEW
 FINANCE
GIQ20 H1 2017

76
 FINANCE
GIQ20 H1 2017
NETENT
15% 
 
 
Net revenue (SEK) 
H1 2016
H1 2017
Change
TOTAL
697m
805m
15%
Swedish casino games developer NetEnt  
posted double-digit increases in revenue and 
proﬁt during the ﬁrst half, with the UK emerg-
ing as one of the supplier’s key markets.
Revenue climbed 15 per cent year-on-year  
to SEK804.5m, driven by growth in the UK,  
Italy and mobile, with the UK now the compa-
ny’s biggest geographical market. The revenue 
growth helped NetEnt post a 10 per cent increase 
in proﬁt for the period to SEK258m.
During Q2 NetEnt signed agreements with 
six customers, launched games with eight new 
customers, and held further agreements with 36 
operators that have yet to launch. 
The supplier’s games were rolled out in the 
regulated Serbian market for the first time, 
while table games were introduced for custom-
ers in Spain.
“The quarter featured continued solid 
growth, higher proﬁtability and a strong cash 
flow,” said president and CEO Per Eriksson. 
“For the second half of 2017, we see conditions 
for continued solid growth.”
GVC HOLDINGS
10% 
 
 
Net revenue (€) 
H1 2016
H1 2017
Change
Sports brands
320.6m
355.1m
11%
Games brands
103.6m
112.4m
8%
B2B
6.5m
7.6m
17%
Non-Core
11.1m
11.1m
n/a
TOTAL
441.8m
486.2m
10%
The return to form of partypoker was the  
highlight for London-listed operator GVC in 
the first half, with the brand benefiting from 
the company’s recent investment.
Total revenue for GVC grew 10 per cent  
versus a year ago, despite last year’s period 
including Euro 2016, with Sports Brands 
(bwin and Sportingbet) comprising 73 per cent 
of the total after seeing growth of 11 per cent  
to €355.1m.
Revenue from Games Brands (partypok-
er, partycasino, CasinoClub, Gioco Digitale  
and Foxy) climbed eight per cent to €112.4m  
during the period, with the strongest growth 
from partypoker, which recorded a 32 per cent 
year-on-year improvement. B2B revenue grew 
17 per cent and contributed €7.6m, with the 
planned launch of bwin.ru in Russia next in 
the pipeline.
JACKPOTJOY
13% 
 
 
Net revenue (£) 
H1 2016
H1 2017
Change
Jackpotjoy
89.0m
103.0m
16%
Vera&John
29.4m
33.1m
13%
Mandalay
11.3m
10.5m
-7%
TOTAL
129.7m
146.6m
13%
There was another solid performance from 
Jackpotjoy as revenue climbed 13 per cent to 
£146.6m during H1, although net loss for the 
period more than doubled due to higher costs 
and ﬁnancing expenses
The online casino and bingo operator saw 
continued growth from the Vera&John and 
Jackpotjoy brands, which contributed revenue 
of £33.1m and £103m. Mandalay generated a fur-
ther £10.5m in revenue, though this was down 
seven per cent year-on-year. Jackpotjoy said it 
expects “robust” revenue growth for the full 
year, but warned that there will be an impact 
on proﬁtability during the second half, follow-
ing the introduction of UK point of consumption 
(POC) tax on bonuses from August.
“I am confident that our good momentum  
in the ﬁrst half of the year puts us in a strong posi-
tion to continue to deliver on our plans through-
out the rest of 2017,” said CEO Andrew McIver.
“I am delighted with the 
strong progress across the 
group, which has continued  
to exceed our expectations 
since last year’s acquisition  
of bwin.party” 
Kenneth Alexander, GVC Holdings

77
GIQ Q3 REVIEW
 FINANCE
GIQ20 H1 2017
“I am delighted with the strong progress 
across the group, which has continued to exceed 
our expectations since last year’s acquisition 
of bwin.party,” said chief executive Kenneth  
Alexander. “A combination of high quality  
talent, proprietary technology and proven 
brands are key components driving the busi-
ness forward.”
ASPIRE GLOBAL
9% 
 
 
Net revenue (€) 
H1 2016
H1 2017
Change
B2B
15.0m
16.7m
11%
B2C
15.6m
16.7m
7%
TOTAL
30.6m
33.4m
9%
Stockholm-listed Aspire Global remains con-
ﬁdent that its departure from the Australian 
iGaming market would not impact its long-term 
targets, despite the loss of a market worth eight 
per cent of its revenue in Q2.
First-half revenue grew nine per cent to 
€33.4m with second-quarter results boosted 
by a record performance from its growing B2B 
division, up 19 per cent to €8.9m. Revenue from 
the B2C segment increased by nine per cent to 
€8.4m. “Since 2014 Aspire Global has focused on 
strengthening its position within the industry 
by developing and improving its B2B offering as 
well as growing the proprietary brands,” said 
CEO Tsachi Maimon. “The company is now in 
a position to leverage on the strong platform and 
position established during the last few years to 
accelerate Aspire Global’s growth; organically 
and through M&A.”
Aspire Global’s withdrawal from Australia 
complies with new gaming regulations which 
came into force in September that speciﬁcally 
bans online and casino games.
 
THE STARS GROUP
8% 
 
 
Net revenue (US$) 
H1 2016
H1 2017
Change
Poker
432.0m
421.6m
-2%
Casino and 
Sportsbook
119.7m
176.3m
47%
Other B2C
22.5m
24.6m
9%
TOTAL
574.3m
622.6m
8%
Online casino and sportsbook continues to  
drive growth for The Stars Group which begun 
a new era after scrapping the Amaya brand and 
moving its Canadian head office to Toronto  
during H1.
First-half revenue increased by eight per 
cent to $622.6m, despite revenue from its core 
online poker offering declining by two per  
cent to $421.6m. Online casino and sportsbook 
contributed $176.3m during the period, an  
 
increase of 47 per cent versus a year ago, while  
revenue from other B2C including social games 
rose nine per cent to $24.6m.
“Our evolution and transformation into 
The Stars Group continued as we completed 
our name change and head ofﬁce move, while 
our second quarter saw the strengthening of 
our core senior management team and contin-
ued solid revenue growth led by our real money 
online casino offering,” said CEO Raﬁ Ashkena-
zi. “We plan to use this momentum to continue 
improving and strengthening our business and 
pursuing our strategic objectives.”
In September the company raised its  
full year guidance and now expects full year 
revenue of between $1,285m and $1,315m,  
which would be up 11 to 14 per cent compared 
to the prior year. Online poker revenue is 
expected to be slightly higher as the company 
continues to see positive customer response to 
Stars Rewards.
GOING DOWN…
There were four companies that saw revenue 
decline in the ﬁrst half of 2017. Paddy Power 
Betfair missed out on a place in the GIQ20 
chart for the ﬁrst time following a disappointing 
performance from its online business during 
Q2. Online revenue was down marginally by 0.2 
per cent for the six-month period, though this 
included a 12 per cent decline in Q2. 
The operator noted that its gaming 
performance had been weak since Q4 2016 and 
said that to achieve market growth rates it needed 
to invest in the gaming product. Overall, Paddy 
Power Betfair reported a nine per cent increase 
in H1 revenue to £827m, with growth in Australia, 
US and retail offsetting its online decline.
New York-listed Churchill Downs 
Incorporated endured a difﬁcult trading  
period for its Big Fish Games division in H1 as 
revenue fell by nine per cent to $224.6m. This 
included a second consecutive quarter of year-
on-year decline for the social gaming business in 
Q2, although this was nearly offset by growth  
 
of 12 per cent from the TwinSpires online betting 
business to $132.5m.
Toronto-listed social casino operator Tangelo 
Games remains in discussion with a number of 
parties regarding a potential acquisition or sale 
of the business. In H1, revenue was down  
13 per cent to $20.9m with the continuing to 
work on migrating to Unity and developing 
mobile applications, including a new version of 
Bingo Rider, one of Tangelo Spain’s most popular 
titles, and a Mundijuegos mobile app.  
German operator mybet Holding also 
endured a difﬁcult ﬁrst half, with revenue 
dropping to €17.1m, but claims to have seen 
positive changes in customer behaviour since 
the deployment of its new platform in March.  
Q2 revenue dropped 28 per cent year-on-year, 
with the key sports betting and casino  
verticals failing to match their previous  
year’s performance. Chief executive Markus 
Peuler said the results were “unsatisfying but 
not surprising”.
Net revenue
Company
Online H1 2016
Online H1 2017
% Change
Paddy Power Betfair (excluding US and Aus)
£440m
£439m
-0.2%
Churchill Downs Incorporated
US$365.3m
US$357.1m
-2%
Tangelo Games
CAD$20.9m
CAD$18.3m
-15%
mybet 
€24.0m
€17.1m
-29%
Tsachi 
Maimon,  
CEO, Aspire 
Global

78
T
he gambling industry in the UK has 
endured months of criticism. This is 
metastasizing into the notion that 
gambling must be banned or heavily restricted. 
This stems from two events. First was 
August’s publication of figures on problem 
gambling by the UK Gambling Commission 
(UKGC), which suggests there are 430,000 prob-
lem gamblers in the UK. Second was the settle-
ment agreed by 888 over failings in its social 
responsibility controls, that saw 7,000 people 
allowed to gamble after self-excluding. As boil-
erplate issues, these appear shocking, but they 
are not as clear-cut as they appear.
Take the addiction ﬁgures. These are based 
on data collected in 2015. At that point the UK 
was less than a year into a new regulatory 
regime. It may be the most recent data available, 
but it is still two years old. 
Spread betting is included in the problem-
gambling ﬁgures. However, spread betting is 
regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority 
– not the Gambling Commission. It is being treat-
ed as a trading product for regulatory purposes, 
then dismissed as a form of gambling when it 
causes problems. That’s bad governance.
With 16 per cent of betting exchange cus-
tomers and land-based poker players showing 
signs of a problem, these were the joint second 
most risky forms of gambling. Both are popular 
among professional gamblers. Separate the pro-
fessional gamblers from the recreational ones 
and the picture would look very different. 
The ﬁgures also cover players aged 16 and 
COLUMN
AND ANOTHER THING...
older. Players can only gamble on products 
from the National Lottery and Health Lot-
tery between 16 and 18. There are no ﬁgures spe-
ciﬁcally covering online gamblers aged 18 and 
over. The private (for-proﬁt) iGaming industry 
is being saddled with issues not of its making.
This has led to a reaction governed by emo-
tion, rather than evidence. That’s not to say 
there are not problems in how gambling com-
panies operate that urgently need addressing.
Let’s tackle the bottom line pushed by the 
media in its criticism of gambling. That gam-
bling is an industry feeding on the poor and 
vulnerable. That’s wrong. It doesn’t make busi-
ness sense to gouge a customer for all they are 
worth then move onto the next. 
Companies that simply bleed punters dry do 
not last that long; they would either be legislated 
out of business or become so toxic that custom-
ers avoid them at all costs. 
The industry’s terms and conditions have 
rightly come under scrutiny. Operators have 
been given too much power to dictate how cus-
tomers bet. This has led to an investigation by 
the Competition and Markets Authority, and 
highlighted a lack of preparedness by the indus-
try to tackle the issue.
This has led to wider issues spilling into the 
open, exempliﬁed by the 888 case.
The industry seems incapable of formulat-
ing a coherent response to the resulting press 
attacks. Senet Group, the body set up to deal with 
exactly these issues, was quick to claim that 
the current furore was simply failings on 888’s 
part. This gives gambling’s critics free reign to 
ramp up attacks.
There is often talk of how it’s up to gamblers 
to regulate their habits – a defence employed  
by the alcohol and junk food industries.  
They claim that it is a personal choice among 
consumers whether to indulge in these hab-
its. Gambling has allowed itself to be hit by 
far too much negative publicity to maintain  
this argument.
The industry needs to tackle its image prob-
lem. This can only be done by taking steps to 
ensure it is operating in a fair and responsible 
way. It then becomes much easier to defend 
against misleading accusations. Operators 
need to be using their reach into communities 
and links with high-proﬁle sporting bodies to 
achieve this.
This would also tackle the negative percep-
tion of gambling and its advertising. There has 
been talk about minors being exposed to gam-
bling through sporting broadcasts. But it is 
important to note that gambling sponsorship 
helps subsidise the cost of showing live sports.
While the criticism of the UK gambling 
industry may be well over the top, the fact that 
it has been allowed to build creates a major 
problem. The industry does not need to come out 
ﬁghting to deny that there is a problem. It needs 
to address each criticism with an evidence-
based response. Where a clear issue is identiﬁed, 
it must set out a plan of action. 
It must address the genuine issues that exist 
and refute the false accusations. The head-in-
the-sand approach does not work. n
The industry needs to tackle 
its image problem. This can 
only be done by taking steps 
to ensure it is operating in  
a fair and responsible way
A wake-up call for the 
UK gambling industry
It’s time for the gambling 
industry to take steps to 
address the issues that  
just won’t go away
OPINION
Robin  
Harrison



