
Enterprise Management 
Strategies in the Era of 
Cloud Computing
N. Raghavendra Rao
FINAIT Consultancy Services, India
A volume in the Advances in Business Information 
Systems and Analytics (ABISA) Book Series 

Published in the United States of America by 
Business Science Reference (an imprint of IGI Global)
701 E. Chocolate Avenue
Hershey PA, USA 17033
Tel: 717-533-8845
Fax:  717-533-8661 
E-mail: cust@igi-global.com
Web site: http://www.igi-global.com
Copyright © 2015 by IGI Global.  All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored or distributed in 
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, without written permission from the publisher.
Product or company names used in this set are for identification purposes only. Inclusion of the names of the products or 
companies does not indicate a claim of ownership by IGI Global of the trademark or registered trademark.
	
	
	
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
British Cataloguing in Publication Data
A Cataloguing in Publication record for this book is available from the British Library.
All work contributed to this book is new, previously-unpublished material. The views expressed in this book are those of the 
authors, but not necessarily of the publisher.
For electronic access to this publication, please contact: eresources@igi-global.com.
CIP Data
Enterprise management strategies in the era of cloud computing / N. Raghavendra Rao, editor. 
       pages cm 
  Includes bibliographical references and index. 
  Summary: “This book seeks to explore the possibilities of business in the cloud, providing a cutting-edge look at the excit-
ing and multifaceted relationships between cloud computing, software virtualization, collaborative technology, and business 
infrastructure in the 21st Century”-- Provided by publisher. 
  ISBN 978-1-4666-8339-6 (hardcover : alk. paper) -- ISBN 978-1-4666-8340-2 (ebook : alk. paper)  1.  Information 
technology--Management. 2.  Cloud computing.  I. Rao, N. Raghavendra, 1939-  
 
  T58.64.E676 2015 
  658’.0546782--dc23 
 
                                                            2015006725 
 
This book is published in the IGI Global book series Advances in Business Information Systems and Analytics (ABISA) 
(ISSN: 2327-3275; eISSN: 2327-3283)
Managing Director: 
Managing Editor: 
Director of Intellectual Property & Contracts: 
Acquisitions Editor: 
Production Editor: 
Development Editor: 
Typesetter: 
Cover Design: 
Lindsay Johnston 
Austin DeMarco 
Jan Travers 
Kayla Wolfe 
Christina Henning 
Brandon Carbaugh 
Cody Page 
Jason Mull 

The Advances in Business Information Systems and Analytics  (ABISA) Book Series (ISSN 2327-3275) is published by IGI Global, 701 
E. Chocolate Avenue, Hershey, PA 17033-1240, USA, www.igi-global.com. This series is composed of titles available for purchase individu-
ally; each title is edited to be contextually exclusive from any other title within the series. For pricing and ordering information please visit 
http://www.igi-global.com/book-series/advances-business-information-systems-analytics/37155. Postmaster: Send all address changes to above 
address. Copyright © 2015 IGI Global. All rights, including translation in other languages reserved by the publisher. No part of this series 
may be reproduced or used in any form or by any means – graphics, electronic, or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, taping, 
or information and retrieval systems – without written permission from the publisher, except for non commercial, educational use, including 
classroom teaching purposes. The views expressed in this series are those of the authors, but not necessarily of IGI Global.
IGI Global is currently accepting manuscripts 
for publication within this series. To submit a pro-
posal for a volume in this series, please contact our 
Acquisition Editors at Acquisitions@igi-global.com 
or visit: http://www.igi-global.com/publish/.
•	
Performance Metrics
•	
Business Systems Engineering
•	
Geo-BIS
•	
Data Governance
•	
Business Information Security
•	
Business Process Management
•	
Data Management
•	
Data Strategy
•	
Information Logistics
•	
Business models
Coverage
The successful development and management of information systems and business analytics is crucial 
to the success of an organization. New technological developments and methods for data analysis have 
allowed organizations to not only improve their processes and allow for greater productivity, but have 
also provided businesses with a venue through which to cut costs, plan for the future, and maintain 
competitive advantage in the information age.
The Advances in Business Information Systems and Analytics (ABISA) Book Series aims to present 
diverse and timely research in the development, deployment, and management of business information 
systems and business analytics for continued organizational development and improved business value.
Mission
ISSN: 2327-3275 
 EISSN: 2327-3283
Madjid Tavana
La Salle University, USA
Advances in Business 
Information Systems and 
Analytics (ABISA) Book Series

Titles in this Series
For a list of additional titles in this series, please visit: www.igi-global.com
Handbook of Research on Organizational Transformations through Big Data Analytics
Madjid Tavana (La Salle University, USA) and Kartikeya Puranam (La Salle University, USA) 
Business Science Reference • copyright 2015 • 561pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466672727) • US $245.00 (our price)
Business Technologies in Contemporary Organizations Adoption, Assimilation, and Institutionalization
Abrar Haider (University of South Australia, Australia) 
Business Science Reference • copyright 2015 • 337pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466666238) • US $205.00 (our price)
Business Transformation and Sustainability through Cloud System Implementation
Fawzy Soliman (The University of Technology, Australia) 
Business Science Reference • copyright 2015 • 300pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466664456) • US $200.00 (our price)
Effects of IT on Enterprise Architecture, Governance, and Growth
José Carlos Cavalcanti (Federal University of Pernambuco, Brazil) 
Business Science Reference • copyright 2015 • 307pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466664692) • US $195.00 (our price)
Technology, Innovation, and Enterprise Transformation
Manish Wadhwa (Salem State University, USA) and Alan Harper (South University, USA) 
Business Science Reference • copyright 2015 • 378pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466664739) • US $195.00 (our price)
Analytical Approaches to Strategic Decision-Making Interdisciplinary Considerations
Madjid Tavana (La Salle University, USA) 
Business Science Reference • copyright 2014 • 417pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466659582) • US $225.00 (our price)
Information Systems and Technology for Organizational Agility, Intelligence, and Resilience
Hakikur Rahman (University of Minho, Portugal) and Rui Dinis de Sousa (University of Minho, Portugal) 
Business Science Reference • copyright 2014 • 355pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466659704) • US $235.00 (our price)
ICT Management in Non-Profit Organizations
José Antonio Ariza-Montes (Loyola Andalucia University, Spain) and Ana María Lucia-Casademunt (Loyola 
Andalucia University, Spain) 
Business Science Reference • copyright 2014 • 297pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466659742) • US $215.00 (our price)
Security, Trust, and Regulatory Aspects of Cloud Computing in Business Environments
S. Srinivasan (Texas Southern University, USA) 
Information Science Reference • copyright 2014 • 325pp • H/C (ISBN: 9781466657885) • US $195.00 (our price)
701 E. Chocolate Ave., Hershey, PA 17033
Order online at www.igi-global.com or call 717-533-8845 x100
To place a standing order for titles released in this series, contact: cust@igi-global.com
Mon-Fri 8:00 am - 5:00 pm (est) or fax 24 hours a day 717-533-8661

﻿
Table of Contents
﻿
Preface..................................................................................................................................................xiv
Acknowledgment.................................................................................................................................. xx
Introduction.........................................................................................................................................xxi
Section 1
Introduction and Frame Work
Chapter 1
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing................................................................................................. 1
Mouna Jouini, Institut Supérieur de Gestion, Tunisia
Latifa Ben Arfa Rabai, Institut Supérieur de Gestion, Tunisia
Chapter 2
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments........................... 26
José C. Delgado, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal
Chapter 3
Design Considerations for a Corporate Cloud Service Catalog............................................................ 60
R. Todd Stephens, AT&T, USA
Section 2
Cloud Computing in Education Sector
Chapter 4
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education: ﻿
One Example in South Africa................................................................................................................ 79
Chaka Chaka, Tshwane University of Technology, South Africa
Chapter 5
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education 
Institutions: Tanzania........................................................................................................................... 104
Camilius Sanga, Sokoine University of Agriculture, Tanzania
George Kibirige, Sokoine University of Agriculture, Tanzania

﻿
Section 3
Business Models in Cloud Computing Environment
Chapter 6
Big Data in Cloud Computing Environment for Market Trends.......................................................... 138
K. Hariharanath, SSN School of Management & Computer Applications, India
Chapter 7
Cloud Computing: An Enabler in Managing Natural Resources in a Country.................................... 155
N. Raghavendra Rao, FINAIT Consultancy Services, India
Section 4
Supply Chain in Cloud Computing Environment
Chapter 8
IPCRESS: Tracking Intellectual Property through Supply Chains in Clouds..................................... 171
Lee Gillam, University of Surrey, UK
Scott Notley, University of Surrey, UK
Simon Broome, Jaguar Land Rover, UK
Debbie Garside, GeoLang, UK
Chapter 9
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain...................................................................... 192
Kijpokin Kasemsap, Suan Sunandha Rajabhat University, Thailand
Section 5
Cloud Computing in Health Sector
Chapter 10
Establishing Synergy between Cloud Computing and Colloborative Technology in Medical 
Informatics........................................................................................................................................... 221
N. Raghavendra Rao, FINAIT Consultancy Services, India
Section 6
Technical Issues in Cloud Computing
Chapter 11
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing............................. 238
Dilip Kumar, National Institute of Technology, India
Bibhudatta Sahoo, National Institute of Technology, India
Tarni Mandal, National Institute of Technology, India

﻿
Chapter 12
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center............................................................... 261
Sourav Kanti Addya, National Institute of Technology, India
Bibhudutta Sahoo, National Institute of Technology, India
Ashok Kumar Turuk, National Institute of Technology, India
Related References............................................................................................................................. 288
Compilation of References................................................................................................................ 322
About the Contributors..................................................................................................................... 352
Index.................................................................................................................................................... 357

﻿
Detailed Table of Contents
﻿
Preface..................................................................................................................................................xiv
Acknowledgment.................................................................................................................................. xx
Introduction.........................................................................................................................................xxi
Section 1
Introduction and Frame Work
Chapter 1
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing................................................................................................. 1
Mouna Jouini, Institut Supérieur de Gestion, Tunisia
Latifa Ben Arfa Rabai, Institut Supérieur de Gestion, Tunisia
Cloud computing has recently emerged as a new paradigm of computing for hosting and delivering 
services over the Internet. It replaces computing as a personal commodity by computing as a public 
utility. It is attractive solution to business owners as it eliminates the requirement for users to plan 
ahead for provisioning, and allows enterprises to start from the small and increase resources only when 
there is a rise in service demand. However, despite the significant benefits, these technologies present 
many challenges including lack of security. The chapter presents an advanced survey focusing on cloud 
computing concept. It highlights its key concepts and presents a physical architecture of this environment. 
Finally, the chapter defines virtualization technology as a factor for cloud computing surge and discuses 
security issues that damage these systems. The aim of this chapter is to provide a better understanding 
of the design challenges of cloud computing.
Chapter 2
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments........................... 26
José C. Delgado, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal
Enterprise Information Systems (EIS) are increasingly designed with cloud environments in mind, as a 
set of cooperating services deployed in a mix of platforms, including conventional servers and clouds, 
private and public. If enterprise value chains are considered, in which their EIS need to cooperate, 
solving all the interoperability problems raised by the need to meaningfully interconnect all these services 
constitutes a rather challenging endeavor. This chapter describes the concept of enterprise as a service, a 
collection of dynamically assembled services with a lifecycle centered on the customers, and proposes 
a multidimensional interoperability framework to help systematizing the various aspects relevant to 
interoperability. Besides lifecycle, this framework presents other dimensions, namely concreteness (with 
various levels of abstraction), interoperability (based on structural compliance and conformance), and 
concerns (to deal with non-functional aspects such as security, reliability and quality of service).

﻿
Chapter 3
Design Considerations for a Corporate Cloud Service Catalog............................................................ 60
R. Todd Stephens, AT&T, USA
This chapter will focus on building an end user service cloud catalog which will bridge the gap from the 
design requirements to the technology delivery organization. Once in the hands of IT, a more traditional 
service catalog can be used to leverage the service orchestration and delivery components. The author 
examines designing, building, and reviewing the impact of a more end user focused service catalog. 
Success will be measured by reviewing the business metrics in order to show the criticality of great 
design techniques and using familiar models like e-commerce.
Section 2
Cloud Computing in Education Sector
Chapter 4
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education: ﻿
One Example in South Africa................................................................................................................ 79
Chaka Chaka, Tshwane University of Technology, South Africa
Within the cloud computing ecosystem and its different permutations, there exists personal mobile cloud 
computing. The latter has not been covered and investigated much in relation to its affordances for higher 
education (HE), especially in South Africa. Thus, this chapter argues that personal mobile cloud computing 
can offer HE significant educational affordances in the form of cloud computing value chain. It does 
so by providing one South African example entailing a two-project study in the HE sector in which the 
cloud affordances of Twitter and Facebook were leveraged for educational purposes. Regarding Twitter, 
one of its affordances is that it was exploited as a cloud based virtual blackboard for a course content, 
thereby facilitating micro-teaching and micro-learning. Concerning Facebook, one of its affordances is 
that it served as a cloud based mobile computing environment in which a course-specific writing process 
was mounted by the instructor and participants. A collective affordance for both Twitter and Facebook 
was both consumerization and BYOD approaches to teaching and learning.
Chapter 5
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education 
Institutions: Tanzania........................................................................................................................... 104
Camilius Sanga, Sokoine University of Agriculture, Tanzania
George Kibirige, Sokoine University of Agriculture, Tanzania
The maturity of free and open source movement has brought a number of ICT tools. It has affected 
the way courses are delivered, the way contents are developed, the way data are interoperable, the way 
learning and teaching materials are shared, the way learners access classes and the way library resources 
are shared. In developing countries, several libraries are migrating into digital libraries using low cost 
technologies readily available due to open access, free and open source technology and e-publishing tools. 
Recent development of cloud computing technology provides state of art tools for libraries. It provides a 
common platform for easy information storage and sharing. Thus, there is lowering of the cost required 
to procure and manage library ICT infrastructure due to the capability of that cloud computing which 
allows the storage to be on a single, efficient system that saves cost and time. In developing countries 
where most libraries suffer from limited budgets for ICT services, it is anticipated that the future of 
digital libraries is on cloud libraries.

﻿
Section 3
Business Models in Cloud Computing Environment
Chapter 6
Big Data in Cloud Computing Environment for Market Trends.......................................................... 138
K. Hariharanath, SSN School of Management & Computer Applications, India
The Industrial and Business landscape is changing because of the convergence of information technology 
and communication technologies. This convergence is creating new types of companies competing with 
each other. It is not about east or west, or developed markets versus developing markets; It is all about 
how soon a business enterprise understands the emerging technology and adapts it into its business. It is 
not enough that a business enterprise understands the technology but one has to be good at thinking about 
the applications of the technology. Now it has become a necessity for business enterprises to manage 
complex and interdisciplinary requirements in their organization. This chapter explores a business model 
developed by a textile mill to remain competitive in global market that uses the concepts of big data, 
cloud computing, virtual reality, and data warehousing.
Chapter 7
Cloud Computing: An Enabler in Managing Natural Resources in a Country.................................... 155
N. Raghavendra Rao, FINAIT Consultancy Services, India
The growth of the Internet has provided scope for multiple applications. Governments in both developed 
and developing nations have started making use of the Internet in their functioning. The idea behind 
these governments moving from manual work to IT enabled systems through the Internet is to improve 
governance. Framing policies pertaining to natural resources and managing them will not be with one 
department under any government. E-governance, consisting of multidisciplinary experts, is required to 
develop a model for natural resources management in a country. The electronic governance will help the 
members of the e-governance and the various departments in the government to facilitate in managing 
their natural resources. E-governance in the area of natural resources management in any country will 
be successful only when there is coordination among the various government departments. Cloud 
computing is economically viable for implementation of e-governance projects. This chapter suggests a 
conceptual model for managing natural resources and natural disaster management for a country under 
cloud computing environment.

﻿
Section 4
Supply Chain in Cloud Computing Environment
Chapter 8
IPCRESS: Tracking Intellectual Property through Supply Chains in Clouds..................................... 171
Lee Gillam, University of Surrey, UK
Scott Notley, University of Surrey, UK
Simon Broome, Jaguar Land Rover, UK
Debbie Garside, GeoLang, UK
This paper provides an overview of the dual challenges involved in protecting intellectual property 
while distributing business information that will need to be readable/viewable at some point such that 
it can be acted upon by parties external to the organization. We describe the principles involved with 
developing such a system as a means to engender trust in such situations – as a deperimeterized supply 
chain likely acting through the Cloud – discuss the requirements for such a system, and demonstrate 
that such a system is feasible for written text by formulating the problem as one related to plagiarism 
detection. The core of the approach, developed previously, has been shown to be effective in finding 
similar content (precision: 0.88), and has some robustness to obfuscation, without needing to reveal the 
content being sought.
Chapter 9
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain...................................................................... 192
Kijpokin Kasemsap, Suan Sunandha Rajabhat University, Thailand
This chapter reviews the role of cloud computing in global supply chain, thus describing the theoretical 
and practical concepts of cloud computing and supply chain management (SCM); the significance of 
cloud computing in global supply chain; the overview of electronic supply chain management (e-SCM); 
and the organizational information processing theory within global supply chain. The utilization of cloud 
computing is necessary for modern organizations that seek to serve suppliers and customers, increase 
business performance, strengthen competitiveness, and achieve continuous success in global business. 
Therefore, it is essential for modern organizations to examine their cloud computing applications, develop 
a strategic plan to regularly check their practical advancements, and immediately respond to the cloud 
computing needs of customers in global supply chain. Applying cloud computing in global supply chain 
will extremely improve organizational performance and reach business goals in the digital age.

﻿
Section 5
Cloud Computing in Health Sector
Chapter 10
Establishing Synergy between Cloud Computing and Colloborative Technology in Medical 
Informatics........................................................................................................................................... 221
N. Raghavendra Rao, FINAIT Consultancy Services, India
The Health care sector needs information driven service. Information is a major resource which is 
important to health of individual patient and the success of hospitals. The understanding between medical 
professionals and software professionals can be a main force behind the design, management and use 
of health care data and information. Health care information systems need to move from traditional 
integrated database to knowledge based database. Generally, data in health care sector is available as 
disperse elements; when it is compiled into a meaningful pattern, then it becomes information. And as 
information is converted into valid basis for action, then it becomes knowledge. This chapter explains 
making use of the concepts such as cloud computing, pervasive computing, virtual reality along with 
the other collaborative technology which will facilitate to create knowledge based health care system.
Section 6
Technical Issues in Cloud Computing
Chapter 11
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing............................. 238
Dilip Kumar, National Institute of Technology, India
Bibhudatta Sahoo, National Institute of Technology, India
Tarni Mandal, National Institute of Technology, India
The energy consumption in the cloud is proportional to the resource utilization and data centers are 
almost the world’s highest consumers of electricity. The complexity of the resource allocation problem 
increases with the size of cloud infrastructure and becomes difficult to solve effectively. The exponential 
solution space for the resource allocation problem can be searched using heuristic techniques to obtain 
a sub-optimal solution at the acceptable time. This chapter presents the resource allocation problem in 
cloud computing as a linear programming problem, with the objective to minimize energy consumed in 
computation. This resource allocation problem has been treated using heuristic approaches. In particular, 
we have used two phase selection algorithm ‘FcfsRand’, ‘FcfsRr’, ‘FcfsMin’, ‘FcfsMax’, ‘MinMin’, 
‘MedianMin’, ‘MaxMin’, ‘MinMax’, ‘MedianMax’, and ‘MaxMax’. The simulation results indicate in 
the favor of MaxMax.

﻿
Chapter 12
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center............................................................... 261
Sourav Kanti Addya, National Institute of Technology, India
Bibhudutta Sahoo, National Institute of Technology, India
Ashok Kumar Turuk, National Institute of Technology, India
The data center is the physical infrastructure layer in cloud architecture. To run a large data center requires 
a huge amount of power. A proper strategy can minimize the number of servers used. Minimization of 
active servers caused minimization of power consumption. But the maximum number of virtual machine 
placement will be a monetary benefit for cloud service providers. To earn maximum revenue, the CSP is 
to maximize resource utilization. VM placement is one of the major issues to achieve minimum power 
consumption as well as to earn maximum revenue by CSP. In this research chapter, we have formulated an 
optimization problem for initial VM placement in the data center. An iterative heuristic using simulated 
annealing has been used for VM placement problem. The proposed heuristic has been analysis to be 
scalable and the coding scheme shows that the proposed technique is outperforming traditional FFD on 
bin packing technique.
Related References............................................................................................................................. 288
Compilation of References................................................................................................................ 322
About the Contributors..................................................................................................................... 352
Index.................................................................................................................................................... 357

﻿
Preface
﻿
OVERVIEW OF CLOUD COMPUTING
The advancements in Information and Communication Technology are forcing enterprises to rethink 
their Business Models and strategy for their business. It has become a necessity for every enterprise to 
keep pace with these advancements. It is also required that executives working in the enterprises are not 
dispensed with for lack of knowledge regarding emerging trends. In the present business scenario suc-
cess is no longer guaranteed for enterprises that have financial resources and size on their side. Smaller 
enterprises that are flexible are providing products or services at a faster pace and lower cost. It is also 
because of the advancements in internet, enterprises no longer have to hire a consultant who lives nearby. 
As boundaries are shrinking, the level of competition is going up. More and more competition means 
enterprises are chasing the same dollar. Now it has become imperative for enterprises to adapt themselves 
to changing market conditions and government regulations of different countries. Enterprises need to plan 
for their business in both domestic and international markets. The better strategy should be integrating 
business, the knowledge of domain experts, and emerging concepts in information and communication 
technology to gain competitive advantage in the global market scenario. Cloud computing facilitates to 
achieve the above strategy.
Cloud computing is one of the concepts among the number of other concepts provided by informa-
tion and communication technology. It may be said that the concepts of cloud computing is the result 
of the advancements in Internet. In the present Information and Communication Technology scenario, 
new technologies appear at high speed in the market place and at the same speed they are disappearing. 
Cloud computing is predicted to have more longevity.
It is said that global virtual enterprises are gaining importance because of cloud computing. The busi-
ness world is in the midst of a significant transition largely due to the emergence of global virtual teams.
The importance of cloud computing is felt in the virtual enterprises. Cloud computing provides 
mechanism for sharing and coordinating the use of diverse resources. This mechanism enables the 
creation of geographically and organizationally distributed components of virtual computing systems. 
Cloud computing supports virtualization in respect of applications, devices, networking, storage, and 
servers Further it can be said cloud computing facilitates the economies across the globe closely inter-
connected and integrated.
There are four components that need to be integrated under cloud computing for the development 
of business models for virtual organizations. They are business process, application software, system 
software, and infrastructure such as servers, network, and database. Adding intelligence to the process 
of developing new models or to existing models and their management makes lots of sense because 
business models need considerable expertise.
xiv

Preface
There are four cloud deployment approaches. They represent specific types of cloud environments. 
Each cloud environment has its own characteristics. Cloud computing is generally classified as public, 
private, community, and hybrid clouds.
•	
Public Cloud: This cloud infrastructure is owned by an organization selling cloud services to the 
general public or to a business enterprise or to a large industry group.
•	
Private Cloud: This cloud infrastructure is owned or leased by single enterprise and is operated 
solely for that organization.
•	
Community Cloud: This cloud infrastructure is shared by several organizations and supports a 
specific community.
•	
Hybrid Cloud: This cloud infrastructure is composition of two or more clouds such as private, 
community or public those are unique entities. They are bound together by standardized or propri-
etary technology that enables data and application portability.
Further the cloud environment consists of generally three core components which refer to three types 
of services such as Software services, Platform services and Infrastructure services. These services are 
generally defined as Software as a Service (SaaS), Platform as a service (PaaS), and Infrastructure as 
a service (IaaS). However, a number of other specialized services are available. They are 1) Storage as 
a service, Database as a service, Security as a service, Communication as a service, Management as a 
service, Integration as a service, Testing as a service. Enterprises can choose a deployment model along 
with a particular or combination of the various services indicated above.
Notwithstanding the benefits that cloud computing offers, there are some issues and challenges as-
sociated while implementing cloud computing concept in enterprises. They are 1) Data Management 
and Governance, 2) Service management and Governance product, 3) Process control and monitoring, 
4) Infrastructure and system reliability and availability. These issues are addressed and they are provided 
solutions by the expert groups in the vendor organizations who provide the cloud computing services.
GLOBALIZATION SCENARIO
In the present global Virtual Enterprises Environment Cloud Computing provides mechanism for shar-
ing and coordination of the use of diverse resources thus enable their creation from geographically and 
organizationally components of virtual computing systems. This book emphasizes that cloud computing 
sufficiently integrates resources to deliver desired qualities of services. Further the book indicates that 
cloud computing facilities support management of credentials and policies when computations span 
multiple enterprises, and resource management protocols. Further it supports services that support se-
cure remote access to Computing, Data Resources, and Co-Allocation of multiple resources. This book 
explains that cloud computing provides solution to application virtualization, storage virtualization and 
server virtualization. The above solutions are mainly needed for Global Virtual Enterprises.
xv

Preface
BENEFITS FROM CLOUD COMPUTING
Data intense applications in cloud computing environment occur in scientific and business domains. 
Scientists require mechanism to transfer, publish, replicate, discover, share and analyze data. Business 
application in domains such as financial services, research and development, and online business ser-
vices need to maintain database consisting regionally or worldwide. There is a good scope for carrying 
out research activities for developing business models for manufacturing, healthcare, education, and 
government sectors.
TARGET AUDIENCES
This book offers comprehensive view of cloud computing concepts being used with collaborative tech-
nologies across multiple sectors such as Education, Health-Care, Manufacturing, Government agencies, 
and Business enterprises. This book would be useful as reference for research scholars, research and 
development departments in industries. It is also a course supplement to the students pursuing computer 
science and information technology related subjects. This is also a good resource for software profes-
sionals who are involved in developing business applications in cloud computing environment.
GIST OF THE CHAPTERS
The book is broadly divided under six sections covering 1) Concepts and Framework, 2) Education 
Sector, 3) Conceptual Business Models, 4) Supply Chain in Cloud Computing, 5) Health Sector, and 
6) Technologies Issues. The contributors of this book are from academics, and professionals who are 
involved in research related to the concept of cloud computing and developing business models using 
this concept.
In the Introduction N. Raghavendra Rao explains the emergence of cloud computing, perceptions 
and misconceptions on cloud computing. The author narrates the working of data centers in the era 
when mainframe systems were popular. Further he compares data center in main frame era with global 
virtual data center under cloud computing environment. He expresses both are similar. The advent of 
internet has facilitated cloud computing supporting global virtual data centers. He has made a reference 
of grid computing and the reason not becoming popular even though it has almost similar features of 
cloud computing. He also talks about the relevance of cloud computing in the domains such as Home 
Sciences, Financial Services, Research Collaboration, and Government Agencies. He explains the vari-
ous cost aspects in the cloud computing environment.
Mouna Jouini and Latifa Ben Arfa Rabai in their chapter, “Design Challenges of Cloud Computing” 
talk about the challenges that arise while designing a system under cloud computing environment they 
also highlight the key characteristics, cloud computing, cloud computing architecture, and core foundation 
capabilities. They also make a reference of user tools. They also talk about stakeholder’s categories and 
their concerns. They explain about the security threats from the angle of host, customers, data centers, 
and virtual machines. They indicate handling of security requirements in cloud computing environment.
xvi

Preface
The Chapter titled “An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Application in Cloud Environ-
ments” written by Jose C. Delgado explains a multidimensional enterprise architecture framework and 
multidimensional interoperability framework. The author also talks about reducing coupling in interoper-
ability. Further the author compares with the other interoperability framework. The author observes that 
the world is increasingly both distributed and interconnected. The author remarks that interoperability 
is crucial and the existing standards are not enough to ensure enterprise information systems.
R. Todd Stephen’s chapter titled “Design Considerations for a Corporate Cloud Service Catalogue” 
gives the background of the organization AT RT Inc. The author describes the traditional services of a 
cloud registry and observes there is a need for a cloud service registry built on solid usability principles 
that can be used by an average user. Further the author explains business oriented cloud service catalog and 
usability criteria for an application system. The author discusses a case study on the basis of the research 
conducted by a team at the author’s organization. The main aim of this chapter is the author is sharing 
the team experience at the author’s organization and the team’s observations on their research project.
Chaka Chaka, author of the chapter “Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordability for Higher 
Education: One Example in South Africa” explains the concept of personal mobile cloud computing. 
The author observes internet service providers and social networking sites support the devices which 
have internet access. The author feels that personal mobile computing is not given importance in respect 
of higher education. In the literature review in the area of higher education sector, the author presents 
a brief summary and synthesis of case studies related to the use and deployment of cloud computing in 
the selected higher education institutions. Further the author has divided the participants in two groups 
who were enrolled in two different undergraduate courses at a rural university in South Africa for the 
research study. These two groups speak English as a second language.
Camilius Sanga and George Kibirige in their chapter “Applying KOLB Experiential Theory with 
Cloud Computing in Higher Educational Institutions: Tanzania” observe that free and open source soft-
ware has revolutionized the entire information and communication technology. They also mention that in 
developing countries, several countries are converting into digital libraries using low cost technologies 
due to open access. They point out many libraries in Tanzania have limited budget for information and 
communications technology services. They also talk about new aspects of this technology in libraries. 
Further, they discuss the creation of cloud libraries. They highlight the challenges, opportunities and the 
role of cloud library. They have also presented the current status of application of information technology 
in the libraries in some selected Tanzania’s higher learning institutions. They have stressed the impor-
tance of applying KOLB experiential learning by making use of cloud computing in relation to library.
K. Hariharnath, author of the chapter titled “Big Data in Cloud Computing Environment for Market 
Trends” observes the concept of big data can be made use of in the cloud computing environment for 
assessing market trends of the manufacturing products. The author explains a business developed by 
a textile mill in India applying the concepts of big data, cloud computing and virtual reality in their 
business model. The author gives the background of the 3G textile mills and their approach in creating 
a business model by them. This mill has been in the business over five decades. The unique aspect of 
this mill is, it is being managed by a management team who belong to three different generations. Their 
approach and decisions are based on their experience, business insight and education. They realized 
the globalization scenario is affecting their market share in the market. At the recommendations of the 
consultants, a business model has been designed on the basis of making use of the concepts such as Big 
Data, Cloud Computing and Virtual Reality. Further the author explains this business model has helped 
3G Textiles to remain competitive in the global market.
xvii

Preface
N. Raghavendra Rao in his chapter titled “Cloud Computing: an Enabler in Managing Natural Re-
sources in a Country” observes that economic development has helped to raise the standard of living 
and has also led to mis-management of natural resources. This has also resulted in environmental issues. 
The author explains the components of natural resources and human activities on natural resources. The 
Author talks about a model for making use of space technology and cloud computing to create a knowl-
edge based system for natural resources. This model will mainly be useful for the various government 
departments which are involved in the management of natural resource and environmental issues. Further 
the author suggests a model for handling damages caused by natural disasters. The author stresses the 
major problem in the developing countries is the identification of the effects on the mismanagement of 
natural resources. The author feels that cloud based natural resources data model will help the govern-
ment in a country to change their practices for using the natural resources.
Lee Gillam, Simon Broome, and Debbie in their chapter titled “IPCRESS: Tracking Intellectual 
Property through Supply Chains in Clouds” observe that document archives and systems of any organiza-
tion, coherently managed or not, can contain variety of high-value information relating to collaborating 
and competing business, business transactions, research and development plans, market analysis and 
strategy. Large organizations may have such documents spread widely across numerous siloed business 
units, with highly evolved but desperate systems, approaches and practices. The authors indicate the 
lack of a readily definable organizational boundary is inherent in supply chains and becomes amplified 
when supply chains act through software as a service. This chapter is based on a collaborative research 
and development project between Jaguar Land Over, University of Surrey and Geo Lang Ltd and with 
funding from the UK Government backed technology strategy board for 18 months. The authors of this 
chapter constructed the intellectual property protecting cloud services in supply chains (IPC Press) sys-
tem to address supply chains and barriers to cloud adoption related data security and resilience. They 
explain that IPC Press, as a project is developing a capability for tracking IP through supply chains, of-
fering cloud services to i) Prevent IP leakage ii) Detect IP leakage or theft and iii) Identify information 
retention beyond allowed periods.
Kijpokin Kasemsap author of “The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain” observes 
that in the global market place, internet, the low cost processing capacity open standard and loosely 
coupled information technology infrastructure has been widely recognized as a tremendous enabler for 
collaboration. The author explains the role of cloud computing in the supply chain. Further the author 
talks about the theoretical and the practical concept of cloud computing. The author also gives an over-
view of e-scms and the organizational information process theory concerning information processing 
requirements and information capability. The author also examines the extent to which environmental 
uncertainty, task uncertainty and inter organizational uncertainty effect intention to adopt cloud comput-
ing concepts in supply chain.
N. Raghavendra Rao, Author of the chapter titled “Establishing Synergy between Cloud Comput-
ing and Collaborative Technology in Medical Informatics”, observes health has been concern of major 
importance across the globe. The kind and amount of resource available now is increasing day by day. 
Information technology has been the most important new resource in the present century. Emergence of 
new tools and devices has been helping the medical profession. The author in his chapter talks about a 
virtual hospital scenario in India under the cloud computing environment. Further the author explains 
pervasive devices and virtual reality concept can be made use with the cloud computing in virtual 
hospital. The author discusses three case illustrations to support his approach in making use of cloud 
computing with collaborative technology. In one case illustration the author talks about health care 
xviii

Preface
information system in the virtual hospital scenario. In another case illustration e author explains the 
rational method in discovering a drug under cloud computing environment. In the third case illustration, 
the author stresses the importance of evidence based learning by medical students across the globe under 
cloud computing based health care system. The author is of the opinion in the era of globalization, cloud 
computing along with the collaboration technology will provide a lot of scope for developing knowledge 
based health care models.
Dilip Kumar, Bibhudatta Sahoo, and Tarni Mandal authors of the chapter titled “Heuristic Task Con-
solidation Techniques for Energy Efficient CloudComputing” observe that cloud computing has emerged 
from the concepts of heterogeneous distributed computing, and autonomic computing. The authors say 
that the cloud computing environment provides high performance servers and high speed mass storage 
devices to manage growing demand for computations and large volume data. These resources are the 
major source of the power consumption in data centers including air conditioning and cooling equipment. 
The authors indicate that data centers are the world’s highest consumers of electricity. They discuss in 
their chapter the resource allocation problem in cloud computing as a linear programming problem with 
the objective of minimizing energy consumption in computation. They have applied heuristic approach 
in handling the resource allocation problem.
Souravkanti Addya, Bibhudutta Sahoo and Ashok Kumar Turuk, authors of the chapter titled “Virtual 
machine Placement Strategy for CloudComputing Data Center” observe that cloud computing technol-
ogy uses the internet and central remote servers to maintain data and application. They indicate in their 
chapter that the use of online resources has been on increase in the last one decade. This has resulted 
in the increase of servers at data centers. They explain that virtualization provides the proper resources 
utilization. They express that the optimum placement of virtual machine server can minimize the power 
consumption at data center. Further they discussed that simulated annealing optimization technique has 
been applied in their model for virtual machine placement strategy for cloud data center.
IMPACT OF THIS BOOK
In the technology domain developments now in process are very different from the kind of information 
handling systems and procedures used in the past. Cloud computing has become ubiquitous. It will provide 
more computation power and storage for less investment than any other current computing solution. This 
book mainly focuses on developing business models under cloud computing and highlights the value of 
cloud computing in the different sectors. Further the book talks about managing virtualization resources.
N. Raghavendra Rao 
FINAIT Consultancy Services, India
xix

﻿
Acknowledgment
﻿
At the outset, I would like to thank all the chapter authors for their excellent contributions. I would like 
to offer my special thanks to IGI Global for the opportunity to edit the publication.
I would like to acknowledge the role of the reviewers and editorial team for their support. Finally, I thank 
my wife Meera for her continuous encouragement and support in my scholastic pursuits.
N. Raghavendra Rao 
FINAIT Consultancy Services, India
xx
xx

﻿
Introduction 
﻿
BACKGROUND
Information and Communication Technologies is the Major Stimulus for changes in trade and commerce. 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Is the result of the convergence of the above tech-
nologies. Now ICT is considered as a separate discipline. ICT is advancing by delivering exponential 
increase in computing power and communications capabilities. Many new concepts are emerging in 
this discipline. Cloud computing concept is one among them. The concept of cloud computing is the 
result of the advancements in internet. New Technologies in ICT Scenario appear at high speed in the 
marketplace and at the same speed they disappear. It is predicted that cloud computing will have more 
longevity (Hagel, & Brown, 2010). It may be said that the cloud computing is the latest innovation that 
has brought computing power within the reach of every business enterprise (Linthicum, 2010).
EMERGENCE OF CLOUD COMPUTING
Emergence of cloud computing in information and communication technology is equivalent to electricity 
revolution of a century ago. Before the advent of electrical utilities, every business enterprise and farms 
produced its own electricity from their stand alone generators. After the electric grid was created, busi-
ness enterprises and farms stopped their generators being used. They have started using electricity by 
paying a reasonable price with much greater reliability. Similar type of revolution is taking place under 
the cloud computing environment. The desk top and laptop centric approach of computing is likely to 
change. Many more pervasive devices in addition to desktop and laptop will support the use of cloud 
computing environment. The whole scene in cloud computing environment, access to data and software 
stored in the centralized servers will be through internet. This is the simplest explanation to understand 
the cloud computing environment.
PERCEPTIONS
There are different perceptions among people who use computing systems about and cloud computing. 
According to some it is to have an access to software and the stored data in the cloud environment through 
internet or network and making use of other associated services. Others feel that there is nothing new 
xxi

Introduction
about this concept. According to them it is something related to modernization of the time sharing model 
that was used before the introduction of reasonably priced computing systems. Time sharing approach 
has disappeared after the development of client/server technology. This Technology has provided large 
amounts of computing power in the desktops.
CLOUD COMPUTING
Cloud computing is a generic term that involves delivering hosted services over the internet (Rhoton, 
2010). The name cloud computing is said to have been derived by the cloud symbol that is often used 
to represent the internet. Another interpretation can also be given that the cloud is visible in the sky 
from any part of the universe. Similarly the cloud services are also available from any part of the world.
DATE CENTER AND CLOUD COMPUTING
In the early days of computing, many companies actually shared a single computer system that was 
located in a remote date center in their premises. The system personnel would allocate and manage the 
resources for each user and each application. Users could request for more computing time or less by 
adjusting the amount of time they utilized for sharing the services. Similarly, cloud computing offers 
various components from deployment models and mix and match the solutions that are sought. One can 
make use of a component such as storage-as-a-service from one service provider, database-as-a-service 
from another and even a complete application development and deployment of platform from a third 
service provider. It has to be remembered that cloud computing facilitates the use of different cloud 
computing deployment models over the internet.
All the software applications, the data, and the control resided in huge main frame computer in the 
date center. Access to the main frame computer by the user is via computer terminal. It was known as 
“work station” or” Dumb Terminal”. This is because; it does not have much memory, storage space or 
processing power. It is a merely device that connects.
USERS OF THE MAIN FRAME SYSTEMS
The users could have an access to the main frame only when they got the permission from the infor-
mation Technology staff from the data center. Information Technology staff generally were not in the 
habit of giving them the access instantly. It was due to processing power on a main frame computer was 
limited. One more reason was for not giving permission to them instantly was because two or more us-
ers could not have access to the same data at the same time. The users would depend on the information 
technology staff for every aspect of information at the data center. Customization of the existing reports, 
generating new reports, or looking at some new data was possible. It could be only as per the schedule 
of the data center. It might take weeks or months to comply with the requests of the users, depending 
on the datacenter schedule.
xxii

Introduction
COLLABORATION UNDER CLOUD COMPUTING
With the growth of the use of internet, there is no need to limit group collaboration to a single enter-
prises network environment. Now it is possible users from multiple locations within an organization 
and also from multiple organizations to collaborate on business processes across business organizations 
and geographic boundaries. Many leading manufactures in the area of infrastructure are offering the 
hardware necessary to build cloud network (Hassan, 2011). Many software companies are developing 
cloud based applications. Cloud computing concept facilitates users of any device to have an internet 
feature (Jennings, 2010). These devices are mobile phones, laptops, tablets and other devices which 
have this facility. It needs some intelligent management to connect all these devices together and assign 
processing task to multitudes of users.
STORAGE OF DATA IN CLOUD ENVIRONMENT
The main use of cloud computing is for the storage of data. Data is stored in multiple servers rather than 
in the dedicated servers used in traditional network data storage. An end-user sees it as a virtual server. It 
is just a pseudo name used to refer virtual space carved out of the cloud. In reality the users’ data could 
be stored on any one computer or more computers used to create the cloud.
RELEVANCE OF CLOUD COMPUTING TO DEVELOPERS AND END USERS
There are many benefits in cloud computing technology for both developers and end users, and infra-
structure.
Developers
Cloud computing provides increased space for storage and processing power to run the applications they 
develop. Cloud computing also enables new ways to access information process and analyze data and 
connect people and resources from any location anywhere in the world. In essence it takes the lid off 
the box with cloud computing developers. Developers are no longer boxed in by physical constraints 
(Roychoudhuri, Mohapatra, & Yadav, 2014).
End Users
Any user using an application under the cloud computing environment is not physically bound to a single 
computer system or network. End user’s application and documents can be accessed wherever the end 
user is on network. Data or documents hosted in the cloud always exist, no matter what happens to the 
end user’s computer system.
xxiii

Introduction
INFRASTRUCTURE
Cloud computing enables more efficient sharing of the resources than in the traditional net working 
computing environment. Hardware need not have to be physically adjacent to a firm’s office or data 
center. Cloud computing infrastructure can be located anywhere in the world. It will be more beneficial, 
if it is located in the areas where real estate and electricity costs are reasonably low. Another advantage 
to the business enterprises, they need not purchase the computing infrastructure for infrequent intensive 
computing tasks. In other words the resources are available on the cost effective basis (Reese, 2010).
CLOUD PRINTING
In the present globalization scenario many electronic devices are connected to the internet. This helps 
us to get information and content that matters most to us. However printers are considered as standalone 
devices at homes or offices connected to a computer. It is felt they are irrelevant to mobile devices. Cloud 
computing is providing a new printing technology. It allows users to send documents to a printer from 
e mail capable device irrespective of the sender’s location. This concept is receiving attention from the 
manufacturers of computer printers.
The requirements in printing business reports are changing. Keeping pace with the requirements in 
the business world, manufactures of printers are adapting themselves to these changes. Some printers 
are being manufactured with specific features to take care of the needs of users. The main change is the 
addition of wireless connectivity to printers. It means a user can send from his / her system a file directly 
to a printer located in any part of the world.
Vishal Tripathi, Principal Research analyst at Gartner, observed “Cloud print services (CPS) are 
Hosted offering that enable users to print documents and other content on any digital printer, copier or 
multi function product that is associated with cloud services. Users create a copy with a software tool, 
receive or down load a document or other content and send the print job from a device of their choice to 
CPS provider which then routes it to a file to a cloud attached printer selected by the user”.
Cloud printing will help users who want to print from their smart phones or tablets, or laptops and 
note books. For a mobile device it is required as an option to email a file to a printer for printing. Inno-
vations in the area of cloud printing especially relevant to internet access are taking place. The essence 
of this concept is to enable printers to be accessed through cloud print services that help any application 
on any device to print on any printer. Cloud printing is at a nascent stage and it will take some time for 
adoption to pickup.
SPECTACULAR GROWTH IN INTERNET
In the early years the internet was mainly used by military and research institutions in the United States 
of America. Now it is being used across the globe in every activity under the sun. People prefer to be “on 
Internet”. One of the main reasons is it is simple to use. The internet is a good example for functional 
freedom. In principle any node can speak as a peer to any other node as long as it obeys the rules of 
xxiv

Introduction
the TCP / IP protocols, which are strictly technical, not social or political. Internet can be compared to 
a human language. Nobody rents a language and nobody owns a language. It is up to an individual to 
learn and to speak a language. People consider internet as a similar to a language. It belongs to everyone.
ORIGINS OF CLOUD COMPUTING
The following elements can be considered as important for the origination of cloud computing.
1. 	
Utility Computing: The packaging and delivery of computing resources to a computer is who 
pays for these resources as a metered service when needed. The objective is to use the services 
effectively while reducing the associated costs. The term “UTILITY” is used to compare this type 
of computing resource utilization and payment to those utilities such as providers of electricity or 
natural gas.
2. 	
Grid Computing: It is a form of parallel processing conducted on a network of computers. In 
grid computing servers, storage and networks are combined to form powerful computing resource 
nodes that can be dynamically provisioned as needed (Joseph, & Fellenstein, 2004).
3. 	
Autonomic Computing: The functioning of a computer system without external control is known 
as autonomic computing. The term “AUTONOMIC COMPUTING” is based on the autonomic 
nervous system of the Human Body. The Human Body controls the functions such as breathing, 
heart and other related functions without conscious input from the individual. The objective of 
autonomic computing is to have the computer perform critical and complex functions without any 
major Intervention by a user.
4. 	
Platform Virtualization: The Logical portioning of physical computing resources into multiple 
execution environments including servers, applications and operating systems is known as plat-
form virtualization. Virtualization is based on the concept of virtual machine running on physical 
computing platform. Virtualization is controlled by a virtual machine monitor known as a hyper 
vision.
5. 	
Software as a Service: A software distribution and deployment model in which applications are 
provided to customers is considered as a service. The applications can run on the users’ comput-
ing systems or the providers of web services. This provides for efficient patch management and 
promoters collaboration.
6. 	
Service Oriented Architectures: A set of services used to communicate with each other, and their 
interfaces are described. Their functions are loosely coupled as to whose use can be incorporated 
by multiple organizations.
CLOUD COMPUTING AND THE ABOVE ELEMENTS
One has to be clear when relating the above elements in the cloud computing concept (Miller, 2009). 
Cloud computing is not the same as utility commuting. Cloud computing does not apply to the metered 
service price of utility computing. Cloud computing generally uses distributed virtualized platforms 
xxv

Introduction
instead of centralized computing resources. Grid computing cannot be considered as equivalent to cloud 
computing. Grid computing does use distributed virtual machines but unlike cloud computing, these 
machines are usually focused on a single, very large task.
Sometimes client/server is viewed as cloud computing, with the cloud appearing in the server role. 
However, in the traditional client server model, the server is a specific machine at a specific location. 
Computation in the cloud can be based on computers anywhere, split among computers. It can use vir-
tualized platform. It will be unknown to the user. The users know that they are accessing the resources 
for processing to get results.
Cloud computing is not software as service. It is because that an organization can purchase and mange 
a software. Generally it is run on the user’s hardware or someone else’s machines.
Though there is an element of virtualization in the cloud, it is generally used for operating system 
virtualization. It can be employed on the organization’s local computers or in a data center. It cannot be 
said virtualization is cloud computing. Cloud computing is not the same as service oriented architecture 
which supports the exchange of data among different applications engaged in business processes. Although 
the preceding elements are not synonymous with cloud computing, depending on the implementation 
they can be a constituent of the cloud.
According to the EDN Article Silicon Designers view cloud computing can be considered as a hier-
archy of three elements. They are (1) Computing Kernels, (2) Clusters, and (3) Systems.
1. 	
Computing Kernels: Processor or groups of cores enclosed within a secure perimeter and united 
by a single coherent address space. This definition is general enough as it encompasses a processor 
in a personal computer or a large multiprocessor system.
2. 	
Clusters: Groups of kernels that are connected by a private local area network and respective tasks 
communicate among each other over low band with links.
3. 	
Systems: Clusters connect through public networks and by employing communications they 
cross security perimeter boundaries. These transactions are necessarily slower than inter cluster 
communications.
APPLICATION COSTS IN CLOUD COMPUTING ENVIRONMENT
One should know the list of costs associated in making use of the services under the cloud computing 
environment. The flowing costs fall under the category of application service costs (Hurwitz, Kaufman, 
& Halper, 2010).
1. 	
Server Costs: The total annual costs for making use of a server/server for software applications 
are decided on the basis of type of applications software are run in the server.
2. 	
Storage Costs: These costs relate to storing data in the server/servers.
3. 	
Network Cost: This cost depends on the basis of band width requirements for accessing the system 
in the cloud environment.
4. 	
Backup and Archive Costs: The actual savings on backup costs depend on the backup strategy 
when the application moves into the cloud. The same is true of archiving.
xxvi

Introduction
5. 	
Disaster Recovery Costs: In theory, the cloud service will have its own disaster recovery capabili-
ties, so there may be a consequential savings on disaster recovery. It will be better to assess cloud 
providers disaster recovery capabilities. Not all cloud providers have the same definition of disaster 
recovery.
6. 	
Data Center Infrastructure Costs: A whole series of costs covering electricity, floor space, 
cooling, building maintenance and other related costs cannot be easily identified to individual ap-
plication, generally it is allocated on the basis of floor space the hardware running the application 
occupies.
7. 	
Platform Costs: Some applications only run in specific operating environments. The annual main-
tenance costs for the application operating environment need to be calculated. It has to be allocated 
as a part of the overall costs.
8. 	
Software Maintenance Costs (Ready Made Software): Generally this cost element is considered 
to be simple because it is a part of the software’s annual maintenance cost. It becomes complicated 
if the software license is tied to processor pricing.
9. 	
Software Maintenance Costs (In-House Software): These costs are related to the software de-
veloped by cloud service providers. It can be allocated at an application level.
10. 	 Help Desk Support Costs: These costs are to be considered wherever the support requirements 
are needed.
11. 	 Operational Support Personnel Costs: There is a whole set of day-to-day operational costs as-
sociated with running any application. Some are general costs that apply to every application. They 
are such as staff support for everything from storage to archiving, patch management, network and 
security. Some support tasks may be particular to a given application such as database tuning and 
performance management.
12. 	 Infrastructure Software Costs: A whole set of infrastructure management software is in use in 
any installation. Generally it is considered as an associated cost.
The total of all the elements mentioned is considered as the annual data center cost. The above ele-
ments are not exhaustive. Types of costs vary from a data center to data center.
CLOUD COMPUTING AND WEB 2.0
The terms cloud computing and web 2.0 appeared at the same point of time. Both the concepts provide 
the same type of features to end-users. TIME O’ REILLY, the god father of web 2.0 defines it as “the 
network as platform, spanning all connected devices. It is said that cloud computing is about computers, 
web 2.0 is about people”. According to TIM O’ REILLY cloud computing refers specifically to the use 
of internet as computing platform and web 2.0 is an attempt to explore and explain the business rules 
of that platform. Perhaps the terms cloud computing and web 2.0 are just two different ways of looking 
at the same phenomenon. It needs to be understood that both cloud computing and web 2.0 offer very 
real benefits for all involved.
xxvii

Introduction
VIRTUAL COMPANY
In the earlier days managing a business mean renting an office space, arranging for a phone line and 
utilities, hiring staff and the other related activities. The owner / executive of a business enterprise would 
commute to the office in the morning and stay till in the evening. The owner / executive of the business 
enterprise would attend all the activities of the business during the office hours only. They would leave 
the work at the office and would clear the pending work on the next working day. Now the scenario has 
changed by internet and web base applications. Now the expensive office space is not needed. One can 
work for a company from the comfort of one’s home over the interest. Note book computer provides the 
access over the internet wherever wi fi connection is available.
The real power of cloud computing is that it lets anyone run ones company’s operations from anywhere 
(Golden, 2010). Web based applications, provide all the support one gets form highly paid employees 
and one office itself is in the cloud rather than in an expensive building. The cloud lets even the smallest 
business operate like a large enterprise over the web. It is the age of the virtual company. One should 
know taking advantage of all that cloud offers.
GOOGLE AND CLOUD COMPUTING
It may help to understand how one of the pioneers of cloud computing, Google perceives cloud comput-
ing. From Google’s perspective, there are six key properties of cloud computing.
1. 	
User Centric under Cloud Computing: Once a user gets connected to the cloud, whatever is 
stored there such as documents, messages, images, applications, becomes yours. In addition, not 
only the data is yours, but you can also share it with others. In effect, any device that accesses your 
data in the cloud also becomes yours.
2. 	
Task Centric under Cloud Computing: Instead of focusing on the application and what it can do, 
the focus is on what you need and how the applications can do it for you. Traditional application 
word processing, spread sheets, email, and so on is becoming less important than the documents 
they create.
3. 	
Computing Power under Cloud Computing: Connecting hundreds or thousands of computers 
together in a cloud creates a wealth of computing power impossible with a single desktop personal 
computer.
4. 	
Data Access under Cloud Computing: Data is stored in the cloud; users can instantly retrieve 
more information from multiple repositories. Access is not restricted to a single source of data, as 
you are with a desktop personal computer.
5. 	
Intelligent Access under Cloud Computing: With all the various data stored on the computers in 
a cloud, data mining and analysis are necessary to access that information in an intelligent manner.
6. 	
Programming under Cloud Computing: Many of the tasks necessary with cloud computing 
must be automated for example to protect the integrity of the data; information stored on a single 
computer in the cloud must be replicated on other computers in the cloud. If that one computer 
goes offline, the cloud’s programming automatically redistributes that computer’s data to a new 
computer in the cloud.
xxviii

Introduction
BRIEF HISTORY OF CLOUD COMPUTING
Generally every new concept evolves from the combination of two or more existing concepts and cloud 
computing is not an exception to this.
1. 	
Peer-to-Peer Computing: Under the client server technology all communications between comput-
ers has to go through the server first. The obvious need to connect one computer to another without 
hitting the server led to the development of peer-to-peer (P2P) computing. P2P computing defines 
a network architecture in which each computer has equivalent capabilities and responsibilities. 
This is in contrast to the traditional client /server architecture. In which one and more computers 
are dedicated to serving the others.
2. 	
Distributed Computing: One of the most important subsets of the P2P model is that of distributed 
computing, while idle personal computers across a network or across the internet are tapped to 
provide computing power for large professor intensive projects.
3. 	
Collaborative Computing: Working as a group from the early days of client /server computing 
through the evolution of P2P, there has been a desire for multiple users to work simultaneously 
on the same computer based project. This type of collaborative computing is the driving force 
behind cloud computing. Early group collaboration systems ranged from relatively simple (Lotus 
notes and Microsoft next meeting) to extremely complex (the building –Block architecture of the 
groove network system). Most were targeted at large corporations and limited to operation over 
the companies private networks.
THE GROWTH OF THE INTERNET
There has been no need to limit group collaboration as a single enterprises network environment. It is 
interesting to note that Google which had a collection of servers that it used to power its massive search 
engine which made them to think using the same computing power for web based applications. This 
process has provided a scope for a new level internet based group collaboration.
NETWORK IS THE COMPUTER
Sun Micro systems slogan is “The Network is the Computer”. This slogan is good to describe how cloud 
computing works. In essence network of computers are to serve data and applications to users over the 
internet. The network exists in the “CLOUD” of IP addresses that is known as the internet, offers mas-
sive computing power and storage capability and enables wide scope for group collaboration. This is a 
simple way of explanation for working of cloud computing (Grigoriu, 2009).
xxix

Introduction
RELEVANCE OF CLOUD COMPUTING IN THE BUSINESS APPLICATIONS
Many organizations have realized the importance of cloud computing in the crucial areas for their busi-
ness (Buyya, & Sukumar, 2011). Some examples of major business areas where cloud computing plays 
an important role are given below. They are not limited to these areas
1. 	
Life Sciences: For analyzing and decoding strings or Biological and Chemical information.
2. 	
Financial Services: Developing complex financial models and facilitating for taking accurate 
decisions.
3. 	
Engineering Services: In the areas of automotive and aerospace for collaborative design and data 
intensive testing.
4. 	
Research Collaborations: Enabling analyzing data and computation for intensive research.
5. 	
Government: Collaboration among the departments and other agencies for Implementation of the 
Government polices.
LIFE SCIENCES
Life sciences sector has been witnessing much advancement in the areas of drug treatment and drug 
discovery. The analytic and applying information technology concepts relating to genomic, proteomics 
and molecules biology provide the basis for the development of a drug and its treatment. The above 
requirements need an infrastructure for managing data storage, providing access to the data. Cloud 
computing is chosen for secure data storage, secure data access, privacy and highly flexible integrating. 
Life sciences can utilize the cloud computing environment to execute sequel comparison algorithms and 
enable molecular using the collected secured data for analysis.
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS AND SERVICES
This sector has also been witnessing much dramatic advancements in the financial analysis and financial 
services. Accuracy of data and faster execution are among the most salient objectives across financial 
communities. These objectives are now achieved by real time access to the current and historical market 
data. Complex financial models in the areas of financial engineering and financial derivatives are required 
to be developed for global financial market. Cloud computing is made use of for these models. Cloud 
computing provides an opportunity to create Global Virtual Financial organizations. Global Virtual 
Financial Organizations Facilitate the experts in the Financial sector to extend their services.
RESEARCH COLLABORATION
Research oriented organizations and universities are involved in advanced research in their respective 
areas. Global virtual research organizations are involved in research collaborative activities. They need 
volumes of data, tremendous amounts of storage space and thousands of computing processors. The 
xxx

Introduction
cloud computing concept provides mechanisms for resource sharing by Global virtual research organi-
zations. These organizations are constituted to resolve scientific research problem with a wide range of 
participants from the different parts of the world.
GOVERNMENT
Generally the data in the information systems in the Government Departments is largely unutilized 
by the respective departments. It is because most of the data is in standalone systems in the respective 
departments. E-Governance followed by many governments departments is in isolation and scattered 
pattern. This procedure lacks integration towards e-governance. It is easier to implement e-governance 
application at one location under cloud computing based architecture compared to similar application 
is being implemented by multiple locations. Migration to new technology is relatively easier and faster 
in the cloud based architecture (Krikos, 2010).
BASIS FOR CHOOSING CLOUD
One of the most important considerations in deciding which services should be placed on a cloud is cost. 
Critical applications that can affect an organization’s mission should not be placed on the cloud. Another 
point to be remembered is that applications should be designed in such a way that they can be moved 
from one cloud provider to another. It helps to avoid being locked to a particular vendor. In addition, 
some laws and regulations require that critical data be kept on organization’s site and under its control.
BASIC DESIGN PRINCIPLES FOR CLOUD SECURITY
Earlier days computer software had not been written with security in mind. Now security has become a 
primary objective (Krutz, & Vines Dean, 2010). It is because of malicious attacks against information 
systems. A completely secure system will exhibit poor performance characteristics or might not function 
at all. It is suggested that the following areas need to be given special attention (Mather, Kumaraswamy, 
& Latif, 2010).
1. 	
Handling Data: Some data is more sensitive and requires special handling.
2. 	
Code Practices: Care must be taken not to expose too much information to hackers.
3. 	
Language Options: Strengths and weakness of the computer language used should be analyzed.
4. 	
Input Validation: Content data entered by a user should never have direct access to a command.
5. 	
Physical Security of the System: Physical access to the cloud servers should be restricted.
GRID AND CLOUD COMPUTING
It is interesting to note that the terms used in grid and cloud computing are similar. However the early 
ideas associated with these terms had a slightly different angle from today’s perspective. It is apt to quote 
xxxi

Introduction
the “TECHNICAL DEFINITION OF THE GRID” from IBM- GRID is the ability, using a set of open 
standards and protocols, to gain access to applications and data, processing power, storage capacity, and 
a vast array of other computing resources over the internet. A grid is a type of parallel and distributed 
system that enables the sharing, selection, and aggression of resources distributed across “MULTIPLE” 
administrative domains based on their (Resources) availability, capacity, performance, cost, and users 
quality of service requirements.
Earlier grid vendors used to mention four types of grids. They are Departmental grids, Enterprise 
grids, Partner grids and Open grids (Plaszezak, & Wellner, 2006).
Departmental Grids
Departmental grids are installations that are allocated to one institution and usually serve one purpose. 
They are behind corporate firewall and therefore have minimal security requirements. Departmental 
grids are usually owned exclusively by one internal user group who work together closely on a project, 
set of related projects or business process. This is basically for resource sharing among the departments 
in an enterprise.
Enterprise Grids
Enterprise grid systems are owned by one organizational entity. They are used for many purposes. Enter-
prises grids stay behind the corporate firewall. External access is restricted. It is also restricted to one way 
communication. Resources themselves are never being moved out of the firewall. Enterprises grids are 
often deployed by enterprises who want to pool the resources previously scattered among departments.
Partner Grids
Partner grids are installations that go beyond the corporate firewall. They allow sharing of resources by 
several organizations. Partner grids often have peer-to-peer architectures. Partner grids are mainly for 
collaborating the number of participants from several enterprises.
Open Grids
It was anticipated that open grids or global grids would emerge in the grid scenario. Organizations us-
ing proprietary communication channels felt open grids would hamper the inter operability with their 
partners. Partner grids by nature would involve several stake holders; it might be difficult to force all of 
them into a single proprietary solution. The appearance of web hosting and the virtual CPU provisioning 
service in the market has been considered as equal to global grids or open grids.
CLOUD COMPUTING
The advancements in the area of internet, contributed to cloud computing, which has over taken global 
grid computing in the process. Comparison may be made in respect of certain terms used in the grid and 
cloud computing concepts. Partner grids can be considered as equal to community cloud. Enterprise grid 
xxxii

Introduction
is similar to private cloud. Open grid or global grid can be said to be equal to public cloud. Departmental 
grid and community cloud can be termed as the same. Grid computing also like cloud computing has 
been applied in the sectors such as life Sciences, Finance, Engineering, and Research.
PERVASIVE COMPUTING AND CLOUD COMPUTING
Pervasive computing (Burkhardt, Henn, Hepper, Rintdorff, & Schack, 2005) is a new dimension of personal 
computing that integrates mobile communication, ubiquitous embedded computer systems, consumer 
electronics and the power of the internet. Micro electronics technology offers small, powerful devices 
and displays with low energy consumption. Digital communication technology provides higher band 
width, higher data transfer rates at lower cost and worldwide roaming. Cloud computing enables delivery 
of business models for information technology services over the internet. Cloud computing provides an 
access to the data from any part of the world. Pervasive devices facilitate an access to cloud computing.
CONCLUSION
Many new concepts have been emerging in information and communication technology discipline. Close 
analysis of these concepts indicate many of these concepts are the extension of the existing concepts. 
Every new concept has an advantage over the previous concept. Sometimes two or more concepts or 
technologies are combined to evolve a new concept. Cloud computing is one among them. It is said that 
cloud computing has contributed to the success of globalization policy followed by many countries. One 
more interesting aspect of the cloud to computing is the emergence of global virtual enterprises. Further 
these enterprises are changing business landscape across the borders of the countries.
N. Raghavendra Rao 
FINAIT Consultancy Services, India
REFERENCES
Burkhardt, J., Henn, H., Hepper, S., Rintdorff, K., & Schack, T. (2005). Pervasive Computing New Delhi: 
Pearson Education. Singapore: Private Limited.
Buyya, R., & Sukumar, K. (2011, May). Platforms for Building and Deploying Applications for Cloud 
Computing. CSI Communications Journal, 35(2), 6–11.
Golden, B. (June 2010). How Cloud Computing Can Transform Business. Boston, MA, USA: Harvard 
Business Review
Grigoriu, A. (2009). The Cloud Enterprise. Wokingham: BP Trends Publications United Kingdom.
Hagel, J., & Brown, J. S. (2010). Cloud Computing’s Stormy Future. Boston: Harvard Business Review 
M A USA.
xxxiii

Introduction
Hassan, M. Z. (2011, May). Cloud Networking. CSI Communications Journal, 35(2), 20–21.
Hurwitz J., Kaufman R., Bloor M, & Halper F. (2010). Cloud Computing for Dummies. New Delhi: 
Willey India Private Limited.
Jennings R. (2010). Cloud Computing with the Windows Azure Platform. New Delhi: Wiley India Private 
Limited.
Joseph, J., & Fellenstein, F. (2004). Grid Computing New Delhi: Pearson Education. Singapore: Private 
Limited.
Krikos A (2010). Disruptive Technology Business Models in Cloud Computing. Cambridge: MIT USA.
Krutz R. L., & Vines R. D. (2010). Cloud Security. New Delhi: Willey India Private Limited.
Linthicum, D. S. (2010). Cloud Computing and SOA Convergence in your Enterprise New Delhi: Dorling 
Kindersley. India: Private Limited.
Mather, T., Kumaraswamy, S., & Latif, S. (2010). Cloud Security and Privacy. Mumbai: Shroff Publish-
ers and Distributors Private Limited.
Miller, M. (2009). Under Standing Cloud Computing; Cloud Computing. New Delhi: Dorling Kinder-
sley. India: Private Limited.
Plaszczak, P., & Wellner, R. Jr. (2006). Grid Computing. New Delhi: Elesvier.
Reese, G. (2010). Cloud Application Architectures. Mumbai: Shroff Publishers and Distributors Private 
Limited.
Rhoton, J. (2010). Cloud Computing Explained: Implementation Hand Book for Enterprises London. 
Recursive Press.
Roychoudhuri, D., Mohapatra, B., & Yadav, M. (2014, February). Rationalize Your Cloud Model Using 
Open Source Stack. CSI Communications Journal, 37(11), 11–14.
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Architecture: In information processing, the design approach taken in developing a program or system.
Batch Processing: A non interactive process that runs in queue. Early computers were capable of 
only batch processing.
Distributed Processing: Spreading the work of an information processing application among several 
computers.
Grid Computing: A step beyond distributed processing, involving large number of network comput-
ers that are harnessed to solve common problem.
Infrastructure: The fundamental systems necessary for the ordinary operation of an information 
technology department.
xxxiv

Introduction
Internet: A huge computer network linking almost all the computers in the world and enabling them 
to communicate via standard protocols (TCP/IP) and data formats.
Interoperability: The ability of a product to interface with many other products; usually used in the 
context of software.
P2P: Peer to Peer networking system in which nodes in a network exchange data directly instead of 
going through a central server.
Protocol: A set of rules that computers use to establish and maintain communication among themselves.
Provisioning: Making resources available to users and software.
xxxv

Section 1
Introduction and Frame Work

1
Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  1
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-8339-6.ch001
Design Challenges of 
Cloud Computing
ABSTRACT
Cloud computing has recently emerged as a new paradigm of computing for hosting and delivering 
services over the Internet. It replaces computing as a personal commodity by computing as a public 
utility. It is attractive solution to business owners as it eliminates the requirement for users to plan ahead 
for provisioning, and allows enterprises to start from the small and increase resources only when there 
is a rise in service demand. However, despite the significant benefits, these technologies present many 
challenges including lack of security. The chapter presents an advanced survey focusing on cloud com-
puting concept. It highlights its key concepts and presents a physical architecture of this environment. 
Finally, the chapter defines virtualization technology as a factor for cloud computing surge and discuses 
security issues that damage these systems. The aim of this chapter is to provide a better understanding 
of the design challenges of cloud computing.
INTRODUCTION
With the advent of information technologies, 
society relies heavily upon software. In fact, 
software is found in automobiles, airplanes, 
chemical factories, power stations and numerous 
other systems in which it plays a critical role. 
Software or business applications need comput-
ing resources and hence important investment in 
IT infrastructure. The infrastructure is often very 
costly ranging from a small number of servers 
to an entire data center. However, provisioning 
and managing computing resources is so costly. 
There are three major costs: (1) capital costs, i.e., 
the cost of buying the hardware, software, and 
installation costs, (2) maintenance and operation 
costs, i.e., the cost of personnel to maintain the 
infrastructure as well as cost of power, cooling, 
and sever storage, and (3) additional costs, for 
example, to buy extra hardware and software to 
Mouna Jouini
Institut Supérieur de Gestion, Tunisia
Latifa Ben Arfa Rabai
Institut Supérieur de Gestion, Tunisia

2
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
provide high availability, reliability, scalability, 
and security (Minhas, 2013). This creates a high 
barrier in adopting software.
In contrast to traditional information technol-
ogy (IT), Cloud computing, as a new technol-
ogy, aims to solve many problems like problems 
outlined above. In fact, it provides computing 
resources at a low cost while at the same time 
freeing users from the tedious and often complex 
tasks of maintaining and provisioning resources 
(Minhas, 2013). It offers on-demand resource 
provisioning. It provides three types of services: 
Software as a Service (SaaS), Infrastructure as a 
Service (IaaS) and Platform as a Service (PaaS) 
which promise potential cost savings for businesses 
by offering remote, scalable computing resources. 
However these services benefits, migrating to a 
cloud computing infrastructure poses several se-
curity risks to an organization’s data and customer 
applications (Buecker et al., 2009 ; Cloud Security 
Alliance, 2009; Hanna, 2009; Heiser & Nicolett, 
2008; Subashini & Kavitha, 2010; Wooley, 2011). 
As an initiative to address such risks, we outline 
security threats in this environment and identify 
customer’s needs on security context.
The purpose of this chapter is to give a state of 
the art to cloud computing technologies. In fact, 
we present, firstly, the basic concepts related to 
this term. Then, we introduce the cloud comput-
ing environment. Finally, we identify threats and 
security attributes occurred in this environment.
The remainder of this chapter is organized as 
follows:
1. 	
In the first part we introduce and define 
cloud computing environments, its history 
and its essentials characteristics.
2. 	
In the second part, we show motivating fac-
tors in cloud computing adoption
3. 	
In the third part, we present essential char-
acteristics of these systems and discus the 
benefits and drawbacks of public cloud 
services.
4. 	
In the fourth part, we provide an overview 
of cloud computing environment. We intro-
duce a detailed architecture, stakeholder’s 
categories and services offered by cloud 
computing systems.
5. 	
In the fifth part, we present an overview of 
virtualization technology.
6. 	
In the sixth part, we study security issues on 
cloud computing systems as well as it was 
cited as major risk in these systems.
1. HISTORY
In the early days of computing, computer resources 
were a centralized organizational asset, that 
represents a massive investment of money, time 
and labor; only large organizations could afford 
to acquire, maintain and operate such infrastruc-
tures. With the advent of personal computers in 
the 1980s, the prevailing computing paradigm 
changed drastically: first, the low cost of personal 
computers opened a worldwide market of people 
and organizations large and small; second, this 
situation fostered, in turn, a large pool of talent 
that was able to develop and distribute PC-based 
applications, at the same time as it was creating 
a market for such applications; third, the central-
ized paradigm of mainframe-based computing at 
large organizations was progressively replaced by 
local area networks, linking servers and terminal 
computers within an organization; fourth, the 
pervasiveness of the internet transformed the 
global mass of personal computers into a massive 
network of nodes, sharing information, services, 
software, and. . . malware of all kinds (Ben Arfa 
Rabai et al., 2013).
Even though personal computers are fairly 
dependable in general, and require relatively little 
expertise to maintain and operate, under this com-
puting paradigm end-users are still responsible for 
operating a complex machine about which they 
understand very little. Also, each individual com-

3
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
puter is used a minimal fraction of the time, and 
typically deploys only a very small fraction of its 
wide range of software and hardware capabilities 
(Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 2013).
The idea of providing a centralized and distrib-
uted computing service dates back to the 1960s, 
when computing services were provided over a net-
work using mainframe time-sharing technology. In 
1966, Canadian engineer Douglass Parkhill pub-
lished his book “The Challenge of the Computer 
Utility” (Papkhill, 1966), in which he describes 
the idea of computing as a public utility with a 
centralized computing facility to which many 
remote users connect over network. Mainframes 
allow multiple users to share both the physical 
access to the computer from multiple terminals as 
well as to share the CPU time. Mainframes allow 
an effective use of computing resources with an ac-
ceptable performance. However, mainframes were 
difficult to scale and provision up-front because 
of the high hardware costs. Indeed, users didn’t 
have control over the performance of mainframe 
applications because it depended on how many 
users utilized the mainframe at a given moment. 
Thus, the introduction of personal computers that 
provokes a new challenge of data sharing.
With the emerging of the internet, it was 
introduced the client-server architecture which 
transformed into more complex two-tier, three-
tier, and four-tier architectures. As a result, the IT 
infrastructure becomes very costly and difficult 
to manage.
Cloud computing become known, in 2006, by 
more people after two events. First was Google 
CEO Eric Schmidt’s announcement, in 2006, of a 
new business model “Cloud Computing”, which 
enables access to remotely hosted data and com-
putation resources from anywhere. In the same 
year, Amazon.com announced one of the most 
important Cloud Computing services by now: 
the Elastic Cloud Computing (EC2) as part of 
the Amazon Web Services (AWS) (Han, 2009).
2. DEFINITIONS
Cloud Computing is an emerging paradigm of 
computing that replaces computing as a personal 
service by computing as a public utility. Cloud 
services are often compared in their nature to 
utility services such as gas or electricity. In fact, 
cloud computing services as a public utility as 
the use of electricity (instead of building genera-
tors) and also as the use of telecommunications 
service call (instead of building and working our 
own cell tower)
Cloud computing systems provide computing 
resources (such as processor compute time and 
data storage) on demand via a service provider 
rather than maintaining your own hardware and 
software environment. The resources are dynami-
cally provisioned over the internet and invoices 
its subscribers based on the use of computing 
resources.
Cloud computing is a subscription-based 
service where you can obtain networked storage 
space and computer resources. We can consider, 
for instance, your experience with email to clarify 
the work of this system. Your email client, if it 
is Yahoo!, Gmail, Hotmail, and so on, takes care 
of housing all of the hardware and software nec-
essary to support your personal email account. 
When you want to access your email you open 
your web browser, go to the email client, and log 
in. Thus, the most important part of the equation 
is having internet access. So, your email is not 
housed on your physical computer and you access 
to it through an internet connection and you can 
access it anywhere. If you are on a trip, at work, or 
down the street getting coffee, you can check your 
email as long as you have access to the internet. 
Finally, as we note, that your email is different 
than software installed on your computer. An email 
client is similar to how cloud computing works. 
Except instead of accessing just your email, you 
can choose what information you have access to 
within the cloud (Foster et al., 2008).

4
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
There are many definitions for Cloud comput-
ing (Vaquero et al., 2009). For example, Wong 
in (Wong, 2009) views Cloud computing as an 
“evolution of the old client/server paradigm, a 
transformation prompted by the ubiquitous pres-
ence of the Internet and the availability of high 
bandwidth connections”. According to Foster et 
al. in (Foster et al., 2008), Cloud computing is “A 
large-scale distributed computing paradigm that 
is driven by economies of scale, in which a pool 
of abstracted, virtualized, dynamically-scalable, 
managed computing power, storage, platforms, 
and services are delivered on demand to exter-
nal customers over the internet.” The National 
Institute of Standards and Technology defines 
cloud computing as “a model grants convenient, 
on-demand network access to a shared pool of 
configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, 
servers, storage, applications, and services) that 
can be rapidly provisioned and released with 
minimal management effort or service provider 
interaction” (Mell & Grance, 2009). Moreover, 
Jensen et al, in (Vaquero et al., 2009), present in 
their paper the most available cloud computing 
definitions, gathered from experts, in order to 
get an integrative definition. They concluded 
that CC “is associated with a new paradigm for 
the provision of computing infrastructure”. In 
(Subashini & Kavitha, 2010), Cloud computing 
was considered as a way to increase the capacity 
or add capabilities dynamically without investing 
in new infrastructure, training new personnel, or 
licensing new software. It extends Information 
Technology’s (IT) existing capabilities.
Cloud computing is the result of Information 
and Communication Technology (ICT) evolution. 
In fact, it is based on several technologies like 
virtualization, distributed systems, web service 
service-oriented architecture, service flows and 
workflows and web 2.0. It conceals, as well, the 
complexity of the infrastructure (buying install-
ing servers, storage, networking, and related 
infrastructure) from users when they used cloud 
computing services because users may allocate 
on demand the infrastructure needed. It does ev-
erything to deploy tools that can scale to serve as 
many users as desired. Providers allow software 
installation and maintenance. In addition to that, 
they centralize control over consumers who can 
access the service anytime, anywhere, can share 
data and collaborate more easily and keep their 
data stored safely in the infrastructure.
Cloud services, as indicated in figure 1, would 
be available to individuals and organizations, 
large and small, and would operate on the same 
pattern as other public utilities (Ben Arfa Rabai 
et al., 2013), namely:
•	
Subscribers sign up for service from a ser-
vice provider, on a contractual basis.
•	
The service provider delivers services of 
data processing, data access and data stor-
age to subscribers.
•	
The service provider offers warranties on 
the quality of services delivered.
•	
Subscribers are charged according to the 
services they use.
Cloud computing plays an important role 
in many recent critical applications, such as 
astronomy, weather forecasting, and financial 
applications. Since these applications process 
large amounts of data, cloud computing is one 
promising solution to handle such data. In fact, 
it provides the needed storage and processing 
equipments though clouds. It also enables users 
that do not have the technical expertise to support 
their own infrastructure to get access to comput-
ing on request.
3. CLOUD COMPUTING 
MOTIVATING FACTORS
A survey conducted by the Records in the Cloud 
(RiC) project conducted in April 2013 to 353 
(Duranti, 2013) responses concluded that 57% of 
respondents are currently using cloud computing, 

5
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
and the majority has adopted cloud computing in 
the last three years. Among potential users, 38% 
are currently considering cloud services.
The survey reveals indeed that both current 
and potential users are motivated by the potential 
to reduce costs by adopting cloud computing, 
but some respondents’ comments reveal that this 
benefit may not be easy to obtain. Approximately 
(54%) of current users and (58%) potential users 
selected “reduce cost” as their primary motivation 
for adopting cloud computing.
The cloud computing adoption is increased 
last years. In fact, Cloud computing has particular 
characteristics that distinguish it from classical 
resource and service provisioning environments 
(Jangra, A. & Bala, R. 2011):
•	
Infinitely (more or less) scalable.
•	
Cost saving/less capital expenditure.
•	
Higher resource utilization.
•	
Business agility.
•	
Disaster recovery and Back up.
We can conclude hence that cost saving fac-
tor presents the main raison that encourages the 
various organizations for the adopting the cloud 
computing.
Moreover, traditional application integration 
technologies are performed in a rigid and slow 
process that usually takes a long time to build 
and deploy, requiring professional developers 
and domain experts. They are server-centric and 
thus do not fully utilize the computing power and 
storage capability of client systems. However, 
Cloud computing is a new infrastructure deploy-
ment environment that delivers on the promise of 
supporting on-demand services like computation, 
software and data access in a flexible manner 
by scheduling bandwidth, storage and compute 
resources on the fly without required end-user 
knowledge of physical location and system con-
figuration that delivers the service.
Figure 1. Structure of cloud computing environments

6
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
4. KEY CHARACTERISTICS 
OF CLOUD COMPUTING
The National Institute of Standards and Technol-
ogy (NIST) defines cloud computing by seven 
essential characteristics (Mell & Grance, 2009; 
Mell & Grance, 2011; Furht & Escalante, 2010):
•	
Multi-Tenancy: In a cloud environment, 
services owned by multiple providers are 
co-located in a single data center. The per-
formance and management issues of these 
services are shared among service provid-
ers and the infrastructure provider. The 
layered architecture of cloud computing 
provides a natural division of responsibili-
ties: the owner of each layer only needs to 
focus on the specific objectives associated 
with this layer.
•	
Scalability 
and 
On-Demand 
Self-
Service: It provides resources and ser-
vices for users on request without requir-
ing human interaction with each service’s 
provider.
•	
Broad Network Access: The services pro-
vided by the cloud are available over the 
network and accessed through standard 
mechanisms that promote use by hetero-
geneous thin client platforms (like mobile 
phones, laptops, and PDAs).
•	
Resource Pooling: It provides resources 
pooled to serve multiple clients, with dif-
ferent physical and virtual resources dy-
namically assigned and reassigned accord-
ing to consumer demand. The customer 
generally has no control or knowledge over 
the exact location of the provided resourc-
es. Examples of resources include storage, 
processing, memory, network bandwidth, 
and virtual machines.
•	
Rapid Elasticity: Cloud computing sys-
tems are autonomous systems managed 
transparently to users. However, software 
and data inside clouds can be rapidly and 
elastically reconfigured and consolidated 
to a simple platform depending on user’s 
needs. The capabilities available for rent 
are infinite and can be purchased in any 
quantity at any time.
•	
Pay per Use: Customers pay for services 
and capacity as they need them. In fact, 
like your electric bill, your cloud comput-
ing bill can be unexpectedly large if you 
don’t keep a close watch on the resources 
your solutions are utilizing.
•	
Measured Service: Cloud computing re-
source usage can be measured, controlled, 
and reported providing transparency for 
both the provider and consumer of the uti-
lized service. Cloud computing services 
use a metering capability which enables to 
control and optimize resource use.
There are four main factors contributing to the 
surge and interests in Cloud Computing (Mell & 
Grance, 2009; Mell & Grance, 2011):
•	
The rapid decrease in hardware cost versus 
the increase in computing power.
•	
The storage capacity and the advent 
of multi-core architecture and modern 
supercomputers.
•	
The exponentially growing data size in sci-
entific instrumentation and Internet pub-
lishing and archiving.
•	
The wide spread adoption of Services 
Computing and Web 2.0 applications.
Therefore, we can notice that the Cloud Com-
puting system has the main following advantages 
(Mell & Grance, 2009; Mell & Grance, 2011; 
Vaquero et al,. 2009 ; Wang et al,. 2008; Ritting-
house & Ransome, 2010):
•	
Lower Cost: Pay as you go, no hardware 
investments or software licenses
•	
More Performance: Processing time on 
demand

7
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
•	
More Efficiency: Higher usage rates of 
servers
•	
Less Maintenance: Someone else man-
ages the servers and core software
•	
Unlimited Storage Capacity: Virtually 
unlimited computing power, bounded only 
by provider assets rather than by individual 
user assets
•	
Convenience: No need for users to be 
computer-savvy, no need for tech support
•	
Dependability: Provided by highly trained 
provider staff
•	
Service Quality: Virtually unlimited data 
storage capacity, protected against damage 
and loss.
However, the most cited possible disadvantages 
of cloud computing are:
•	
Dependency on Internet Connectivity: 
Requires a constant connection
•	
Loss of Control: The problem of someone 
else hosting hardware, software and data, 
which results in security concerns
•	
Unpredictable Cost: Pay as you go means 
that the cost of computing will be different 
every month.
5. CLOUD COMPUTING 
ENVIRONMENT
We present, in this section, architectural elements 
that form the basis for cloud computing system. 
Then, we try to distinguish different cloud com-
puting actors. Finally we present services offers 
by this technology.
5.1 Cloud Computing Architecture
The Cloud Computing Architecture of a cloud 
computing system is the structure of the system 
which includes cloud resources, services, middle-
ware, software components and the relationships 
between them. Figure 2 summarizes the proposed 
cloud computing architecture (Ben Arfa Rabai et 
al., 2013; Jouini et al 2012).
Cloud computing architecture can be divided 
into three parts:
•	
Core foundation capabilities
•	
Cloud services
•	
User tools
5.1.1 Core Foundation Capabilities
The core foundation capabilities layer provides 
basic building blocks to architect and enable the 
above layers. It includes:
•	
Data Center Facilities: This level pro-
vides information concerning the provid-
er’s data centers like location of data (host-
ing place), type network used to accede 
to it, the firewall used… This is primarily 
focused on helping users identify common 
data center characteristics that could be 
damaging services continuity, as well as 
characteristics.
•	
Security and Data Privacy: This level 
aims to identify security, privacy and other 
organizational requirements for cloud ser-
vices to meet as a criterion for selecting a 
cloud provider. It covers security control 
techniques or recommendations to provide 
security and privacy in data and secure 
cloud services. It gives many procedures, 
policies and solutions in privacy and secu-
rity requirements (authentification and au-
thorization, privacy, certification and com-
pliance, auditing and accounting) that are 
believed to have long-term significance for 
cloud computing (Cloud Security Alliance, 
2009; ENISA, 2010).
•	
Service Management and Provisioning: 
Cloud monitoring and cloud service man-
agement tools allow cloud providers to 
ensure optimal performance, continuity 

8
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
and efficiency in virtualized, on-demand 
environments. These tools, software that 
manages and monitors networks, systems 
and applications, enable cloud providers 
not just to guarantee performance, but also 
to better control provisioning of resources. 
For example, cloud monitoring tools en-
able cloud providers to track the perfor-
mance, continuity and security of all of the 
components that support service delivery: 
the hardware, software and services in the 
data center and throughout the network 
infrastructure.
5.1.2 Cloud Services
Cloud Computing services are formed by three 
sub layers. We will explain more these layers in 
the following section.
•	
Infrastructure as a Service layer (IaaS): 
It is also known as the virtualization layer. 
It offers a pool of storage and computing 
resources as a service to its contracted 
customers on demand. This computing 
infrastructure is formed for instances by 
servers, CPUs, memories, software, and 
network equipment.
•	
Platform as a Service (PaaS): Provides a 
development and support environment for 
application development through the use 
of support tools. The purpose of the plat-
form layer is to minimize the burden of de-
ploying applications directly into VM con-
tainers. For example, Google App Engine 
operates at the platform layer to provide 
API support for implementing storage, da-
tabase and business logic of typical web 
applications.
•	
Software as a Service (SaaS): Is where 
application services are delivered over the 
Figure 2. Cloud computing services and architecture (Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 2013)

9
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
network on a subscription and on-demand 
basis. SaaS or PaaS services are often de-
veloped and provided by a third party dis-
tinct from the IaaS provider.
Compared to traditional service hosting en-
vironments such as dedicated server farms, the 
architecture of cloud computing is more modular. 
Each layer is coupled with the layers above and 
below, allowing each layer to evolve separately. 
The architectural modularity allows cloud comput-
ing systems to support a wide range of application 
requirements while reducing management and 
maintenance overheads.
5.1.3 User Tools
Cloud computing user tools helps users to ac-
complish their needs. We cite as tool application 
integration and reporting and analyzing tools.
Cloud management interfaces (for example, 
the Amazon admin console) provide functions 
allowing users to manage a cloud lifecycle. For 
instance, users can add new components to the 
cloud such as servers, storage, databases, caches, 
and so on. Users can use the same interface to 
monitor the health of the cloud and perform many 
other operations.
As examples of users tools, we can cite:
Jboss Enterprise Middleware
JBoss Enterprise Middleware is the leading 
enterprise-class open source software used to 
build, deploy, integrate, orchestrate, and present 
web applications and services in a service oriented 
architecture (SOA). These software products are 
used by end-users to create applications, integrate 
applications, data and devices, and automate busi-
ness processes.
These solutions offer customers stability and 
open source innovation. Using JBoss Enterprise 
Middleware, customers can:
•	
Decrease development complexity
•	
Improve inadequate end-user experience
•	
Resolve business process friction
•	
Enable unparalleled flexibility
•	
Significantly lower total cost of ownership
Eucalyptus Entreprise Edition
Eucalyptus Enterprise Edition (Eucalyptus EE) 
enables customers to implement on-premise cloud 
computing with Eucalyptus, the most popular open 
source private cloud software, and vSphere, VM-
ware’s industry-leading virtualization platform. 
Eucalyptus EE support is the only on-premise 
cloud computing solution available today for 
customers, providing a robust, affordable cloud 
computing solution that leverages their investment 
in VMware technologies.
Eucalyptus Enterprise Edition is built on Eu-
calyptus. Eucalyptus is the acronym for Elastic 
Utility Computing Architecture for Linking Your 
Programs To Useful Systems. Eucalyptus enables 
pooling compute, storage, and network resources 
that can be dynamically scaled up or down as ap-
plication workloads change. Eucalyptus Systems 
announced a formal agreement with AWS in March 
2012 to maintain compatibility. It is an open source 
software infrastructure for implementing on-
premise cloud computing using an organization’s 
own information technology (IT) infrastructure, 
without modification, special-purpose hardware 
or reconfiguration. Eucalyptus turns data center 
resources such as machines, networks, and stor-
age systems into a cloud that is controlled and 
customized by local IT. Eucalyptus is the only 
cloud architecture to support the same application 
programming interfaces (APIs) as public clouds, 
and today Eucalyptus is fully compatible with the 
Amazon Web Service cloud infrastructure.
5.2 Stakeholder’s Categories
Cloud providers and consumers are the two main 
entities in CC system (Huth & Cebula, 2011). 

10
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
Cloud providers can be devided into three classes 
of stakeholders, namely: the service provider, the 
corporate or organizational subscribers, govern-
ment subscriberd and the individual subscribers:
•	
The Service Provider: Is an external enter-
prise or organization that offers cloud ser-
vices to its customers. The providers host 
and manage the underlying infrastructure 
and offer different services (SaaS, PaaS, 
IaaS) to the consumers, the service brokers 
or resellers. Cloud brokers and resellers 
plays the same role as “Cloud providers” in 
certain contexts. We can cite as exemples 
of cloud providers Amazon, Google, IBM, 
Microsoft and Sun Microsystems, that es-
tablish new data centers for hosting cloud 
computing applications in various loca-
tions around the world in order to provide 
redundancy and ensure reliability in case 
of site failures.
•	
The 
Corporate 
or 
Organizational 
Subscribers: Are multiple organizations 
(governments …) that access the infra-
structure based on similar needs. The cloud 
consumers access to different type of ser-
vices (SaaS, PaaS, IaaS) through Internet-
based interfaces (like a browser)
•	
The Individual Subscribers: Are persons 
that are customers of a cloud. The cloud 
consumers access to different type of ser-
vices (SaaS, PaaS, IaaS) through Internet-
based interfaces (like a browser).
5.3 Cloud Computing Services
Cloud computing providers can offer services at 
different layers of the resource stack (see figure 
3), simulating the functions performed by appli-
cations, operating systems, or physical hardware. 
The most common approach (Mell & Grance, 
2009 ; Mell & Grance, 2011 ; Vaquero et al,. 
2009) defines cloud computing services as three 
layers of services which provide infrastructure 
resources, application platform and software as 
services to the consumer.
5.3.1 Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)
The Infrastructure as a service layer was based 
on virtualization technology and provides the 
basic computing infrastructure of servers, pro-
cessing, storage, networks and other fundamental 
computing resources where the consumer is able 
to deploy and run arbitrary software, which can 
include operating systems and applications. The 
consumer does not manage or control the under-
lying cloud infrastructure but has control over 
operating systems, storage, deployed applications 
and possibly limited control of select networking 
components (Mell & Grance, 2009).
The main purpose of IaaS is to avoid purchas-
ing, housing and managing the basic hardware and 
software infrastructure components, and instead 
obtain those resources as virtualized objects con-
trollable via a service interface (which reduces 
hardware costs).
Customers are allocated computing resources 
in order to run virtual machines consisting of 
operating systems and applications.
5.3.2 Platform as a Service (PaaS)
Platform as a Service adds a higher level to the 
cloud infrastructure by providing a platform upon 
which applications can be written or deployed. 
These service providers offer, in this layer, ap-
plication programming interfaces (APIs) that 
enable developers to exploit functionality over 
the Internet rather than delivering complete ap-
plications. It delivers development environments 
to programmers, analysts and software engineers 
as a service. PaaS gives end users control over 
application design, but does not give them control 
over the physical infrastructure (Rittinghouse & 
Ransome, 2010).
The main purpose of PaaS is to reduce the cost 
and complexity of buying, housing and managing 

11
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
the underlying hardware and software components 
of the platform, including any needed program and 
database development tools (Meiko et al., 2009). 
PaaS gives end users control over application 
design, but does not give them control over the 
physical infrastructure.
5.3.3 Software as a Service (SaaS)
Software as a Service provides the consumer with 
typical software applications that run over the 
cloud computing infrastructure. SaaS delivers ap-
plications through a web browser to thousands of 
customers rather than installed on their computer. 
The end user does not exercise any control over 
the design of the application, servers, networking, 
and storage infrastructure.
The main purpose of SaaS is to reduce the 
total cost of hardware and software development, 
maintenance and operations. All these services 
offer scalability and multitenancy. In addition, 
they are self-provisioning and can be deployed 
through public cloud deployment modules.
Examples of these three modes of Cloud 
Computing are shown in Table 1.
Figure 3. Cloud computing presented as a stack of service
Table 1. Examples of the three delivery services 
of cloud computing
Layer
Examples
Software as Service (SaaS)
Facebook, Gmail, 
Google Apps
Platform as Service (PaaS)
Amazon Web services, 
Windows Azure
Infrastructure as Service 
(IaaS)
Amazon EC2, Xen 
SalesForce.com

12
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
Examples
Amazon’s Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) is a 
prominent example for an IaaS offer. It offers 
the user a virtual server, with the CPU, memory, 
storage, operating system and hypervisor or 
system monitoring software included (Furht & 
Escalante, 2010).
•	
Google App Engine: Is an example for a 
Web platform as a service (PaaS) which 
enables to deploy and dynamically scale 
Python and Java based Web applications.
•	
Google Apps: Provides web-based office 
tools such as e-mail, calendar, and docu-
ment management.
•	
Rackspace Cloud: Is a cloud IaaS. It pro-
vides users with access to dynamically 
scalable computing and storage resources, 
as well as third-party cloud applications 
and tools
•	
Salesforce.com: Is a cloud SaaS. It pro-
vides a full customer relationship manage-
ment (CRM) application
•	
Zoho.com: Is a cloud SaaS. It provides a 
large suite of web-based applications and it 
is used often by organizations.
Cloud service models describe how cloud 
services are made available to clients. Figure 3 
illustrate that cloud computing service models 
have synergies between each other and be in-
terdependent, like PaaS that dependent on IaaS 
because application platforms require physical 
infrastructure. In cloud computing system, we 
focus on three main parts as shown in Figure 3: 
the front end, the back end connecting to each 
other through the Internet and the cloud services.
There are many new and emerging technologies 
which adopted by for cloud computing systems. 
One such enabling technology for cloud computing 
is virtualization. In the next section, we provide 
a brief overview of virtualization.
5.4 Cloud Computing 
Deployment Models
Cloud computing may be deployed on four types 
of cloud (Mell & Grance, 2011):
•	
Private Cloud: Cloud computing services 
are accessible only within private network. 
It operates for just one organization or one 
subscriber. It provides a full control over 
data, security, access control and quality of 
service.
•	
Community Cloud: cloud computing ser-
vices are offered to a limited number of 
organizations. It may be managed by orga-
nizations or by cloud providers.
•	
Public Cloud: cloud services are avail-
able to publicity and computing resources 
are provisioned over the internet to its sub-
scribers (any organizations can use it).
•	
Hybrid Cloud: it combines several cloud 
types (more than one) that stay unique enti-
ties but are bound together by proprietary 
technology that enables data and applica-
tion portability (like cloud bursting for 
load balancing between clouds).
NIST has also defined the cloud deployment 
models, which include public, private, hybrid, 
and community clouds as shown in figure 4. 
An example of a public cloud model is Google 
Docs, where the application and data are stored 
in Google’s data center somewhere.
6. VIRTUALIZATION TECHNOLOGIES
Cloud computing shares many aspect with several 
technologies like grid computing, virtualization, 
utility Computing, autonomic Computing:

13
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
•	
Grid Computing: It involves a network of 
computers that are utilized together to gain 
large supercomputing type computing re-
sources. Using this network of computers 
large and complex computing operations 
can be performed. In grid computing these 
networks of computers may be present in 
different locations.
•	
Utility Computing: It defines a “pay-per-
use” model for using computing services. 
In utility computing, billing model of com-
puting resources is similar to how utilities 
like electricity are traditionally billed.
•	
Autonomic 
Computing: 
Originally 
coined by IBM in 2001, it aims at building 
computing systems capable of self-man-
agement, i.e. reacting to internal and exter-
nal observations without human interven-
tion in order to overcome the management 
complexity of today’s computer systems.
After presenting a quick overview of most 
technologies adopted by cloud systems, we will 
detail virtualization technology at the rest of 
this section. In fact, cloud computing leverages 
virtualization technology to achieve the goal of 
providing computing resources as a utility.
Virtualization concept has been around in 
some form since 1960s (for example in IBM 
mainframe systems). Since then, the concept has 
matured considerably and it has been applied to 
all aspects of computing, memory, storage, pro-
cessors, software, networks, as well as services 
that IT offers (Sahoo et al., 2010).
Virtualization was defined by Vaughan-Nich-
ols in (Vaughan-Nichols, 2008) as “Technology 
that lets a single PC or server simultaneously run 
multiple operating systems or multiple sessions of 
a single OS. This lets users put numerous applica-
tions and functions on a PC or server, instead of 
having to run them on separate machines as in the 
past”. Virtualization can be defined as a technol-
ogy such that there is a software abstraction layer 
between the hardware and operating system and 
applications running on top of it. This software 
abstraction layer is called Virtual Machine Moni-
tor (VMM) or Hypervisor.
Virtualization or Machine virtualization is a 
technique that allows the resources of a physical 
machine to be shared among multiple partitions 
Figure 4. NIST cloud models

14
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
known as virtual machines (VMs). Each virtual 
machine runs an independent (possibly different) 
operating system and the associated set of ap-
plications. The hypervisor manages the physical 
resources and provides a mapping between the 
physical resources and the abstractions known as 
virtual devices (Liu et al., 2010). A virtual device 
corresponding to each physical resource, e.g., 
CPU, disk, memory, and network, is exported to 
every virtual machine. Xen (Barham et al., 2003) 
and VMware (VMware) are popular examples of 
virtual machine monitors. We provide in figure 5 
an overview of machine virtualization.
Thus, virtualization architecture provides this 
illusion through a hypervisor/VMM. The Hypervi-
sor is software layer which:
•	
Allows multiple Guest OS (Virtual 
Machines) to run simultaneously on a sin-
gle physical host.
•	
Provides hardware abstraction to the run-
ning Guest OSs and efficiently multiplexes 
underlying hardware resources.
Virtualization allows abstraction and isola-
tion of lower level functionalities and underlying 
hardware. This enables portability of higher level 
functions and sharing of the physical resources. 
Virtualization technologies rely on a hypervisor 
to provide the abstraction between the physical 
and virtual machines. The hypervisor interacts 
with the hardware and software in the physical 
world and manages the distribution of resources 
to virtual machines. So, the hypervisor provides 
everything the virtual machine requires, including 
virtual networks, memory, CPU, and virtual hard-
ware. This level manages the physical resources 
and allows sharing of their capacity among virtual 
instances of servers, which can be enabled or 
destroyed on demand.
6.1 Virtualization in the Cloud
Virtualization simplifies the process of sharing 
computer resources. Cloud computing needs to 
be able to share resources in order to improve 
efficiency and reduce costs. This makes the two 
Figure 5. Virtualization architecture (Minhas, 2013)

15
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
technologies a natural fit to work together. Vir-
tualization increases the efficiency of hardware 
utilization, while cloud adds a layer of management 
so that VMs care be created, scaled and torn down 
as required. This is why a majority of today’s cloud 
solutions are built on virtualization technology.
The behind of cloud computing high perfor-
mance is a virtualized infrastructure. Virtualiza-
tion has been in data centers for several years as 
a successful IT strategy for consolidating servers. 
Used more broadly to pool infrastructure re-
sources, virtualization can also provide the basic 
building blocks for your cloud environment to 
enhance flexibility.
IaaS is the virtualized, multitenant infrastruc-
ture that underpins your cloud and enables multiple 
applications for business groups across the enter-
prise to share. IaaS is built and delivered using a 
set of technologies that start with virtualization 
as the basic building block. A cloud management 
platform enables you to run a multitenant environ-
ment using the resources from the virtual infra-
structure and security technologies at every level.
Virtualizing storage and networks is emerging 
as a general strategy. In fact, results from a Gartner 
survey of 505 data center managers worldwide 
reports that planned or in-process virtualization 
of infrastructure workloads will increase from 
approximately 60 percent in 2012 to almost 90 
percent in 2014 (Gartner, 2013).
For example, in the IaaS Amazon’s Elastic 
Computing Cloud (EC2), the cloud provider 
manages and operates a pool of possibly tens of 
thousands of interconnected machines. Users can 
rent out as much computing power as they need 
from this pool of resources. In Amazon’s EC2, 
this is made possible by the use of virtualization. 
Users are provided access to virtual appliances 
that come in varying sizes in terms of physical 
resources allocated (e.g., CPU, memory), allowing 
users to choose a size depending on their resource 
needs. By exploiting virtualization, cloud provid-
ers are able to achieve higher resource consolida-
tion, better resource utilization, and flexibility in 
provisioning and managing computing resources 
(Minhas, 2013).
Applications, services and basic functions 
provided in a Cloud Computing system are based 
on the Virtual resources which are abstracted from 
Physical Resources, for example Ben Arfa Rabai 
et al., 2013):
•	
Virtual 
physical 
resources, 
such 
as 
V-CPUs, V-Storages, V-Networks.
•	
V-Networks can be further divided into 
V-Routers, V-Switches,
•	
V-Firewalls, VPNs, V-Interfaces, V-Links 
based on physical Router/ Switch.
Virtualization uses the hypervisor or virtual 
machine monitor which (Mell & Grance, 2009):
•	
Enables guest operating systems (OSs) to 
run in isolation of other Oss
•	
Run multiple types of Oss.
•	
Increases utilization of physical servers.
•	
Enables portability of virtual servers be-
tween physical servers.
•	
Increases security of physical host server.
One of the most important and heavily relied 
technology in cloud computing is Virtualization 
(Liu et al., 2010). The reason for using virtual-
ization is reduced cost and better monitoring. 
Virtualization allows (Menken & Blokdijk, 2009; 
Sahoo et al., 2010):
•	
Easier Manageability: Whole network 
can be monitored and managed form a 
single point. Administrators manage and 
monitor the whole group of computers in 
a network from a single physical computer.
•	
Availability: One can keep the virtualized 
instances running even if the node needs 
to be shut down for maintenance purposes. 
This can be done by migrating the virtual-

16
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
ized instances to other machines and later 
migrating them back to the computer with-
out closing the instance.
•	
Scalability: Administrator can easily add 
a new node with basic installation to con-
tribute with the existing virtual machines 
to provide the services. So as the company 
expands the cluster will also expand.
•	
Increased Security: The information and 
applications can be put in different virtual 
machines (separate entities) on a single 
physical machine. If a virus comes in it 
will not affect the whole computer because 
it will reside only in the one VM and other 
VMs will not be affected thus delivering 
the services.
•	
Reduced Costs: Costs are reduced in the 
sense that less hardware, less space and 
less staffing requirements. Network costs 
are also lowered as less switches, hubs and 
wiring closets are required.
7. SECURITY IN CLOUD 
COMPUTING ENVIRONMENT
Cloud Computing offers all the advantages of 
a public utility system, in terms of economy of 
scale, flexibility, convenience but it raises major 
issues, not least of which are: loss of control and 
loss of security. We show in this section security 
challenges in cloud environment. We conducted, 
then, a systematic literature review to identify its 
information security threats and identify security 
requirements applicable in the cloud computing.
7.1 Security Challenges in 
Cloud Computing System
Security is one of the most challenging research 
works in cloud computing system because users 
secrete are by providers who try to protect the data 
from other outside source. In fact, the use of cloud 
computing technology carries some risks along 
with its many rewards, not least of which are the 
loss of control and the loss of security (Hanna, 
2009; Subashini & Kavitha, 2010; Wooley, 2011; 
Xuan et al., 2010 ; Rittinghouse & Ransome, 2010; 
Vouk, 2008; Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 2013; Jouini et 
al 2012). Indeed, by trusting its critical data to a 
service provider (externalization of service), a user 
(whether it be an individual or an organization) 
takes risks with the availability, confidentiality and 
integrity of this data: availability may be affected 
if the subscriber’s data is unavailable when needed, 
due for example to a denial of service attack or 
merely to a loss; confidentiality may be affected 
if subscriber data is inadvertently or maliciously 
accessed by an unauthorized user, or otherwise 
unduly exposed; integrity may be affected if 
subscriber data is inadvertently or maliciously 
damaged or destroyed.
In addition to that, security is cited as the ma-
jor issues for this environment by many surveys. 
For example, figure 6 shows a survey recently 
conducted by IDC enterprise. The survey was ap-
plied on 244 IT executives/CIOs and their line-of 
business (LOB) colleagues to gauge their opinions 
and understand their companies’ use of IT cloud 
services. So, Security ranked first as the greatest 
challenge or issue of cloud computing (Meiko et 
al., 2009 ; Subashini & Kavitha, 2010; Xuan et 
al., 2010 ; Kenneth Kofi, 2010 ; Rittinghouse & 
Ransome, 2010).
The sections below highlight security issues 
and threats related to cloud computing technol-
ogy and their potential risks. Then, we determine 
the security requirements for CC environments.
7.2 Security Threats on Cloud 
Computing Environment
Virtualization, which is the software layer that 
emulates hardware to increase utilization in large 
datacenters, is one of the main components of a 
cloud computing system (Ibrahim et al., 2010), 
but it causes major security risks. In fact, ensur-
ing that different instances running on the same 

17
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
physical machine are isolated from each other is 
a major task of virtualization. Therefore, a cloud 
computing system is threatened by many types of 
attacks including security threats between the sub-
scriber and the datacenter, the hypervisor and the 
VMs and between the VMs themselves (Wooley, 
2011; Jouini et al 2012; Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 
2013). We consider the security threats that are 
most often cited in relation with cloud computing 
system (Cloud Security Alliance, 2010; Ibrahim et 
al., 2010; Subashini & Kavitha, 2010 ; Wayne & 
Timothy, 2011; Wooley, 2011; Jouini et al 2012; 
Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 2013).
Computing is based on virtualization technol-
ogy that may causes major security risks which can 
be classified into three categories. Each of these 
types of attacks is examined in more detail below 
(Jouini et al 2012; Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 2013):
•	
Security threats originating from the host 
(hypervisor).
•	
Security threats originating from the VMs.
•	
Security threats originating between the 
customer and the data center.
7.2.1 Security Threats Originating 
from the Host (Hypervisor)
•	
Monitoring Virtual Machines from 
Host: Monitoring the VM from the hyper-
visor software is an important part of man-
aging and controlling the VMs. Hypervisor 
Figure 6. Results of IDC survey ranking security challenges (Rittinghouse & Ransome, 2010)

18
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
is software that controls the layer between 
the hardware and the operating systems. 
The system administrator or other autho-
rized user can make changes to the com-
ponents of one or more virtual machines 
(VMs) which generates a security risk 
(Jouini et al 2012; Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 
2013).
•	
Virtual 
Machine 
Modification: 
Hypervisor represents the next lower layer 
of software under the customer’s operating 
system, applications and data. Attacks on 
the hypervisor layer are attractive to hack-
ers because of the scope of control they 
can gain if they can install and execute 
their malicious software on this layer of the 
VM software. Compromising the hypervi-
sor means that an attacker can take control 
of that layer and all of the hosted virtual 
machines that are hosted on that machine 
Jouini et al 2012; Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 
2013).
•	
Threats on Communications between 
Virtual Machines and Host: In cloud 
computing system, all communications 
must pass through the hypervisor to all of 
the hosted VMs and at this point an attack-
er can inject malicious software in an at-
tempt to eavesdrop or gain control over any 
or all of the systems. However, the worst 
case occurs when the hypervisor is com-
promised by malware, since this puts all 
the VMs that are being hosted on that ma-
chine at risk for security breaches (Wooley, 
2011; Jouini et al 2012; Ben Arfa Rabai et 
al., 2013)).
•	
Placement of Malicious VM Images on 
Physical Systems: The attack known as 
cloud malware injection involves creat-
ing a malicious virtual machine image and 
then places that image into the hypervisor 
so that it is treated like a legitimate system 
in a collection of virtual machines. If this 
is successful, then the malicious virtual 
machine image is allowed to run the adver-
sary’s code (Ibrahim et al., 2010; Wooley, 
2011; Jouini et al 2012; Ben Arfa Rabai et 
al., 2013).
7.2.2 Security Threats Originating 
Between the Customer 
and the Datacenter
•	
Flooding Attacks: Flooding attacks con-
sist of overloading the server hosting ser-
vices with an enormous number of requests 
for data processing (Wooley, 2011; Jouini 
et al 2012; Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 2013).
•	
Denial of Service (DoS): The denial of 
service attack is a critical problem for vir-
tual machines (VMs) used on cloud com-
ponents. In fact, it indicates that the hyper-
visor software is allowing a single VM to 
consume all the system resources and thus 
starving the remaining VMs and impairing 
their function (Jouini et al 2012; Ben Arfa 
Rabai et al., 2013).
•	
Data Loss or Leakage: The threat of data 
compromise increases because of the ar-
chitectural or operational characteristics 
of the cloud environment (user’s data is 
stored outside the enterprise boundary, 
by the service provider). Data loss may 
be caused operational failures, insufficient 
authentication or authorization, deletion or 
alteration of records without a backup of 
the original content, jurisdiction and po-
litical issues, disasters, inconsistent use of 
encryption and software keys. Thus, intru-
sion of data can be done either by hacking 
through the loop holes in the application 
or by injecting client code into the system 
(Jouini et al 2012; Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 
2013).
•	
Malicious Insiders: This threat is ampli-
fied for consumers of cloud services by 
the convergence of information technol-

19
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
ogy (IT) services combined with a general 
lack of transparency into provider process 
and procedure. Such threats include fraud, 
sabotage and theft or loss of confidential 
information caused by trusted insiders. The 
impact that malicious insiders can have on 
an organization is considerable, given their 
level of access and ability to infiltrate or-
ganizations and assets like brand damage, 
financial impact and productivity losses 
(Cloud Security Alliance, 2010; Jouini et 
al 2012; Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 2013). .
•	
Account, Service and Traffic Hijacking: 
Attack methods such as phishing, fraud 
and exploitation of software vulnerabilities 
still achieve results. Cloud solutions add a 
new threat: If an attacker gains access to 
your credentials, they can eavesdrop on 
your activities and transaction, return fal-
sified information and redirect your cli-
ents to illegitimate sites allowing them to 
compromise the confidentiality, integrity 
and availability of those services (Cloud 
Security Alliance, 2010; Jouini et al 2012; 
Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 2013).
•	
Abuse and Nefarious Use of Cloud 
Computing: Cloud computing provid-
ers offer their customers an unlimited 
compute, network and storage capacity 
coupled with a week registration process 
where anyone with a valid credit card 
can register and immediately begin using 
cloud services. Cloud computing providers 
are so being under attack due to the weak-
ness of their registration systems which 
let to spammers, malicious code authors 
and other criminals to perform their ac-
tivities easily. We can site also as threats, 
zeus botnet, trojan horses (Cloud Security 
Alliance, 2010; Jouini et al 2012; Ben Arfa 
Rabai et al., 2013).
•	
Insecure 
Application 
Programming 
Interfaces: Cloud computing provid-
ers expose a set of software interfaces or 
APIs that customers use to manage and 
interact with cloud services. These inter-
faces must be designed to protect against 
both accidental and malicious attempts to 
circumvent policy. Reliance on a weak set 
of interfaces and APIs exposes organiza-
tions to a variety of security issues related 
to confidentiality, integrity, availability 
and accountability. This category includes 
Anonymous access and/or reusable tokens 
or passwords threat, clear-text authentica-
tion or transmission of content threat, in-
flexible access controls or improper autho-
rizations threats, unknown service or API 
dependencies (Cloud Security Alliance, 
2010; Jouini et al 2012; Ben Arfa Rabai et 
al., 2013).
7.2.3 Security Threats Originating 
from the Virtual Machines
•	
Monitoring VMs from Other VMs: One 
of the security risks encountered when us-
ing virtual machines is the lack of guaran-
teed isolation of the application and data 
when a shared resource such as memory 
space is utilized by multiple VMs. Cloud 
computing servers can contain tens of VMs 
and these are vulnerable to attack whether 
they are active or not. VMs that are active 
are vulnerable to all of the security attacks 
that a conventional physical service is 
subject to. However, once a VM has been 
compromised by an attack on other VMs 
residing on the same physical server, they 
become all vulnerable to the same attack 
due to the fact that each machine shares 
memory, disk storage, driver software and 
hypervisor software (Ibrahim et al., 2010; 
Jouini et al 2012; Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 
2013).
•	
Virtual Machine Mobility: Virtual ma-
chines (VMs) which are disk images hosted 

20
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
in a hypervisor platform are easily copied 
or transferred to other locations. The abil-
ity to move and copy VMs poses a security 
risk because the entire system, applications 
and data can be stolen without physically 
stealing the machine (Wooley, 2011; Jouini 
et al 2012; Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 2013).
•	
Threats on Communications Between 
Virtual Machines: VMs are allowed to 
communicate with other VMs running on 
the same physical equipment using chan-
nels such as the shared clipboard functions. 
When sharing resources such as memory, 
real or virtual network connections, be-
tween VMs can introduce possible security 
risks for each machine because there is the 
possibility that one or more of the VMs 
has been compromised by malicious pro-
grams (Ibrahim et al., 2010; Wooley, 2011; 
; Jouini et al 2012; Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 
2013).
We can classify these threats into three categories 
according to their origins as it is shown in table 2.
7.3 Security Requirements on 
Cloud Computing Environment
Information security encompasses three basic se-
curity attributes namely confidentiality, availabil-
ity and integrity (Allen et al., 2008). Besides these 
three fundamental attributes, non-repudiation and 
accountability, authentification, authorization, 
identification and privacy (Firesmith, 2004; Al-
len et al., 2008).
As security requirements for cloud computing 
systems, we consider the security concerns that 
are most often cited in connection with cloud 
computing (Krutz & Vines, 2010 ; Cloud Secu-
rity Alliance, 2009; Hanna, 2009; Subashini & 
Kavitha, 2010 ; Wooley, 2011; ENISA, 2010), 
namely: availability, integrity, confidentiality. We 
further refine this classification by considering 
different levels of criticality of the data to which 
these requirements apply (Jouini et al 2012; Ben 
Arfa Rabai et al., 2013).
7.3.1 Availability
Availability refers to the subscriber’s ability to 
retrieve his/ her information when he/she needs 
it. Un-availability may be more or less costly de-
pending on how critical the data is to the timely 
operation of the subscriber. We refine availability 
requirement by considering different levels of 
criticality of the data as follow (Jouini et al 2012; 
Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 2013):
•	
Critical Data: This data is critical to the 
day-to-day (or minute-by-minute) opera-
tion of the subscriber, and any delay in 
making this data available is deemed dis-
ruptive to the subscriber. Example: product 
data for an e-commerce merchant; the mer-
chant cannot conduct business without it, 
and stands to lose sales as well as customer 
loyalty as a result of un-availability (Jouini 
et al 2012; Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 2013).
•	
Archival Data: Archival data typically has 
two attributes that set it apart from critical 
data: first, it is accessed seldom; second, its 
access is not time-critical, i.e. delays in de-
livering it do not cause a great loss. In an e-
Commerce application, this data could be, 
for example, archival order data: such data 
is accessed only in exceptional cases (for 
example: a customer has a complaint, or 
wants to return or exchange merchandise), 
not a routine operation; and when that data 
is needed, it is accessed off-line (for exam-
ple, by staff who are handling a customer 
complaint), rather than as part of an inter-
active operation. As a result of these two 
attributes, unavailability of archival data 
carries a much lower penalty than unavail-
ability of critical data (Jouini et al 2012; 
Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 2013).

21
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
7.3.2 Integrity
Integrity refers to the assurances offered to sub-
scribers that their data is not lost or damaged 
as a result of malicious or inadvertent activity. 
Violations of integrity may be more or less costly 
depending on how critical the data is to the secured 
operation of the subscriber. We refine integrity 
requirement by considering different levels of 
criticality of the data as follow (Jouini et al 2012; 
Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 2013):
•	
Critical Data: This data is critical to the 
normal operation of subscriber functions; 
if this data is lost; subscribers can no lon-
ger operate normally, or can no longer op-
erate at all. For example, if we are talking 
about a subscriber who is an e-Commerce 
merchant, critical data would be his prod-
uct catalog that includes product identifi-
cation, product pricing, and product avail-
ability for his merchandise (Jouini et al 
2012; Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 2013).
•	
Archival Data: This data is not critical to 
the operation of the subscriber, in the sense 
that the subscriber can operate if this data 
is lost or damaged. We assume that if integ-
rity is lost, subscribers are duly informed. 
For example, if we are talking about a sub-
scriber who is an e-Commerce merchant, 
archival data would be the file that contains 
customer information or (for even less crit-
ical data) or information about customer 
recommendations (Jouini et al 2012; Ben 
Arfa Rabai et al., 2013).
7.3.3 Confidentiality
Confidentiality: Confidentiality refers to the as-
surances offered by subscribers that their data is 
protected from unauthorized access. Violations of 
confidentiality may be more or less costly depend-
ing on how confidential the divulged data is. We 
refine confidentiality requirement by considering 
different levels of criticality of the data as follow:
•	
Highly Classified Data: Exposure of this 
data to unauthorized parties represents an 
unrecoverable loss for the subscriber, that 
carries a very high cost, including unquan-
tifiable/imponderable costs (such as loss of 
life, mission failure, security implications, 
etc.). For an e-Commerce subscriber, this 
may represent detailed personal data of its 
client database; exposure of such informa-
tion can lead to identity theft on a massive 
Table 2. Security threats on the cloud computing environment
Attack Types
Threats
Security threats originating from the host 
(hypervisor)
Monitoring virtual machines from host. 
Communications between virtual machines and host. 
Virtual Machine modification. 
Placement of malicious VM images on physical systems.
Security threats originating from the VMs
Monitoring VMs from other VM. 
Communication between VMs. 
Virtual machine mobility
Security threats originating between the 
customer and the data center
Denial of service (DoS) 
Flooding attacks 
Data loss or leakage 
Malicious insiders 
Account, service and traffic hijacking 
Abuse and nefarious use of cloud computing 
Insecure application programming interfaces

22
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
scale, which leads in turn to customer dis-
satisfaction, damaged corporate reputation, 
civil liability and penal lawsuits (Jouini et 
al 2012; Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 2013).
•	
Proprietary Data: Exposure of this data 
to unauthorized parties represents an im-
portant but controllable and quantifiable 
loss; the scale of this loss is limited by its 
nature (typically: financial loss) and its 
scale (quantifiable and recoverable). For a 
corporate subscriber, this may be proprie-
tary information about its intellectual prop-
erty, its products or its processes (Jouini et 
al 2012; Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 2013).
•	
Public Data: Exposure of this data to un-
authorized parties represents a minor and 
recoverable loss, resulting in perhaps a 
slight loss of competitive advantage. For 
a corporate subscriber, this could be de-
mographic information about its customer 
base; a competitor who gains access to 
that data may cancel whatever marketing 
advantage the data afforded the subscriber 
(Jouini et al 2012; Ben Arfa Rabai et al., 
2013).
8. CONCLUSION
Cloud computing is rapidly changing the comput-
ing landscape by fundamentally revolutionizing 
the way computing is viewed and delivered to the 
end user. Computing is now treated as a “utility” 
that can be provisioned on-demand, in a cost 
effective manner. Cloud computing presents a 
paradigm shift in how we provision and manage 
computing resources as well as how we develop, 
deploy, and use software applications.
In this chapter, we have surveyed the state-of-
the-art of cloud computing, covering its essential 
concepts, architectural designs, well-known char-
acteristics, key technologies as well as virtualiza-
tion. We show in this chapter cloud computing 
systems as an emerging paradigm of computing 
that replaces computing as a personal commod-
ity by computing as a public utility. Besides, this 
technology offers all the advantages of a public 
utility system, in terms of economy of scale, 
flexibility, convenience but it raises major issues 
mainly security concerns. Thus, the protection of 
computer systems and the integrity, confidentiality 
and availability of the data they contain has long 
been recognized as a critical issue. In addition, 
cyber attacks or breaches of information security 
appear to be increasing in frequency and few are 
willing to ignore the possibility that the severity 
of future attacks could be much greater than what 
has been observed to date.
REFERENCES
Allen, J. H. Barnum, S. Ellison, S. R. et al., (2008). 
Software Security Engineering: A Guide for 
Project Managers. Addison Wesley Professional.
Barham, P. T., Dragovic, B., Fraser, K., Hand, S., 
Harris, T. L., Ho, A., . . . Warfield, A. (2003). Xen 
and the art of virtualization. In Symposium on 
Operating System Principles (SOSP). 19, 20, 28
Ben Arfa Rabai, L., Jouini, M., Ben Aissa, A., & 
Mili, A. (2013). A cybersecurity model in cloud 
computing environments, Journal of King Saud 
University: Computer and Information Sciences.
Boehm, B. Huang, L. Jain, A., & Madachy, 
R. (2004). The Nature of Information System 
Dependability: A Stakeholder/Value Approach. 
USC-CSSE Technical Report. 
Buecker, A., Guézo, L., Lodewijkx, K., Moss, 
H., Skapinetz, K., & Waidner, M. (2009). Cloud 
Computing: guide de la sécurité Recommanda-
tions d’IBM pour la sécurisation de l’informatique 
en nuage. 

23
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
Cloud Security Alliance. (2009). Security Guid-
ance for Critical Areas of Focus in Cloud Com-
puting V2.1. 
Cloud Security Alliance. (2010). Top Threats to 
Cloud Computing V 1.0.
Duranti, L. (2013). Records in the Cloud (RiC) 
User Survey Report, Records in the Cloud (RiC). 
Project University of British Columbia.
ENISA. (2010). Cloud computing: Benefits, risks 
and recommendations for information security. 
Retrieved from http://www.enisa.europa.eu/act/
rm/files/deliverables/cloud-computingrisk-
assessment
Firesmith, D. (2004). Specifying Reusable Secu-
rity Requirements. Journal of Object Technology, 
3(1), 61–75. doi:10.5381/jot.2004.3.1.c6
Foster, I., Zhao, Y., Raicu, I., & Lu, S. (2008). 
Cloud computing and grid computing 360 de-
gree compared. In Proceedings grid computing 
environments workshop: GCE 2008, 1-10. DOI 
doi:10.1109/GCE.2008.4738445
Furht, B., & Escalante, A. (2010). Handbook 
of cloud computing. New York: Springer. 
doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-6524-0
Gartner. (2013). Will Private Cloud Adop-
tion Increase by 2015? Gartner Research Note 
G00250893 (12 May 2013).
Grobauer, B., Walloschek, T., & Stocker, E. 
(2011). Understanding Cloud Computing Vulner-
abilities Security & Privacy, IEEE, 9(2), 50–57. 
doi:10.1109/MSP.2010.115
Han, L. (2009). Market Acceptance of Cloud 
Computing: An Analysis of Market Structure, Price 
models and systems management. Retrieved from 
http://opus4.kobv.de/opus4-ubbayreuth/files/468/
thesis_leihan.pdf
Hanna, S. (2009). Cloud Computing: Finding the 
silver lining.
Heiser, J., & Nicolett, M. (2008). Assessing the 
Security Risks of Cloud Computing. Gartner 
Research.
Huth, A., & Cebula, J. (2011). The Basics of 
Cloud Computing.
Ibrahim, A. S., Hamlyn-Harris, J., & Grundy, J. 
(2010). Emerging security challenges of cloud 
virtual infrastructure. The Asia Pacific Software 
Engineering Conference 2010 Cloud Workshop.
Jangra, A., & Bala, R. (2011). Spectrum of Cloud 
Computing Architecture: Adoption and Avoidance 
Issues. International Journal of Computing and 
Business Research, 2(2).
Jouini, M., Ben Arfa Rabai, L., Ben Aissa, A., & 
Mili, A. (2012). Towards quantitative measures of 
Information Security: A Cloud Computing case 
study. International Journal of Cyber-Security 
and Digital Forensics, 1(3), 265–279.
Kenneth Kofi, F. (2010). Cloud security require-
ments analysis and security policy development 
using a high-order object-oriented modeling 
technique. Thesis.
Krutz, R. L., & Vines, R. D. (2010). Cloud se-
curity: A comprehensive guide to secure cloud 
computing. John Wiley & Sons.
Liu, Q., Weng, C., Li, M., & Luo, Y. (2010). An 
In-VM measuring framework for increasing virtual 
machine security in clouds. IEEE Security Privacy 
Journal, 8(6), 56–62. doi:10.1109/MSP.2010.143
McCarthy, L. (2011). Adoption of Cloud Comput-
ing. Retrieved from http://askvisory.com/research/
adoption-of-cloudcomputing/
Meiko, J., Jorg, S., Nils, G., & Luigi, L. I. (2009). 
On Technical Security Issues in Cloud Comput-
ing. IEEE International Conference on Cloud 
Computing.

24
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
Mell, P., & Grance, T. (2009). Effectively and 
Securely Using the Cloud Computing Paradigm. 
ACM Cloud Computing Security Workshop.
Mell, P., & Grance, T. (2011). The NIST Defini-
tion of Cloud Computing. NIST Special Publica-
tion 800-145. Retrieved from http://csrc.nist.gov/
publications/nistpubs/800-145/SP800-145.pdf
Menken, I., & Blokdijk, G. (2009). Cloud Comput-
ing Virtualization Specialist Complete Certifica-
tion Kit - Study Guide Book and Online Course. 
Emereo Pty Ltd.
Minhas, U. F. (2013). Scalable and Highly Avail-
able Database Systems in the Cloud. PhD thesis, 
University of Waterloo.
Parkhill, D. (1966). The Challenge of the Com-
puter Utility. US: Addison-Wesley Educational 
Publishers Inc.
Rittinghouse, J. W., & Ransome, J. F. (2010). 
Cloud computing: Implementation, management, 
and security. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
Sahoo, J. Mohapatra, S. & Lath, R. (2010). Virtu-
alization: A Survey on Concepts, Taxonomy and 
Associated Security Issues (pp. 222-226).
Subashini, S., & Kavitha, V. (2010). A survey on 
security issues in service delivery models of cloud 
computing. Journal of Network and Computer 
Applications.
Vaquero, L. M., Rodero-Merino, L., Caceres, J., 
& Lindner, M. (2009). Caceres J and Lindner M, 
A Break in the Clouds: Towards a Cloud Defini-
tion. Computer Communication Review, 39(1), 
50–55. doi:10.1145/1496091.1496100
Vaughan-Nichols, S. J. (2008). Virtualization 
sparks security concerns. IEEE computer, 41(8), 
13-15.
VMware. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.
vmware.com/
Vouk, M. A. (2008). Cloud Computing: Issues, 
Research and Implementations. In Proceedings of 
the ITI 2008 30th Int. Conf. on Information Tech-
nology Interfaces. doi:10.1109/ITI.2008.4588381
Wang, L., Von Laszewski, G., Kunze, M., & Tao, 
J. (2008). Cloud computing: A Perspective study. 
Proc. Grid Computing Environments (GCE) work-
shop. doi:10.1007/s00354-008-0081-5
Wayne, J., & Timothy, G. (2011). Guidelines on 
Security and Privacy in Public Cloud Computing. 
Information Technology Laboratory.
Wong, K. (2009). Pictures in the Cloud. Computer 
Graphics World, 32, 42–47.
Wooley, P. (2011). Identifying Cloud Computing 
Security Risks.
Xuan, Z., Nattapong, W., Hao, L., & Xuejie, Z. 
(2010). Information Security Risk Management 
Framework for the Cloud Computing Environ-
ments. 10th IEEE International Conference on 
Computer and Information Technology (CIT 
2010).
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Cloud Computing: Is a technology that al-
lows an efficient computing by centralizing data 
storage, processing and bandwidth between users.
IaaS: Is physical or virtual machines and 
other resources (storage) offered to cloud users 
as a service.
Outsourcing: Is the contracting out (exter-
nalization) of a business process to a third-party.
PaaS: Is a computing platform delivered as 
service, including operating system, program-
ming language execution environment, database, 

25
Design Challenges of Cloud Computing
﻿
and web server to let customers to develop their 
applications.
SaaS: Is applications delivered as a service 
to users.
Security Risk: Is any incident that compro-
mises the assets, operations and objectives of an 
organization.
Virtualization: Is a recent technology that 
allows abstraction and isolation of lower level 
functionalities and underlying hardware.

26
Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  2
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-8339-6.ch002
An Interoperability Framework 
for Enterprise Applications 
in Cloud Environments
ABSTRACT
Enterprise Information Systems (EIS) are increasingly designed with cloud environments in mind, as a 
set of cooperating services deployed in a mix of platforms, including conventional servers and clouds, 
private and public. If enterprise value chains are considered, in which their EIS need to cooperate, solv-
ing all the interoperability problems raised by the need to meaningfully interconnect all these services 
constitutes a rather challenging endeavor. This chapter describes the concept of enterprise as a service, 
a collection of dynamically assembled services with a lifecycle centered on the customers, and proposes 
a multidimensional interoperability framework to help systematizing the various aspects relevant to in-
teroperability. Besides lifecycle, this framework presents other dimensions, namely concreteness (with 
various levels of abstraction), interoperability (based on structural compliance and conformance), and 
concerns (to deal with non-functional aspects such as security, reliability and quality of service).
INTRODUCTION
A cloud can simply be defined as a remote 
platform supporting the deployment and use of 
computer-based resources and services, in a setting 
characterized by elastic, dynamic and automated 
resource provisioning, paid as used and managed 
in a self-service way (Armbrust et al., 2010).
Through virtualization, a pool of physical 
resources (servers, storage, networks, and so on) 
supports the dynamic allocation, provisioning, 
decommissioning and release of virtual resources, 
forming an apparently elastic fabric of resources 
that are used on demand and paid as used. How-
ever, users want the services that resources sup-
port, not the resources themselves. Resources are 
increasingly seen as a commodity (Carr, 2004), 
allowing some IT enterprises, the providers, to 
specialize in providing IT-based services and 
resource infrastructures cheaper, more reliably, 
José C. Delgado
Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal

27
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
better managed, faster provisioned and in a more 
scalable way than any of the organizations that 
just require these services and resources for their 
business activities, the consumers.
This dichotomy between consumers and 
providers, a marriage of convenience as any 
outsourcing agreement, is known as utility com-
puting (Brynjolfsson, Hofmann & Jordan, 2010). 
Providers take care of many issues on behalf of 
the consumers, namely expertise, risks, costs and 
management, in what concerns resources and 
generic services. Consumers still have to tackle 
a part of the overall solution, namely application-
specific services, but they can concentrate more in 
their core business and less on the IT technologies 
that support it.
After an initial period of slow growth, in which 
concerns about security, privacy, performance 
and availability acted as inhibiting factors, cloud 
computing is finally blossoming. For consumers, 
it is now easier, cheaper, and faster to get comput-
ing resources from a cloud than by resorting to 
conventional IT systems and applications. In most 
cases, the advantages now outweigh the risks and 
other disadvantages. All large IT providers are now 
investing heavily in cloud computing.
This is clearly a market driven by providers, 
with consumers still cautious about the transi-
tion, but the scenario is evolving at a fast pace, 
both for individual and enterprise consumers. 
Gartner analysts forecast that the public cloud 
services market will grow at a compound annual 
growth rate (CAGR) of 17.3% over the 2014-2018 
five-year period (Anderson et al, 2014, May 13). 
Gartner also expects that end-user spending on 
public cloud services will grow 19% in 2014, up 
to $158 billion, with annual growth rates of 45% 
and 33% for infrastructure (IaaS) and platform 
(PaaS) cloud services, respectively (Anderson et 
al, 2014, March 31). These rates clearly indicate 
a shift in spending, from traditional IT systems 
to cloud services.
Two relevant factors gave their contribution 
to the bootstrap and boom of cloud computing:
•	
For individual consumers, social network-
ing and multiplatform mobility (laptops, 
tablets and smartphones) raised the need to 
store information in a server somewhere, 
always available to be accessed seam-
lessly and in a synchronized way across 
platforms;
•	
For enterprise consumers, the market pres-
sure caused by increasing global competi-
tion and ever-shortening turnaround times, 
combined with a sluggish global economy, 
emphasized the basic principle of concen-
trating on core business and (dynamically) 
outsourcing the rest.
However, the problem that drove the ap-
pearance of the Web, interoperability, remains 
unsolved. The goal is to endow distributed sys-
tems with the ability of meaningfully exchang-
ing information in interaction patterns known as 
choreographies. The problem, unfortunately, is 
even worse today than 25 years ago:
•	
The Web provided uniform e global access 
to media information and created the mar-
ket, instead of reacting to it. This gave time 
to standards (HTTP, HTML and, later, 
XML) to become universally used before 
diversity could set in. This is why today 
we can use any browser to access any Web 
site. Even in the service realm, with either 
SOA or REST, the scenario is essentially 
standardized, although standards are not 
enough to ensure interoperability (Lewis, 
Morris, Simanta & Wrage, 2008). The usu-
al integration problems are exacerbated by 
the dynamic cloud environments, in which 
an application can migrate, which may en-
tail a change in the access URI or in non-
functional characteristics, such as security 
settings, policies and quality of service;
•	
Cloud computing provides global access 
to all kinds of computer-based resources, 
in a very dynamic environment, but these 

28
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
are more complex than simple hyperme-
dia documents and, above all, the mar-
ket exploded before standardization was 
achieved. This means that today many 
cloud providers offer incompatible inter-
faces (Petcu, 2013), which hamper the 
seamless use of the various clouds and 
lead to provider lock-in, since the costs of 
changing provider are typically higher than 
the benefits of the optimizations stemming 
from the free choice of a new provider.
This chapter concentrates on the first set of 
problems, application interoperability in cloud 
environments, which also entails heterogeneity. 
Figure 1 illustrates a scenario that may well be 
applicable to many enterprises, to interconnect 
either subsystems of an Enterprise Information 
System (EIS) or complete EIS, in value chains 
or other cooperation agreements.
An EIS will have to deal with conventional 
web servers, in-house servers, several general-
purpose clouds types (private, public and hybrid) 
and specific cloud-like systems, involving mobility 
(Fernando, Loke & Rahayu, 2013), sensor net-
works (Potdar, Sharif & Chang, 2009) and RFID 
tags (Aggarwal & Han, 2013), increasingly used 
for supply chain control.
Taking into account that enterprises need to 
be cooperate and to be connected, and the exist-
ing diversity of platforms and applications, any 
computer-based system can be considered a dis-
tributed and heterogeneous cloud of clouds. Some 
will be more dynamic than others, but all will 
endure the same basic problem: how to provide 
enough interoperability to enable EIS to cooperate 
without requiring exact mutual knowledge and 
allowing them to evolve independently.
The main goals of this chapter are:
Figure 1. An example of a complex enterprise IT environment

29
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
•	
To contribute to the field of cloud com-
puting, in particular in the interoperability 
area, by analyzing several of the problems 
involved, especially in what concerns the 
design of EIS;
•	
To describe a multidimensional framework 
that explores EIS interoperability at vari-
ous levels, to better dissect and understand 
what is involved and how this can help in 
systematizing methods and solutions;
•	
To assess the potential of structural com-
patibility (instead of schema sharing, used 
in current interoperability technologies) as 
a means to reduce coupling and increase 
adaptability, changeability and reliabil-
ity, while maintaining interoperability 
requirements.
The chapter is organized as follows. The Back-
ground section describes some of the existing 
technologies relevant to the context of this chap-
ter, followed by a discussion on how an EIS can 
be designed for changeability, including several 
variants of increasing maturity, from a traditional 
EIS to a more dynamic and service-based EIS. To 
understand better the EIS interoperability problem, 
a multidimensional interoperability framework is 
outlined, presenting several levels of abstraction of 
interoperability and the importance of EIS compat-
ibility (compliance and conformance) in reducing 
EIS coupling without impairing interoperability. 
The chapter ends by comparing this framework 
with existing ones, outlining future directions of 
research and drawing the main conclusions of 
this work.
BACKGROUND
One of the most cited definitions of cloud comput-
ing, encompassing the characteristics described in 
the previous section, is given by Mell and Grance 
(2011), of the US National Institute of Standards 
and Technology (NIIST). This and other survey 
papers (Rimal, Choi & Lumb, 2009; Armbrust, 
2010; Zhang, Cheng & Boutaba, 2010) discuss the 
most relevant issues involving cloud computing.
There are many providers offering cloud-based 
platforms services, such as big market players 
Amazon, Microsoft and Google, with specific 
systems, and other providers that have joined the 
open-source movement in the cloud market (Bist, 
Wariya & Agarwal, 2013), with cloud management 
platforms such as OpenStack (Jackson, 2012), 
CloudStack (Sabharwal & Shankar, 2013) and 
Eucalyptus (Nurmi et al., 2009).
Interoperability between different clouds is 
not easy. Standards such as OCCI (Open Cloud 
Computing Interface) (Edmonds, Metsch & Pa-
paspyrou, 2011) and TOSCA (Topology and Or-
chestration Specification for Cloud Applications) 
(Binz, Breiter, Leyman & Spatzier, 2012), as well 
as initiatives such as the Intercloud (Demchenko, 
Makkes, Strijkers & de Laat, 2012), have no real 
impact yet on market players. Each cloud ends 
up having its own features and characteristics, 
since cloud providers need differentiation to at-
tract customers. The dominant position of some 
players entitles them to define their own de facto 
standards, in particular at the API level.
Standards have been useful essentially at the 
lower cloud computing levels, in which the advan-
tages of interoperability by adoption of common 
specifications outweigh the value stemming from 
differentiation (and incompatibility).
CIMI (Cloud Infrastructure Management 
Interface) (DTMF, 2013) is an example of such 
a standard, providing an API to provision and to 
manage resources typically found in clouds, such 
as virtual machines, storage volumes and networks.
CMDI (Cloud Data Management Interface) 
(ISO/IEC, 2012) is a SNIA (Storage Networking 
Industry Association) standard, adopted by ISO/
IEC, which provides a RESTful API to deal with 
storage resources in a cloud.
OVF (Open Virtual Format) (DTMF, 2012), 
a DTMF standard adopted by ISO/IEC, allows 
applications to be packaged and deployed to virtu-

30
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
alized systems. It is the lowest level and the most 
used standard in cloud computing, constituting 
a means to promote portability of applications 
between clouds.
Besides cloud API interoperability problems, 
applications deployed in clouds need to interact 
by exchanging messages and require functional 
and contextual interoperability, the focus of this 
chapter. These applications can span a wide spec-
trum, from high-level domains such as enterprise 
cooperation (Jardim-Goncalves, Agostinho & 
Steiger-Garcao, 2012), e-government services 
(Gottschalk & Solli-Sæther, 2008), military 
operations (Wyatt, Griendling & Mavris, 2012), 
healthcare applications (Weber-Jahnke, Peyton 
& Topaloglou, 2012), and digital libraries (El 
Raheb et al, 2011).
Several frameworks have been proposed to sys-
tematize interoperability, such as Athena (Berre et 
al., 2007), LCIM (Wang, Tolk & Wang, 2009), the 
European Interoperability Framework (EIF, 2010) 
and the Framework for Enterprise Interoperability 
(Chen, 2006). The European project ENSEMBLE 
embodies an effort to formulate a science base for 
enterprise interoperability (Jardim-Goncalves et 
al., 2013). A more detailed account of the existing 
frameworks is given in the section “Comparison 
with other interoperability frameworks”.
Service interoperability (Athanasopoulos, 
Tsalgatidou & Pantazoglou, 2006) requires that 
interactions occur according to the assumptions 
and expectations of the involved applications. This 
involves several levels (Mykkänen & Tuomainen, 
2008), such as communication protocol, message 
structure, data format, syntax, semantics and 
service composition (Khadka et al., 2011), and 
even non-functional and social aspects (Loutas, 
Peristeras & Tarabanis, 2011).
Regarding service interoperability, the world 
is divided into two main architectural styles: 
service-oriented, or SOA (Erl, 2008), and resource-
oriented, or REST (Webber, Parastatidis & Rob-
inson, 2010). SOA, usually implemented by Web 
Services, emphasizes behavior (although limited 
to interfaces, with state and structure hidden in the 
implementation). REST follows the principles de-
fined by Fielding (2000) and emphasizes structure 
and state, by exposing inner URIs (with interac-
tion and application state separated and stored in 
the client and server, respectively, and behavior 
hidden in the dynamically changing structure and 
in the implementation of individual resources). 
Web Services are technologically more complex, 
but their model is a closer match to real world 
resources. REST is simpler and finer grained, but 
leans towards some restrictions (such as interaction 
statelessness) and is lower level (higher semantic 
gap between application concepts and REST re-
sources), which for complex applications entails 
a greater effort to model, develop and maintain.
SOA and REST are not actually competitors, 
but rather complementary approaches, each natu-
rally a better fit to different areas of application 
domains (Pautasso, Zimmermann & Leymann, 
2008). Simplicity, however, is a very strong argu-
ment and most cloud management APIs now use 
the REST style.
DESIGNING ENTERPRISE 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
FOR CHANGEABILITY
As Heraclitus, an ancient Greek philosopher 
(Heraclitus & Patrick, 2013), once wrote, “The 
only thing that is constant is change”. Complex 
systems like EIS start being changed while they are 
still being conceived. Therefore, an EIS must be 
designed primarily for changeability, throughout 
its lifecycle.
Figure 2 depicts a basic system lifecycle, em-
phasizing changeability, which can be applied to 
the whole EIS, as it is usually conceived today, or 
to any of its subsystems. The market represents 
the rest of the world (namely, other EIS) or the 
environment in which the subsystem being mod-
eled is immersed.

31
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
This model is maximalist, open and not pre-
scriptive, in the sense that any EIS (or a subsystem 
thereof) should go through all the stages (con-
ceptually, at least), but the level of emphasis and 
detail in every stage does not have to be always 
identical. The higher the level of the subsystem, 
the more important the vision and strategy will 
be, but it must go all the way down to operations 
if it is meant to work. Lower level subsystems 
will emphasize development and operation, but 
must have an underlying vision and mission as 
well. In the remainder of this chapter, “EIS” 
should be understood as the whole EIS or any of 
its subsystems.
Figure 2 models the lifecycle of an EIS by a 
pipeline of stages, each more concrete and detailed 
than the previous on, with several improvement 
loops. Each of these loops assumes that metrics 
(indicators) are defined so that goals and objec-
tives can be assessed. If the difference between 
the desired and measured indicators is greater 
than some acceptable measure, the loop should 
be iterated to decide and implement what needs 
to be changed in order to improve that difference.
The inner loops deal with lower levels and 
greater detail, whereas outer loops deal with 
higher levels and less detail. Figure 2 considers 
the following loops (but others are possible, with 
a pipeline in which the stages are more detailed):
•	
Reaction: All changes involve state only, 
so the cost and time to detect (monitor-
ing) and to produce a change (of state) are 
usually very small. The changes are very 
frequent and occur as a reaction to events 
or to foreseeable trends, in adaptive sys-
Figure 2. The lifecycle of an EIS, emphasizing changeability

32
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
tems. This is the loop more amenable to 
automation. However, and not considering 
self-changing systems (hard to build, par-
ticularly in complex systems), every pos-
sible change must have been included in 
the design;
•	
Reconfiguration: Some EIS, such as in the 
manufacturing domain, support reconfigu-
rability (Putnik & Sluga, 2007). This is not 
a new EIS, but involves more than merely 
changing state. Some of the subsystems 
will be used in a different configuration 
or parameterization, for example to manu-
facture a different product in a production 
line. This, however, has to have been in-
cluded in the EIS design. Otherwise, we 
will need a new version, which is the next 
loop. A reconfiguration can be as frequent 
as its cost makes it effective;
•	
Reorganization: The EIS needs to be 
changed in a way that has not been includ-
ed in the current design. A new version 
needs to be produced and deployed, which 
may not be completely compatible with 
the previous one and may imply changing 
other subsystems as well;
•	
Reorientation: A reorientation is a pro-
found reorganization, as result of changes 
in the strategy. This usually is driven by 
external factors, such as evolution of com-
petitors or customers, but can also be de-
manded by an internal restructuring to in-
crease competitiveness;
•	
Rebirth: The vision and/or mission can 
also suffer significant changes, driven by 
factors such as stiff competition, technol-
ogy evolution, merges/acquisitions or even 
replacing the person fulfilling the CEO 
role. This implies changes that are so pro-
found that, in practice, it has to be rethought 
and redesigned almost from scratch. This 
loop can also correspond to a diversifica-
tion of business areas, making it necessary 
to build a new EIS or subsystem.
Figure 2 also indicates the typical actors in-
volved in the change/no change decision taken at 
the decision points (the circles with a “?”). The 
strategy makers vary from entrepreneurs, in small 
enterprises, to a full-fledged team driven by the 
CEO in large enterprises. Typically, a change is 
decided when an actor realizes that the benefit 
value of changing is higher than the cost value 
of the change implementation. Agile enterprises 
need low change costs (Ganguly, Nilchiani & Farr, 
2009), so that changes can be frequent, either 
reactively (to market changes) or proactively (an-
ticipating market trends) (Putnik & Sluga, 2007).
In the context of this chapter, Figure 2 is impor-
tant in what concerns interoperability. Enterprises 
need to collaborate and their EIS to interoperate. 
Changing a collaboration partner, even if not 
changing anything else, most likely means chang-
ing objectives, processes, data formats, and so on. 
Therefore, reducing coupling between EIS, while 
ensuring the minimum business requirements for 
interoperability, is a fundamental factor in increas-
ing enterprise agility. What this means, and how 
to do it, is the main goal of the interoperability 
framework proposed by this chapter.
THE EVOLUTION OF ENTERPRISE 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
The following sections establish several possible 
scenarios with several types of EIS, establishing 
a route from a traditional EIS to the concept of 
what an agile EIS should be, in particular in what 
concerns the interaction with other enterprises 
and their EIS. This route can also be viewed as an 
agility maturity model (Imache, Izza & Ahmed-
Nacer, 2012).
The Traditional Enterprise
A traditional EIS is designed and built with 
traditional frameworks and methods. It deals 
essentially with an ERP (Enterprise Resource 

33
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
Planning) system, there is usually a global data 
model, processes are the main paradigm and reflect 
a repeatable workflow design, N-tier architecture 
is the norm, the strategy is typically oriented to-
wards well-typified market sectors, and the goals 
and objectives rely essentially on past experiences 
and statistics as a guide for evolution.
It usually implements most of its components, 
with outsourcing more the exception than the 
norm, does not experience frequent changes, and 
does not deal very well with unpredictability and 
risk. The EIS is seen as the center of the business 
world, with suppliers, outsourcees and customers 
around it, and one of the main concerns is inte-
gration with the processes of other EIS (Chen, 
Doumeingts & Vernadat, 2008).
The Optimizing Enterprise
Ideally, resources should have 100% utilization, 
all the time. Unfortunately, customer demand 
is not constant and supplier capacity is limited. 
One solution is to own resources planned for an 
average customer demand, but this translates into 
wasted capacity when demand is lower and will 
not be able to satisfy customers when demand 
is high. Another solution is to design the EIS 
for dynamic, on-demand outsourcing (minimum 
TCO complemented with outsourcing as needed):
•	
When demand for a module’s functional-
ity is higher than its capacity, the requests 
in excess are dynamically forwarded to one 
or more alternative modules (with an out-
sourcing contract foreseeing occasional or 
seasonal demand);
•	
When the demand is lower than the mod-
ule’s capacity, the business model is in-
verted and the module can offer its excess 
capacity to other enterprises needing its 
functionality.
This way, load balancing can be achieved 
both at the demand and capacity ends. The load 
balancing between consumption and generation 
is automatic and dynamic, although under previ-
ously agreed contractual constraints.
The Resilient Enterprise
Any enterprise should have a backup plan in case 
any of its EIS modules or resources fails. Resources 
include humans, computers, and other equipment. 
Although replacing a sick person that holds spe-
cific knowledge is much more difficult than finding 
an alternative to a broken truck, for example, the 
point is that any backup plan must be built into 
the EIS by proper enterprise architecture design, 
and not dealt with only when a problem occurs. 
Resilience is a usual topic in IT, but sometimes 
enterprises tend to forget that the problem is the 
same in every aspect of the business (including 
failing suppliers, outsourcees and customers).
A typical solution for a resource failure is re-
dundancy, either in normal use (in case of failure, 
only capacity is reduced) or in standby, in which 
case the alternative resource is only put into ser-
vice when the normal one fails. In hot standby, 
the alternative resource exists and is reserved and 
ready for (almost) immediate use upon failure de-
tection. This is generally too expensive and used 
only for truly critical resources. The others use 
warm or cold standby, in which case the situation 
is foreseen, what needs to be done is known but 
it takes increasingly longer to get the alternative 
solution to work. This usually implies a breach in 
the service provided by the failed resource, and 
its impact and allowed recovery time should be 
part of the EIS design.
The Virtual Enterprise
In industrial environments, the traditional mean-
ing of “virtual enterprise” has been “a temporary 
alliance of enterprises” (Camarinha-Matos, 
Afsarmanesh, Garita & Lima, 1999). In more 
information oriented circles, Petrie and Bussler 
(2003) define it as “a temporary consortium of 

34
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
partners and services”, in which services are es-
sentially Internet-based, and take a service centric 
integration perspective. Grefen, Mehandjiev, 
Kouvas, Weichhart and Eshuis (2009) go further 
and use the “instant virtual enterprise” designation 
to emphasize the agility of a supplier network.
The meaning of “virtual enterprise” (Esposito 
& Evangelista, 2014) has evolved from a classi-
cal partnership of strategic outsourcing and col-
laboration, in a timescale of weeks to years, to a 
dynamic, cost optimizing service networks and 
collaborations, valid for a time span as small as 
a single business transaction.
Virtualization, through dynamic outsourc-
ing and reconfigurability, is very important for 
enterprise agility. However, the automatic (or 
semi-automatic) design of an EIS from a market 
of services or processes implies a loss of design 
control over the outcome, unless the components 
comply with a general semantic framework or 
domain defined beforehand, to ensure their com-
patibility when translating goals into requirements, 
and component procurement and composition. 
That is why most of the examples in this area 
come from the manufacturing domain, in which 
the goals and requirements of a component are 
easier to express, and reconfigurability of the pro-
duction supply chain is a fundamental objective.
The Cloud-Oriented Enterprise
Cloud sourcing (Géczy, Izumi & Hasida, 2012) 
is a growing trend in which outsourcing is done 
dynamically to cloud-based applications, typically 
using Web Services or a RESTful API. It is cloud 
computing seen from an outsourcing point of view, 
entailing a service delivery model characterized 
by the usual cloud properties:
•	
Self-Service: The customer is a heavy 
co-producer;
•	
Automation: The customer does not have 
to deal with the management of resourc-
es, provisioning of services, application 
patches and updates;
•	
Virtualization: The customer has no 
notion of where and how the service is 
implemented;
•	
Elasticity: The apparent service capacity 
shrinks or grows dynamically as the cus-
tomer requires;
•	
Pay-per-Use: No investment upfront, no 
minimum consumption;
•	
Multi-Tenancy: The resources are shared 
by many customers, transparently, with se-
curity and load balancing, which reduces 
maximum capacity and hence the service 
costs.
Cloud sourcing is just a form of virtualization 
in service outsourcing, used as needed in a cloud 
bursting (Fadel & Fayoumi, 2013) fashion. An EIS 
must still be designed and someone has to decide 
which modules will be needed. Providers offer 
services using a utility paradigm, which means 
that they can offer the same service (although 
configurable) to any customer that wants it.
Decoupling and distributed interoperability 
become relevant concerns, because cloud-based 
services must now be designed not for a specific 
EIS but for a broad base of potential customers.
The Enterprise as a Service (EaaS)
This concept can be defined by the following 
guidelines:
•	
Instead of guessing what and how much 
the customer demand will be (introducing 
provisions for it in the EIS in advance), the 
EIS should be designed and assembled on 
the fly in reaction to concrete customer de-
mand, with a high degree of customization;
•	
Instead of considering the EIS as part of a 
value chain, see it as a value creator, or an 
adapter between what the customer wants 
and what other enterprises can provide;

35
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
•	
Instead of seeking collaboration with other 
enterprises, build the EIS dynamically and 
virtually on top of a library of services, us-
ing outsourcing as the main organizational 
paradigm;
•	
Instead of investing a lot in defining an 
elaborate strategy, build the entire EIS for 
agility, so that strategy is easily and quick-
ly adaptable to the fast-evolving business 
world.
The EaaS is a menu-based EIS, in the sense 
that a new, specialized and customized EIS can 
be built for each business transaction (or class of 
transactions), with lower granularity and higher 
agility than traditional EIS. Unlike any of the pre-
vious scenarios, outsourcing is the main service 
delivery mechanism of the EaaS model and is 
meant to be used with all service types, including 
human roles.
Although EaaS may seem similar to SaaS 
(Software as a Service), these are two orthogonal 
concepts. SaaS is essentially a service delivery 
mechanism, whereas EaaS is an EIS building 
paradigm. SaaS offers full applications remotely, 
hiding management problems, but has no idea of 
how an EIS should be organized, and indeed cur-
rent SaaS offerings (ERPs, in particular) are not 
that easy to configure and to integrate with other 
subsystems. EaaS, on the other hand, advocates 
lower granularity and promotes the dynamic in-
teroperability of services more than their static 
integration into an EIS. Instead of one large ap-
plication, it is better to use a library of smaller, 
customizable services. Agile adaptability to the 
customer requirements is the main tenet.
Figure 3 depicts the lifecycle of the EIS of 
an EaaS, reflecting a changeability model more 
dynamic than that of Figure 2, which reflects the 
EIS of a traditional enterprise. Customers are at 
the center by design.
The EaaS model divides the EIS lifecycle 
into two parts, with the customer precisely at the 
middle. The customer is the most important actor 
in the lifecycle, around which everything cycles. 
Again, this is a maximalist model, and real cases 
can optimize some of the aspects. This model can 
be briefly explained as follows:
•	
The Market Making Part: This involves 
not only assessing what the customer 
wants but also influencing him by show-
ing how a customized solution can solve 
his problems. The EaaS must make its own 
customers, not just wait for them to appear. 
It involves two loops:
◦◦
Reorientation: This essentially rec-
ognizes business patterns and tries 
to contribute to the organization and 
structure of the service library, to 
capitalize on service reuse and mini-
mize the customization effort and 
implementation time. On the other 
hand, the customer does not always 
know what exactly he needs, and the 
service library, based on proven busi-
ness patterns, can be a precious help. 
In other words, it contributes to the 
mutual alignment between the ser-
vice library and the customer needs;
◦◦
Rebirth: Necessary when new tech-
nologies, innovative ideas, or compe-
tition changes appear. The EaaS de-
velops its market vision from the gap 
between the customer needs and the 
suppliers offerings, which define the 
business opportunities, in particular 
when innovative ideas are available. 
Strategy, which must be light and ag-
ile, must also be attentive to competi-
tion, which has to be assumed agile 
as well;
•	
The Service Implementation Part: The 
EaaS should be able to provide a new 
EIS design for each customer request. 
Naturally, most of these requests will fol-
low common business patterns and there-
fore the EIS will actually be variants of 

36
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
pre-established EIS, adequate to those 
patterns. How easy will be to adapt these 
patterns to concrete cases depends on how 
well the library is designed. This involves 
the following loops:
◦◦
Reaction: This is essentially the same 
as in traditional EIS, but we need to 
keep in mind that the EaaS must be 
flexible to be adaptable, which means 
that monitoring and control tech-
niques may be made more specialized 
and adapted to each case;
◦◦
Reconfiguration: This is less relevant 
than in traditional EIS because reor-
ganization, the next loop, becomes a 
feasible and more flexible alternative, 
given the customization philosophy 
of an EaaS. Nevertheless, the EIS 
of an EaaS must be able to cater for 
situations that require frequent choice 
among a fixed set of configurations;
◦◦
Reorganization: This needs to be 
done in each change of pattern of cus-
tomer requests. The design, develop-
ment, and deployment box of Figure 
2 has been replaced here by an assem-
bly box, to make clear that this essen-
tially involves assembling services 
from reusable services in the library. 
Adapting services and in particular 
developing new ones should be the 
exception, rather than the norm.
Figure 3. The lifecycle of the EIS of an enterprise as a service

37
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
A MULTIDIMENSIONAL ENTERPRISE 
ARCHITECTURE FRAMEWORK
The customer-centric approach of the EaaS, 
adapting as much as possible to the customer, 
whatever small the business volume is, and hav-
ing the production done only when the customer 
requires it, is a significant business paradigm shift 
that makes agility the most important feature, next 
to quality. Dividing the service lifecycle in two 
parts, one whose output is the library of services 
and the other that uses that library, helps in de-
signing for flexibility and in promoting a wider 
customer base.
However, our main concern is interoperabil-
ity, concerning how EIS will be able to connect 
and interoperate. Figures 2 and 3 express very 
high-level models, with not enough separation of 
concerns to allow us to understand what is really 
involved in interoperability, in its several slants 
and dimensions. More than a mere lifecycle, in 
a somewhat linear pipeline from a conceptual to 
an operational level, we need a multidimensional 
framework, in which independent dimensions can 
be analyzed separately.
We start by simplifying Figure 3 into two loops, 
which correspond to the left and right parts of 
Figure 3 and are depicted in Figure 4.
The architectural loop is inspired by the Busi-
ness Motivation Model (Malik, 2009) and contem-
plates three main concepts, which embody three 
of the main questions about system development 
that were popularized by the Zachman framework 
(O’Rourke, Fishman & Selkow, 2003):
•	
Motivations: Emphasize the reasons be-
hind the architectural decisions taken (why 
is the EIS this way), in accordance with the 
specification of the problem that the EIS is 
designed to solve;
•	
Ends: Express the desires and expecta-
tions (i.e., goals and objectives) of the 
stakeholders for which the EIS is relevant 
(what is the EIS trying to achieve);
•	
Means: Describe the mechanisms (i.e., 
actions) used to fulfill those expectations 
(how can the EIS do it).
The fulfillment loop in Figure 4 models sub-
sequent stages in the lifecycle and is based on the 
organization adopted by classical development 
methods, such as the Rational Unified Process 
(Kruchten, 2004), eventually adapted to take into 
account the dynamic features of the EaaS:
•	
Implementation: Includes stages such as 
development, testing and deployment, but 
also the more dynamic features of Figure 
3, such as component assembly and setup;
•	
Operation: Corresponds to executing the 
EIS;
•	
Evaluation: Monitors the EIS and mea-
sures indicators to assess how well the EIS 
meets the expectations stemming from the 
motivations.
The dashed arrows in Figure 4 are used to dis-
tinguish the two loops and to indicate that, in initial 
iterations, when details are scarce, the Means stage 
can loop directly to the Motivations stage. When 
enough detail and design decisions are reached, 
the lifecycle can be enlarged to encompass both 
loops, with Means transitioning to Implementation 
and Evaluation, back to Motivations if needed.
The lifecycle is just one dimension (or axis) 
of our architectural framework, which includes 
the following dimensions (or axes), depicted in 
Figure 5:
•	
Lifecycle: This axis is discretized into the 
six stages of Figure 4;
•	
Concreteness: Each stage in the lifecycle 
can be viewed at a very high and abstract 
level, or at a very detailed and concrete 
level. We have discretized this axis into 
six levels: Conceptual, Strategic, Tactical, 
Pragmatic, Semantic, and Syntactic. Stages 
of the lifecycle and their level of concrete-

38
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
ness are orthogonal concepts. We can have 
the Implementation stage at a conceptual 
level (just ideas on how to do it) as well 
as the Motivations stage at a very con-
crete level (justification for the lowest level 
actions);
•	
Concerns: The focus words (what, how, 
where, who, when, why) in the Zachman 
framework (O’Rourke, Fishman & Selkow, 
2003) are generic but do not address the 
entire focus range. Other questions are 
pertinent, such as whence (where from), 
whither (where to), how much (quantita-
tive assessment) and how well (qualitative 
assessment). It is important to be able to 
express the dynamics of the EIS, its quality 
(how good it is, quantitatively and quali-
tatively) and other concerns (performance, 
Figure 4. Lifecycle of an EIS, with emphasis on separation of concerns
Figure 5. The axes of the architecture framework, with the front plane detailed

39
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
standards, security, reliability, and so on), 
both functional and non-functional. This 
axis is discretized as needed, according 
to the number of concerns considered. 
Therefore, the framework is open-ended.
The Lifecycle and Concreteness axes form the 
front plane of Figure 5. Each cell, resulting from 
crossing the values of both axes, represents one 
lifecycle stage at a given level of concreteness. 
Each row is a refinement of the level above it, by 
including decisions that turn some abstract aspects 
into concrete ones. Each concern, functional or 
non-functional, represents a new plane, along the 
Concerns axis. We have illustrated some concerns, 
with plane details omitted for simplicity.
We consider the levels in the Concreteness 
axis organized in two categories:
•	
Decisions taken, which define, structure 
and refine the characteristics of the EIS, at 
three levels:
◦◦
Conceptual: The top view of the EIS, 
including only global ideas;
◦◦
Strategic: Details these ideas by tak-
ing usually long lasting decisions;
◦◦
Tactical: Refines these decisions into 
shorter-term decisions;
•	
Semiotics (Chandler, 2007): The study of 
the relationship between signs (manifesta-
tions of concepts) and their interpretation 
(pragmatics), meaning (semantics) and 
representation (syntax). In this chapter, 
these designations correspond to the fol-
lowing levels:
◦◦
Pragmatic: Expresses the outcome 
of using the EIS, most likely produc-
ing some effects, which will depend 
on the context in which the EIS is 
used;
◦◦
Semantic: Specifies the meaning of 
the EIS, using an ontology to describe 
the underlying concepts;
◦◦
Syntactic: Deals with the represen-
tation of the EIS, using some ap-
propriate notation or programming 
language.
All the concreteness levels express a range 
between two opposite thresholds, also represented 
in Figure 5:
•	
Tacit: This is the highest level, above 
which concepts are too complex or too 
difficult to describe. It encompasses the 
tacit knowledge and know-how (Oguz & 
Sengün, 2011) of the designers of the EIS, 
expressing their insight and implicit expec-
tations and assumptions about the problem 
domain;
•	
Empiric: The lowest level, below which 
details are not relevant anymore. The EIS 
designers just settle for something that al-
ready exists and is known to work, such as 
a standard or a software library.
A method will be needed to exercise the 
enterprise architecture framework, to navigate 
from the top-left cell in Figure 5 (conceptual 
motivations, or purpose) to the bottom-right cell 
(operation at the syntactic level, or interpretation 
& execution), with the rightmost column taking 
care of evaluation to decide whether to loop back 
for lifecycle evolution. The path taken determines 
the method to use. The usual approach is to follow 
the diagonal, more or less, reflecting the fact that 
advancing in the lifecycle stages also provides 
further detail because decisions are taken along 
the way, increasing the concreteness level of 
the design. However, other approaches are also 
possible, more breadth-first or more depth-first. 
This must be done in all concern planes. Deciding 
which planes to tackle first also leads to method 
variants. This methodology is outside the scope 
of this chapter.

40
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
A MULTIDIMENSIONAL 
INTEROPERABILITY FRAMEWORK
The framework described in the previous section 
details what is involved in the design of an EIS. 
Now we need to tackle the problem of interoper-
ability between two interacting EIS. These can be 
deployed in the same cloud, in different clouds or 
even span several clouds. We consider services 
implemented by virtual resources, managed by the 
relevant cloud management APIs. However, bring-
ing more than one cloud into the picture raises a 
cloud API interoperability problem, and different 
servers or cloud platforms raise portability issues.
The fundamental issue is to determine the 
minimum information than one needs to know 
about the other in order to interact in a meaning-
ful way. This minimizes coupling (so that they 
can evolve as independently as possible) without 
hampering interoperability.
A Linearized View of Interoperability
Most interoperability technologies, such as Web 
Services and RESTful applications, consider only 
the syntactic format of messages, or at most the 
semantics of its terms. As Figure 5 shows, the 
ability to meaningfully interact involves higher 
levels (upper levels in the Concreteness dimen-
sion) and lifecycle stages to the left of Operation. 
If the Concerns dimension is taken into account, 
things get even more complex. For example, an 
interaction may fail due to excessive response times 
(making timeouts expire), even if functionally the 
design is correct.
To understand the interoperability aspect com-
pletely, we need an interoperability framework. 
The basic tenet is that it should be well matched 
to the architecture framework depicted by Fig-
ure 5. In particular, an EIS A should be able to 
interact with another B if each cell of the three-
dimensional space (Figure 5) of EIS A satisfies 
the requirements of the corresponding cell in the 
three-dimensional space of EIS B. This is valid 
even in the design stages, before Operation. For 
example, the motivations of A to send a message 
should match the motivations of B to receive it 
and to honor its purpose.
In practice, most of these interactions between 
corresponding cells are dealt with tacitly, not 
explicitly. In particular, stages to the left of Opera-
tion are usually tackled at the documentation level 
only. However, they are very relevant, because 
what happens in the design stages allows us to 
understand the true capabilities and limitations 
of interoperability solutions and technologies. 
Nevertheless, the Operation stage is the most 
visible, in terms of interoperability.
As any complex issue, interoperability may 
be considered at various levels of abstraction. 
Table 1 establishes a linearized classification of 
interoperability levels, with some correlation with 
the values in the Concreteness axis of Figure 5.
The interoperability categories in this table 
(first column) should be interpreted as follows:
•	
Symbiotic: Expresses the purpose and in-
tent of two interacting EIS to engage in a 
mutually beneficial agreement. This can 
entail a tight coordination under a common 
governance (if the EIS are controlled by 
the same entity), a joint-venture agreement 
(if the two EIS are substantially aligned), 
a collaboration involving a partnership 
agreement (if some goals are shared), or 
a mere value chain cooperation (an out-
sourcing contract). Enterprise engineering 
is usually the topmost level in resource in-
teraction complexity, since it goes up to the 
human level, with governance and strategy 
heavily involved. Therefore, it maps main-
ly onto the symbiotic category, although 
the same principles apply (in a more rudi-
mentary fashion) to simpler subsystems;
•	
Pragmatic: The effect of an interaction be-
tween a consumer and a provider is the out-
come of a contract, which is implemented 
by a choreography that coordinates pro-

41
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
cesses, which in turn implement workflow 
behavior by orchestrating service invoca-
tions. Languages such as Business Process 
Execution Language (BPEL) (Juric & 
Pant, 2008) support the implementation of 
processes and Web Services Choreography 
Description Language (WS-CDL) is an ex-
ample of a language that allows choreogra-
phies to be specified;
•	
Semantic: Both interacting EIS must be 
able to understand the meaning of the 
content of the messages exchanged, both 
requests and responses. This implies in-
teroperability in rules, knowledge, and on-
tologies, so that meaning is not lost when 
transferring a message from the context of 
the sender to that of the receiver. Semantic 
languages and specifications, such as OWL 
and RDF, map onto this category;
•	
Syntactic: Deals mainly with form, rather 
than content. Each message has a structure, 
composed of data (primitive resources) ac-
cording to some structural definition (its 
schema). Data need to be serialized to be 
sent over the network as messages, using 
formats such as XML or JSON;
•	
Connective: The main objective is to 
transfer a message from the context of one 
EIS to the other’s, regardless of its content. 
This usually involves enclosing that content 
in another message with control informa-
tion and implementing a message protocol 
Table 1. A linear perspective of interoperability
Category
Level
Main artifact
Description
Symbiotic (purpose and 
intent)
Coordination
Governance
Motivations to have the interaction, with varying 
levels of mutual knowledge of governance, strategy 
and goals
Alignment
Joint-venture
Collaboration
Partnership
Cooperation
Outsourcing
Pragmatic (reaction and 
effects)
Contract
Choreography
Management of the effects of the interaction at the 
levels of choreography, process and service
Workflow
Process
Interface
Service
Semantic (meaning of 
content)
Inference
Rule base
Interpretation of a message in context, at the levels 
of rule, known EIS components and relations, and 
definition of concepts
Knowledge
Knowledge base
Ontology
Concept
Syntactic (notation of 
representation)
Structure
Schema
Representation of EIS components, in terms of 
composition, primitive components and their 
serialization format in messages
Predefined type
Primitive resource
Serialization
Message format
Connective (transfer 
protocol)
Messaging
Message protocol
Lower level formats and network protocols involved 
in transferring a message from the context of the 
sender to that of the receiver
Routing
Gateway
Communication
Network protocol
Physics
Media protocol
Environmental 
(deployment and 
migration)
Management
API
Cloud environment in which each EIS is deployed 
and managed, and the portability problems raised
Library (SaaS)
Utility service
Platform (PaaS)
Basic software
Computer (IaaS)
Virtual hardware

42
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
(such as SOAP or HTTP) over a commu-
nications network, according to its own 
protocol (such as the Transmission Control 
Protocol/Internet Protocol – TCP/IP) and 
possibly involving routing gateways;
•	
Environmental: Each EIS also interacts 
with the environment in which it is de-
ployed (anew or by migration). The cloud’s 
API and the infrastructure level that the EIS 
requires (existing utility services, software 
servers, operating system and virtual hard-
ware, including processor types) will most 
likely have impact on the way EIS interact, 
particularly if they are deployed in (or mi-
grate between) different clouds, from dif-
ferent cloud vendors. Interoperability be-
tween an application and the environment 
in which it is deployed is usually known 
as portability (Petcu, Macariu, Panica & 
Crăciun, 2013).
These levels are always present in all EIS inter-
actions, even the simplest ones. There is always a 
motivation and purpose in sending a message, an 
effect stemming from the reaction to its reception, 
a meaning expressed by the message, and a format 
used to send it over a network under some protocol.
However, what happens in practice is that some 
of these layers are catered for tacitly or empirically:
•	
Portability is mainly dealt with in an ad 
hoc manner and usually under some form 
of vendor lock-in, particularly at the API 
level, since cloud standards are still incipi-
ent (Lewis, 2012);
•	
The Connective category is usually dealt 
with empirically, by assuming some proto-
col, such as HTTP or SOAP;
•	
Syntactic is the most used category, be-
cause it is the simplest and most famil-
iar, with interfaces that deal mainly with 
syntax or primitive semantics, with data 
description languages such as XML and 
JSON;
•	
The Semantic category, given the in-
creasing relevance of the Semantic Web 
(Shadbolt, Hall & Berners-Lee, 2006), is 
beginning to be explicitly addressed with 
semantic annotations and languages, based 
either on XML or JSON, but it is still 
largely subject to tacit assumptions, for 
example regarding XML’s namespaces or 
predefined media types;
•	
The Pragmatic category is usually consid-
ered at the documentation level only, with 
many tacit assumptions, or implemented 
by software but without formal specifi-
cation. Choreography specifications and 
tools to verify them are seldom used;
•	
The Symbiotic category is considered 
only with very complex EIS (such as en-
terprises) and in the conceptual stages of 
the lifecycle, again at the documentation 
level only. In most cases, it is simply as-
sumed that, if an EIS exposes a service, it 
can be invoked regardless of motivations, 
purpose, or any other high-level concerns.
Another important aspect is non-functional 
interoperability. It is not just a question of invoking 
the right operation with the right parameters. Ad-
equate service levels, context awareness, security, 
and other non-functional issues must be considered 
when EIS interact, otherwise interoperability 
will be less effective or not possible at all. The 
framework of Table 1 must be considered for each 
plane in Figure 5.
Finally, we must realize that all these interoper-
ability categories constitute an expression of EIS 
coupling. On the one hand, two uncoupled EIS 
(with no interactions between them) can evolve 
freely and independently, which favors adapt-
ability, changeability and even reliability (if one 
fails, there is no impact on the other). On the other 
hand, EIS need to interact to cooperate towards 
common or complementary goals, implying that 
some degree of previously agreed mutual knowl-
edge is indispensable. The more they share with 

43
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
the other, the more integrated they are and the 
easier interoperability becomes, but the greater 
coupling gets.
What the interoperability framework expressed 
by Table 1 provides is a classification that allows 
us to understand better the coupling details, namely 
at what levels they occur and what is involved in 
each level, instead of having just a blurred depen-
dency notion. In this respect, it constitutes a tool to 
analyze and to compare different interoperability 
models and technologies.
Reducing Coupling in 
Interoperability
Most EIS are made interoperable by design, i.e., 
conceived and implemented to work together, in a 
consumer-provider relationship. Web Services are 
a typical interoperability solution, in which case:
•	
Schemas are shared between interacting 
services, establishing coupling for all the 
possible documents satisfying each sche-
ma, even if they are not actually used;
•	
Searching for an interoperable service is 
done by schema matching with similar-
ity algorithms (Jeong, Lee, Cho & Lee, 
2008) and ontology matching and mapping 
(Euzenat & Shvaiko, 2007). This does not 
ensure interoperability and manual adapta-
tions are usually unavoidable.
The interoperability concept, as defined in 
this chapter, introduces a different perspective, 
stronger than similarity but weaker than common-
ality (the result of sharing the same schemas and 
ontologies). The trick is to allow partial (instead 
of full) interoperability, by considering only the 
intersection between what the consumer needs and 
what the provider offers. If the latter subsumes 
the former, the degree of interoperability required 
by the consumer is feasible, regardless of whether 
the provider supports additional features or not. 
When this is true, the consumer is said to be com-
patible with the provider or, more precisely, that 
an EIS A is compatible with an EIS B regarding 
a consumer-provider relationship.
The main advantages of this are:
•	
Coupling is limited to the documents that 
actually contain the used features and not 
to all possible documents that satisfy the 
schema (reduced coupling);
•	
A consumer is more likely to find suitable 
providers based on a smaller set of fea-
tures, rather than on a full schema;
•	
A provider will be able to serve a broader 
base of consumers, since it will impose 
less restrictions on them.
Compatibility between a consumer and a pro-
vider is known as compliance (Kokash & Arbab, 
2009). The consumer must satisfy (comply with) 
the requirements established by the provider to 
accept requests sent to it, without which these 
cannot be validated, understood and executed.
It is important to note that any consumer that 
complies with a given provider can use it, inde-
pendently of having been designed for interaction 
with it or not. The consumer and provider need not 
share the same schema. The consumer’s schema 
needs only to be compliant with the provider’s 
schema in the features that it actually uses.
Since EIS have independent lifecycles, they 
cannot freely share names, and schema compli-
ance must be tested structurally, feature by feature, 
between messages sent by the consumer and the 
interface offered by the provider. This is known 
as structural compatibility.
Besides the use relationship between a con-
sumer and a provider, the replacement relationship 
between two providers is also of relevance. The 
issue is to ascertain whether a provider B, serving 
a consumer A, can be replaced by another provider 
Y, such that the consumer-provider relationship 
enjoyed by A is not impaired. In other words, 
the issue is whether Y is replacement compatible 
with B.

44
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
The reasons for replacing a provider by another 
may be varied, such as switching to an alterna-
tive in case of failure or lack of capacity of B, 
evolution of B (in which case Y would be the new 
version of B), or simply a management decision. 
The important aspect to note is that, again, Y does 
not need to support all the features of B, but just 
those that A actually uses (partial compatibility).
Replacement compatibility between two pro-
viders is known as conformance (Kim & Shen, 
2007; Adriansyah, van Dongen & van der Aalst, 
2010). The provider must fulfill the expectations 
of the consumer regarding the effects of a request 
(including eventual responses), therefore being 
able to take the form of (to conform to) whatever 
the consumer expects it to be. Note that a provider 
may be conformant to another with respect to one 
consumer but not with respect to another. It all 
depends on the set of features used by the consumer.
Compliance and conformance are relationship 
properties that are not symmetric (e.g., if A com-
plies with B, B does not necessarily comply with 
A) but are transitive (e.g., if A complies with B 
and B complies with C, then A complies with C).
Figure 6 illustrates compliance and confor-
mance. An EIS A, in the role of consumer, has 
been designed to interact with an EIS that includes 
specification B, in the role of provider. B includes 
only the features that A requires and corresponds 
to how A views its provider (any other feature is 
irrelevant to A). A is fully compliant with B, in the 
sense that it uses only features that B provides, in 
the way that B expects, and B does not include any 
additional feature. At some point, B is replaced 
by an EIS Y, which has been designed to expect 
consumers that require no more features than those 
used by specification X (which is how Y views its 
consumers). Can A use Y as if it were B?
This depends on two necessary conditions:
•	
Compliance: B must comply with X. Since, 
by design, A complies with B and X com-
plies with Y, transitiveness means that A 
complies with Y and can use Y as if it were 
B, as it was designed for;
•	
Conformance: X must conform to B. 
Since, by design, Y conforms to what X 
expects as a provider (and the same about 
B regarding A), transitiveness means that Y 
conforms to what A expects as a provider B 
and can replace (take the form of) B with-
out A noticing it.
Merging the Interoperability and 
Enterprise Architecture Frameworks
Compliance and conformance are general con-
cepts, in terms of satisfying requirements and 
expectations, respectively, and can be applied 
to behavior, data, or any other aspect of EIS 
that interact, at a high level of abstraction or at 
a low and detailed level, as categorized by Table 
1. Wherever there is a relationship, compliance 
and conformance are present and can explain the 
degree of interoperability achieved.
Figure 7 expresses this by establishing a 
compliance and conformance relationship (as 
described by Table 1 and Figure 6) between two 
EIS, each described by an instantiation of the en-
terprise architecture framework. This corresponds 
to adding another dimension to the framework of 
Figure 5.
Lower degrees of interoperability can be 
achieved by relaxing some of these conditions, 
along each of the axes. This means considering 
them tacitly, instead of explicitly. For example:
•	
Concerns: Not all concerns are identically 
relevant. Security may require fulfilling 
every detail, but other concerns may have 
fuzzier rules, such as social and cultural 
issues, or vary dynamically, such as qual-
ity of service (in a best effort approach) 
or financial conditions (with dynamic 
optimizations);
•	
Lifecycle: The columns Implementation 
and Evaluation are less relevant to interop-

45
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
Figure 6. EIS compatibility, by use (compliance, A complies with B) and replacement (conformance, Y 
conforms to B)
Figure 7. Complete framework, with interoperability axis (plane details omitted for simplicity)

46
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
erability than the others, since different 
implementations can support the same op-
erational specifications, and each interact-
ing EIS can be evaluated separately;
•	
Concreteness: By lowering the Tacit 
threshold (in Figure 5) and raising the 
Empiric threshold, we can adjust the lev-
els of concreteness at which interoperabil-
ity is considered. The most common case 
in programming is to deal explicitly with 
the syntactic level, with some incursions 
into higher levels in some columns (mostly 
Means and Implementation). Nevertheless, 
it also makes sense that integration at high-
er levels and at lower levels uses different 
technologies, by using APIs that raise the 
empiric level and hide the details of differ-
ent implementations.
COMPARISON WITH OTHER 
INTEROPERABILITY FRAMEWORKS
The usefulness of any framework lies in its ex-
pressive power. It should be able to describe any 
instantiation of the problem domain for which it 
has been conceived. The objective of this section 
is to show how several interoperability frameworks 
can be mapped onto ours and be described by it. 
Although not an exhaustive exercise, it gives a 
hint on how these mappings can be undertaken.
We start with the frameworks that express a 
linear perspective of interoperability, in the line 
with Table 1, which described several levels of 
interoperability, from high-level and abstract 
to low-level and concrete. One of the first sys-
tematizations of distributed interoperability was 
accomplished by the Open Systems Intercon-
nection (OSI) reference model (ISO, 1994), with 
seven levels. This standard deals mostly with 
communication issues, with the objective of 
sending data and reproducing it at the receiver. 
How these data are interpreted by the receiver 
and how it reacts to the data is left unspecified, 
encompassed by the topmost level, Application. 
Since interoperability must ensure not only data 
exchange but also meaningful use of information, 
this level needs to be detailed. Table 2 describes 
other linear interoperability frameworks, created 
to fulfill this purpose.
Table 2 suggests a vertical composition mecha-
nism, in which each level is composed of artifacts 
in the levels below it. However, the following 
difficulties arise in these frameworks, caused by 
the existence of only one dimension:
•	
Composition alone is not sufficient to de-
scribe completely each level in terms of 
the artifacts in lower levels, particularly in 
the higher levels (social, cultural, ethical, 
legal, etc.);
•	
Not all interoperability levels are dealt with 
at the same time. Some are more dynamic 
and pertain to operation time, whereas oth-
ers are more static and must be dealt with 
at conception or design time;
•	
An EIS is not a monolithic artifact with a 
single facet. It has several slants and as-
pects, under which interoperability may 
need differentiated treatment. This is usu-
ally the case of non-functional aspects, 
such as reliability, security, and context-
oriented behavior.
These interoperability frameworks are simple 
but limited, when trying to cater for this diversity 
and variability. To overcome these problems, sev-
eral multidimensional interoperability frameworks 
have been proposed, namely those described in 
Table 3. Some give more relevance to enterprise 
architecture than others do, but most are heavily 
influenced by the interoperability problem, which 
corresponds to the method of making two EIS in-
teroperable. In a way, these frameworks start from 
the real world, in a set of contexts and domains, 
identify which types of artifacts need to be made 

47
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
interoperable and conceive an architectural space 
of dimensions oriented towards the problems to 
be solved in those contexts and domains.
Our approach is different, guided by the fol-
lowing principles:
•	
To consider the interoperability a generic 
system problem, context and domain in-
dependent, but contemplating interacting 
systems of arbitrarily high complexity, 
such as enterprises;
•	
To introduce real world contexts and do-
mains as instantiations of the generic in-
teroperability problem, using the provisions 
of the framework (dimensions, namely 
Concerns) to solve a given problem;
•	
To separate the framework (the organi-
zation and classification scheme of the 
various aspects of the enterprises that 
are relevant to interoperability) from the 
method (the plan to make two or more 
enterprises interoperable). In this chapter 
we focus on the framework, although the 
method is briefly mentioned in section “A 
multidimensional enterprise architecture 
framework”;
•	
To elect the enterprise architecture as the 
foundation ground for interoperability, by 
starting with a set of orthogonal dimen-
sions, as illustrated by Figure 5, with life-
cycle stages and levels of concreteness as 
the main structuring guidelines;
•	
To organize interoperability as a mapping 
from one EIS to another, as expressed by 
Figure 7. In other words, each interoper-
ability issue arises from the need to relate 
the corresponding issues of two interacting 
enterprises;
•	
To separate what is relevant to the interop-
erability mechanism proper, in a domain 
independent way (which corresponds to 
understanding the intent, content and trans-
Table 2. Comparison between several linear interoperability frameworks (referred to by acronym and/
or first author)
OSI 
(ISO, 1994)
C4IF 
(Peristeras, 2006)
Lewis 
(2008)
Stamper 
(1996)
LCIM 
(Wang, 2009)
EIF 
(2010)
Monfelt 
(2011)
Application
Collaboration
Organizational
Social world
Conceptual
Political
SWOT
Cultural
Ethical
Legal
Legal
Pragmatic
Dynamic
Organizational
Managerial
Pragmatic
Organizational
Consolidation
Semantic
Semantic
Semantic
Semantic 
(includes 
syntactic)
Adaptation
Application
Presentation
Communication
Syntactic
Syntactic
Syntactic
Presentation
Session
Session
Transport
Machine
Empirics
Technical
Technical
Transport
Network
Connection
Network
Link
Link
Physical 
Medium
Physical 
world
Physical Medium

48
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
fer mechanism of a message, as well as the 
reaction of the interlocutor, in the context 
of a generic transaction), from what is do-
main specific (such as social, cultural, ethi-
cal and legal issues);
•	
To separate the roles of consumer and 
provider in an interaction, which discrimi-
nates compliance from conformance, in-
stead of considering generic, symmetric 
relationships;
•	
To include interoperability issues between 
and EIS and its deployment platform, 
namely in terms of portability and cloud 
API management diversity.
Under these principles, the mapping of the 
interoperability frameworks of Table 2 in our 
framework is done essentially in the following way:
•	
OSI (ISO/IEC, 1994), C4IF (Peristeras 
& Tarabanis, 2006), Lewis (2008) and 
LCIM (Wang, Tolk & Wang, 2009) have 
a straightforward mapping, essentially 
one-to-one at the lower levels and with 
our framework detailing the higher levels 
in these frameworks. In the case of LCIM, 
the Dynamic level corresponds roughly to 
the Symbiotic category in Table 1 and the 
Conceptual level, dealing with documen-
Table 3. Several multidimensional interoperability frameworks
Framework
Dimensions
Description
SOSI (Morris et al, 2004)
Operational
Issues between existing systems that need to interoperate, such as lack of information 
and non-intuitive user interfaces
Programmatic
Interoperability between computer applications and solutions
Constructive
Architectural issues such as data schema interoperability
AIF, ATHENA 
Interoperability 
Framework 
(Berre et al, 2007)
Conceptual
Integration models at the levels of enterprise/business, process, service and 
information/data
Application
Methodology with methods to support the development of interoperability projects
Technical
Implementation basis around technologies such as BPEL, Web Services and XML
FEI, Framework for 
Enterprise Interoperability 
(ISO, 2011), based on 
(Chen, 2006)
Concerns
At the levels of business, processes, services and data
Barriers
Difficulties in making systems interoperable (conceptual, technological and 
organizational)
Approach
Plan to overcome the barriers. Can be organized in three ways: 
• Integrated (a common format is used by all systems); 
• Unified (common goals and semantic mapping); 
• Federated (common goals and ontology are possible, but each system must adapt 
to others dynamically, without any imposed model).
ULS Interoperability 
Framework (Ostadzadeh 
& Fereidoon, 2011)
Abstract
Six classical questions of the Zachman framework (O’Rourke, Fishman & Selkow, 
2003), in the interoperability context: what, how, where, who, why, when
Perspective
Layered interoperability concerns (contextual, conceptual, logical, physical and out-
of-context)
Barriers
Considers the dimensions of SOSI (Operational, Constructive and Programmatic) as 
barriers and extends them with cultural barriers
ENSEMBLE European 
Project (Agostinho, 
Jardim-Goncalves & 
Steiger-Garcao, 2011)
Domains
Interoperability problem space: social, applied and formal sciences
Areas
Scientific areas underlying interoperability: data, process, rules, objects, software, 
cultural, knowledge, services, social networks, electronic identity, cloud and 
ecosystems
Elements
Scientific interoperability elements: semantics, models, tools, orchestration

49
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
tation, is mapped onto the left side of the 
Lifecycle-Concreteness plane of our frame-
work, in which the EIS is designed and 
models and documentation are produced;
•	
In the framework of Stamper (1996), there 
is a good mapping to our framework up to 
the Pragmatics level. The Social world lev-
el is mapped onto a plane in the Concerns 
axis of our framework;
•	
The political and legal levels in the 
European 
Interoperability 
Framework 
(EIF, 2010) are also mapped onto planes in 
the Concerns axis;
•	
A similar mapping is done in the case of the 
framework of Monfelt (2011). The Legal, 
Ethical and Cultural levels are mapped 
onto planes in the Concerns axis. The 
SWOT analysis (Strengths, Weaknesses, 
Opportunities, and Threats) actually be-
longs to the method, not the framework, 
and entails performing the analysis in the 
context of several Concerns planes.
The mapping of the multidimensional frame-
works of Table 3 can be done in the following way:
•	
The SOSI framework (Morris et al, 2004) 
includes the lifecycle dimension, which 
can be easily mapped onto the Lifecycle 
dimension in our framework;
•	
In the ATHENA framework (Berre et al, 
2007), the conceptual integration, with the 
levels of enterprise/business, process, ser-
vice and information/data, has a straight-
forward mapping onto our interoperabil-
ity layers, in Table 1. The application and 
technical integrations, however, involve 
activities that are best mapped onto the 
method, not the framework;
•	
In the framework proposed by Chen 
(2006), the concerns dimension (business, 
processes, services, and data) correspond 
to our interoperability dimension and are 
mapped onto levels in Table 1. The other 
dimensions, the barriers to overcome and 
the approach taken fit better the method 
than the framework. Nevertheless, there 
is an interesting mapping from the types 
of approach to the higher levels of our in-
teroperability dimension, in Table 1. These 
types are integrated (a common format 
is used by all systems), unified (common 
goals and semantic mapping) and federat-
ed (there may be common goals and ontol-
ogy, but each system must adapt to others 
dynamically, without any imposed model). 
These can be mapped onto interoperability 
profiles and therefore be described by the 
framework prior to exercising the method;
•	
The 
framework 
of 
Ostadzadeh 
& 
Fereidoon (2011) is based on an enterprise 
architecture framework, like our own. The 
Zachman questions map partly onto the 
Lifecycle stages (Motivations is why, Ends 
is what, Means is how) and partly onto the 
Concerns axis (who, where and when). 
The layered interoperability concerns 
(contextual, conceptual, logical, physical 
and out-of-context) map directly onto our 
interoperability levels in Table 1 and the 
remaining dimension is identical to SOSI 
(expressing the lifecycle), with the addi-
tion of a cultural aspect, which we map 
onto a Concerns plane.;
•	
The project ENSEMBLE (Agostinho, 
Jardim-Goncalves & Steiger-Garcao, 2011) 
follows a methodology to establish a sci-
entific base for enterprise interoperability, 
rather than an interoperability framework. 
In this respect, the ENSEMBLE’s approach 
is complementary to ours, coming from the 
opposite direction. Essentially, it adopts a 
top-down approach by gathering informa-
tion on the real world domains that pose 
interoperability problems and then deriv-
ing the scientific base to solve them. Our 
approach, bottom-up, entails establishing 
a rationale for what interoperability is, as 

50
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
a universal concept relating entities of any 
level of complexity and domain, and deriv-
ing a generic framework that allows us to 
structure and to organize the aspects in real 
world interoperability problems, as a tool 
that can be a precious aid in solving them.
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
Compliance and conformance are basic concepts in 
interoperability and can be applied to all domains 
and levels of abstraction and complexity. Although 
work exists on its formal treatment in specific 
areas, such as choreographies (Adriansyah, van 
Dongen & van der Aalst, 2010), an encompassing 
study needs to be conducted on what is the exact 
meaning of compatibility (compliance and con-
formance) at each of the interoperability levels of 
Table 1. Their formal definition, across all levels, 
needs to be made in a systematic way, building 
on previous work.
Cloud interoperability (Loutas, Kamateri, 
Bosi & Tarabanis, 2011) is a huge problem with 
increasingly importance. Cloud providers favor 
standardization but not homogeneity, since they 
need differentiation as a marketing argument. A 
study needs to be carried out on the suitability of 
compliance and conformance as a partial interop-
erability solution in cloud computing, namely in 
concerns cloud management APIs.
The interoperability framework presented in 
this chapter needs to be improved and made more 
complete, namely in the Concerns axis, to include 
relevant concerns such as security and common 
domain-specific aspects and problems, such as 
those uncovered by other frameworks and those 
being systematized by ENSEMBLE (Agostinho, 
Jardim-Goncalves & Steiger-Garcao, 2011).
The method to exercise the framework needs 
to be specified and structured in a systematic way, 
with a comparative case study regarding other 
interoperability methods being used today, namely 
those that are part of specifications promoted by 
relevant bodies, such as the European Interoper-
ability Framework (EIF, 2010) or standardized, 
such as the Framework for Enterprise Interoper-
ability (Chen, 2006). As noted above, several 
multidimensional frameworks include parts of a 
method, for which currently there is no mapping 
in our proposal.
CONCLUSION
The world is increasingly both distributed and 
interconnected. Interoperability is crucial and 
standards are not enough to ensure cooperation 
between EIS (Lewis, Morris, Simanta & Wrage, 
2008). In the case of cloud computing, standardiza-
tion is yet to become a reality, with each large cloud 
provider offering its own cloud management API.
In an attempt to shed light into the problem, 
providing a classification structure to organize 
interoperability concerns, several interoperabil-
ity frameworks have been proposed, both one-
dimensional and multidimensional. However, 
their approaches fall short of providing a truly 
systematic organization of the problem. Most of 
the proposals tackle the problem of integrating 
existing EIS and not the general problem of how 
to conceive them so that they are prepared for 
interoperability from the start.
This chapter has presented a generic multidi-
mensional interoperability framework, conceived 
with the purpose of providing a systematic way 
to organize and structure the various aspects that 
interoperability entails, with orthogonality of 
concepts, domain independence, large-scale com-
plexity and extensibility as the main goals, which 
have been pursued along the following guidelines:
•	
Orthogonality: By considering multiple 
dimensions, each for an aspect or concern 
orthogonal to others, with all combina-
tions valid and, as a whole, able to support 
a wide spectrum of applications;

51
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
•	
Domain Independence: By basing the 
framework on dimensions with universal 
applicability (such as lifecycle, level of 
concreteness and layers of interoperabili-
ty), with domain dependent aspects as part 
of a concerns dimension, orthogonal to the 
others;
•	
Large-Scale Complexity: By contemplat-
ing not only recursive system composition 
(any system is a composition of other sys-
tems) and but also very complex aspects, 
up to the tacit, human level of understand-
ing and reasoning;
•	
Extensibility: By allowing new concern 
planes and the promotion of a concern to 
a full dimension, if its relevance and ap-
plicability breadth justifies it.
The approach taken is generic and bottom-up, 
from universal architectural concepts to domain 
and context dependent concerns, as a complement 
to the more common approach, application-driven 
and top-down. For example, the European In-
teroperability Framework (EIF, 2010) has been 
conceived specifically for e-Government level 
services. The advantage of the bottom-up approach 
is that it leads to an open-ended framework, with 
a universal core that can then be instantiated and 
extended at will and as required in each context 
and domain.
REFERENCES
Adriansyah, A., van Dongen, B., & van der Aalst, 
W. (2010). Towards robust conformance checking. 
In M. Muehlen & J. Su (Eds.), Business Process 
Management Workshops (pp. 122–133). Berlin, 
Germany: Springer.
Aggarwal, C., & Han, J. (2013). A Survey of 
RFID Data Processing. In C. Aggarwal (Ed.), 
Managing and Mining Sensor Data (pp. 349–382). 
New York, NY: Springer US. doi:10.1007/978-
1-4614-6309-2_11
Agostinho, C., Jardim-Goncalves, R., & Steiger-
Garcao, A. (2011). Using neighboring domains 
towards setting the foundations for Enterprise 
Interoperability science. In Callaos, N. et al. 
(Eds.) International Symposium on Collaborative 
Enterprises in the Context of the 15th World-
Multi-Conference on Systemic, Cybernetics and 
Informatics (pp. 258-264, vol. II). Winter Garden, 
FL: International Institute of Informatics and 
Systemics.
Anderson, E., .... (2014, March 31). Forecast: 
Public Cloud Services, Worldwide, 2012-2018, 
1Q14 Update. Document ref. G00263153. Stam-
ford, CT: Gartner. Retrieved May 31, 2014 from 
https://www.gartner.com/doc/2696318
Anderson, E., .... (2014, May 13). Forecast 
Analysis: Public Cloud Services, Worldwide, 
1Q14 Update. Document ref. G00261940. Stam-
ford, CT: Gartner. Retrieved May 31, 2014 from 
https://www.gartner.com/doc/2738817/forecast-
analysis-public-cloud-services
Armbrust, M., Stoica, I., Zaharia, M., Fox, 
A., Griffith, R., Joseph, A. D., & Rabkin, A. 
et  al. (2010). A View of Cloud Computing. 
Communications of the ACM, 53(4), 50–58. 
doi:10.1145/1721654.1721672
Athanasopoulos, G., Tsalgatidou, A., & Pantazo-
glou, M. (2006). Interoperability among Hetero-
geneous Services, in International Conference on 
Services Computing (pp. 174-181). Piscataway, 
NJ: IEEE Computer Society Press.

52
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
Berre, A. et al.. (2007). The ATHENA Interoper-
ability Framework. In R. Gonçalves, J. Müller, K. 
Mertins, & M. Zelm (Eds.), Enterprise Interoper-
ability II (pp. 569–580). London, UK: Springer. 
doi:10.1007/978-1-84628-858-6_62
Binz, T., Breiter, G., Leyman, F., & Spatzier, T. 
(2012). Portable cloud services using Tosca. IEEE 
Internet Computing, 16(3), 80–85. doi:10.1109/
MIC.2012.43
Bist, M., Wariya, M., & Agarwal, A. (2013). 
Comparing delta, open stack and Xen Cloud Plat-
forms: A survey on open source IaaS. In KalraB.
GargD.PrasadR.KumarS. (Eds.) 3rd International 
Advance Computing Conference (pp. 96-100). 
Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Computer Society Press. 
doi:10.1109/IAdCC.2013.6514201
Brynjolfsson, E., Hofmann, P., & Jordan, J. (2010). 
Cloud computing and electricity: Beyond the util-
ity model. Communications of the ACM, 53(5), 
32–34. doi:10.1145/1735223.1735234
Camarinha-Matos, L., Afsarmanesh, H., Garita, 
C., & Lima, C. (1999). Hierarchical Coordination 
in Virtual Enterprise Infrastructures. Journal of 
Intelligent & Robotic Systems, 26(3/4), 267–287. 
doi:10.1023/A:1008137110347
Carr, N. (2004). Does IT matter?: information 
technology and the corrosion of competitive ad-
vantage. Boston, MA: Harvard Business Press.
Chandler, D. (2007). Semiotics: the basics. New 
York, NY: Routledge.
Chen, D. (2006). Enterprise interoperability frame-
work. In MissikoffM.De NicolaA.D’AntonioF. 
(Eds.) Open Interop Workshop on Enterprise 
Modelling and Ontologies for Interoperability. 
Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Chen, D., Doumeingts, G., & Vernadat, F. (2008). 
Architectures for enterprise integration and in-
teroperability: Past, present and future. Comput-
ers in Industry, 59(7), 647–659. doi:10.1016/j.
compind.2007.12.016
Demchenko, Y., Makkes, M., Strijkers, R., & 
de Laat, C. (2012). Intercloud Architecture for 
interoperability and integration. In 4th Interna-
tional Conference on Cloud Computing Tech-
nology and Science (pp.666-674). Piscataway, 
NJ: IEEE Computer Society Press. doi:10.1109/
CloudCom.2012.6427607
DTMF. (2012). Open Virtualization Format Speci-
fication. Document Number: DSP0243, version 
2.0.0. Portland, OR: Distributed Management 
Task Force, Inc. Retrieved May 30, 2014 from 
http://www.dmtf.org/sites/default/files/standards/
documents/DSP0243_2.0.0.pdf
DTMF. (2013). Cloud Infrastructure Manage-
ment Interface (CIMI) Model and REST Interface 
over HTTP Specification. Document Number: 
DSP0263, version 1.1.0. Portland, OR: Distributed 
Management Task Force, Inc. Retrieved May 30, 
2014 from http://www.dmtf.org/sites/default/files/
standards/documents/DSP0263_1.1.0.pdf
Edmonds, A., Metsch, T., & Papaspyrou, A. 
(2011). Open Cloud Computing Interface in Data 
Management-Related Setups. In S. Fiore & G. 
Aloisio (Eds.), Grid and Cloud Database Man-
agement (pp. 23–48). Berlin, Germany: Springer. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-20045-8_2
EIF. (2010). European Interoperability Frame-
work (EIF) for European Public Services, Annex 
2 to the Communication from the Commission to 
the European Parliament, the Council, the Eu-
ropean Economic and Social Committee and the 
Committee of Regions ‘Towards interoperability 
for European public services. Retrieved May 30, 
2014 from http://ec.europa.eu/isa/documents/
isa_annex_ii_eif_en.pdf

53
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
El Raheb, K. et al.. (2011). Paving the Way for 
Interoperability in Digital Libraries: The DL.org 
Project. In A. Katsirikou & C. Skiadas (Eds.), New 
Trends in Qualitive and Quantitative Methods in 
Libraries (pp. 345–352). Singapore: World Sci-
entific Publishing Company.
Erl, T. (2008). SOA: Principles of Service Design. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall PTR.
Esposito, E., & Evangelista, P. (2014). Inves-
tigating virtual enterprise models: Literature 
review and empirical findings. International 
Journal of Production Economics, 148, 145–157. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijpe.2013.10.003
Euzenat, J., & Shvaiko, P. (2007). Ontology match-
ing. Berlin, Germany: Springer.
Fadel, A., & Fayoumi, A. (2013). Cloud Resource 
Provisioning and Bursting Approaches. In Taka-
hashiS.LeeR. (Eds.) 14th ACIS International 
Conference on Software Engineering, Artificial 
Intelligence, Networking and Parallel/Distributed 
Computing (pp. 59-64). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE 
Computer Society Press.
Fernando, N., Loke, S., & Rahayu, W. (2013). 
Mobile cloud computing: A survey. Future 
Generation Computer Systems, 29(1), 84–106. 
doi:10.1016/j.future.2012.05.023
Fielding, R. (2000). Architectural Styles and the 
Design of Network-based Software Architectures. 
Doctoral dissertation. University of California at 
Irvine, CA.
Ganguly, A., Nilchiani, R., & Farr, J. (2009). 
Evaluating agility in corporate enterprises. In-
ternational Journal of Production Economics, 
118(2), 410–423. doi:10.1016/j.ijpe.2008.12.009
Géczy, P., Izumi, N., & Hasida, K. (2012). Cloud-
sourcing: Managing Cloud Adoption. Global 
Journal of Business Research, 6(2), 57–70.
Gottschalk, P., & Solli-Sæther, H. (2008). Stages 
of e-government interoperability. Electronic Gov-
ernment. International Journal (Toronto, Ont.), 
5(3), 310–320.
Grefen, P., Mehandjiev, N., Kouvas, G., Weich-
hart, G., & Eshuis, R. (2009). Dynamic business 
network process management in instant virtual 
enterprises. Computers in Industry, 60(2), 86–103. 
doi:10.1016/j.compind.2008.06.006
Heraclitus., & Patrick, G. (Eds.). (2013) The Frag-
ments of Heraclitus. New York, NY: Digireads.
com Publishing.
Imache, R., Izza, S., & Ahmed-Nacer, M. (2012). 
An enterprise information system agility assess-
ment model. Computer science and information 
systems, 9(1), 107-133.
ISO. (2011). CEN EN/ISO 11354-1, Advanced 
Automation Technologies and their Applications, 
Part 1: Framework for Enterprise Interoperability. 
Geneva, Switzerland: International Standards 
Office.
ISO/IEC. (1994). ISO/IEC 7498-1, Information 
technology – Open Systems Interconnection – 
Basic Reference Model: The Basic Model, 2nd 
edition. Geneva, Switzerland: International 
Standards Office. Retrieved May 31, 2014 from 
http://standards.iso.org/ittf/PubliclyAvailableS-
tandards/index.html
ISO/IEC. (2012). Information technology -- Cloud 
Data Management Interface (CDMI). ISO/IEC 
Standard 17826:2012. Geneva, Switzerland: 
International Organization for Standardization.
Jackson, K. (2012). OpenStack Cloud Computing 
Cookbook. Birmingham, UK: Packt Publishing 
Ltd.

54
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
Jardim-Goncalves, R., Agostinho, C., & Steiger-
Garcao, A. (2012). A reference model for sustain-
able interoperability in networked enterprises: 
Towards the foundation of EI science base. In-
ternational Journal of Computer Integrated 
Manufacturing, 25(10), 855–873. doi:10.1080/0
951192X.2011.653831
Jardim-Goncalves, R., Grilo, A., Agostinho, C., 
Lampathaki, F., & Charalabidis, Y. (2013). Sys-
tematisation of interoperability body of knowl-
edge: The foundation for enterprise interoperabil-
ity as a science. Enterprise Information Systems, 
7(1), 7–32. doi:10.1080/17517575.2012.684401
Jeong, B., Lee, D., Cho, H., & Lee, J. (2008). A 
novel method for measuring semantic similarity 
for XML schema matching. Expert Systems with 
Applications, 34(3), 1651–1658. doi:10.1016/j.
eswa.2007.01.025
Juric, M., & Pant, K. (2008). Business Process 
Driven SOA using BPMN and BPEL: From 
Business Process Modeling to Orchestration and 
Service Oriented Architecture. Birmingham, UK: 
Packt Publishing.
Khadka, R., .... (2011). Model-Driven Develop-
ment of Service Compositions for Enterprise 
Interoperability. In van Sinderen, M., & John-
son, P. (Eds.), Enterprise Interoperability (pp. 
177-190). Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-19680-5_15
Kim, D., & Shen, W. (2007). An Approach to 
Evaluating Structural Pattern Conformance of 
UML Models. In ACM Symposium on Applied 
Computing (pp. 1404-1408). New York, NY: ACM 
Press. doi:10.1145/1244002.1244305
Kokash, N., & Arbab, F. (2009). Formal Behav-
ioral Modeling and Compliance Analysis for 
Service-Oriented Systems. In F. Boer, M. Bon-
sangue, & E. Madelaine (Eds.), Formal Methods 
for Components and Objects (pp. 21–41). Berlin, 
Germany: Springer-Verlag. doi:10.1007/978-3-
642-04167-9_2
Kruchten, P. (2004). The rational unified process: 
an introduction. Boston, MA: Pearson Education 
Inc.
Lewis, G. (2012). The Role of Standards in Cloud-
Computing Interoperability, Software Engineering 
Institute, Paper 682. Retrieved May 30, 2014 from 
http://repository.cmu.edu/sei/682
Lewis, G., Morris, E., Simanta, S., & Wrage, L. 
(2008). Why Standards Are Not Enough To Guar-
antee End-to-End Interoperability. In NcubeC.
CarvalloJ. (Eds.) Seventh International Confer-
ence on Composition-Based Software Systems (pp. 
164-173). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Computer Society 
Press. doi:10.1109/ICCBSS.2008.25
Loutas, N., Kamateri, E., Bosi, F., & Tarabanis, 
K. (2011). Cloud computing interoperability: the 
state of play. In LambrinoudakisC.RizomiliotisP.
WlodarczykT. (Eds.) International Conference 
on Cloud Computing Technology and Science 
(pp. 752-757). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Computer 
Society Press. doi:10.1109/CloudCom.2011.116
Loutas, N., Peristeras, V., & Tarabanis, K. (2011). 
Towards a reference service model for the Web of 
Services. Data & Knowledge Engineering, 70(9), 
753–774. doi:10.1016/j.datak.2011.05.001
Malik, N. (2009). Toward an Enterprise Business 
Motivation Model. The Architecture Journal, 19, 
10–16.

55
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
Mell, P., & Grance, T. (2011). The NIST definition 
of cloud computing. Special publication 800-145, 
National Institute of Standards and Technology. 
Retrieved May 30, 2014 from http://csrc.nist.gov/
publications/nistpubs/800-145/SP800-145.pdf
Monfelt, Y., Pilemalm, S., Hallberg, J., & 
Yngström, L. (2011). The 14-layered framework 
for including social and organizational aspects 
in security management. Information Manage-
ment & Computer Security, 19(2), 124–133. 
doi:10.1108/09685221111143060
Morris, E., .... (2004). System of Systems Interop-
erability (SOSI): final report. Report No. CMU/
SEI-2004-TR-004. Carnegie Mellon Software 
Engineering Institute. Retrieved May 31, 2014 
from http://www.sei.cmu.edu/reports/04tr004.pdf
Mykkänen, J., & Tuomainen, M. (2008). An evalu-
ation and selection framework for interoperability 
standards. Information and Software Technology, 
50(3), 176–197. doi:10.1016/j.infsof.2006.12.001
Nurmi, D. et al.. (2009). The eucalyptus open-
source cloud-computing system. In CappelloF.
WangC.BuyyaR. (Eds.) 9th IEEE/ACM Inter-
national Symposium on Cluster Computing and 
the Grid (pp. 124-131). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE 
Computer Society Press.
O’Rourke, C., Fishman, N., & Selkow, W. (2003). 
Enterprise architecture using the Zachman frame-
work. Boston, MA: Course Technology.
Oguz, F., & Sengün, A. (2011). Mystery of 
the unknown: Revisiting tacit knowledge 
in the organizational literature. Journal of 
Knowledge Management, 15(3), 445–461. 
doi:10.1108/13673271111137420
Ostadzadeh, S., & Fereidoon, S. (2011). An Ar-
chitectural Framework for the Improvement of 
the Ultra-Large-Scale Systems Interoperability. 
In ArabniaH.RezaH.DeligiannidisL. (Eds.) In-
ternational Conference on Software Engineering 
Research and Practice (pp. 212-219). Athens, 
GA: CSREA Press.
Pautasso, C., Zimmermann, O., & Leymann, 
F. (2008). Restful web services vs. “big”’ web 
services: making the right architectural decision. 
In International conference on World Wide Web 
(pp. 805-814). ACM Press.
Peristeras, V., & Tarabanis, K. (2006). The Con-
nection, Communication, Consolidation, Col-
laboration Interoperability Framework (C4IF) 
For Information Systems Interoperability. Inter-
national Journal of Interoperability in Business 
Information Systems, 1(1), 61–72.
Petcu, D. (2013). Multi-Cloud: expectations and 
current approaches. In International Workshop 
on Multi-cloud Applications and Federated 
Clouds (pp. 1-6). New York, NY: ACM Press. 
doi:10.1145/2462326.2462328
Petcu, D., Macariu, G., Panica, S., & Crăciun, 
C. (2013). Portable cloud applications—from 
theory to practice. Future Generation Computer 
Systems, 29(6), 1417–1430. doi:10.1016/j.fu-
ture.2012.01.009
Petrie, C., & Bussler, C. (2003). Service agents 
and virtual enterprises: A survey. Internet Comput-
ing, 7(4), 68–78. doi:10.1109/MIC.2003.1215662
Potdar, V., Sharif, A., & Chang, E. (2009). Wireless 
sensor networks: A survey. In AwanI.YounasM.
HaraT.DurresiA. (Eds.) International Conference 
on Advanced Information Networking and Ap-
plications Workshops (pp. 636-641). Piscataway, 
NJ: IEEE Computer Society Press. doi:10.1109/
WAINA.2009.192

56
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
Putnik, G., & Sluga, A. (2007). Reconfigurabil-
ity of manufacturing systems for agility imple-
mentation, part I: requirements and principles. 
In Cunha, P., & Maropoulos, P. (Eds.), Digital 
Enterprise Technology: Perspectives and Future 
Challenges (pp. 91-98). New York, NY: Springer 
Science+Business Media.
Rimal, B., Choi, E., & Lumb, I. (2009). A tax-
onomy and survey of cloud computing systems. In 
KimJ. (Eds.) Fifth International Joint Conference 
on INC, IMS and IDC (pp. 44-51). Piscataway, 
NJ: IEEE Computer Society Press. doi:10.1109/
NCM.2009.218
Sabharwal, N., & Shankar, R. (2013). Apache 
Cloudstack Cloud Computing. Birmingham, UK: 
Packt Publishing Ltd.
Shadbolt, N., Hall, W., & Berners-Lee, T. (2006). 
The semantic web revisited. IEEE Intelligent Sys-
tems, 21(3), 96–101. doi:10.1109/MIS.2006.62
Stamper, R. (1996). Signs, Information, Norms 
and Systems. In Holmqvist, B., Andersen, P., 
Klein, H. and Posner, R. (Eds.), Signs of Work 
(pp. 349–397). Berlin, Germany: de Gruyter.
Wang, W., Tolk, A., & Wang, W. (2009). The 
levels of conceptual interoperability model: Ap-
plying systems engineering principles to M&S. In 
Wainer, G., Shaffer, C., McGraw, R. & Chinni, M. 
(Eds.), Spring Simulation Multiconference (article 
no.: 168). San Diego, CA: Society for Computer 
Simulation International.
Webber, J., Parastatidis, S., & Robinson, I. (2010). 
REST in Practice: Hypermedia and Systems Ar-
chitecture. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-15114-9_3
Weber-Jahnke, J., Peyton, L., & Topaloglou, T. 
(2012). eHealth system interoperability. Informa-
tion Systems Frontiers, 14(1), 1–3. doi:10.1007/
s10796-011-9319-8
Wyatt, E., Griendling, K., & Mavris, D. (2012). 
Addressing interoperability in military systems-
of-systems architectures. In BeaulieuA. (Ed.) 
International Systems Conference (pp. 1-8). 
Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Computer Society Press.
Zhang, Q., Cheng, L., & Boutaba, R. (2010). 
Cloud computing: State-of-the-art and research 
challenges. Journal of Internet Services and 
Applications, 1(1), 7–18. doi:10.1007/s13174-
010-0007-6
ADDITIONAL READING
Adamczyk, P., Smith, P., Johnson, R., & Hafiz, M. 
(2011). REST and Web services: In theory and in 
practice. In E. Wilde & C. Pautasso (Eds.), REST: 
from research to practice (pp. 35–57). New York, 
NY: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-8303-9_2
Amundsen, M. (2012, April). From APIs to af-
fordances: a new paradigm for web services. In 
Proceedings of the Third International Workshop 
on RESTful Design (pp. 53-60). ACM Press. 
doi:10.1145/2307819.2307832
Bravetti, M., & Zavattaro, G. (2007). Towards a 
unifying theory for choreography conformance 
and contract compliance. In LumpeM.Vanderper-
renW. (Eds.) 6th International Symposium on Soft-
ware Composition (pp. 34-50). Berlin, Germany: 
Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-77351-1_4
Bravetti, M., & Zavattaro, G. (2009). A theory 
of contracts for strong service compliance. 
Journal of Mathematical Structures in Com-
puter Science, 19(3), 601–638. doi:10.1017/
S0960129509007658
Castillo, P. et  al.. (2013). Using SOAP and 
REST web services as communication protocol 
for distributed evolutionary computation. Inter-
national Journal of Computers & Technology, 
10(6), 1659–1677.

57
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
Diaz, G., & Rodriguez, I. (2009). Automatically 
deriving choreography-conforming systems of 
services. In IEEE International Conference on 
Services Computing (pp. 9-16). Piscataway, NJ: 
IEEE Computer Society Press.
Dillon, T., Wu, C., & Chang, E. (2007). Refer-
ence architectural styles for service-oriented 
computing. In LiK. (Eds.) IFIP International 
Conference on Network and parallel computing 
(pp. 543–555). Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-540-74784-0_57
Ehrig, M. (2007). Ontology alignment: bridging 
the semantic gap (Vol. 4). New York, NY: Springer 
Science+Business Media, LLC.
Erl, T. (2005). Service-oriented architecture: 
concepts, technology and design. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Pearson Education.
Erl, T., Balasubramanians, R., Pautasso, C., & 
Carlyle, B. (2011). Soa with rest: Principles, 
Patterns & Constraints for Building Enterprise 
Solutions with REST. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall PTR.
Fielding, R. (2008). REST APIs must be hypertext-
driven. Roy Fielding’s blog: Untangled. Retrieved 
May 30, 2014 from http://roy.gbiv.com/un-
tangled/2008/rest-apis-must-be-hypertext-driven
Fielding, R., & Taylor, R. (2002). Principled 
Design of the Modern Web Architecture. ACM 
Transactions on Internet Technology, 2(2), 
115–150. doi:10.1145/514183.514185
Gray, N. (2004). Comparison of Web Services, 
Java-RMI, and CORBA service implementations. 
In SchneiderJ.HanJ. (Eds.) The Fifth Australasian 
Workshop on Software and System Architectures 
(pp. 52-63). Melbourne, Australia: Swinburne 
University of Technology.
Graydon, P., Habli, I., Hawkins, R., Kelly, T., & 
Knight, J. (2012). Arguing Conformance. IEEE 
Software, 29(3), 50–57. doi:10.1109/MS.2012.26
Greefhorst, D., & Proper, E. (2011). Architec-
ture principles: the cornerstones of enterprise 
architecture. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-20279-7
Haslhofer, B., & Klas, W. (2010). A survey of 
techniques for achieving metadata interoperability. 
ACM Computing Surveys, 42(2), 1–37.
Henkel, M., Zdravkovic, J., & Johannesson, P. 
(2004). Service-based Processes– Design for Busi-
ness and Technology. In International Conference 
on Service Oriented Computing (pp. 21-29). New 
York, NY: ACM Press.
ISO/IEC/IEEE. (2010). Systems and software 
engineering – Vocabulary. International Standard 
ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765:2010(E) (1st ed., p. 186). 
Geneva, Switzerland: International Organization 
for Standardization.
Jardim-Goncalves, R., Grilo, A., Agostinho, C., 
Lampathaki, F., & Charalabidis, Y. (2013). Sys-
tematisation of Interoperability Body of Knowl-
edge: The foundation for Enterprise Interoperabil-
ity as a science. Enterprise Information Systems, 
7(1), 7–32. doi:10.1080/17517575.2012.684401
Jardim-Goncalves, R., Popplewell, K., & Grilo, 
A. (2012). Sustainable interoperability: The future 
of Internet based industrial enterprises. Comput-
ers in Industry, 63(8), 731–738. doi:10.1016/j.
compind.2012.08.016
Laitkorpi, M., Selonen, P., & Systa, T. (2009). 
Towards a Model-Driven Process for Designing 
ReSTful Web Services. In International Confer-
ence on Web Services (pp. 173-180). Piscataway, 
NJ: IEEE Computer Society Press. doi:10.1109/
ICWS.2009.63

58
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
Läufer, K., Baumgartner, G., & Russo, V. (2000). 
Safe Structural Conformance for Java. [Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press.]. The Computer 
Journal, 43(6), 469–481. doi:10.1093/com-
jnl/43.6.469
Li, L., & Chou, W. (2010). Design Patterns for 
RESTful Communication. In International Con-
ference on Web Services (pp. 512-519). Piscat-
away, NJ: IEEE Computer Society Press.
Li, W., & Svard, P. (2010). REST-based SOA Ap-
plication in the Cloud: A Text Correction Service 
Case Study. In 6th World Congress on Services 
(pp. 84-90). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Computer 
Society Press. doi:10.1109/SERVICES.2010.86
Loreto, S., & Romano, S. (2012). Real-time 
communications in the web: Issues, achieve-
ments, and ongoing standardization efforts. IEEE 
Internet Computing, 16(5), 68–73. doi:10.1109/
MIC.2012.115
Mooij, A., & Voorhoeve, M. (2013). Specification 
and Generation of Adapters for System Integra-
tion. In van de Laar, P., Tretmans, J. & Borth, 
M. (Eds.) Situation Awareness with Systems of 
Systems (pp. 173-187). New York, NY: Springer. 
doi:10.1007/978-1-4614-6230-9_11
Ostadzadeh, S., & Fereidoon, S. (2011). An Ar-
chitectural Framework for the Improvement of 
the Ultra-Large-Scale Systems Interoperability. In 
International Conference on Software Engineering 
Research and Practice. Las Vegas, NV.
Pautasso, C. (2009). RESTful Web service com-
position with BPEL for REST. Data & Knowledge 
Engineering, 68(9), 851–866. doi:10.1016/j.
datak.2009.02.016
Popplewell, K. (2011). Towards the definition 
of a science base for enterprise interoperability: 
A European perspective. Journal of Systemics, 
Cybernetics, and Informatics, 9(5), 6–11.
Severance, C. (2012). Discovering JavaScript 
Object Notation. IEEE Computer, 45(4), 6–8. 
doi:10.1109/MC.2012.132
Shadbolt, N., Hall, W., & Berners-Lee, T. (2006). 
The semantic web revisited. IEEE Intelligent Sys-
tems, 21(3), 96–101. doi:10.1109/MIS.2006.62
Sheth, A., Gomadam, K., & Lathem, J. (2007). 
SA-REST: Semantically interoperable and easier-
to-use services and mashups. IEEE Internet Com-
puting, 11(6), 91–94. doi:10.1109/MIC.2007.133
Upadhyaya, B., Zou, Y., Xiao, H., Ng, J., & Lau, 
A. (2011). Migration of SOAP-based services to 
RESTful services. In 13th IEEE International 
Symposium on Web Systems Evolution (pp. 105-
114). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Computer Society 
Press. doi:10.1109/WSE.2011.6081828
Uram, M., & Stephenson, B. (2005). Services are 
the Language and Building Blocks of an Agile 
Enterprise. In N. Pal & D. Pantaleo (Eds.), The 
Agile Enterprise (pp. 49–86). New York, NY: 
Springer. doi:10.1007/0-387-25078-6_4
Villegas, D. et al.. (2010). The role of grid comput-
ing technologies in cloud computing. In B. Furht 
& A. Escalante (Eds.), Handbook of Cloud Com-
puting (pp. 183–218). New York, NY: Springer 
US. doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-6524-0_8
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Compliance: Asymmetric property between 
a consumer C and a provider P (C is compliant 
with P) that indicates that C satisfies all the re-
quirements of P in terms of accepting requests.
Conformance: Asymmetric property between 
a provider P and a consumer C (P conforms to C) 
that indicates that P fulfills all the expectations of 
C in terms of the effects caused by its requests.

59
An Interoperability Framework for Enterprise Applications in Cloud Environments
﻿
Consumer: A role performed by a resource A 
in an interaction with another B, which involves 
making a request to B and typically waiting for 
a response.
Distributed Interoperability: Interoper-
ability between systems that have independent 
lifecycles. This means that they can evolve (to a 
new version) without having to change, to suspend 
or to stop the behavior or interface of the other. 
Distribution does not necessarily imply geographi-
cal dispersion.
Enterprise Architecture Framework: Set of 
guidelines, best practices, and tools to analyze, to 
classify, to structure and to describe the architec-
ture of an enterprise.
Interoperability Framework: Set of prin-
ciples, assumptions, rules, and guidelines to 
analyze, to structure and to classify the concepts 
and concerns of interoperability.
Interoperability Method: Set of steps to 
be taken to derive an interoperable enterprise 
architecture from an initial problem statement or 
from an already existing enterprise. This is used 
typically in conjunction with an interoperability 
framework.
Interoperability: Asymmetric property 
between a consumer C and a provider P (C is 
compatible with P) that holds if C is compliant 
with P and P is conformant to C.
Lifecycle: Set of stages that a system goes 
through, starting with a motivation to build it and 
ending with its destruction. Different versions of 
a system result from iterations of these stages, in 
which the system loops back to an earlier stage 
so that changes can be made.
Provider: A role performed by a resource B 
in an interaction with another A, which involves 
waiting for a request from A, honoring it and typi-
cally sending a response to A.

60
Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  3
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-8339-6.ch003
Design Considerations 
for a Corporate Cloud 
Service Catalog
ABSTRACT
This chapter will focus on building an end user service cloud catalog which will bridge the gap from the 
design requirements to the technology delivery organization. Once in the hands of IT, a more traditional 
service catalog can be used to leverage the service orchestration and delivery components. The author 
examines designing, building, and reviewing the impact of a more end user focused service catalog. 
Success will be measured by reviewing the business metrics in order to show the criticality of great 
design techniques and using familiar models like e-commerce.
ORGANIZATION BACKGROUND
AT&T Inc., together with its subsidiaries, pro-
vides telecommunications services to consumers, 
businesses, and other providers worldwide. The 
company’s Wireless segment offers wireless voice 
and data communication services, such as local 
wireless communications services, long-distance 
services, and roaming services. This segment 
also sells various handsets, wirelessly enabled 
computers, and personal computer wireless data 
cards; and accessories, including carrying cases, 
hands-free devices, batteries, battery chargers, 
and other items. This segment sells its products 
through its own stores, or through agents or third-
party retail stores. Its Wireline segment provides 
data services comprising switched and dedicated 
transport, Internet access and network integration, 
U-verse services, and data equipment; businesses 
voice applications over IP-based networks; and 
digital subscriber lines, dial-up Internet access, 
private lines, managed Web-hosting services, 
packet services, enterprise networking services, 
and Wi-Fi services, as well as local, interstate, and 
international wholesale networking capacity to 
other service providers. This segment also offers 
voice services, such as local and long-distance, 
calling card, 1-800, conference calling, whole-
sale switched access, caller ID, call waiting, and 
voice mail services; and application management, 
R. Todd Stephens
AT&T, USA

61
Design Considerations for a Corporate Cloud Service Catalog
﻿
security services, integration services, customer 
premises equipment, outsourcing, government-
related services, and satellite video services. The 
company was formerly known as SBC Communi-
cations Inc. and changed its name to AT&T Inc. 
in November 2005. AT&T Inc. was founded in 
1983 and is headquartered in Dallas, Texas.
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
The background section is going to take a look at 
several different areas of the technology spectrum 
as they relate to this research chapter. We will begin 
by taking a look at basics of cloud computing and 
the impact this technology is having on the busi-
nesses. Next, the chapter will review a few of the 
usability frameworks and design considerations 
that can impact the utility of the application itself. 
Finally, we will review the traditional cloud service 
registry and the basic functional requirements 
needed by large organizations.
Cloud Computing Overview
In many ways, cloud computing offers up an al-
ternative to the infrastructure ownership paradigm 
that is so prevalent today. Business and Information 
Technology organizations assumed they needed 
dedicated computers and software for their busi-
ness needs. Over time this methodology creates 
infrastructure that has a lower utilization rate 
and limits the flexibility that is needed in today’s 
rapidly changing environment. Cloud computing 
comes into focus only when you think about the 
core business drivers within Information Technol-
ogy today. Some of these requirements include 
ways to increase capacity or add capabilities on 
the fly without investing in new infrastructure, 
training new personnel, or licensing new software. 
Cloud computing encompasses any subscription-
based or pay-per-use service.
The service models of Infrastructure as a 
Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS) 
and Software as a Service (SaaS) have generally 
become well accepted, as well as the notions of 
public, private and hybrid clouds. Some authors 
have suggested a further division of IaaS to include 
Hardware as a Service (Haas), Data as a Service 
(DaaS) and Communication as a Service (CaaS). 
(Butrico, M., Silva, D., & Youseff, 2008). SaaS 
may be the most common Cloud technology that 
you have used in the past. Take for example, 
Turbo Tax that runs in the cloud and you simply 
interact with the software via your computer. 
Nothing is actually stored on your computer and 
you can access the information from any device. 
PaaS is a little more complicated since it focuses 
its attention on the development of applications. 
Salesforce.com is an example of a company 
providing PaaS where you can develop applica-
tions on their platform that interact with the core 
Salesforce application and data. Here, the cloud 
service is a development platform. The final area 
is IaaS in which the infrastructure for your applica-
tion is a cloud utility. By infrastructure, we mean 
databases, servers, power, and network equipment 
is provided for you for a utility fee. You have no 
long term commitment and you can simply pay for 
the computing service based on your usage. For 
instance, a cloud provider might also host its own 
customer-facing services on cloud infrastructure. 
From a hardware provisioning and pricing point of 
view, three aspects are new in cloud computing. 
The appearance of infinite computing resources 
available on demand, quickly enough to follow 
load surges, thereby eliminating the need for cloud 
computing users to plan far ahead for provisioning. 
The elimination of an up-front commitment by 
cloud users, thereby allowing companies to start 
small and increase hardware resources only when 
there is an increase in their needs (Armbrust, Fox, 
Griffith, Joseph, Katz, Konwinski, Lee, Patterson, 
Rabkin, Stoica, & Zaharia, 2010.)
Like any emerging paradigm of information 
technology, cloud computing present several 
research challenges that need to be addressed. 
While the literature reporting research challenges 

62
Design Considerations for a Corporate Cloud Service Catalog
﻿
in cloud computing is growing quite fast, there 
has not been much attention paid to identify and 
report software engineering related challenges for 
designing, developing, and deploying solutions for 
cloud computing. We have observed that while 
several dozens of cloud based services are being 
offered, the landscape is still fragmented and there 
are no comprehensive guidelines for designing, 
developing and deploying solutions to leveraging 
cloud computing. Moreover, we have also observed 
that there is hardly any guidance available for 
migrating existing systems to cloud computing 
in terms of software engineering aspects (Babat 
& Chauhan, 2011).
Usability and Design Standards
The idea of usability as a key theme in the 
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) literature is 
not new. Research in this area has been reviewed 
for several decades now. The basic idea is that 
study of human factors is a critical component in 
all software applications. The main goal of HCI 
is to propose and review techniques, methods, 
and guidelines associated with designing better 
and more usable interfaces. Research of web site 
usability, application usability, and now mobile 
interfaces all share a common goal which is to 
provide a better end user experience. Some re-
search focuses on the existence or non-existence 
of specific functional components. Other research 
reviews the environment based on the emotions 
of the end user as well as the ability to provide a 
positive or negative experience. This chapter is 
going to focus time and energy on the functional 
and design elements of a web application.
The goal of this chapter is to ask the question 
does usability have an impact on a cloud registry 
environment. Can you apply usability principles to 
a cloud registry environment and see an improve-
ment in end user engagement? First, we need to 
define what usability actually is or is not. The im-
portance of usability is well documented. Lecerof 
and Paterno (1998) defined usability to include 
the concepts of relevance, efficiency, user attitude, 
learnability, and safety. The ISO organization de-
fines usability as the extent to which a product can 
be used by specified users to achieve goals with 
effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction within a 
pattern of contextual use (Karat, 1997). Usability 
is the broad discipline of applying sound scientific 
observation, measurement, and design principles 
to the creation and maintenance of web applica-
tions in order to bring about the greatest ease of 
use, ease of learnability, amount of usefulness, 
and least amount of discomfort for the humans 
who use the application (Pearrow, 2000). All of 
these definitions focus on the ability of the user 
to leverage the application for value creation.
There are various schools of thought on which 
design elements make a successful web site. 
Scanlon, Schroeder, Snyder, and Spool (1998) 
collected qualitative and quantitative data on key 
design factors, which included: searching, content, 
text links, images, links navigation, page layout, 
readability, graphics, and user’s knowledge. Each 
of these design elements makes an important 
contribution to a successful website. Websites 
are built to provide information or sell a product 
or service. Experts indicate that usability is about 
making sure that the average person can use the 
site as intended. Well-chosen names, layout of 
the page, text, graphics, and navigation structure 
should all come together to create instantaneous 
recognition (Krug, 2000). Becker and Mottay 
(2001) developed a usability assessment model 
used to measure a user’s experience within a web 
environment. The authors defined eight usability 
factors, which included page layout, navigation, 
design consistency, information content, perfor-
mance, customer service, reliability, and security. 
Usability and design can play an important role 
within the electronic commerce market. Design 
consistency has been defined as the key to usability 
(Nielsen, 1998). Karvonen (2000) reported that 
experienced users admitted to making intuitive 
and emotional decisions when shopping online. 
Some users simply stated, “If it looks pleasant 

63
Design Considerations for a Corporate Cloud Service Catalog
﻿
then I trust it”. Even if developing trust is not that 
simple, the research clearly shows how important 
design is in the area of trust.
There are a variety of web design elements 
that can have a positive impact on a website’s 
image, effectiveness, and trustworthiness. Design 
elements like well-chosen images, clean and clear 
layout, careful typography, and a solid use of 
color can create an effective site. In addition, a 
solid navigation structure and continuity in design 
can provide the user with the control and access 
required within an electronic commerce interface 
(Andres, 1999). Although, design elements may 
take on the form of a visual cue, the true value 
comes from a combination presentation, structure, 
and interactivity. A solid website is a collabora-
tion of design, content, usability, and a back end 
system that is integrated into the processes of the 
business (Veen, 2001). Krug (2000) defines a set 
of tools as location indicators, which are design 
elements of the site that tells the user where they 
are. This can be in the form of a page name, 
header, sitemap or page utility. The page utility 
should be used within a list type program, which 
allows the user to know where they are within the 
list of elements. Indicators like “Page 1 of 12” 
can be extremely helpful informing the user of 
their location. Nielsen (2000) describes the need 
for the user to know where they are, where they 
have been and where they can go.
Usability is increasingly recognized as an 
essential factor that determines the success of 
software systems. Practice shows that for current 
software systems, most usability issues are detect-
ed during testing and deployment. Fixing usability 
issues during this late stage of the development 
proves to be very costly. Some usability-improving 
modifications such as usability patterns may have 
architectural implications. We believe that the 
software architecture may restrict usability. The 
high costs associated with fixing usability issues 
during late-stage development prevent develop-
ers from making the necessary adjustments for 
meeting all the usability requirements (Bosch, J., 
Folmer, E., & Gurp, J., 2004).
Traditional Services of 
a Cloud Registry
A cloud service registry may also be known as a 
metadata repository in that it does not contain the 
actual service but the associated metadata describ-
ing that service. The external service registries 
store and maintain various types of service speci-
fications for a certain service including structural 
specifications represented in WSDL, behavioral 
specifications represented in BPEL4WS, quality 
specification represented in different XML-based 
schema, and context specification represented in 
specific XML-based ontologies (Dooley, Spanou-
dakis, & Zisman, 2008).
The automated provisioning of services in 
cloud computing presents several challenges 
to any organization. Users can request virtual 
machines from cloud infrastructure providers, 
but these machines have to be configured and 
managed properly. This article describes an ar-
chitecture that enables the automated deployment 
and management of the virtual infrastructure and 
software of services deployed in the cloud. The 
architecture takes a template description of a ser-
vice, which encapsulates requirements, options, 
as well as behavior for a collection of resources 
and orchestrates the provisioning of this service 
into a newly created set of virtual resources. The 
template is used for integrating the deployment 
and reconfiguration behavior of a service in which 
logical components are described along with op-
tions to scale them and appropriately change their 
configuration. Services are described through a 
set of components, which can easily be mapped 
and remapped to dynamically created resources, 
letting services take full advantage of flexible 
cloud resources (Kirschnick, J., Alcaraz Calero, 
J., Wilcock, L. & Edwards, N., 2010). The imple-
mentation of a cloud service catalog can provide 

64
Design Considerations for a Corporate Cloud Service Catalog
﻿
some simplifications for the end user where the 
complexity of the cloud environment is hidden.
With cloud computing, service providers enjoy 
greatly simplified software installation and main-
tenance and centralized control over versioning 
and offload these problems to cloud computing 
provider The diversity of the services hosting 
on the infrastructures or platforms provided by 
clouds brings a challenge: how to discover the 
most suitable service cater to the discovery request 
of service consumer which includes functional 
requirements and nonfunctional requirements 
(Chen & Li, 2010). Much has been written in 
the literature about automatic discovery based 
on functional requirements. However, most early 
implementations of cloud computing rarely review 
the catalog from an end user perspective. In this 
perspective, the service catalog is an integral 
and critical component of the cloud computing 
architecture. By reviewing the landscape of ven-
dor offerings, most service registries focus on the 
service orchestration or deployment automation of 
the services. Unfortunately, the usability of these 
applications are poor and can only be used with 
extensive training. The gap in the architecture is 
having the ability for the traditional information 
worker to review and order services. The cloud 
services approach focuses on a positive user 
experience while shielding the user from the 
complexity of the underlying technology. Each 
cloud service progresses through a well-defined 
life cycle: The cloud service provider defines the 
cloud services to be offered and exposes them via 
a service catalog; service requesters instantiate 
the services, which are managed against a set of 
service-level agreements; and finally the cloud 
service is destroyed when it is no longer needed 
(Breiter, G., & Behrendt, M., 2009).
Research Review
Based on the research provided in this chapter, 
there is a need for a cloud service registry build 
on solid usability principles that can be used by 
the average end user. From the traditional services 
research section, we see a very complex cloud 
registry design is used in today’s solutions. This 
makes sense when you think about the main 
requirement of automation and integration. How-
ever, business users that leverage this type of reg-
istry find very difficult to understand and a lot of 
training is required in order to be able to perform 
even the simplest of functions. When users want 
cloud services provided in a seamless and clear 
understanding way, traditional design is flawed.
BUSINESS ORIENTED CLOUD 
SERVICE CATALOG
During the latter part of 2009 and early 2010, the 
AT&T cloud program interviewed a collection 
of information technology professionals on what 
they would like to see in a cloud service catalog. 
The results of this interview and documentation 
of business requirements provided a different set 
of needs than the one’s traditionally found in the 
information technology area. In this case project 
managers, business users, and architectural plan-
ners wanted to focus more on the service catalog 
functions provided by the application. The fol-
lowing is a result of the documented business 
requirements needed by this group of users:
•	
The users wanted a single location to get 
cloud services regardless if those services 
were virtualized cloud environments or 
dedicated hardware.
•	
The users wanted to be able to filter and 
sort services based on their needs.
•	
Users wanted to be able to view the de-
tailed specifications of the cloud services.
•	
The users wanted to be able to get a price 
based on the quantity of services ordered.
•	
The users wanted to be able to get a total 
price for all the services ordered.
•	
The users wanted to be able to complete 
the order with a one button click.

65
Design Considerations for a Corporate Cloud Service Catalog
﻿
•	
The users wanted to be able to do duplicate 
an order as well as change it.
From these business requirements we can see 
that the end-user is more focused on features and 
functionality versus the integration of backend 
systems. That is to say that while information 
technology focuses on integration and orchestra-
tion, the end-user was more concerned about what 
services were available, how they can get them, 
and how fast they can get a functional environment 
up an operational. The overall goal of the informa-
tion technology department is to move to a much 
more seamless environment. An environment that 
is customer focused and one that can fulfill the 
needs of the customer as quickly as possible. By 
leveraging this type of cloud service registry, the 
end-user has the ability to fulfill those obligations 
and get their cloud infrastructure configured 
ordered configured set up and completed within 
days or even hours.
Business Layer of the 
Cloud Service Catalog
Figure 1 provides an overview of the business 
requirements presented in the prior section. 
The left side of the diagram is the information 
technology administration area while the right 
side represents the business functions associated 
with the information worker. The middle section 
represents the cloud service catalog which inte-
grates with the service orchestration application. 
The service catalog acts like an ordering platform 
for cloud services and any specific conditions 
associated with the services themselves. With 
the service catalog, we can leverage the system 
for demand management as well as a governance 
platform for controlling the services available and 
service level agreements. Starting with the left 
side, there are many administration type functions 
that a cloud service catalog could perform. The 
first box represents the service inventory which 
is the inventory of IaaS, SaaS, and PaaS services 
that the end user can order. These services can 
be bundled in order to build a complete vertical 
environment designed for the specific business 
need. The specification section is the detailed 
service information that can be used to describe 
the service. This content would include sizing 
information, various pricing models and a variety 
of categorical classifications. The metadata of the 
service could be segmented into the database or 
included in the more detailed specification. There 
is really no limit to the information that can be 
captured and then shared back to the end user. 
Even obscure information like service retirement 
data, transactions processed, or frequency of use 
could be leveraged by the end user to decide on 
a particular service.
With all of this metadata, the service catalog 
can leverage this information to provide functional 
services which create a better end user experience. 
Everything from search to service classifications, 
the catalog can make it easy to locate and procure 
the cloud services. Other features such as notifica-
tions, sorting, and bundling can extend the service 
catalog’s utility to the community. Specifications 
may also include sizing options and any custom 
configurations are available. Specifications are 
usually more detailed documentation for the 
service which include usage rates, pricing, and 
service level agreements.
Metrics have always been an important part 
of information technology. Unfortunately for the 
most part, metrics are an afterthought of the project 
or application itself. The natural progression of a 
system that moves from innovation, incubation, 
and migration (or the SDLC of choice) is to even-
tually measure the impact and value-add to the 
business. Some metrics are simply irrelevant to 
the cloud work being done or do not have a direct 
impact on the long term success of the program. 
Information gets gathered, but no action is taken 
as a result. Take a look at the performance metrics 
in the service catalog and ask yourself, “When 
was the last time we took an action, based on 
this number?” Many times metrics are used as 

66
Design Considerations for a Corporate Cloud Service Catalog
﻿
a weapon against the staff member. Dr. Edward 
Deming often said, “We need to drive fear out of 
the workplace” but most performance measure-
ment systems do exactly the opposite. Two key 
categories of metrics include content and usage 
based metrics. Content metrics describe what in-
formation we have inside the repositories. Without 
considering how the data is used; content focuses 
on the what. Perhaps the most obvious example 
of content metrics is the service count. A service 
count sounds like a simple concept except for fact 
that there are multiple methods for defining what 
classifies as a service. We can measure the breath 
and scope of these service metadata elements for 
each object type as well as the percentage of com-
pleteness for the model itself. Some objects may 
have an extended meta-model with 20 metadata 
elements while others may only contain only a 
few. The number of attachments is another mea-
surement that we can take on a specific asset. The 
thinking here is that objects that have extended 
unstructured documentation are better understood 
than those with only a few attachments. Examples 
of attachments could include service level agree-
ments, service models, user guides, installation 
instructions, etc. The relationship is another 
content metric that most implementations fail to 
measure. Relationships between service assets 
can follow into a wide variety of classifications: 
assimilation, classification, semantic, and activity 
based. The most obvious relationship between as-
sets is the assimilation relationship which basically 
states that one asset is directly, systematically, and 
purposefully related to another. The classification 
relationship is a basic domain based relationship. 
The activity base relationships are created by 
reviewing the usage metrics which in turn create 
relationships like “Most Popular” or “Top Ten 
Downloads”. Content metrics should be captured 
on a monthly basis and evaluated by utilizing trend 
analysis software which evaluates the information 
over an extended period of time. Ideally, the pro-
cess of collection should be automated and have 
the ability to capture at any point in time. What 
growth percentage should be applied to the content 
metrics? Again, long term success is not defined 
by the explosion of growth in the first year but by 
the subsequent 3-5 years. The other key metric is 
usage. Remember, you can have all of the content 
in the world but without usage you haven’t done 
much more than build a nice inventory. Usage is 
the key to delivering long term value-add to the 
organization. The first usage metric class is focused 
on the user. Many web based applications utilize 
three high-level classifications for user traffic. A 
“hit” is each individual file sent to a browser by 
Figure 1. Cloud registry functionality structure

67
Design Considerations for a Corporate Cloud Service Catalog
﻿
the web server. A “page view” can be described 
as each time a visitor views a webpage on your 
site, irrespective of how many hits are generated. 
Web pages are comprised of files. Every image 
in a page is a separate file. When a visitor looks 
at a page (i.e. a page view), they may see numer-
ous images, graphics, pictures etc. and generate 
multiple hits. For example, if you have a page with 
10 pictures, then a request to a server to view that 
page generates 11 hits (10 for the pictures, and 
one for the html file). A page view can contain 
hundreds of hits. This is the reason that we measure 
page views and not hits. Additionally, there is a 
high potential for confusion here, because there 
are two types of ‘hits’. The hits we are discussing 
in this article are the hits recorded by log files, 
and interpreted by log analysis. A second type of 
‘hits’ are counted and displayed by a simple hit 
counter. Hit counters record one hit for every time 
a webpage is viewed, also problematic because 
it does not distinguish unique visitors. The third 
type of class is a visitor which is a human being, 
and their actions are ‘human’ events, because 
only humans navigate the internet. We can also 
track the length of time a person stays on the 
service catalog, what time of day is most popular, 
and which day compromises the heaviest traffic. 
These time based metrics are important to ensure 
the repository is up and operational 100% of the 
time, especially during high traffic periods. Now, 
if we move away from the user and focus the at-
tention on the actual page or artifact, other metrics 
provide insight. We can tell which of the asset 
pages is viewed the most and which artifact has 
the highest download rate. These simple metrics 
may alter the way you present artifacts and even 
generate new classifications. Having links on the 
repository that represent “Most Popular”, “Most 
Downloaded” or “Latest Additions” add value to 
the metadata environment. These classifications 
are defined as usage based classifications. In other 
words, the use of the repository actually defines 
the classification of the assets. Assuming your 
repository has some advanced features, you can 
measure how many subscriptions per asset you 
have, how many transactions may be processed by 
the component, or what is the reuse level within 
the application. Remember, you can generate any 
number of metrics but we should only focus on the 
ones that can generate action, support the expan-
sion of the brand, and help managers understand 
the environment.
On the information worker side, we start with 
the idea to bundle services together. We could 
bundle the services based on size; such as a large 
server collection. Users may also bundle services 
associated with the business function. For example 
a business unit that needs a Web server might 
select a small database with a couple Web server 
applications on top these bundling type activities 
to be preconfigured. Another function of bundling 
service is the idea of associating orders with past 
orders. This would allow the end-user to duplicate 
or replicated an order for a future application or 
project. The second area, project requests, would 
allow for things such as project approval, verifica-
tion a budget, and executive oversight that would 
be required. The final area would include the cost 
estimation with service pricing. An end user can 
get a cost estimate which they can then take back 
to their business unit to gain approval. The lower 
circle in figure 4 indicates the need for the catalog 
to integrate with service orchestration piece of the 
infrastructure. Service orchestration is the appli-
cations that will create the virtual environments.
Design and Implementation 
of the Framework
With a general understanding of cloud computing 
and the need for a end user focused service cata-
log, we need to focus our attention to the design 
elements that can be used to improve the overall 
end user experience. This section will review the 
usability criteria that can be used to enhance the 
usability of the application or service registry.

68
Design Considerations for a Corporate Cloud Service Catalog
﻿
USABILITY CRITERIA FOR 
APPLICATION SYSTEMS
Criteria for evaluating the usability of cloud regis-
try systems should follow similar usability issues 
with traditional web applications and business 
systems. A common set of criteria needs to be 
developed which could be used across all cloud 
registry applications. Singh and Wesson (2009) 
provide some of the common usability criteria 
including the following items:
•	
Ease of use
•	
Usefulness
•	
Task Support
•	
Navigation
•	
Guidance
•	
Flexibility
•	
Image Design
•	
Customization
•	
Memorability Accuracy and Completeness
•	
Learnability
•	
Performance and Stability
•	
Visual Appeal
•	
System Reliability
•	
System Responsiveness
•	
UI Presentation
•	
Output Presentation
In order to simplify the research, this chapter 
will condense the list into five basic categories of 
usability constructs in order to evaluate improve-
ments made on the cloud registry application. 
These will include the following:
•	
Visual Appeal of the application and cloud 
registry functionality.
•	
System Performance of the cloud registry 
tool.
•	
Ease of Use which will include the con-
cepts of customization and navigation.
•	
Learnability 
of 
the 
cloud 
registry 
application.
•	
Task Support which includes workflow, 
form management, and basic cloud regis-
try functionality.
The aim of this chapter is to propose a set of 
characteristics that are specific to cloud registry 
applications. This is necessary to address the 
inconsistent engagement of most cloud registry 
environments. The following sections will look 
at these five criteria and how they can be applied 
to cloud registry environments. In order to mea-
sure usability, we will define a set of heuristics 
or descriptors to manage the improvements. This 
will allow us to define specific criteria that can be 
evaluated in order to show the improved usability. 
Based on the criteria we can then measure the 
improvements in the cloud registry environment.
Visual Appeal
Visual appeal is a phrase used for application 
components that impact the presentation of in-
formation. Many technical solutions focus on 
putting as much information on the screen as 
possible with little regard to how that presenta-
tion provides context and meaning. Visual appeal 
includes components such as page layout, image 
quality, color palette, font selection, dialog boxes, 
controls, and form elements. Visual appeal can be 
reviewed by the following heuristics:
•	
Visual layout of the information.
•	
Image quality.
•	
Measuring the accuracy and understanding 
of the information being presented.
•	
Intuitiveness of the interface.
•	
Consistency of the design.
System Performance
System performance is a measurement of the how 
the system performs in handling the user requests. 
We can measure the performance by the speed 
by which processes requests and the number of 

69
Design Considerations for a Corporate Cloud Service Catalog
﻿
concurrent users within a specific environment. 
Research suggests that performance impacts 
usability with a positive correlation in the areas 
of efficient access, search success, flexibility, 
understanding of content, relevant search result, 
and satisfaction (Janecek & Uddin, 2007). System 
performance can be evaluated by the following 
heuristics:
•	
Transaction processing speed.
•	
End user task accomplishment.
•	
Expected results (i.e. search results).
•	
Learning times.
•	
End user satisfaction.
Ease of Use
Perceived ease of use is the extent to which a person 
believes that using a technology will be free of 
effort. Perceived ease of use is a construct tied to 
an individual’s assessment of the effort involved 
in the process of using the system (Venkatesh, 
2000). Ease of use can be reviewed by the fol-
lowing heuristics:
•	
Navigation elements.
•	
End user task accomplishment.
•	
Learning times.
•	
End user satisfaction.
•	
Ability to locate specific information.
•	
Timeliness of information presented.
Learnability
Learnability is in some sense the most fundamental 
usability attribute of cloud registry applications 
(Nielsen, 2000). The system should be easy to 
learn so that the user can rapidly start getting 
value from the application. As Dzida, Herda, and 
Itzfelt (1978) reported, learnability is especially 
important for novice users. Learnability can be 
described as the amount of effort in using a new 
Web site and to measure how easy a site for new 
visitors to orient themselves and get a good over-
view of what the site offers (Jeng, 2005). Ease of 
use can be reviewed by the following heuristics:
•	
Time required to learn the application.
•	
Access to online help and community 
support.
•	
Ability to actively contribute to the conver-
sation is a short period of time.
•	
Consistency of the design.
•	
Complexity of the core tasks.
Task Support
The idea of task support is an alignment between 
the technical world and the business environment. 
Does the technology support the business envi-
ronment by ensuring tasks are started, completed, 
and communicated effectively? Task support deals 
with how well a product or system enables users 
to perform their typical tasks to achieve their 
goals with the product (Anschuetz, L., Keirnan, 
T. & Rosenbaum, S., 2002). Task support can be 
reviewed by the following heuristics:
•	
Consistent terminology is used in the 
application.
•	
Consistent use of imagery and style based 
on the organizational style.
•	
Information is real and contextual in nature.
•	
Confirmation of tasks.
•	
Tasks 
process 
support 
and 
state 
communication.
•	
Automation of redundant tasks.
•	
Personalization of content and context.
CASE STUDY
The research methodology was designed to provide 
a basis for usability along with a heuristic evalua-
tion. The goal of the study is to demonstrate that 
improvements in usability will increase the usage 
and utility of a cloud registry environment. Usage 
can be defined as the number of times an end user 

70
Design Considerations for a Corporate Cloud Service Catalog
﻿
consumes the information which is represented by 
the number of visits, downloading documentation 
and actual service orders. Utility or utilization is 
measured by the number of changes in the envi-
ronment which come in the form of information 
updates. Updates can be measured by the number 
of adds, changes, and deletes across all of the 
content containers within the online environment.
Design Review
With the design information, the organization 
setup out to build a common cloud portal which 
would house information about cloud comput-
ing. This information would come in the form of 
written content, social media platforms, online 
videos, and other interactive components. The 
goal of the design was to increase the end user 
experience by implementing the usability criteria 
defined above. Additionally, the design would 
include a common cloud service catalog which 
would drive the deployment of cloud services 
throughout the enterprise.
Figure 2 provides a visual example of the home 
page (left) for the cloud portal as well as the on-
line training page (right). The main focus of the 
design on the informational style pages is in the 
visual design, use of images, and ease of use. The 
rotating banner allows the cloud organization to 
spotlight a variety of touch points for the end user 
as well as enhancing the graphical user interface. 
Cloud users can find the latest information on the 
services in the catalog, a collection of training 
materials, access to the social media environment 
for the cloud organization, and access to the latest 
communications. The variety of information avail-
able helps the site focus on task support related to 
accessing cloud services as well as other features 
of a cloud environment. Additional integration 
elements, such as RSS, are present to allow for 
information exchange with different tools such as 
native RSS readers, outlook, and web browsers. 
Users also have the ability to subscribe for email 
alerts in the social media environment which 
provides a greater sense of integration. By making 
the site easy to use and ensuring a consistency in 
design, we address many of the learnability issues 
related to internally developed web applications.
Figure 3 contains the actual service catalog 
(left) and the service shopping cart (right). The 
service catalog contains all of the PaaS, SaaS, 
and IaaS services available for purchase. The 
site provides a “Show Me” filter that allows the 
services to be filtered by type, category, size, and 
operating system. Each service contains metadata 
information pertaining to the actual service includ-
ing category, type, operating system, size, number 
of CPU’s, memory, storage, and cost breakdown. 
The service specification can be downloaded to 
provide a physical copy of what the end user 
can see on the screen. The catalog leverages the 
traditional shopping cart methodology which is 
familiar to most information technology profes-
sionals. End users can add the different services 
along with the quantities to the shopping cart. The 
catalog leverages a consistent look and feel with 
the rest of the site to ensure users follow a pattern 
of usability. Once a user has completed selecting 
which services they need, they can then click the 
shopping cart to get a final price. The right side 
of Figure 3 provides a visual of the shopping cart 
screen. The primary purpose of this screen is to 
provide the end-user a last chance to review the 
services they placed into the cart, quantities of 
those services they asked for as well as the pricing 
breakdown. The user will also be able to update 
the quantities of services or delete the service from 
the card from this particular screen.
At any point in time the end-user can return to 
the cloud service inventory catalog and add ad-
ditional services. As described up in the research 
area the ability to integrate with the backend 
orchestration application is critical. Up until 
this point we’ve created a very nicely designed 
interactive service catalog that aids the end-user 
in the ability to select services compare services 
and prices services based on their business needs. 
But, ultimately the best level of integration is 

71
Design Considerations for a Corporate Cloud Service Catalog
﻿
Figure 2. Example pages in the cloud portal
Figure 3. Service catalog and cloud service cart

72
Design Considerations for a Corporate Cloud Service Catalog
﻿
the ability to integrate the service order into the 
backing orchestration piece. The reason for this 
of course is the speed of how long it takes from 
when the customer decides on what services 
they want places the order and then that order is 
processed by the information technology depart-
ment. Systems and applications that integrate of 
course will take a lot longer because it requires 
the need of manual processing or manual data 
movements. Here you can see that the application 
with a click of a button can simply transfer the 
service and service order over to the project man-
agement application systems which again feeds 
into the orchestration application the end result 
is that orders a pass-through seamlessly without 
any friction defined by traditional application or 
nonintegrated applications. Table 1 provides a 
more detailed review of the specific design ele-
ments defined in the background section and the 
actual implementation of the cloud portal.
Review Impact of a Functional 
Business Cloud Service
The main research question was to determine if 
these design elements can make a difference to 
the number of services or quantity of cloud en-
vironments that are being built? While the cloud 
program was operational for 12 months prior to 
the implementation, the correlation of impact may 
be elusive. Take a look at Figure 4where the cloud 
environments have been charted with a resulting 
linear trend line. The base metric was the actual 
number of cloud environments constructed. Dur-
ing the first full-year about 240 cloud environments 
were created by the deployment teams. We have 
taken the first 12 months of cloud deployments 
and mapped that along a linear progression. The 
Figure 4. Linear trend lines for cloud environments
Table 1. Design elements and implementation 
tracking
Design Element
Implementation
Visual Appeal
• Overall Design of the Portal 
• Professional Cloud Images 
• Consistency of Design
System 
Performance
• Build upon SharePoint Infrastrucure 
• Leverage XML Data Exchange 
• Local JQuery 
• Responsive Design for Mobile Devices
Ease of Use
• Leverage Shopping Cart Patterns 
• Consistent Navigation 
• Feedback 
• Integrated Shopping Cart Inventory
Learnability
• Online Help 
• Social Media Community for Support 
• Visual Progression for Online Orders 
• Saving Cloud Service Cart
Task Support
• Order Confirmations 
• Email Confirmations 
• Consistent Use of Cloud Related Images 
• Site Map for all Cloud Resources

73
Design Considerations for a Corporate Cloud Service Catalog
﻿
lower line or black line, in Figure 4, shows this 
trend as well as the estimated environments for 
three years out. As an example by the end of the 
second year an estimated 350-400 cloud environ-
ments should have been built. By the end of the 
third year, we should have upwards of 500 cloud 
environments constructed.
The second trend line (red) starts the envi-
ronment calculation after the cloud portal was 
implemented; after the first 12 months of deploy-
ment. Notice that by the end of the second year, 
we exceeded 1,000 environments and by the third 
year, we exceeded 1,500. Clearly, the introduction 
of the cloud portal and service catalog influenced 
the number of environments constructed during 
the second and third years. This indicates that 
the ability to integrate the end-user business 
requirements as well as getting cost estimations 
actually makes it easier to do business with the 
cloud environment. This translates into more 
cloud environments and more conversions to the 
cloud infrastructure. The two trend lines indicate 
a divergence between the original estimate and 
the new trend line. By the end of year three, this 
difference was upwards of 700 sites.
Now the question that remains, what would 
have the infrastructure growth had been if this 
education portal, information design elements and 
integration had not taken place. Clearly they would 
be some element of growth because as with all 
programs early in their nature may or may not take 
off that will eventually continue to move forward. 
That is to say that the assumptions on the linear 
trend line may not have continued but more of 
an exponential growth would be seen. However, 
with the limited amount of data and not having 
a comparison environment, we have to assume 
the increase in environments is influenced by the 
ease of use as well as the information presented 
in the portal.
Based on subject matter expert interviews 
with the cloud program leadership, the cloud 
information portal benefited the program greatly 
on three different fronts. The first front was the 
online communications, education and training 
that was provided to the community. The ability 
to communicate the benefits of the cloud program 
including the cost advantages was an critical step 
in the deployment plan. End users needed to know 
what the cloud was as well as why they should 
migrate to this new type of infrastructure. Having 
the information was important but having it easy to 
locate and consume was just as critical. Many of the 
interviewees commented on how professional the 
application looked which in turn gave the program 
more credibility. This was important during the 
early stages when many of the automated pieces 
were not in place. Other comments focused on the 
familiarity of the end user shopping cart paradigm. 
Most people understand how the shopping cart 
works and the transition from physical goods to 
cloud services was relatively easy.
The second area which was aided by the design 
function was of course the service catalog itself. 
Normally services would have included a Word 
document to describe the specific of the service. 
The service catalog provided the end-user with 
a list of services and the ability to filter, search, 
and categorize them. This creates the ability to 
find services which increases the desire to actually 
move into the cloud environment. This front end 
environment also enables cloud service manag-
ers the ability to edit service metadata such as 
prices sizing configurations memory and storage 
very easily. This means that price shifts or price 
changes are automatically updated. For example 
a price that may change in the backend but then 
requires a programmer effort in order to get that 
price implemented. This was accomplished by 
leveraging feeds from the orchestration element 
so that the prices and quantities and sizing all 
always up-to-date
The final area of improvement is the abil-
ity to integrate the application with the project 

74
Design Considerations for a Corporate Cloud Service Catalog
﻿
management systems as well as the orchestration 
environment. Project management here means the 
ability to get a budget, get approvals, and then 
process the order within the cloud environment. 
By integrating the cloud portal with the backend 
applications, we reduced the length of time that 
it took to process an order for a cloud service to 
drop. The next major task in the process is the 
ability to build the physical infrastructure. Cloud 
orchestration powers the self-service portals that 
allow end users to employ a browser interface to 
rapidly provision services and resources available 
from a catalog of standardized offerings. With 
orchestration software, we can streamline the 
process and reduce the time required to implement 
a cloud solution. Based on the results, the studied 
organization reduced the time required to build the 
virtual cloud environment by 85%. This decrease 
was in large part based on the increased integra-
tion and the automation putting both to update 
pricing as well as to integrate the prices into the 
backing orchestration applications. The largest 
gap in time is for the budget approvals which are 
still manual in that an individual must approve the 
order. Unlike external cloud environments that 
can take an order without budget approval, large 
organizations still have this oversight in place.
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
The design structure and case study introduced 
in this chapter provides a natural guide to future 
research. Typically, case studies have a much nar-
rower domain due to the nature of business. That 
is to say, businesses generally do not allow for 
multiple iterations in order to produce a working 
product. Additional case studies would provide 
a much broader perspective and analysis which 
will expand the body of knowledge in this space. 
This chapter set out to show how solid design 
principles could be applied to an end user cloud 
service catalog. The results of which have been 
positive but additional research needs to be done 
as cloud computing moves toward a more mature 
technology. The transition from an information 
technology perspective to one based on general 
knowledge workers comes with maturity of the 
technology itself. Therefore, additional research 
needs to be done to aid this transition.
CONCLUSION
Cloud computing offers several opportunities of 
using IT infrastructures as a utility with the pos-
sibility of scaling up or scaling down depending 
upon the needs an organization. However, like most 
of the emerging IT technologies, cloud computing 
has raised several technical and design challenges. 
The research question that this chapter wanted to 
address was to determine if good design based 
on human factors would improve the deployment 
of cloud services. Can we leverage other design 
research and improve how cloud services are de-
fined, discovered, and selected in order to expand 
the value to the business? While this chapter only 
focused on a single implementation, it is clear that 
great design does help the deployment of cloud 
based services. From the simple education and 
expansion of knowledge around cloud computing 
to the actual ordering process, design elements 
improve the overall experience from the end users 
perspective. We have not observed much literature 
on software engineering aspects of developing 
and evolving cloud-enabled catalog systems that 
focus on the end user versus the core integration 
and orchestration tasks. During this project, we 
studied the common cloud portal which allowed 
us to test the design elements and then review 
the impact by the number of orders and cloud 
infrastructure environments. This chapter aimed at 
sharing our experiences and observations gained 
through this project and critical analysis of the 
literature with those who intend to move toward 
a more user friendly service catalog.

75
Design Considerations for a Corporate Cloud Service Catalog
﻿
REFERENCES
Andres, C. (1999). Great Web Architecture. Foster 
City, CA: IDG Books World Wide.
Anschuetz, L., Keirnan, T., & Rosenbaum, S. 
(2002). Combining Usability Research with 
Documentation Development for Improved User 
Support. In Proceedings of the SIGDOC. To-
ronto, Canada: The Association of Computing 
Machinery.
Armbrust, A., Fox, A., Griffith, R., Joseph, A., 
Katz, R., Konwinski, A., & Zaharia, M. et al. 
(2010). Above the Clouds: A View of Cloud 
Computing. Communications of the ACM, 53(4), 
50. doi:10.1145/1721654.1721672
Babat, M., & Chauhan, M. (2011). A Tale of 
Migration to Cloud Computing for Sharing Expe-
riences and Observations. Workshop on Software 
Engineering for Cloud Computing. Honolulu, 
HI: IEEE.
Becker, S., & Mottay, F. (2001, January). A global 
perspective on website usability. IEEE Software, 
18(1), 61–54. doi:10.1109/52.903167
Butrico, M., Silva, D., & Youseff, L. (2008). 
Toward a unified ontology of cloud computing. 
Grid Computing Environments Workshop. Austin, 
TX: IEEE.
Chen, H., & Li, S. (2010). SRC: A Service Reg-
istry on Cloud Providing Behavior-aware and 
QoS-aware Service Discovery. In International 
Conference on Service-Oriented Computing and 
Applications. Perth, Australia: IEEE. doi:10.1109/
SOCA.2010.5707179
Dooley, J., Spanoudakis, G., & Zisman, A. (2008). 
Proactive Runtime Service Discovery. In Proceed-
ings of IEEE 2008 International Service Comput-
ing Conference. Honolulu, HI: IEEE.
Dzida, W., Herda, S., & Itzfelt, W. (1978). User-
perceived quality of interactive systems. IEEE 
Transactions on Software Engineering, SE-4(4), 
270–276. doi:10.1109/TSE.1978.231511
Janecek, P. (2007). Faceted classification in web 
information architecture: A framework for using 
semantic web tools. The Electronic Library, 25(2), 
219–233. doi:10.1108/02640470710741340
Jeng, J. (2005). Usability assessment of academic 
digital libraries: Effectiveness, efficiency, sat-
isfaction, and learnability. Libri: International 
Journal of Libraries and Information Services, 
55(2/3), 96–121.
Karat, J. (1997). User-centered software evaluation 
methodologies. In M. Helander, T. K. Landauer, & 
P. Prabhu (Eds.), Handbook of Human-Computer 
Interaction (pp. 689–704). New York: Elsevier 
Press.
Karvonen, K. (2000). The beauty of simplicity. In 
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Universal 
Usability. Arlington, VA: The Association of 
Computing Machinery.
Krug, S. (2000). Don’t Make Me Think. India-
napolis, IN: New Riders Publishing.
Lecerof, A., & Paterno, F. (1998). Automatic 
Support for Usability Evaluation. IEEE Transac-
tions on Software Engineering, 24(10), 863–888. 
doi:10.1109/32.729686
Nielsen, J. (1998). Introduction to web design. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems. Los Angeles, CA: The 
Association of Computing Machinery.
Nielsen, J. (2000). Designing Web Usability. In-
dianapolis, IN: New Riders Publishing. Nielsen, 
J. & Tahir, M. (2002). Homepage Usability: 50 
Websites Deconstructed. Indianapolis, IN: New 
Riders Publishing.

76
Design Considerations for a Corporate Cloud Service Catalog
﻿
Pearrow, M. (2000). Web Site Usability Handbook. 
Independence, KY: Charles River Media.
Scanlon, T., Schroeder, W., Snyder, C., & Spool, J. 
(1998). Websites that work: Designing with your 
eyes open. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI on Hu-
man Factors in Computing Systems. Los Angeles, 
CA: The Association of Computing Machinery.
Singh, A., & Wesson, J. (2009). Evaluation Cri-
teria for Assessing the Usability of ERP Systems 
In Proceedings of the 2009 Annual Conference of 
the South African Institute of Computer Scientists 
and Information Technologists. Vaal River, South 
Africa: The Association of Computing Machinery. 
doi:10.1145/1632149.1632162
Veen, J. (2000). The Art & Science of Web Design. 
Indianapolis, IN: New Riders Publishing.
Venkatesh, V. (1985). Determinants of Perceived 
Ease of Use: Integrating Control, Intrinsic Mo-
tivation, and Emotion into the Technology Ac-
ceptance Model. Information Systems Research, 
11(4), 342–365. doi:10.1287/isre.11.4.342.11872
ADDITIONAL READING
Bouchenak, S., Chockler, G., Chockler, H., 
Gheorghe, G., Santos, N., & Shraer, S. (2013). 
Verifying cloud services: Present and fu-
ture. Operating Systems Review, 47(2), 6. 
doi:10.1145/2506164.2506167
Card, S., Newell, A., & Moran, T. (1983). The 
Psychology of Human-Computer Interaction. 
Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum Associates Inc.
Cooper, A. (2007). About Face 3.0: The Essen-
tials of Interaction Design. New York, NY: John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Erl, T., Puttini, R., & Mahmood, Z. (2013). Cloud 
Computing: Concepts, Technology & Architecture. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Jaitly, A., Suri, B., & Wadhwa, B. (2014). Making 
sense of academia-industry gap in the evolving 
cloud service brokerage. In Proceedings of the 1st 
International Workshop on Software Engineering 
Research and Industrial Practices. New York, 
NY: The Association of Computing Machinery.
Kavis, M. (2014). Architecting the Cloud: 
Design Decisions for Cloud Computing Ser-
vice Models. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley Publishing. 
doi:10.1002/9781118691779
Preece, J., Rogers, Y., & Sharp, H. (2011). Interac-
tion Design: Beyond Human-Computer Interac-
tion. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley Publishing.
Shneiderman, B., & Plaisant, P. (2009). Design-
ing the User Interface: Strategies for Effective 
Human-Computer Interaction (5th ed.). Boston, 
MA: Pearson Addison-Wesley.
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Cloud Computing: The practice of using a 
network of remote servers hosted on the Internet 
to store, manage, and process data, rather than a 
local server or a personal computer.
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI): HCI 
(human-computer interaction) is the study of how 
people interact with computers and to what extent 
computers are or are not developed for successful 
interaction with human beings.
Registry: Registry acts as a core component 
in Service Oriented Architecture (SOA). Early 
SOA reference architecture named the registry as 
a service broker for service providers to publish 
service definitions, allowing service consumers 
to look up and directly consume the services.

77
Design Considerations for a Corporate Cloud Service Catalog
﻿
Service: A cloud service is any resource that 
is provided over the Internet. The most common 
cloud service resources are Software as a Service 
(SaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS) and Infra-
structure as a Service (IaaS).
Service Model: Cloud computing can be 
divided into three service models: Software as a 
Service (SaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), and 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS). These models 
describe the specific function performed by the 
cloud service.
Service Orchestration: Application or service 
orchestration is the process of integrating two or 
more applications and/or services together to au-
tomate a process, or synchronize data in real-time. 
Often, point-to-point integration may be used as 
the path of least resistance.
Usability: Usability is a quality attribute that 
assesses how easy user interfaces are to use. 
The word “usability” also refers to methods for 
improving ease-of-use during the design process.

Section 2
Cloud Computing in Education 
Sector

79
Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  4
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-8339-6.ch004
Personal Mobile Cloud 
Computing Affordances 
for Higher Education:
One Example in South Africa
ABSTRACT
Within the cloud computing ecosystem and its different permutations, there exists personal mobile cloud 
computing. The latter has not been covered and investigated much in relation to its affordances for higher 
education (HE), especially in South Africa. Thus, this chapter argues that personal mobile cloud comput-
ing can offer HE significant educational affordances in the form of cloud computing value chain. It does 
so by providing one South African example entailing a two-project study in the HE sector in which the 
cloud affordances of Twitter and Facebook were leveraged for educational purposes. Regarding Twitter, 
one of its affordances is that it was exploited as a cloud based virtual blackboard for a course content, 
thereby facilitating micro-teaching and micro-learning. Concerning Facebook, one of its affordances is 
that it served as a cloud based mobile computing environment in which a course-specific writing process 
was mounted by the instructor and participants. A collective affordance for both Twitter and Facebook 
was both consumerization and BYOD approaches to teaching and learning.
INTRODUCTION
Cloud computing comprises an evolving ecosys-
tem that is exponentially gaining traction in the 
computing ecosphere. Within this cloud comput-
ing ecosystem and its different strata, there exist 
both enterprise and personal cloud computing. The 
emerging upshot of the latter, especially among 
consumers, is a personal mobile cloud computing 
permutation. Driven largely by both major Internet 
corporates that provide consumer cloud computing 
services (e.g., Google Apps, Dropbox, SkyDrive, 
(see Lin, Wen, Jou, & Wu, 2013), iCloud, iTunes 
and YouTube) and social networking sites (e.g., 
Chaka Chaka
Tshwane University of Technology, South Africa

80
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
Facebook and Twitter), and enabled particularly by 
consumerization and the practice of bring your own 
device (BYOD), personal mobile cloud computing 
seems to have convenient affordances to offer to 
higher education institutions (HEIs). Much work 
about the use of cloud computing in the higher 
education (HE) sector has been reported in some 
places, especially, in both the United States and 
the United Kingdom (Katz, Goldstein & Yanosky, 
2010; Mircea & Andreescu, 2011). However, in 
other places such as South Africa, that is not the 
case. This does not necessarily imply that there 
is no cloud computing deployment and adoption 
in the HE sector in South Africa, but that there 
is not much documented and reported research 
work on the use of this variant of computing in 
this sector. This is even more so pertaining to the 
deployment of personal mobile cloud computing 
in the HE sector.
At the core of personal mobile cloud comput-
ing are, this chapter contends, disruptive twin 
trends: consumerization and BYOD. In this regard, 
HEIs that are willing to both cloud compute their 
academic services and operations and virtualize 
their information technology (IT) architectures 
stand a chance of leveraging affordances offered 
by this computing permutation, thereby assigning 
themselves the role of being game changers in the 
increasingly competitive and often cash-strapped 
HE sector. Against this backdrop, this chapter 
argues that personal mobile cloud computing can 
offer HE significant affordances in the overall 
academic cloud computing value chain. It does 
so by providing one South African example in the 
HE sector in which the cloud affordances of Face-
book and Twitter were leveraged for educational 
purposes through an instructor’s and participants’ 
mobile phone handsets. In terms of its structure, 
the chapter, first, provides an overview of personal 
mobile cloud computing and mounts a relevant 
literature review. Second, it outlines a framework 
within which its main argument is located. Third, 
it presents a South African instance of the use of 
personal mobile cloud computing for educational 
purposes in one HE institution. Fourth, the chapter 
presents the findings of this instance and outlines 
the limitations of this instance, while mapping out 
future research directions pertaining to personal 
mobile cloud computing within the HE sector.
DISRUPTIVE POST-PC TRENDS 
AND GAME CHANGERS
The personal computer (PC) has for a long time 
been the lifeline of the computing ecosystem – 
both the corporate and personal computing eco-
systems – with the workstation and the desktop 
effectively being the dominant interface of this 
ecosystem. The PC era was, at its high water-
mark, dominated by what Cheston (2012) refers 
to as a bring your own PC (BYOPC) approach to 
corporate IT. This development helped entrench 
the PC as the mother lode of many variants of 
computing. However, this computing trajectory 
has been unexpectedly upstaged by personal 
mobile cloud computing, consumerization and 
BYOD, three trends gaining popular traction that 
this chapter perceives as disruptive post-PC trends 
and game changers. Cloud computing - itself not 
necessarily a new trend (see Thomas, 2009) - is 
mostly riddled with hype and diverse definitions 
and views (see, for example, Alberta Education, 
2012; Katz et al., 2010; McDonald, MacDonald 
& Breslin, 2010). As a result, an eclectic working 
definition is provided here which is, though not 
definitive, but relevant to the chapter. Therefore, 
cloud computing refers to a practice in which 
computing infrastructures, platforms and software 
reside in the Internet and a network of servers, and 
are provided as service offerings in a connected 
way. This network and connection of servers me-
diating these service offerings within the Internet 
environment is metaphorically known as the cloud 
(McDonald et al., 2010; Mitrano, 2009; Thomas, 
2009; Wang, Chen & Khan, 2014; cf. Katz et al., 
2010; Kraan & Yuan, 2009; Plummer, Bittman, 
Austin, Cearley & Smith, 2008; Sarga, 2012). 

81
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
The service offerings in question can be private, 
public, community, or hybrid (see McDonald et 
al., 2010). In this way, personal mobile cloud com-
puting is a cloud computing variant that leverages 
mobility (in the form of mobile devices such as 
mobile phones (especially smart phones), iPads, 
tablets and laptops) and portability, and pervasive 
computing inherent in mobility. Its disruptive and 
game-changing nature lies in mobility, portability 
and ubiquity, three elements which obviate the 
necessity for the PC.
While consumerization as a trend is about cor-
porates embracing and adopting web technologies 
for storage, collaboration and email applications 
(cf. Cheston, 2012) in relation to their IT needs, it 
is more than this corporate practice. It also entails 
consumer electronic devices (e.g., smart phones, 
iPads, tablets, virtual storages, social networking 
sites, instant messages and microblogs) being 
deployed voluntarily by end users, first, for main-
stream enterprise IT purposes and, then, corporates 
adopting these devices for their enterprise IT needs 
(see Chaka, 2013a). This practice of consumers 
leading the way in using non-corporate devices for 
enterprise IT needs, and their being emulated in 
this practice by corporates themselves, gives rise 
to the concept, consumerization. And this is where 
its disruptive and game-changing disposition lies. 
Lastly, BYOD means precisely what this acronym 
stands for: it is a trend in which employees, in any 
company, bring personally owned mobile devices 
(e.g., smart phones, iPads, tablets, phablets (phone-
tablet hybrids) and mini-laptops) to workplaces 
and use them in their daily corporate work. In so 
doing, employees effectively render their own 
devices enterprise-ready (see Burmeister, 2014). 
Thus, in this twin employee practices, lies not 
only the role of BYOD as a disruptive and game 
changing post-PC trend, but also that of bring your 
own application (BYOA) as a concurrent disrup-
tive force. The different aspects of the disruptive 
nature of the post-PC trends and game changers 
are as characterized here displayed in Figure 1.
HIGHLIGHTS OF SOCIAL 
NETWORKING CLOUD 
COMPUTING IN THE HE SECTOR: 
A LITERATURE REVIEW
This section presents a brief summary and synthe-
sis of case studies related to the use and deployment 
of cloud computing by selected higher education 
institutions (HEIs) for diverse educational pur-
poses and for varied cloud computing affordances. 
Firstly, a desktop search of case studies of the use 
and deployment of cloud computing for teaching 
and learning by HEIs was conducted through the 
Google Scholar at different intervals from January 
2014 to May 2014. Secondly, search results were 
screened and vetted for their relevance, informa-
tiveness, rigor and credibility in relation to the 
topic at hand. In the end, eight case studies were 
identified and selected for further scrutiny. These 
eight case studies were selected not for their report-
ing on the effectiveness or the non-effectiveness 
of cloud-based learning but for their highlighting 
the uses and applications of cloud computing for 
learning purposes. These case studies, then, serve 
as the locus of summary and synthesis for this 
section and as a prelude to the main case study 
discussed later in this chapter. The reason for a 
desktop search option and for not using articles 
in most accredited journals is that educational 
cloud computing is a relatively new area in the 
HE sector. As such, not much research work is 
currently available in most established academic 
journals as the desktop search revealed.
The first case study, conducted at two South-
eastern community colleges – one rural and the 
other urban -in the United States (U.S.), involved 
about 750 students and a group of college ad-
ministrators and IT support staff. However, for 
the purpose of this chapter, the focus will be on 
students’ participation in the case study as this is 
what the chapter intends reporting about. The 750 
students were enrolled in a basic computing course 
which was offered to them either on an online, 

82
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
face-to-face or hybrid basis. Their demographic 
profiles were as follows: 142 of them were from 
a rural community college while 618 were from 
an urban community college; 52% of them were 
females and 48% of them were males; and most 
of them (63%) were traditional full-time degree 
seekers, while others were either part-time degree 
seekers or part-time non-degree seekers. Students’ 
age ranged from 25 years to 55 years. Employing 
a technology acceptance model, this case study set 
out to test six hypotheses on students’ perceptions 
of and attitudes towards the usefulness and ease of 
use of a cloud computing technology used at their 
colleges. Two of these hypotheses - hypotheses 
1 and 4 - were: usefulness perceptions (1a) and 
ease-of-use perceptions (1b) will affect the student 
usage of the cloud computing tool; and student 
attitudes about technology will affect usefulness 
(4a) and ease of use (4b). Moreover, the case study 
utilized two methods, an online questionnaire and 
a focus group, to collect its data, and employed a 
path-analytic model to analyze this data (Behrend, 
Wiebe, London & Johnson, 2010).
A cloud computing used in the study was the 
Virtual Computing Lab (VCL) developed by a 
team of IT technicians at the two colleges. The 
platform was available to registered students for 
24 hours a day, 7 days a week, who in turn could 
Figure 1. The different aspects of the disruptive nature of the post-PC trends and game changers

83
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
access it from their own devices, anywhere. It was 
deployed as a private infrastructure-as-a-service 
(IaaS) model that offered a wireless connection 
window into a computer desktop run from a remote 
server. In this context, the purpose of the study 
was to investigate factors leading to technology 
adoption by college students. Among other things, 
in relation to hypothesis 1, part 1a of it was not 
supported, while part 1b was supported (Behrend 
et al., 2010). So, this case study represents an 
instance in which an on-premise cloud comput-
ing platform encouraged a BYOD practice for the 
teaching and learning of a basic computer course.
The second case is Wakefield, Warren and 
Alsobrook’s (2011) project. Its purpose was to 
employ Twitter to help support the development 
of a positive, online communal and social space 
and to facilitate student learning. It was conducted 
at a university in the southwest U.S. among 13 
undergraduate students (7 of whom were females 
and 6 of whom were males) enrolled in the course, 
Global Policy Issues. In this case study, Twitter was 
employed as a communication tool for classroom 
discussion. The latter was a course component 
allotted some grading. There were three research 
questions the case study set out to answer:
•	
To what extent does the use of Twitter in-
crease students’ engagement in a course?
•	
To what extent does Twitter help students 
understand the course content and assigned 
readings better?
•	
To what extent does communication over 
Twitter promote social presence (interac-
tive learning/participation/sense of being 
there) amongst students, and to what extent 
are there gender differences, if any, in this 
perception?
A new online survey instrument with closed 
and open-ended items, designed specifically for 
the purpose of this study, was used and admin-
istered to students at the end of a semester in a 
given academic year. Two of the merged findings 
of this case study were as follows: students per-
ceived Twitter as a free-flowing and interactive 
environment that helped them engage with one 
another regarding the course content; they also 
felt that Twitter encouraged them to engage in 
different types of constative communication at 
different times (Wakefield et al., 2011). This case 
study embodies elements of synchronous cloud 
social learning as students were able to interact 
with each other and with the course content in the 
cloud. But above all, it reflects a sense of pres-
ence learning – learning through social presence 
afforded by Twitter (see Chaka, 2013b, 2014a).
The third case study involved the use of five 
social media tools - Twitter, YouTube, Flickr, 
blogging and Skype - to facilitate student learning. 
Students had to access these social media technolo-
gies from their own mobile devices. Conducted 
in 2010 at a state college of medicine in the U.S., 
the case study had two parts and 15 fourth-year 
medical students as its participants. The latter had 
enrolled in one of the two intensive, month-long 
final humanities electives which they had to do 
after completing their medical coursework. The 
two electives (Creative Writing for Medicine and 
The Narratives of Aging: Exploring Creative Ap-
proaches to Dementia Care) were part of students’ 
compulsory medical humanities curriculum and 
were designed to integrate the five social media 
tools in their teaching and learning delivery mode. 
In this regard, the main aim of this case study was 
to use and evaluate the integration of these five 
social media tools into the two electives (George 
& Dellasega, 2011).
The first part of the case study focused on the 
module, Creative Writing for Medicine, and the use 
of Twitter as a supplementary learning platform. 
Students were provided with writing prompts on 
Twitter by their instructor and were connected to 
other writing prompts from their classmates. Once 
they were comfortable with using this platform, 
their writing assignments were migrated to a shared 
group blog. The second part of the case study 
entailed the module, The Narratives of Aging: 

84
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
Exploring Creative Approaches to Dementia Care, 
and the use of Twitter and YouTube as additional 
learning platforms. Two of the purposes for which 
YouTube was used were to: stream video clips 
made by Alzheimer’s advocacy groups from dif-
ferent countries; and link students to video content 
of persons having dementia engaging in therapies 
from several countries. Finally, students designed a 
short video clip as part of their out-of-class group 
assignment that was uploaded on YouTube. In 
addition, Twitter was integrated into the elective 
to allow students to have real-time communica-
tion about their filed observations and field notes 
(George & Dellasega, 2011). Overall, this two-part 
case study enabled students to engage in: a BYOD 
approach to learning; real-time learning (through 
real-time individual writing prompts and assign-
ments and through real-time collaboration); and 
a video streaming driven learning. All of this was 
powered through cloud-based mobile and social 
media technologies: the instructor could monitor 
students’ participation and post responses to stu-
dents using cloud-based social computing while, 
in turn, students were able to leverage personal 
mobile cloud computing affordances.
The fourth case study is Hershock and La-
Vaque-Manty’s (2012) project. This case study 
is about how various instructors at a U.S.’s uni-
versity use cloud-based online collaboration tools 
(OCTs) in the respective courses that they teach. 
Two projects relating to utilizing such OCTs as 
deployed on Google Docs, are presented here. The 
first project concerns upper-level undergraduate 
Nursing students who are expected to write grant 
proposals to prepare themselves for independent 
research proposals with faculty mentors. Students 
are required to draft or revise certain sections of 
grant proposals and refine designs of their indi-
vidual research proposals and their disciplinary 
writing skills. A students’ instructor creates a 
Google Docs collection for weekly assignments, 
collating sections of grant proposals that require 
different skill sets and levels of conceptual mastery. 
Once students post their drafts to each collection, 
the whole class is able to automatically view these 
drafts and comment on them. The instructor is 
also able to view and assess the extent of changes 
to student drafts in response to peer feedback by 
means of Google Docs’ history revision feature 
(Hershock & LaVaque-Manty, 2012).
The second project involves the course, In-
troduction to Engineering, in which students are 
expected to work in teams to design, build, and trial 
products for given professional scenarios. Student 
teams have to apply course concepts to assess rival 
designs in relation to client-generated objectives 
and constraints. Nonetheless, face-to-face student 
discussions often result in suboptimal designs 
because of poor group interactions. To obviate 
this interactional hiccup, the instructor opted to 
have team discussions take place on Google Docs. 
Thus, tapping into Google Docs, teams are able to 
have synchronous, text-based online discussions 
in which members are geographically dispersed. 
In this case, students are also in a position to use 
the comment and chat features of Google Docs 
(Hershock & LaVaque-Manty, 2012). In both 
instances of Google Docs usage, students are able 
to exploit real-time affordances offered by cloud 
computing. That is, in both instances, students are 
able to engage in real-time, cloud-based online 
collaborative learning. For example, in the first 
project, not only do students engage in real-time 
commenting and peer feedback, but they also 
engage in synchronous writing. Above all, they 
are also subject to the instructor’s synchronous 
monitoring and evaluation. In the second project, in 
addition to other highlighted affordances, students 
can tap into synchronous chatting.
The fifth case study is Lam’s (2012) project 
which took place at a university in Hong Kong, 
China. It had 284 Hi-Diploma Program partici-
pants (who were students) from the School of Con-
tinuing and Professional Studies who were selected 
by means of convenience sampling. The primary 
objective of the case study was to develop a model 
of student motivation in learning with Facebook 
by focusing on four Facebook benefits: interac-

85
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
tion, communication, social relationship and 
participation. Since Facebook was incorporated 
into Moodle (a learning management system), 
only aspects of the case study related to the use 
of Facebook are presented here. An arrangement 
was made for participants to access both Moodle 
and Facebook for 15 weeks in a given semester. In 
respect of Facebook, participants were requested 
to join a private study group (on Facebook) created 
by their instructors at the beginning of a semester. 
They were then required to submit their individual 
and group projects on the private Facebook group’s 
wall. They also had to answer quizzes on Facebook 
and prepare group presentation video clips and 
upload them onto Facebook. In turn, instructors 
had to respond to student questions posted on the 
Facebook group promptly, update students about 
any new information, and provide supplementary 
resources using the Facebook group frequently 
(Lam, 2012). Here, we have Facebook being de-
ployed as a social networking platform to enable 
both instructors and students to participate in a 
cloud-based teaching and learning, respectively. 
This cloud-based social computing platform offers 
users synchronous and asynchronous teaching and 
learning affordance among its other affordances.
The sixth case study is Lin et al.’s (2013) 
experiment that took place at a Taiwanese uni-
versity and involved 70 students (38 males and 
32 females) whose average age was 21 years. The 
main purpose of the experiment was to determine 
the effectiveness of a proposed cloud-based reflec-
tive learning environment on enhancing students’ 
reflective practices and their learning performance 
in an industrial course on product design. The 
70 students were enrolled in the Department of 
Industrial Education and were randomly assigned 
to an experimental group and a control group. The 
former had 35 students who used the proposed 
learning environment that supported their reflec-
tive learning activities; and the latter also had 35 
students who underwent similar activities as the 
experimental group, but with the help of a discus-
sion board and not of web applications. In view of 
this, the experiment then integrated Google and 
Microsoft web applications as a suite of teach-
ing and learning tools with a reflective learning 
environment. Google applications were meant for 
use by the experimental group, while the control 
group had to use Microsoft Office Word document 
to conduct and present a specific issue. Cognate 
Google applications used by the experimental 
group were: Google Plus (to facilitate reflective 
activities between instructors and students using 
this social networking application); Google Drive 
(to enable instructors and students to instantly 
edit, write down, view, and reply to reflective 
ideas conveyed through any PC or mobile device 
connected to this web-based office suite); and 
Google sites (to allow instructors and students to 
consolidate and express their reflective thoughts 
using this structured wiki- and webpage-creation 
application) (Lin et al., 2013..
Employing questionnaires, pre-test/post-test 
results and interviews, the experiment yielded 
positive results, two of which are: the proposed 
cloud-based reflective learning environment 
enabled instructors and students to engage in 
reflective learning activities - the environment 
seamlessly facilitated a student-centered learning 
context to help students enhance their reflection 
abilities; and students in the experimental group 
displayed higher learning motivation and reflec-
tion performance than those in the control group 
(Lin et al., 2013). In the main, this experiment 
represents one way in which freemium – not 
premium – cloud computing can be leveraged 
by instructors in the HE sectors for educational 
purposes.
The seventh case study pertains to Dell’s 2012 
(see Dell Inc., 2012) deployment of corporate 
cloud computing at Universidad Europea de 
Madrid. Attracting students around the world and 
offering courses spanning sports science, econom-
ics and law, Universidad Europea de Madrid is a 
private university servicing about 16,000 students 
in Spain. A majority of its students are the so-
called digital natives - who are said to be familiar 

86
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
with the web and digital devices from an early 
age – and tend to arrive at Universidad Europea 
de Madrid with high digital expectations. In order 
to satisfy its IT needs and those of its students (its 
primary clients), Universidad Europea de Madrid 
has enlisted the services of Dell to help it roll out 
a cloud computing system that includes among 
other solutions, software-as-a-service (SaaS) (Dell 
Inc., 2012). In this instance, its business goal was 
to reduce IT costs and enhance online and campus-
based learning, while allowing its students to use 
their own devices in university laboratories. In 
fact, at one point, it had 500 different pieces of 
software at 40 different laboratories that it had to 
constantly maintain, service and update. There-
fore, there was a need for it to move to boxless 
IT. So, as part of its solutions to scale down its IT 
costs, it has adopted a BYOD policy, Dell cloud 
services and a desktop virtualization. Besides, it 
has adopted these cloud solutions to add value 
to its image so it can have a competitive edge in 
the HE market. As a result of all these efforts, 
Universidad Europea de Madrid seems to have 
garnered the following benefits:
•	
Online student numbers are set to grow by 
more than 100 per cent.
•	
Students can bring their own devices to 
university, boosting learning.
•	
Saved resources can be invested into cam-
pus facilities.
•	
Opening up easy and simple access to 
cloud computing (Dell Inc., 2012).
The eighth case study which also entails the 
deployment of corporate cloud computing relates 
to Ozyegin University (IBM, 2010).The latter is a 
private, non-profit university in Instabul, Turkey, 
that intends becoming a premier entrepreneurial 
research university with a stronger focus on qual-
ity teaching. Since its inception, it is experiencing 
an exponential growth in academic departments, 
research centers and student numbers. As a result, 
it has had pressing challenges: maintaining high-
quality educational, entrepreneurial and research 
standards for its growing students and faculty 
members; adopting fast changing technologies; 
and spiraling IT-related burden on faculty. In 
collaboration with IBM, it then embraced a cloud 
computing solution, and it set itself the following 
goals:
•	
Develop a new, modern curriculum with 
courses that make it easy for faculty to 
adopt emerging technologies.
•	
Persuade faculty members to utilize cloud 
computing-based software and hardware.
•	
Enable online and offline computer-based 
examinations (e.g., programming) for 
many students simultaneously.
•	
Simplify the use of high-performance 
computing (HPC) and distributed process-
ing technologies for several disciplines so 
as to facilitate computational sciences or 
e-science quickly.
•	
Provide each registered student with a lap-
top (IBM, 2010).
This cloud computing roll-out process has 
yielded the following positives: a cloud-based 
finite element analysis (FEA) service has been de-
signed and implemented for use for HPC research 
and teaching in different engineering departments; 
USB-bootable operating systems in conjunction 
with cloud applications are deployed to deliver 
custom-designed and network-controlled appli-
cations (exams and labs) to may students at the 
same time; and an IBM LotusLive™ collaboration 
suite is being rolled out so that members of the 
IBM Cloud Academy in Turkey can be eventually 
brought under one cloud universe (IBM, 2010).
Theorizing Learning within Mobile 
Social Networking Cloud Computing
Most learning mounted on mobile social network-
ing occurs conversationally in the form of chat-
ting. Such chatting – especially as deployed on 

87
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
Facebook and Twitter - is mainly text-based and 
entails a lot of real-time texting/writing. In this 
way, learning delivered through social networking 
as an instance of cloud computing is mediated by 
texting or writing. As such, it needs to be theorized 
in line with the social networking cloud comput-
ing environment within which it takes place. One 
way of theorizing learning mediated through and 
embedded within a cloud-based personal mobile 
social computing provided by social networking 
is through an ecological framework. Grounded 
in the twin notion of ecology and ecosystem as 
conceptualized by Boylan (2004), Brooke (2009), 
Buck (2012) and Hodgson and Spours (2009), this 
framework regards learning, chatting, texting and 
writing on the one hand, and social networking and 
cloud computing on the other hand, as collectively, 
constituting ecologies of practices. Buck (2012), 
especially, posits writing as used by young adults 
on their mobile devices as an ecology of practice 
within digital environments. Employing the same 
analogy, in this chapter, chatting and texting en-
acted by young adults for purposes of learning 
within cloud-based mobile social networking 
are viewed as instances of new media writing 
scholarship (Brooke, 2009) occurring as part of 
digital literacy practices (Buck, 2012). The latter 
feed into ecologies of practices typifying mobile 
social networking and cloud computing. More-
over, in keeping with this ecological framework, 
both mobile social networking and mobile cloud 
computing are construed as enablers of real-time 
chat- and text-based writing and learning.
The other essential components of this 
framework are learners (users), mobile devices, 
cloud-based social networks (e.g., Facebook and 
Twitter) and wireless connectivity which, together, 
constitute a critical layer within a mobile cloud 
computing ecosystem. Within this ecosystem, all 
of these components are symbiotically interde-
pendent: users, who in this case are learners, rely 
on and need mobile devices, social networks, and 
wireless connectivity for them to be able to access 
mobile cloud computing for learning purposes. In 
the South African context, in particular, wireless 
connectivity is a critical ingredient in the mobile 
cloud computing ecosystem mix as broadband 
connectivity is expensive and, in certain cases, 
unreliable. Furthermore, these four components 
also serve as drivers and enablers of mobile cloud 
computing within this ecosystem. But in contrast 
to the other three components, learners or users 
hold the leverage of being actors and adopters 
in the overall mobile cloud computing equation. 
Therefore, their early or late uptake of mobile 
cloud computing finally determines whether they 
enjoy cloud affordances offered by this variant of 
computing earlier enough or only later on in their 
uptake trajectory.
Lastly, a theoretical lens through which real-
time chat- and text-based writing and learning 
are viewed is that of socio-situated practice. The 
latter is articulated by Castro and Chala (2013) as 
a socially and culturally situated process within 
which writing is embedded and which determines 
writing as an act. According to this view, writing, 
as a social practice, occurs at a specific historical 
and temporal juncture and at a particular place in 
society. By extension, real-time chat- and text-
based writing and learning are socio-culturally 
embedded in the digital life worlds of learners and 
mirror the lifestyles and cultures of such learners 
as mediated through both digital mobile devices 
(e.g., smart phones, iPads, tablets, phablets and 
mini-laptops) and the accompanying digital online 
environments (e.g., Facebook and Twitter). These 
digital online environments, in turn, mediate learn-
ers’ equally digital online lifestyles and cultures.
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
This study utilized a qualitative research paradigm 
and followed an interactive interpretivist research 
approach (see Maxwell, 2005). Based on this, it 
operated within a descriptive and interpretive case 
study design. This type of research design enables a 
researcher to analyze and interpret data with a view 

88
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
to theorizing it inductively against the backcloth 
of a given theoretical framework (see Griffee, 
2012; Zacharias, 2012). In the current study, the 
data collected consisted of chunks of messages 
written through the researcher’s and participants’ 
mobile phones. This data was analyzed in relation 
to an ecological framework delineated earlier on. 
Participants together with Twitter and Facebook, 
then, represented a case studied in this instance.
Statement of the Problem
Both Twitter and Facebook rank among the most 
highly used social media applications, making 
them some of the most preferred social network-
ing tools by, especially, young adults. The same 
applies to South Africa where these two social 
media applications are used by, among others, 
young adults for chatting and social networking, 
and for social relationship purposes (see Chaka, 
2013b; Vosloo, 2009; World Wide Worx &Fuse-
ware, 2012). Mostly, these young adults use their 
personal mobile phones as Internet devices to ac-
cess these two social media tools and other related 
online mobile applications. Likewise, participants 
in this study accessed Twitter and Facebook from 
their personal mobile phones. Much as Twitter 
and Facebook are preferred social networking 
tools by young adults in South Africa - includ-
ing those who participated in this study - they 
are, nonetheless, not often embraced as tools for 
educational purposes by most HEIs. This partly 
has to with the view that these two social media 
tools are implicated in retarding and corrupting 
users’ English grammar - and language use in 
general – due to the texting or messaging (Chaka, 
2012; Vosloo, 2009) in which users engage every 
time they leverage them. Again, this also partly 
has to do with the fact that most HE faculty mem-
bers are reluctant to use and averse to embracing 
students’ own personal mobile devices – which 
resonate with the BYOD approach – for educa-
tional purposes, save for announcements, alerts 
and emergency purposes. The third reason has to 
with the informal writing that social media tools 
such as Twitter and Facebook facilitate.
Despite the concerns cited above about the 
use of social networking tools, this study set out 
to employ Twitter and Facebook for educational 
cloud computing purposes. In so doing, it sought 
to discover some of the personal mobile cloud 
computing affordances these two social network-
ing tools have for educational purposes.
Research Questions
In the light of the above, this study sought to 
answer the following questions:
•	
What types of personal mobile educational 
cloud computing affordances can Twitter 
and Facebook offer to designated groups 
of undergraduate students?
•	
Is it possible to facilitate formal writing for 
a designated group of undergraduate stu-
dents using Facebook as a mobile cloud 
computing social networking tool?
Participants and Sampling
This study consisted of two projects: the Twitter 
and the Facebook projects. It sought participants’ 
consent to take part in the two projects. The Twit-
ter project involved 50 undergraduate students 
(out of a population of 200 students) enrolled in a 
first-year bi-semester English Academic Purposes 
(EAP) course in 2011 at a rural university in South 
Africa. Of these students, 28 were females and 22 
were males, and their average age was 21 years 
(SD=0.87). All of the students used English as a 
second language and spoke one of South African 
indigenous languages as their mother tongue. 
The Facebook project had 30 students (out of a 
population of 100 students), who had enrolled in 

89
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
a first year intensive English writing course in 
2012 at the self-same university, as its participants. 
Of these students, 18 were females and 12 were 
males whose average age was 22 years (SD=0.75). 
These students, too, spoke English as a second 
language and used one of South African indigenous 
languages as their mother tongue. Two sampling 
techniques, opportunistic and quota sampling 
techniques, were used (Teddlie &Yu, 2007; cf. 
Green, 2007; Yount, 2006; Zacharias, 2012). In 
the first instance, participants were chosen over 
a period of three weeks in August 2011 (for the 
first course) and in March 2012 (for the second 
course) after the researcher realized that they had 
their own mobile devices (mobile phones) that 
they used for accessing Twitter and Facebook. In 
the second instance, participants (in both groups) 
who showed to be persistent users of Twitter and 
Facebook were selected.
Twitter Project: Instruments, 
Materials, and Procedures
Participants’ personal mobile phones were the 
main instruments through which the Twitter data 
was obtained and through which participants 
accessed mobile cloud computing. These partici-
pants were 50 students who had enrolled in the 
first-year bi-semester English Academic Purposes 
(EAP Economic Science) course in 2011 at a speci-
fied South African university. The course focused 
mainly on academic writing and communication 
skills as they related to the business and manage-
ment context. So, in the second semester of 2011 
academic year, participants were informed that for 
the next three months (from August to October) 
the course information and some of the content 
of the course would be made available to them 
via the instructor’s Twitter account. Then, in the 
first week of August, those participants who did 
not have Twitter accounts were requested to sign 
up for such accounts and follow the instructor 
on his Twitter account. Once the participants 
had signed up for Twitter accounts, requests (see 
Exemplar 1), reminders, announcements and 
alerts, snippets of the course content definitions or 
explanations, some practice course activities and 
a course assignment were tweeted and displayed 
on the instructor’s Twitter’s timeline.
Exemplar 1. A sample of a screenshot of one of 
the tweets sent to participants
18 Aug. 
So, let’s all together make Twitter an interactive 
learning platform and not just a ‘follow me’ me-
dium or a ‘personality’ following medium.
Facebook Project: Instruments, 
Materials, and Procedures
Similarly, in respect of this project, participants’ 
personal mobile phones served as both instruments 
to obtain the Facebook data and mobile devices 
for accessing cloud computing. The participants 
here were 30 students who had enrolled in a first 
year intensive English writing course in 2012 at a 
university mentioned above. The intensive English 
writing course in question – whose major focus 
was descriptive writing - was one of the English 
course offerings that participants had to do in the 
first semester as part of their Bachelor of Educa-
tion in Humanities degree program. Even though 
it was a first year course, participants could only 
enroll in it when they were in their second year 
level of their degree program. At the beginning 
of March 2012, participants were informed that 
certain course activities would be provided to them 
on a Facebook group page. Subsequently, a class 
Facebook group page was created for participants 
which they were requested to join. Those who 
did not have Facebook accounts, were advised to 
sign up for them with a view to joining the class 
Facebook group page. Writing activities were 
then posted on the group page and participants 

90
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
had, in turn, to do them by posting their responses 
to the self-same group page. Comments about 
the course were also posted on the group page’s 
wall by both the instructor and participants. In 
addition, feedback to participants’ responses and 
comments was sent to individual participants 
using the Facebook group page facility. More-
over, at times, the instructor communicated with 
participants through a Facebook group’s chat 
feature. The agreement between participants and 
their instructor was that all Facebook activities 
and their feedback to them, would not be done in 
a physical face-to-face encounter in class. One 
Facebook writing activity, as depicted in Figure 
2, is the focus of this project:
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION
Data Analysis
A composite analytic approach incorporating 
conversational and discourse analysis was used for 
analyzing the data for this study. The former - con-
versational analysis – analyses human conversation 
and focuses on, among other things, elements like 
talk, conversation structure, adjacency pairs and 
turn-taking (see Sacks, 1994; Sacks, Schegloff 
& Jefferson, 1974; Wooffitt, 2005). For its part, 
discourse analysis deals with features of discourse 
or language such as sentences, discourse markers, 
discourse patterns within given texts (Burman & 
Parker, 1993; Jones, 2012; Norris, 2004; Römer 
& Schulze, 2010; Wooffitt, 2005). Pertaining to 
the Twitter and Facebook projects, in particular, 
conversation and discourse were typified by tweets 
and posts either from participants or from their 
instructor, or from both parties. These tweets and 
posts constituted the data types for this study and 
were, accordingly, subjected to conversational and 
discourse analysis. Above all, the findings related 
to the Twitter project are discussed in response 
to and on the basis of the first research question, 
while those pertaining to the Facebook project are 
discussed in response to both research questions. 
These findings are, therefore, contextual as envi-
ronments for Twitter and Facebook as instances 
of personal mobile educational cloud computing 
deployed on participants’ mobile devices – es-
pecially their mobile phones – vary according to 
contexts of use and application.
Twitter and Mobile Cloud Computing-
Based Teaching and Learning
The findings presented and discussed in this sub-
section are informed by the instructor’s tweets to 
EAP Economic Science students as displayed on 
his timeline. Therefore, the discussion of these 
findings is in response to the following research 
question:
•	
What types of personal mobile educational 
computing affordances can Twitter offer 
to a designated group of undergraduate 
students?
As pointed out earlier on, after the participants 
had signed up for their respective Twitter accounts 
and had been requested to follow their instructor 
on his Twitter account, requests, reminders, an-
nouncements and alerts, snippets of the course 
content definitions or explanations, some practice 
course activities and a course assignment were 
tweeted and displayed on the instructor’s Twitter’s 
timeline. Two instances of requests are depicted 
in Figure 3.
In the same breath, the following instance 
exemplifies two reminders that were tweeted to 
the instructor’s timeline for participants to note 
as represented in Figure 4.
As the use of Twitter gathered traction, tweets 
expressing gratitude to participants were also 
tweeted to the instructor’s timeline as depicted 
in Figure 5.
In the midst of all this, announcements were 
tweeted for participants to view in the course of this 

91
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
Twitter project. Figure 6 provides four examples 
of such announcements.
Moreover, snippets of the course content were 
tweeted and posted on the instructor’s Twitter 
timeline. These snippets were mainly intended 
to provide definitions or explanations of the 
designated aspects of the course content that 
were sometimes accompanied by relevant short 
questions. The snippets themselves were tweeted 
at different times throughout the duration of the 
Twitter project. Samples of such tweets are il-
lustrated by Figure 7.
Finally, some tweets were meant for asking 
short questions related to the course content while 
others were intended for course content assignment 
purposes. Two such tweets exemplifying these 
two aspects of the course content are featured in 
Figure 8.
The uses that Twitter was put to as outlined 
in the preceding figures are a proof positive of 
some of the personal mobile educational cloud 
computing affordances this social networking 
tool could offer users. Firstly, it was deployed 
as a cloud based virtual platform for posting 
requests, reminders and announcements to par-
ticipants about both micro- and macro-aspects of 
their course. In this sense, it served as a virtual 
notice board and a digital communication medium 
interfacing both participants and their instructor 
concerning the course information. Since both 
parties accessed Twitter from their personal mobile 
phones, the leveraging of Twitter for this particular 
educational cloud affordance occurred within the 
overall BYOD ecosystem. Secondly, Twitter was 
exploited as a cloud based virtual blackboard 
onto which snippets of the course content in the 
form of definitions and explanations and course 
related questions – including a course assignment 
question - were tweeted for participants to view 
and follow from their mobile phones anytime, 
wherever they were. This means that it served 
as a digital mobile cloud environment in which 
bite-sized teaching and learning occurred. This 
type of micro-teaching and micro-learning took 
place synchronously and asynchronously. Addi-
tionally, it was timeless (had no time constraints), 
Figure 2. A sample of a Facebook writing activity given to participants

92
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
Figure 3. Two screenshots of two requests tweeted for participants
Figure 4. Two screenshots of two requests tweeted for participants

93
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
Figure 5. A screenshot of a gratitude-expressing tweet
Figure 6. Four screenshots of four announcement tweets

94
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
borderless (had no geographic boundaries), and 
virtual. And above all, it was BYOD-driven, and 
device-agnostic. Most importantly, it required no 
further mobile infrastructure than participants’ 
own mobile devices.
Facebook and Mobile Cloud 
Computing-Based Writing
As is the case with the previous sub-section, the 
findings presented and discussed in this sub-
section are based on the responses and comments 
made by the intensive English writing course par-
Figure 7. Three screenshots of the snippets of the course content definitions/explanations some of which 
were accompanied by short course content questions

95
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
ticipants concerning a Facebook writing activity 
posted on the class Facebook group page. They 
also incorporate some of the instructor’s feedback 
to participants’ responses and comments. So, 
therefore, it is in response to the following two 
research questions:
•	
What types of personal mobile educational 
cloud computing affordances can Facebook 
offer to a designated group of undergradu-
ate students?
•	
Is it possible to facilitate formal writing for 
this group of undergraduate students using 
Facebook as a mobile cloud computing so-
cial networking tool?
As mentioned earlier on, after all participants 
in this project had been requested to sign up 
for Facebook accounts, they were subsequently 
asked to join a class Facebook group page facil-
ity. Thereafter, writing activities were posted on 
the Facebook group page that participants were 
required to do using the self-same group page. 
Additionally, comments about the course were 
also posted on the group page’s wall by both the 
instructor and participants. Moreover, feedback 
Figure 8. Two screenshots, one for a short course content question and the other for a course content 
assignment

96
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
to participants’ responses and comments was 
sent to individual participants as messages using 
the Facebook group page facility. One instance 
of a participant’ response to the Facebook writ-
ing activity mentioned earlier on in Figure 2, is 
displayed in Figure 9.
Another instance of a participant’s response 
to this Facebook writing activity is represented 
in Figure 10.
Participants responded to the Facebook writing 
activity and posted their respective responses on 
their class Facebook group page facility. In turn, 
the instructor responded and provided feedback to 
participants’ written tasks as posted on the group 
page. But, in addition, participants posted their 
comments as well. In this regard, Figure 11 illus-
trates two instances of the instructor’s feedback 
and a sample of a participant’s comment.
Moreover, notification and gratitude messages 
to participants were posted on the Facebook group 
page as exemplified by Exemplar 2.
Exemplar 2: A notification and gratitude message 
posted to participants on a group page’s wall 
June 2, 2012
Hi everybody! I’ve now wrapped up all FB sub-
missions and I’ll pass on your marks to Mr M ….! 
Thanx and God Bless each one of you! It has been 
nice interacting with all of you on FB!!! Cheerio!!!
As illustrated in the preceding figures, with 
reference to the first question of the Facebook proj-
ect, the class Facebook group page facility served 
as a cloud based mobile computing environment 
in which a course-specific writing activity (see 
Figure 3) was posted to which participants had to 
respond by leveraging the self-same group page 
facility. In this instance, this environment man-
aged to mediate and facilitate a writing process 
between the instructor and participants in the same 
way as a real-life physical environment exploit-
ing paper or a chalkboard would do. Therefore, it 
digitally and virtually simulated a real-life student 
writing environment. Since the writing activity 
and participants’ written responses to it occurred 
digitally and virtually, the Facebook group page 
facility acted as a digital and virtual blackboard. In 
addition, as the instructor at times communicated 
with participants via a Facebook group page’s chat 
feature, this enabled the Facebook group page to 
function in the same as way as a conventional 
learning management system (LSM) deployed on 
mainstream university ITs. This is more so when 
considering that a Facebook group page allows 
messages or comments to be emailed and SMSed in 
addition to their being posted on the group page’s 
wall. In this case, then, the Facebook group page 
offered both the instructor and participants some 
of the affordances provided by conventional LMSs.
Moreover, this facility enabled the instruc-
tor and participants to engage in asynchronous 
communication and writing (when messages 
or comments were posted on the group page’s 
wall) and in synchronous communication and 
writing (when messages or comments were sent 
live via a Facebook group page’s chat feature. 
Furthermore, the Facebook group page served as 
a cloud based mobile digital feedback platform 
on which this feedback happened synchronously 
and asynchronously (Chaka, 2014a, 2014b; Chaka 
& Ngesi, 2010; see Kabilan, Ahmad & Abidin, 
2010; Lam, 2012). As this feedback was sent to 
individual participants, it means, thus, that it was 
also personalized in the same way as paper-based 
written student feedback becomes personalized 
when it is given to individual students in a real-life 
university situation. Since all the Facebook group 
page affordances in this project occurred on the 
instructor’s and participants’ own mobile devices 
(and especially on mobile phones) for university’s 
enterprise/educational purposes, so, the leveraging 
of Facebook here had elements of consumeriza-
tion and BYOD as mentioned earlier on. These 
affordances all together provided participants with 
a mobile cloud computing-based writing.

97
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
Figure 9. A participant’s response to the Facebook writing activity
Figure 10. Another participant’s response to the Facebook writing activity

98
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
With respect to the second question, partici-
pants produced different pieces of writing. Some 
of these pieces of writing reflected the following 
features: well structured paragraphs; acceptable 
English grammar and language use; fewer spell-
ing errors; proper use of punctuation marks (see 
Aziz, Shamim, Aziz & Avais, 2013; DuBay, 2004). 
Others displayed forms that deviated from these 
features in varying degrees (see Figure 8 and 9). 
So, overall, the different pieces of writing that 
participants produced as part of their responses to 
the writing activity given to them on the Facebook 
group page depicted varying degrees of formal 
writing (Aziz et al., 2013; DuBay, 2004). All of 
these pieces of writing did not have textisms char-
acteristic of instant messaging or SMS language.
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE 
RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
As stated earlier on, this study employed an in-
teractive interpretivist research approach and a 
descriptive and interpretive case study design. In 
its case design, it had 50 and 30 participants in its 
Twitter and Facebook projects, respectively. So, in 
all, in both cases its total sample was small. One 
of the reasons for the small sample was to make 
it possible for the researcher to pay attention to all 
participants in each project with a view to giving 
each of them personalized responses, comments 
and feedback. This was necessary as in a teaching 
and learning environment provided by the two 
social networking sites (SNSs), participants who 
felt neglected or perceived not to be attended to, 
were likely to discontinue partaking in a project 
of which they were part. This potential drawback 
was more likely in the case of the Facebook 
project than in the Twitter project which allowed 
Figure 11. Two instances of the instructor’s feedback and a sample of a participant’s comment

99
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
course announcements, requests, reminders and 
questions to be posted en mass to participants on 
the instructor’s Twitter timeline. Of course, per-
taining to Twitter, in particular, its major inherent 
downside is the 140-character quota per tweet.
In addition, a cloud based educational environ-
ment offered by these two SNSs only allowed that 
student written work be assessed and graded by 
a human instructor and not by an intelligent or a 
virtual tutor. However, though, the forms of writing 
that participants were required to produce could 
not be assessed and graded by such intelligent or 
virtual tutors, even if they had been embedded into 
these SNSs. Again, once participants had posted 
their responses on the Facebook group page for 
submission purposes, especially, they could not 
edit or revise them without having to delete them 
altogether. Even then, they would have needed to 
get the instructor’s permission as he was the sole 
administrator of the class Facebook group page. 
Yet, the kind of writing in which participants en-
gaged, required some editing and revising before 
and, at times, after submitting. Most importantly, 
the findings of this study are more valuable for 
their transferability and replicability than for their 
generalizablity as is the case with most studies 
grounded on case study designs (see, for example, 
Griffee, 2012; Maxwell, 2005; Zacharias, 2012).
Furthermore, the present study explored the 
use of Twitter and Facebook for sharing course 
content with participants and for engaging partici-
pants in the writing process, respectively, over a 
limited period of time. Even, then, the two projects 
were one-off efforts. As a result, it is necessary 
that future research employing these two SNSs 
for educational purposes in the HE sector, do so 
over a sustained period of time. Such research 
will need to have integrated and corresponding 
follow-up projects. Additionally, in this study, both 
Twitter and Facebook were employed separately 
for each project. It is, therefore, advisable that 
future research intending leveraging these two 
SNSs synergize them within each project with a 
view to harnessing their optimal mobile educa-
tional cloud computing affordances (cf.. George 
& Dellasega, 2011).
CONCLUSION
The present study investigated the use of Twitter 
and Facebook for sharing course content with 
participants and for engaging participants in the 
writing process, respectively. Each of these two 
SNSs constituted a project on its own, making 
the study a dual project study, each with its own 
group of participants. The two groups of partici-
pants were enrolled in two different undergradu-
ate courses at a rural university in South Africa 
and spoke English as a second language. With 
respect to the Twitter project, some of the mobile 
educational cloud affordances it could offer were 
tapped. Firstly, it was deployed as a cloud based 
virtual platform for posting requests, reminders 
and announcements to participants about both 
the micro- and macro-aspects of their course. 
Secondly, it was exploited as a cloud based virtual 
blackboard for snippets of the course content, 
thereby facilitating anytime, anywhere bite-sized 
or micro-teaching and micro-learning.
The Facebook project, offered some of the mo-
bile educational cloud affordances that participants 
harnessed. First, a class Facebook group page 
facility served as a cloud based mobile computing 
environment in which a course-specific writing 
process was mounted by both the instructor and 
participants. Second, this group page facility lent 
itself well as a mobile cloud and digital platform 
for feedback for both the instructor and partici-
pants. Third, participants exploited a Facebook 
group page to produce varying degrees of formal 
writing. Fourth and last, the use of both Twitter 
and Facebook as deployed especially from the 
instructor’s and from participants’ own mobile 
devices, embodied elements of both consum-
erization and BYOD approaches to teaching 

100
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
and learning. Finally, these two SNSs provided 
participants with mobile cloud computing-based 
learning affordances.
REFERENCES
Alberta Education. (2012). Bring your own de-
vice: A guide for schools. Retrieved April 2, 2014, 
from https://education.alberta.ca/media/6749210/
byod%20guide%20revised%202012-09-05.pdf
Aziz, S., Shamim, M., Aziz, M. F., & Avais, P. 
(2013). The impact of texting/SMS language on 
academic writing of students - What do we need 
to panic about? Elixir Linguistics and Translation, 
55, 12884–12890.
Behrend, T. S., Wiebe, E. N., London, J. E., & 
Johnson, E. C. (2010). Cloud computing adoption 
and usage in community colleges. Behaviour & 
Information Technology, 30(2), 231–240. doi:10
.1080/0144929X.2010.489118
Boylan, M. (2004). Questioning (in) school math-
ematics: Lifeworlds and ecologies of practice 
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Sheffield 
Hallam University, Sheffield.
Brooke, C. (2009). Lingua fracta: Towards a rheto-
ric of new media. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Buck, A. (2012). Examining digital literacy 
practices on social network sites. Research in the 
Teaching of English, 47(1), 9–38. http://www.
ncte.org/library/NCTEFiles/Resources/Journals/
RTE/0471-aug2012/RTE0471Examining.pdf 
Retrieved April 2, 2014
Burman, E., & Parker, I. (1993). Introduction 
- discourse analysis: The turn to the text. In E. 
Burman & I. Parker (Eds.), Discourse analytic 
research: Repertoires and readings of texts in 
action (pp. 1–13). London: Routledge.
Burmeister, B. (2014, February 27). Benefits (and 
risks) of the mobile organisation. Finweek, 3, 7.
Castro, C. M. C., & Chala, P. A. (2013). Un-
dertaking the act of writing as a situated social 
practice: Going beyond the linguistic and the 
textual. Colombian Applied Linguistics Jour-
nal, 15(1), 25–42. doi:10.14483/udistrital.jour.
calj.2013.1.a02
Chaka, C. (2012). Mobiles for sustainable learning 
environments: Mobile phones and MXit with a 
South African school context. Journal for Com-
munity Communication and Information Impact, 
17, 161–182.
Chaka, C. (2013a). Virtualization and cloud 
computing: Business models in the virtual cloud. 
In A. W. Loo (Ed.), Distributed computing in-
novations for business, engineering, and sci-
ence (pp. 176–190). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2533-4.ch009
Chaka, C. (2013b). Digitization and consumeriza-
tion of identity, culture, and power among Gen 
Mobinets in South Africa. In R. Luppicini (Ed.), 
Handbook of research on technoself: Identity in 
a technological society (pp. 77–96). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2211-
1.ch022
Chaka, C. (2014a). Facebook’s cloud value chain 
for higher education. Infosys Labs Briefings, 
11(4), 84–89.
Chaka, C. (2014b). Social media as technologies 
for asynchronous formal writing and synchronous 
paragraph writing in the South African higher edu-
cation context. In V. Benson & S. Morgan (Eds.), 
Cutting-edge technologies and social media use in 
higher education (pp. 213–241). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-5174-6.ch009
Chaka, C., & Ngesi, N. (2010). Mobile writing: 
Using SMSes to write short paragraphs in English. 
In R. Guy (Ed.), Mobile learning: Pilot projects 
and initiatives (pp. 185–233). Santa Rosa, Cali-
fornia: Informing Science Press.

101
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
Cheston, R. W. (2012). BYOD & consumeriza-
tion: Why the cloud is key to a viable implemen-
tation. Retrieved May 10, 2014, from https://
kapost-files-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/
direct/20130709-2006-19803-4221/BYOD-
Consumerization-White-Paper-Rich-Cheston-
Aug-2012.pdf
Dell Inc. (2012). University enhances educa-
tion through the cloud. Retrieved May 10, 2014, 
from http://i.dell.com/sites/doccontent/corporate/
case-studies/en/Documents/2012-europea-ma-
drid-10011452.pdf
DuBay, W. H. (2004). The principles of readability. 
Retrieved April 10, 2014, from http://en.copian.
ca/library/research/readab/readab.pdf
George, D. R., & Dellasega, C. (2011). Use of 
social media in graduate-level medical humani-
ties education: Two pilot studies from Penn State 
College of Medicine. Medical Teacher, 33(8), 
e429–e434. doi:10.3109/0142159X.2011.586749 
PMID:21774639
Green, J. (2007). A guide to using qualita-
tive research methodology. Retrieved May 30, 
2014, from http://fieldresearch.msf.org/msf/
bitstream/10144/84230/1/Qualitative%20re-
search%20methodology.pdf
Griffee, D. T. (2012). An introduction to second 
language research methods: Design and data. 
Retrieved June 24, 2014, from http://www.tesl-ej.
org/pdf/ej60/sl_research_methods.pdf
Hershock, C., & LaVaque-Manty, M. (2012). 
Teaching in the cloud: Leveraging online col-
laboration tools to enhance student engagement. 
Retrieved June 24, 2014, from http://www.crlt.
umich.edu/sites/default/files/resource_files/
CRLT_no31.pdf
Hodgson, A., & Spours, K. (2009). Collaborative 
local learning ecologies: Reflections on the gov-
ernance of lifelong learning in England. Retrieved 
June 24, 2014, http://www.niace.org.uk/lifelong-
learninginquiry/docs/IFLL-Sector-Paper6.pdf
IBM. (2010). Ozyegin University: Cloud comput-
ing with IBM. Retrieved May 4, 2014, from http://
www.ibm.com/ibm/files/W771375B62431S24/
Ozyegin_EDB03009-USEN-00.pdf
Jones, R. H. (2012). Discourse analysis: A resource 
book for students. London: Routledge.
Kabilan, M. K., Ahmad, N., & Abidin, M. J. 
Z. (2010). Facebook: An online environment 
for learning of English in institutions of higher 
education? The Internet and Higher Education, 
3(4), 179–187. doi:10.1016/j.iheduc.2010.07.003
Katz, R., Goldstein, P., & Yanosky, R. (2010). 
Cloud computing in higher education. Retrieved 
May 4, 2014, from http://net.educause.edu/sec-
tion_params/conf/ccw10/highered.pdf
Kraan, W., & Yuan, L. (2009). Cloud computing in 
institutions: A briefing paper. Retrieved June 24, 
2014, from http://wiki.cetis.ac.uk/images/1/11/
Cloud_computing_web.pdf
Lam, L. (2012). An innovative research on the 
usage of Facebook in the higher education con-
text of Hong Kong. The Electronic Journal of 
e-Learning, 10(4), 377-386.
Lin, Y.-T., Wen, M.-L., Jou, M., & Wu, D.-W. 
(2013). A cloud-based learning environment for 
developing student reflection abilities. Computers 
in Human Behavior, 32, 244–252. doi:10.1016/j.
chb.2013.12.014
Maxwell, J. A. (2005). Qualitative research de-
sign: An interactive approach. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage.

102
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
McDonald, D., MacDonald, A., & Breslin, C. 
(2010). Final report from the JISC review of 
the environmental and organisational implica-
tions of cloud computing in higher and further 
education. Retrieved April 2, 2014, from http://
www.jisc.ac.uk/media/documents/programmes/
greeningict/cloudstudyreport.pdf
Mircea, M., & Andreescu, A. I. (2011). Using 
cloud computing in higher education: A strat-
egy to improve agility in the current financial 
crisis. Communications of the IBIMA, 1-15. 
doi:10.5171/2011.875547
Mitrano, T. (2009). Outsourcing and cloud com-
puting for higher education. Retrieved April 2, 
2014, from http://www.it.cornell.edu/cms/poli-
cies/publications/upload/Memo-on-Outsourcing-
and-Cloud-Computing.pdf
Norris, S. (2004). Analyzing multimodal inter-
action: A methodological framework. London: 
Routledge.
Plummer, D. C., Bittman, T. J., Austin, T., Cearley, 
D. W., & Smith, D. M. (2008). Cloud computing: 
Defining and describing an emerging phenom-
enon. Retrieved from June 24, 2014, http://www.
emory.edu/BUSINESS/readings/CloudComput-
ing/Gartner_cloud_computing_defining.pdf
Römer, U., & Schulze, R. (Eds.). (2010). Patterns, 
meaningful units and specialized discourses. 
Philadephia. John Benjamins. doi:10.1075/bct.22
Sacks, H. (1994). Lectures on conversation. Ox-
ford: Blackwell.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E., & Jefferson, G. A. (1974). 
A simplest systematics for the organization of 
turn-taking for conversation. Language, 50(4), 
696–735. doi:10.1353/lan.1974.0010
Sarga, L. (2012). Cloud computing: An overview. 
Journal of Systems Integration, 4, 1–12.
Teddlie, C., & Yu, F. (2007). Mixed methods 
sampling: A typology with examples. Journal 
of Mixed Methods Research, 1(1), 77–100. 
doi:10.1177/2345678906292430
Thomas, P. Y. (2009). Cloud Computing: A 
potential paradigm for practising the scholar-
ship of teaching and learning. Retrieved May 4, 
2014, from http://www.ais.up.ac.za/digi/docs/
thomas_paper.pdf
Vosloo, S. (2009). The effects of texting on literacy: 
Modern scourge or opportunity? Retrieved March 
15, 2010, from http://vosloo.net/wp-content/
uploads/pubs/texting_and_literacy_apr09_sv.pdf
Wakefield, J. S., Warren, S. J., & Alsobrook, M. 
(2011). Learning and teaching as communicative 
actions: A mixed-methods twitter study. Knowl-
edge Management & E-Learning: An International 
Journal, 3(4), 563–584.
Wang, M., Chen, Y., & Khan, M. J. (2014). Mobile 
cloud learning for higher education: A case study 
of Moodle in the cloud. International Review of 
Research in Open and Distance Learning, 15(2), 
254–267. 
Wooffitt, R. (2005). Conversation analysis and 
discourse analysis: A comparative and critical 
introduction. London: Sage.
World Wide Worx & Fuseware. (2012). South 
African social media landscape 2012 – Execu-
tive summary. Retrieved April 21, 2013, from 
http://www.worldwideworx.com/wp-content/
uploads/2012/10/Exec-Summary-Social-Me-
dia-20121.pdf
Yount, W. R. (2006). Research design and statis-
tical analysis for Christian ministry. Louisville: 
NAPCE.
Zacharias, N. T. (2012). Qualitative research 
methods for second language education: A 
coursebook. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge 
Scholars Publishing.

103
Personal Mobile Cloud Computing Affordances for Higher Education
﻿
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
BYOD (Bring Your Own Device): An ap-
proach or strategy adopted within an information 
technology framework according to which users 
or employees bring and use their own convenient 
devices – in lieu of company’s infrastructure and 
tools - at their respective workplaces.
Cloud Computing Ecosystem: A network 
of different permutations of cloud computing in 
relation to one another and in respect to how they 
operate and exist in a computing ecosystem. Some 
of the examples of consumer cloud computing 
services are Google Apps, Dropbox, iCloud and 
SkyDrive.
Consumerization: In the information tech-
nology (IT) field, consumerization refers to the 
adoption and use of consumer-grade mobile de-
vices, applications, and platforms by employees 
to enhance their workplace productivity.
Facebook: A social networking site (started 
at Harvard University by Mark Zuckenberg) 
enabling users to create networks of friends, and 
share personal profiles, blogs, music, photos, and 
video clips.
Higher Education: This refers to tertiary 
education, and includes institutions such as col-
leges, institutes of technology, and universities.
Post-PC Trends: These are computing trends 
that relate mainly to non-PC devices such as lap-
tops, tablets, smartphones, gaming consoles, and 
other related mobile devices.
Twitter: A messaging site (also an application 
or a platform) allowing users to post messages that 
do not exceed a 140 character limit per post, and 
to post and share pictures, music, and video clips.

104
Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  5
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-8339-6.ch005
Applying Kolb Learning 
Experiential Theory with 
Cloud Computing in Higher 
Education Institutions:
Tanzania
ABSTRACT
The maturity of free and open source movement has brought a number of ICT tools. It has affected the way 
courses are delivered, the way contents are developed, the way data are interoperable, the way learning 
and teaching materials are shared, the way learners access classes and the way library resources are 
shared. In developing countries, several libraries are migrating into digital libraries using low cost tech-
nologies readily available due to open access, free and open source technology and e-publishing tools. 
Recent development of cloud computing technology provides state of art tools for libraries. It provides a 
common platform for easy information storage and sharing. Thus, there is lowering of the cost required 
to procure and manage library ICT infrastructure due to the capability of that cloud computing which 
allows the storage to be on a single, efficient system that saves cost and time. In developing countries 
where most libraries suffer from limited budgets for ICT services, it is anticipated that the future of 
digital libraries is on cloud libraries.
1. INTRODUCTION
The advent of Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) has changed the landscape of 
libraries in the world. The libraries in developed 
and developing countries no longer depend only 
from print materials for its customers (Wiederhold, 
1995). Thus, with the advancement of ICT even 
the conventional definition of library need to be 
revisited so that it includes aspects of electronic 
resources:
Camilius Sanga
Sokoine University of Agriculture, Tanzania
George Kibirige
Sokoine University of Agriculture, Tanzania

105
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
A place in which literary and artistic materials, 
such as books, periodicals, newspapers, pam-
phlets, prints, records, and tapes, are kept for 
reading, reference, or lending. (Hartman, 2007; 
Plutchak, 2012)
Libraries are incorporating traditional meth-
ods of keeping, referencing and lending literary 
materials with new methods using ICT. This is 
what is referred as “digital library” (Lyons, 2007). 
Examples of ICT applications which use digital 
libraries include: television and radio; Compact 
Discs (CDs) and Digital Versatile Discs (DVDs); 
video conferencing; mobile technologies; web-
based library management technologies; and 
electronic learning platforms. Challenges facing 
libraries in developing countries to adopt digital 
library are inherent contributed by challenges 
affecting Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) 
in adopting new ICTs tools as mentioned by Sife 
et al. (2007) in paper titled “New technologies 
for teaching and learning: Challenges for higher 
education institutions in developing countries”. 
The challenges are namely: lack of systemic ap-
proach for ICT implementation, awareness and 
attitude towards ICTs, administrative support, 
technical support, staff development, lack of 
ownership and inadequate funds (Sife, Lwoga, 
& Sanga., 2007). Other challenges include: cost 
of acquiring, managing, and maintaining ICT 
infrastructure, high cost of bandwidth, inadequate 
competent technical staff and lack of cloud and 
digital library policies (Fox, 2009). Nonetheless, 
the advancement of ICT in cloud computing and 
Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) provide 
an opportunity for libraries in developing countries 
to address some of these challenges by effectively 
utilizing the potential of cloud services.
By definition, cloud computing from the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST) is defined as follows:
Cloud computing is a model for enabling con-
venient, on-demand network access to a shared 
pool of configurable computing resources (e.g., 
networks, servers, storage, applications, and 
services) that can be rapidly provisioned and 
released with minimal management effort or ser-
vice provider interaction. (Mell &Grance, 2011). 
The cloud computing is characterized by com-
munication, information sharing, collaboration, 
interoperability and user-centered design. Inher-
ently these characteristics of cloud computing 
are well embedded in FOSS (Yuan et al., 2008). 
FOSS has brought new movement in educa-
tion. These include open acess, open educational 
resources, open courseware etc. The advocacy 
of open education argues that knowledge can be 
shared using different ICT tools. This knowledge 
sharing can be in different forms, for example, (i) 
sharing in scholarly research (open access) (ii) 
sharing in teaching and learning materials (open 
educational resources) (iii) sharing in computer 
code (open source) (iv) sharing in research data in 
a machine readable format (open data) (v) sharing 
in how you work/learn (open practice) (vi) shar-
ing in courses to classes (either open courses or 
massive open online course) (Yuan, MacNeill, & 
Kraan 2008). These characteristics provide basis 
for implementing cloud library (Xinping, 2010). 
Mavodza (2013) argues that cloud library is go-
ing to shift the problems of HEI from hardware 
and software demands for storing and organizing 
data, to information access concerns. The reason 
behind this is because there is exponential growth 
of information sources and it is associated with 
its complexities that limit capacity of libraries in 
developing countries to host their own electronic 
information resources in its entirety. Thus, this 
necessitates opting for alternatives solutions using 
cloud computing (Mavodza, 2013). Libraries in 
developing countries are migrating from conven-
tional library to digital library and cloud library 
which is for virtual library (Lwoga, 2012). This 
migration to virtual library is supported by tools 
from cloud computing (CC, 2014). Cloud comput-
ing refers as a model of network computing where 

106
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
a program or application runs on a connected 
server or servers rather than on a local comput-
ing device such as a PC, tablet or Smartphone. 
Thus, cloud computing utilizes the concept of 
virtualization where one or more physical servers 
can be configured and partitioned into multiple 
independent “virtual” servers, all functioning 
independently and appearing to the user to be a 
single physical device.
Cloud computing has changed even the soft-
ware development paradigms (Figure 1) from 
unstructured paradigm to structured paradigm, 
and to object oriented paradigm and component 
based paradigm to component based service 
oriented (Mei & Liu, 2011). In a library which 
has adopted cloud computing, cloud users access 
library services either as free “subscription-based” 
or by paying “pay-per-use service in real time over 
the Internet” (Scale, 2010). Thus, using cloud 
computing different cloud library stakeholders 
can access library services anywhere anytime (24 
hours, 7days, 365days).
The emerging of cloud computing has started 
revolutionizing services offered from conventional 
library to digital library (Rasmussen & Jochum-
sen, 2009) and cloud library. In cloud library, 
services of libraries and its ICT infrastructure, 
library software and applications can be hosted 
into cloud servers and its digital services accessed 
via Internet with some predefined permission to 
different type of stakeholders. Thus, adoption of 
cloud library has the potential to lower the cost. 
With cloud library, the cost associated with man-
aging digital ICT application for library, paying 
Figure 1. Software paradigm (adapted from Mei and Liu, 2011)

107
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
licenses fees for software, procuring the hardware 
and salaries for ICT staff can be minimized. These 
are some of the benefits which can be obtained 
from adoption of cloud library because of the 
seamless integration of computing devices, human 
society and physical objects (Mei & Liu, 2011). 
Other benefits of cloud computing to digital library 
are similar to those for blended learning in HEIs, 
namely: reduction of ICT investment, support for 
maintenance is guaranteed, the accessibility and 
reliability of cloud services is higher, reduction 
of cost since the cloud services are paid as per 
use model, increased storage space which can be 
personalized into quota for each user of library, 
improve efficiency and effectiveness of library 
from the access of high performance computing 
(HPC) facilities and easy to scale up the access 
of high performance cloud service (Harris, 2012; 
Mtebe, 2013; Shimba, 2010; Shimba et al., 2014). 
In addition, other benefits are: risk mitigation (i.e. 
services host far away from library and incase of 
catastrophic event the services are still uptime), 
speed of delivery of services, no need of new staff 
when scaling up services, improved services and 
universities are left with their core functions rather 
than technical issues of cloud library.
In summary, the advantages of cloud comput-
ing as identified by He et al. (2011) include:
1. 	
Less Maintenance: Hardware, applications 
and bandwidth are managed by the provider.
2. 	
Continuous Availability: Public cloud ser-
vices are available wherever you are located.
3. 	
Scalability: Pay only for the applications 
and data storage you need.
4. 	
Elasticity: Private clouds can be scaled to 
meet your changing IT system demands.
5. 	
Expert Service: Expedient’s cloud comput-
ing services are continuously monitored and 
maintained by onsite staff of expert data 
center technicians.
6. 	
Automatic Software Integration: In the 
cloud, software integration is usually some-
thing that occurs automatically. This means 
that no need to take additional efforts to 
customize and integrate applications as per 
users’ preferences. Cloud computing allows 
users’ to customize their options with great 
ease. Hence, users’ can handpick just those 
services and software applications that you 
think will best suit their particular enterprise.
7. 	
Backup and Recovery: Since all your data 
is stored in the cloud, backing it up and 
restoring the same is relatively much easier 
than storing the same on a physical device. 
Furthermore, most cloud service providers 
are usually competent enough to handle 
recovery of information. Hence, this makes 
the entire process of backup and recovery 
much simpler than other traditional methods 
of data storage.
From the literature review, the critical analysis 
of benefits which can be obtained by HEIs in de-
veloping countries after adopting cloud computing 
services into their digital library is presented. It 
is anticipated that some of the challenges which 
libraries in developing countries are now ex-
periencing can be addressed by adopting cloud 
computing services. This book chapter presents 
different aspects of the application of cloud com-
puting in libraries, different platforms available, 
how to create cloud libraries, challenges and op-
portunities, and the role of cloud librarians along 
with situation analysis from selected Tanzania’s 
HEIs libraries. The literature review identified 
that previous studies did not apply any theory 
to guide their researches (Harris, 2012; Mtebe, 
2013; Shimba, 2010; Shimba et al., 2014). This 
is one of the major weaknesses of the previous 
researches done in cloud computing. Thus, this 
study differs from earlier studies by applying Kolb 
Experiential Learning theory (Kolb, Boyatzis, & 
Mainemelis,, 2001). Kolb experiential learning 
theory is built on six propositions namely: (i) 
Learning is best conceived as a process, not in 
terms of outcomes. (ii) All learning is re-learning. 
(iii) Learning requires the resolution of conflicts 

108
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
between dialectically opposed modes of adaptation 
to the world. (iv) Learning is a holistic process of 
adaptation to the world. (v) Learning results from 
synergetic transactions between the person and 
the environment (vi) Learning is the process of 
creating knowledge (Kolb, & Kolb 2005). Also, 
Kolb experiential learning theory is a recursive 
process which involves experiencing, reflecting, 
thinking, and acting (Kolb, & Kolb, 2005), The 
fundamental aspect of Kolb experiential learning 
theory is experience. Kolb experiential learning 
theory differs from behavioral and cognitive learn-
ing theories which are rational learning theory 
based on empirical epistemology (Kolb, 1984). 
Epistemology deals with theory of knowledge 
under which the research is seeking to contribute 
(Crotty, 1998). Epistemology stances for Kolb 
experiential learning theory combine theories from 
other school of thoughts that is why Kolb (1984) 
argues that Kolb experiential learning theory is 
holistic integrative approach which combines 
experience, perception, cognition and behavior. 
Thus, learning is defined as the process of creat-
ing new knowledge or skills through experience 
transformation. The experience transformations 
are done in objective or subjective forms to the 
learner. This forms the basis for choosing the 
theoretical perspective of the research which is 
to be undertaken (Crotty, 1998). HEIs need to 
change their setting so as to create a conducive 
environment for problem solvers by adopting dif-
ferent forms of Kolb experiential learning theory. 
Kolb and Kolb(2005) suggested that HEIs must 
have enabling environment for promoting lifelong 
learning through (i) evaluation of educational 
structures and processes against promotion of 
learning criteria. (ii) longitudinal outcome studies 
to determine learning value added. (iii) becom-
ing a learner-centered institution. (iv) continuous 
research and inquiry about the learning process. 
(v) becoming a learning organization by having 
regular stakeholder conversation. The aim of these 
criteria for promoting lifelong learning at HEIs is 
towards developing open system for a university. 
The university with open system is one which 
has adopted either open courseware or open data 
or open source software or open educational re-
sources or massive open online course.
Scale (2010) assessment of the impact of cloud 
computing on library services can be taken as 
supporting evidence which shows that libraries of 
different organizations are striving to make their 
libraries as open system rather than close systems. 
The basis for this argument is that for a library 
in this digital era to be competitive and remain 
relevant to different users who are mobile and 
using Web 2.0 tools, there is a need of adopting 
cloud computing which facilitates open systems 
development. Scale (2010) proposed that if librar-
ies are to adopt cloud computing, the concept of 
physical libraries will have different implications if 
compared to cloud library in provisions of libraries 
services. Hence, there is no way for convetional 
library to escape adopting cloud library since 
the stakeholders of most e-government services, 
which include library services from conventional 
library, are nomad (Ochara-Muganda & Van Belle, 
2010). Nomadicity for stakeholders of library is 
driven by technologies such as portable computers, 
laptops, notebooks, Personal Digital Assistants 
(PDA), Smart Card devices (e.g. IPAD), mobiles 
(mobile phones) and now cloud computing ser-
vices. This is one of the feature of nomadicity 
when combined with portability increases the 
probability of having a good results from the 
implementation of cloud library in developing 
countries where the conventional libraries are not 
adequate. It is from this analysis that the applica-
tion of cloud computing in library is an emerging 
area of concern for library in developing countries. 
Also, cloud computing for library is among the 
development informatics research agenda in area 
of ICT for Development (Heeks, 2014). Thus, 
this book chapter contributes toward filling this 
research gap in knowledge by adding more critical 
analysis literature in area of cloud computing for 
digital library. The concept ‘cloud computing’ 
for digital library was conceptualized using Kolb 

109
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
experiential learning theory. Kolb experiential 
learning theory was chosen since it works better 
in analyzing the dynamics of exploitation and ex-
ploration in intra- and inter-organizational learning 
processes (Holmqvist, 2004). This differentiated 
this study from other previous researchers (He 
et al., 2011;Scale, 2010) who were not guided 
by theoretical stance in their studies that is why 
there results are not grounded in particular theory 
and thus, difficult to understand their claim in 
knowledge contribution. Heeks (2014) argues 
that any study which is not supported by a good 
philosophical stance, theoretical knowledge, 
research methodology and research method its 
results / findings are as good as fallacy.
Therefore, the research design for this study 
was formulated by choosing a combination of tech-
niques: namely; philosophical stance, theoretical 
knowledge, research methodology and research 
method. The research approach was designed 
based on techniques suggested by Crotty (1998). 
According to Crotty (1998) four questions are 
considered when designing a research:
1. 	
What Epistemology?: This deals with 
theory of knowledge embedded in the 
theoretical perspectives which informs the 
research (e.g. objectivism, subjectivism, 
etc.).
2. 	
What Theoretical Perspectives?: This deals 
with philosophical stance which lies behind 
the chosen research methodology in your 
research (e.g. positivism, post-positivism, 
interpretivism, critical theory, etc.)
3. 	
What Methodology?: This deals with 
strategy or plan of action that links research 
methods to outcomes. Outcome governs 
the researcher choice and use of research 
methods (e.g. experimental research, survey 
research, ethnography, etc.)
4. 	
What Methods?: This deals with techniques 
and procedures proposed by research to use 
in data collection and data analysis (e.g. 
questionnaire, interview, focus groups, etc.)
These four questions (Figure 2) are usually 
missing in many previous researches done in area 
of ICT for development (ICT4D) (Heeks, 2014).
In order to fill the identified research gap in 
cloud library literature and to better help different 
library stakeholders’ understand and adopt cloud 
computing (Heeks, 2014), this book chapter pro-
vides some insights for developing cloud comput-
ing strategies for libraries in developing countries, 
based on the literature review and on the authors’ 
years of practical experience in ICT4D projects. 
These insights are intended to assist different li-
brary stakeholders in developing countries when 
they are integrating cloud computing in their either 
digital library or conventional library as part of 
their ICT strategy planning (Kamel, 2010).
Furthermore, this book chapter contributes by 
adding literature from both the industry and the 
academia as cloud library is still not comprehen-
sive and mature field of study. This is the research 
gap which was identified by (Shimba, 2010).
This book chapter is organized as follows: sec-
tion one presents the introduction, literature review 
in cloud library and Kolb experiential learning 
theory. Also, section one describes benefits that 
cloud computing brings to conventional library. 
Section two describes the research methodol-
ogy. The remaining sections present the cloud 
computing architecture, including its delivery 
models and deployment methods. Also, the sub – 
section of section two presents the challenges of 
cloud computing in library. Furthermore, it offers 
insights for different stakeholders of library who 
are interested in adopting and implementing cloud 
computing in their digital library or conventional 
library. Finally, conclusions and suggestions for 
future research areas are presented.
2. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
This research was conducted in Tanzania. The 
research methodology which was adopted in this 
study was desk research. It included meta - analysis 

110
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
approach mixed with Kolb Experiential Learning 
Model (Kolb et al., 2001).
The study employed a meta-analysis approach 
where several studies on cloud computing in 
developing countries were analyzed (Harris, 
2012; Mtebe, 2013; Shimba, 2010; Shimba et 
al., 2014). Meta -analysis approach was selected 
because several studies on cloud services have 
been conducted, however; each study has limited 
itself to some general aspects of cloud computing 
services. This study was conducted to address 
specific issues related to cloud library.
The Kolb Experiential Learning Model en-
abled the author to start by being observant and 
critically reflective on cloud computing and then, 
they develop some abstract concepts on cloud 
library (that can be generalized) and thereafter, 
we designed new ideas and experiment on them 
and finally, we end up with concrete experience 
and this provided avenue for repeating the cycle 
in future study (Kolb et al., 2001). Previous stud-
ies which presented on this theory started with 
concrete experience but in this book chapter, we 
started with the observation and critical reflection 
because the researchers wanted to avoid biasness 
(Figure 3). The biasness can be attributed by the 
researcher after having concrete experience of the 
matter which s/he wants to research.
The studies selected in Meta – analysis were 
conducted in between 2012 and 2013; choice of 
this time interval was due to the fact that huge 
investments in the information sector have taken 
place over the recent years. For example, the recent 
rollout of SEACOM, EASSy and TEAMs marine 
cables increased internet speed up to 155Mbps as 
well reducing telecommunication costs by 95% 
(Swarts & Wachira, 2010). This is one of the 
factors which creates enabling environment for 
cloud library.
Since the theory chosen for this study need both 
qualitative and quantitative research methods thus, 
the mixed research methods (i.e. triangulation) 
Figure 2. Four elements of the research process

111
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
were adopted. The aim of triangulation is to have 
counter effect between qualitative and quantita-
tive research methods where by the advantages 
of qualitative research methods will address the 
weakness of quantitative research method and 
vice versa (Sanga, 2010).
The outline of the research for this research 
(using Crotty’s model) is represented in Figure 2 
and Figure 4.
Case study was chosen as research method in 
order to explore in depth how libraries in HEIs of 
Tanzania have adopted digital library supported by 
cloud computing services. Using different cases 
of computerization of library, the researchers col-
lected detailed information using a variety of data 
over a specified period of time. Then evaluation 
was done to do the comparison. Thereafter, the 
experiment was set to know the level of digital 
library and cloud computing adoption in 5 HEIs 
out of 48 HEIs found in Tanzania. This was the 
sample size used in this research.
Since time and finance was limited, thus desk 
research was adopted as research methodology. It 
fits well with this kind of researches which aimed 
at looking into what others have done in the area of 
cloud library and also, doing comparison studies.
Without specifying theoretical perspective 
and epistemology in the research design there is 
a great chance of obtaining results which are not 
filtered in proper scientific lenses. Thus it was 
unavoidable to follow this principle. Theoretical 
perspective which was used in this research was 
Kolb experiential learning theory. The reason for 
choosing this theory is as discussed earlier.
Finally, post-positivist was chosen as philo-
sophical stance. Before starting the research, the 
authors selected some knowledge claims so that 
they can be guided well while looking for new 
knowledge. As Crotty (1994) argues that “knowl-
edge that develops through a post-positivist lens is 
based on careful observation and measurement of 
the objective reality that exists “out here” in the 
world”. It is from this premise that post – positiv-
ist was chosen.
3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The Kolb Experiential Learning Cycle (KELC) 
guided the study and resulted into the following 
outcomes which is presented in the below section.
Observation and critical reflection: under this 
initial phase of KELC different literature were 
searched on cloud computing and Meta – analysis 
was done. The outcome of the literature search 
enabled the authors to confirm that there is a need 
Figure 3. The Kolb experiential learning cycle (Adapted from Kolb et al., 2001)

112
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
of integration of cloud computing and not any 
other computing systems such as cluster and grid 
computing systems (Buyya, Ranjan, & Calheiros 
N., 2009). The comparisons of these different 
computing systems are as shown in Table 1.
From Table 1, the characteristics of cloud 
computing systems outperform those of grid and 
cluster computing systems. This is the reason why 
cloud systems in library was preferred than grid 
library or cluster library (Figure 5).
1. 	
Different, new, aspects of the application of 
cloud computing in libraries:
a. 	
The literature search about cloud library 
delivery model showed that there are 
four categories for delivery, namely:
i. 	
Consumption: How users of 
digital library consume the ap-
plications and business processes
ii. 	
Creation: What’s required to 
build applications and business 
processes
iii. 	 Orchestration: How parts are 
integrated or pulled from an ap-
plications server
iv. 	 Infrastructure: Where the core 
guts such as servers, storage, and 
networks reside
2. 	
Different cloud platforms presently available 
are namely:
a. 	
Business Services and Software-
as-a-Service (SaaS): The traditional 
applications layer in the cloud includes 
software as service apps, business 
services, and business processes on 
the server side (Figure 6).
i. 	
Development-as-a-Service 
(DaaS): Development tools 
take shape in the cloud as shared 
community tools, web based dev 
tools, and mashup based services 
(Figure 6). This category is not in 
the Figure 6 but it has been list 
in the classification by Sodhi and 
Prabhakar (2011).
b. 	
Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS): 
Middleware manifests in the cloud with 
app platforms, database, integration, 
and process orchestration (Figure 6).
Figure 4. The four elements of research as was used in this research

113
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
Table 1. Characteristics of cluster, grid and cloud computing systems (Adapted from Buyya et al., 2009)
Characteristics
Systems 
Clusters
Grids
Clouds
Population
Commodity computers
High-end computers 
(servers, clusters)
Commodity computers and high-end servers 
and network attached storage
Size/scalability
100s
1000s
100s to 1000s
Node Operating System (OS)
One of the standard OSs 
(Linux, Windows)
Any standard OS 
(dominated by Unix)
A hypervisor (VM) on which multiple OSs 
run
Ownership
Single
Multiple
Single
Interconnection network||speed
Dedicated, high-end with 
low latency and high 
bandwidth
Mostly Internet with 
high latency and low 
bandwidth
Dedicated, high-end with low latency and 
high bandwidth
Security/privacy
Traditional login/
password-based. Medium 
level of privacy–depends 
on user privileges.
Public/private key pair 
based authentication and 
mapping a user to an 
account. Limited support 
for privacy.
Each user/application is provided with a 
virtual machine. High security/privacy is 
guaranteed. Support for setting per-file 
access control list (ACL).
Discovery
Membership services
Centralised indexing 
and decentralised info 
services
Membership services
Service negotiation
Limited
Yes, SLA based
Yes, SLA based
User management
Centralised
Decentralised and also 
virtual organization 
(VO)-based
Centralised or can be delegated to third party
Resource management
Centralized
Distributed
Centralized/Distributed
Allocation/scheduling
Centralised
Decentralised
Both centralised/decentralized
Standards/inter-operability
Virtual Interface 
Architecture (VIA)-based
Some Open Grid Forum 
standards
Web Services (SOAP and REST)
Single system image
Yes
No
Yes, but optional
Capacity
Stable and guaranteed
Varies, but high
Provisioned on demand
Failure management (Self-
healing)
Limited (often failed 
tasks/applications are 
restarted).
Limited (often failed 
tasks/applications are 
restarted).
Strong support for failover and content 
replication. VMs can be easily migrated from 
one node to other.
Pricing of services
Limited, not open market
Dominated by public 
good or privately 
assigned
Utility pricing, discounted for larger 
customers
Internetworking
Multi-clustering within 
an Organization
Limited adoption, but 
being explored through 
research efforts such as 
Gridbus InterGrid
High potential, third party solution providers 
can loosely tie together services of different 
Clouds
Application drivers
Science, business, 
enterprise computing, 
data centers
Collaborative scientific 
and high throughput 
computing applications
Dynamically provisioned legacy and web 
applications, Content delivery
Potential for building 3rd party 
or value-added solutions
Limited due to rigid 
architecture
Limited due to strong 
orientation for scientific 
computing
High potential — can create new services 
by dynamically provisioning of compute, 
storage, and application services and offer 
as their own isolated or composite Cloud 
services to users

114
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
c. 	
Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS): 
The physical world goes virtual with 
servers, networks, storage, and systems 
management in the cloud (Figure 6).
3. 	
How to create cloud libraries, challenges 
and opportunities:
a. 	
SaaS: With SaaS, there is no control 
of underlying infrastructure network, 
servers, operating systems, storage, 
or individual application capabili-
ties which are needed from the IT 
department of any HEI which need to 
adopt cloud library (Figure 10). The 
IT department can have a control of a 
limited set of user-specific application 
configuration settings which require no 
programming. The greatest concern for 
SaaS is the issue of privacy in the user 
generated data since they are controlled 
by cloud provider (Figure 7).
b. 	
PaaS: PaaS is characterized by al-
lowing only HEI to support data and 
application. The cloud provider has 
control of underlying infrastructure 
network, servers, operating systems, 
or storage (Figure 10). Thus, PaaS 
provides limited flexibility to the end 
user who in this case is any HEI which 
has transformed its library into cloud 
library (Figure 8).
Figure 5. Cloud Systems (Adapted from Jeffrey and Neidecker-Lutz, 2010)

115
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
c. 	
IaaS: IaaS is characterized by providing 
back-bones computing infrastructure 
storage, computer networking. This is 
often done using virtual machine (VM) 
where cloud user is given responsible 
to install and manage all software on 
VM (Figure 10). Also, cloud user is 
allowed to monitor resource utiliza-
tion and reacting to events in different 
user applications. Furthermore, the 
cloud user is given limited control on 
networking components (e.g. host fire-
walls). In comparison to IaaS and PaaS, 
IaaS is the most flexible cloud variant 
user can configure and control the VM 
and software stack. On other hand, this 
means the cloud user is needed to be 
competent to configure, install, operate 
and maintain IaaS (Figure 9).
Abstract conceptualization and generalization: 
After the critical reflection has been done then 
conceptual framework for the cloud library were 
identified as per KELC framework. The framework 
is generic and thus, it caters for any service to be 
offered under cloud computing.
In summary, Figure 10 depicts how the inte-
grated architecture will look like.
After the description of each cloud platform 
then there is a need to find out how they can be 
integrated. The following proposed architecture 
(Figure 11) shows integration of IaaS, PaaS and 
SaaS which can be adopted for cloud library.
One peculiar feature for the integrated archi-
tecture is that the weaknesses of each constitute 
architecture is strengthened by the advantages of 
other combined architecture.
There is justification why there is a need for 
such integration of different platforms for cloud 
computing in digital library. The reasons for this 
are:
1. 	
Advancement of ICT with resulted into 
lowering cost for computing devices
2. 	
Plenty of ICT tools are available either as 
free and open source library software or as 
proprietary library software
3. 	
The computer methods, techniques and 
algorithms for developing interactivity 
on tools for digital library have increased 
substantially
4. 	
In near future, the price for procuring band-
width will be reduced due to landing of fiber 
optical cable (e.g. SEACOM, EASSy and 
TEAMs) in Tanzania.
The logical view of the proposed integration 
of architecture which favors the enabling environ-
ment due to above factors is as depicted below 
(Figure 10) wheel for the integration of cloud 
categories:
Applications for each category (i.e. SaaS, PaaS, 
IaaS) shown in Figure 12 are depicted and briefly 
explained in Figure 13 below:
Under the proposed integrated architecture, 
there is need of multi-stakeholders to work as cloud 
providers, cloud consumers, cloud infrastructural 
providers, virtulization software providers as well 
as IaaS, PaaS and SaaS providers (or vendor) 
(Figure 14).
The Table 2 shows some example of the cloud 
service providers (Figure 14) which can also be 
for cloud library service providers.
Table 2 fits well with the cloud computing 
landscape which is shown in the Figure 15 below.
The advantage of this architecture is that the 
disadvantages of each model complement to each 
other. Also, it has additional model for dSaaS 
which is an extension of SaaS.
Active Experimentation of Ideas
The aim of this phase of KELC is to come up 
with an empirical experiment which can validate 
some concepts in cloud library. There is a good 

116
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
Figure 6. Cloud computing categories (adapted from Mtebe, 2013)
Figure 7. SaaS architecture (Adapted from Sodhi and Prabhakar, 2011)

117
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
Figure 8. PaaS architecture for cloud library (Adapted from Sodhi and Prabhakar, 2011)
Figure 9. IaaS architecture for cloud library (Adapted from Sodhi and Prabhakar, 2011)

118
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
Figure 10. Combined figure showing what cloud user and cloud vendor manage (Adapted from Sodhi 
& Prabhakar, 2011)
Figure 11. Proposed integrated Iaas, PaaS and SaaS (Adapted from Sodhi and Prabhakar, 2011)

119
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
Figure 12. Logical view of integrated IaaS, PaaS and SaaS (MOOC, 2013)
Figure 13. Applications belonging to each category of cloud computing (MOOC, 2013)

120
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
study which evaluated the clouding computing 
(Buyya et al., 2009; Yang, 2012). In this study, 
the results of testing out new ideas about cloud 
library provided the findings which are presented 
in Table 3.
Examples of Open Source 
Application in Cloud Computing
There is a lot of open source applications software 
that are used in cloud as SaaS others used by 
industries to set up IaaS or PaaS (OHR, 2014). 
Many of the current Open Source Software is 
now available on SaaS basis, this provides the 
benefit to customer to obtained quality services 
with low-cost applications and eliminate the dif-
ficult of deploying software on their own servers 
(OSS, 2014)
According to Salih and Zang (2012) the the 
comparison of open source and closed source cloud 
applications are as shown in Figure 18, Figure 19 
and Figure 20. Salih and Zang (2012) found that 
most cloud application based on open source are 
for IaaS followed by PaaS and very few are from 
SaaS. The closed source applications for cloud are 
costly compared to those from open source but 
cloud applications based on open source are more 
secure. Hence, Salih and Zang (2012) concluded 
that the future is towards using open source tools 
for cloud applications.
Open Source software offer tools for cloud 
computing (and in particular, cloud library) which 
are developed from open source development 
community typically centre on specific computer 
applications for cloud rather than integrated cloud 
systems (Jeffrey &Neidecker-Lutz, 2010). There 
are only a few which are more generic for cloud 
systems (e.g. OpenNebula is based on a virtual-
ization layer for IaaS) (Jeffrey & Neidecker-Lutz, 
2010).
Concrete Experience
This is the last phase of phase of KELC which 
aimed at presenting some case studies to work 
as models for future implementations of cloud 
library in HEIs. HEIs in Tanzania are using both 
open source software and closed source software 
for digital library computer systems. Staff and 
students in East African HEIs are using Google 
Apps such as Gmail, Google Calendar, Google 
Talk, and Google Docs and Spreadsheets in a daily 
basis (GCP, 2014;Wanjiku, 2009;). These cloud 
services are best suited for HEIs in East Africa 
with limited bandwidth.
The Role of Cloud Librarians 
Along with Some Examples from 
Tanzania’s Higher Education 
Institutions’ Libraries
From the above discussions the role of cloud li-
brary has been explained. After this, libraries from 
HEIs were evaluated if they have implemented 
library 2.0. By definition, library 2.0 consists of 
traditional library which have integrated library 
systems (digital library) which embedded web 
Table 2. Example of cloud service providers 
(MOOC, 2013)
Service Provider
Company 
Size
Platform Type
Microsoft SQL Azure
Large
IaaS
Google Docs
Large
SaaS
Google Apps Engine
Large
PaaS
Amazon
Large
SaaS
Salesforce.com
Large
SaaS
Microsoft office live
Large
SaaS
Oracle
Large
IaaS
Accenture
Large
PaaS
Rackspace
Small
IaaS
Cloud9Analytics
Small
SaaS
Cloudworks
Small
IaaS
Gogrid
Medium
PaaS
CloudAppy
Not 
Available
PaaS

121
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
Figure 14. Multiple Stakeholders in proposed integrated cloud architecture (MOOC, 2013)
Figure 15. Integrated SaaS, PaaS, IaaS, and dSaaS

122
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
2.0. Building digital library with web 2.0 consist 
of using social bookmark, social media platform, 
blogs, wiki instant messaging (e.g. twitter), tag-
ging system and RSS feeds (Lwoga, 2012). Web 
2.0 is a set of technology that facilitates a more 
socially connected Web where everyone is able 
to add and edit the information space (Anderson, 
2007). These include blogs, wikis, and multimedia 
sharing services, content syndication, podcasting 
and content tagging services. Integration of web 
2.0 and library is called library 2.0. It is arises from 
the theory that knowledge is socially constructed 
(i.e. constructivism theory).
The universities selected for evaluation are 
those which are public funded and with good 
ranking in Tanzania (UR, 2014).
Also, the libraries of these four universities 
were evaluated if they are using online tools 
for research publication management (Table 3). 
These tools help university to improve its visibil-
ity. Examples of such tools are Google Scholar 
Citations (http://scholar.google.com/citations), 
Microsoft Academic Publication (http://academic.
research.microsoft.com/), researchgate (http://
researchgate.net/), academic.edu and mendeley 
(http://mendeley.com/).
Among the five universities under this study, 
SUA has good number of staff who have subscribed 
to online tools for research publication manage-
ment. The following are some of the links for SUA:
1. 	
https://suanet.academia.edu/
2. 	
http://academic.research.microsoft.com/
Organization/15768/sokoine-universi-
ty-of-agriculture?query=sokoine%20
university%20of%20agriculture
3. 	
http://scholar.google.com/
citations?hl=en&view_op=search_
authors&mauthors=suanet.ac.tz
4. 	
http://www.mendeley.com/research-papers/
search/?query=sokoine+university+agricu
lture
SUA and MUHAS have institutional reposito-
ries to collect, preserve and disseminate electronic 
copies of research products.
•	
http://ir.muhas.ac.tz:8080/jspui/
•	
http://www.taccire.suanet.ac.tz/xmlui/
In order to mitigate the problem which can arise 
from intellectual property right of materials to be 
uploaded in cloud library system it is better the 
free and open source software are used. Also the 
contents need to have open access rights (Sanga, 
Lwoga, & Venter, 2006; Suleman, 2012).
Table 3. Evaluation of the integration of web 2.0 to libraries of universities in Tanzania
Delicious
Blog
RSS 
feeds
Social 
Networks 
(facebook)
Wiki
Institutional 
repository
Online public 
catalogue
MUHAS 
http://www.muhas.ac.tz
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
UDSM 
http://www.udsm.ac.tz
×
√
×
√
√
×
√
SUA 
http://www.suanet.ac.tz
×
√
√
√
√
√
√
MZUMBE 
http://www.mzumbe.ac.tz
×
×
×
√
×
×
√
OUT 
http://www.out.ac.tz/
×
×
√
√
√
√
×

123
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
Another problem hindering electronic users of 
digital library is the use of multiple credentials 
required in order to use some online databases 
and e-resources subscribed by certain university. 
This problem at SUA and MUHAS has been 
resolved through the use of single interface for 
all e-resources found in each library. The service 
is accessible within and outside the Local area 
Network of SUA and when the user is accessing 
outside the network of SUA, she / he must supply 
other credentials for authentication. This service 
is found at the below link:
•	
http://libhub.kiox.org/ or http://www.sua-
sis.suanet.ac.tz/authentication?url= 
or 
http://libhub.kiox.org.proxy.suanet.ac.tz/
There is an initiative to host journal on web 
server of SUA. Currently, testing is being done 
to evaluate if the local journal in the Faculty of 
Agriculture can be hosted locally (Appendix A: 
Figure 17).
As Mavodza (2013) summarized that when 
discussing cloud computing in a library context, 
it is important to evaluate the models of clouds 
used in terms of the types of services involved, 
the infrastructure used, the platform on which ap-
plications are built and the associated applications. 
For example, the use of a Platform as a Service 
(PaaS) refers to a situation where software already 
exists, such as when the library uses an Integrated 
Library System whether it is open source such as 
Koha or Greenstone or ABCD, or proprietary such 
as Millennium Innovative Interfaces or SirsiDynix, 
library catalogues, subject catalogues, OverDrive, 
Googledocs, and WorldCat. SUA uses ABCD as 
library catalogue and loan system which is acces-
sible at http://snal.suanet.ac.tz/cgi-bin/wxis.exe/
iah/scripts/ (Emmanuel & Sife, 2008).
On the other hand, Software as a Service (SaaS) 
can be viewed in the use of LibGuides, the library 
catalogue, WorldCat, OverDrive, aggregated 
subject gateways that support systematic unified 
web-scale resource discovery such as SUMMON 
(a ProQuest business), Ebsco Discovery Service, 
Primo Central (Ex Libris), Free and Open Source 
Software (FOSS), FOSS library management sys-
tem, Citation Management software. From these 
examples which already they are in wide use in 
libraries of HEIs in Tanzania, the demarcation 
between PaaS and SaaS is very difficult since 
library systems use both platforms and software,. 
Services that are referred to as cloud-based ser-
vices also include the provision of actual resources, 
for example, OverDrive e-books, research guides 
and online reference services that are ready for 
use. The examples of cloud applications is shown 
by Google Docs or library e-book readers such 
as for elibrary books or Safari books that are 
normally accessed with a web browser. At SUA, 
the free e-reources are found at http://www.lib.
suanet.ac.tz/index.php?option=com_content&vi
ew=article&id=86:environmental-management-
index-&catid=69:free-electronic-resources-
&Itemid=49
Also, in HEIs’ libraries online database are ac-
cessed as cloud applications. Cloud Infrastructure 
(IaaS) refers mostly to the space/time that users can 
buy to use external servers for electronic storage 
as in institutional digital repositories or institu-
tional archives. On this aspect, for example there 
is digital repository for climate change research 
output at SUA which is shared among HEIs in 
Tanzania. It is also the infrastructure that enables 
open-source software for running repositories, for 
example, D-Space, FEDORA, Eprints, or hosted 
software packages such as Digital Commons, and 
SimpleDL. At SUA, DSpace is a platform used 
of an institutional repository. It is found at http://
www.taccire.suanet.ac.tz/xmlui/
From this book chapter, one can deduce that 
librarians in HEIs in Tanzania are using cloud 
tools which are found on Internet. Even though 
the implementation of cloud library is at infancy 
stage but this necessitate the change of functions of 
librarians. This is the reason Scale (2010) argues 
that “cloud computing is an unresolved area of 
concern and debatable among the library profes-

124
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
sion”. According to Scale (2010), cloud computing 
is enabling librarians to shift from the paradigm of 
ownership and maintenance of resources towards 
the provision of access to information maintained 
and controlled by others libraries. This is already 
happening in Tanzania for example journals sub-
scribes by libraries of HEIs in Tanzania provide 
more opportunities for librarians not to be tasked 
for its daily maintenance of the servers hosting 
those journals from abroad libraries.
When cloud computing services will be fully 
implemented in libraries of HEIs of Tanzania then 
the roles of librarians will need to be revised so 
that it includes not only provision of access to 
resources but also collection, preservation, and 
ownership of information resources (materials). 
Some fields such as information resource manage-
ment and information security need to be included 
in the training of librarians. Other aspects which 
must be included in the curriculum of librarians 
are as shown in Figure 16.
From this analysis, it is found that HEIs in 
Tanzania have not migrated fully to digital library 
and thus, they are good candidate to be involved 
in migration into cloud library to minimize the 
problems which traditional libraries are facing. 
The mentioned ICT tools which are used in HEIs 
of Tanzania are part of the tools needed to be 
integrated to form cloud library (Chen, Zhang, 
Li, Li, & Gao, Y., 2011; Buyya et al., 2009; Fox, 
2009). It is proposed that the modified framework 
for adoption of cloud computing suggested by 
Shimba could be used in adopting cloud library 
for HEIs in Tanzania (Shimba, 2010).
The proposed framework (Figure 16) differ 
from those proposed by different researchers in 
previous studies (Galvin & Sun, 2012; Mitchell, 
2010; Nuernberg, Leggett, & McFarland,, 2012) 
since it is grounded on philosophical stance, 
theory of knowledge, research methodology 
and research method. Also, it is guided by prin-
ciples underlying developing a good framework 
(Ochara-Muganda & Van Belle, 2010). Accord-
ing to Ochara-Muganda and Van Belle (2010) a 
framework for any e-government project (which 
include cloud library) need to incorporate the key 
technological drivers that underlie the develop-
ment of computing technology which are mobility, 
digital convergence and mass scale. Thus, there 
is adequacy of mobility due to physical, digital, 
social and human resources for cloud library 
(Ochara, 2008). In cloud library there is digital 
convergence since it favors integration of differ-
ent architectures, platforms, vendors, networks 
and operating systems as depicted in Figure 6 
up to Figure 15 due to interoperability. Also, in 
digital library there is mass scale of utilization 
of cloud library services since it advocates open 
data and open access. This characteristic allows 
many stakeholders to have free access of the cloud 
library services. This confirms that the proposed 
framework for adopting cloud library is good since 
it has all required attributes (i.e. mobility, digital 
convergence and mass scale).
One good example for cloud library which was 
found through literature search is that reported by 
Ruz (2014). It reports how cloud computing has 
started improving the literacy of people in rural 
areas of Africa.
The end product of using the Kolb Experiential 
Learning Cycle is presenting concrete experience 
gained after experimentation of ideas. The example 
given of cloud library serves this purpose (Kolb 
et al., 2001). Also, for this purpose there are well 
documented cloud library called CALIS (Buyya et 
al., 2009; Chen et al., 2011; Fox, 2009; Yang, 2012) 
which are already in use in developed countries 
which can be adopted in developing countries.
Using the proposed framework for adopting 
cloud library (Figure 16), one need to make sure 
that the disadvantages of cloud computing are 
minimized. According to He et al. (2011), some 
of the disadvantages of cloud computing includes:

125
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
•	
More Elasticity Means Less Control: 
While public clouds for library are great 
for quickly scaling up and down your re-
sources, companies that require complete 
and total control over their data and appli-
cations will need to avoid the public cloud 
library. Alternative solutions for cloud li-
brary include hybrid clouds, private clouds, 
and co-location (Buyya et al., 2009; Chen 
et al., 2011; Fox, 2009).
•	
Not Everything Fits into the Cloud 
Library: Depending on the cloud library 
provider, you may face restrictions on 
available applications, operating systems, 
and infrastructure options. Complicating 
matters more is the simple fact that not all 
platforms can live in the cloud library. To 
combat this, it is important to ensure that 
the cloud library provider you choose also 
offers physical co-location services. Then 
if your platform in the cloud needs to speak 
to applications on other platforms, this flex-
ibility of physical co-location will work to 
ensure successful interoperation (Buyya et 
al., 2009; Chen et al., 2011;; Fox, 2009).
Figure 16. Adoption framework for cloud computing (modified from Shimba, 2010)

126
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
•	
Technical Issues: Though it is true that in-
formation and data on the cloud library can 
be accessed anytime and from anywhere at 
all, there are times when this system can 
have some serious dysfunction. You should 
be aware of the fact that this technology is 
always prone to outages and other technical 
issues. Even the best cloud service provid-
ers run into this kind of trouble, in spite of 
keeping up high standards of maintenance. 
Besides, you will need a very good Internet 
connection to be logged onto the server at 
all times otherwise one will invariably be 
stuck in case of network, bandwidth short-
age and connectivity problems (Buyya et 
al., 2009; Chen et al., 2011;; Fox, 2009). 
This is very problematic for HEIs in devel-
oping countries.
•	
Security in the Cloud: The other major 
issue while in the cloud library is that of 
security issues. Before adopting this tech-
nology, you should know that you will be 
surrendering all your organization’s sen-
sitive information to a third-party cloud 
service provider. This could potentially 
put your organization to great risk. Hence, 
you need to make absolutely sure that you 
choose the most reliable service provider 
of the cloud library, who will keep your 
information totally secure (Buyya et al., 
2009; Chen et al., 2011;; Fox, 2009).
•	
Prone to Attack: Storing information in 
the cloud library could make your orga-
nization vulnerable to external hack at-
tacks and threats. This is due to the fact 
that nothing on the Internet is completely 
secure and hence, there is always the pos-
sibility of losing sensitive data (Buyya et 
al., 2009; Chen et al., 2011;; Fox, 2009)• 
Phobia from the librarians and other stake-
holders to adopt cloud library: even though 
there are promising potential benefits of 
cloud library but the resistance might arise 
from different stakeholders of library since 
there is a need of changing their mindset 
from comfort zones which they are familiar 
or used to (Buyya et al., 2009; Chen et al., 
2011;; Fox, 2009).
Proposing Cloud Computing 
Security Approach for Cloud Library
Cloud computing security concerns all the aspects 
of making cloud computing secure. Nowadays 
with increase of technology and attack tools, data 
are vulnerable to attack irrespectively where it 
is stored, for example, the recent breach in eBay 
security. In everyday life different security mecha-
nism are created to achieve the goal of information 
security which are: Confidentiality, Integrity, and 
Availability (CIA). Cloud computing security 
encompasses all the topics of computing security, 
including the design of security architectures, 
minimization of attack surfaces, protection from 
malware, and enforcement of access control. But 
there are some aspects of cloud computing security 
that appear to be specific to that domain (Chen et 
al., 2010; Christodorescu et al., 2009; CSA, 2010).
Below are the challenges that need security 
mechanism to prevent or minimize its effects (Car-
lin & Curran, 2011; Hamlen, Kantarcioglu, Khan 
& Thuraisingham, 2010; Tilley & Parveen, 2013).
1. 	
Cloud-based data is usually intentionally 
widely accessible by potentially insecure 
protocols and APIs across public networks.
2. 	
Data in the cloud is vulnerable to being lost 
(e.g., accidentally deleted) or incorrectly 
modified by the cloud provider.
3. 	
Data in the cloud can be accessed by the cloud 
provider, its subcontractors and employees.
The currently solutions which can be used 
to solve challenges (a and b) mentioned above 
include: authentication protocols, authorization 
frameworks, and encryption. Loss of data is ad-
dressed by careful backup policies (Ryan, 2012). 
The other security challenge is based on cloud 

127
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
provider and his /her relationship with customer. 
For example, if the task of the provide is to store 
data on behalf of customer then security imple-
mentation will be encrypting the data with the 
customer hold the key.
In other situation like those listed below, dif-
ferent security technology need to be adopted 
(Ryan, 2012).
•	
The data may be financial data, payroll 
data, human resource data, banking data, 
etc., and the computation is usual business 
processing.
•	
The data is documents and photographs, 
and the cloud is expected to enforce access 
rules that depend on the content.
•	
The data may be scientific data obtained 
by experiment and observation, and the 
computation may be to find patterns, or or-
ganize the data according to rules. Other 
examples in this category include data-
intensive financial modelling or network 
traffic modelling.
•	
The data is an email archive, and the cloud 
is expected to handle email in a way that 
depends on its content (e.g., spam filtering, 
topic classification, compliance with cor-
porate disclosure policies).
•	
The data may be documents to review (job 
applications, research papers, business ten-
ders) and the computation may be to sup-
port the review process (sending to review-
ers, collating reviews, etc.).
Based on the functionality of cloud provider 
in cloud library it’s better to use the security ap-
proach called CryptDB (a weaker attacker model). 
CryptDB is a framework that allows query pro-
cessing over an encrypted database. The database 
is stored and managed by the cloud provider, but 
data items are encrypted with keys that are not 
under the cloud provider’s control. It works by 
executing SQL queries over the encrypted database 
using a collection of efficient SQL-aware encryp-
tion schemes. To achieve database operations 
such as equality checks and order comparisons, 
CryptDB uses encryption schemes that allow such 
comparisons to be made on ciphertexts. CryptDB 
supports a wider set of applications, although it is 
still restricted to database searches (Ryan, 2012).
For any organization looking to implement 
cloud library the underlying principle is that it 
must review its ICT policy so that aspects of 
cloud computing are included. Jaeger et al. (2008) 
argue that
Cloud computing is likely to present policy ques-
tions and raise many issues as it becomes more 
commonplace. 
Jaeger et al. (2008) identified the following 
questions which need some guidelines from the 
ICT policy of any organization adopting cloud 
computing. The questions are:
1. 	
What expectations for privacy, security, 
reliability, and anonymity do users of cloud 
computing have?
2. 	
Are there variations in these expectations 
among individuals, corporate users, aca-
demic users, and governmental users?
3. 	
Would greater degrees of privacy, security, 
reliability, and anonymity influence users’ 
decisions about which cloud providers to 
use?
4. 	
Have users even considered issues like pri-
vacy, security, reliability, and anonymity?
5. 	
Do users have any concerns about protection 
of their intellectual property in the cloud?
6. 	
Do users have any concerns about the 
monitoring of their activities in the cloud 
by providers or by the government?
7. 	
Do users only trust cloud computing for 
certain types of functions?
8. 	
Can information policies for print-based 
environments intelligibly translate to cloud 
computing? If so, how?

128
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
9. 	
What issues of cloud computing are com-
pletely unaddressed in the current policy 
environment?
The above mentioned questions need some 
security measures which must be implemented 
in cloud library so that the potential benefits of 
cloud library are realized. According to Goldner 
(2010) and Rosenthal et al. (2010), the fundamen-
tal benefits of cloud library over the traditional 
library are:
1. 	
Take advantage of current and rapidly 
emerging technology to fully participate in 
the Web’s information landscape
2. 	
Increased visibility and accessibility of 
library digital collections
3. 	
Reduced duplication of effort from net-
worked technical services and collection 
management
4. 	
Streamlined workflows, optimized to fully 
benefit from network participation
5. 	
Cooperative intelligence and improved 
service levels enabled by the large-scale 
aggregation of usage data
6. 	
Make libraries greener by sharing computing 
power thus reducing carbon footprints
4. CONCLUSION AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS
The concept of cloud computing in relation to 
library has been introduced in this book chapter 
using Kolb Experiential Learning Model. Different 
cloud architectures have also been discussed from 
literature with their characteristics and advantages. 
The proposed integrated architecture for cloud 
computing in library has been presented. There-
after, the situation analysis of digital libraries in 
HEIs of Tanzania has been given out. In order for 
Tanzania’s HEIs to adopt cloud library there is need 
of framework for cloud computing adoption which 
has been given out as generic model. Currently, 
applications from cloud computing which are be-
ing used by different stakeholders of libraries in 
Tanzania’s HEIs are at infancy stage. A framework 
has been modified to be used as guideline for 
HEIs which are adopting cloud library. Thus, the 
given framework will help to fill gap which exists 
in knowledge. Currently, there are frameworks 
proposed which are not well researched. In order 
to test the validity of the proposed framework in 
this book chapter, there is need of future study to 
explore its usefulness in specific environment of 
Tanzania’s HEI. Students in HEIs are using cloud 
based resources such as Google Docs, Facebook 
and Youtube for accessing and uploading learning 
materials. This has changed the paradigm from 
teacher centred learning and teaching to student 
centred learning and teaching. The students are 
no longer consumers of learning materials but 
they are becoming both consumers and producers 
(Mtega et al., 2012).
The recommendation from this book chapter 
is that for cloud library to be fully implemented 
in HEIs of Tanzania the Government and HEIs 
should revise their library, research and ICT poli-
cies so that they state categorically how cloud user, 
cloud provider, cloud vendor, cloud consumer, 
cloud broker and cloud service management 
(cloud carrier or cloud grid management) will 
work together in the business of cloud library 
which is already happening in developed HEIs. 
The expected outcomes for the implementation 
of cloud library depend on the chosen framework 
(Harris, 2012). This process need to be guided 
by a good evaluation algorithm since there are 
multi-criteria attributes to be considered during 
the migration from conventional library or digital 
library by HEI. For successful implementation of 
cloud library, stakeholders’ involvement must be 
participatory in all the phases of the implementa-
tion as shown in Figure 16. This must be guided by 
the proposed framework embedded in the KELC.

129
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank the instructors 
who taught a Massive Open Online Course for 
Development titled Mobiles for Development. 
Its Open Educational Resources are available at: 
http://m4d.colfinder.org/node/2372
REFERENCES
Buyya, R., Ranjan, R., & Calheiros, R. N. (2009). 
Modeling and simulation of scalable Cloud 
computing environments and the CloudSim 
toolkit: Challenges and opportunities. In High 
Performance Computing & Simulation, June 
2009. HPCS’09. International Conference on 
(pp. 1-11). IEEE.
Buyya, R., Yeo, C. S., Venugopal, S., Broberg, 
J., & Brandic, I. (2009). Cloud computing and 
emerging IT platforms: Vision, hype, and reality 
for delivering computing as the 5th utility. Future 
Generation Computer Systems, 25(6), 599–616. 
doi:10.1016/j.future.2008.12.001
Carlin, S., & Curran, K. (2011). Cloud computing 
security. International Journal of Ambient Com-
puting and Intelligence, 3(1), 14–19. doi:10.4018/
jaci.2011010102
Chen, Y., Paxson, V., & Katz, R. H. (2010). 
What’s new about cloud computing security? 
Technical Report UCB/EECS-2010-5, Electrical 
Engineering and Computer Sciences, University 
of California at Berkeley.
Chen, Y., Zhang, R., Li, H., Li, R., & Gao, Y. 
(2011). CALIS-based cloud library services 
platform model. AISS: Advances in Information 
Sciences and Service Sciences, 3(6), 204–212. 
doi:10.4156/aiss.vol3.issue6.25
Christodorescu, M., Sailer, R., Schales, D. L., 
Sgandurra, D., & Zamboni, D. (2009). Cloud 
security is not (just) virtualization security: a 
short paper. In Proceedings of the 2009 ACM 
Workshop on Cloud Computing Security (pp. 
97–102). doi:10.1145/1655008.1655022
Cloud Security Alliance (CSA). (2010). Top 
threats to cloud computing v1.0. Retrieved on 3th 
June 2014, from https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/
topthreats/csathreats.v1.0.pdf
Crotty, M. (1998). The foundations of social re-
search: Meaning and perspective in the research 
process. Sage (Atlanta, Ga.).
Emmanuel, G., & Sife, A. (2008). Challenges 
of managing information and communication 
technologies for education: Experiences from 
Sokoine National Agricultural Library. Interna-
tional Journal of Education and Development 
using ICT, 4(3).
Fox, R. (2009). Library in the clouds. 
OCLC Systems & Services, 25(3), 156–161. 
doi:10.1108/10650750910982539
Galvin, D., & Sun, M. (2012). Avoiding the death 
zone: Choosing and running a library project 
in the cloud. Library Hi Tech, 30(3), 418–427. 
doi:10.1108/07378831211266564
Google Cloud Platform (GCP). (2014). Retrieved 
from https://cloud.google.com/ 
Goldner, M. R. (2010). Winds of change: Librar-
ies and cloud computing. BIBLIOTHEK Forsc-
hung und Praxis, 34(3), 270–275. doi:10.1515/
bfup.2010.042
Hamlen, K., Kantarcioglu, M., Khan, L., & Th-
uraisingham, B. (2010). Security issues for cloud 
computing. International Journal of Information 
Security and Privacy, 4(2), 36–48. doi:10.4018/
jisp.2010040103

130
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
Harris, A. (2012). The Legal Standing of Data in 
a Cloud Computing Environment (Doctoral dis-
sertation, Dublin Institute of Technology).
Hartman, T. (2007). The changing definition 
of US libraries. Libri, 57(1), 1–8. doi:10.1515/
LIBR.2007.1
He, W., Cernusca, D., & Abdous, M. H. (2011). 
Exploring cloud computing for distance learning. 
Online Journal of Distance Learning Administra-
tion, 14(3).
Heeks, R. (2014). Future Priorities for Develop-
ment Informatics Research from the Post-2015 
Development Agenda. Working Paper Series, 
paper no. 57, Centre for Development Informatics 
- IDPM, University of Manchester, UK. Retrieved 
from http://www.seed.manchester.ac.uk/medi-
alibrary/IDPM/working_papers/di/di_wp57.pdf
Holmqvist, M. (2004). Experiential Learning 
Processes of Exploitation and Exploration Within 
and Between Organizations: An Empirical Study 
of Product Development. Organization Science, 
15(1), 70–81.
Jaeger, P. T., Lin, J., & Grimes, J. M. (2008). 
Cloud computing and information policy: 
Computing in a policy cloud? Journal of Infor-
mation Technology & Politics, 5(3), 269–283. 
doi:10.1080/19331680802425479
Jeffrey, K. and Neidecker-Lutz, B. (2010). The 
Future of Cloud Computing: Opportunities for 
European Cloud Computing Beyond 2010: Expert 
Group Report. European Commission, Informa-
tion Society and Media.
Kamel, S. (2010). E-strategies for Techno-
logical Diffusion and Adoption: National ICT 
Approaches for Socioeconomic Development. 
Information Science Reference. IGI Global USA. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-388-3
Kolb, A. Y., & Kolb, D. A. (2005). Learning 
styles and learning spaces: Enhancing experiential 
learning in higher education. Academy of Man-
agement Learning & Education, 4(2), 193–212. 
doi:10.5465/AMLE.2005.17268566
Kolb, D. A. (1984). Experiential learning: Experi-
ence as the source of learning and development 
(Vol. 1). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kolb, D. A., Boyatzis, R. E., and Mainemelis, C. 
(2001). Experiential learning theory: Previous 
research and new directions. Perspectives on think-
ing, learning, and cognitive styles, 1, 227-247.
Lwoga, E. T. (2012). Building a virtual academic 
library with Web 2.0 technologies in Tanzania, 
IST-Africa 2012 Conference, Dar es salaam. 
Retrieved on 9-11 May 2012, from: http://hdl.
handle.net/123456789/17
Lyons, C. (2007). The library: A distinct lo-
cal voice? First Monday, 12(3). doi:10.5210/
fm.v12i3.1629
Mei, H., & Liu, X. Z. (2011). Internetware: An 
emerging software paradigm for Internet comput-
ing. Journal of Computer Science and Technology, 
26(4), 588–599. doi:10.1007/s11390-011-1159-y
Mell, P.and Grance, T. (2011). The NIST Definition 
of Cloud Computing. Recommendations of the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
Special Publication 800-145, September 2011
Mitchell, E. (2010). Using cloud services for 
library IT infrastructure. code4lib Journal, 9.
MOOC. (2013). Mobiles for Development: A Mas-
sive Open Online Course for Development. Open 
Educational Resources. Retrieved on 01 January 
2014, from http://m4d.colfinder.org/node/2372
Mtebe, J. S. (2013). Exploring the Potential of 
Clouds to Facilitate the Adoption of Blended 
Learning in Tanzania. International Journal of 
Education and Research, 1(8).

131
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
Mtega, W. P., Bernard, R., Msungu, A. C., & 
Sanare, R. (2012). Using mobile phones for 
teaching and learning purposes in higher learn-
ing institutions: The case of Sokoine University 
of Agriculture in Tanzania. In Proceedings and 
report of the 15th UbuntuNet alliance Annual 
Conference.
Nuernberg, P., Leggett, J., & McFarland, M. 
(2012). Cloud as infrastructure at the Texas Digital 
Library. Journal of Digital Information, 13(1).
Ochara, N. M. (2008). Emergence of the e-
Government artifact in an environment of social 
exclusion in Kenya. The African Journal of In-
formation Systems, 1(1), 3.
Ochara-Muganda, N., & Van Belle, J. (2010). A 
proposed framework for E-Government knowl-
edge infrastructures for Africa’s transition econo-
mies. Journal of e-Government Studies and Best 
Practices, 2010, 1–9.
Open Hybrid Resources (OHR). (2014). Retrieved 
on, from http://www.redhat.com/solutions/open-
hybrid-cloud/cloud-resources/
OSS. (2014). Plutchak, T. S. (2012). Breaking 
the barriers of time and space: The dawning of 
the great age of librarians. Journal of the Medical 
Library Association: JMLA, 100(1), 10. http://
www.datamation.com/open-source/60-open-
source-apps-you-can-use-in-the-cloud-1.html 
Retrieved on 3th June 2014
Popa, R. A., Redfield, C. M. S., Zeldovich, 
N., & Balakrishnan, H. (2012). CryptDB: 
Processing queries on an encrypted database. 
Communications of the ACM, 55(9), 103–111. 
doi:10.1145/2330667.2330691
Rasmussen, C. H., & Jochumsen, H. (2009). The 
fall and rise of the physical library. In The 17th 
BOBCATSSS Symposium. Retrieved on 01 Janu-
ary 2014, from http://pure.iva.dk/files/30767688/
The_Fall_and_Rise_-_Bobcatsss_2009.pdf
Rosenthal, A., Mork, P., Li, M. H., Stanford, J., 
Koester, D., & Reynolds, P. (2010). Cloud com-
puting: A new business paradigm for biomedi-
cal information sharing. Journal of Biomedical 
Informatics, 43(2), 342–353.
Ruz, C. (2014). Cloud computing key to improving 
literacy in Africa. Retrieved from http://www.is-
gtw.org/feature/cloud-computing-key-improving-
literacy-africa
Ryan, M. D. (2013). Cloud computing security: 
The scientific challenge, and a survey of solu-
tions. Journal of Systems and Software, 86(9), 
2263–2268. doi:10.1016/j.jss.2012.12.025
Sanga, C. (2010). A technique for the evaluation of 
free and open source e-learning systems. Doctoral 
dissertation, University of the Western Cape.
Sanga, C., Lwoga, E. T., & Venter, I. M. (2006). 
Open Courseware as a Tool for Teaching and 
Learning in Africa, Fourth IEEE International 
Workshop on Technology for Education in De-
veloping Countries, 2006 (pp. 55-56).
Salih, N. K., & Zang, T. (2012). Survey and 
comparison for Open and closed sources in cloud 
computing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1207.5480.
Scale, M.-S. E. (2010). Assessing the Impact of 
Cloud Computing and Web Collaboration on the 
Work of Distance Library Services. Journal of 
Library Administration, 50(7-8), 7–8, 933–950. 
doi:10.1080/01930826.2010.488995
Shimba, F. (2010). Cloud Computing: Strategies 
for Cloud Computing Adoption. Retrieved on 08 
August 2013, from http://arrow.dit.ie/cgi/view-
content.cgi?article=1028&context=scschcomdis
Shimba, F. J., Koloseni, D., & Nungu, A. (2014). 
Challenges and Implications of adoption of cloud 
services in healthcare in developing countries. 
In A. Moumtzoglou (Ed.), Cloud Computing 
Applications for Quality Health Care Delivery. 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global Publishers.

132
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
Sife, A., Lwoga, E., & Sanga, C. (2007). New 
technologies for teaching and learning: Challenges 
for higher learning institutions in developing 
countries. International Journal of Education 
and Development using ICT, 3(2). Retrieved from 
http://ijedict.dec.uwi.edu/viewarticle.php?id=246
Sodhi, B., & Prabhakar, T. V. (2011). Application 
architecture considerations for cloud platforms, 
Communication Systems and Networks (COM-
SNETS), 2011 Third International Conference 
on, 1-4, 4-8 Jan. 2011 doi:10.1109/COMS-
NETS.2011.5716417
Suleman, H. (2012). Why should African academ-
ics care about Open Access? Retrieved from http://
repository.up.ac.za/handle/2263/18808
Swarts, P., & Wachira, E. (2010). ICT in Education 
Situational Analysis. Tanzania: Global e-Schools 
and Communities Initiative. Retrieved from http://
www.gesci.org/assets/files/Knowledge Centre/
Situational Analysis_Tanzania.pdf
Tilley, S. R., & Parveen, T. (2013). Software 
Testing in the Cloud: Perspectives on an Emerg-
ing Discipline. Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2536-5
University Ranking (UR). (2014). Retrieved from 
http://www.webometrics.info/en/Ranking_africa/
Sub_saharan_Africa
Xinping, H. (2010). The Concept of Cloud Library. 
Information Studies: Theory & Application, 6, 009.
Yang, S. Q. (2012). Move into the Cloud, 
shall we? Library Hi Tech News, 29(1), 4–7. 
doi:10.1108/07419051211223417
Yuan, L., MacNeill, S., & Kraan, W. (2008). 
Open educational resources—Opportunities and 
challenges for higher education. Retrieved from 
http://learn.creativecommons.org/wp-content/
uploads/2008/09/oer_briefing_paper.pdf
Wanjiku, R. (2009). East African universi-
ties take advantage of Google cloud. Info 
World. Retrieved from http://news.idg.no/
cw/art.cfm?id=D3ED873F-1A64-6A71-CE-
3B759E5A305061
Wiederhold, G. (1995). Digital libraries, value, 
and productivity. Communications of the ACM, 
38(4), 85–96.
ADDITIONAL READING
Al-Zoube, M., Abou El-Seoud, S., & Wyne, M. 
F. (2010). Cloud computing based e-learning 
system. International Journal of Distance Edu-
cation Technologies, 8(2), 58–71. doi:10.4018/
jdet.2010040105
Buyya, R., Ranjan, R., & Calheiros, R. N. (2009, 
June). Modeling and simulation of scalable Cloud 
computing environments and the CloudSim tool-
kit: Challenges and opportunities. In High Perfor-
mance Computing & Simulation, 2009. HPCS’09. 
International Conference on (pp. 1-11). IEEE.
Carlin, S., & Curran, K. (2011). Cloud comput-
ing security. [IJACI]. International Journal of 
Ambient Computing and Intelligence, 3(1), 14–19. 
doi:10.4018/jaci.2011010102
Chen, Y., Zhang, R., Li, H., Li, R., & Gao, Y. 
(2011). CALIS-based cloud library services 
platform model. AISS: Advances in Information 
Sciences and Service Sciences, 3(6), 204–212. 
doi:10.4156/aiss.vol3.issue6.25
Fox, R. (2009). Library in the clouds. 
OCLC Systems & Services, 25(3), 156–161. 
doi:10.1108/10650750910982539
Galvin, D., & Sun, M. (2012). Avoiding the death 
zone: Choosing and running a library project 
in the cloud. Library Hi Tech, 30(3), 418–427. 
doi:10.1108/07378831211266564

133
Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
﻿
Hamlen, K., Kantarcioglu, M., Khan, L., & Th-
uraisingham, B. (2010). Security issues for cloud 
computing. International Journal of Information 
Security and Privacy, 4(2), 36–48. doi:10.4018/
jisp.2010040103
Lei, M., Lu, G., Guo, Y., and Wang, A. (2011). 
Cloud-Computing Based Solution for Campus 
Computer Laboratory Administration. Computer, 
18, 024.
Li, Y. X., Luan, X. L., & Li, S. S. (2009). On the 
Application of Cloud Computing Technology in 
Library. The Journal of the Library Science in 
Jiangxi, 1, 67–71.
Mavodza, J. (2013). The impact of cloud comput-
ing on the future of academic library practices and 
services. New Library World, 114(3/4), 132–141. 
doi:10.1108/03074801311304041
Mitchell, E. (2010). Using cloud services for 
library IT infrastructure. code4lib Journal, 9.
Nuernberg, P., Leggett, J., & McFarland, M. 
(2012). Cloud as infrastructure at the Texas Digital 
Library. Journal of Digital Information, 13(1).
Peng, X. (2009). The Dual Impact of Cloud 
Computing on the Library Career. Researches in 
Library Science, 8, 012.
Sclater, N. (2010). eLearning in the Cloud. 
[IJVPLE]. International Journal of Virtual and 
Personal Learning Environments, 1(1), 10–19. 
doi:10.4018/jvple.2010091702
Tilley, S. R., & Parveen, T. (2013). Software Test-
ing in the Cloud: Perspectives on an Emerging 
Discipline. Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Cloud Computing: Is a term used to refer to a 
model of network computing where a program or 
application runs on a connected server or servers 
rather than on a local computing device such as a 
personal computer, tablet or smartphone (http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cloud_computing).
Library: Is an organized collection of sources 
of information and similar resources which are 
made accessible to a defined community for 
reference or borrowing. The material can be 
physical or digital confined in either a physical 
building or room, or a virtual space, or both (http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Library).
Electronic Library: (Digital library or digital 
repository) is a collection of digital objects that 
can include text, visual material, audio material, 
video material, stored as electronic media formats. 
Also, it involves the means of organizing, stor-
ing, and retrieving the files and media contained 
in the library digital collection. This normally 
is opposed to print, micro form, or other media 
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_library).
Information and Communications Technol-
ogy (ICT): Refers to all types of technology used 
to handle telecommunications, broadcast media, 
intelligent building management systems, audio-
visual processing and transmission systems, and 
network-based control and monitoring functions 
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_and_
communications_technology).
“Stakeholder” or “User” or “Actor”: Refers 
generically to organizations or or community or 
individuals who use or exploit cloud library. While 
these types of users / stakeholders may have some 
different interests and perhaps different concerns 
based on scale of data involved, generally a cor-
porate / organization and an individual user are 
going to have different expectations and concerns 
related to cloud library.

Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
134
APPENDIX
Snapshot of the Journal Hosted at SUA Web Server
Figure 17. Webpage of TAJAS

Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
135
Figure 18. Comparison of open and closed source in SaaS (adapted from Salih & Zang, 2012)
Figure 19. Comparison of open and closed source in PaaS (adapted from Salih & Zang, 2012)

Applying Kolb Learning Experiential Theory with Cloud Computing in Higher Education Institutions
136
Figure 20. Comparison of open and closed source in IaaS (adapted from Salih & Zang, 2012)

Section 3
Business Models in Cloud 
Computing Environment

138
Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  6
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-8339-6.ch006
Big Data in Cloud Computing 
Environment for Market Trends
ABSTRACT
The Industrial and Business landscape is changing because of the convergence of information technology 
and communication technologies. This convergence is creating new types of companies competing with 
each other. It is not about east or west, or developed markets versus developing markets; It is all about 
how soon a business enterprise understands the emerging technology and adapts it into its business. It 
is not enough that a business enterprise understands the technology but one has to be good at thinking 
about the applications of the technology. Now it has become a necessity for business enterprises to man-
age complex and interdisciplinary requirements in their organization. This chapter explores a business 
model developed by a textile mill to remain competitive in global market that uses the concepts of big 
data, cloud computing, virtual reality, and data warehousing.
INTRODUCTION
Globalization which was initially viewed with fear 
and distrust has opened up huge new markets for 
many business enterprises across the globe. This 
has been focusing on the need for an innovative 
approach in conducting business by enterprises. 
It is apt to recall the observation of Peter Ducker 
on innovation. “A Business enterprise has to and 
only two basic functions, marketing and innova-
tion. Marketing and innovation produce results. 
All the rest are cost”. The dividing factors in the 
market are niche markets and unique products or 
services. Innovative approach is needed to achieve 
the above factors in the present competitive market. 
Strategic thinking is required for any innovative 
approach. Strategic thinking decisions are based 
on the following
1. 	
An understanding of the current and emerg-
ing needs,
2. 	
An understanding of the organizations cur-
rent and anticipated future core competences 
such as special skills or knowledge resources 
and culture and,
3. 	
A future view of the industry sector and 
market place.
K. Hariharanath
SSN School of Management & Computer Applications, India

139
Big Data in Cloud Computing Environment for Market Trends
﻿
Even the most stable industries and the stron-
gest brands can be blown to bits by the emerging 
concepts in information and communication 
technologies. Technology is forcing to rethink 
its business models and organizational designs as 
it contributes to the rebalancing of power in the 
market place. It is no longer guaranteed to those 
organizations that have financial resources and size 
on their side. Smaller organizations that are fast 
and flexible can now outmaneuver the traditional 
large enterprises by employing new technology 
that enables them to deliver goods and services 
to their customers at a faster pace and lower cost 
(Kumar & Kumar, 2013).
NEED FOR A BUSINESS MODEL
The problem arises when the organizations are 
spending too much time tinkering with the exist-
ing business models of their organizations instead 
of re allying their teams around the potential to 
do something extraordinary in the market place. 
Tinkering is like painting a Car when the engine 
is weak. The challenge today is to develop sustain-
able business that is compatible with the current 
economic reality. In the present global market 
scenario an enterprise remaining competitive in 
the market depends on its ability to focus on core 
business and adapting to changes quickly. Now 
it has become imperative for every business en-
terprise to innovate a process that will help them 
to remain competitive in the market. Innovative 
process is nothing but identifying what is relevant 
to the emerging technologies and develop a busi-
ness model suitable to their business enterprise.
DESIGNING A BUSINESS MODEL
One of the most interesting opportunities in the 
present scenario is the dynamic nature of the 
information and communication technology ca-
pabilities available in almost every sector that one 
could imagine. Business enterprises need to know 
how to make use of the capabilities of information 
and communication technology and their relevance 
and context to their business requirements. Busi-
ness process, technological applications, practices, 
past business performances, market potential and 
target market are the factors to be considered for 
designing a business model. A case study of a 
textile mill in India is discussed in this chapter 
and how they developed a business model on 
the basis of the above factors transforming their 
business process and market share.
CASE ILLUSTRATION
3G Textile Mill is one of leading textile mills 
in India. This Textile mill has been in the busi-
ness over five decades. The unique aspect of this 
mill is that it is managed by a management team 
consisting of a President, Senior Vice President 
and Vice President who belong to three different 
generations. Their approach and decisions are 
based on their experiences, business insight and 
education.
3G Textile Mill products range from western 
and Indian cloth materials for ladies, suiting and 
shirting materials and readymade garments for 
ladies and gents. Each management team member 
has taken the responsibility to be in charge of 
one of their products range. Their responsibility 
covers all the activities related from production 
to marketing of the product. The major financial 
activities such as purchase of capital items and 
investment activities will be the responsibility of 
the Management Team. The product design, pro-
duction schedule, purchase of raw materials and 
other materials will be purchased by the concerned 
team member of the product he is associated with. 
The cost of common support services such as 
finance, human resource and administrative are 
borne by the product divisions. Activity based 
costing method is followed in allocating the cost 
of common support services.

140
Big Data in Cloud Computing Environment for Market Trends
﻿
Selection of cotton and mix of various varieties 
of cotton for the production of different “count 
of yarn” is the main activity in any textile mill in 
India It is interesting to note the method followed 
for the selection of cotton and mix of cotton varies 
among the management team.
The President of 3G Textile Mill who is look-
ing after the activity related to the production of 
ladies cloth materials and ladies garments has 
three decades of rich experience in all the aspects 
related to the textile field. Though he has no formal 
education, he updates himself in information tech-
nology, textile technology and marketing aspects 
of textile products. Further he is aware of Indian 
and Global economy. The method he follows is 
the method of testing the strength of the cotton 
manually. He interacts with the vendors who bring 
the cotton sample. In his interaction with them, 
he gets the information such as the year of crop, 
place and country of origin of cotton. He mentally 
calculates the costing for the mix of two varieties 
of cotton. He also recalls the economic conditions, 
weather conditions, currency exchange rates and 
other relevant information pertaining to the year 
of crop and preceding years on the basis of these 
factors. He fixes the purchase price for imported 
cotton and the cotton produced in India. He also 
further visualizes the design of the end market 
for a particular market segment.
The senior vice president who is looking after 
the activities related to “shirting” material has a 
degree in textile technology and fifteen years of 
experience in the Textile Industry. He has formal 
business interaction with the cotton vendors. Then 
he selects few samples of cotton and sends them 
to quality department for testing and analysis of 
the cotton. He works out the costing for the mix 
of cotton for the production of yarn on the basis 
of the report given by the quality department. He 
uses the calculator to arrive at the cost of “Mix 
of Cotton”. He negotiates with vendors for the 
purchase price.
The Vice President who is in charge of the 
activities related to “Pant Material” has a master 
degree in textile technology and a Masters Degree 
in Business Management from a world renowned 
University. He never meets any cotton vendor. 
Vendors are expected to handover the samples 
of cotton to the group of purchase executives 
identified for this type of assignment. It is the 
responsibility of this group to send the samples 
to the quality department for testing. They arrive 
at the costing of the cotton mix on the basis of 
the report given by the quality department. Cost-
ing for the different mix of cotton is arrived at 
by using a software developed for this purpose. 
The report generated from the computer system 
is sent along with the report given by the quality 
department to the Vice President. He decides the 
purchase of the cotton on the basis of the reports 
received by him.
The 3G textiles mills have been making profits 
even though the three management team members 
follow their own methods. They also never claim 
that their methods are best. Every team member has 
his own information system for his product related 
activities such as production, design, purchases and 
marketing. The information pertaining to finance 
is only integrated for all the activities related to 
all the products manufactured by 3G textiles, 3G 
textile mill has been in the market over a period of 
three decades. Their business models worked well. 
Their products are well received in the market. 
Their market has been encouraging. Though the 
overall profit and the market share of the company 
is fluctuating, overall performance of 3G textiles 
is not affected. It is because one product’s dip in 
profit is offset by the other products profits of the 
company. The management team has felt this trend 
is not encouraging a healthy sign. The President of 
the company has analyzed the situation and came 
to the conclusion that the linear process in their 
business models that is research through design, 
development and marketing is not conductive 
to the present globalization scenario. It is also 
due to global market being open to many players 
across the globe.

141
Big Data in Cloud Computing Environment for Market Trends
﻿
SERVICES OF A 
CONSULTANCY FIRM
3G Textile Mills hired the services of a consul-
tancy firm who have experience in textile domain, 
information and communication technology and 
global market scenario. The assignment given to 
them is to study the present working of the mills. 
On the basis of their study they are expected to 
suggest a business process. New business process 
needs to be discussed with the management before 
developing a business model.
The study conducted by the Consultant indi-
cated that 3G Textile Mills has cost advantage over 
the competitors in the areas of process technol-
ogy and size of business enterprise. They do not 
have an edge over the competitors in the areas of 
distribution networking, product technology and 
brands in the global market. The company has 
barriers to entry due to brands and retaliatory 
capability. But the company has vertical bar-
gaining power due to sound financial resources. 
Information systems in the company are isolated 
and not integrated. Further the company has not 
made use of the emerging concepts in the areas 
of information and communication technologies.
BUSINESS MODEL FOR 
3G TEXTILE MILLS
The consultants have designed a business model 
for 3G Textile Mills with cloud computing as 
a base component with the concepts of virtual 
reality, data warehouse and big data (Jorgensen, 
Rowland, Welch, Clark, Price, & Mitchell, 2014).
The information pertaining to all the products 
produced by the three divisions is to be integrated 
and stored in a centralized system. Purchase of 
cotton for the production of cloth material is to 
be centralized. Marketing information and its 
activities are to be centralized. Domain experts 
with rich experience across the globe in the area of 
textile sector need to be hired. The domain experts 
can operate with their team members from their 
respective countries. Their role is to design the 
textile material (cloth) and readymade garments 
for men and women. Domain experts are expected 
to design as per the tastes of the people of their 
country. Domain experts would guide the tech-
nical personnel of the 3G Textile Mills in India 
for implementing the design developed by them. 
Types of cotton and mix of cotton information will 
be provided for their design. The color of dyes 
and combination and the required quantities are 
to be provided by the domain experts. Vendors 
who will supply cotton, dyes and other materials 
as per the ISO standards, they will be given access 
to the bills of material module in the system for 
knowing the quantity of cotton and dyes, date of 
supply. The domain experts are expected to sug-
gest marketing strategies that would work in their 
countries. The approach suggested by the domain 
experts is based on virtual organizations.
CLOUD COMPUTING FOR 
VIRTUAL ORGANIZATION
The essence of Virtual Organization is a collabo-
ration of participants who are both geographi-
cally and organizationally distributed. Cloud 
Computing helps to implement virtualization in 
information and communication technologies. 
Advancements in internet has facilitated that 
there is no need to limit group collaboration to a 
single enterprises network environment. Use from 
multiple locations within their and other organi-
zations can have access to the systems through 
internet. Cloud computing helps the users to create 
a centralized pool of virtual servers, storage and 
networking equipment (Mather, Kumaraswamy, 
& Latif, 2010)
Applications virtualization allows for an ap-
plication to run from a remote server rather than 
on the user’s system. Each application is bundled 
with its own configuration set and the user can 
execute it on demand.

142
Big Data in Cloud Computing Environment for Market Trends
﻿
VIRTUAL REALITY
Virtual reality refers to the presentation of com-
puter generated data made available in such a way 
that those who use it can perceive the information 
at their disposal. The ability to get real world per-
ception inter activity through computers explain 
interest associated with 3-D Graphics Virtual 
Reality. One can master the concept of virtual real-
ity through simulation. The way business model 
is being developed provides scope for the study 
of complex real world situations. It also helps to 
develop steps for simulation and studying complex 
business concepts.
DATA MANAGEMENT
Data formats are most important aspect in any 
integrated database. The data may be put into 
the particular resource and the results from the 
resource on the execution of a specific task if 
the database is not designed properly. The data 
movement in geographically distributed systems 
can cause scalability problems. Data movement 
in any cloud computing environment requires 
absolutely secure data transfers both to and from 
the respective resources.
MOBILE COMPUTING
The concept of mobile computing is to facilitate 
end users to have access to data, Information or 
logical objects through a device in any network 
while one is on the move. It also enables the users 
to perform a task from anywhere using a computer 
device which has features or mobile computing. 
Generally mobile computing is used in different 
contexts with different names. The most common 
names are 1. Mobile computing, 2 Any where any 
time information, 3. Virtual home environment, 4 
Normadic Computing, 5 Pervasive Computing, 6 
Ubiquitous Computing, 7 Global service portabil-
ity, and 8 Wearable Computers.
DEVICES
The convergence of information and communica-
tion technology is responsible for the production 
of new generation devices working on wireless 
technology. These devices can make concept of 
cloud computing a workable solution in virtual 
organization scenario. Even though many mobile 
and wireless devices are available there will be 
many more in the future. There is no precise clas-
sification of such devices by size, shape, weight 
or computing power. Currently the mobile device 
range is sensors, mobile phones, pocket computer, 
note book, laptop, tablet and I pads.
BIG DATA
The term “Big Data” it suggests “Bigness” in 
data (Franks, 2014). It indicates volume of data 
is only the major factor. In industry analyst firm 
Gartner defines it as: Big data is high volume, 
high velocity and high variety information as-
sets that demand cost-effective, innovative forms 
information processing for enhanced insight and 
decision making.
A major driving force behind this big data 
growth is ubiquitous connectivity through rapidly 
growing mobile devices constantly connected to 
the networks (Schmarzo, 2014). It is remarkable 
to note that only a small portion of the digital 
universe is visible, in the form of videos, pictures, 
documents and tweets. A vast of data is being 
created about humans by the digital universe. 
Data will be analyzed by the enterprise such as 
internet service providers and Cloud Service pro-
viders of different varieties of services. They are 
infrastructure-as-a-service, platform-as-a-service 
and software-as-a-service.

143
Big Data in Cloud Computing Environment for Market Trends
﻿
Social data, websites, machine generated data 
and traditional enterprise data are the main ele-
ments for big data. Social data in social media 
sites cover face book, twitter and LinkedIn. Sen-
sor reading and satellite communication form a 
part of machine generated data. Data in websites, 
blogs and portals provide specific information. 
Traditional enterprise data is confined to products, 
purchase, sales, customer and finance information. 
Figure 1 shows the elements in big data.
PROCESSING OF DATA IN BIG DATA
Technology provides access to a vast amount of 
usable information in big data. The users in enter-
prises need to master integrating that information 
and those technology capabilities to create relevant 
context. The relevance and content would come 
out of what would actually help in transforming 
their business.
The following steps are required to be consid-
ered while making use of big data.
1. 	
Search Engines: Search engines are avail-
able to analyze large unstructured data.
2. 	
Business Intelligence Tools: Analytics tools 
are used to get new and create visualizations 
to intuitively depict the meaning of data.
3. 	
Storage of Data: Private and public cloud 
are made use of the required infrastructure 
to store the big data.
4. 	
Cloud Computing: Software-as-a –service 
in cloud environment will be useful to run 
the required software for processing the big 
data.
5. 	
Predictive Analytics: This will be more 
effective for analyzing data from multiple 
dimesions.
Enterprises in the present business scenario 
need more data for analysis. Till recently it was 
possible only to store selected important data in 
the systems of business enterprises. This was due 
to cost effective way of storing data for business 
decision. Business analysts feel for the need of 
huge volume of data for analysis and designing 
of business models. Mathematical and statistic 
tools are required to be used for designing these 
business models. These models facilitate to solve 
complex business problems. In the present busi-
ness context big data is considered to be a better 
solution for storing data for business analysis. 
Velocity, variety and volume are the three main 
elements in big data. Generally it is known as 3rd 
of big data.
The term “BIG DATA” can be pretty nebulous 
in the same way that the term “CLOUD” covers 
diverse technologies. Input data to big data systems 
could be from social networks, web server logs, 
traffic flow sensors, satellite imagery, broad cast 
audio systems, and content of web pages, GPS 
trails and market data. This list indicates the basis 
for 3 elements in big data. The three elements 
volume, velocity and variety can be referred as 
lens to view and understand the data and the soft-
ware platforms for making use of them. Volume 
refers to the said of data in terms of petabytes or 
Figure 1. The elements of big data

144
Big Data in Cloud Computing Environment for Market Trends
﻿
xetabytes. Velocity talks about the rate at which 
the data is growing. Variety indicates structured, 
semi structured and unstructured another three 
features which play an important role in creat-
ing a database, they are consistency, availability 
and platform tolerance. Consistency means even 
if current updates are happening, users will get 
updated data irrespective of the place from where 
they are accessing the data, available to the users 
24 x 7 irrespective of the load on the server. Plat-
form tolerance means even in the case of partial 
failures the system should be functional.
WHY BIG DATA?
Big data is considered for exceeding the process-
ing capacity of conventional data base systems. 
Big data is required wherever the data is too big 
and does not fit the structures of the conventional 
data base architectures. Big data is an alternative 
way to process the data. It facilitates to gain value 
from this data. Big data has become viable as 
cost effective approach. Earlier information was 
hidden because of the amount of work required 
to extract them.
The value of big data to an enterprise falls 
into two categories. One is for analytical use and 
another is for enabling new products. Big data 
analytics can reveal insights hidden previously 
by data too costly to process (Minelli, Cham-
bers, & Dhiraj, 2014). Big data helps to reveal 
peer influence among customers by analyzing 
shoppers’ transactions, social and geographical 
data. It enables to process every item of data in 
reasonable time. It removes the need for sampling 
and promotes an investigative approach to data. 
It facilitates to avoid static nature of generating 
predetermined reports. The past decades suc-
cessful web startups are important examples of 
big data used as an enabler for introducing new 
products and services.
Face book has been to make use of highly per-
sonalized user experience and create a new kind of 
advertising business. It is no coincidence that the 
major shares of ideas and tools in big data have 
emerged from Google, Yahoo, Amazon and Face 
book. The emergence of big data in the business 
enterprises has made the experiment and explore 
for the business purposes. The business purposes 
can be for the creation of new products or looking 
for ways to gain competitive advantage.
VOLUME, VELOCITY, AND VARIETY
Many business innovators are excited about the 
potential use in creating new design and develop-
ing a wide of range of new products and services 
based on big data concept. Volume, Velocity and 
Variety need to be understood clearly by them.
Volume
The benefit gained from the ability to process 
large amounts of data is the main attraction for 
big data analytics. More data for analysis helps to 
create better models. Any complex mathematics 
formulas will appear more simple and effective 
in big data as many factors as 500 factors can be 
considered for forecasting to know demand pattern. 
This volume presents a challenge to conventional 
information technology structures. Then it calls 
for scalable storage and a distributed approach to 
querying. Many companies have large amounts 
of achieved data. They may not have required 
capacity to process it.
Data warehouse needs predetermined schemas 
suiting a regular dataset. Apache hadoop on the 
other hand places no conditions on the structure 
of the data it can process. Hadoop is a platform for 
distributing computing problems across a number 
of servers. First developed and released as an open 
source by Yahoo. It implements the map reduce 
approach pioneered by Google in compiling its 

145
Big Data in Cloud Computing Environment for Market Trends
﻿
search indexes. Hadoop’s map reduce involves 
distributing data set among multiple servers and 
operating on the data at map stage. The partial 
results are then recombined at the reduce stage.
To store data Hadoop utilized its own distrib-
uted file systems. HEFS makes data available to 
multiple computing nodes. A typical hadoop usage 
pattern involves three stages. They are (1) Load-
ing data into HDFS (2) Map reduce operation and 
(3) Retrieving results from HDFS. This process 
is by nature a batch operation suited for analyti-
cal purpose or non interactive computing tasks. 
It can be considered as an adjunct to a data base.
Velocity
Increasing rate at which data flows into an en-
terprise is on increase. Data’s velocity problems 
similar to volume previously restricted to certain 
segments of industry are now presenting them-
selves in a much broader setting. The internet and 
mobile era is making velocity more complex. On 
line retailers are able to compile large histories 
of customers every click and interaction not just 
the final sales. Retailers will gain a competitive 
advantage by making use of the information for 
recommending additional purchase. The Smart 
Phone era is also increasing the rate of data in-
flow. Consumers who carry these devices will 
have a stream source of Geo Located Imagery 
and audio data.
Streaming data or complex event processing 
are the terms used in enterprises. The term com-
plex event processing was used more in product 
categories before the term streaming processing 
data gained more widespread relevance. There are 
two main reasons to consider streaming process-
ing. The first is when the input data are too fast 
to store in their entirety. In order to keep storage 
requirements practical, some level of analysis 
must occur as the data streams in. The second 
reason is where the application requires immediate 
response to the data.
Variety
A common theme in big data systems that source 
data is diverse and does not fall into neat rational 
structure. Data can be from social networks, im-
age data, and data from sensor source. None of 
this comes ready for integration in to application. 
A common use of big data processing is to take 
unstructured data and convert it into meaningful 
data or structured input for an application.
CLOUD SERVICES FOR BIG DATA
The majority if big data solutions are now provided 
in three methods. They are (1) Software only (2) 
An Application and (3) Cloud –Based. Selection 
of a method depends on many factors. Some of the 
factors are location of Data, Privacy, Regulations, 
Human Resources and Project Requirements. 
Generally Enterprises prefer hybrid computing. 
They make use of the resources of private cloud 
along with public cloud. Cloud environment is 
preferred for processing because the nature of data 
being big (Reese, 2010). Another aspect is required 
to be considers besides information technology 
infrastructure cleaning the data. It is apt to recall 
Pete wardens observation in his big data glossary. 
“I probably spend more time turning messy source 
data into some timing usable than I do on the rest 
of the data analysis process combined”.
DATA SCIENCE
Data science is a discipline that combines Math-
ematics, Statistics and software programming. 
Big data has also similar features of Data science. 
Business analytics that make use of big data con-
cepts need to have the qualities such as experience, 
curiosity, storytelling and innovation.

146
Big Data in Cloud Computing Environment for Market Trends
﻿
EXPERTISE
Expertise is required in one of the areas such as 
mathematics or statistics or software program-
ming with good knowledge of either mathematics 
or statistics.
CURIOSITY
A desire is required to go deep into the data for 
analysis and creating a set of hypotheses for testing.
STORY TELLING
One should have the ability to use data to tell a 
story.
INNOVATION
Ability is needed to look at a problem differently 
and suggest an innovative solution.
ETHICS OF BIG DATA
Big Data is persistent. It is persistent in a way 
that business and society have never experienced 
before persistence of data influences the very 
important concepts such as privacy, ownership 
and identity for both individuals and enterprises, 
as information is aggregated and correlated by not 
only the originating entity, but also by those who 
may seek to further innovate products and services 
using the original information. It is very difficult 
to have a control over the information used once it 
is out of one’s hands (Davis, & Patterson, 2012).
Big data is mostly about people and their char-
acteristics, and behavior. The potential use of this 
acquired data extends in a great many directions. 
The concerns about the consequences of having 
personal data captured, aggregated and linked to 
other data are slowly realized now. These risks 
are not just limited to individuals. It is equally 
applicable to enterprises. Enterprises are not in 
the business of misusing the information of their 
customers. Hospitals generally do not disclose 
the patient’s confidentiality. Yet there is a risk of 
using big data technology.
Organizations must explicitly and transpar-
ently evaluate the ethical impacts of the data they 
collect from their customers. Ethical evaluation 
must indicate the utilization of the customers 
data. It must clearly describe the historical ac-
tions, characteristics, data handed practices and 
the value system followed by the organization, 
organizations work more effectively once their 
value is shared across their organization.
PRIVACY
Digital data can be used by any one. It does not 
differentiate the users. It is inevitable that Govern-
ments change, laws change, social mores change, 
but data once collected and placed on a global 
distributed net work, such as the internet, is for 
all practical purposes permanent. The laws are 
required to regulate the usage of data collected. 
If the regulations are strict in saying that no data 
should be collected without user consent, then 
only there will be hope for privacy in data (Craig, 
& Ludloff, 2013).
SOFTWARE TOOLS
There has been an innovative approach in the de-
velopment of data /software tools. The innovative 
approach has become possible due to the trends 
in information and communication technology 
discipline. These trends can be classified under 
three areas (1) Techniques originally developed 
by website for scaling issues are being extended to 
other domains. (2) Google has proven that research 
techniques from computer science can be effective 

147
Big Data in Cloud Computing Environment for Market Trends
﻿
at solving problems and creating value in many 
real world situations. (3) Presently the machines 
with a decent amount of processing power can be 
hired for large scale date processing tasks. Open 
source has become an alternative for high priced 
data software.
These trends have led to explosion of new soft-
ware tools, and systems for big data. They cover 
data bases, storage systems, and servers, process-
ing tools, machine learning systems, acquisition 
tools, data visualization tools and serialization 
(Singh, & Kumar, 2014).
DATA MANAGEMENT IN 
CLOUD ENVIRONMENT
Data movement is an important factor especially 
in the development of a hybrid solution. Gener-
ally the requirement is moving data to and from 
the cloud environment. An effective software 
tool is needed to move data to either populate a 
solution in the cloud with the data or to bring the 
data from the cloud to the enterprise computing 
environment. It would be better to integrate big 
data solution to the analytics and business intel-
ligence infrastructure of the enterprises. This will 
facilitate many executives in the enterprise to gain 
insights in the solutions (Warden, 2012).
EVALUATION OF BIG 
DATA STRATEGY
The following points need to be considered for 
evolving a big data strategy for an enterprise.
BUSINESS UNITS INVOLVEMENT
It must be remembered that big data is not an 
isolated activity. Enterprises can leverage huge 
volumes of data to learn more about customers, 
process and events with big data. Proper imple-
mentation of big data strategy can have a broad 
impact on the effectiveness of business strategy.
CLOUD COMPUTING FOR DATA
Big data has petabytes of data. Cloud computing 
environment infrastructure has the facility to store 
and manage petabytes of data.
BIG DATA AND DATA WARE HOUSE
It is a common opinion among the many enter-
prises that traditional data ware house is no longer 
required. It is because of big data analytics are 
providing the required results for them. This is 
not correct. Enterprises have to make use of the 
results of big data analytics in conjunction with 
their data ware house. The data ware house. The 
data ware house includes the information about 
the enterprise operate. It is advisable to compare 
the big data results against the bench marks of the 
core data for decision making.
CONSISTENT META DATA
Enterprises have to be careful while taking data 
from customer service sites and social media en-
vironment. Generally the data from these sources 
is not cleansed. Enterprises have to make sure 
that they are dealing with a consistent set of mata 
data for analysis.
HANDLING DATA
A Proper tool has to be selected for managing 
volume, velocity and variety of data.

148
Big Data in Cloud Computing Environment for Market Trends
﻿
BIG DATA ANALYTICS
A lot of important technologies are available for 
big data analysis. They are text analytics, predic-
tive analytics, streaming data environments and 
spatial data analysis. Evaluation of each technol-
ogy is required for the job to be accomplished.
SUGGESTION
It is advisable that enterprises start with pilot 
projects to gain experience. Enterprises need to 
take experts advice to avoid, mistakes in inference 
and decision making.
INTEGRATION OF DATA
Many good technologies in the market are focused 
on making it easier to integrate the results of big 
data analytics with other data sources.
MANAGEMENT OF DATA
Big data demonstrates that enterprises can make 
use of more data than before at a faster rate of 
speed than before. Enterprises are benefited by this 
capability. If the data is not managed in an effective 
way, it will create problems for the enterprises. 
Enterprises need a road map for managing data 
under big data (Bhandarkard, 2013).
SECURITY
Security is a part of big data life cycle. Enterprises 
should be aware of the third party data licenses 
and government regulations.
BIG DATA IN THE MARKETING 
PERSPECTIVE
Traditionally the major source of data has been 
from expanding CRM application. In the present 
business scenario the complexity of data sources 
is on increase. The data sources which contribute 
to the complexity are (1) Primary Research, (2) 
Secondary Research, (3) Internet data (4) Device 
Data, (5) Image Data, and (6) Supply Chain Data.
(1).Primary Research provides data related to 
surveys, experiments, and observations. (2). Sec-
ondary Data is based on business data, industries 
reports, market place and competitive date (3). 
The source for internet data is click stream, social 
media, and social networking (4). The data from 
the devices such as mobile phones, sensors, RF 
devices and telemetry add to the complexity of 
data. (5). Image data plays an important role in 
Big Data and (6). Vendor data and pricing from 
supply chain data are considered as another im-
portant source. The data from the above sources 
become the part of volume, velocity and variety 
in the data storage of big data (Hurwitz, Nugent, 
Halper, & Kaufman, 2014).
NEW SCHOOL OF MARKETING 
UNDER BIG DATA
It is apt to quote the observation of DAN SPRING-
ER CEO of responses on new school of marketing 
“To days consumers have changed. They have put 
down the news paper, they fast forward through 
TV commercials, and they junk unsolicited email. 
Why? They have new options that better fit their 
digital life style. They can choose which market-
ing messages they receive, when, where, and 
from whom. They prefer marketers who talk with 
them, not at them. New school marketers deliver 
what today’s consumers want: relevant interactive 
communication across the digital power channels: 
email, mobile, social, display and the web”.

149
Big Data in Cloud Computing Environment for Market Trends
﻿
Cross channel life cycle marketing approach is 
gaining importance. This approach only talks about 
conversation, stickiness, win back and permission.
CLOUD AND BIG DATA
Most of the data in big data is unstructured. Cloud 
is an ideal computing environment to store big 
data sets. Big data is known in its volume, variety 
and velocity. These 3V’s can be managed without 
much difficulty in the cloud computing environ-
ment. Market economics are forcing enterprises 
to consider new business models (Miller, 2009).
BUSINESS ANALYTICS
Analytics is generally defined as the scientific 
approach of transforming data into insight for 
making better decisions. Business analytical pro-
fessionals require special skills, and they are to be 
familiar with technologies, business applications 
and practices for continuous interactive explora-
tion and analyzing of past business performance 
to gain insight and prepare business planning.
BIG DATA ANALYTICS
Big data analytics need new skills such as fairly 
good knowledge in mathematics and information 
technology. They should be adept at visualizing 
large data and discerning between signal and noise. 
They need to be in position to weave together data 
that has traditionally not been woven together. The 
skill required in this product or organization on 
is the face book with the contents made recently 
about the product or organization on Twitter. 
Once all data is woven together, the quality of 
the prediction gets better and better
PRIVATE CLOUD ENVIRONMENT
Infrastructure in private cloud environment is 
owned or leased by a single enterprise and is 
operated solely for that organization. The advan-
tage being in private cloud environment is highly 
secure, flexible, visible, traceable and manageable 
(Miller, 2009).
CONCEPTS AND PRACTICES
Concepts and practice are generally divergent. 
Challenge of developing an effective business 
model by a global virtual team is substantially 
greater than identifying relevant concepts in 
management and information and communica-
tion technology. The consultants have indicated 
that in order to grow in global market, it is not 
just enough to be competitive. The products pro-
duced by 3G Textile Mills should be acceptable 
in global market, so also domain experts in the 
areas of design, production and marketing of the 
products manufactured by the 3G Textile Mills. 
The Domain experts are based in Paris (Europe), 
Sydney (Australia), Singapore and HongKong. 
The global virtual team is familiar with the global 
development team frame. They are also aware 
that 3G Textile Mills business has become highly 
competitive and dominated by a set off aggressive 
global players.
Figure 2 gives an overview of the concepts 
made use of in the business models developed 
by the domain experts in the respective countries.
Business model for 3G Textile Mills focuses 
on the three main areas.
1. 	
Designing cloth materials and Readymade 
garments
2. 	
Materials required for manufacturing prod-
ucts of the above in bill of materials module 
and

150
Big Data in Cloud Computing Environment for Market Trends
﻿
3. 	
Analyzing the global market scenario with 
company’s performance.
MACRO LEVEL DESIGN
The Figure 3 indicates the use of resources such 
as hardware and software made by the domain 
experts from their respective countries.
CLOTH MATERIAL
Cloth material is designed by the domain experts 
from their experience based on the needs of the 
consumer requirements. Color combination of 
dyes with the cotton mix will be suggested by 
them. Virtual reality concept is made use of in 
designing the cloth material.
READYMADE GARMENTS
The domain experts design and create readymade 
garments on the basis of real world requirements. 
Simulated version of readymade garments are 
carried out in computer systems in the cloud 
computing environment. The concept of virtual 
reality helped them to look from the real world 
situation. Resources in cloud computing has made 
it possible for the domain experts to make use of 
virtual reality concepts.
3G TEXTILE MILLS IN INDIA
The management team along with their technical 
executives of 3G Textile Mills in India is able to 
view the designs of cloth and design of readymade 
garments. On their system from India they can 
also suggest changes if required.
Figure 2. Business model for 3G textile mills

151
Big Data in Cloud Computing Environment for Market Trends
﻿
Figure 3. Big data in cloud

152
Big Data in Cloud Computing Environment for Market Trends
﻿
Marketing Wing
The proposed design of readymade garments are 
uploaded in company’s portal and face book by 
the marketing executives for feed back from their 
prospective customers. After evaluating the feed 
back from the prospective customers, production 
and marketing plan will be prepared for different 
country’s requirements.
Vendors
Vendors of 3G Textile Mills are given an access to 
the information needed for the supply of materi-
als by them. Bill of materials will provide details 
of the quality, variety of cotton, dyes and other 
material to the Vendors.
Device Management
The need for device management is required in 
cloud computing environment. Heterogeneous 
devices, applications and users needed to be man-
aged. The core functionality of a private device 
is to perform task with high speed. The main 
requirement of device management is to take care 
of operating system, structure, memory protection, 
security and multi-tasking.
Development of a New 
Product in 3G Textile Mills
The domain experts have proved that a new product 
can be jointly designed by the experts in a global 
virtual team through a process of continuous 
exchange of ideas between members dispersed 
across the globe. This process helps in generating 
alternative ideas by taking inputs from different 
sources and structuring through virtual reality 
application. This models provides an idea for 
the creation of global innovation model. Further 
it helps to structure the work flow by visual-
izing the various phases of the development of 
a product. Customers’ tastes are becoming more 
homogeneous around the globe. Consequently, 3G 
Textile Mills can provide a good product through 
the economies of scale with common design. 3G 
Textile Mills model can increase the chances of 
successfully defusing knowledge, technology 
and process. Advanced tele-communication tech-
nologies have drastically changed the business 
operation providing new services and creating an 
inter-connected world-wide community.
Summary of the Development 
of 3G Textile Mills
Till recently the standard model of innovation 
has been a linear process from research through 
design, development and then manufacturing. 
In the case of 3G Textile Mills model many of 
these processes are carried out concurrently and 
collaborating through the concepts of information 
technology in private cloud deployment model. In 
the management team of 3G Textile Mills could 
hire the services of the domain experts from the 
respective countries. The employees of 3G Textile 
Mills and Domain experts with their team members 
have formed virtual team to develop 3G Textile 
Mills model. It is because of cloud computing, 
they could develop 3G Textile Mills models by 
making use of the virtual reality concept and the 
features in Big Data. At the same time the bill of 
materials required for readymade garments and 
designing of cloth material to be produced is made 
available in 3G Textile Mills model.
CONCLUSION
In today’s knowledge rich environment, enter-
prises can no longer afford to rely entirely on their 
ideas to advance their business nor can they restrict 
their innovation to a single path market (O’Reilly 
Media Inc, 2013). As a result, the traditional model 
for innovation which has been largely internally 
focused or a “closed one” has become obsolete. 
Emerging in its place is a new paradigm “open 

153
Big Data in Cloud Computing Environment for Market Trends
﻿
innovation”. This strategically leverages internal 
and external sources of ideas and takes them to 
market through multiple paths. Global enterprises 
can take advantage of unique knowledge and 
resource wherever they are located. Information 
and communication technology has increased 
virtualization in business activities and ways of 
working. The term “virtual” is now appearing in 
many forms. 3G Textile Mills models explains 
how to adopt innovative approach in invoking 
global enterprises by applying the concept of 
“mind invoking”.
It may be observed that 3G Textile Mills has 
made use of the services of the domain experts 
from the respective countries. The concept of 
virtual reality and multimedia are made use of in 
their development process of designing readymade 
garments and cloth material for global market. At 
the same time, Vendors are able to get the required 
information for the supply of their materials.
Cloud computing concept facilitated innova-
tion at 3G Textile Mills. 3G Textile Mills has found 
that private cloud is a better solution for their 
organization in leveraging the benefits of cloud 
computing within their firewall. 3G Textile Mills 
has proved that the concept of virtual organization 
is the key to cloud computing.
REFERENCES
Bhandarkar, M. (2013, April). Big Data Systems: 
Past, Present & (Possibly) Future. CSI Commu-
nications Journal, 37(1), 7–16.
Craig, T., & Ludlof, M. E. (2013). Privacy and Big 
Data. Mumbai: Shroff Publishers & Distributors 
Private Limited.
Davis, K., & Patterson, D. (2012). Ethics of Big 
Data. Mumbai: Shroff Publishers & Distributors 
Private Limited.
Franks, B. (2014). Taming the Big Data Tidal 
Wave. New Delhi: Wiley India Private Limited.
Hurwitz, J., Nugent, A., Halper, F., & Kaufman, 
M. (2014). Big Data for Dummies. New Delhi: 
Wiley India Private Limited.
Jorgensen, A., Rowland-Jones, J., Welch, J., Clark, 
D., Price, C., & Brain, M. (2014). Microsoft Big 
Data Solutions. New Delhi: Wiley India Private 
Limited.
Kumar, S., & Kumar, S. (2013, April). Big Data: 
A Big game changer. CSI Communications Jour-
nal, 37(1), 9–10.
Mather, T., Kumaraswamy, S., & Latif, S. (2010). 
Cloud Security and Privacy. Mumbai: Shroff 
Publishers & Distributors Private Limited.
Miller, M. (2009). Cloud Computing; New Delhi: 
Dorling Kindersley. India: Private Limited.
Minelli, M., Chambers, M., & Dhiraj, A. (2014). 
Big Data Analytics. New Delhi: Wiley India 
Private Limited.
O’Reilly Media Inc. (2013). Big Data Now Cur-
rent Perspectives from O’Reilly Media. Mumbai: 
Shroff Publishers & Distributors Private Limited.
Reese, G. (2010). Cloud Application Architec-
ture. Mumbai: Shorff Publishers & Distributors 
Private Limited.
Schmarzo, B. (2014). Big Data Understanding 
How Data Powers Big Business. New Delhi: Wiley 
India Private Limited.
Singh, R., & Kumar, S. (2014, November). Big 
Data Visualization using Cassandra and R; Mum-
bai. CSI Communications Journal, 38(8), 15–21.
Warden, P. (2012). Big Data Glossary. Mumbai: 
Shroff Publishers & Distributors Private Limited.

154
Big Data in Cloud Computing Environment for Market Trends
﻿
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Big Data: The capability to manage a huge 
volume of disparate data, at the right speed and 
within the right time frame, to allow real time 
analysis and reaction.
Cloud Computing: A computing Model that 
makes information technology resources such as 
servers, middleware, and applications available 
over the internet as services to business organiza-
tions in a self-service manner.
Data Cleansing: Software used to identify 
potential data quality problems.
Data Ware House: A large data store contain-
ing the organization’s historical data, which is 
used primarily for data analysis and data mining.
Predictive Analytics: A statistical or data 
mining solution consisting of algorithms and 
techniques that can be used on both structured and 
unstructured data to determine future outcomes.
Private Cloud: A private cloud is a set of 
computing resources within the organization that 
serves only the organization.
Streaming Data: An analytic computing 
platform that is used on speed.
Unstructured Data: Data that does not follow 
a specific data format.

155
Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  7
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-8339-6.ch007
Cloud Computing:
An Enabler in Managing Natural 
Resources in a Country
ABSTRACT
The growth of the Internet has provided scope for multiple applications. Governments in both developed 
and developing nations have started making use of the Internet in their functioning. The idea behind 
these governments moving from manual work to IT enabled systems through the Internet is to improve 
governance. Framing policies pertaining to natural resources and managing them will not be with one 
department under any government. E-governance, consisting of multidisciplinary experts, is required 
to develop a model for natural resources management in a country. The electronic governance will help 
the members of the e-governance and the various departments in the government to facilitate in manag-
ing their natural resources. E-governance in the area of natural resources management in any country 
will be successful only when there is coordination among the various government departments. Cloud 
computing is economically viable for implementation of e-governance projects. This chapter suggests 
a conceptual model for managing natural resources and natural disaster management for a country 
under cloud computing environment.
INTRODUCTION
Economic development has helped to raise the 
standard of living and has also led to mismanage-
ment of natural resources. This has resulted in en-
vironmental issues. Wisdom is used in maintaining 
a balance between the needs of human beings and 
supplies from natural resources so that the delicate 
ecological balance is not disturbed. Governments 
in many countries in their zeal to go ahead with 
ambitious plans of development, integration of 
knowledge relating to environmental sciences, 
economics, space technology and information 
and communication technologies has escaped the 
attention of the governments.
N. Raghavendra Rao
FINAIT Consultancy Services, India

156
Cloud Computing
﻿
The advancements in information and com-
munication technologies have resulted in new 
concepts being developed in this discipline. Cloud 
computing is one among the number of other 
concepts. Cloud computing is a concept generally 
defined as the clusters of scalable and virtualized 
resources such as distributed computers, storage, 
system software and application software which 
make use of internet to provide on-demand ser-
vices to the user.
This chapter explains the components of 
natural resources and the human activities on 
natural resources. Further it recommends a model 
for making use of space technology and Cloud 
computing to create knowledge based system 
for natural resources. This model will mainly be 
useful to the various government departments 
which are involved in the management of natural 
resources and environmental issues. Further it also 
suggests a model for handling the damage caused 
by natural disasters.
GOVERNMENT AND GOVERNANCE
Governments in both developed and developing 
countries aim at protecting the interests of their 
people and preserving the resources of their Coun-
try. They pass laws to implement their plans. In 
this process they also recommend new policies 
and propose changes as needed in the existing 
policies and programs.
One needs to be clear about the distinction 
between government and governance. A quotation 
going back to 1656 is relevant in understanding 
the distinction. “Wise princes ought not to be ad-
mired for their Government, but governance”. The 
distinction that is drawn at present briefly runs as 
follows: While Government refers to actions car-
ried out within a formal legal setting, governance 
involves all activities of government along with 
informal activities, even outside a formal govern-
ment setting that are meant to achieve goals.
COORDINATION FOR 
E-GOVERNANCE
UNESCO defines E-Governance as: “Governance 
refers to the exercise of political, economic and 
administrative authority in the management of 
Country’s affairs, including citizen’s articulation 
of their interests and exercise of their legal rights 
and obligations. E-governance may be under-
stood as the performance of this governance via 
the disseminating information to the public, and 
other agencies, and for performing government 
administrative activities.
UNESCO definition indicates the importance 
of coordination among the Government depart-
ments to provide and improve the Government 
services, transactions with citizens, business, and 
other departments of government. E-Governance 
in the area of natural resource management in 
any country will be successful only when there 
is coordination among the various government 
departments.
Framing policies pertaining to natural resource 
and managing them will not be with one depart-
ment under any government. An e-governance 
consisting of a multidisciplinary expert is required 
to develop a model for resources management in a 
country (Kaushik, & Kaushik, 2006). Electronic 
governance will help the members of the core team 
and the various departments in the government 
to facilitate in managing their resources. When 
they work as a team, they need to have central-
ized data pertaining to geographical information 
both quantitative and textual content. Then only 
it will be possible to develop a knowledge based 
system for natural resources management. Further 
the knowledge based system will be useful for 

157
Cloud Computing
﻿
environmental management and natural disaster 
management. Cloud computing is more useful 
for data-intensive application such as knowledge 
based system for natural resources management. 
This application has to manage data replication 
for facilitating data recovery and responding 
dynamically to changes in the volume of data in 
databases. Cloud computing supports the above 
requirements (Buyya,& Sukumar, 2011).
CLOUD COMPUTING FOR 
E-GOVERNANCE
Cloud computing has a real advantage over other 
conventional systems. Technological benefits and 
cost advantage together makes it a viable Tech-
nology. Cloud computing has inbuilt features like 
scalability, virtualization, rapid elasticity, pay as 
per usages, on demand access to software, stor-
age, network and other platform services. Many 
governments across the world have realized the 
importance of Cloud computing in e-governance. 
The analyst firm Gartner has predicted that Cloud 
Computing will be the top most technology area 
in information technology.
Japanese Government has undertaken a major 
initiative to bring all the Government ministries 
under Cloud Computing, known as “KASUMI-
GASEKI CLOUD” and is likely to be completed 
by 2015. Accordingly to Japan’s ministry of 
internal affairs and communication it will have 
benefits like integrated and consolidated hard-
ware, shared platform services and security. It will 
greatly reduce the Government’s efforts in terms 
of electronic governance related to development 
and operating cost.
The United Kingdom Government has ac-
cepted the proposal of creation of “G-CLOUD” for 
Government wide Cloud Computing as a strategic 
priority. The Digital Britain report prepared by the 
department of business innovation and skills and 
the department of culture, media, sports outlined 
the benefits of Cloud and supported this national 
initiative. According to UK Government, they have 
identified the initiatives under this plan such as 
standardization and simplification of the desktop, 
standardization of networking, realization of data 
centre estate, making use of open source, open 
standards and reuse strategy, green IT, information 
security and assurance.
United States Government has also started ef-
forts for shifting information systems to the Cloud 
across the US Federal Government. It may be 
noted that the efforts in this direction have already 
been started by general services administration, 
national aeronautics and space administration, 
department of health and human services, census 
bureau and White House.
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Generally economic development and natural 
resources management; are considered mutually 
antagonistic. Promotion of one would inevitably 
mean damage to the other. In the present glo-
balization scenario it has become a necessity 
for integrating natural resources concerns into 
economic development activities. If the agenda of 
any government is to concentrate only on urban 
development, there will be a risk of losing natural 
resources. This is because the former will take over 
the latter. The stress on the earth’s surface requires 
careful assessment. A new natural resources man-
agement agenda is needed for reducing the stress 
on natural management. The type of information 
required for the purpose of analysis and framing 
policies for natural resources management varies 
from country to country. It also depends on the 
resources available and their usage in the respec-
tive areas in a country.

158
Cloud Computing
﻿
ADVANTAGES OF CLOUD 
COMPUTING FOR GOVERNMENT
Cloud computing based systems are better alterna-
tive systems to high capacity and high computing 
power hardware at each department in the govern-
ment. There would be reduction in investments and 
in operating cost in Cloud computing environment. 
Every department in the government can make 
use of the services such as storage, platform, and 
software as per its needs. Infrastructure at a remote 
centre will help the government to minimize the 
investment on software and its licenses. Further, 
it helps to reduce the power consumption. DAR-
REL M. WEST – Vice President and Director of 
Governance Studies at Brookings has reported 
Cost Savings Estimates from various sources. 
The Cost Saving Analysis based on its reports 
says a minimum of 40% cost reduction in almost 
all the cases.
SCALABILITY
Changing needs in the conventional architecture, 
scaling requires procurement, deployment and 
configuration of hardware and software. Generally 
there will be delays in the procurement process 
in the government. To avoid delays in the pro-
curement process, each department procures the 
information Technology infrastructure, more than 
its needs within the Budget sanctioned limit. In 
most of the cases there will be under utilization 
of its resources.
The Cloud computing architecture is designed 
in such a way that additional requirement can be 
provided to each department at any time. The size 
of Cloud architecture can be scaled up or down 
effectively. Internally, the resources can be shared 
by the different government departments. Distribu-
tion of resources can be determined on the basis of 
each department’s needs. This provides elasticity 
within the systems wherein each department get 
s its requirement fulfilled.
USEFULNESS TO GOVERNMENT
Generally the data is largely unutilized by the gov-
ernment except for preparation of few departmental 
reports under the conventional E-Governance 
procedure. Cloud based e-governance model 
facilitates to monitor the centrally managed data 
centre of the government, stores the vital informa-
tion pertaining to the various departments. This 
will have the real time as well as the historic data. 
Software tools can be used for analyzing the data 
at the centralized government data centre for fram-
ing policies and planning strategies (Levin, 2013).
DISASTER MANAGEMENT
Disaster is inevitable and unpredictable. It can 
be either natural disaster or human error. Any 
disaster leads to loss of lives, property or data 
security and safety of electronic data is vital in 
e-governance. Disaster management is an integral 
part of Cloud based architecture which provides 
data protection and fault tolerance to the client 
as a part of its service. Internal Cloud service 
providers replicate their data at multiple loca-
tions so loss of one data centre’s data due to any 
disaster does not lead to loss of information for 
its clients. Similarly the government in a Country 
can have their data centers at different locations 
in their Country.
IMPLEMENTATION
It is easier to implement e-governance application 
at one location under Cloud computing based 
architecture compared to a similar application 
being implemented at multiple locations. The 
latter approach requires a uniform infrastructure 
at all locations which can be expensive and may 
not be available in certain situations. Even if it 
is available it may lead to inconsistency due to 
variations in versions of Software.

159
Cloud Computing
﻿
MIGRATION TO NEW TECHNOLOGY
Generally the government polices of various minis-
tries change from time to time requiring appropri-
ate changes in e-governance applications. Many 
times it may need to migrate to new technology. 
Migration is a challenging task in the distributed 
computing environment. Comparatively migration 
to new technology is relatively easier and faster 
in the Cloud based architecture. This is because 
changes at one location alone ensure migration 
to new application by the concerned department 
(Majumdar, 2011).
GREEN COMPUTING
Traditional infrastructure requires personal 
computers, number of servers, printers and other 
related devices in every government department. 
Maintaining environmental condition will be 
required at least in Server Rooms. It is not consid-
ered to be a healthy practice for the environment 
to have more systems in the various departments 
in government. It also accumulates large stock of 
obsolete hardware waste that need to be destroyed 
properly over the years. The Cloud computing 
architecture optimizes utilization of resources 
cleverly ensuring lower consumption of electricity, 
less emission of harmful gases and lower stock 
pile of obsolete hardware.
EXISTING E-GOVERNANCE 
PRACTICE
E-governance adopted by many government de-
partments is in isolation and scattered pattern. This 
procedure lacks an integrated approach towards 
e-governance. Information available with one 
department is not easily accessible by the other 
departments. This is due to lack of standardiza-
tion and uniformity in platform, data and software 
instead of sharing the data, departments go for 
creation of their own data.
CASE ILLUSTRATION
Managing natural resources and economic de-
velopment in a country are considered mutually 
antagonistic, because promoting one would result 
in damaging the other and economic development 
is given more importance to remain competitive 
in the globalization scenario. It is important that a 
Government in a Country should realize the neces-
sity for integrating natural resources concerns into 
economic development activity. Careful assess-
ment is required to assess the stress on the earth’s 
surface. A good natural resources management 
agenda is needed especially in the developing 
countries. The agenda should concentrate to reduce 
the stress on natural resources and to manage envi-
ronmental issues in urban areas. The type of data 
and information for the purpose of analysis and 
framing policies for natural resources management 
varies from country to country. It also depends on 
the availability of natural resources and its uses in 
the respective areas in a country. A well-structured 
database and information systems are required by 
the authorities who are involved in planning and 
framing the policies for managing the natural re-
sources under their control. Developing countries 
need a model that helps them to manage their 
country’s resources judiciously (Henry, & Heinke, 
2004). It is a general practice in many countries 
that the government assigns the responsibility to 
one department or two or more departments for 
managing the components of natural resources. In 
most of the cases there will not be co-ordination 
among departments for handling the issues related 
to natural resources management. So a core team 
consisting of multi-disciplinary experts to develop 
a model for managing natural resources is needed. 
The concept of cloud computing and other col-
laborative technologies will be the backbone for 
this model (Tiwari, 2010).

160
Cloud Computing
﻿
COMPONENTS OF 
NATURAL RESOURCES
It is needless to say that nature belongs to all of us. 
It is important that the authorities who are involved 
in managing the natural resources are expected 
to be aware of the structural composition and 
functions of natural resources. These components 
play an important role as life supporting systems. 
The structural components of life systems are 
land, mines, water resources and forest resources. 
These components are otherwise known as natural 
resources. It is to be remembered that natural eco 
system operates themselves under natural condi-
tions without any interference by human beings 
(Sharada, 2006). Misuse of natural resources will 
affect the human beings on the planet earth.
E-GOVERNANCE
Natural resource management is inter-disciplinary 
where co-ordination is required among the various 
government departments. It is advisable to form 
a core team consisting of the representatives of 
the various departments along with environmental 
and bio-technology experts, professionals in the 
areas of space, information and communication 
technologies will provide their expertise to the 
e-governance for creation of knowledge based 
model for natural resources. Members of the core 
team can analyze and draw conclusion from the 
knowledge based model. This model will help 
them framing policies pertaining to usage of 
natural resources.
KNOWLEDGE BASED MODEL
This Model can be created with five sub modules. 
They are 1) Geographical data for a Country 2) 
Quantitative and textual contents of geographi-
cal data 3) Data for environmental management 
4) Knowledge base for natural resources and 5) 
Disaster Management Data
1. 	
Geographical Data for a Country: GIS 
Software is required for creating geographi-
cal data of a Country.
2. 	
Quantitative and Textual Contents of 
Geographical Data: Geographical data 
is the base for converting into quantitative 
and textual data. This data will be useful 
for analysis and framing policies and issues 
related to natural resources.
3. 	
Data for Environmental Management: 
The type of data required for Analysis for 
environmental issues related to urban areas 
can be stored under this module.
4. 	
Knowledge Base for Natural Resources: 
The data related to analysis done under the 
sub mode 1 and 2 can be stored in this sub 
module.
5. 	
Disaster Management Data: Places prone 
to natural disaster can be identified from 
this sub Module 4. The information in this 
sub module will be useful for handling the 
natural disasters.
CLOUD DEPLOYMENT 
FOR E-GOVERNANCE
Cloud Computing can be classified and deployed 
under four ways. They are 1) Private Cloud 2) 
Public Cloud 3) Community Cloud and 4) Hy-
brid Cloud
1. 	
Private Cloud: The Cloud infrastructure is 
owned or leased by single enterprise. It is 
operated solely for that organization.
2. 	
Public Cloud: The Cloud infrastructure is 
owned by an organization which provides 
the Cloud services for a fee. Generally these 
services are made use by the general public 
and business enterprises.

161
Cloud Computing
﻿
3. 	
Community Cloud: The Cloud infrastruc-
ture is shared by several organizations and 
supports a specific community.
4. 	
Hybrid Cloud: The Cloud infrastructure is 
composition of two or more Clouds such as 
private, community or public that remains 
unique entities. They are bound together by 
standardized or proprietary technology that 
enables data and application portability.
DATA INTENSIVE APPLICATIONS
Cloud Computing is more useful for data intensive 
application. Data for natural resource management 
falls under this category. The core team members 
require the data for sharing and analyzing data 
across a Country. Data related to land, mines, forest 
and rivers need to be maintained in the database 
consisting Region wise and country wide data 
replication of the above components is required 
to be maintained in the system. Further it will 
have the facility of data recovery and responding 
dynamically to changes in the volume of data in 
databases (Krutz & Vines, 2010).
PRIVATE CLOUD
Data related to natural resources is considered to 
be sensitive data for any Country. A Government 
in a Country should have its own data center. Pri-
vate Cloud is the best solution for a Government 
data center. High volume and sensitive data of a 
government can be maintained in the private cloud.
With the growing use of internet there is no 
need to limit group collaboration to a single 
department’s network environment. Users from 
multiple locations within the government and 
multiple governments can collaborate on data and 
information related to natural resources stored in 
private cloud environment with ease. Many lead-
ing manufacturers in the area of infrastructure are 
offering to build cloud network.
Similarly the software companies are offering 
the cloud based software applications. Essence of 
cloud computing concepts is to facilitate users 
of any device which has an internet feature such 
as mainly mobile phones and laptops. It is clear 
from the above that cloud computing concept 
make e-governance reasonably simple (Sahoo, 
Mehfuza, & Rai, 2013).
GEOGRAPHICAL 
INFORMATION SYSTEM
Geographical Information System is associated 
with basic terms such as geography and informa-
tion system. The literal interpretation of geogra-
phy is “Writing about the Earth”. Geography is 
the base for identifying the relationship of land 
with human beings (Quazi, 2009) and (Kraak & 
Ormelling, 2004).
Geographical information system is a tool for 
handling geographic (Spatial and Descriptive) 
data. It is an organized collection of computer 
hardware, software with geographic data. This 
is designed efficiently to capture, store, retrieve, 
update and manipulate data. This data can be 
used for analysis and displaying all forms of 
geographically referenced information as per the 
user defined specifications. One can visualize the 
real world consisting of much geography such 
as topography, land use, coverage of land, soil, 
crops, forests, water bodies, districts, and towns 
(Chandra, & Ghosh, 2006).
GEOGRAPHICAL DATA 
FOR A COUNTRY
The details of natural resources, population, and 
location of industries, educational institutions, 
town and cities are available in the various depart-
ments in a government. Most of the above infor-
mation is not available in the integrated system. 
Many Governments do not have integrated system 

162
Cloud Computing
﻿
due to heavy investment on infrastructure. Many 
governments across the world find it very difficult 
to frame policies in respect of management of 
natural resources in their countries.
Geographical Information System (GIS) facili-
tates to know the inventory of natural resources 
and exact location of the resources. Once the data 
obtained by GIS System is stored in the database 
under the cloud computing environment, then it 
can be accessible by many government depart-
ments across the country.
COMPONENTS OF 
NATURAL RESOURCES
The components of natural resources can be clas-
sified as renewable resources and non-renewable 
resources. Renewable resources have the inherent 
ability to repair or replenish themselves by recy-
cling, reproduction or replacement. These renew-
able resources are water, plants, animals, soil and 
living organisms. Non-renewable resources are the 
earth’s geologic environment such as minerals and 
fossil fuels. These resources are available in the 
fixed quantity in the environment. It is required 
that every member of the core team needs to be 
aware of this.
QUANTITATIVE AND TEXTUAL 
CONTENTS IN THE SUB MODEL
A quantitative and textual data in reference to 
geographical data can be classified and stored in 
the sub modules. They are the following
•	
Forests: Data related to different types of 
forests such as moist topical forests, dry 
topical forests, mountain sub tropical for-
ests, mountain temporal forests, sub alpine 
forests and alpine scrubs. Classification of 
forest varies from country to country.
•	
Water Resources: Data related to fresh 
water, lakes, rivers, ground water and 
oceans falls under this category.
•	
Minerals: Data related to metallic and non 
metallic are stored under this category.
•	
Agricultural Land: Data related to culti-
vable and non cultivable land will be stored 
under this category.
•	
Industrial Areas: This will contain data 
pertaining to various industries such as 
automobile, textiles, pharmaceuticals, con-
sumer durables and consumer related prod-
ucts. This is not an exhaustive list.
•	
Urban Areas: Data related to residential, 
roads, transport, infrastructure and utility 
falls under this category.
•	
Rural Areas: Data related to the areas 
which do not fall under the category of 
urban areas can be Considered under this 
category.
•	
Service Units: Data related to educational 
institutions, healthcare units and other re-
lated units fall under this category.
•	
Business Units: Data related to trading or-
ganizations, financial institutions, hospital-
ity units and other similar units fall under 
this category.
The above category of data in the sub modules 
of the database in the cloud computing will be 
useful for framing policies to manage resources 
of a Country.
NATURAL RESOURCES AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
Industrialization and urbanization has become 
a worldwide phenomenon. Industrialization and 
urbanization raise many environmental issues. It is 

163
Cloud Computing
﻿
because of the requirements of people living in ur-
ban and industrial areas are increasing. Managing 
their requirements need to be accessed properly.
The relationship between the availability of 
natural resources and its consumption can be 
established from the quantitative and textual data 
in any particular area. Further it helps to address 
the environmental issues (Thakur, 2006). This 
also helps the policy makers to understand mini-
mizing environmental hazards and avoiding the 
depletion of resources. The details pertaining to 
water usage, solid waste products, disposition of 
package materials and other related information 
can be made available from this model. This will be 
more useful for environmental management. The 
type of data required for analyzing environmental 
issues are 1) Underground composition of urban 
areas 2) Water usage 3) Disposition of wastage 
and 4) Air pollutants
1. 	
Underground Composition of Urban 
Areas: Earth is being dug up in the de-
veloping countries very frequently for the 
purpose of laying lines for communication, 
electricity, water mains, sanitary and sewage 
lines. Generally it is not well planned activ-
ity especially in the developing countries. 
The details of the information pertaining to 
every area in cities and sub-urban parts are 
required for analysis and developing urban 
areas. The data in the module in Cloud 
computing environment will help the town 
planners for action.
2. 	
Water Usage: The data related to water con-
sumption by residents and industrial, service 
and business sectors can be ascertained and 
stored in this module. This will be useful in 
accessing the requirements of consumption 
of water by these sectors. The contingency 
plan at the time of shortage of water can be 
prepared on the basis of information in this 
module.
3. 	
Disposition of Wastage: The advance-
ment in the package industry has created 
a good scope of marketing of the products 
manufactures across the globe. Demand 
for packed products is on the rise in the de-
veloping countries. Disposal of every kind 
of packaging materials at the end are to be 
carried out by the civic authorities. Statistics 
of discarded packaging material is required 
for allocation of places in cities and suburban 
areas. This module will provide the required 
information.
4. 	
Air Pollutants: Oxygen and nitrogen are 
the major constituents of the atmosphere. 
Coal, fuel oil and gasoline used by us emit 
carbon monoxide. This human activity is 
contributing to changes in the atmosphere. 
The largest single source of this emission 
from automobile pollution in air is from the 
above factors. The health of human beings 
is affected by this pollution. The data in this 
Model will help the policy makers to think 
of workable solutions.
REMOTE SENSING FOR EARTH 
RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
Remote sensing data and image have been used 
to derive thematic information on various natural 
resources and environment. The type and level of 
information extracted depends on the expertise 
of the analyst’s requirements. The utilization of 
remote sensing data can be broadly classified 
into three categories 1) To identify the category 
to which the earth surface express belongs 2) 
To infer a particular parameter or phenomenon 
using the part of data for suitable modeling 3) 
under the third category, surface expressions are 
the indicators of certain resources, which are not 
directly observable by remote sensing.

164
Cloud Computing
﻿
DATA FOR NATURAL 
DISASTER MANAGEMENT
It is said that global warming causes climatic 
changes and natural disasters. Unprecedented 
rains, floods, earthquakes, tsunami, severely dry 
and wet weather are considered as natural disasters. 
It is the responsibility of governments in a country 
to have a proper “Disaster Management” plan. It is 
required under this plan to provide services to the 
victims of natural disasters whenever they acquire.
The stress caused on planet earth needs a careful 
assessment of the use of natural resources. Satellite 
systems facilitate to observe atmospheric changes 
and disturbances (Rao, 2005). High resolution 
remote sensing satellites integrated GPS system 
provides the inputs at the various phases of natural 
disasters for preparedness, prevention, mitigation 
and disaster management.
Any disaster management needs data. The past 
data can be used as guidance for preparedness to 
handle disasters. Same approach is needed for 
managing natural disasters. Disaster prevention 
measures can be improved in three ways. They are 
1) Mapping the disaster prone areas 2) Forecasting 
impending areas and 3) Disaster affected areas.
Geostationary satellite data is capable of pro-
viding information every half an hour and is use-
ful in monitoring short term disaster by cyclones 
and tornadoes. It is felt that the combination of 
high spatial, temporal and spectral resolution 
data would certainly be beneficial in disaster 
management.
DISASTER MANAGEMENT
It is said that natural disasters are likely to occur 
more often due to global warming. Information 
pertaining to the type of help and services rendered 
is to be stored in the information system. This will 
be more useful for taking action in an emergency. 
The kinds of services needed are medical services, 
transporting people from the affected areas to 
safe places and organizing food and provisions to 
the people in distress. The macro level data and 
information in the disaster management system 
are given below:
The experiences of the people who have been 
directly involved in providing services to the 
victims of disaster will be the inputs for creating 
this database.
Resource Allocation Module
This Module will have the list of basic supplies such 
as food items, clothes, rain coats and umbrellas 
required to help the victims of natural disasters. 
Addresses of voluntary rescue team, medical 
doctors and paramedical professionals are to be 
stored in this module.
Transport Module
The details of heavy transport vehicles that can 
wade through water, boats and aerial survey air-
crafts should be available in this module.
Evacuation Module
Vulnerable areas and safe regions’ exact locations 
are to be stored in this module by using GIS ap-
plication.
Shelter Module
This module will contain the details of resources 
of various shelter locations.
Deprivation Module
This module will contain the details of short sup-
ply of food items in the earlier disaster affected 
areas and statistics of number of people infected 
with diseases. This information will be useful for 
avoiding such type of situations.

165
Cloud Computing
﻿
Disaster Module
This module will contain the details of handling the 
various situations at various disaster management 
operations. Success and failure of the rescue opera-
tions can be derived from information from this 
Module. It will be useful for the future operations.
CLOUD BASED NATURAL 
RESOURCES DATA MODEL
Experts in the areas of information technology, 
space technology, domain and functional experts 
and executives in the government departments are 
the backbone of the e-governance. The role of the 
e-governance is to design cloud based natural re-
sources data module. This model will take care of 
the basic data of the natural resources of a Country. 
The e-governance’s analysis and solutions can be 
stored in this model. Data and information in this 
model can be made available to the executive of 
the various governments who are associated with 
the natural resources management, environmental 
issues and natural disaster management systems. 
Access to this module by them will be through 
e-governance.
Remote sensing systems and geographical 
systems are used for acquiring data of natural 
resources in a Country. Private Cloud can be 
made use of storing and organizing data. The 
type of and level of information required depends 
on the expertise of analysts. Data pertaining to 
geographical, quantitative and textual in respect 
of natural resources will be the base for graphical, 
data ware house and text database in this model. 
This model will have the data at a Country, state, 
region, city, town and village levels. This will 
provide a good scope for analyzing the various 
aspects of natural resources.
Software tools such as GIS analysis, data 
mining and text mining can be made use of 
analysis (Pujari, 2010). The data analyzed by the 
specialists identified by the E-Governance will be 
available in this Model. The analyzed data will 
help the policy makers to frame policies for their 
Country. This model stresses the importance of 
systematic approach in the creation of this Model. 
The exponential increase in computing power 
under the cloud environment and advancements 
in space technology have led to design this con-
ceptual model.
Data in this Model will also be useful for man-
aging environmental issues and managing natural 
disasters. Figure 1 gives an idea of a model at 
macro level. Figure 2 talks about the macro level 
contents for analyzing for environmental issues. 
Figure 3 explains the macro level data and informa-
tion needed in the disaster management system.
FUTURE TRENDS
The policy of many countries is to encourage 
adapting Cloud computing concepts in the in-
formation technology infrastructure programs. 
The advancements in space technology and geo-
graphical information system will be collabora-
tive technology to develop modules under cloud 
computing environment. It is because of the above 
policy followed by many countries, there is scope 
in making use of expertise of multi-disciplinary 
professionals to develop modules under cloud 
computing environment.
CONCLUSION
The major problem in the developing countries is 
in identification of the effects of mismanagement 
of natural resources. Assessment of mismanage-
ment of natural resources can be carried out only 
when the core team is aware of the functionality 
of each component of natural resources.

166
Cloud Computing
﻿
A government in a country uses the resources 
of nature such as forests, water resources, mines 
and land to create economic activities such as 
industrialization, globalization and technology. 
These activities result in green house change such 
as carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, ozone 
and carbons. These results will have an effect on 
changing environment. Changes in the environ-
ment will lead to unprecedented rains, floods, 
earthquakes, tsunami and dry and wet weather 
conditions.
Managing resources of nature are diverse 
and approaches toward their solution to mitiga-
tion depend on the information, monitoring and 
pressure for action which is acute. Cloud based 
natural resources data model will help the gov-
ernment in a country to change their practices 
for using the natural resources. Further it will 
also help addressing the problems of depletion of 
non renewable resources. This Model facilitates 
to handle environmental issues and to manage 
natural disaster. Involvement of the executives 
of the various government departments is pos-
sible under cloud computing environment with 
e-governance.
Figure 1. Classification of data of a country

167
Cloud Computing
﻿
Figure 2. Environmental data

168
Cloud Computing
﻿
Figure 3. Modules in disaster management systems

169
Cloud Computing
﻿
REFERENCES
Chandra, A. H., & Ghosh, S. K. (2006). Image 
Interpretation, Remote sensing and Geographical 
Information System. New Delhi: Narosa Publish-
ing House.
Henry Glynn, J., & Heinke Gary, W. (2004). Envi-
ronmental Science and Engineering; New Delhi: 
Pearson Education. Singapore: Private Limited.
Kaushik, A., & Kaushik, C. P. (2006). Environ-
mental Studies-A Multidisciplinary Subject: Per-
spectives in Environmental Studies. New Delhi: 
New Age International Publishers.
Krutz, R. L., & Dean, V. R. (2010). Cloud Security. 
New Delhi: Wiley India Private Limited.
Kumar, B. R., & Karthik, S. (2011, May). Plat-
forms for Building and Developing Applications 
for Cloud Computing. CSI Communications 
Journal, 35(2), 6–11.
Levin, S. (2013). Cooperation and Sustainability. 
In G. Madhavan, B. Oakley, D. Green, D. Koon, 
& P. Low (Eds.), Practicing Sustainability (pp. 
39–41). New York: Springer.
Menno-Jan, K., & Ferjan, O. (2004). Cartography 
Visualization of Geospatial Data; New Delhi: 
Pearson Education. Singapore: Private Limited.
Pujari Arun, K. (2004). Data mining Techniques; 
New Delhi: Universities Press. India: Private 
Limited.
Quazi, S. A. (2009). Principles of Physical Geog-
raphy. New Delhi: APH Publishing Corporation.
Rao Raja, K. N. (2005). An Overview of Space and 
Satellite: Fundamental of Satellite Communica-
tion. New Delhi: Prentice Hall of India.
Sahoo, G., Shabana, M., & Rashmi, R. (2013, 
November). Applications of Cloud Computing for 
Agriculture Sector. CSI Communications Journal, 
37(8), 10–17.
Sharada, V. N. (2006). Environment & Agriculture. 
New Delhi: Malhotra Publishing House.
Shikharesh, M. (2011, May). Resource Man-
agement on Clouds: Handling Uncertainties in 
Parameters and Polices. CSI Communications 
Journal, 35(2), 16–17.
Thakur, I. S. (2006). Introduction Environmental 
Biotechnology. New Delhi: IK International.
Tiwari, A. K. (2010). Infrastructure for Sustain-
able Rural Development. New Delhi: Regal 
Publications.
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Cloud Computing: A computing model that 
makes information technology resources such as 
servers, middleware, and applications available 
over the internet as services to business organiza-
tions in self service manner.
Data Ware House: A large data store contain-
ing the organization’s historical data, which is 
used primarily for data analysis and data mining.
Ecosystem: A biological community and its 
physical environment exchanging matter and 
energy.
Elasticity: The ability to expand or shrink a 
computing resource in real time, based on need.
Natural Disasters: Hazards that destroy or 
damage wild life habitats, damages property and 
human settlements.
Scalability: Regarding hard ware, the ability 
to go from small to large amounts of processing 
power with the same architecture.
Urbanization: Increasing concentration of 
people in cities.

Section 4
Supply Chain in Cloud 
Computing Environment

171
Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  8
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-8339-6.ch008
IPCRESS: 
Tracking Intellectual Property 
through Supply Chains in Clouds
ABSTRACT
This paper provides an overview of the dual challenges involved in protecting intellectual property 
while distributing business information that will need to be readable/viewable at some point such that 
it can be acted upon by parties external to the organization. We describe the principles involved with 
developing such a system as a means to engender trust in such situations – as a deperimeterized supply 
chain likely acting through the Cloud – discuss the requirements for such a system, and demonstrate 
that such a system is feasible for written text by formulating the problem as one related to plagiarism 
detection. The core of the approach, developed previously, has been shown to be effective in finding 
similar content (precision: 0.88), and has some robustness to obfuscation, without needing to reveal 
the content being sought.
INTRODUCTION
Document archives and systems of any organi-
zation, coherently managed or not, can contain 
a variety of high-value information relating to 
collaborating and competing businesses, business 
transactions, research and development plans, 
market analysis and strategy, and so on. Large 
organisations may have many such documents 
spread very widely across devices used by nu-
merous siloed business units, with highly evolved 
but disparate systems, approaches, and practices. 
Careful curation across such a variety can be costly 
and difficult to implement, and enforced changes 
to practices which are geared towards making the 
business as productive as possible may be poorly 
received. Custodians may wish to impose con-
straints on the use of such systems for very sound 
Lee Gillam
University of Surrey, UK
Scott Notley
University of Surrey, UK
Simon Broome
Jaguar Land Rover, UK
Debbie Garside
GeoLang, UK

172
IPCRESS
﻿
business reasons, but where these actively impede 
everyday activities the organization will risk users 
exploring unconstrained workarounds, and so such 
impositions will encourage the emergence of new 
problems. Free-flowing communication, some-
times across geographical and legislative borders 
through a wide variety of mechanisms including 
email, also presents a risk to such businesses. 
Whilst free-flowing communication is essential 
when organizations are not self-sufficient – i.e. 
when they act in supply chains – communication, 
deliberate and accidental, can readily flow bi-
directionally. Recipient recommendation, with a 
simple auto-completion mechanism when an email 
address begins to be typed, without checking on 
the suitability of the recommendation, is but one 
way in which accidents can happen (Carvalho and 
Cohen, 2007). Such accidents can also be quite 
difficult to recover from subsequently.
Of interest for this paper is that deperimeteriza-
tion, the lack of a readily definable organizational 
boundary, is inherent in Supply Chains, in which 
companies must trust aspects of their work to oth-
ers, and becomes amplified when Supply Chains 
act through the Cloud, and often through the most 
prevalent cloud service model of Software as a 
Service (SaaS) (Mell and Grance, 2011). This 
deperimeterization presents risks, and of key 
importance for us is the risk presented to high 
value Intellectual Property, by which we mean the 
expression of some novel aspect of a particular 
product. Costs of Intellectual Property risks have 
been reported, albeit with subsequent controversy 
regarding the difficulty in justifying such a figure, 
at £9.2bn annually for the UK with the notion 
that insider assistance is typical (OCSIA/Detica, 
2011). A figure as high as $300bn annually has 
been mooted for the US with issues identified with 
protection when dealing with specific nations who 
“literally copy patents from any country and have 
them filed and granted”, but with similar difficulty 
in justifying any such value (The National Bureau 
of Asian Research, 2013). 
In a collaborative research and development 
project between Jaguar Land Rover, University 
of Surrey, and GeoLang Ltd, and with funding 
from the UK government-backed Technology 
Strategy Board for 18 months, we are construct-
ing the Intellectual Property Protecting Cloud 
Services in Supply Chains (IPCRESS) system to 
address just such a predicament in respect to Sup-
ply Chains and barriers to Cloud adoption. The 
focus for IPCRESS is this difficulty of entrusting 
valuable Intellectual Property (IP) to third parties, 
through the Cloud, as is necessary to allow for the 
construction of components in the supply chain: 
such information needs to be readily readable and 
usable by suppliers so that they can see what to 
build and understand vital properties of the things 
being built, and so encryption-based approaches 
may become, at best, inconvenient; at worst, they 
will encourage removal of protection through 
transformations of the received information into 
forms that avoid such inconvenience. IPCRESS 
is developing a capability for being able to track 
IP through supply chains without unnecessarily 
exposing or otherwise revealing the IP in the 
tracking process. IPRCESS is built around Sur-
rey’s approach to privacy-preserving plagiarism 
detection - which might be considered also as a 
kind of private search capability – that has been 
formulated for this very purpose (US patent filed 
November 2011; PCT filed November 2012). This 
kind of tracking is well-suited to the tasks of (i) 
preventing IP leakage; (ii) detecting IP leakage 
or theft; and (iii) identifying retention beyond al-
lowed review periods. Discussions around such a 
system and its uses have been presented previously 
(Cooke & Gillam, 2011). In this paper, we offer 
an overview of the overall context (Section II), 
expected formulation of the system (Section III), 
and information regarding the operation of the 
approach (Section IV) and its evaluation (Section 
V).We conclude by speculating on the potential 
business value of adopting such a system.

173
IPCRESS
﻿
BACKGROUND
Organisations of various kinds have become very 
familiar with the risks of information that is in 
their possession leaking out to undesirable and/
or unexpected parties. Where this concerns the 
data collected about people covered under data 
protection legislation, the need in various juris-
dictions to disclose, and potentially be fined for, 
‘allowing’ such problems to exist at least leads 
to a better understanding of the extent of this 
problem – in the UK, for example, the National 
Health Service, which should be safeguarding 
sensitive personal/medical information, appears 
to suffer the most from data leakage, although an 
alternative explanation is that they are simply the 
most open and transparent about the existence of 
such issues and a large majority elsewhere remain 
unreported. For the purposes of this paper, how-
ever, we are not focused on protection of data about 
individuals, nor in respect to companies whose 
business model involves trade in personal data. 
Our concern is with the need to protect valuable 
corporate information – the Intellectual Property, 
and by extension Trade Secrets, which would be 
related to competitive advantage in products and 
services. This covers information prior to public 
disclosure, for example ahead of a patent becoming 
published for inspection, embargoed marketing 
materials and press releases, business strategies, 
information as may relate to initial public offerings 
(IPOs) and so on. According to the FBI’s pages 
on Corporate Espionage, “methods of targeting 
or acquiring trade secrets”, which would also 
cover IP, include:
•	
“Steal, conceal, or carry away by fraud, ar-
tifice, or deception;
•	
Copy, duplicate, sketch, draw, photograph, 
download, upload, alter, destroy, photo-
copy, replicate, transmit, deliver, send, 
mail, communicate, or convey; and,
•	
Receive, buy, or possess a trade secret, 
knowing the same to have been stolen or 
appropriated, obtained, or converted with-
out authorization.”
With these methods in mind, there are two 
main risks to such information: systems and 
people (although people are also responsible for 
the former), with weakly secured systems offering 
an inbound route to such information, and weakly 
secure people creating an outbound route. The 
latter is our concern, with the focus on the insider 
assistance referred to previously (OCSIA/Detica, 
2011). However, the true extent of this problem 
is quite unclear - here we will draw for the first 
of several times, on the UK’s Home Office report 
on “Cyber crime: a review of the evidence” which 
addresses the robustness of such figures (McGuire 
and Dowling 2003):
As outlined by the Home Affairs Select Committee 
report on e-crime (Home Affairs Select Committee, 
2013), the precision of Detica’s (2011) £27 bil-
lion estimate has been questioned due to the lack 
of robust and transparent data upon which their 
estimates were based. [..]The UK cyber security 
strategy (Cabinet Office, 2011) recognised the 
challenges in this area and noted “a truly robust 
estimate will probably never be established, but it 
is clear the costs are high and rising. [Emphasis 
added]
the issue of finding reliable data from which to 
extrapolate:
‘Insider-threats’ are a prominent issue reported in 
business surveys. However, the limited evidence 
available is mixed on whether they are a bigger 
problem than outsider attacks. [..] The majority 
(86%) of recent online crime incidents reported 
by businesses in the CVS (Home Office, 2013b) 
were thought to be external attacks from outside 
the organisation, with just 2 per cent thought 
to be internal (for the remaining 12% of cases, 
respondents did not know if they were internal 
or external). However, it is not possible to verify 

174
IPCRESS
﻿
the accuracy of these reports. Another survey of 
1,007 businesses in 2008 reported that over half of 
the most serious incidents (57%) were believed to 
have an internal cause, whereas 38 per cent had 
an external cause (BERR, 2008). However, this 
difference may simply reflect the different scope 
of the two surveys, making direct comparisons 
problematic.
and qualifies the difference between the deliberate 
and the accidental: 
‘Insider threats’ from members of staff may be 
malicious and targeted activity, for example, 
someone seeking revenge if they know they are 
about to be fired. However, they may also be 
accidental or generally negligent, for example, 
emailing data to the incorrect person, or losing 
a memory stick (and recorded as data loss rather 
than theft).
We further consider that those with deliberate 
intent are likely to have formulated strategies to 
achieve their goal whilst avoiding detection, which 
likely involves trying to avoid using systems which 
may be monitored, and that those with deliberate 
intent are also in a minority. And the nature of 
subsequent actions would also differ, ranging from 
expensive legal actions, such as when designs are 
imitated1, or when deliberate acts of espionage are 
alleged2. On the other hand, accidents will tend to 
occur in close proximity to the existing systems, 
which could be monitored for this with prevention 
a possibility if only the capability were available.
However, the notion of ‘insider’ itself demands 
challenge, especially within the framing of the 
so-called extended enterprise, which seems to 
be the fashionable way to cover the notion of the 
Supply Chain. We will refer to the Supply Chain 
in this paper, as we feel this best expresses the 
interaction of one corporate entity with other par-
ties that are entirely separated from the corporate 
entity. The creation of a wide variety of products 
now relies on the interactions between a number 
of different organizations with aligned interests – 
typically monetary – in such supply chains. And, 
in certain industries, supply chains have a very 
extensive influence on the final product: figures 
of 65-70% of components being built in the the 
automotive supply chain are typical. In such large, 
and complex, supply chains, the very definition 
of an insider becomes rather more complex. If we 
consider an insider as somebody with sufficient 
access to information that would allow for deliber-
ate or accidental propagation of this information 
to a party whom, in normal business operations, 
would not be expected to be a recipient of this 
information, individuals within the organization 
with the requirement are prime, and this naturally 
extends to individuals within those suppliers with 
whom information is shared directly. But this must 
also be extended at each point where the informa-
tion of interest is then shared onwards in order to 
supply those suppliers, and so on. 
Adding Cloud into this mix means that those 
involved with hosting the means of sharing the 
information should also be considered as insid-
ers, although Cloud providers themselves would 
likely want to be considered as excluded from 
this. Large corporations with large supply chains 
operating through the Cloud would seem to have 
a very large set of insiders, employed directly in 
various ways and through their supply chain and 
systems (Cloud) providers, and without a means 
of command and control must work on effective 
means to police such a setup. But even this con-
sideration is limited. The very large set of insiders 
must also include those within companies who 
have tendered, unsuccessfully, for work in the 
process of which they have been made privy to 
information about nature of the work to be done, 
perhaps for a fixed period of time, and may have 
learnt from the information provided in this manner 
to it in order to offer to supply similar to others. 
This offers potential for less scrupulous suppliers 
to win business with others and deliberately or 
inadvertently to end up supplying a very similar 
item. Aside from the kinds of self-destructing 

175
IPCRESS
﻿
documents as provided for by digital rights man-
agement systems, checks that such suppliers have 
destroyed all forms of related correspondence 
when unsuccessful are difficult to make. Indeed, 
the need for convenience, for example, to pass on 
to the suppliers to the supplier, may have led the 
supplier to reproduce this information in a man-
ner now unprotected. The problem is now one of 
detection of such unprotected information in the 
document collections of the entire supply chain, 
or in the worst case, on the web. Put another way, 
there is a need to find (or not find) existence of a 
whole document, or parts thereof, in the archives 
of a multiplicity of other organizations, some of 
whom will be directly engaged and some of whom 
may not. Put more simply, such a question could 
be formulated as: “Can we search all your docu-
ments to see if you’ve got any of ours?”. And an 
approach to find reproduction on the web might 
involve a question of: “Shall we put all the para-
graphs into the Google, Bing, etc., search engine 
and see if we get any hits?”. This latter, of course, 
is already exposing the information to the search 
engine. Clearly, there is a need but the means 
to achieve must multilaterally prevent exposure 
of such information. Worse still, though out of 
scope of our present concerns, is that if detecting 
retention or leakage is quite a challenge; acting on 
such information requires yet wider consideration. 
Such supply chains, then, present the need 
for management of at least two key elements: 
the components which must be formed into the 
product; and the information which is required in 
order for those components to be constructed. The 
information necessarily travels, to a certain point, 
opposite to the components. But at some point, 
the need for propagating information regarding 
what is being built any further will cease, and 
may even become negotiated. For example, in 
manufacturing, the size, length and number of bolts 
and screws would no longer necessarily impart 
information about their specific use in respect to 
a particular part or set of parts, so those needing 
them to secure parts may avoid propagating the 
information about the parts being secured; those 
providing the natural resources from which the 
screws and bolts are forged also have no need for 
further information – indeed, here the informa-
tion about details such as size, length, and forging 
process may be propagated in either direction as 
a requirement or an availability of supply. This 
is not to suggest, however, that this is the limit of 
information provision. 
By way of example, we can consider specific 
information regarding the launch of a new car, 
and assume that the manufacturer wishes to keep 
its design and composition entirely secret until its 
launch event. A variety of information, includ-
ing but not limited to sketches of the concept, 
complex 3D computer aided designs, moulds, 
repair manuals, and photographs, videos and other 
materials as required for product marketing, will 
all be needed at various stages of the process. A 
near-production version of the vehicle may need 
to be moved to various sites, not least for road 
tests. And a variety of supply chain members must 
be engaged with at various stages with various 
quantities of this information in order to bring it all 
together. The appetite for information about such 
a car means that certain measures can be taken to 
try to prevent disclosure, including the addition 
of camouflaging panels to hide various aspects 
of the final body shape. But information can still 
get out somehow, as a Google search for Jaguar 
F-type leaked [or Lamborghini leaked, Ferrari 
leaked, and so on would] quickly reveal the level 
of interest on the web for such items3, with even a 
“Fiat Punto facelift – new images leaked” creating 
interest. Clearly this is somewhat preferable to the 
kinds of vehicles for which leaks are more directly 
related to fuel, water and oil which indicates an 
issue of maintenance (and quality), and the depth 
to which one has to explore in search results for 
the Jaguar, Lamborghini, Ferrari and Fiat Punto 
to identify any such issue may be interesting for 
some – perhaps in contrast to a similar search for a 
less desirable vehicle. And it would also be naïve 
to underestimate the potential for any apparently 

176
IPCRESS
﻿
standard/familiar processes such as translation 
to be considered immune from the possibility 
of becoming a leak point when even the scripts 
for a popular television programme can end up 
online “after being sent to the BBC’s new Latin 
American headquarters for translation”4. 
THE IPCRESS CONTEXT
Protection of IP rights (IPR) is critical to the pres-
ence and growth of business activities in ensuring 
that those investing in research and development 
have a means by which to recoup such costs, and 
to protect against being undercut on price by those 
who have not had to take the exposure to such 
investment – and associated risk (Choate, 2005). 
This creates an awkward tension: price-sensitive 
consumers want cheap goods, and businesses 
who can create similar goods more cheaply have 
a market niche here – and consumers are perhaps 
unsympathetic to the claims of revenues harmed 
and jobs being lost in large corporations because 
they view corporate wealth as residing in a few 
very rich hands, rather than considering the plight 
of the newly jobless. Nations in Western Europe, 
the US, Japan and Singapore have well-established 
regulations with stringent and enforceable rules 
for IP protection. Many emerging economies 
recognize that this is vital to attract and maintain 
foreign investment, so Malaysia, Hungary, India, 
and China also begin to craft legislation to im-
prove IP protection standards. And yet even with 
these stringent and enforceable rules large-scale 
markets exist in counterfeits. This is brought into 
sharp relief when counterfeits include medicines 
and aircraft parts: Choate cites the FAA’s report 
that counterfeit parts were involved with some 
174 aircraft crashes in the US between 1973 and 
1996, suggests that most of the world’s 2,000 to 
5,000 aircraft parts dealers (in the supply chains) 
are unregulated, and that 2% of aircraft parts may 
be counterfeit, stolen, too old, or improperly re-
conditioned. Laws exist, but require enforcement. 
And for IP, this largely also comes at a cost.
Even the tracking of IP across companies in 
these nations where each has different consider-
ations for IP remains a significant problem. In 
IP-heavy industries, an innovative IP tracking sys-
tem to monitor data across multiple silos without 
incurring high costs of manual curation or risking 
loss of IP in the process is appealing. Again we 
consider the automotive industry, with its 65-70% 
reliance on the supply chain. An exemplar in this 
industry is Jaguar Land Rover, which has several 
UK sites and several off-shore sites to actively 
take production to emerging markets. Although 
the focus on IP generation is in the UK, it must 
be trusted first amongst these sites and from there 
to suppliers for various of these sites. Locations 
of suppliers, then, becomes important, as do the 
required information security approaches. Tech-
nological ‘solutions’ typically take the view of 
securing organisational borders against outside 
threats, which are less relevant here, and then the 
network - reinforcing a view of a safe perimeter. 
Such a view helps to retain the illusion that it is 
possible to control all technologies, and indeed 
people, at all points of the supply chain. All of this 
can be somewhat at odds with business needs as 
R&D strategies demand more connectivity outside 
the enterprise. However, distrust and perimeterisa-
tion will tend to become the norm across industries 
that suffer most from IP theft. Our aim, then, is to 
offer a means of safer deperimeterisation whilst 
fostering recognition of IP value across the supply 
chain. Such an environment could facilitate new 
and lucrative manufacturing and development 
partnerships and consequently enable confident 
utilisation of cloud technologies. 
A system such as that proposed in IPCRESS 
should help to encourage similar levels of respect 
for IP even where local legal systems for IP are 
poor or under-enforced, or cultural importance is 
lacking. Clearly elaborated operational protocols 
are required which, allied to software-based track-

177
IPCRESS
﻿
ing methods, act to deter opportunistic industrial 
theft and become off-putting to an ‘insider’, who 
we might want now to be defined as: “individuals 
that are trusted, and have (some) authorized access 
over the organization’s assets” (Franqueira et al, 
2010), which would seem to offer greater embodi-
ment of the supply chain (or extended enterprise).
IPCRESS, as a project, is developing a capabil-
ity for tracking IP through supply chains, offering 
Cloud services to (i) prevent IP leakage; (ii) detect 
IP leakage, or theft; and (iii) identify information 
retention beyond allowed periods. The approach 
to be trialled within Jaguar Land Rover is based 
on a computationally efficient method for find-
ing IP without exposing IP, referred to as private 
search, but with an additional novelty (patents 
filed by the University of Surrey) of avoiding 
costs of encryption.
To act effectively, the system needs to account 
for the following requirements:
1. 	
Scale to the Entire (Potentially Deep) 
Web: Information as leaked straight out ‘to 
public’ would need to be traced. This requires 
a system that can process such information 
efficiently. 
2. 	
Be Used Against (Private) Corporate 
Resources: Information within a corporate 
must first be indexed. Care must, of course, 
be taken with such an index since it also, in 
theory at least, contains a trace of the valuable 
information and, indeed, likely of rather more 
valuable information, in pulling together all 
such information of value, than would ever 
be shared in any individual interaction.
3. 	
Be Used Across (Private) Corporates: The 
key challenge, since it requires corporates 
to be willing to share their indexes, which, 
from 2 above, may include trace of all their 
valuable information, whilst still unwilling 
to share actual content. This places a specific 
on the index not being a route to revealing 
the content – this is the key novelty of the 
approach being embedded into IPCRESS, 
and which helps to satisfy 1 and 2 here.
4. 	
Be Built In and For ‘The Cloud’: If we 
have achieved, in particular, 3, the entire 
system and all of the produced corporate 
indexes could be deployed in ‘the Cloud’ 
to allow for scalable processing.
The system needs to be responsive – ideally, 
operating for queries at the speed of search (1) – and 
should be usable directly within an organization 
(2) for ‘private search’ – for us, the ability to find 
information without exposing the queries being 
used, and hence not leaking information through 
any other exposure (3).
The approach shares some similarities with 
a Federated Search capability across different 
instances of the same Enterprise Content Man-
agement (ECM) system (for example, Shokouhi 
& Si, 2011). In a Federated Search approach, the 
same query – likely a few keywords - is presented 
to each individual instance of the system, and 
results are presented in a single page but parti-
tioned according to instances searched. A user 
at any of the locations can search for content in 
any of the instances exposed this way. Each in-
stance maintains its own search index across the 
underlying server farm that hosts the documents, 
generally to support querying, and the Federated 
Search consolidates efforts that would be needed 
to separately search each instance. However, 
this is a product-specific approach – most likely 
locked-in to a single vendor - for a distributed 
large enterprise, where full access is likely to be 
granted to content across the Federation and where 
the cost of maintenance of multiple geographically 
distributed instances is easier to justify than at-
tempting to produce a single monolithic system 
with concomitant difficulties associated to latency 
and bandwidth. Relevance ranking is provided 
with respect to the query issued for each separate 
instance rather than a consolidated ranking being 
offered. In IPCRESS, we consider the Federation 

178
IPCRESS
﻿
as being across enterprises, and the query com-
prises the patterns generated from entire docu-
ments. With this external-first view, the approach 
should also be readily suited to search within an 
organisation. And so, for a given document, all 
documents containing matching segments from 
both inside and outside the organisation should 
be identifiable. Companies can then manage and 
protect such materials internally, using this as a 
means to bootstrap such provision and assist in 
confidentiality marking of documents.
ADDRESSING THE IPCRESS 
REQUIREMENTS
We consider the implications around the first 3 
of the 4 requirements of the IPCRESS system, 
discussed briefly in the previous section, and the 
relationship this has to common systems for pla-
giarism detection, in the remainder of this section.
Private Search in Public (Req.1)
Public content, here web texts, need to be compos-
able into an index produced in a manner consistent 
with the approach for internal resources. Matches 
are made against patterns, with ranking by largest 
extent of match. This can offer a similar capabil-
ity to a search engine, but one in which complete 
(but private) documents are the query, rather than 
a few clear text keywords. The actual content of 
the private documents never leaves the organisa-
tion in this process, having only been involved in 
pattern production; moreover, the matching system 
need retain no trace of patterns matched against. 
Consider, for example, a user with a document 
open in a common Word Processing application 
on a laptop. They have available to them a menu 
bar offering one initial button – ‘Private Search’. 
On pressing this button, the pattern production 
process takes place on this laptop (within the 
Word Processing application). The patterns pro-
duced, and only the patterns, are exchanged with 
the server. The server finds all instances of these 
patterns in its index and collects associated docu-
ment identifiers. Results are ranked by frequency 
of occurrence of the document identifiers. The 
Word Processing application retrieves the list of 
matches (alarms) which can be explored adjacent 
to the existing document. Documents of interest to 
the user would then, and only then, be retrieved, 
with matching segments in documents aligned 
for inspection post-retrieval. A simple alarm, for 
one document, could carry the following initial 
information: 
1. 	
An identifier for the source document;
2. 	
Web address (URL) of matching document 
– to allow retrieval; 
3. 	
Extent of match by proportion; 
4. 	
Title, description, and other useful metadata 
of the matching document
For inspection, following retrieval, the follow-
ing are also needed: 
5. 	
List of fragments of document involved in 
match – to able to view sections involved 
with the match without yet needing to retrieve 
the matching document - including, for each 
match fragment: 
a. 	
Start and end location of fragment in 
source document; 
b. 	
Start and end location of fragment in 
matching document
Private Search Internally (Req.2)
Full archive match would operate similarly, but 
in relation to full indexes –potentially one per 
business unit - already produced, likely as back-
ground processing. The approach is inherently 
similar, but without the involvement of Word 
Processor software - more likely, with index 
generation operating in close technical proximity 
to the Enterprise Content Management system. 

179
IPCRESS
﻿
Subsequent investigation of matches of significant 
concern – document segments in business units 
that might not be expected, for example the very 
latest and most technical innovations being near 
to ‘press releases’. Internal private search helps 
to demonstrate external operation, and enables 
tracking of the IP through the organisation. This 
may also imply indexing and matching within the 
email system and any other collaborative platform.
Private Search Across 
Privates (Req.3)
As above, matches are made against indexes, 
with ranking by largest extent of match. Again, 
the capability is similar to a search engine, with 
full (but private) documents as the query. Here, 
the actual content of the private documents being 
matched never leaves any of the organisations and 
again the matching system need retain no trace of 
patterns matched against.
Most importantly, when a match in private con-
tent is detected an alarm is generated multilaterally 
to inform all parties to which it is relevant of a 
potential concern. But the matching content is not 
revealed at this stage. The information identified 
as being carried with an alarm varies as follows: 
1. 	
Instead of URL, a supply chain member 
identifier and document id is provided – to 
assist in investigations; 
2. 	
Title, description, and other useful meta-
data of the matching document is not made 
available to either party – indeed, each or-
ganisation’s metadata may need authorised 
access before they can even see which files 
are implicated on their own side.
Having received such an alarm, investigation 
is now required by all implicated parties. This 
necessitates the description of a protocol for 
investigation. Such a protocol could involve, for 
example, a mediation process, or the exposure of 
smaller fragments implicated in the match that still 
do not reveal the critical content – for example, 
by redaction and selective revealing.
Though a potentially very effective technical 
approach, it cannot be adopted readily without 
cross-organisational agreement and buy-in, and 
so the protocol for investigation will become a key 
dependency as the project progresses.
OPERATION OF THE 
IPCRESS APPROACH
The need to search for sections of documents as 
are re-used would immediately suggest the use 
of existing approaches for copy detection (which 
some may equate narrowly to plagiarism detec-
tion systems). These perform reasonably, reliant 
on the extent of coverage of their indexes, across 
documents of which all the content is readily 
readable – i.e. when the queries and texts can be 
exposed in entirety. 
For efficiency reasons, the index is likely 
formed of n-grams, hashes, or encrypted data 
– n-grams mean the documents could be recon-
stituted if document id and n-gram position are 
known; hashing and encryption both add process-
ing costs, but consistency requires the hash or 
encrypted value to be reasonably unique – and 
particularly for hashing, data similarity does not 
mean hash similarity: a one character difference 
will change the hash value quite significantly. 
Relative uniqueness, and access to keys, as well as 
access to the same hashing approach, means that 
such techniques, whilst offering potential look-up 
efficiency in an index, are unlikely to be worth 
the processing cost. Indeed, typical techniques for 
plagiarism detection will readily fail the first three 
of our requirements. Homomorphic encryption 
such as that proposed by Gentry (2009) promises 
to offer a processable trace of the encrypted data, 
and researchers including Wang et al (2010) are 
generating encrypted search indices to support 
search in private, yet costs of processing may be 
prohibitive.

180
IPCRESS
﻿
Addressing the requirements means that it must 
not be readily possible to reverse-engineer the 
document, or to be able to achieve this by knowing 
the approach and the simple expedient of brute 
force. Such a system will work well if it is pos-
sible to generate many possible inputs for a single 
pattern – typically, hashing should be collision-
avoiding; here, we are collision-embracing, and 
hash proximity/similarity and data similarity have 
a much clearer relationship – in particular, the 
extent of change in the hash is a direct reflection 
on the extent of change in the data. In addition, 
reasonable detection performance must be as-
sured at speed, and so linguistic processing (part 
of speech tagging) approaches are also mitigated 
against. The patented approach does, we believe, 
meet such requirements. For a set of documents, 
we are able to convert the plain text of each docu-
ment to a set of (statistically almost irreversible) 
patterns, and insert these patterns into an index 
(pattern as key, value as document and pattern start 
position. Such an index can readily be sharded by 
key to allow for scaling. Consider a simplified 
example source index where a key is assigned to 
a specific text pattern (it would be repeated if the 
pattern is found in other documents). The index 
would be of the form [key, document, position]: 
001, 1, 75 
002, 1, 84 
003, 1, 99 
004, 2, 2574 
005, 2, 2599
The approach to detection is similar. For a 
document of interest [d], another index is produced, 
although for a single document we need not be 
concerned about its id. Matches in the indexes are 
generated from the same key production process. 
Each detection returns only the pair of document 
id and position, so sorting on document and 
then position, and subsequently identifying the 
document with the most detections and addressing 
the nature of the overlapping positions, helps to 
compose the results. 
So, if d returned all the examples above, 
documents 1 and 2 are of interest with matching 
segments spanning 75, 84, 99 and 2574, 2599. 
Segment sizes depend on the length of encoded 
data, so if we assumed a 14-gram (14 word seg-
ment), for document 1 we have a continuous 
segment from words 75-113. For document 2, 
however, there is a gap between the 2 segments. 
However, here we can apply a notion of a stitch 
distance, allied to a confidence value relative to 
the length of the stitch, such that we retain just one 
continuous segment from 2574-2613, but with a 
slightly lowered match confidence [here, 10 words 
are missing, so we could say 30 plus 10 x 4/14 
to account for the stitchable distance] of (about) 
33 vs 39. So, documents would remain ordered 
1, 2. The combination of an ambiguous pattern 
production approach, and a confidence weighting 
for missing detections, helps to overcome some 
obfuscation.
One key generation approach for plagiarism 
detection is to use MD5hash. Suppose that we 
break each document into 5-grams that overlap 
by 2 words, and produce a hash value for each 
(Table 1). 
These positions would be ‘1’, ‘4’, ‘7’. Key 
length is ‘5’, so if the second pattern went un-
detected (somebody changes ‘over’ to ‘across’ 
in their document, which results in an entirely 
Table 1. Overlapping 5-grams and their corre-
sponding MD5 hash values
Text
MD5 Hash
the quick brown fox 
jumped
e0c19dedd2e35a44b70ca531144ac953
fox jumped over the 
lazy
842ff3fabd7032a95c5cd5cc919a7e6b
the lazy dog and cat
2b4032a8f7fa15aa933dd916e93cf8d2

181
IPCRESS
﻿
different hash value), a stitch distance of 1 would 
allow for a continuous segment to be reported 
albeit with a slightly lower confidence. It should 
be apparent how brittle such a hash-based ap-
proach is. Somebody wishing to avoid detection 
would need change only 2 words (e.g. ‘jumped’, 
‘lazy’ to ‘jumps’, ‘tired’) and none of the resulting 
hashes would be matchable. To see the effect of 
this, consider switching dog to dogs in the third 
5-gram. This results in a hash of f15f022792d-
b93722733b4b5b2b6f548. Our approach does not 
suffer this (see Figure 1).
Furthermore, with common n-gram patterns 
available from Google and Microsoft for research 
purposes, such approaches have even greater brute-
forceability. Imagine, now, that many n-grams 
produce the same (ambiguous) hash, and the value 
of the approach should be clearer.
EVALUATION OF THE IPCRESS 
APPROACH: PAN
The Uncovering Plagiarism, Authorship, and 
Social Software Misuse (PAN) activity first ap-
peared in 2007. The external detection part of the 
plagiarism detection task, where external refers to 
matching to source texts that are also available, 
changed markedly in 2012 from a prior moderate-
sized index comparison to two tasks: i) a retrieval 
of documents from a search engine as might be 
useful in match; ii) a matching between given 
pairs of documents. Offering a search engine for 
the first of these avoids the need for those who 
have struggled to construct an efficient index with 
a few gigabytes of text to struggle further with 
terabytes. However, common search engines work 
best for plagiarism detection with long quoted 
phrases, although the offered search system does 
not. Further, this means presenting segments of the 
text in-clear to the search system, which doesn’t 
readily fit with our context. We focus here on 
results obtained for ii) in 2012 and 2013, with a 
brief view of results in 2011 and the very latest 
available for 2014 by way of contrast.
In Cooke et al (2011) we described various 
aspects of our system as used for the external 
plagiarism detection task, which could process 
the entire PAN11 collection within relatively 
short timescales without requiring a specialized 
computer cluster, and which was still able to 
produce a reasonable degree of matching per-
formance (4th place, with PlagDet=0.2467329, 
Recall=0.1500480, Precision=0.7106536, Granu-
larity=1.0058894). In 2012, we again showed 
good granularity (at or near 1, meaning that the 
same passage is not indicated multiple times) with 
high recall and precision for non-obfuscated text. 
A beneficial side-effect is that some obfuscation 
is handled by the same approach, but additional 
efforts need to be focused on obfuscation to offer 
a truly robust system (Table 2).
In 2013, apart from for non-obfuscated data, 
descriptions of the nature of data used seem also 
Figure 1. Fragment of a matching suspicious document (above) and source (below) from PAN (see next 
section), showing robustness to variations in both lexical selection and spelling 

182
IPCRESS
﻿
to have shifted from the previous year. Our preci-
sion and granularity figures remain high (Table 
3), but it is difficult to conclude anything with 
regard to performance comparison for the other 
tasks – and prior examples of random obfuscation 
(see examples in Potthast et al, 2010) suggest that 
this is not a realistic problem worth focusing on.
PAN 2014 test results, only available as a broad 
characterization for two test corpora at the time 
of writing, evidence expected values for granular-
ity and precision (Table 4), which is reassuring 
given the re-engineering of our approach between 
2013 and 2014, but offers a surprising difference 
between values for recall. Subsequent investiga-
tions discovered a bug in detecting UTF-8 codes 
having a significant impact here. 
The best performing approaches, for three 
different years Grman and Ravas (2011), Kong 
et al (2012) and Torrejon and Ramos (2013) all 
involve the creation of indexes containing clear 
text (strings that comprise the texts). No other 
approach has yet been seen which attempts the 
same as has been described here.
In addition, we have been exploring ways to 
handle the kinds of obfuscation inherent in the 
competition data. We have initially considered 
two approaches based on transformations of a 
single query into closely related queries. Since the 
hash-like codes mentioned above are formulated 
such that code similarity can be indicative of 
data similarity, the ‘closeness’ of any two queries 
becomes meaningful, which means that a value 
for similarity can be determined on the basis of 
(binary) distance approaches such as Hamming 
and Levenshtein. Results from initial evaluations 
against PAN 2012 (Table 5) and 2013 (Table 6) 
data demonstrate improvements in recall without 
loss of precision, although much more rigorous 
evaluation will be required to determine the fullest 
extent of impact achievable by these, and other 
related, approaches on the hash-like codes.
EVALUATION OF THE 
IPCRESS APPROACH: LAND 
ROVER MANUALS
Suppose that a new vehicle is in production, 
for which a repair manual is being produced. 
A manual with ‘similar’ content for a different 
vehicle appears elsewhere on the web, with the 
suggestion that the costs of preparation of such a 
manual might have been avoided either by a less 
scrupulous manufacturer, or this might have oc-
curred through some supply chain member who 
acts on behalf of both manufacturers. Or perhaps 
this is a large chunk of the original document that 
simply should not be propagated by email. The 
need in every instance is to be able to find such 
an occurrence but in the process of detection the 
original content should not be exposed generally 
to the web, to the website, nor to the email. The 
irreversible IPCRESS patterns, which do not 
expose content, are the limit of what is needed 
to effect the detection, ahead of any subsequent 
need for evaluation of similarity.
As a small scale test of such a scenario, we 
obtained the Land Rover Defender 1999 and 2002 
MY Workshop Manual Supplement and Body 
Repair Manual, and the Land Rover Discovery 
Table 2. Surrey’s results in PAN for four parts of the text alignment task in 2012
   Test
Plagdet Score
Recall
Precision
Granularity
   02_no_obfuscation
0.85884
0.83788
0.88088
1.0
   03_random_obfuscation
0.04191
0.02142
0.95968
1.0
   04_translation_obfuscation
0.01224
0.00616
0.97273
1.0
   05_summary_obfuscation
0.00218
0.00109
0.99591
1.0

183
IPCRESS
﻿
1995 MY Body Repair Manual (see Figure 2) in 
PDF from online sources and converted these to 
plain text. We assume, for the sake of this paper, 
that the Discovery manual is derived from the 
Defender manual (the reverse, indeed, of the 
likely scenario – but we operate this way around 
to reduce the expectation bias). On conversion, 
the Defender manual has over 107,000 words, and 
the Discovery manual over 35,000. No checks are 
made on the quality of the conversion.
A comparison between the two using the IP-
CRESS approach involves creating an index of 
Table 3. Surrey’s results in PAN for four parts of the text aligment task in 2013
   Test
   Plagdet Score
   Recall
   Precision
   Granularity
   02_no_obfuscation
   0.92530
   0.90449
   0.94709
   1.0
   03_artificial_low
   0.09837
   0.05374
   0.93852
   1.04688
   04_artificial_high
   0.01508
   0.00867
   0.96822
   1.20313
   06_simulated_paraphrase
   0.11229
   0.05956
   0.97960
   1.0
Table 4. Surrey’s results in PAN 2014 for two test corpora
   Test Data
   Plagdet 
   Precision 
   Recall 
   Granularity 
   Runtime
Corpus 2
0.28302 
0.88630 
0.16840 
1.00000 
00:00:55
Corpus 3
0.44076
0.85744
0.29661
1.00000
00:00:56
Table 5. Testing obfuscation handling approaches against PAN 2012 data
   IPCRESS Raw – PAN 2012 Data
Test
Plagdet Score
Recall
Precision
Granularity
02_no_obfuscation
0.9437
0.9045
0.9877
1.0008
03_artificial_low
0.0956
0.0525
0.9942
1.0608
04_artificial_high
0.0200
0.0118
0.9852
1.2459
06_simulated_paraphrase
0.0992
0.0522
0.9922
1.0000
Obfuscation Handler #1 (Hamming)
02_no_obfuscation
0.9358
0.9048
0.9703
1.0008
03_artificial_low
0.1970
0.1110
0.9853
1.0178
04_artificial_high
0.0373
0.0201
0.9577
1.0759
06_simulated_paraphrase
0.1512
0.0825
0.9038
1.0000
Obfuscation Handler #2 (Levenshtein)
02_no_obfuscation
0.9236
0.9057
0.9423
1.0000
03_artificial_low
0.1888
0.1066
0.9820
1.0266
04_artificial_high
0.0682
0.0368
0.9489
1.0535
06_simulated_paraphrase
0.1345
0.0723
0.9572
1.0000

184
IPCRESS
﻿
the Defender manual (Source), and then querying 
this index with patterns derived from Discovery 
(Suspicious). It is useful to note, at this point, 
that using the Discovery document against the 
PAN 2012 collection produces no false positives, 
and the same would be expected against all PAN 
collections.
Where keys relate to overlapping data by 
start position and key length, these are merged 
into fewer larger segments (now of varying size) 
as shown below in Table 7, ordered by match 
length, for the first 23 matches - each are of over 
100 words and account for a span of some 4380 
words. The remaining 38 matches of 49 words or 
more account cover a further span of 2578 words.
A merging (‘stitching’) strategy is demon-
strated below in Table 8: the distance between 
segments (Suspicious Start plus Match Length) 
for the fragments shown is: 6, 0, 14, 15992, 73. 
Stitching takes place when the fragment distance 
is less than 900, and since the first 4 fragments 
satisfy this condition they are merged into a single 
result. The remaining 2 fragments represent the 
start of the next result.
Using this strategy, the 61 segments found 
offer suitable proximity to allow stitching into 
4 major chunks covering some 10895 words (in 
decreasing size order, chunks of 4807, 4684, 944, 
and 460 words).
Figure 3, above, shows a matching fragment 
that has been detected between the two documents 
using the IPCRESS patterns, prior to stitching. 
There are several important factors to note here. 
First and foremost, it is important to clarify the 
nature of precision scores in PAN. These relate 
to the number of characters which are consid-
ered involved with the match – the proportion 
of those which should be reported versus those 
which should not be. The text in Figure 3which 
is shown darker is that which is implicated in the 
detection by the IPCRESS patterns. This is also 
what we report for the purposes of the PAN evalu-
ation, so that results offer a very clear sense of 
the match efficacy of the patterns against unseen 
text. From this, it should be quite apparent that 
Table 6. Testing obfuscation handling approaches against PAN 2013 data
   IPCRESS Raw – PAN 2013 Data
Test
Plagdet Score
Recall
Precision
Granularity
   02_no_obfuscation
   0.9253
   0.9273
   0.9233
   1.0000
   03_random_obfuscation
   0.1356
   0.0729
   0.9675
   1.0000
   04_translation_obfuscation
   0.0243
   0.0123
   0.9865
   1.0000
   05_summary_obfuscation
   0.0022
   0.0011
   0.9959
   1.0000
   Obfuscation Handler #1 (Hamming)
   02_no_obfuscation
   0.9029
   0.9289
   0.8783
   1.0000
   03_random_obfuscation
   0.1297
   0.1297
   0.9120
   1.0000
   04_translation_obfuscation
   0.0244
   0.0244
   0.8953
   1.0000
   05_summary_obfuscation
   0.0035
   0.0017
   0.9807
   1.0000
   Obfuscation Handler #2 (Levenshtein)
   02_no_obfuscation
   0.9058
   0.9274
   0.8853
   1.0000
   03_random_obfuscation
   0.2151
   0.1224
   0.8936
   1.0000
   04_translation_obfuscation
   0.0743
   0.0386
   0.9533
   1.0000
   05_summary_obfuscation
   0.0035
   0.0017
   0.9920
   1.0000

185
IPCRESS
﻿
this will result in a lower precision score in PAN 
that would be possible if considering this from the 
perspective of content that is available for inspec-
tion. It should also be quite readily apparent that 
this kind of match indication can be quite readily 
refined towards higher precision score at the point 
at which access can be provided to the content of 
both of the texts for the purposes of making such 
an alignment. Figure 3 also shows that there is a 
near perfect match of over 50 words after this 8 
word mismatch, starting with “Where possible, the 
original production….” through to “spot welds” 
and passing over a variation in expression of the 
imperial measurement. In the Defender content, 
we then see a further 11 words highlighted which 
are not shared between these two. Subsequent to 
this, we also see a segment which again appears 
in both. At this stage of the process, this would 
be treated as a separate fragment. The ‘stitching’ 
would then be expected to step over those 11 
words to produce a coherent segment that covers 
at least these two.
The challenge of scaling such an approach 
relates to remaining able to discover such a match 
across two or more very large document archives. 
Suppose company A and company B each have 
100,000 documents. Company A is interested in 
whether any of B’s 100,000 documents contains 
content from them. The same may also be true in 
reverse. This comparison will require an index to 
be generated on both sides for all of the documents. 
And once such an index has been built, to address 
similar questions in future it would make sense 
to retain this index. In particular, this supports a 
similar interaction in respect to companies C, D, 
and so on, who are also within the supply chain. 
Company A may only be interested in the results 
for a specific subset of their 100,000 documents, 
but that certainly does not mean that they should 
only create an index of only these documents for 
Figure 2. Covers of the online repair manuals for Land Rover’s Defender and Discovery (PDF) 

186
IPCRESS
﻿
B, or C, or D, to check against. As such, every 
company would be required to produce an index 
against which other parties can check their own 
documents. IPCRESS supports this kind of cross-
index comparison capability. 
CONCLUSION
Widespread adoption of a system such as IP-
CRESS could engender a culture of IP protection 
irrespective of the sharpness of the legal teeth in 
any particular jurisdiction, and offer an ability to 
address an apparent security risk (one of the four 
categories of supply chain risks for Manuj and 
Mentzer (2008)): supply, demand, operational 
and security) through information sharing of an 
over-eager or careless nature. It is likely in the 
interests of companies to adopt such a system, 
but assurances are vital in order to engender trust 
in its operation. And, in fact, the reputation of 
members of supply chains could be enhanced by 
a trustmark allied to a relative lack of identified 
IP issues, or be drawn substantially into question 
where unresolved issues have leave to remain. 
The means by which such issues are identified, 
and the process towards resolution is another 
important aspect of the processes and procedures 
for IPCRESS, but is still to be defined. IPCRESS 
must be acceptable to adopt, and enforceable by 
contract within the supply chain in order to be 
successful. Of course, if such a system can be 
adopted in one supply chain, it is more likely to be 
adopted across all supply chains that involve each 
party. The view of supply chains as of sequences 
of producer/consumer relationships, akin to food 
chains, does not account for the complex reality 
of many supply chains. These can be variously 
interconnected with the same organisation acting 
many times on both sides of the supposed divide, 
and with larger organisations readily acting as 
suppliers to smaller ones. Larger companies in 
Table 7. Merged overlapping results from the 
indexed Defender document, queries using the 
Discovery document
Match Length 
(words)
Suspicious 
Start
Source Start
552
23250
78933
338
549
774
307
22869
78552
299
4613
75040
237
23799
79490
210
26857
84780
209
25751
81023
182
260
449
174
26273
84271
171
22383
78062
158
25310
80814
156
105
295
154
22720
78400
147
24385
77461
144
25057
80267
133
25525
81230
125
6124
76910
124
3008
2870
121
24261
77248
111
1148
74782
110
23158
78841
110
24682
77771
108
929
74528
Table 8. Strategy for merging (‘stitching’) non-
contiguous segments
Match Length (words)
Suspicious 
Start
Source Start
84
6034
76821
125
6124
76910
75
6249
77035
53
6338
77129
171
22383
78062
85
22627
78277

187
IPCRESS
﻿
these supply chains would be readily positioned 
for such a scale of adoption.
The results shown against document sets use 
in a plagiarism detection competition (PAN) are 
certainly not going to be suitably near to the best 
that is achievable when it is possible to evaluate 
similarity between texts based on the content be-
ing fully exposed. However, that is not our chal-
lenge, and it is important to note again that we 
are attempting to undertake plagiarism detection 
in such a way as would be impervious to a range 
of attempts to discover the content being matched 
against – a kind of privacy-preserving plagiarism 
detection that can be used against documents 
whose content should be kept from plain sight. To 
understand the effectiveness of the approach, it is 
also important to understand how such evaluation 
figures are generated in PAN, and to see that good 
quality matches are indeed produced – since the 
alarms that would be generated by systems should 
be based on such good quality matches and this 
has to be possible absent the original document. 
Although the present approach works well, bet-
ter treatment of obfuscation is likely an essential 
additional ingredient for adoption. The open 
publication of data, as here, regarding evaluations 
can only be helpful in trying to achieve this, and 
the strength/lossy nature of pattern production 
is readily demonstrable by Gedankenexperiment 
to private audiences, and is fully described in 
the patent filing. Where organisations were to 
agree on such an undertaking, exposure of the 
organisational archives to the pattern production 
process is the vital step, which presents a new but 
minor risk to information security: the pattern 
production process is one-way, but as with any 
such processing requires, temporarily, full access 
to unencrypted (clear text) document content. 
Such processing should ideally be undertaken in 
a network-isolated or security assertion enforc-
ing system so as to assure the organisations that 
their document content cannot be leaked during 
such processing. The resulting index can also 
be visually inspected prior to release to increase 
the degree of assurance, and the mechanism for 
release should be relatively constrained also. 
Indeed, a vital effort in IPCRESS is to craft the 
set of acceptable processes and procedures for 
Figure 3. A matching fragment detected using IPCRESS patterns, prior to stitching

188
IPCRESS
﻿
deploying IPCRESS and identifying associated 
risk levels in relation to information assurance. 
Related processes and procedures, including the 
drafting contractual terms for such an adoption, 
are also required.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors gratefully recognize prior contribu-
tions of Neil Newbold, Neil Cooke, Peter Wrobel 
and Henry Cooke to the formulation of the code-
base used for this task and by Cooke and Wrobel 
to the patents generated from these efforts. This 
work has been supported in part by the the UK’s 
Technology Strategy Board (TSB, 169201), and 
contributions from others at Surrey, Jaguar Land 
Rover and GeoLang are also acknowledged in this 
respect, and by EPSRC and JISC (EP/I034408/1). 
We recognize also the efforts of the PAN13 orga-
nizers in system evaluation (Section V).
REFERENCES
Carvalho, V. R., & Cohen, W. W. (2007) Preventing 
Information Leaks in Email. Proceedings of the 
SIAM International Conference on Data Mining, 
Minneapolis.
Choate, P. (2005). Hot Property: The Stealing 
of Ideas in an Age of Globalization. New York: 
Alfred A. Knopf.
Cooke, N., & Gillam, L. (2011). Clowns, Crowds 
and Clouds: A Cross-Enterprise Approach to 
Detecting Information Leakage without Leaking 
Information. In Z. Mahmood & R. Hill (Eds.), 
Cloud Computing for Enterprise Architectures. 
London: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-1-4471-
2236-4_16
Franqueira, V. N. L., van Cleeff, A., van Eck, P., 
& Wieringa, R. (2010). External Insider Threat: 
A Real Security Challenge in Enterprise Value 
Webs. In Proceedings of Availability, Reliability, 
and Security (pp. 446–453). ARES.
Gentry, C. (2009) Fully homomorphic encryp-
tion using ideal lattices. In Proceedings of the 
Symposium on the Theory of Computing (STOC), 
2009 (pp. 169-178).
Grman, J. & Ravas, R. (2011). Improved Imple-
mentation for Finding Text Similarities in Large 
Collections of Data. Notebook for Uncovering 
Plagiarism, Authorship, and Social Software 
Misuse (PAN) at CLEF.
Kong, L., Qi, H., Wang, S., Du, C., Wang, S. 
& Han, Y. (2012). Approaches for Candidate 
Document Retrieval and Detailed Comparison 
of Plagiarism Detection. Notebook for Uncover-
ing Plagiarism, Authorship, and Social Software 
Misuse (PAN) at CLEF.
Manuj, I., & Mentzer, J. T. (2008). Global 
supply chain risk management strategies. In-
ternational Journal of Physical Distribution 
& Logistics Management, 38(3), 192–223. 
doi:10.1108/09600030810866986
McGuire, M., & Dowling, S. (2003). Cyber 
crime: a review of the evidence. Home Office. 
Retrieved 9 July, 2014, from https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/cyber-crime-a-review-
of-the-evidence
Mell, P., & Grance, T. (2011). The NIST Definition 
of Cloud Computing (pp. 800–145). Gaithersburg, 
MD: NIST Special Publication.
National Bureau of Asian Research. (2013). The 
IP Commission Report: The report on the theft 
of American Intellectual Propery. Retrieved 18 
March, 2014, from http://www.ipcommission.
org/report/IP_Commission_Report_052213.pdf

189
IPCRESS
﻿
OCSIA/Detica. (2011). The cost of cyber crime. 
A Detica report in partnership with the Office 
of Cyber Security and Information Assurance 
in the Cabinet Office. Retrieved 18 March, 
2014, from https://www.baesystemsdetica.com/
uploads/press_releases/THE_COST_OF_CY-
BER_CRIME_SUMMARY_FINAL_14_Febru-
ary_2011.pdf
Potthast, M., Barrón-Cedeño, A., Stein, B., & 
Rosso, P. (2010). An Evaluation Framework for 
Plagiarism Detection. Proceedings of the 23rd 
International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics (COLING) 2010, August 23-27, Beijing, 
China.
Shokouhi, M., & Si, L. (2011). Federated Search. 
Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval, 
5(1), 1–102. doi:10.1561/1500000010
Torrejón, D.A.R. & Ramos, J.M.M. (2013). Text 
Alignment Module in CoReMo 2.1 Plagiarism 
Detector. Notebook for Uncovering Plagiarism, 
Authorship, and Social Software Misuse (PAN) 
at CLEF.
Wang, C., Cao, N., Li, J., Ren, K., & Lou, W. 
(2010) Secure Ranked Keyword Search over 
Encrypted Cloud Data. Proceedings of the 30th 
International Conference on Distributed Comput-
ing Systems (ICDCS’10), Genoa, Italy, June 21-25, 
2010. doi:10.1109/ICDCS.2010.34
ADDITIONAL READING 
Antonopoulos, N., & Gillam, L. (Eds.). 
(2010). Cloud Computing: Principles, Systems 
and Applications. London: Springer-Verlag. 
doi:10.1007/978-1-84996-241-4
Berger, S., Cáceres, R., Goldman, K., Pendarakis, 
D., Perez, R., Rao, J. R., & Valdez, E. et al. (2009). 
Security for the cloud infrastructure: Trusted vir-
tual data center implementation. IBM Journal of 
Research and Development, 560–571.
Bull, J., Collins, C., Coughlin, C., & Sharp, D. 
(2000). Technical Review of Free Text Plagiarism 
Detection Software. JISC.
Cao, N., Wang, C., Li, M., Ren, K., & Lou, W. 
(2011). Privacy-preserving multi-keyword ranked 
search over encrypted cloud data. In Proceedings 
of IEEE INFOCOM, IEEE Shanghai, China (pp. 
829–837). doi:10.1109/INFCOM.2011.5935306
Cooke, N., & Gillam, L. (2011). Clowns, Crowds 
and Clouds: A Cross-Enterprise Approach to 
Detecting Information Leakage without Leaking 
Information. In Z. Mahmood & R. Hill (Eds.), 
Cloud Computing for Enterprise Architectures. 
London: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-1-4471-
2236-4_16
Cooke, N., Gillam, L., Wrobel, P., Cooke, H., 
& Al-Obaidli, F. (2011). A high performance 
plagiarism detection system. Proceedings of the 
3rd PAN workshop.
Culwin, F. (2009). The Efficacy of Turnitin and 
Google. Proceedings of the 9th HEA-ICS Confer-
ence, Kent, U.K.
Denz, R., & Taylor, S. (2013). A survey on secur-
ing the virtual cloud. Journal of Cloud Comput-
ing: Advances. Systems and Applications, 2(17). 
doi:10.1186/2192-113X-2-17
Doran, D. (2004). Rethinking the supply chain: An 
automotive perspective. Supply Chain Manage-
ment: An International Journal, 9(1), 102–109. 
doi:10.1108/13598540410517610

190
IPCRESS
﻿
Dubin, D. (2004). The most influential paper 
Gerard Salton never wrote. Library Trends, 52(4), 
748–764.
Gillam, L. (2013). Guess again and see if they 
line up: Surrey’s runs at plagiarism detection. 
Proceedings of the 5th PAN workshop.
Gillam, L., Broome, S., & Garside, G. (2013) 
On Supply Chains, Deperimeterization and the 
IPCRESS Solution. Fifth International Conference 
on Internet Technologies and Applications (ITA), 
10-13 September 2013, Wrexham, UK
Gillam, L., Newbold, N., & Cooke, N. (2012). 
Educated guesses and equality judgements: using 
search engines and pairwise match for external 
plagiarism detection. Proceedings of the 4th PAN 
workshop.
Grolinger, K., Higashino, W. A., Tiwari, A., & Ca-
pretz, M. A. M. (2013). Data management in cloud 
environments: NoSQL and NewSQL data stores. 
Journal of Cloud Computing: Advances. Systems 
and Applications, 2(22). doi:10.1186/2192-
113X-2-22
Hamming, R. W. (1950). Error detecting and error 
correcting codes. The Bell System Technical Journal, 
29(2), 147–160. doi:10.1002/j.1538-7305.1950.
tb00463.x
Lancaster, S., & Clarke, R. (2009). Automated 
Essay Spinning. Proceedings of the 9th HEA-ICS 
Conference, Kent, U.K.
Levenshtein, V. I. (1966). Binary codes capable 
of correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals. 
Soviet Physics, Doklady, 10(8), 707–710.
Luhn, H. P. (1957). A statistical approach to 
mechanized encoding and searching of literary 
information. IBM Journal of Research and Devel-
opment, 1(4), 309–317. doi:10.1147/rd.14.0309
Miemczyk, J., & Howard, M. (2008). Sup-
ply strategies for build-to-order: Managing 
global auto operations. Supply Chain Manage-
ment: An International Journal, 13(1), 3–8. 
doi:10.1108/13598540810850265
Morris, D., Donnelly, T., & Donnelly, T. (2004). 
Supplier parks in the automotive industry. Supply 
Chain Management: An International Journal, 
9(2), 129–133. doi:10.1108/13598540410527024
Rabin, M. O. (1981). Finger printing by random 
polynomials. Center for Research in Computing 
Technology Harvard University Report TR-15-81.
Stefanov, E., Papamanthou, C., & Shi, E. (2014). 
Practical Dynamic Searchable Encryption with 
Small Leakage. Proceedings of NDSS ’14, San 
Diego, CA, USA. doi:10.14722/ndss.2014.23298
Sun, X., Zhu, Y., Xia, Z., & Chen, L. (2014). 
Secure ranked semantic keyword search over 
encrypted cloud data. Journal of Cloud Comput-
ing: Advances. Systems and Applications, 3, 8.
Teufel, S., & Moens, M. (2000). What’s yours and 
what’s mine: Determining Intellectual Attribution 
in Scientific Text. Proceedings of the Joint SIGDAT 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing and Very Large Corpora, 
Hong Kong. doi:10.3115/1117794.1117796
Wang, C., Cao, N., Ren, K., & Lou, W. (2012). 
Enabling secure and efficient ranked keyword 
search over outsourced cloud data. IEEE Transac-
tions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 23(8), 
1467–1479. doi:10.1109/TPDS.2011.282
Wang, Z., & Gemmell, J. (2006). Clean Living: 
Eliminating Near-Duplicates in Lifetime Personal 
Storage. Microsoft Research Redmond.

191
IPCRESS
﻿
Wiengarten, F., Fynes, B., Humphreys, P., 
Chavez, R. C., & McKittrick, A. (2011). As-
sessing the value creation process of e-business 
along the supply chain. Supply Chain Manage-
ment: An International Journal, 16(4), 207–219. 
doi:10.1108/13598541111139035
Wiengarten, F., Humphreys, P., Cao, G., Fynes, 
B., & McKittrick, A. (2010). Collaborative supply 
chain practices and performance: Exploring the 
key role of information quality. Supply Chain Man-
agement: An International Journal Volume, 15(6), 
463–473. doi:10.1108/13598541011080446
Yang, C., Zhang, W., Xu, J., Xu, J., & Yu, N. 
(2012). A Fast Privacy-Preserving Multi-keyword 
Search Scheme on Cloud Data. Proceedings of 
International Conference on Cloud and Service 
Computing (CSC). IEEE, Shanghai, China, pp 
104–110 doi:10.1109/CSC.2012.23
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Cloud Computing: The flexible and on-
demand provision of specific computational capa-
bilities by identifiable parties external to a given 
company and whose business relationship with 
the company is specific to this provision such that 
the company does not provide the computational 
capability to itself.
Data Leak: An event in which data is made 
available to parties to whom it should not have 
been by some deliberate, accidental, or negligent 
means.
Insiders: Individuals that are trusted, and have 
(some) authorized access over the organization’s 
assets (Franqueira et al, 2010).
Intellectual Property: Creations of the mind, 
such as inventions; literary and artistic works; 
designs; and symbols, names and images used in 
commerce (source: WIPO).
Plagiarism Detection: The ability to find 
passages that have been copied from one source 
to another, where such copying is disallowed 
and the intention of the copying party is to gain 
advantage either by recognition or by reducing 
their own efforts.
Stitching: The joining together, given a certain 
threshold of distance, of fragments of copied text 
that would otherwise be considered separated.
Supply Chain / Extended Enterprise:  The 
set of actors – sole traders, and small and large 
companies - involved in the creation, produc-
tion, distribution, sales, and related activities, 
for a given good, service, or commodity, with an 
identifiable brand.
ENDNOTES
1	
 http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/
yourbusiness/8936685/Sir-James-Dyson-
attacks-China-over-designs-theft.html 
2	
 http://www.theguardian.com/busi-
ness/2012/oct/24/dyson-accuses-bosch-
paying-research-spy 
3	
 For just one example, Jaguar F-Type 
Project 7 leaks in production trim ahead 
of Goodwood debut: http://www.autoblog.
com/2014/06/24/jaguar-f-type-project-7-
production-leaked/ 
4	
 http://www.theguardian.com/technol-
ogy/2014/jul/08/new-doctor-who-scripts-
leak-deep-breath 

192
Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  9
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-8339-6.ch009
The Role of Cloud Computing 
in Global Supply Chain
ABSTRACT
This chapter reviews the role of cloud computing in global supply chain, thus describing the theoretical 
and practical concepts of cloud computing and supply chain management (SCM); the significance of 
cloud computing in global supply chain; the overview of electronic supply chain management (e-SCM); 
and the organizational information processing theory within global supply chain. The utilization of cloud 
computing is necessary for modern organizations that seek to serve suppliers and customers, increase 
business performance, strengthen competitiveness, and achieve continuous success in global business. 
Therefore, it is essential for modern organizations to examine their cloud computing applications, de-
velop a strategic plan to regularly check their practical advancements, and immediately respond to the 
cloud computing needs of customers in global supply chain. Applying cloud computing in global supply 
chain will extremely improve organizational performance and reach business goals in the digital age.
INTRODUCTION
For modern organizations competing in the greatly 
potential markets, the search for new sources of 
competitive advantage is necessary in order to 
sustain in the social media age (Kasemsap, 2015). 
In the globalized world with its ever-changing 
economic conditions, enterprises are urged to react 
on threats and opportunities in an adjustable man-
ner (Krumeich, Weis, Werth, & Loos, 2014). The 
use of cloud computing technology is increasing 
among customers and information management 
development focuses on the increased cost and 
time efficiencies derived from using innovative 
services (Ratten, 2014). Supply chain management 
(SCM) is a highly integrative discipline, which is 
jointly connected with key management functions 
such as strategic management, marketing, and 
finance (Kaufmann & Saw, 2014). Stable supply 
chain processes in a dynamic environment support 
enterprise competitiveness (Ivanov & Sokolov, 
2012). Supply chain practically shapes competi-
tive management prospect (Christopher, 2012).
Cloud computing has become a rising paradigm 
in the information and communication technology 
(ICT) industry (Hung, Bui, Morales, Nguyen, 
Kijpokin Kasemsap
Suan Sunandha Rajabhat University, Thailand

193
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
& Huh, 2014), with wide benefits extending to 
diverse areas including cost cutting, better manage-
ment of business (Sagar, Bora, Gangwal, Gupta, 
Kumar, & Agarwal, 2013). Cloud computing has 
been envisioned as key technology to achieve 
economy of scale in the deployment and operation 
of information technology (IT) solutions (Chen, 
Wu, & Vasilakos, 2014). Cloud computing is an 
ascending technology that has introduced a new 
paradigm by making a computational model pos-
sible (Durao, Carvalho, Fonseka, & Garcia, 2014). 
Cloud computing is the new era of information 
processing and has proved its benefits in high 
scalability and functional diversity (Shon, Cho, 
Han, & Choi, 2014). Cloud computing has emerged 
as the latest development in IT (Yoo, 2011) that 
embodies economic advantages in terms of the 
increased efficiency in modern organizations 
(Gottschalk & Kirn, 2013).
Cloud computing is the modern computing 
paradigm that transparently distributes ICT re-
sources (Ranjan, Buyya, Leitner, Haller, & Tai, 
2014). Cloud computing is functionally utilized by 
a large number of innovative organizations (Rajara-
man, 2014). Cloud computing produces the high 
quality, on-demand services with service-oriented 
architecture (Wang, Liu, Sun, Zou, & Yang, 2014). 
Cloud computing services have become more cost 
effective and technically flexible than traditional 
solutions (Stieninger & Nedbal, 2014). Cloud com-
puting has the potential to reshape the landscape 
of the IT industry (Yu, Sheng, & Han, 2013). The 
dimension of IT relates to a high dependency of 
modern organizations regarding information sys-
tem infrastructure (Bajgoric, 2014). The Internet 
has been employed in multidimensional ways in 
various supply chains (Durowoju, Chan, & Wang, 
2011). Cloud computing for customers is an in-
creasing subject of discussion in business world 
because of its rapid emergence as an innovative 
marketing technology (Stein, Ware, Laboy, & 
Schaffer, 2013). There is a global increase in the 
utilization of cloud computing services as more 
people use the Internet to access, transfer, and 
store electronic information (Leymann, Fehling, 
Mietzner, Nowak, & Dustdar, 2011).
SCM as philosophy has both theoretical and 
managerial implications, and is positively related 
to organization’s orientation, recognizing the way 
that the organization integrates supply chain impli-
cations throughout decisions that the organization 
makes (Ellram & Cooper, 2014). As the industrial 
environment becomes more competitive, SCM 
has attained growing attention from practical 
and academic societies as an essential discipline 
(Shafieezadeh & Sadegheih, 2014). Organiza-
tions adopt cloud computing technologies that 
align with their SCM strategy and enable them 
to generate organizational capabilities effectively 
utilized to facilitate business performance (Wu, 
Cegielski, Hazen, & Hall, 2013). As organizations 
look for ways to enhance competitive advantage 
by leveraging their supply chains (Barney, 2012; 
Hunt & Davis, 2012; Priem & Swink, 2012), many 
IT solutions have been realized to improve man-
agement effectiveness and supply chain process 
performance (Fawcett, Wallin, Allred, Fawcett, 
& Magnan, 2011). Cloud computing helps or-
ganizations to maintain the alignment between 
supply chain initiatives and IT, thus promoting 
organizational agility (Vickery, Droge, Setia, & 
Sambamurthy, 2010).
The strength of this chapter is on the thorough 
literature consolidation of cloud computing in 
global supply chain. The extant literature of 
cloud computing in global supply chain provides 
a contribution to practitioners and researchers by 
describing a comprehensive view of the functional 
applications of cloud computing in global supply 
chain to appeal to different segments of cloud 
computing in global supply chain in order to 
maximize the business impact of cloud computing 
in global supply chain.

194
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
BACKGROUND
Cloud Computing application comes about in order 
to potentially arrange and use massive amount of 
data with the development of the Internet (Kang, 
Barolli, Park, & Jeong, 2014). Cloud computing 
is a model for enabling convenient, on-demand 
network access to a shared pool of configurable 
computing resources (Chun & Choi, 2014). As 
a technological innovation, cloud computing is 
adopted into regular usage by customers as it 
continues to develop because of its dynamic cloud 
computing nature (Ratten, 2014).
Cloud computing services reduce the upfront 
costs from technological innovations by delivering 
the functionality of existing IT services (Marston, 
Li, Bandyopadhyay, Zhang, & Ghalsasi, 2011). 
Cloud computing frameworks such as Amazon 
Web Services, Google AppEngine and Windows 
Azure are popular among IT organizations and 
developers (Rahimi, Ren, Liu, Vasilakos, & 
Venkatasubramanian, 2014). As cloud computing 
is expanding and adopted in numerous business 
domains, it starts drawing attention of supply 
chain practitioners (Truong, 2014). Organiza-
tions choose cloud computing to be their primary 
ways of sourcing applications. Cloud computing 
is new to modern organizations in supply chains 
(Truong, 2014).
Cloud computing can provide on-demand com-
puting services with high reliability, scalability 
and availability in a distributed environment (Xun, 
2012). Developing scalability to build, access, 
manage, deploy, and maintain cloud computing 
applications has become critical (Ranjan, Buyya, 
& Benatallah, 2012). Cloud computing is a valu-
able resource that helps organizations to create 
sustainable competitive advantage (Truong, 2010). 
Cloud computing technologies are useful for 
managing supply chain (Cegielski, Jones-Farmer, 
Wu, & Hazen, 2012). Cloud computing introduces 
the new delivery models and supply chains that 
will mature over time in modern organizations 
(Lindner, Galan, Chapman, Clayman, Henriksson, 
& Elmroth, 2010). Business enterprises and their 
supply chains focus on economic activities (Jakhar, 
2014). Organizations must rely on many inter-
organizational relationships to ensure efficient and 
effective movements within their supply chains 
(Kotzab, Grant, Teller, & Halldorsson, 2009).
Since its introduction as a concept in the 
1980s, SCM has undergone significant modifi-
cation and expansion (Stock, Boyer, & Harmon, 
2010). Business processes integration provides 
an efficient way for the flow of information to 
improve the flow of work and material (Faisal, 
Azher, Ramzan, & Malik, 2011). Current trends 
in IT progress for networked systems include the 
development of cyber-physical networks, cloud 
service environments, pervasive computing, 
and data mining (Jain, Wadhwa, & Deshmukh, 
2009; Bardhan, Demirkan, Kannan, Kauffman, 
& Sougstad, 2010; Zhuge, 2011). Using cloud 
computing improves organizational innovation in 
global business (Willcocks, Venters, & Whitley, 
2013). Organizational innovation is potentially 
correlated with organizational performance in 
the social media age (Kasemsap, 2013a, 2014a, 
2014b). Organizations, which plan to utilize 
cloud computing, analyze costs to minimize risks 
concerning cost types (Walterbusch, Martens, & 
Teuteberg, 2013).
THE ROLE OF CLOUD COMPUTING 
IN GLOBAL SUPPLY CHAIN
This section reviews the theoretical and practical 
concepts of cloud computing and supply chain 
management (SCM); the significance of cloud 
computing in global supply chain; the overview 
of electronic supply chain management (e-SCM); 
and the organizational information processing 
theory within global supply chain.

195
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
Concept of Cloud Computing
Cloud computing is defined as a collection of 
disembodied services accessible from anywhere 
using any mobile device with an Internet-based 
connection (Misra & Mondal, 2010; Sultan, 2010). 
Cloud computing is defined as a type of parallel 
and distributed system consisting of a collection 
of interconnected and virtualized computers that 
are dynamically provisioned and presented as the 
unified computing resources based on service-
level agreements established through negotiation 
between the service providers and consumers 
(Buyya, Chee Shin, & Venugopal, 2008). Cloud 
computing emerges as a paradigm of Internet 
computing in which dynamical, scalable and often 
virtualized resources are provided as services (Liu, 
Ma, Zhang, Li, & Chen, 2011).
The concept of cloud computing is based on 
utilizing the distributed resources for application 
and services that need massive amount of com-
puting assets for a specific short period of time 
(Khasnabish, Huang, Bai, Bellavista, Martinez, 
& Antonopoulos, 2012). Cloud computing is one 
of the major topics in the distributed systems 
(Blair, Kon, Cirne, Milojicic, Ramakrishnan, 
Reed, & Silva, 2011). Cloud computing is one 
of the management methods for distributed data 
processing and storage (Dudin & Smetanin, 2011). 
Cloud computing is considered as the virtualized 
resources (i.e., software, infrastructure, and plat-
forms) to support various degrees of organizational 
need for optimized system utilization (Vaquero, 
Rodero-Merino, Caceres, & Lindner, 2008), and 
provide customized computing environments for 
end-users (Wang, von Laszewski, Younge, He, 
Kunze, Tao, & Fu, 2011).
Cloud computing is a recent advancement 
wherein IT infrastructure and applications are 
provided as services to end-users under the 
usage-based payment model (Calheiros, Ranjan, 
Beloglazov, De Rose, & Buyya, 2011). Cloud 
computing resources are provided as services 
over the Internet and users can access resources 
based on their payments (Chen, Violetta, & Yang, 
2013). Cloud computing is a model of service 
delivery and access where virtualized resources 
are provided as a service over the Internet (Rimal, 
Jukan, Katsaros, & Goeleven, 2011). The use 
of ICT can improve business competitiveness, 
and has provided genuine advantages for small 
and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), enabling 
them to compete with large organizations (Bayo-
Moriones & Lera-Lopez, 2007).
Cloud computing is a new way of delivering 
computing resources (Helmbrecht, 2010). Cloud 
computing is recognized as one of the modern 
innovative technologies (Arutyunov, 2012). 
Cloud computing is a management platform for 
entrepreneurship to drive corporate efficiency 
(Kushida, Murray, & Zysman, 2011). Cloud com-
puting can arrange a high capacity for massive 
computing, storage as well as processing (Liang, 
Wang, & Zhang, 2011). Cloud computing offers 
the scalable on-demand services to customers 
with greater flexibility and lesser infrastructure 
investment (Modi, Patel, Borisaniya, Patel, & 
Rajarajan, 2012). Cloud-based end-user services, 
such as e-mail and office applications, are well-
known in daily business practices, offering new 
opportunities and capabilities, but equally creat-
ing new challenges for stakeholders (Alshamaila, 
Papagiannidis, & Li, 2013).
Cloud computing systems are widely con-
sidered as a promising paradigm for an IT infra-
structure capable of creating an added value for 
business, society, and administration (Aoyama & 
Sakai, 2011). Cloud computing uses the advances 
of technology communication such as grid com-
puting for delivering a range of technology ser-
vices delivered through the Internet and private or 
public networks (Chonka, Xiang, Zhou, & Bonti, 
2011). These services are delivered to customers 
in a self-service fashion enabling resources to be 
shared and released with minimal service provider 
interaction from any device and location (Mar-
ston et al., 2011). Cloud computing has enabled 
more people to access and share information on 

196
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
cyberspace that can be seen by other users at the 
same time (Ratten, 2014). Public cloud provid-
ers are open to all individuals, companies, and 
organizations while private cloud providers are 
usually set up by one organization for a specific 
purpose with limited access (Vouk, 2008).
Leaders of global businesses should arrange 
training and contribute essential ICT skills for 
all employees to improve their knowledge to deal 
with the advanced technologies in the digital age 
(Kasemsap, 2014c). Some of the promised benefits 
from cloud computing can be very appealing for 
modern organizations, which need to maximize 
the return on their investment, and still remain 
competitive in an ever-demanding business en-
vironment. Saya, Pee, and Kankanhalli (2010) 
stated that while extant research has studied cloud 
computing architecture, potential applications 
(Liu & Orban, 2008), and benefits (Assuncao, 
Costanzo, & Buyya, 2009), the decision making 
on cloud computing adoption has not been empiri-
cally examined. Cloud computing involves a large 
number of computers connected through a com-
munication network such as the Internet, similar 
to utility computing (Carroll, Kotze, & van der 
Merwe, 2010). Cloud computing reshapes the IT 
sector and the IT marketplace in modern business 
(Prasad, Gyani, & Murti, 2012).
Cloud computing deployments support the 
improved business intelligence (Gendron, 2014). 
Cloud computing has revolutionized availabil-
ity and access to cloud computing and storage 
resources (Afgan, Chapman, Jadan, Franke, & 
Taylor, 2012). The emergence of cloud comput-
ing contributes to the integration of multiple 
services, in particular Voice over Internet Protocol 
(VoIP) services (Dabbebi, Badonnel, & Festor, 
2014). Cloud computing environments have led 
to research in the areas of data processing, virtual 
environments, and access control (Lee, Cho, Seo, 
Shon, & Won, 2013). The infrastructure, platforms, 
and software applications are offered as services 
using cloud computing technologies (Perera, 
Zaslavsky, Cristen, & Georgakopoulos, 2014).
Concept of Supply Chain 
Management
SCM is quickly growing as both a strategic initia-
tive and an academic discipline (Richey, Roath, 
Whipple, & Fawcett, 2010). Supply chain is a 
coordinated system in moving products or services 
from supplier to customer (Saberi, Nookabadi, & 
Hejazi, 2012). SCM is an ongoing process and 
needs continuous efforts to get the desired results 
(Siddiqui, Haleem, & Sharma, 2012). Supply 
chains and SCM are the significant areas of busi-
ness practices that overlap with the discipline and 
practice of marketing and marketing management 
(Mentzer & Gundlach, 2010). One of the main 
research issues in SCM is to improve the global 
efficiency of supply chains (Ahn & Lee, 2004). 
SCM creates value from cost and working capital 
(Brandenburg & Seuring, 2011). Supply chain 
orientation is essential to accomplish customers’ 
requirements (Min, Mentzer, & Ladd, 2007). Sup-
ply chains and modern industries are the examples 
of socio-economic systems affecting a country’s 
economy (Shoushtari, 2013).
Recent trends toward outsourcing and global 
sourcing have created more complex supply chains 
(Mena, Humphries, & Choi, 2013). SCM improves 
competitiveness of the supply chain through a long-
term commitment to supply chain relationships 
and a cooperative approach to business processes 
(Om, Lee, & Chang, 2007). Organizations launch 
strategic supply chain initiatives through project 
implementation (Mathieu & Pal, 2011). Organiza-
tions integrate sustainability in their SCM practices 
(Wolf, 2011). SMEs are facing customers in a 
global marketplace with increasing performance 
demands in terms of delivery consistency and 
reduction of lead times (Soderberg & Bengtsson, 
2010). SCM must adopt different and more in-
novative strategies that support a better response 
to customer needs in an uncertain environment 
(Carvalho, Azevedo, & Cruz-Machado, 2012).
Effective SCM requires the integration of vari-
ous business functions, organizational units, and 

197
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
channel partners such that each has a well-defined 
role in accomplishing SCM objectives (Manuj & 
Sahin, 2011). Supply chain integration is broadly 
conceptualized as an aggregation consisting of 
supplier integration, internal integration, and 
customer integration (Mackelprang, Robinson, 
Bernardes, & Webb, 2014). The practical integra-
tions of business functions and SCM channels are 
important toward achieving overall SCM objec-
tives (Sahin & Robinson, 2005). The dynamic 
nature of supply chains with their multiplicity of 
organizations, processes, and flows yield highly 
complex, multifaceted, and large-scale systems, 
referring to supply chain complexity (Choi & 
Hong, 2002). Manuj and Sahin (2011) stated 
that the degree of complexity is derived from the 
structural properties of system determined by a 
variety of elements defining the supply chains and 
their interactions (i.e., the number of participants, 
facilities, products, transportation links, and in-
formation flows).
Supply chains have to satisfy the demands and 
needs of their stakeholders (Pagell & Shevchenko, 
2014). The functional roles within business or-
ganizations have changed as SCM has evolved 
in importance within modern organizations 
(Zacharia, Sanders, & Fugate, 2014). The highly 
complex supply chains, due to the vastness of 
data, decision variables, intricate interrelation-
ships among variables and system constraints, and 
performance trade-offs present many challenges 
for management in arriving at effective busi-
ness decisions (Manuj & Sahin, 2011). Supply 
chains are the adaptive systems (Choi, Dooley, 
& Rungtusanatham, 2001; Wycisk, McKelvey, & 
Hulsmann, 2008), and their efficient management 
poses many challenges for business professionals 
(Ellinger, Ellinger, & Keller, 2002). Supply chain 
complexity is widely recognized as a key issue 
confronting supply chain managers and executives 
(Choi & Krause, 2006). Supply chain complex-
ity can weaken brand image, lower brand loy-
alty, stagnate category management, and disturb 
channel trade relations (Quelch & Kenny, 1994), 
and reduce supply chain adaptability (Masson, 
Iosif, MacKerron, & Fernie, 2007). Knowledge 
management is a strategy for reducing supply 
chain decision-making complexity (Manuj & 
Sahin, 2011). Knowledge management leads to 
the increased job performance in global business 
(Kasemsap, 2013b).
SCM promises competitive advantages for 
industrial organizations (Arlbjørn, de Haas, & 
Munksgaard, 2013). SCM focuses on the manage-
ment of exchange flows across the organizational 
members of supply chain (Esper, Defee, & Men-
tzer, 2010). Defee and Stank (2005) reviewed the 
supply chain structure literature and proposed five 
structural elements and five external contingency 
factors necessary to develop a complete supply 
chain strategy-structure-performance theoretical 
model. Structural dimensions include information 
integration, communications, standardization, 
decision-making authority, and rewards. Three 
of the structural elements in the proposed model 
are empirically tested and validated (Defee, Stank, 
Esper, & Mentzer, 2009). Structural elements 
developed by organizations are the results of 
organizational design activities. The structures 
developed by the supply chain-oriented orga-
nizations promote cross-functional thinking, 
communication, and information sharing (Esper 
et al., 2010). Eliminating non-value added steps 
in distribution channels simplifies supply chain 
processes, reduces costs, and diminishes manage-
rial complexity (Manuj & Sahin, 2011).
SCM is a human-centric phenomenon (Myers, 
Griffith, Daugherty, & Lusch, 2004). Over 90 
percent of logistics activities take place outside 
of direct supervision (Bowersox, Closs, & Stank, 
2000), exhibiting the importance of effective 
people to supply chain excellence. Although 
financial, equipment, technological and market-
based resources are necessary for effective SCM, 
the people that accomplish organizational tasks 
are critical for effective functioning and exploita-
tion of each of these resource categories (Richey, 
Tokman, & Wheeler, 2006). Collaboration is 

198
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
considered as a driving force necessary for ef-
fective SCM (Horvath, 2001). Collaboration is an 
interdependent relationship, where parties closely 
work with each other to create beneficial outcomes 
(Sinkovics & Roath, 2004). Collaboration should 
be developed across functional areas inside the 
organizations, with the goal of creating the more 
integrated internal operations (Kahn & Mentzer, 
1996). Effective intra-organizational collaboration 
is strongly associated with external collaboration 
(Gimenez & Ventura, 2003). Esper et al. (2010) 
suggested the development of learning capabilities 
and transformational leadership styles to facilitate 
the creation of supply chain ideas.
Performance of supply chain depends on the 
effectiveness of communication and coordination 
(Chen & Huang, 2007). Developing performance 
measurement model is a critical task for supply 
chain and its members in order to examine their 
current status and identify improvement oppor-
tunities for steering their future direction (Lin & 
Li, 2010). Performance evaluation is necessary 
for effective SCM (Yang, Wu, Liang, Bi, & Wu, 
2011). Measuring supply chain performance is 
one of the main indicators of business success 
(Oztemel & Tekez, 2009). An important issue in 
measuring supply chain performance is the lack 
of holistic measures spanning all members (Hol-
mberg, 2000; Lambert & Pohlen, 2001).
Brewer and Speh (2000) stated that the mea-
sures such as logistics service quality (Mentzer, 
Flint, & Kent, 1999), the perfect customer order 
(Novack & Thomas, 2004), and the balanced 
scorecard (BSC) practically exhibit supply chain 
performance from a customer’s perspective. This 
is especially important considering the perceptual 
gaps that often exist between an organizational 
view of their performance and the perceptions of 
other supply chain entities (Forslund, 2006), the 
historical lack of emphasis on service elements 
of supply chain performance (Novack, Rinehart, 
& Langley, 1996), and the increased emphasis on 
the holistic supply chain (Mentzer, DeWitt, Min, 
Nix, Smith, & Zacharia, 2001). Organizations 
place great emphasis on both supply chains and 
BSC to develop effective measures to evaluate 
organizational performance (Chang, Hung, Wong, 
& Lee, 2013). Supply chain measures facilitate 
operational integration and focus on monitoring 
supply chain performance (Esper et al., 2010).
The Supply Chain Operations Reference 
(SCOR) model, published in 1996 by Supply 
Chain Council (SCC), is based on the concepts 
of business process reengineering, benchmarking, 
and process measurement (Jalalvand, Teimoury, 
Makui, Aryanezhad, & Jolai, 2011). The SCOR 
model provides a process-oriented language, 
which helps supply chain partners to communi-
cate with each other (Lockamy & McCormack, 
2004). The SCOR model spans customer interac-
tions, physical material transactions, and market 
interactions from supplier’s supplier to customer’s 
customer. The SCOR model is organized around 
the five processes (i.e., plan, source, make, de-
liver, and return). Five performance attributes of 
SCOR model (i.e., reliability, responsiveness, 
agility, cost, asset management) are the standard 
characteristics to describe supply chain, evaluated 
against other supply chains (Jalalvand et al., 2011).
Brewer and Speh (2000) indicated that the mea-
sures of supply chain favorably facilitate learning 
and innovation in modern business. Considering 
strategic emphasis on supporting supply chain 
operations for competitive advantage, learning 
and innovation are the key areas to measure in the 
supply chain-oriented organizations (Esper et al., 
2010). Measures such as new product develop-
ment cycle time and process improvement rates 
are important (Brewer & Speh, 2000). Lambert 
and Pohlen (2001) emphasized the importance of 
connecting supply chain initiatives to economic 
value and profit and loss statements. Lambert and 
Pohlen (2001) facilitated the use of non-financial 
measures to align the behavior of supply chain-
related operational personnel with strategic goals.
From the global supply chain contexts, non-
financial measures include a valuable focus on 
integration with suppliers and customers to sup-

199
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
port collaborative supply chain strategies and 
initiatives (Esper et al., 2010). In addition, non-
financial measures such as the perfect customer 
order place emphasis on internal integration by 
adopting a measure of operational performance 
(Novack & Thomas, 2004). Enterprise value chains 
must develop and support a broader sustainability 
perspective to ensure that its customer, business, 
supply chain, community, and environmental 
relationships remain viable (Closs, Speier, & 
Meacham, 2011).
Significance of Cloud Computing 
in Global Supply Chain
Cloud computing promises a radical shift in the 
facility of computing resources within enterprises 
(Khajeh-Hosseini, Greenwood, Smith, & Som-
merville, 2012). Cloud computing is attractive to 
business owners as it eliminates the requirement 
for users to plan ahead for provisioning when 
there is an increase in service demand (Zhang, 
Cheng, & Boutaba, 2010). A marketplace for 
cloud computing represents a promising alterna-
tive for obtaining standardized IT resources in a 
highly flexible manner (Hauff, Huntgeburth, & 
Veit, 2014). Business agility involves the utiliza-
tion of computing services through the reduction 
of initial costs in enterprise information systems 
(Ratten, 2014). Technological advancements in 
information systems over the past few decades 
have enabled the organizations to work with major 
suppliers and customers in their supply chains 
in order to improve the performance of entire 
channels (Drake & Schlachter, 2008). By the use 
of strategic supply chain networks, the essential 
improvement of supply chain flexibility can be 
achieved in global business (Winkler, 2009).
Holtgrewe (2014) exhibited the convergence 
of telecommunications and related developments 
of ubiquitous computing concerning ICT working 
environments and ICT value chains. Individuals 
can collect data about their habits, routines, and 
environments using ubiquitous computing tech-
nologies (Shilton, 2012). The increase in cloud 
computing services has been in conjunction with 
the emerging trends in IT toward the improved 
organizational efficiency and business agility 
(Hameed, Counsell, & Swift, 2012). Efficiency 
of hardware and software resources encourages 
the use of interactive applications that respond to 
users’ requirements, thus incorporating resource 
efficiency in which computers are located in geo-
graphic areas with cheap electricity (Marston et 
al., 2011). The creation of strategic agility within 
enterprise information systems is an important way 
for organizations to increase innovative adoption 
rates (Doz & Kosonen, 2010). This can be done 
through aligning business agility from technology 
innovations (Tallon & Pinsonneault, 2011). Both 
efficiency and business agility have enabled the 
flexible deployment of consumers’ business ap-
plications (Ratten, 2014).
Concerning cloud computing, IT is described 
as a critical prerequisite ability for organizations 
attempting to use their logistics capabilities 
to create competitive advantage (Bowersox & 
Daugherty, 1995; Closs, Goldsby, & Clinton, 
1997). IT serves as a coordinating mechanism 
providing connection across departments across 
organizations in global supply chain (Simchi-Levi, 
Kaminski, & Simchi-Levi, 2008). Logistics IT can 
be separated into internal and external compo-
nents (Closs & Savitskie, 2003; Savitskie, 2007). 
Internal IT facilitates tighter internal integration 
(Brah & Lim, 2006) and internal collaboration in 
logistics and supply chain organizations (Sanders 
& Premus, 2005). It is the presence of effective 
IT-enabled internal coordination (Lewis & Ta-
lalayevsky, 1997) that allows the organization 
to expand collaborative efforts outside its own 
boundaries to include other organizations across 

200
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
supply chain (Sanders & Premus, 2002). IT is 
broadly recognized as a critical tool for effective 
logistics and supply chain organizations for over 
20 years (Closs et al., 1997; Forman & Lippert, 
2005). The perspective of IT relates to increased 
emphasis on the integration and collaboration of 
supply chain (Esper et al., 2010).
IT is considered as a critical enabler of SCM 
processes (Mabert & Venkataramanan, 1998; 
Auramo, Kauremaa, & Tanskanen, 2005). The 
organizational goals for IT in the SCM context in-
clude ensuring information availability at a single 
point of data access, creating visibility to upstream 
and downstream changes in demand or supply, 
and enabling effective decision-making based on 
the wide information of supply chain (Simchi-
Levi et al., 2008). IT is needed to improve op-
erational quality and organizational performance 
by reducing lead time, improving efficiency, 
and eliminating errors in global business (Brah 
& Lim, 2006). The availability of supply chain 
information allows the supply chain organization 
to mitigate its risks (Christopher & Lee, 2004). 
The difficulties of connecting multiple disparate 
systems (Narasimhan & Kim, 2001) lead to a shift 
from the functionally-centered applications to the 
process-oriented applications across organizations 
(Edwards, Peters, & Sharman, 2001). The ability 
of IT to make information available potentially fa-
cilitates the implementation of integrated logistics 
processes (Gustin, Daugherty, & Stank, 1995).
Regarding global supply chain, customers 
have been affected by cloud computing services 
(Marston et al., 2011). This is due to cloud com-
puting incorporating a comprehensive computing 
platform that can be configured on demand. This 
allows the digital ecosystem of information to be 
constantly generated, converged, and expanded 
(Karakas & Manisaligil, 2012). It also encourages 
the cloud computing infrastructure to be effectively 
utilized (Vouk, 2008). Some of the most important 
determinants of adoption behavior of technology 
are perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness 
from the technology acceptance model, which 
focus on consumers’ attitudes of usage (Gao, 
Rohm, Sultan, & Huang, 2012).
Concerning cloud-based supply chain, the 
technology acceptance model is the most com-
mon theory that investigates user’s acceptance of 
new IT (Chen & Chang, 2013). The technology 
acceptance model is a widely used perspective to 
understand consumer’s adoption of technological 
innovations (Gao et al., 2012). The technology ac-
ceptance model focuses on how perceived ease of 
use and perceived usefulness predict technology 
adoption (Davis, Bagozzi, & Warshaw, 1989). The 
technology acceptance model is one of the first 
theories specifically developed for the IT context 
(Venkatesh & Davis, 2000). The technology accep-
tance model is a simplistic model frequently used 
in technology innovation studies to understand, 
explain, and predict human behavior (Bagozzi, 
2007). While the technology acceptance model 
is first introduced to study information systems, 
it has been extended to other types of technology 
products and services including mobile services 
(Revels, Tojib, & Tsarenko, 2010) and Internet 
banking (Yousafzai, Foxall, & Pallister, 2010). 
The technology acceptance model has been en-
larged to the unified theory of acceptance and 
use of technology (Venkatesh, Morris, Davis, & 
Davis, 2003). This has meant that the technol-
ogy acceptance model has been applied to more 
complex services that have resulted in technology 
innovations (Wang & Lin, 2012).
Lindner et al. (2010) defined a cloud-based 
supply chain as two or more parties connected by 
the provisions of cloud computing services, related 
information, and funds. Cloud-based supply chain 
represents a network of interconnected organiza-
tions in the cloud computing area involved in the 
provision of products and services required by 

201
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
customers. In cloud-based supply chain, logistics 
process is handled using cloud computing services 
in which shipping schedule, shipping notice, re-
ceiving notice, and payment information are stored 
and shared through cloud computing applications. 
While the promising benefits of cloud computing 
lead to the likelihood of adopting cloud-based 
solutions in supply chain, organizations need to 
be fully aware of risks associated with new cloud 
computing technology.
Most studies either focus on defining cloud 
supply chain (Lindner et al., 2010), proposing lists 
of benefits and challenges for organizations con-
sidering cloud supply chain solutions (Demirkan, 
Cheng, & Bandyopadhyay, 2010; Durowoju et al., 
2011; Li, Zhang, & Chen, 2012), cloud supply 
chain adoption model (Casey, Cegielski, Jones-
Farmer, Wu, & Hazen, 2012; Wu et al., 2013), 
and exploring architectures and applications of 
cloud computing environment (Bu & Wang, 2011; 
Ferguson & Hadar, 2011). Organizations that adopt 
cloud supply chain solutions need to ensure the 
efficiency of cloud supply chain operations given 
their current resources.
Cloud computing enables customers conve-
nient access to the cloud computing resources by 
delivering information on a mobile technology 
format, which is created from cloud computing 
environment using information accessed in any 
geographic and time location (Wang & Lin, 2012). 
SCM can benefit from using cloud computing since 
it promises to enable a wide range of capabilities 
in SCM about reducing startup costs, increasing 
supply chain visibility, reducing lead time, enhanc-
ing inter-organizational collaboration and supply 
chain integration, and reducing response time to 
customers (Shacklett, 2010; Marston et al., 2011; 
Schramm, Nogueira, & Jones, 2011). While cloud-
based supply chain solutions help reduce startup 
costs, they usually increase recurring costs (Tru-
ong, 2014). Standardization, integration, visibility, 
and control of processes, enabled by enterprise 
systems, potentially help the organizations in im-
proving their ability to form customers’ needs and 
build business agility into their decision-making 
processes (Seethamraju, 2014).
Organizations may be interested in cloud-based 
supply chain solutions regarding their potential 
benefits but they may not be fully aware of chal-
lenges and difficulties in using cloud computing. 
Integrating cloud-based supply chain solutions to 
in-house systems and applications can be chal-
lenging and requires strategic decisions (Truong, 
2010). Since organizations in global supply chain 
share important information about products, or-
ders, inventory, shipment, payment, and customer 
profile through cloud computing systems and 
applications, they need to be ensured that there is 
no data leakage or any potential privacy and legal 
issues (Truong, 2014). Since operations are the 
cloud-based supply chains, a cloud service out-
age situation will have dramatic effect on supply 
chain performance. Thus, it is important for global 
supply chain executives to assess and control risks 
associated with the use of cloud computing in 
global supply chain.
Overview of Electronic Supply 
Chain Management
A new era for development is needed and busi-
ness needs to play an important role in the social 
media age (Lenssen & Van Wassenhove, 2012). 
Evolutions rooted in technology in market arena, 
business, and demands practically reforms in 
global supply chain (Aliei, Sazvar, & Ashrafi, 
2012). Cloud computing is a suitable artifact 
through organizational information processing 
capability. The cloud-based infrastructure sup-
ports individual artifacts for e-SCM utilized in 
communication, collaboration, and coordination 
(Cegielski et al., 2012). The e-SCM includes the 

202
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
concepts of electronic business and SCM and 
depicts how trade channel members are working 
together to optimize resources and opportunities.
The e-SCM is considered as a potential remedy 
for operational issues that construct supply chain 
effectiveness and efficiency (Boyer & Hult, 2005; 
Rai, Patnayakuni, & Seth, 2006). Internet-enabled 
e-SCM facilitates the development of effective 
supply chain (Olson & Boyer, 2005; Wang, Tai, & 
Wei, 2006). Cloud computing technology supports 
some of traditional advantages of e-SCM (Cegiel-
ski et al., 2012). The e-SCM is the operational and 
strategic enhancement in communication, coor-
dination, and collaboration across organizations 
(Autry, Grawe, Daugherty, & Richey, 2010; Liu, 
Ke, Wei, Gu, & Chen, 2010). Many organizations 
that participate in supply chain recognize e-SCM 
as an essential component of their supply chain 
strategy (Boyer & Hult, 2005; Liu et al., 2010).
Within the technological aspect of Internet-
enabled e-SCM, the advances in cloud computing 
technology offer organizations opportunity to 
improve the flexibility of their technology infra-
structure while reducing total cost of ownership 
for systems (IBM, 2009). Organizations can sup-
port cloud-based IT services from providers such 
as Google and IBM to rapidly scale systems to 
meet their organizational needs for capacity, col-
laboration, and coordination in modern business 
(Lohr, 2007). Many researchers have examined the 
e-SCM in a number of different theoretical and 
empirical contexts (Ke, Liu, Wei, Gu, & Chen, 
2009; Autry et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2010).
Organizational Information 
Processing Theory within 
Global Supply Chain
The organizational information processing theory 
characterizes organizations as systems that possess 
both requirement and ability to prepare information 
as a method to reduce uncertainty in organizations 
(Galbraith, 1974). The organizational informa-
tion processing theory indicates three important 
concepts: information processing requirements, 
information processing capability, and the fit 
between the two to obtain optimal performance 
in modern business.
1. Information Processing 
Requirements
The information processing requirements of orga-
nization are defined as the disconnection between 
necessary information and general information 
for decision-making process (Premkumar, Rama-
murthy, & Saunders, 2005). SCM is often defined 
by the levels of uncertainty, and there exists a 
large body of research devoted to examining and 
reducing uncertainties (Van der Vorst & Beu-
lens, 2002; Sanchez-Rodrigues, Potter, & Naim, 
2010). With the assumption that organizations 
are open systems, the organizational information 
processing theory categorizes the three sources 
of uncertainty: environmental uncertainty, task 
uncertainty, and inter-organizational uncertainty, 
to which organizations must respond (Tushman & 
Nadler, 1978). Regarding global supply chain, the 
sources of uncertainty increase decision making 
complexity and affect organizational requirement 
for information (Premkumar et al., 2005).
Regarding environmental uncertainty, each 
participant is exposed to environmental uncertain-
ty (Peck & Juttner, 2000; Peck, 2005). Organiza-
tional members in supply chain organizations must 
be responsive to the environmental uncertainty 
created through interfaces with external environ-
ment. Organizations require information to reduce 
environmental uncertainty that they face while 
attempting to make decisions (Christopher & Lee, 
2004; Christopher, Lowson, & Peck, 2004). For 
instance, a transportation provider must positively 
account for environmental uncertainty related 
to fluctuations in the availability of commodity. 
The perspective of environmental uncertainties 
contributes to the availability of environmental 

203
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
resources (Cegielski et al., 2012). The patterns 
of environmental uncertainty enhance levels of 
risk and impact organizations (Juttner, Peck, & 
Christopher, 2003; Juttner, 2005).
Task uncertainty is universal among organiza-
tions (Premkumar et al., 2005). Organizations seek 
to reduce task uncertainty through the application 
of information to their decision-making processes. 
For instance, manufacturing organizations utilize 
information to support quality improvement initia-
tives of improving their manufacturing processes 
and eliminating waste regarding product defects 
(Cegielski et al., 2012). Inter-organizational uncer-
tainty is obtained from the nature of relationship 
among units, responsibilities of each unit, and lead-
ership of each unit (Melville & Ramirez, 2008). 
To make appropriate decisions, organizational 
members of supply chain should use information 
to reduce uncertainty associated with complicated 
interactions (Christopher & Peck, 2004).
2. Information Processing Capability
Tushman and Nadler (1978) considered informa-
tion processing capability as an organization’s 
capacity to utilize information in a meaningful 
procedure that supports decision-making process. 
IT is a key aspect of an organization’s information 
processing capability (Premkumar et al., 2005; 
Melville & Ramirez, 2008). Tushman and Nadler 
(1978) stated that formalized information system 
is the highest capacity to facilitate organizational 
information processing. Many researchers have 
proposed various IT artifacts as the delegates to 
measure an organization’s information processing 
capability (Premkumar et al., 2005; Melville & 
Ramirez, 2008). Communication, collaboration, 
and coordination technologies such as electronic 
data interchange, e-SCM, and IT-based produc-
tion controls have been utilized as proxies for an 
organization’s information processing capability 
(Premkumar et al., 2005; Melville & Ramirez, 
2008).
3. The Fit between Information 
Processing Requirements and 
Information Processing Capability
Organizations have two strategies to cope with 
uncertainty and information needs: develop buffers 
to reduce the effect of uncertainty; and implement 
structural mechanisms and information process-
ing capability to enhance information flow and 
reduce uncertainty. A basic example of the first 
strategy is building inventory buffers to reduce 
the effect of uncertainty in demand or supply. An 
example of the second strategy is the redesign 
of business processes in modern organizations 
and implementation of integrated information 
system in order to improve information flow and 
reduce uncertainty in modern business. A business 
strategy creates better information flow between 
organizations to exhibit uncertainties in global 
supply chain (Premkumar et al., 2005).
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
The strength of this chapter is on the thorough 
literature consolidation of cloud computing in 
global supply chain. The extant literature of 
cloud computing in global supply chain provides 
a contribution to practitioners and researchers by 
describing a comprehensive view of the functional 
applications of cloud computing in global supply 
chain to appeal to different segments of cloud 
computing in global supply chain in order to 
maximize the business impact of cloud comput-
ing in global supply chain. The classification of 
the prevailing literature in the domain of cloud 
computing in global supply chain will provide the 
potential opportunities for future research. Future 
research direction should broaden the perspectives 
in the implementation of cloud computing in the 
knowledge-based supply chain organizations.
Practitioners and researchers should identify 
the applicability of a more multidisciplinary ap-

204
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
proach toward research activities in implement-
ing cloud computing in global supply chain with 
knowledge management-related variables (i.e., 
knowledge-sharing behavior, knowledge creation, 
organizational learning, learning orientation, and 
motivation to learn). It will be useful to bring 
additional disciplines together (i.e., strategic 
management, marketing, finance, and human 
resources) to support a more holistic examina-
tion of cloud computing in global supply chain 
in order to combine or transfer existing theories 
and approaches to inquiry in this area. Although 
cloud computing itself has many open problems, 
researchers in the field have already made the 
leap to realize inter-cloud computing (Grozev & 
Buyya, 2014). Inter-cloud research is still in its 
infancy, and the body of knowledge in the area of 
inter-cloud computing has not been well defined 
yet (Grozev & Buyya, 2014). An examination of 
linkages between inter-cloud computing in global 
supply chain and business management would 
seem to be viable for future research efforts.
CONCLUSION
This chapter reviewed the role of cloud comput-
ing in global supply chain, thus describing the 
theoretical and practical concepts of cloud com-
puting and supply chain management (SCM); the 
significance of cloud computing in global supply 
chain; the overview of electronic supply chain 
management (e-SCM); and the organizational 
information processing theory within global sup-
ply chain. This chapter examined the extent to 
which environmental uncertainty, task uncertainty, 
and inter-organizational uncertainty affect inten-
tion to adopt cloud computing technology in the 
supply chain. As an emerging technology, cloud 
computing changes the form and function of IT 
infrastructures in global supply chain. From a 
broader literature review, given the prevalence 
of the adoption of Internet-enabled technologies 
like cloud computing in global supply chain en-
vironment, researchers and practitioners would 
expect the importance of cloud computing to 
gain sustainable competitive advantage in the 
social media age. Applying cloud computing in 
global supply chain will greatly increase business 
performance and gain competitive advantage in 
modern organizations.
REFERENCES
Afgan, E., Chapman, B., Jadan, M., Franke, V., 
& Taylor, J. (2012). Using cloud computing in-
frastructure with CloudBioLinux, CloudMan, and 
Galaxy. Current Protocols in Bioinformatics, 38, 
11.9.1-11.9.20.
Ahn, H. J., & Lee, H. (2004). An agent-based 
dynamic information network for supply chain 
management. BT Technology Journal, 22(2), 18–
27. doi:10.1023/B:BTTJ.0000033467.83300.c0
Aliei, M., Sazvar, A., & Ashrafi, B. (2012). As-
sessment of information technology effects on 
management of supply chain based on fuzzy logic 
in Iran tail industries. International Journal of 
Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 63(1-4), 
215–223. doi:10.1007/s00170-012-3900-2
Alshamaila, Y., Papagiannidis, S., & Li, F. (2013). 
Cloud computing adoption by SMEs in the north 
east of England: A multi-perspective framework. 
Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 
26(3), 250–275. doi:10.1108/17410391311325225
Aoyama, T., & Sakai, H. (2011). Inter-cloud 
computing. Business & Information Systems 
Engineering, 3(3), 173–177. doi:10.1007/s12599-
011-0158-4
Arlbjørn, J. S., de Haas, H., & Munksgaard, K. 
B. (2013). Exploring supply chain innovation. 
Logistics Research, 3(1), 3–18. doi:10.1007/
s12159-010-0044-3

205
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
Arutyunov, V. V. (2012). Cloud computing: Its 
history of development, modern state, and future 
considerations. Scientific and Technical Informa-
tion Processing, 39(3), 173–178. doi:10.3103/
S0147688212030082
Assuncao, M., Costanzo, A., & Buyya, R. (2009). 
Evaluating the cost-benefit of using cloud comput-
ing to extend the capacity of clusters. Paper pre-
sented at the 18th ACM International Symposium 
on High Performance Distributed Computing, 
Garching, Germany.
Auramo, J., Kauremaa, J., & Tanskanen, K. (2005). 
Benefits of it in supply chain management: An 
explorative study of progressive companies. 
International Journal of Physical Distribu-
tion & Logistics Management, 35(2), 82–100. 
doi:10.1108/09600030510590282
Autry, C. W., Grawe, S. J., Daugherty, P., & 
Richey, R. G. (2010). The effects of technological 
turbulence and breadth on supply chain technology 
acceptance and adoption. Journal of Operations 
Management, 28(6), 522–536. doi:10.1016/j.
jom.2010.03.001
Bagozzi, R. P. (2007). The legacy of the technology 
acceptance model and a proposal for a paradigm 
shift. Journal of the Association for Information 
Systems, 8(4), 244–254.
Bajgoric, N. (2014). Business continuity 
management: A systemic framework for 
implementation. Kybernetes, 43(2), 156–177. 
doi:10.1108/K-11-2013-0252
Bardhan, I. R., Demirkan, H., Kannan, P. K., 
Kauffman, R., & Sougstad, R. (2010). An inter-
disciplinary perspective on IT services manage-
ment and service science. Journal of Management 
Information Systems, 26(4), 13–64. doi:10.2753/
MIS0742-1222260402
Barney, J. B. (2012). Purchasing, supply chain 
management and sustained competitive advan-
tage: The relevance of resource-based theory. 
Journal of Supply Chain Management, 18(2), 3–6. 
doi:10.1111/j.1745-493X.2012.03265.x
Bayo-Moriones, A., & Lera-Lopez, F. (2007). A 
firm-level analysis of determinants of ICT adop-
tion in Spain. Technovation, 27(6-7), 352–366. 
doi:10.1016/j.technovation.2007.01.003
Blair, G., Kon, F., Cirne, W., Milojicic, D., Ra-
makrishnan, R., Reed, D., & Silva, D. (2011). 
Perspectives on cloud computing: Interviews with 
five leading scientists from the cloud community. 
Journal of Internet Services and Applications, 
2(1), 3–9. doi:10.1007/s13174-011-0023-1
Bowersox, D. J., Closs, D. J., & Stank, T. P. (2000). 
Ten mega-trends that will revolutionize supply 
chain logistics. Journal of Business Logistics, 
21(2), 1–15.
Bowersox, D. J., & Daugherty, P. J. (1995). 
Logistics paradigms: The impact of information 
technology. Journal of Business Logistics, 16(1), 
65–80.
Boyer, K. K., & Hult, G. T. M. (2005). Extend-
ing the supply chain: Integrating operations and 
marketing in the online grocery industry. Journal 
of Operations Management, 23(6), 642–661. 
doi:10.1016/j.jom.2005.01.003
Brah, S. A., & Lim, H. Y. (2006). The effects of 
technology and TQM on the performance of logis-
tics companies. International Journal of Physical 
Distribution & Logistics Management, 36(3), 
192–209. doi:10.1108/09600030610661796
Brandenburg, M., & Seuring, S. (2011). Impacts 
of supply chain management on company value: 
Benchmarking companies from the fast moving 
consumer goods industry. Logistics Research, 
3(4), 233–248. doi:10.1007/s12159-011-0056-7

206
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
Brewer, P. C., & Speh, T. W. (2000). Using the 
balanced scorecard to measure supply chain per-
formance. Journal of Business Logistics, 21(1), 
75–95.
Bu, Y., & Wang, L. (2011). Leveraging cloud 
computing to enhance supply chain manage-
ment in automobile industry. Paper presented at 
the 2011 International Conference on Business 
Computing and Global Informatization (BCGIn 
2011), Shanghai, China.
Buyya, R., Chee Shin, Y., & Venugopal, S. 
(2008). High performance computing and com-
munications. Paper presented at the 10th IEEE 
International Conference, Dalian, China.
Calheiros, R. N., Ranjan, R., Beloglazov, A., De 
Rose, C. A. F., & Buyya, R. (2011). CloudSim: A 
toolkit for modeling and simulation of cloud com-
puting environments and evaluation of resource 
provisioning algorithms. Software, Practice & 
Experience, 41(1), 23–50. doi:10.1002/spe.995
Carroll, M., Kotze, P., & van der Merwe, A. (2010). 
Securing virtual and cloud environments. In I. 
Ivanov, M. van Sinderen, & B. Shishkov (Eds.), 
Cloud computing and services science (pp. 73–90). 
Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Carvalho, H., Azevedo, S., & Cruz-Machado, V. 
(2012). Agile and resilient approaches to supply 
chain management: Influence on performance 
and competitiveness. Logistics Research, 4(1-2), 
49–62. doi:10.1007/s12159-012-0064-2
Casey, G., Cegielski, L., Jones-Farmer, A., Wu, Y., 
& Hazen, B. T. (2012). Adoption of cloud comput-
ing technologies in supply chains. International 
Journal of Logistics Management, 23(2), 184–211. 
doi:10.1108/09574091211265350
Cegielski, C. G., Jones-Farmer, L. A., Wu, Y., & 
Hazen, B. T. (2012). Adoption of cloud computing 
technologies in supply chains: An organizational 
information processing theory approach. Interna-
tional Journal of Logistics Management, 23(2), 
184–211. doi:10.1108/09574091211265350
Chang, H. H., Hung, C. J., Wong, K. H., & Lee, 
C. H. (2013). Using the balanced scorecard on 
supply chain integration performance: A case 
study of service businesses. Service Business, 
7(4), 539–561. doi:10.1007/s11628-012-0175-5
Chen, H. C., Violetta, M. A., & Yang, C. Y. 
(2013). Contract RBAC in cloud computing. The 
Journal of Supercomputing, 66(2), 1111–1131. 
doi:10.1007/s11227-013-1017-5
Chen, K. Y., & Chang, M. L. (2013). User ac-
ceptance of “near field communication” mobile 
phone service: An investigation based on the 
unified theory of acceptance and use of technol-
ogy model. Service Industries Journal, 33(6), 
609–623. doi:10.1080/02642069.2011.622369
Chen, M., Wu, Y., & Vasilakos, A. V. (2014). 
Advances in mobile cloud computing. Mobile 
Networks and Applications, 19(2), 131–132. 
doi:10.1007/s11036-014-0503-1
Chen, S. J., & Huang, E. (2007). A systematic 
approach for supply chain improvement using 
design structure matrix. Journal of Intelligent 
Manufacturing, 18(2), 285–299. doi:10.1007/
s10845-007-0022-z
Choi, T. Y., Dooley, K. J., & Rungtusanatham, 
M. (2001). Supply networks and complex adap-
tive systems: Control versus emergence. Journal 
of Operations Management, 19(3), 351–366. 
doi:10.1016/S0272-6963(00)00068-1

207
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
Choi, T. Y., & Hong, Y. (2002). Unveiling the 
structure of supply networks: Case studies in 
Honda, Acura, and DaimlerChrysler. Journal 
of Operations Management, 20(5), 469–493. 
doi:10.1016/S0272-6963(02)00025-6
Choi, T. Y., & Krause, D. R. (2006). The supply 
base and its complexity: Implications for trans-
action costs, risks, responsiveness, and innova-
tion. Journal of Operations Management, 24(5), 
637–652. doi:10.1016/j.jom.2005.07.002
Chonka, A., Xiang, Y., Zhou, W., & Bonti, A. 
(2011). Cloud security defence to protect cloud 
computing against HTTP-DOS and XML-DOS 
attacks. Journal of Network and Computer Ap-
plications, 34(4), 1097–1107. doi:10.1016/j.
jnca.2010.06.004
Christopher, M. (2012). Logistics and supply chain 
management: Creating value-adding networks. 
Dorchester, UK: Financial Times Prentice-Hall.
Christopher, M., & Lee, H. (2004). Mitigating 
supply chain risk through improved confidence. 
International Journal of Physical Distribu-
tion & Logistics Management, 34(5), 388–396. 
doi:10.1108/09600030410545436
Christopher, M., Lowson, R., & Peck, H. (2004). 
Creating agile supply chains in the fashion 
industry. International Journal of Retail & 
Distribution Management, 32(8), 367–376. 
doi:10.1108/09590550410546188
Christopher, M., & Peck, H. (2004). Build-
ing the resilient supply chain. International 
Journal of Logistics Management, 15(2), 1–13. 
doi:10.1108/09574090410700275
Chun, S. H., & Choi, B. S. (2014). Service models 
and pricing schemes for cloud computing. Cluster 
Computing, 17(2), 529–535. doi:10.1007/s10586-
013-0296-1
Closs, D. J., Goldsby, T. J., & Clinton, S. R. (1997). 
Information technology influences on world class 
logistics capability. International Journal of Physi-
cal Distribution & Logistics Management, 27(1), 
4–17. doi:10.1108/09600039710162259
Closs, D. J., & Savitskie, K. (2003). Internal and ex-
ternal logistic information technology integration. 
International Journal of Logistics Management, 
14(1), 63–76. doi:10.1108/09574090310806549
Closs, D. J., Speier, C., & Meacham, N. (2011). 
Sustainability to support end-to-end value chains: 
The role of supply chain management. Journal 
of the Academy of Marketing Science, 39(1), 
101–116. doi:10.1007/s11747-010-0207-4
Dabbebi, O., Badonnel, R., & Festor, O. (2014). 
Leveraging countermeasures as a service for VoIP 
security in the cloud. International Journal of 
Network Management, 24(1), 70–84. doi:10.1002/
nem.1853
Davis, F. D., Bagozzi, R. P., & Warshaw, P. R. 
(1989). User acceptance of computer technology: 
A comparison of two theoretical models. Man-
agement Science, 35(8), 982–1003. doi:10.1287/
mnsc.35.8.982
Defee, C. C., & Stank, T. P. (2005). Applying 
the strategy-structure-performance paradigm 
to the supply chain environment. International 
Journal of Logistics Management, 16(1), 28–50. 
doi:10.1108/09574090510617349
Defee, C. C., Stank, T. P., Esper, T. L., & Men-
tzer, J. T. (2009). The role of followers in supply 
chains. Journal of Business Logistics, 30(2), 
65–84. doi:10.1002/j.2158-1592.2009.tb00112.x
Demirkan, H., Cheng, H. K., & Bandyopadhyay, 
S. (2010). Coordination strategies in an SaaS sup-
ply chain. Journal of Management Information 
Systems, 26(4), 119–143. doi:10.2753/MIS0742-
1222260405

208
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
Drake, M. J., & Schlachter, J. T. (2008). A virtue-
ethics analysis of supply chain collaboration. 
Journal of Business Ethics, 82(4), 851–864. 
doi:10.1007/s10551-007-9597-8
Dudin, E. B., & Smetanin, Y. G. (2011). A review 
of cloud computing. Scientific and Technical Infor-
mation Processing, 38(4), 280–284. doi:10.3103/
S0147688211040083
Durao, F., Carvalho, J. F. S., Fonseka, A., & Gar-
cia, V. C. (2014). A systematic review on cloud 
computing. The Journal of Supercomputing, 68(3), 
1321–1346. doi:10.1007/s11227-014-1089-x
Durowoju, O. A., Chan, H. K., & Wang, X. (2011). 
The impact of security and scalability of cloud 
service on supply chain performance. Journal of 
Electronic Commerce Research, 12(4), 243–256.
Edwards, P., Peters, M., & Sharman, G. 
(2001). The effectiveness of information sys-
tems in supporting the extended supply chain. 
Journal of Business Logistics, 22(1), 1–27. 
doi:10.1002/j.2158-1592.2001.tb00157.x
Ellinger, A. E., Ellinger, A. D., & Keller, S. B. 
(2002). Logistics managers’ learning environments 
and firm performance. Journal of Business Logis-
tics, 23(1), 19–37. doi:10.1002/j.2158-1592.2002.
tb00014.x
Ellram, L. M., & Cooper, M. C. (2014). Supply 
chain management: It’s all about the journey, not 
the destination. Journal of Supply Chain Manage-
ment, 50(1), 8–20. doi:10.1111/jscm.12043
Esper, T. L., Defee, C. C., & Mentzer, J. T. (2010). 
A framework of supply chain orientation. Inter-
national Journal of Logistics Management, 21(2), 
161–179. doi:10.1108/09574091011071906
Faisal, C. M. M., Azher, E. M. K., Ramzan, E. 
B., & Malik, M. S. A. (2011). Cloud computing: 
SMEs issues and UGI based integrated collabora-
tive information system to support Pakistani textile 
SMEs. Interdisciplinary Journal of Contemporary 
Research in Business, 3(1), 564–573.
Fawcett, S., Wallin, C., Allred, C., Fawcett, A. M., 
& Magnan, G. M. (2011). Information technol-
ogy as an enabler of supply chain collaboration: 
A dynamic-capabilities perspective. Journal 
of Supply Chain Management, 47(1), 38–59. 
doi:10.1111/j.1745-493X.2010.03213.x
Ferguson, D. F., & Hadar, E. (2011). Optimizing 
the IT business supply chain utilizing cloud com-
puting. In Paper presented at the 8th International 
Conference & Expo on Emerging Technologies for 
a Smarter World (CEWIT 2011), Hauppauge, NY.
Forman, H., & Lippert, S. K. (2005). Toward the 
development of an integrated model of technology 
internalization within the supply chain context. 
International Journal of Logistics Management, 
16(1), 4–27. doi:10.1108/09574090510617330
Forslund, H. (2006). Performance gaps in 
the dyadic order fulfillment process. Inter-
national Journal of Physical Distribution 
& Logistics Management, 36(8), 580–595. 
doi:10.1108/09600030610702871
Galbraith, J. R. (1974). Organization design: An 
information processing view. Interfaces, 4(3), 
28–36. doi:10.1287/inte.4.3.28
Gao, T., Rohm, A. J., Sultan, F., & Huang, S. 
(2012). Antecedents of consumer attitudes toward 
mobile marketing: A comparative study of youth 
markets in the United States and China. Thun-
derbird International Business Review, 54(2), 
211–225. doi:10.1002/tie.21452

209
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
Gendron, M. S. (2014). Business intelligence 
and the cloud. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 
doi:10.1002/9781118915240
Gimenez, C., & Ventura, E. (2003). Supply 
chain management as a competitive advance 
in the Spanish grocery sector. International 
Journal of Logistics Management, 14(1), 77–88. 
doi:10.1108/09574090310806558
Gottschalk, I., & Kirn, S. (2013). Cloud com-
puting as a tool for enhancing ecological goals? 
Business & Information Systems Engineering, 
5(5), 299–313. doi:10.1007/s12599-013-0284-2
Grozev, N., & Buyya, R. (2014). Inter-Cloud ar-
chitectures and application brokering: Taxonomy 
and survey. Software, Practice & Experience, 
44(3), 369–390. doi:10.1002/spe.2168
Gustin, C. M., Daugherty, P. J., & Stank, T. P. 
(1995). The effects of information availability on 
logistics integration. Journal of Business Logistics, 
16(1), 1–21.
Hameed, M. A., Counsell, S., & Swift, S. (2012). A 
conceptual model for the process of IT innovation 
adoption in organizations. Journal of Engineering 
and Technology Management, 29(3), 358–390. 
doi:10.1016/j.jengtecman.2012.03.007
Hauff, S., Huntgeburth, J., & Veit, D. (2014). 
Exploring uncertainties in a marketplace for 
cloud computing: A revelatory case study. Jour-
nal of Business Economics, 84(3), 441–468. 
doi:10.1007/s11573-014-0719-3
Helmbrecht, U. (2010). Data protection and legal 
compliance in cloud computing. Datenschutz und 
Datensicherheit, 34(8), 554-556.
Holmberg, S. (2000). A systems perspec-
tive on supply chain measurements. Inter-
national Journal of Physical Distribution 
& Logistics Management, 30(10), 847–868. 
doi:10.1108/09600030010351246
Holtgrewe, U. (2014). New new technologies: 
The future and the present of work in information 
and communication technology. New Technology, 
Work and Employment, 29(1), 9–24. doi:10.1111/
ntwe.12025
Horvath, L. (2001). Collaboration: The key to 
value creation in supply chain management. Supply 
Chain Management: An International Journal, 
6(5), 205–207. doi:10.1108/EUM0000000006039
Hung, P. P., Bui, T. A., Morales, M. A. G., Nguyen, 
M. V., & Huh, E. N. (2014). Optimal collabora-
tion of thin–thick clients and resource allocation 
in cloud computing. Personal and Ubiquitous 
Computing, 18(3), 563–572. doi:10.1007/s00779-
013-0673-z
Hunt, S. D., & Davis, D. F. (2012). Grounding 
supply chain management in resource-advantage 
theory: In defense of a resource-based view of the 
firm. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 48(2), 
14–20. doi:10.1111/j.1745-493X.2012.03266.x
IBM. (2009). The benefits of cloud computing. 
Retrieved September 6, 2014, from http://public.
dhe.ibm.com/common/ssi/ecm/en/diw03004u-
sen/DIW03004USEN.PDF
Ivanov, D., & Sokolov, B. (2012). The inter-
disciplinary modeling of supply chains in the 
context of collaborative multi-structural cyber-
physical networks. Journal of Manufacturing 
Technology Management, 23(8), 976–997. 
doi:10.1108/17410381211276835
Jain, V., Wadhwa, S., & Deshmukh, S. G. (2009). 
Revisiting information systems to support a 
dynamic supply chain: Issues and perspectives. 
Production Planning and Control, 20(1), 17–29. 
doi:10.1080/09537280802608019
Jakhar, S. K. (2014). Designing the green supply 
chain performance optimisation model. Global 
Journal of Flexible Systems Management, 15(3), 
235–259. doi:10.1007/s40171-014-0069-6

210
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
Jalalvand, F., Teimoury, E., Makui, A., Aryane-
zhad, M. B., & Jolai, F. (2011). A method to 
compare supply chains of an industry. Supply 
Chain Management: An International Journal, 
16(2), 82–97. doi:10.1108/13598541111115347
Juttner, U. (2005). Supply chain risk management: 
Understanding the business requirements from 
a practitioner perspective. International Jour-
nal of Logistics Management, 16(1), 120–141. 
doi:10.1108/09574090510617385
Juttner, U., Peck, H., & Christopher, M. (2003). 
Supply chain risk management: Outlining an 
agenda for future research. International Journal 
of Logistics Research and Applications, 6(4), 
197–210. doi:10.1080/13675560310001627016
Kahn, K. B., & Mentzer, J. T. (1996). Lo-
gistics and interdepartmental integration. 
International Journal of Physical Distribu-
tion & Logistics Management, 26(8), 6–14. 
doi:10.1108/09600039610182753
Kang, A. N., Barolli, L., Park, J. H., & Jeong, 
Y. S. (2014). A strengthening plan for enterprise 
information security based on cloud computing. 
Cluster Computing, 17(3), 703–710. doi:10.1007/
s10586-013-0327-y
Karakas, F., & Manisaligil, A. (2012). Reorienting 
self-directed learning for the creative digital era. 
European Journal of Training and Development, 
36(7), 712–731. doi:10.1108/03090591211255557
Kasemsap, K. (2013a). Unified framework: 
Constructing a causal model of Six Sigma, orga-
nizational learning, organizational innovation, 
and organizational performance. The Journal of 
Interdisciplinary Networks, 2(1), 268–273.
Kasemsap, K. (2013b). Innovative framework: 
Formation of causal model of organizational 
culture, organizational climate, knowledge 
management, and job performance. Journal of 
International Business Management & Research, 
4(12), 21–32.
Kasemsap, K. (2014a). Strategic innovation 
management: An integrative framework and 
causal model of knowledge management, strategic 
orientation, organizational innovation, and orga-
nizational performance. In P. Ordóñez de Pablos 
& R. D. Tennyson (Eds.), Strategic approaches 
for human capital management and development 
in a turbulent economy (pp. 102–116). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4530-
1.ch007
Kasemsap, K. (2014b). The role of knowledge 
sharing on organisational innovation: An in-
tegrated framework. In L. Al-Hakim & C. Jin 
(Eds.), Quality innovation: Knowledge, theory, 
and practices (pp. 247–271). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4769-5.ch012
Kasemsap, K. (2014c). The role of social network-
ing in global business environments. In P. A. C. 
Smith & T. Cockburn (Eds.), Impact of emerg-
ing digital technologies on leadership in global 
business (pp. 183–201). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-6134-9.ch010
Kasemsap, K. (2015). Implementing enterprise 
resource planning. In M. Khosrow-Pour (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of information science and tech-
nology (3rd ed., pp. 798–807). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global; doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-5888-2.ch076
Kaufmann, L., & Saw, A. A. (2014). Using a 
multiple-informant approach in SCM research. 
International Journal of Physical Distribu-
tion & Logistics Management, 44(6), 511–527. 
doi:10.1108/IJPDLM-05-2013-0099
Ke, W., Liu, H., Wei, K. K., Gu, J., & Chen, H. 
(2009). How do mediated and non-mediated power 
affect electronic supply chain management sys-
tem adoption? The mediation effects of trust and 
institutional pressures. Decision Support Systems, 
46(4), 839–851. doi:10.1016/j.dss.2008.11.008

211
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
Khajeh-Hosseini, A., Greenwood, D., Smith, J. 
W., & Sommerville, I. (2012). The cloud adoption 
toolkit: Supporting cloud adoption decisions in 
the enterprise. Software, Practice & Experience, 
42(4), 447–465. doi:10.1002/spe.1072
Khasnabish, B., Huang, D., Bai, X., Bellavista, 
P., Martinez, G., & Antonopoulos, N. (2012). 
Cloud computing, networking, and services. 
Journal of Network and Systems Management, 
20(4), 463–467. doi:10.1007/s10922-012-9254-0
Kotzab, H., Grant, D. B., Teller, C., & Halldors-
son, A. (2009). Supply chain management and 
hypercompetition. Logistics Research, 1(1), 5–13. 
doi:10.1007/s12159-008-0002-5
Krumeich, J., Weis, B., Werth, D., & Loos, P. 
(2014). Event-driven business process manage-
ment: Where are we now? A comprehensive 
synthesis and analysis of literature. Business 
Process Management Journal, 20(4), 615–633. 
doi:10.1108/BPMJ-07-2013-0092
Kushida, K. E., Murray, J., & Zysman, J. (2011). 
Diffusing the cloud: Cloud computing and implica-
tions for public policy. Journal of Industry, Com-
petition and Trade, 11(3), 209–237. doi:10.1007/
s10842-011-0106-5
Lambert, D. M., & Pohlen, T. L. (2001). 
Supply chain metrics. International Jour-
nal of Logistics Management, 12(1), 1–19. 
doi:10.1108/09574090110806190
Lee, J., Cho, J., Seo, J., Shon, T., & Won, D. (2013). 
A novel approach to analyzing for detecting mali-
cious network activity using a cloud computing 
testbed. Mobile Networks and Applications, 18(1), 
122–128. doi:10.1007/s11036-012-0375-1
Lenssen, J. J., & Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2012). 
A new era of development: The changing role and 
responsibility of business in developing coun-
tries. Corporate Governance, 12(4), 403–413. 
doi:10.1108/14720701211267766
Lewis, I., & Talalayevsky, A. (1997). Logistics 
and information technology: A coordination 
perspective. Journal of Business Logistics, 18(1), 
141–157.
Leymann, F., Fehling, C., Mietzner, R., Nowak, 
A., & Dustdar, S. (2011). Moving applications 
to the cloud: An approach based on application 
model enrichment. International Journal of Co-
operative Information Systems, 20(3), 307–356. 
doi:10.1142/S0218843011002250
Li, Q., Zhang, X., & Chen, M. (2012). Design 
on enterprise knowledge supply chain based on 
cloud computing. Paper presented at the 2012 Fifth 
International Conference on Business Intelligence 
and Financial Engineering (BIFE 2012), Gansu, 
China. doi:10.1109/BIFE.2012.28
Liang, Q., Wang, Y. Z., & Zhang, Y. H. (2011). 
Resource virtualization model using hybrid-graph 
representation and converging algorithm for cloud 
computing. International Journal of Automation 
and Computing, 10(6), 597–606. doi:10.1007/
s11633-013-0758-1
Lin, L. C., & Li, T. S. (2010). An integrated frame-
work for supply chain performance measurement 
using six-sigma metrics. Software Quality Journal, 
18(3), 387–406. doi:10.1007/s11219-010-9099-2
Lindner, M., Galan, F., Chapman, C., Clayman, 
S., Henriksson, D., & Elmroth, E. (2010). The 
cloud supply chain: A framework for information, 
monitoring, accounting and billing. Retrieved 
September 6, 2014, from https://www.ee.ucl.
ac.uk/,sclayman/docs/CloudComp2010.pdf
Liu, H., Ke, W., Wei, K. K., Gu, J., & Chen, H. 
(2010). The role of institutional pressures and 
organizational culture in the firm’s intention to 
adopt Internet-enabled supply chain management 
systems. Journal of Operations Management, 
28(5), 372–384. doi:10.1016/j.jom.2009.11.010

212
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
Liu, H., & Orban, D. (2008). Gridbatch: Cloud 
computing for large-scale data-intensive batch 
applications. Paper presented at the 8th IEEE 
International Symposium on Cluster Comput-
ing and the Grid, Lyon, France. doi:10.1109/
CCGRID.2008.30
Liu, Y. C., Ma, Y. T., Zhang, H. S., Li, D. Y., & 
Chen, G. S. (2011). A method for trust manage-
ment in cloud computing: Data coloring by cloud 
watermarking. International Journal of Automa-
tion and Computing, 8(3), 280–285. doi:10.1007/
s11633-011-0583-3
Lohr, S. (2007). Google and I.B.M. Join in “cloud 
computing” research. New York Times. Retrieved 
September 6, 2014, from http://www.csun.edu/
pubrels/clips/Oct07/10-08-07E.pdf
Mabert, V. A., & Venkataramanan, M. A. (1998). 
Special research focus on supply chain linkages: 
Challenges for design and management in the 
21st century. Decision Sciences, 29(3), 537–552. 
doi:10.1111/j.1540-5915.1998.tb01353.x
Mackelprang, A. W., Robinson, J. L., Bernardes, 
E., & Webb, G. S. (2014). The relationship 
between strategic supply chain integration and 
performance: A meta-analytic evaluation and im-
plications for supply chain management research. 
Journal of Business Logistics, 35(1), 71–96. 
doi:10.1111/jbl.12023
Manuj, I., & Sahin, F. (2011). A model of supply 
chain and supply chain decision-making complex-
ity. International Journal of Physical Distribu-
tion & Logistics Management, 41(5), 511–549. 
doi:10.1108/09600031111138844
Marston, S., Li, Z., Bandyopadhyay, S., Zhang, 
J., & Ghalsasi, A. (2011). Cloud computing: The 
business perspective. Decision Support Systems, 
51(1), 176–189. doi:10.1016/j.dss.2010.12.006
Masson, R., Iosif, L., MacKerron, G., & Fernie, 
J. (2007). Managing complexity in agile global 
fashion industry supply chains. International 
Journal of Logistics Management, 18(2), 238–254. 
doi:10.1108/09574090710816959
Mathieu, R. G., & Pal, R. (2011). The selection of 
supply chain management projects: A case study 
approach. Operations Management Research, 
4(3-4), 164–181. doi:10.1007/s12063-011-0058-2
Melville, N., & Ramirez, R. (2008). Information 
technology innovation diffusion: An information 
requirements paradigm. Information Systems 
Journal, 18(3), 247–273. doi:10.1111/j.1365-
2575.2007.00260.x
Mena, C., Humphries, A., & Choi, T. Y. (2013). 
Toward a theory of multi-tier supply chain man-
agement. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 
49(2), 58–77. doi:10.1111/jscm.12003
Mentzer, J. T., DeWitt, W., Min, S., Nix, 
N. W., Smith, C. D., & Zacharia, Z. G. 
(2001). Defining supply chain management. 
Journal of Business Logistics, 22(2), 1–25. 
doi:10.1002/j.2158-1592.2001.tb00001.x
Mentzer, J. T., Flint, D. J., & Kent, J. L. (1999). 
Developing a logistics service quality scale. Jour-
nal of Business Logistics, 20(1), 9–32.
Mentzer, J. T., & Gundlach, G. (2010). Exploring 
the relationship between marketing and supply 
chain management: Introduction to the special 
issue. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Sci-
ence, 38(1), 1–4. doi:10.1007/s11747-009-0150-4
Min, S., Mentzer, J. T., & Ladd, R. T. (2007). A 
market orientation in supply chain management. 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 
35(4), 507–522. doi:10.1007/s11747-007-0020-x

213
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
Misra, S. C., & Mondal, A. (2010). Identification 
of a company’s suitability for the adoption of 
cloud computing and modelling its corresponding 
return on investment. Mathematical and Com-
puter Modelling, 53(3-4), 504–521. doi:10.1016/j.
mcm.2010.03.037
Modi, C., Patel, D., Borisaniya, B., Patel, A., & 
Rajarajan, M. (2012). A survey on security issues 
and solutions at different layers of Cloud com-
puting. The Journal of Supercomputing, 63(2), 
561–592. doi:10.1007/s11227-012-0831-5
Myers, M. B., Griffith, D. A., Daugherty, P. J., 
& Lusch, R. F. (2004). Maximizing the human 
capital equation in logistics: Education, experi-
ence, and skills. Journal of Business Logistics, 
25(1), 211–232. doi:10.1002/j.2158-1592.2004.
tb00175.x
Narasimhan, R., & Kim, S. W. (2001). Informa-
tion system utilization strategy for supply chain 
integration. Journal of Business Logistics, 22(2), 
51–75. doi:10.1002/j.2158-1592.2001.tb00003.x
Novack, R. A., Rinehart, L. M., & Langley, C. J. 
(1996). A comparative assessment of senior and 
logistics executives’ perceptions of logistics value. 
Journal of Business Logistics, 17(1), 135–178.
Novack, R. A., & Thomas, D. J. (2004). The chal-
lenges of implementing the perfect order concept. 
Transportation Journal, 43(1), 5–17.
Olson, J. R., & Boyer, K. K. (2005). Internet 
ticketing in a not-for-profit, service organization: 
Building customer loyalty. International Journal 
of Operations & Production Management, 25(1), 
74–92. doi:10.1108/01443570510572259
Om, K., Lee, J., & Chang, J. (2007). Using supply 
chain management to enhance industry-university 
collaborations in IT higher education in Korea. 
Scientometrics, 71(3), 455–471. doi:10.1007/
s11192-007-1690-3
Oztemel, E., & Tekez, E. K. (2009). Interactions 
of agents in performance based supply chain man-
agement. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 
20(2), 159–167. doi:10.1007/s10845-008-0229-7
Pagell, M., & Shevchenko, A. (2014). Why 
research in sustainable supply chain manage-
ment should have no future. Journal of Supply 
Chain Management, 50(1), 44–55. doi:10.1111/
jscm.12037
Peck, H. (2005). Drivers of supply chain 
vulnerability: An integrated framework. In-
ternational Journal of Physical Distribution 
& Logistics Management, 35(4), 210–232. 
doi:10.1108/09600030510599904
Peck, H., & Juttner, U. (2000). Strategy and 
relationships: Defining the interface in sup-
ply chain contexts. International Journal 
of Logistics Management, 11(2), 33–44. 
doi:10.1108/09574090010806146
Perera, C., Zaslavsky, A., Cristen, P., & Georga-
kopoulos, D. (2014). Sensing as a service model 
for smart cities supported by Internet of Things. 
Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications 
Technologies, 25(1), 81–93. doi:10.1002/ett.2704
Prasad, M. R., Gyani, J., & Murti, P. R. K. (2012). 
Mobile cloud computing: Implications and chal-
lenges. Journal of Information Engineering and 
Applications, 2(7), 7–16.
Premkumar, G., Ramamurthy, K., & Saunders, 
C. S. (2005). Information processing view of 
organizations: An exploratory examination of fit 
in the context of interorganizational relationships. 
Journal of Management Information Systems, 
22(1), 257–294.
Quelch, J. A., & Kenny, D. (1994). Extend prof-
its, not product lines. Harvard Business Review, 
72(5), 153–160.

214
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
Rahimi, M. R., Ren, J., Liu, C. H., Vasilakos, A. 
V., & Venkatasubramanian, N. (2014). Mobile 
cloud computing: A survey, state of art and future 
directions. Mobile Networks and Applications, 
19(2), 133–143. doi:10.1007/s11036-013-0477-4
Rai, A., Patnayakuni, R., & Seth, N. (2006). Firm 
performance impacts of digitally enabled sup-
ply chain integration capabilities. Management 
Information Systems Quarterly, 30(2), 225–246.
Rajaraman, V. (2014). Cloud computing. Reso-
nance, 19(3), 242–258. doi:10.1007/s12045-014-
0030-1
Ranjan, R., Buyya, R., & Benatallah, B. (2012). 
Special section: Software architectures and ap-
plication development environments for Cloud 
computing. Software, Practice & Experience, 
42(4), 391–394. doi:10.1002/spe.1144
Ranjan, R., Buyya, R., Leitner, P., Haller, A., 
& Tai, S. (2014). A note on software tools and 
techniques for monitoring and prediction of cloud 
services. Software, Practice & Experience, 44(7), 
771–775. doi:10.1002/spe.2266
Ratten, V. (2014). A US-China comparative 
study of cloud computing adoption behavior: The 
role of consumer innovativeness, performance 
expectations and social influence. Journal of 
Entrepreneurship in Emerging Economies, 6(1), 
53–71. doi:10.1108/JEEE-07-2013-0019
Revels, J., Tojib, D., & Tsarenko, Y. (2010). 
Understanding consumer intention to use mobile 
services. Australasian Marketing Journal, 18(2), 
74–80. doi:10.1016/j.ausmj.2010.02.002
Richey, R. G. Jr, Roath, A. S., Whipple, J. 
M., & Fawcett, S. E. (2010). Exploring a 
governance theory of supply chain manage-
ment: Barriers and facilitators to integration. 
Journal of Business Logistics, 31(1), 237–256. 
doi:10.1002/j.2158-1592.2010.tb00137.x
Richey, R. G., Tokman, M., & Wheeler, A. R. 
(2006). A supply chain manager selection meth-
odology: Empirical test and suggested application. 
Journal of Business Logistics, 27(2), 163–190. 
doi:10.1002/j.2158-1592.2006.tb00221.x
Rimal, B. P., Jukan, A., Katsaros, D., & Goeleven, 
Y. (2011). Architectural requirements for cloud 
computing systems: An enterprise cloud ap-
proach. Journal of Grid Computing, 9(1), 3–26. 
doi:10.1007/s10723-010-9171-y
Saberi, S., Nookabadi, A. S., & Hejazi, S. R. 
(2012). Applying agent-based system and nego-
tiation mechanism in improvement of inventory 
management and customer order fulfillment in 
multi echelon supply chain. Arabian Journal 
for Science and Engineering, 37(3), 851–861. 
doi:10.1007/s13369-012-0197-2
Sagar, M., Bora, S., Gangwal, A., Gupta, P., 
Kumar, A., & Agarwal, A. (2013). Factors af-
fecting customer loyalty in cloud computing: 
A customer defection-centric view to develop a 
void-in-customer loyalty amplification model. 
Global Journal of Flexible Systems Management, 
14(3), 143–156. doi:10.1007/s40171-013-0035-8
Sahin, F., & Robinson, E. P. Jr. (2005). Information 
sharing and coordination in make-to-order sup-
ply chains. Journal of Operations Management, 
23(6), 579–598. doi:10.1016/j.jom.2004.08.007
Sanchez-Rodrigues, V., Potter, A., & Naim, M. 
M. (2010). The impact of logistics uncertainty 
on sustainable transport operations. International 
Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics 
Management, 40(1-2), 61–83.
Sanders, N. R., & Premus, R. (2005). Modeling the 
relationship between firm it capability, collabora-
tion, and performance. Journal of Business Logis-
tics, 26(1), 1–23. doi:10.1002/j.2158-1592.2005.
tb00192.x

215
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
Savitskie, K. (2007). Internal and external 
logistics information technologies: The per-
formance impact in an international setting. 
International Journal of Physical Distribution 
& Logistics Management, 37(6), 454–468. 
doi:10.1108/09600030710763378
Saya, S., Pee, L., & Kankanhalli, A. (2010). The 
impact of institutional influences on perceived 
technological characteristics and real options 
in cloud computing adoption. Paper presented at 
the 31st International Conference on Information 
Systems (ICIS 2010), St. Louis, Missouri.
Schramm, T., Nogueira, S., & Jones, D. (2011). 
Cloud computing and supply chain: A natural fit 
for the future. Retrieved September 6, 2014, from: 
http://www.aberdeen.com/aberdeen-library/7470/
RA-software-service-cloud.aspx
Seethamraju, R. (2014). Enterprise systems and 
demand chain management: A cross-sectional 
field study. Information Technology Management, 
15(3), 151–161. doi:10.1007/s10799-014-0178-0
Shacklett, M. (2010). Is supply chain management 
emerging from the clouds? The short answer is 
“yes,” and now’s the time to take a more serious 
look. World Trade, 23(4), 34–37.
Shafieezadeh, M., & Sadegheih, A. (2014). De-
veloping an integrated inventory management 
model for multi-item multi-echelon supply chain. 
International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing 
Technology, 72(5-8), 1099–1119. doi:10.1007/
s00170-014-5684-z
Shilton, K. (2012). Participatory personal data: 
An emerging research challenge for the informa-
tion sciences. Journal of the American Society 
for Information Science and Technology, 63(10), 
1905–1915. doi:10.1002/asi.22655
Shon, T., Cho, J., Han, K., & Choi, H. (2014). 
Toward advanced mobile cloud computing for 
the Internet of Things: Current issues and future 
direction. Mobile Networks and Applications, 
19(3), 404–413. doi:10.1007/s11036-014-0509-8
Shoushtari, K. D. (2013). Redesigning a large 
supply chain management system to reduce the 
government administration: A socio-functional 
systems approach. Systemic Practice and Action 
Research, 26(2), 195–216. doi:10.1007/s11213-
012-9244-x
Siddiqui, F., Haleem, A., & Sharma, C. (2012). 
The impact of supply chain management practices 
in total quality management practices and flexible 
system practices context: An empirical study in 
oil and gas industry. Global Journal of Flexible 
Systems Management, 13(1), 11–23. doi:10.1007/
s40171-012-0002-9
Simchi-Levi, D., Kaminski, P., & Simchi-Levi, 
E. (2008). Designing and managing the supply 
chain: Concepts, strategies, and case studies. 
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
Sinkovics, R. R., & Roath, A. S. (2004). 
Strategic orientation, capabilities, and perfor-
mance in manufacturer - 3PL relationships. 
Journal of Business Logistics, 25(2), 43–64. 
doi:10.1002/j.2158-1592.2004.tb00181.x
Soderberg, L., & Bengtsson, L. (2010). Supply 
chain management maturity and performance in 
SMEs. Operations Management Research, 3(1), 
90–97. doi:10.1007/s12063-010-0030-6
Stein, S., Ware, J., Laboy, J., & Schaffer, H. E. 
(2013). Improving K-12 pedagogy via a cloud 
designed for education. International Journal 
of Information Management, 33(1), 235–241. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2012.07.009

216
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
Stieninger, M., & Nedbal, D. (2014). Character-
istics of cloud computing in the business context: 
A systematic literature review. Global Journal 
of Flexible Systems Management, 15(1), 59–68. 
doi:10.1007/s40171-013-0055-4
Stock, J. R., Boyer, S. L., & Harmon, T. (2010). Re-
search opportunities in supply chain management. 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 
38(1), 32–41. doi:10.1007/s11747-009-0136-2
Sultan, N. (2010). Cloud computing for education: 
A new dawn? International Journal of Informa-
tion Management, 30(2), 109–116. doi:10.1016/j.
ijinfomgt.2009.09.004
Truong, D. (2010). How cloud computing en-
hances competitive advantages: A research model 
for small businesses. The Business Review, Cam-
bridge, 15(1), 59–65.
Truong, D. (2014). Cloud-based solutions for 
supply chain management: A post-adoption study. 
Paper presented at the ASBBS 21st Annual Con-
ference, Las Vegas, CA.
Tushman, M. L., & Nadler, D. A. (1978). Infor-
mation processing as an integrating concept in 
organizational design. Academy of Management 
Review, 3(3), 613–624.
Van der Vorst, J. G. A. J., & Beulens, A. J. 
M. (2002). Identifying sources of uncertainty 
to generate supply chain redesign strategies. 
International Journal of Physical Distribu-
tion & Logistics Management, 32(6), 409–430. 
doi:10.1108/09600030210437951
Vaquero, L. M., Rodero-Merino, L., Caceres, J., & 
Lindner, M. (2008). A break in the clouds: Towards 
a cloud definition. Computer Communication Re-
view, 39(1), 50–55. doi:10.1145/1496091.1496100
Venkatesh, V., & Davis, F. D. (2000). A theo-
retical extension of the technology acceptance 
model: Four longitudinal field studies. Manage-
ment Science, 46(2), 186–204. doi:10.1287/
mnsc.46.2.186.11926
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M. G., Davis, G. B., & Da-
vis, F. D. (2003). User acceptance of information 
technology: Toward a unified view. Management 
Information Systems Quarterly, 27(3), 425–478.
Vickery, S. K., Droge, C., Setia, P., & Sam-
bamurthy, V. (2010). Supply chain information 
technologies and organizational initiatives: 
Complementary versus independent effects on 
agility and firm performance. International Jour-
nal of Production Research, 48(23), 7025–7042. 
doi:10.1080/00207540903348353
Vouk, M. A. (2008). Cloud computing: Issues, 
research and implementations. Journal of Comput-
ing and Information Technology, 16(4), 235–246.
Walterbusch, M., Martens, B., & Teuteberg, F. 
(2013). Evaluating cloud computing services 
from a total cost of ownership perspective. Man-
agement Research Review, 36(6), 613–638. 
doi:10.1108/01409171311325769
Wang, E. T. G., Tai, J. C. F., & Wei, H. L. (2006). 
A virtual integration theory of improved supply-
chain performance. Journal of Management 
Information Systems, 23(2), 41–64. doi:10.2753/
MIS0742-1222230203
Wang, K., & Lin, C. L. (2012). The adoption of 
mobile value-added services: Investigating the 
influence of IS quality and perceived playful-
ness. Managing Service Quality, 22(2), 184–208. 
doi:10.1108/09604521211219007

217
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
Wang, L., von Laszewski, G., Younge, A., He, 
X., Kunze, M., Tao, J., & Fu, C. (2011). Cloud 
computing: A perspective study. New Genera-
tion Computing, 28(2), 137–146. doi:10.1007/
s00354-008-0081-5
Wang, S., Liu, Z., Sun, Q., Zou, H., & Yang, F. 
(2014). Towards an accurate evaluation of quality 
of cloud service in service-oriented cloud comput-
ing. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 25(2), 
283–291. doi:10.1007/s10845-012-0661-6
Willcocks, L. P., Venters, W., & Whitley, E. A. 
(2013). Cloud sourcing and innovation: Slow train 
coming? A composite research study. Strategic 
Outsourcing: An International Journal, 6(2), 
184–202. doi:10.1108/SO-04-2013-0004
Winkler, H. (2009). How to improve supply chain 
flexibility using strategic supply chain networks. 
Logistics Research, 1(1), 15–25. doi:10.1007/
s12159-008-0001-6
Wolf, J. (2011). Sustainable supply chain man-
agement integration: A qualitative analysis of 
the German manufacturing industry. Journal of 
Business Ethics, 102(2), 221–235. doi:10.1007/
s10551-011-0806-0
Wu, Y., Cegielski, C. G., Hazen, B. T., & Hall, 
D. J. (2013). Cloud computing in support of 
supply chain information system infrastructure: 
Understanding when to go to the cloud. Journal 
of Supply Chain Management, 49(3), 25–41. 
doi:10.1111/j.1745-493x.2012.03287.x
Wycisk, C., McKelvey, B., & Hulsmann, M. 
(2008). Smart parts, supply networks as complex 
adaptive systems: Analysis and implications. 
International Journal of Physical Distribu-
tion & Logistics Management, 38(2), 108–125. 
doi:10.1108/09600030810861198
Xun, X. (2012). From cloud computing to cloud 
manufacturing. Robotics and Computer-integrated 
Manufacturing, 28(1), 75–86. doi:10.1016/j.
rcim.2011.07.002
Yang, F., Wu, D., Liang, L., Bi, G., & Wu, D. 
D. (2011). Supply chain DEA: Production pos-
sibility set and performance evaluation model. 
Annals of Operations Research, 185(1), 195–211. 
doi:10.1007/s10479-008-0511-2
Yoo, C. S. (2011). Cloud computing: Architec-
tural and policy implications. Review of Indus-
trial Organization, 38(4), 405–421. doi:10.1007/
s11151-011-9295-7
Yousafzai, S. Y., Foxall, G. R., & Pallister, J. G. 
(2010). Explaining internet banking behavior: 
Theory of reasoned action, theory of planned be-
havior, or technology acceptance model? Journal 
of Applied Social Psychology, 40(5), 1172–1202. 
doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.2010.00615.x
Yu, J., Sheng, Q. Z., & Han, Y. (2013). Introduction 
to special issue on cloud and service computing. 
Service Oriented Computing and Applications, 
7(2), 75–76. doi:10.1007/s11761-013-0132-8
Zacharia, Z. G., Sanders, N. R., & Fugate, B. S. 
(2014). Evolving functional perspectives within 
supply chain management. Journal of Supply 
Chain Management, 50(1), 73–88. doi:10.1111/
jscm.12022
Zhang, Q., Cheng, L., & Boutaba, R. (2010). 
Cloud computing: State-of-the-art and research 
challenges. Journal of Internet Services and 
Applications, 1(1), 7–18. doi:10.1007/s13174-
010-0007-6
Zhuge, H. (2011). Semantic linking through spaces 
for cyber-physical-socio intelligence: A methodol-
ogy. Artificial Intelligence, 175(5-6), 988–1019. 
doi:10.1016/j.artint.2010.09.009
ADDITIONAL READING
Amies, A., Sluiman, H., Tong, Q. G., & Liu, G. 
N. (2012). Developing and hosting applications 
on the cloud. Indianapolis, IN: IBM Press.

218
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
Berman, S. J., Kesterson-Townes, L., Marshall, 
A., & Srivathsa, R. (2012). How cloud comput-
ing enables process and business model innova-
tion. Strategy and Leadership, 40(4), 27–35. 
doi:10.1108/10878571211242920
Breeding, M. (2012). Cloud computing for librar-
ies. Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Carlo, J. L., Lyytinen, K., & Rose, G. M. (2011). 
Internet computing as a disruptive technology: The 
role of strong order effects. Information Systems 
Journal, 21(1), 91–122. doi:10.1111/j.1365-
2575.2009.00345.x
Chaisiri, S., Lee, B. S., & Niyato, D. (2012). Op-
timization of resource provisioning cost in cloud 
computing. Computer, 5(2), 1–32.
Chang, V., Li, C. S., De Roure, D., Wills, G., Wal-
ters, R., & Chee, C. (2011). The financial clouds 
review. International Journal of Cloud Applica-
tions and Computing, 1(2), 41–63. doi:10.4018/
ijcac.2011040104
Chang, V., Walters, R., & Wills, G. (2012). 
Business Integration as a Service. International 
Journal of Cloud Applications and Computing, 
2(1), 16–40. doi:10.4018/ijcac.2012010102
Chang, V., Walters, R. J., & Wills, G. (2013). The 
development that leads to the Cloud Comput-
ing Business Framework. International Journal 
of Information Management, 33(3), 524–538. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2013.01.005
Ghezzi, A. (2012). Emerging business models 
and strategies for mobile platforms providers: 
A reference framework. Info, 14(5), 36–56. 
doi:10.1108/14636691211256296
Ghezzi, A., Cortimiglia, M., & Balocco, R. (2012). 
Mobile content and service delivery platforms: 
A technology classification model. Info, 14(2), 
72–88. doi:10.1108/14636691211204879
Goldner, M. (2011). Winds of change: Libraries 
and cloud computing. Multimedia Information & 
Technology, 37(3), 24–28.
Goldner, M., & Birch, K. (2012). Resource 
sharing in a cloud computing age. Inter-
lending & Document Supply, 40(1), 4–11. 
doi:10.1108/02641611211214224
Hall, D. J., Huscroft, J. R., Hazen, B. T., & Hanna, 
J. B. (2013). Reverse logistics goals, metrics, and 
challenges: Perspectives from industry. Interna-
tional Journal of Physical Distribution & Logis-
tics Management, 43(9), 768–785. doi:10.1108/
IJPDLM-02-2012-0052
Han, Y. (2013). IaaS cloud computing services 
for libraries: Cloud storage and virtual machines. 
OCLC Systems & Services: International digital 
library. Perspectives, 29(2), 87–100.
Harmon, R. R., Demirkan, H., & Raffo, 
D. (2012). Roadmapping the next wave of 
sustainable IT. Foresight, 14(2), 121–138. 
doi:10.1108/14636681211222401
Hazen, B. T., & Byrd, T. A. (2012). Toward 
creating competitive advantage with logistics 
information technology. International Journal of 
Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 
42(1), 8–35. doi:10.1108/09600031211202454
Hazen, B. T., Hall, D. J., & Hanna, J. B. (2012). 
Reverse logistics disposition decision-making: 
Developing a decision framework via content 
analysis. International Journal of Physical Distri-
bution & Logistics Management, 42(3), 244–274. 
doi:10.1108/09600031211225954
Ivanov, D., Sokolov, B., & Kaschel, J. (2011). 
Integrated supply chain planning based on a 
combined application of operations research and 
optimal control. Central European Journal of Op-
erations Research, 19(3), 219–317. doi:10.1007/
s10100-010-0185-0

219
The Role of Cloud Computing in Global Supply Chain
﻿
Krikos, A. (2011). Cloud computing as a disrup-
tive technology. Cloudbook Journal, 2(2), 13–18.
Mavodza, J. (2013). The impact of cloud comput-
ing on the future of academic library practices and 
services. New Library World, 114(3-4), 132–141. 
doi:10.1108/03074801311304041
Neirotti, P., Paolucci, E., & Raguseo, E. (2013). 
Is it all about size? Comparing organizational and 
environmental antecedents of IT assimilation in 
small and medium-sized enterprises. Interna-
tional Journal of Technology Management, 61(1), 
82–108. doi:10.1504/IJTM.2013.050245
Ross, P. K. (2011). How to keep your head above 
the clouds: Changing ICT worker skill sets in a 
cloud computing environment. The Employment 
Relations Record, 11(1), 62–74.
Sanders, N. R., & Wagner, S. M. (2011). Mul-
tidisciplinary and multimethod research for ad-
dressing contemporary supply chain challenges. 
Journal of Business Logistics, 32(4), 317–323. 
doi:10.1111/j.0000-0000.2011.01027.x
Sutherland, E. (2013). The enterprise and the digital 
single market: Business telecommunications. Info, 
15(2), 62–72. doi:10.1108/14636691311305425
Tangpong, C. (2011). Content analytic approach 
to measuring constructs in operations and sup-
ply chain management. Journal of Operations 
Management, 29(6), 627–638. doi:10.1016/j.
jom.2010.08.001
Tokar, T., Aloysius, J. A., Waller, M. A., & 
Williams, B. D. (2011). Retail promotions 
and information sharing in the supply chain: 
A controlled experiment. International Jour-
nal of Logistics Management, 22(1), 5–25. 
doi:10.1108/09574091111127534
Truong, H. L., & Dustdar, S. (2012). A survey on 
cloud-based sustainability governance systems. 
International Journal of Web Information Systems, 
8(3), 278–295. doi:10.1108/17440081211258178
Wu, W. W., Lan, L. W., & Lee, Y. T. (2013). Factors 
hindering acceptance of using cloud services in 
university: A case study. The Electronic Library, 
31(1), 84–98. doi:10.1108/02640471311299155
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Application Software: The complete, self-
contained computer program that performs a 
specific useful task.
Cloud Computing: The process where a task 
is solved by using a wide variety of technologies, 
including computers, networks, servers, and the 
Internet.
Information Processing: The interpretation 
of the incoming information to make a response 
suitable within the context of an objective, prob-
lem, or situation.
Information Technology: A set of tools, 
processes, and associated equipment employed to 
collect, process, and present information.
Internet: A means of connecting a computer 
to any other computer anywhere in the world via 
routers and servers.
Network: The operating system that enables 
users of data communications lines to exchange 
information over long distances by connecting with 
each other through a system of routers, servers, 
switches, and the like.
Operating System: The master control pro-
gram that automatically runs first when a computer 
is switched on, and remains in the background 
until the computer is turned off.
Supply Chain: The entire network of entities, 
directly or indirectly interlinked and interdepen-
dent in serving the same customer.
Supply Chain Management: The manage-
ment of material and information flow in a supply 
chain to provide the highest degree of customer 
satisfaction at the lowest possible cost.

Section 5
Cloud Computing in Health 
Sector

221
Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  10
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-8339-6.ch010
Establishing Synergy between 
Cloud Computing and 
Colloborative Technology 
in Medical Informatics
ABSTRACT
The Health care sector needs information driven service. Information is a major resource which is im-
portant to health of individual patient and the success of hospitals. The understanding between medical 
professionals and software professionals can be a main force behind the design, management and use 
of health care data and information. Health care information systems need to move from traditional 
integrated database to knowledge based database. Generally, data in health care sector is available as 
disperse elements; when it is compiled into a meaningful pattern, then it becomes information. And as 
information is converted into valid basis for action, then it becomes knowledge. This chapter explains 
making use of the concepts such as cloud computing, pervasive computing, virtual reality along with 
the other collaborative technology which will facilitate to create knowledge based health care system.
INTRODUCTION
Health has been a concern of major importance 
across the world. The kind and amount of resources 
available now are increasing day by day. Technol-
ogy has been the most important new resource in 
the present century. Emergence of new tools and 
devices has been helping the medical profession. 
Further it is enhancing the medical professionals to 
offer better service to their patients. Advancements 
in information and communication technology 
have been making medicine and medical infor-
mation systems integrated (Sunitha, & Preethi, 
2013). Electronic health or e-health is the result 
of the above integration. Most of the hospitals 
in the world have reasonably good information 
systems to manage the internal administrative 
and clinical processes for their patients (Vijayrani, 
N. Raghavendra Rao
FINAIT Consultancy Services, India

222
Establishing Synergy between Cloud Computing and Colloborative Technology in Medical Informatics
﻿
2013). Exchange of information in the above in-
frastructure is mostly confined to their hospital 
and the hospitals attached to them.
Now it has become a necessity to integrate 
geographically distributed and organizationally 
independent organizations for medical informa-
tion system. This integration gives a scope for 
designing a knowledge based system for health 
care sector. The present information and com-
munication technology provides several concepts 
that enable to develop a health care information 
system more effectively.
Cloud Computing, Pervasive computing, Vir-
tual Reality and other collaborative technologies 
are among a number of other concepts provided 
by information and communication technology. 
There are two types of approaches prevalent in 
health care sector. They are ‘Conservative ap-
proach’ and ‘Adaptive Change Approach’. The 
elements in the latter approach are reasoning 
knowledge based understanding and enlightened 
creative wisdom blended with professional values. 
Implementation of emerging concepts in informa-
tion and communication technology is possible 
under the latter approach.
NEED FOR KNOWLEDGE 
BASED SYSTEM
Due to the change in the life style of the people 
across the Globe, the nuclear family has become 
the order of the day. There used to be a doctor for 
each family when the joint family was prevalent. 
Most of these doctors knew the entire medical 
history of all the members of the family. These 
doctors used to organize all the medical services 
through their professional contacts whenever the 
family needed their services. The family doctor 
was considered as a part of the family, philosopher, 
and guide. The concept of ‘Family Doctor” has 
disappeared today. In the present scenario hospi-
tals are the most important element in health care 
delivery system. Every time a patient or patient’s 
relative approaches a hospital, he or she comes with 
an expectation. What happens next will form an 
experience. A good experience may increase one’s 
confidence in the hospital and he/she recommends 
the same hospital to friends and relatives. But a 
bad experience may dissuade probable patients 
not to make use of the services provided by a 
hospital. Health problems and needs are increas-
ing and becoming more complex. The demands 
and pressures on the hospitals are also increasing. 
Providing timely service and care is the primary 
responsibility of all the hospital authorities. The 
ability to recognize this process and to actively 
manage it, forms the basis for “Knowledge Based 
Health Care System”.
Health care organizations have a large volume 
of data which is generated by the number of trans-
actions that take place during the services rendered 
to patients. One of the greatest difficulties in health 
care organizations is not so much in gathering data 
but deciding what needs to be gathered to provide 
the necessary information and making sure that it 
is distributed to the right people at the right time 
and in the right form. “Knowledge Based Health 
Care System” will be useful in taking care of the 
above requirements.
Innovative Approach
Globalization has been forcing health care sector 
to focus on the need for innovative approach in 
designing and developing knowledge based health 
care system. The World is poised to take a huge 
leap at the rate innovation is gaining importance. 
This is the result of use of enhanced sharing of in-
formation and collaborative possibilities provided 
by cloud computing. Cloud computing (Buyya, 
Vecchiola, & Selvi, 2013) provides infrastructure 
for creation of virtual hospitals with knowledge 
based health care system. The following case il-
lustration gives an idea of developing knowledge 
based health care information system by a hospital 
in India.

223
Establishing Synergy between Cloud Computing and Colloborative Technology in Medical Informatics
﻿
CASE ILLUSTRATION 1
A team of four medical doctors started a medical 
consulting center a decade ago at Chennai in India. 
They have taken a small area in a big building on 
rent. The area taken on rent could accommodate 
two doctors and twenty patients at any point of 
time in a day. These doctors would provide their 
services in their areas of specialization. It was 
because of the constraint in the space they have 
agreed among themselves to the specific time al-
lotted to each doctor for their consultancy. They 
had a tie up with the selected clinical laboratories 
and investigating medical equipments Centers. 
These doctors would refer their patients to these 
centers for tests and investigations. Medical 
consulting center had a standalone system with 
readymade application software for health care 
information system. This readymade application 
software would support some basic functions 
required by the doctors. Over a period of time 
much advancement has taken place in the area of 
information and communication technology. To 
take advantage of these advancements, they have 
changed to an integrated health care information 
system in a relation database under client server 
technology. The new system has been more useful 
to the doctors in their professional work.
“Diagnosis” is the essence of patient’s health 
management. The doctors at the medical consult-
ing center have proved themselves to be good at 
correct diagnosis and appropriate treatment. India 
has been becoming more popular as one of the good 
health care service providers in the globalization 
scenario. Consequent to this many patients across 
the globe started preferring India for their health 
care destination. Some of the patients have been 
keen to visit medical consulting center at Chennai.
This has led the doctors at the center to start a 
separate fully fledged hospital with the advanced 
infrastructure. Care plus Cure hospital limited has 
been established by them. Many more specialists 
have joined the hospital to serve. The hospital 
has acquired the latest medical equipments for 
investigations. The hospital has set up its own 
clinical laboratories for testing. The hospital has 
been particular to concentrate on the following 
areas besides providing the regular health care 
services. The areas are 1) Medical Research 2) 
Medical education to patients 3) Developing 
formulas for medicines with the collaboration 
with the reputed pharmaceutical companies 4) 
Information for acquiring medical equipments 
5) Sharing medical knowledge with the students 
of medicine 6) Providing hospital management 
systems to the hospitals who want to make use 
of this service.
Core teams in the hospital consisting of medical 
doctors who have knowledge in information and 
communication technology and software profes-
sionals have designed, developed and have been 
managing the system.
Many young medical doctors in India are 
evincing interest to start medical centers in the 
rural areas. They are looking for medical infor-
mation system to support in their ventures. Care 
plus Cure hospital limited has been extending its 
service to the young medical doctors in their ven-
ture. It is interesting to note that cloud computing 
and the collaborative technologies are the main 
components for the creation of “Care plus Cure” 
integrated health care system. Figure-1 illustrates 
the integrated hospital management system at Care 
plus Cure Hospital Limited.
GOALS OF CARE PLUS 
CURE HOSPITAL LIMITED
Every enterprise has mission and vision goal for 
its enterprise. Care plus Cure hospital Limited 
has realized the need for an integrated health 
care system under cloud computing environment. 
Their health care system is designed to support 
the following.

224
Establishing Synergy between Cloud Computing and Colloborative Technology in Medical Informatics
﻿
1. 	
Mission: To provide health care and health 
care related services to their hospital and 
the needs of the other hospitals.
2. 	
Strategy: Designing integrating information 
health care system to support their mission.
3. 	
Health Care Process Models: Developing 
medical information process models to ac-
complish their strategy.
4. 	
Hospital Functions: To define the technol-
ogy infrastructure needed for supporting 
the data and application in the health care 
system.
5. 	
Standards: To document the required stan-
dards for hospitals.
CLOUD COMPUTING IN 
HEALTH CARE SECTOR
Making use of cloud capabilities is more than the 
latest technology. It is moving from traditional 
model to knowledge based model. Medical doc-
tors, medical students, patients, and research 
scholars are the main participants in the latter 
model. It is much more important for the health 
care sector to understand the changing trends in 
the information and communication technology. 
The changing trends help health care sector also 
define the best strategy to leverage cloud comput-
ing. Basically cloud computing can divide the data 
Figure 1. Integrated hospital management system

225
Establishing Synergy between Cloud Computing and Colloborative Technology in Medical Informatics
﻿
center into application cloud, hardware cloud, and 
computing cloud. Adoption of the cloud idea itself 
emphasizes that it is a mixture of centralized and 
distributed architecture.
CLOUD COMPUTING PROVIDES 
THE FOLLOWING ADVANTAGES
1. 	
Investment on infrastructure: Capital 
Investment optimizes the reduction of costs 
of hardware and software. This investment 
helps hospitals to make use of economies of 
scale and operational costs in information 
and communication technology.
2. 	
Innovative Approach: Developing models 
under cloud computing environment facili-
tate to adopt innovative approach in health 
care information system.
3. 	
Electronic Devices: Most of the electronic 
devices are connected to the internet. Internet 
is the main access in the cloud computing 
environment. Electronic Devices are more 
useful in a health care system.
PRIVATE CLOUD ENVIRONMENT 
IN CAR PLUS CURE 
HOSPITAL LIMITED
There are four different models under cloud 
computing concept with different characteristics. 
Care plus Cure hospital limited has chosen private 
cloud for their information system. Private cloud 
(Chorafas, 2011) is considered to be suitable for 
maintaining sensitive data in health care systems. 
Private cloud can be said to be a private data center 
and residing within the organization. This data 
center is exclusive for the use of their organiza-
tion. This is shared and multi user environment 
built on highly efficient, automated and virtualized 
infrastructure. The advantage of Private cloud is 
setting up and managing the cloud services under 
the control of the enterprise who owns it. The 
enterprise can take a better control of security 
and regulatory compliance issues. Private cloud 
is a better solution for health care organizations 
in leveraging the benefits of cloud computing 
within their firewall.
VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENT
One of the big changes that is emerging in the 
present globalization scenario is virtual environ-
ment. This has given a scope for virtual medical 
conferences, virtual consultations and even virtual 
hospitals. The professional isolation that is expe-
rienced by so many professionals working away 
from distant places has become largely a thing 
of the past. Now they can take part in interactive 
exchanges and have access to online knowledge 
bases and expertise as anyone and anywhere in the 
World. The idea behind choosing private cloud by 
care plus cure hospital limited is to provide health 
care services under virtual environment.
VIRTUAL REALITY IN 
VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENT
Virtual reality is a way of creating a three dimen-
sional image of an object or scene. It is possible 
for the user to move through or around the image. 
Virtual reality imitates the way the real object 
or scene looks and changes. Information system 
helps to use information in databases to stimulate. 
The line dividing simulated tasks and their real 
world counter parts is very thin. Virtual reality 
systems are designed to produce in the participant 
the cognitive effects of feeling immersed in the 
environment created by computer system. The 
computer system uses sensory inputs such as 
vision, hearing, feeling and sensation of motion. 
The concept of multimedia is required in virtual 
reality process. The components of multimedia 
are tactile (Touch), Visual (Image) and auditory 
(Sound).

226
Establishing Synergy between Cloud Computing and Colloborative Technology in Medical Informatics
﻿
The concept of virtual reality is more useful 
for showing the advancements taking place in the 
health care sector especially in the area of surgery. 
Medical students will be benefited by upgrading 
their knowledge. Simulated tasks replicate the real 
medical tasks. Care plus Cure hospital Limited 
wants to make use of this concept in explaining the 
latest developments in surgery to medical students.
RESEARCH ACTIVITIES IN 
HEALTH CARE SECTOR
Certain diseases are peculiar to certain countries 
(Auewarkul, 2008). An independent research 
center or a center for a group of hospitals can be 
established to analyze the disease and its causes. 
Many samples of information are required for 
analysis. Generally database in any hospital has 
the current information only to optimize the use 
of database. The data from the database are trans-
ferred to historical database as backup.
Four types of hospital enterprises provide 
medical services in India (Govil, & Purohit, 2011). 
They are 1) Corporate Hospitals 2) Government 
Hospitals 3) Hospitals managed by a group of 
trustees and 4) Nursing homes. Care plus Cure 
Hospitals limited along with some of the above 
mentioned hospitals have agreed to have a joint 
research center. Care plus Cure Hospitals limited 
is ready to store their data along with the data of 
other hospitals in their private cloud. It is mutu-
ally agreed that the data is to be used for research 
purpose only. Historical data and spatial data 
collected from several databases from different 
hospitals are stored in one database under private 
cloud at Care plus Cure hospitals limited. Private 
cloud provides an extremely useful activity in 
the medical field for research. Figure-2 gives an 
overview of medical research base at Care plus 
Cure Hospital Limited.
Data ware house concept is used by the above 
hospitals for their research work. Data ware house 
is a central store of data that is extracted either from 
Figure 2. Medical research base

227
Establishing Synergy between Cloud Computing and Colloborative Technology in Medical Informatics
﻿
operational data base or from historical data base. 
The data in data ware house is subject oriented, 
non-volatile and of a historical nature. So data 
ware house tends to contain extremely large data 
sets. It can be inferred that the purpose of data 
ware house is 1) To slice and dice through data 
2) To ensure that past data is stored accurately 3) 
To provide one version of data 4) To operate for 
analytical process and 5) To support the decision 
process.
Data Mining (Pujari K, 2003) is a concept 
used in Data ware house. Data Mining deals with 
discovering hidden data and unexpected patterns 
and rules in large data base. The terms “Data 
Mining” and KDD (Knowledge Discovery in 
Databases) are considered as synonyms. At the 
first international conference on KDD in Mon-
treal in the year 1995, it was proposed that the 
term “KDD” be employed to describe the whole 
process of extraction of knowledge from data. 
In this context knowledge means relationships 
and patterns between data and elements. It was 
proposed that the term “Data Mining” (Adriaans, 
& Zantinge, 1999) should be used exclusively 
for the discovery stage of the KDD process. It 
is clear that KDD is not an activity that stands 
on its own. A good foundation in terms of data 
ware house is a necessary condition for effective 
implementation. Four types of knowledge can be 
identified in Data Mining. They are 1) Shallow 
Knowledge 2) Multi-Dimensional Knowledge 3) 
Hidden Knowledge 4) Deep Knowledge
SHALLOW KNOWLEDGE
Information can be easily retrieved from data-
bases using a query tool such as structured query 
language (SQL)
MULTI-DIMENSIONAL KNOWLEDGE
Information can be analyzed using online analyti-
cal processing tools.
HIDDEN KNOWLEDGE
Data can be found relatively easily by using pat-
tern recognition or machine learning algorithms.
DEEP KNOWLEDGE
Information that is stored in the database can be 
located if one has a clue that tells the user where 
to look.
INFORMATION AT A 
HOSPITAL LEVEL
The primary entity for a hospital is the patient. 
The information pertaining to patients such as 
activities, habits, health problems, treatment and 
reactions to medicines may be available at a par-
ticular hospital where all the services needed are 
provided to patients. The information pertaining 
to the services rendered may be available in a 
same database or different databases and at dif-
ferent locations.
The required information transferred to data 
ware house in the private cloud at Care plus Cure 
Hospitals is limited for research. Combinations 
of data ware house and data mining indicates an 
innovative approach to information management. 
Private cloud environment at Care plus Cure 
hospital limited has given a strategic source of 
opportunity to the doctors attached to the various 

228
Establishing Synergy between Cloud Computing and Colloborative Technology in Medical Informatics
﻿
hospitals to be a part of research group for making 
use of their medical knowledge and experience 
in the area of research.
CASE ILLUSTRATION 2
The doctors have been highlighting some of the 
side effects of the drugs prescribed by them to 
their patients at the various medical conferences 
being held in India. It has been the practice among 
some of the pharmaceutical companies to send 
their executives in their R and D Departments 
to attend these conferences. On Call pharma 
Limited which has a base in India has felt it 
would be better to associate with a hospital to 
analyze the medical cases for improving and 
discovering a drug. On the basis of the proposal 
submitted by the above pharmaceutical company, 
Care plus Cure Hospitals Limited has accepted 
their proposal and is ready to share the data with 
them for discovering a drug. It has been mutually 
agreed that discovering a drug (Bandopadhyay, 
2013) should be on a rational approach. Further it 
has been agreed to create a core team consisting 
of medical doctors, paramedical professionals, 
research executives and information technology 
professionals for this project. Members of the 
core team are from On Call Pharma Limited, Care 
plus Cure Hospital Limited and the professionals 
from the hospitals associated with Care plus Cure 
hospitals limited. The data in the private cloud at 
Care plus Cure hospital limited will be the base 
for research purpose.
DISCOVERY OF A DRUG
A Drug is a molecule that interacts with target 
biological molecule in the body and through such 
interaction triggers a physiological effect. The 
target molecules are usually proteins. Drugs can 
be beneficial or harmful depending on their effect. 
The aim of discovering a drug is with specific 
beneficial effects to treat diseases in human beings.
Discovering a drug can be arrived by two 
methods (Ignacimuthu, 2005). The methods are 
empirical and rational. Empirical method is a 
blind or loose method. It is also called black box 
method. Thousands of chemical compounds are 
tested on the disease without even knowing the 
target on which the drug acts and the mechanism 
of action. Rational method starts from the clear 
knowledge of the target as well as the mechanism 
by which it is to be attacked. Drugs act either to 
stimulate or block the activity of the target protein.
ROLE OF BIO-INFORMATICS 
IN DRUG DISCOVERY
Bio Informatics is the storage, manipulation, and 
analysis of biological information by making use 
of information technology. Bio Informatics is an 
essential infrastructure under pinning biological 
research (Bergeron, 2003). Adoption of bioinfor-
matics based approach to drug discovery provides 
an important advantage in rational approach.
BIOLOGICAL DATA
The properties that characterize a living organ-
ism (Species) are based on its fundamental set of 
genetics information. It is important to understand 
the fundamental aspects of terms such as DNA, 
RNA, Protein and their information in relation 
to Genome.
Different sequences of bases in DNA specify 
different sequences of bases in RNA. The sequence 
of bases in RNA specifies the sequences of amino 
acids in proteins. The central dogma states that 
DNA is transcribed into RNA which is then trans-
lated later into protein (Teresa, & David, 2005).

229
Establishing Synergy between Cloud Computing and Colloborative Technology in Medical Informatics
﻿
The main advantage in Bioinformatics disci-
pline is biological data are available on the various 
web sites (Krane, & Raymer, 2005). The databases 
in these websites can be classified into two types 
such as generalized and specialized databases. 
The generalized databases contain information 
related to DNA, Protein or similar types. The 
generalized databases can again be further split 
into sequence databases and structured databases. 
Sequence databases hold the individual sequence 
records of either nucleotides or amino acids or 
proteins. Structured databases contain the indi-
vidual sequence records of bio-chemically solved 
structures of macro-molecules.
Specialized databases are 1) EST (Expressed 
Sequence Tags) 2) GSS (Genome Survey Se-
quences) 3) SNP (Single Nucleotide Polymor-
phism) 4) STS (Sequence Tag Sites) 5) KABAT for 
Immunology Proteins and LIGAND for enzymes 
reaction legends. These databases can be further 
split into three types based on the complexity of 
the data stored.
1. 	
Primary Databases: These databases 
contain data in its original form from the 
sequences.
2. 	
Secondary Databases: These databases 
have value added data and derived informa-
tion from the primary databases.
3. 	
Composite Databases: Composite data-
bases amalgamate a variety of different 
primary databases structured into one. 
There are various software tools available 
to facilitate search in the above databases.
Developing or designing a drug is possible 
by making use of the information in the diverse 
chemical libraries along with the information 
pertaining to biological functions stored in the 
above databases before starting laboratory based 
experiment. It is always possible to generate as 
much information as possible about potential drug 
and target interaction from the above databases 
and chemical libraries.
ENVIRONMENTAL DATA IN 
HEALTH CARE MANAGEMENT
Care plus Cure Hospital limited plans to emulate 
the UK experience in the environmental data in 
health care management. It is interesting to note 
a database containing environmental conditions 
and diagnosis at a patient’s surroundings can be 
made use of in health care system. This will fa-
cilitate in diagnosing and providing treatment for 
an individual patient. This was a pioneer health 
care system for diagnosing and monitoring asthma 
patients via internet. This was introduced before 
Cloud computing came into existence.
Care plus Cure Hospitals limited wants to col-
late data from different parts in India and monitor 
the patients, since they have the patient’s data in the 
private cloud environment (Kumar, & Joy, 2013).
Middle Sex University has created a central 
disease management system. Asthma patients 
and those with a chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease would use a portable monitoring device 
to record breathing patterns up to four times a day 
in the comfort of their homes. The data was sent 
via modem and telephone lines to central disease 
management system. It was processed and results 
were sent to the patient’s doctor using the cable 
and wireless secure internet way. This system 
would record the date and time, temperature and 
humidity measures critical for analyzing the health 
of asthma patient’s surroundings such as air pol-
lution and quality which would assist in providing 
the correct treatment and diagnosis for individual 
patients. More over patients would record their 
symptoms and use of medication as well as their 
lung functions data in central disease management 
which would contain two parts of data in respect 
of asthma patients. One part of data would be in 
respect of patient’s data pertaining to date and 
time, temperature and humidity measure. The 
second part of data would relate to environmental 
condition, air pollution and quality.

230
Establishing Synergy between Cloud Computing and Colloborative Technology in Medical Informatics
﻿
NEED FOR SELF LEARNING 
AMONG MEDICAL STUDENTS
Learning any subject and in depth understanding 
of it requires that learners actively construct their 
own personal meanings of the things they learn 
and integrate with their prior knowledge and skills. 
Medical students once they qualify themselves as 
professionals bear the responsibility for translating 
their in depth knowledge into practice. As their 
skills grow learners can work towards enhancing 
themselves and improving both competence and 
confidence.
The knowledge based system developed at Care 
plus Cure Hospitals limited provides the mecha-
nism of interaction with their system. Patient Data 
Ware House in their system is useful for evidence 
based information resource. A medical student or 
a doctor makes use of the knowledge based system 
to get answers for the questions formulated on the 
basis of “Background” of a particular disorder/
disease and “Fore Ground” of treatment of the 
patients concerned.
CASE ILLUSTRATION 3
Mr. X is an accounts executive in a private firm in 
India. He is 52 years old moderately obese with 
type 2 diabetes, diagnosed 11 years ago. He has 
been trying to quit his smoking habit of 25 years. 
No diabetic complications have been detected so 
far. His blood sugar is well controlled. But his 
blood pressure has been mildly elevated averag-
ing 158/94 mm HG during the past three visits 
to the hospital. He has been unable to reduce his 
weight during the past two years despite his doc-
tor’s suggestion. He is also not keen to further 
medicate himself preferring “Natural Remedies”. 
However he is open to taking medicines if their 
efficacy proved in lowering his blood pressure and 
blood sugar. As an accounts executive, he wants 
to quantify the result of additional medication 
prescribed. The data related to the above patient 
is available in the patient data ware house, at Care 
plus Cure Hospitals limited in the private cloud 
environment. Each patient’s information is stored 
under three groups. They are 1) History of the 
patient 2) History of the treatment prescribed, and 
3) Summary of treatment given to the patients of 
similar complaints.
1. 	
History of a patient consists of diagnosis, 
habits, tests conducted, test results, treat-
ments, allergies, and reactions.
2. 	
History of the treatment prescribed covers 
drugs prescribed, composition of drugs, 
dosage, precautions, and likely reactions.
3. 	
The data related to the patients of similar 
complaints is available under the separate 
head in the patient’s data ware house.
A medical student or a doctor has to search 
from the basis of diseases and the treatments 
prescribed to similar patients. They can review 
the information downloaded from the patient data 
ware house and can prepare an abstract. They 
can compare with the treatment perceived by the 
medical student or a doctor. This helps them to 
assess their knowledge in a particular case.
ANALYSIS OF THE APPROACH OF 
CARE PLUS CURE HOSPITAL LTD
Care plus Cure Hospital limited has created a 
knowledge based health care system. The idea 
behind creation of medical informatics system 
under the cloud computing environment is for easy 
accessibility by them and other hospitals associ-
ated with them. One more salient feature of the 
cloud computing is it enables delivery of business 
models for IT services over the internet. Further 
most of the electronic devices are connected to 
the Internet. Care plus Cure Hospital Limited has 
felt that it is an advantage to make use of private 
cloud computing for their requirements. Core 
team at Care plus Cure Hospital limited has made 

231
Establishing Synergy between Cloud Computing and Colloborative Technology in Medical Informatics
﻿
use of the collaborative technology in the private 
cloud computing environment to create a virtual 
hospital enterprise. Virtual hospital enterprise 
approach is to extend its services to the hospitals 
attached to them. Following paragraphs indicate 
the benefits derived by this approach.
HOSPITALS IN RURAL AREAS
Medical fraternity who started the hospitals in 
the rural areas in India has taken advantage of 
the integrated hospital management system at 
Care+Cure hospital limited. More over medical 
doctors are the part of the core team for design-
ing and developing the system. The integrated 
hospital management system provides the benefits 
such as 1) Validation of data across the system 
2) Parameterization in application software 3) 
Multilevel security 4) Multilevel authorization 5) 
Reduction in patients’ waiting time 6) Elimination 
of wastage of stationery 7) Accuracy of Data 8) 
Educating Patients 9) Analysis of the reactions of 
medicines, and 10) Better co-ordination among 
different departments. Further their data is stored 
in the above system and is available to the broad 
group of users at different locations.
DRUG DESIGN
The purpose behind Care plus Cure Hospital 
Limited and hospitals associated with them is 
designing a drug with On Call Pharma limited. 
They have actual data of medicines prescribed 
and the reactions on their patients. This data is 
most important for research in designing a drug. 
Private cloud provides the required space for stor-
ing and analysis. Rational method in designing a 
drug needs data from genial and the specialized 
databases in bio informatics.
The research team could make use of data 
related to the components of drugs prescribed and 
the relations on the patients for guidance for their 
research. This approach emphasizes the need for 
integrating health service research and design-
ing research to reduce reactions on the patients. 
It is expected this approach will be better before 
laboratory tests take place in respect of new drugs 
produced. Figure 3 illustrates rational approach 
for discovery and development of drugs.
MEDICAL RESEARCH ACTIVITIES
Any Research needs a large volume of data for 
research. There is not dearth of medical data in 
India. It is general practice in many hospitals in 
India for the sake of optimizing the use of database; 
their databases contain one year data only. The 
earlier years’ data either is transferred to another 
system as back up or deleted. The historical data 
is never made use of for any research purpose. 
Care plus Cure Hospital limited has initiated the 
process of the historical data of the patients of the 
hospitals associated with them for research. They 
could persuade corporate hospitals, Government 
hospitals, hospitals managed by trustees, and 
nursing homes to transfer the historical data of 
their patients to the patient data ware house in 
their private cloud environment. Medical doctors 
who have research bent of mind working in the 
above hospitals are associated with the research. 
The doctors at these hospitals need not move out 
of their hospitals for their research work. This 
has become possible because of private cloud 
environment and access through internet. They 
can conduct research with ease from their work 
place by making use of data mining tool in the 
patient data ware house in the system.
VIRTUAL REALITY CONCEPT 
UNDER PRIVATE CLOUD 
ENVIRONMENT
The inputs provided by the medical doctor who 
performed surgical operations by them is the lat-

232
Establishing Synergy between Cloud Computing and Colloborative Technology in Medical Informatics
﻿
est methodology, core team will develop a model. 
This model will consider the real medical world 
requirements. Parameters will be created on the 
basis of the requirements. Simulated version of 
human body is designed and operation is carried 
out in the computer systems in the private cloud 
environment. Medical doctors in the core team 
have immersed themselves in every aspect of the 
design and testing. They have worked in front of 
a large screen of a computer, which has given a 
sense of surgical operation is taking place in the 
real medical world situation. The concept of virtual 
has helped them to look from the real medical 
world situation. Private cloud environment has 
facilitated the above process with virtual reality.
Medical doctors working at Care plus Cure 
Hospital Limited, the hospitals associated with 
them and medical students can take advantage of 
updating themselves the advancements made in 
the surgical operations. It is said visualization is 
more effective than giving a detailed description 
of an event (Epstetin, & Macvoy, 2011).
EMULATING AN INNOVATIVE 
APPROACH
Some years ago a telemedicine project was imple-
mented in the United Kingdom. The participants 
of this project were telecommunication firm, 
Consortium of Industrial Academia, Clinical 
Partners across Europe including university col-
lege, London, Middle Sex University, A German 
medical diagnostic Business, The Whittington 
Hospital National Health Service Trust (North 
London) and Spains Hospital General.
The main essence of this project was the use 
of portable monitoring device to record breath-
ing patterns in the comfort of the patient’s home. 
Modem and telephone lines were made use of 
sending data to central disease management sys-
tem where it would be processed and results sent 
directly to the patient’s consultant using the cable 
and wireless secure internet gateway.
The Core team at the Care plus Cure Hospital 
Limited has taken a lead from the above project. 
Figure 3. Rational base approach for discovery and development of drugs

233
Establishing Synergy between Cloud Computing and Colloborative Technology in Medical Informatics
﻿
The team is evaluating the various portable 
medical devices on the similar type of project. 
Cloud computing has all the required features to 
support this type of project. In order to provide 
good health care to their patients in India and 
foreign Countries, the core team is working on 
this project. Once this model is developed and 
tested, there will be advantages to the patients. 
This model aims to save patient patient’s time 
and travel expenses. Further it reduces stress as 
they no longer have to visit the hospitals so fre-
quently and do not have to keep paper records to 
monitor health. The core team wants to make use 
of their private cloud computing environment for 
developing this model with the various portable 
medical devices.
EVIDENCE BASED LEARNING
Patient Data Ware House at Care plus Cure 
Hospital Limited is useful for evidenced based 
learning. A medical student can make use of this 
data ware house to get answers for the questions 
formulated on the basis of “Background” of a 
particular disorder/disease and ‘for ground’ of 
treatment concerned. Patient data ware house 
contains the case history of the patients treated at 
various hospitals for learning purposes.
Three Dimensional Visualization has the great 
potential in medical education and training. By 
making use of virtual reality concepts doctors 
and medical students can practice the surgical 
procedures. Pilots have been training on flight 
simulators for decades. The simulators are real-
istic that the trainee pilots before their first real 
flight can perform thousands of perfect take off 
and landing. Same way the medical students can 
learn the surgical skills before operating on the 
first patient. Figure 4 provides an idea of evidenced 
based learning.
MEDICAL INFORMATION 
TO PATIENTS
Increasing number of people seeking information 
pertaining to disease/symptoms/drugs/reactions 
is on the increase. One cannot be sure of the au-
thenticity of the information available on the net.
Care plus Cure Hospital Limited has created 
an exclusive database in their system for their 
patients. This database provides the required 
information to dispel doubts arising in the minds 
of their patients. Access to this database is pos-
sible by their patients through internet to private 
cloud environment.
DEVICE MANAGEMENT
The need for device management is obvious in 
cloud computing environment. Heterogeneous 
devices, applications, and users needs are to be 
administered. The important functionality of a 
pervasive device is to perform a task with high 
speed. For each application and type of device it 
has to support different kinds of user interfaces. 
The main requirement of device management is to 
take care of operating system, structure, memory 
protection, security and multi tasking.
HEALTH CARE SYSTEM UNDER 
CLOUD COMPUTING
Knowledge based health care system developed 
by Care plus Cure Hospital Limited proves that a 
useful system can be developed for medical fra-
ternity. Main significance in the system is making 
use of private cloud along with the collaborative 
technology. This system can increase the chances 
of successfully diffusing knowledge, technology 
and process. Advanced concepts in information 

234
Establishing Synergy between Cloud Computing and Colloborative Technology in Medical Informatics
﻿
and communication technology have drastically 
changed the medical informatics, providing new 
services and creating an inter connected medical 
fraternity.
FUTURE TRENDS
Many more requirements in the area of medical 
informatics will be needed. There will be increased 
use of cloud computing concepts with collabora-
tive technologies. In the era of globalization, cloud 
computing will provide a lot of scope for develop-
ing knowledge based health care models. There 
is a good scope for research scholars to develop 
innovative models in health care sector.
CONCLUSION
In today’s knowledge rich environment, informa-
tion and communication technology has increased 
virtualization in the activities of health care sector 
and ways of working. The term “Virtual” is now 
appearing in many forms. Knowledge based health 
care system at Care plus Cure Hospital Limited 
explains the need for adopting innovative approach 
in involving medical fraternity by applying the 
concept of “Mind invoking”.
It may be observed that Care+ plus Cure Hos-
pital Limited has made use of the services of the 
core team in designing and developing a system 
for health care sector.
Figure 4. Evidence based learning

235
Establishing Synergy between Cloud Computing and Colloborative Technology in Medical Informatics
﻿
Hospitals will find that private cloud is better 
solution for them in leveraging the benefits of cloud 
computing within their firewall. Care plus Cure 
Hospital Limited has proved the concept of virtual 
hospital which is the key to cloud computing. It 
will be beneficial for virtual hospitals sharing 
the common resources for computing power and 
accessing data across the globe.
REFERENCES
Adrains, P., & Zantinge, D. (1999). Data Mining. 
England: Addison Wesley Longman.
Attwood, T. K., & Parry, S. D. J. (2005). Intro-
duction to Bioinformatics; New Delhi: Pearson 
Education. Singapore: Private Limited.
Auewarkul, P. (2008). The Past and Present 
Threat of Avian Influenza in Thailand. In E. M. 
Yichenlu & B. Roberts (Eds.), Emerging Infections 
in Asia (pp. 31–34). New York, NY: Springer. 
doi:10.1007/978-0-387-75722-3_2
Bandopadhyay, D. (2013, December). A Technol-
ogy Lead Business Model for Pharma: Collabora-
tive Patient Care. CSI Communications Journal, 
37(9), 12–26.
Bergeron, B. (2003). Bioinformatics Comput-
ing; New Delhi: Pearson Education. Singapore: 
Private Limited.
Buyya, R., Vecchiola, C., & Selvi, T. S. (2013). 
Mastering Cloud Computing. New Delhi: McGraw 
Hill Education. India: Private Limited.
Chorafas, D. N. (2011). Cloud Computing Strate-
gies. Boca Raton: CRC Press Taylor & Francis 
Group.
Epstein, R. A., & Macvoy, S. P. (2011). Making 
A Scene in the Brain. In L. R. Harris & M. R. 
M. Jenkin (Eds.), Vision in 3D Environments (pp. 
270–273). Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511736261.012
Govil, D., & Prohit, N. (2011). Health Care Sys-
tems in India. In H. S. Rout (Ed.), Health Care 
Systems – A Global Survey (pp. 576–612). New 
Delhi: New Century Publications.
Ignacimuthu, S. (2005). Basic Informatics. New 
Delhi: Narosa Publishing House.
Krane, D. E., & Raymer, M. L. (2005). Funda-
mental Concepts of Bioinformatics; New Delhi: 
Pearson Education. Singapore: Private Limited.
Kumar, K. L., & Joy, J. (2013, December). Ap-
plication of Zigbee Wireless Frequency for Patient 
Monitoring System; Mumbai. CSI Communica-
tions Journal, 37(9), 17–18.
Pujari, A. K. (2003). Data Mining Techniques; 
Hyderabad: Universities Press. India: Private 
Limited.
Sunitha, C., Kokilam, V. K., & Preethi, M. B. 
(2013, December). Medical Informatics-Perk up 
Health Care through Information; Mumbai. CSI 
Communications Journal, 37(9), 7–8.
Vijayrani, S. (2013, December). Economic Health 
Records: An Overview. Mumbai. CSI Communi-
cations Journal, 37(9), 9–11.
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Collaborative Technology: Various concepts 
in information and communication technology 
facilitate to work jointly in developing an ap-
plication software.
Core Team: A team consisting of domain 
experts to perform a multi disciplinary activities.
Globalization: The process by which business 
starts operating on a global scale.
Knowledge Based System: Information 
system containing information and skills gained 
through experience of education.

236
Establishing Synergy between Cloud Computing and Colloborative Technology in Medical Informatics
﻿
Pervasive Device: A piece of equipment made 
for a particular purpose. User will be able to use 
both local and remote services.
Software Tool: A readymade software is 
developed to perform a particular task in a com-
puter system.
Virtual Reality: A system in which images 
that look like real, three dimensional objects are 
created by a computer system.
Pervasive Computing: This is a new dimen-
sion of personal computing that integrates mobile 
communication, ubiquitous embedded computer 
system, and consumer electronics with the power 
of internet.
Mind Invoking: Making an earnest effort in 
an innovative approach.
Data Ware House: A subject-Oriented, in-
tegrated, time variant, non volatile collection of 
data in support of management’s decision making 
process.
Data Mining: The process of analyzing large 
data sets in a data ware house to find number of 
obvious patterns.
Private Cloud: A Cloud computing like envi-
ronment within the boundaries of an organization 
and typically for its exclusive use, typically hosted 
on an enterprises private network.

Section 6
Technical Issues in Cloud 
Computing

238
Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  11
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-8339-6.ch011
Heuristic Task Consolidation 
Techniques for Energy 
Efficient Cloud Computing
ABSTRACT
The energy consumption in the cloud is proportional to the resource utilization and data centers are 
almost the world’s highest consumers of electricity. The complexity of the resource allocation problem 
increases with the size of cloud infrastructure and becomes difficult to solve effectively. The exponential 
solution space for the resource allocation problem can be searched using heuristic techniques to obtain 
a sub-optimal solution at the acceptable time. This chapter presents the resource allocation problem in 
cloud computing as a linear programming problem, with the objective to minimize energy consumed in 
computation. This resource allocation problem has been treated using heuristic approaches. In particu-
lar, we have used two phase selection algorithm ‘FcfsRand’, ‘FcfsRr’, ‘FcfsMin’, ‘FcfsMax’, ‘MinMin’, 
‘MedianMin’, ‘MaxMin’, ‘MinMax’, ‘MedianMax’, and ‘MaxMax’. The simulation results indicate in 
the favor of MaxMax.
1. INTRODUCTION
Cloud computing infrastructures are designed 
to support the accessibility and deployment of 
various service oriented applications by the users 
(Hwang, Fox, & Dongarra, 2012; Mell & Grance, 
2011). Cloud computing services are made avail-
able through the server firms or data centers. The 
concept of cloud computing has been emerging 
from the concept of heterogeneous distributed 
computing, grid computing, utility computing 
and autonomic computing (Buyya, Broberg, 
Dilip Kumar
National Institute of Technology, India
Bibhudatta Sahoo
National Institute of Technology, India
Tarni Mandal
National Institute of Technology, India

239
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
& Goscinski, 2010b; Mezmaz et al., 2011). A 
cloud computing is the convergence of 3 major 
trends, these trends are Virtualization, Utility 
components, and Software as a service. To meet 
the growing demand for computations and large 
volume of data, the cloud computing environ-
ment provides high performance servers and high 
speed mass storage devices (Beloglazov,Abawajy, 
& Buyya, 2012). These resources are the major 
source of the power consumption in data centers 
along with air conditioning and cooling equip-
ment (Rodero et al., 2010). Moreover the energy 
consumption in the cloud is proportional to the 
resource utilization and data centers are almost the 
world’s highest consumers of electricity (Buyya, 
Beloglazov, & Abawajy, 2010a). Due to the high 
energy consumption by data centers, it requires 
efficient technology to design green data center 
(Liu et al., 2009). Cloud data center, on the other 
hand, can reduce the energy consumed through 
server consolidation, whereby different workloads 
can share the same server or physical host using 
virtualization and hence un-used servers or physi-
cal host can be switched off.
Power management represents a collection of 
IT processes and supporting technologies geared 
toward optimizing data center performance against 
cost and structural constraints. This includes in-
creasing the deploy-able number of servers per 
rack, when the racks are subject to power or thermal 
limitations, and making power consumption more 
predictable and easier to plan for. Power manager 
comes in two categories: static and dynamic. Static 
power management deals with fixed power caps to 
manage aggregate power, while the policies under 
dynamic power management take advantage of 
additional degrees of freedom inherent through 
virtualization, as well as the dynamic behaviors 
supported by advanced platform power manage-
ment technologies (ITU, 2012).
Generally, clouds are deployed to customers 
giving them three levels of access: Software-as-
a-Service (SaaS), Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS), 
and Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS). Clouds 
use virtualization technology in distributed data 
centers to allocate resources to customers as they 
need them. The task originated by the customer 
can differ greatly from customer to the customer. 
Entities in the Cloud are autonomous and self-
interested; however, they are willing to share their 
resources and services to achieve their individual 
and collective goals. In such an open environment, 
the scheduling decision is a challenge given the 
decentralized nature of the environment. Each 
entity has specific requirements and objectives that 
need to achieve. Server consolidation is allowing 
the multiple servers running on a single physical 
server simultaneously to minimize the energy 
consumed in a data center (Ye, Huang, Jiang, 
Chen, & Wu, 2010). Running the multiple servers 
on a single physical server are realized through 
virtual machine concept. The task consolidation 
is also known as server/workload consolidation 
problem (Lee & Zomaya, 2012). Resource alloca-
tion problem discussed in this chapter is the task 
consolidation problem on cloud data center. Task 
consolidation problem addressed in this chapter is 
to assign n task to a set of r resources in a cloud 
computing environment. This energy efficient 
load management maintains the utilization of all 
computing nodes and distributes virtual machines 
in a way that is energy efficient. The goal of this 
algorithm is to maintain availability to compute 
nodes while reducing the total power consumed 
by the cloud.
Cloud computing resources are managed 
through the centralized resource manager. The 
centralized resource manager assigned the tasks 
to the appropriate VMs. The resources of cloud 
data center are available to the users/applica-
tions through Virtual Machines (VMs). Virtual 
Machines are used to meet the resource require-
ment and run time support for the applications. 
In particular executing an application for required 
resource can be made available through two steps: 
creating an instance of the virtual machine as re-
quired by the application (VMs provisioning) and 
scheduling the request to the physical resources 

240
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
otherwise known as resource provisioning (Rodero 
et al., 2010). The Virtual Machine (VM) here is 
to describe the operating system concept: a soft-
ware abstraction with the looks of a computer 
system’s hardware (real machine) (Rosenblum, 
2004). A virtual machine is sufficiently similar to 
the underlying physical machine running existing 
software unmodified. The VM technology has 
become popular in recent years in data centers 
and cloud computing environments because it has 
a number of benefits including server consolida-
tion, live migration, and security isolation. Cloud 
computing is based on the concept of virtualiza-
tion that encapsulates various services that can 
meet the user requirement in a cloud computing 
environment (Jing,, Ali, She, & Zhong, 2013). 
Virtual machines (VMs) are designed to run on 
a server to provide a multiple OS environment 
with the support of various applications. One 
or more VM(s) can be placed or deployed on a 
physical machine that meet the requirement for 
the VM. The task can be scheduled dynamic to 
have the load balanced among the hosts in cloud 
computing environments. Task consolidation is an 
aim to maximize utilization of cloud computing 
resources. Maximizing resource utilization pro-
vides various benefits such as the rationalization 
of maintenance, IT service customization, QoS 
and reliable services, etc.
The energy efficiency of clouds has become one 
of most crucial research issues (Lee & Zomaya, 
2012). Advancements in hardware technologies 
(Venkatachalam & Franz, 2005), such as low 
power CPUs, solid state drives, and energy effi-
cient computer monitors have helped relieve this 
energy issue to a certain degree. In the meantime, 
there also have been a considerable amount of 
research conducted using software approaches, 
such as scheduling, server consolidation (Lee & 
Zomaya, 2012) and task consolidation (Srikan-
taiah, Kansal, & Zhao, 2008).
Task scheduling problems are related to the 
efficiency of all cloud computing facilities and are 
of paramount importance. Scheduling algorithms 
in distributed systems usually have the goal of 
spreading the load on the processors and maxi-
mizing their utilization while minimizing the total 
task execution time (zomaya & Yee, 2011). Task 
scheduling, one of the best known combinatorial 
optimization problems, plays a key role in improv-
ing flexible and reliable distributed systems. Its 
main purpose is to schedule tasks over resources 
dynamically, taking into account the resources 
available for execution, which involves the discov-
ery of a suitable sequence in which tasks can be 
executed under transaction logic constraints (Zhao 
& Zhang, 2001). The task consolidation problem 
in a cloud computing environment has been shown, 
in general, to be NP-complete, requiring the de-
velopment of heuristic techniques. The complex-
ity of the resource allocation problem increases 
with the size of cloud infrastructure and becomes 
difficult to solve effectively. The exponential so-
lution space for the resource allocation problem 
can search using heuristic techniques to obtain a 
suboptimal solution at the acceptable time. This 
chapter formulated the resource allocation prob-
lem in cloud computing as a linear programming 
problem, with the objective to minimize energy 
consumed in computation. A set of ten greedy 
heuristics for task consolidation algorithms have 
been used to solve task consolidation problem. 
All these heuristics from the literature have been 
selected: adapted, implemented, and analyzed 
under one set of common assumptions consider-
ing ETC task model. These heuristic algorithms 
are greedy algorithm and operate in two phases, 
selection of task from the task pool, followed by 
selection of cloud resource. The greedy paradigm 
provides a framework to design an algorithm 
that works in stages, considering one input at a 
time. At each stage a particular input is selected 
through a selection procedure. Then a decision 
is made regarding the selected input, whether to 
include it into the partially constructed optimal 
solution. The selection procedure can be realized 
using a 2-phase heuristic. In particular, we have 
used ‘FcfsRand’, ‘FcfsRr’, ‘FcfsMin’, ‘FcfsMax’, 

241
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
‘MinMin’, ‘MedianMin’, ‘MaxMin’, ‘MinMax’, 
‘MedianMax’, and ‘MaxMax’. The simulation 
results indicate in favor of MaxMax. In MaxMax 
the first Max indicates the task has to be selected 
which required the Maximum resource utilization 
and the second Max indicate that the resource are 
allocated for that task, which is maximum utilized 
and also it can compute the selected task without 
exceeding the peak load. The performance of 
these algorithms has been analyzed with in house 
simulator designed using Matlab. This discrete 
event simulation uses the task set represented as 
ETC matrix.
The remainder of this chapter is organized 
as follows. Section 2, discusses related research 
work on energy aware scheduling and resource 
allocation for cloud computing systems. Section 
3 presents the model of cloud computing system, 
task model and energy consumption of the system. 
Based upon this system model, we have defined 
the Linear Programming Problem to minimize 
the energy in a cloud computing environment 
in Section 4. In Section 5 discusses the different 
heuristic allocation algorithms to allocate tasks to 
VMs. Section 6 discusses our simulation setup and 
analyses the obtained simulation results. Finally, 
conclusions and directions for future research are 
discussed in Section 7.
2. BACKGROUND
Current research in the area of cloud comput-
ing load balancing focuses on the availability of 
resources. The specific load balancing approach 
depends on the type of resource offered. In a cloud 
environment, the number of individual tasks, as 
well as the number of available resources, can 
change very quickly, especially when virtual 
resources are allocated. Calculating all possible 
tasks-resource mappings in a cloud environment 
and selecting the optimal mapping is not feasible, 
since the complexity grows exponentially with the 
number of tasks and resources (Juhnke, Dorne-
mann, Bock, & Freisleben, 2011). The use of a 
heuristic algorithm ensures an acceptable runtime 
of the scheduling algorithm because it significantly 
reduces the complexity of the search space. This 
provides a compromise between the scheduling 
tasks to processors at runtime and the optimality 
of the assignment (Juhnke, Dornemann, Bock, 
& Freisleben, 2011). As the initiator of dynamic 
collaboration, the Task Manager needs an efficient 
local task selection and allocation algorithm to 
partition all the tasks and allocate those tasks 
that are to be executed locally. Galloway, Smith, 
and Vrbsky (2011) has proposed a load balanc-
ing algorithm for infrastructure as a service 
(IaaS) for cloud infrastructure implemented on 
the cluster. There are many proposed systems 
utilizing market-based resource management for 
various computing areas (Yeo & Buyya, 2006; 
Buyy, Beloglazov & Abawajy 2010a; Kusic, 
Kephart, Hanson, Kandasamy, & Jiang, 2009) 
have stated the problem of continuous consolida-
tion as a sequential optimization and addressed 
it using Limited Look ahead Control (LLC). The 
proposed model requires simulation-based learn-
ing for the application specific adjustments. Due 
to the complexity of the model the optimization 
controller execution time reaches 30 minutes, 
even for a small number of nodes (e.g. 15), that 
is not suitable for large-scale real-world systems. 
Srikantaiah, Kansal, and Zhao (2008) have 
studied the problem of requests, scheduling for 
multi-tiered web-applications in virtualized het-
erogeneous systems in order to minimize energy 
consumption, while meeting performance require-
ments. To handle the optimization over multiple 
resources, the authors have proposed a heuristic 
for the multidimensional bin packing problem as 
an algorithm for workload consolidation. Song, 
Wang, Li, Feng, and Sun, (2009) have proposed 
resource allocation to applications according to 

242
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
their priorities in a multi-application virtualized 
cluster. The approach requires machine-learning 
to obtain utility functions for the applications and 
defined application priorities. Cardosa, Korupolu, 
and Singh (2009) have explored the problem of 
power efficient allocation of VMs in virtualized 
heterogeneous computing environments. They 
have leveraged min, max and shares parameters 
of VMM that represent minimum, maximum and 
proportion of CPU allocated to VMs sharing the 
same resource. The approach suits only enterprise 
environments or private Clouds. Verma, Ahuja, 
and Neogi (2008) have formulated the problem 
of dynamic placement of applications in virtually 
heterogeneous systems as continuous optimiza-
tion: at each time frame the placement of VMs 
is optimized to minimize power consumption 
and maximize performance. The authors have 
applied a heuristic for the bin packing problem 
with variable bin sizes and costs. The authors 
have introduced the notion of cost of VM live 
migration, but the information about the cost 
calculation is not provided. Calheiros, Buyya, 
and Rose (2009) have investigated the problem 
of mapping VMs on physical nodes optimizing 
network communication between VMs, however, 
the problem has not been explored in the context 
of energy consumption minimization. The studies 
show that software-driven thermal management 
and temperature aware workload placement bring 
additional energy savings.
The placement problems can be classified 
into static and dynamic. In the static allocation 
problem, the VM requirement and PM capacities 
are known as priori and do not change, and the 
object is to find out a placement in which they 
turned on PMs consume less energy than other 
placements. In static allocation problem, the al-
gorithm can be run offline, allowing it to use a 
rather long time. Besides the static consolidation, 
the live VM migration technique has also been 
applied to further reduce energy consumption 
by migrating VMs to fewer physical nodes when 
fewer VMs are running, and doing the opposite 
when the number of running VM is larger. In the 
dynamic problem, although the size VMs and 
PMs are assumed known, the existing VMs may 
be decommissioned and new VMs can be created. 
The PM number can also change due to old PMs 
exiting and new ones joining, when some PMs 
need to maintain or are out of order, or when ad-
ditional PMs are required. As a result, both the 
numbers and sizes of the VMs and PMs change 
with time, making the variation hard to predict; 
therefore the allocation of the VMs cannot be 
arranged beforehand. The placement can only 
be adjusted online, according to the current VM 
requirement and the provision of PMs. Because of 
the ’online’ nature of the problem, the algorithm 
must be able to give results in the expected time 
frame, so that the rearrangement can still be valid 
to accommodate the changing demands of the 
VMs. Dynamic reallocation to another physical 
server is assumed to be done by performing live 
VM migration. A greedy algorithm solving the 
problem by making the locally optimal choice at 
each with the hope of finding a global optimum 
stage (Black, 2005). In many problems, a greedy 
strategy does not in general produce an optimal 
solution, but nonetheless a greedy heuristic may 
yield locally optimal solutions that approximate 
a global optimal solution in a reasonable time. 
Song, Hassan, and Huh (2010) proposed a general 
task selection and allocation framework to apply 
directly in a dynamic collaboration environment 
and improve resource utilization for PCP. To 
achieve better results in task scheduling, Li et al. 
(2012) have taken the resource allocation pattern 
into account and proposed a task and resource 
optimization mechanism. Their approach contains 
two online dynamic task scheduling algorithms: 
dynamic cloud list scheduling and dynamic cloud 
min–min scheduling. These algorithms have been 
designed to schedule tasks for an IaaS with pre-
emptable tasks and task priorities. The authors 
considered task maps, and task types such as 

243
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
Advance Reservation or Benefit Effort (Li et al, 
2012), to determine tasks priorities. Their algo-
rithms dynamically adjust the resource allocation 
based on updated actual task execution, which 
can be calculated by applying the information 
about the resource status. Li et al. (2011) applied 
another heuristic optimization approach to pro-
pose an algorithm called Normal Best-Oriented 
Ant Colony Optimization (NBOACO). Taheri, 
Lee, Zomaya, and Siegel (2013) proposed a Job 
Data Scheduling algorithm using Bee Colony 
(JDS-BC). JDS-BC includes two collaborating 
mechanisms to schedule jobs onto computational 
nodes and replicate datafiles on storage nodes in 
a system. In their proposed method, they simul-
taneously minimized makespan and total datafile 
transfer time that are two independent, and in many 
cases conflicting objectives of such heterogeneous 
systems. Kolodziej and Xhafa (2011) presented 
two general non-cooperative game approaches, 
namely, the symmetric non-zero sum game and 
the asymmetric Stackelberg game for modeling 
grid user behavior defined as user requirements 
to effectively express the hierarchical nature of 
computational grids in the task and resource al-
location optimizationmodel in grid scheduling 
problems. They designed and implemented Ge-
netic Algorithm (GA) based hybrid schedulers to 
approximate the equilibrium points for both games. 
Zomaya, and The (2001) ; Zhao (2009) applied 
GA to develop a loadbalancing algorithm whereby 
optimal or near optimal task allocation evolves dur-
ing the operation of the parallel computing system. 
Juhnke, Dornemann, Bock, and Freisleben (2011) 
proposed a multiobjective scheduling algorithm 
for cloud-based workflow applications by applying 
the Pareto Archived Evolution Strategy (PAES), 
which is a type of GA that is capable of dealing 
with multi-objective optimization problems. Al-
though GA has provided an optimal solution for 
task scheduling in previous works, it may not be 
the best method; as illustrated by Zhang, Chen, 
Sun, Jing, and Yang (2008), It takes more time 
to compute the optimal solution.
3. CLOUD COMPUTING 
SYSTEM MODEL
The cloud computing system consists of fully inter-
connected set of m resources denoted as R. These 
computing resources are the physical machine in 
the cloud data center and referred as host comput-
ing system or host in this chapter. These resources 
are to be allocated on demand to run applications 
time to time. Figure 1 depicts the system model 
of cloud computing system, that has been referred 
in this Chapter. We have assumed the centralized 
cloud is hosted in a data center that is composed 
of a large number of heterogeneous servers. Each 
of server may be assigned to perform different or 
similar functions.
The virtualization technologies allow the 
creation of multiple virtual machine on any of 
the available physical host. There for a task can 
be flexibly assigned to any server. Servers can be 
modeled as a system that consumes energy in an 
idle state to perform maintenance functions and 
to have all the subsystems ready while it waits for 
task to arrive. On arrival of task, a VM processes 
the task and host may spend an additional amount 
of energy, which depends on the number of re-
sources demanded by the task, it is represented 
as resource utilization in the work load model.
Although a cloud can span across multiple 
geographical locations (i.e., distributed), the cloud 
model in our study is assumed to be confined to 
a particular physical location. We assume that 
resources are homogeneous in terms of their 
computing capability and capacity; this can be 
justified by using virtualization technologies 
(Lee & Zomaya, 2012). It is also assumed that 
a message can be transmitted from one resource 
to another while a task is being executed on the 
recipient resource, which is possible in many 
systems (Lee & Zomaya, 2012). The maximum 
and minimum energy consumption of the server 
in a cloud computing system are denoted as pick 
load state and idle state.

244
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
Figure 1. Cloud computing architecture

245
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
3.1 Energy Consumption in Cloud
The CPU is the main hardware of a physical 
machine and its consumed up to 35% of the 
total energy usages. (Chedid, Yu, & Lee, 2005) 
surveyed a variety of energy models at different 
levels. So, the computational energy models help 
to understand the energy consumption in cloud 
computing and to develop suitable strategies to 
improve energy efficiency in the cloud comput-
ing system.
As formulated in (Chedid, Yu, & Lee, 2005), 
energy consumption is defined as E and charac-
terised for digital static CMOS circuits can be 
given by
E
C V f
eff
clk



∝
2
	
where Ceff is the effective switching capacitance 
of the operation, V is the supply voltage, and fclk 
is the clock frequency. Furthermore, fclk is relevant 
to supply voltage as in the equation:
f
V
clk
k
=
−
(
)
V

V

α
	
where v is the supply voltage, vk is the empirical 
voltage for dynamic power consumption of leak-
age power dissipation and α is the activity factor 
which depends on workload.
Equation 1 and 2 represents the relationships 
among the energy, voltage and frequency lead 
to a way of dynamically adjusting voltage and 
frequency according to the current workloads to 
conserve energy. However, how much energy can 
be saved depends largely on the hardware design. 
Unfortunately, many types of server CPU do not 
have as many levels of voltage and frequency as 
CPUs for embedded devices, and therefore the 
power saving acquired by adjusting frequency 
and voltage vary significantly from one CPU 
type to another. As the CPU is responsible for ap-
proximately only one third of the total energy of a 
typical server, the method of adjusting frequency 
and voltage only is not enough to solve the power 
conservation problem.
It is generally believed that the energy con-
sumed by a Physical Machine should be pro-
portional to workloads running on it. However, 
this is far from true in reality. According to the 
measurement results by (SPECpower, 2013), even 
with a nearly zero percentage of CPU utilization, a 
server can cost up to 50% - 60% of the maximum 
power consumption (VMware, 2012; Packard, 
2011; Gray, Kumar, & Li, 2008).
This means that it is better to push up the 
CPU utilization rate to achieve better energy ef-
ficiency. However, the system performance may 
degrade significantly if 100% of CPU or memory 
utilization is sustained. Instead of 100% resource 
usage, most servers can handle 70 - 80% CPU 
workloads or memory without performance deg-
radation, and high end servers can push the value 
up to approximately 90% (SPECpower, 2013). 
Energy consumption by host varying with CPU 
workloads For the whole machine, the power con-
sumption, which varies with CPU utilization, can 
be formulated as the Equation 3 (Verma, Ahuja, 
& Neogi, 2008; Minas & Ellison, 2009; Lee & 
Zomaya, 2012):
E
P
P
u
P
max
min
min
u
(
) =
−
(
)
+

 
 *
 

100
	
In the equation, u is the percent value of the 
processor utilization, E(u) is the Energy consumed 
by CPU at the utilization u%, and Pmax and Pmin 
are the power consumption in watt at maximum 
performance and at idle respectively.

246
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
4. PROBLEM MODEL 
FOR ENERGY EFFICIENT 
RESOURCE ALLOCATION
Total Energy E consumed by CPU utilization in 
time τ by the cloud computing infrastructure by 
an efficient allocation of resources to the set of 
tasks. The resource allocation problem with cloud 
computing are based on the following assumptions.
•	
Virtualization technologies allow the cre-
ation of multiple virtual machines on any 
of the available host.
•	
Each host may be assigned to perform dif-
ferent or similar services.
•	
Hosts consumes energy in an idle state to 
perform maintenance functions and denot-
ed as Pmin.
•	
Hosts consumes more energy as per utili-
zation of the CPU by the tasks.
•	
Hosts consumes maximum energy at the 
pick level and denoted as Pmax.
•	
Hosts put the task in waiting queue, if its 
CPU utilization is at pick level.
The work load submitted to the cloud is as-
sumed to be in the form of tasks. These tasks 
are submitted service scheduler. The service 
scheduler allocates the tasks to VMs on different 
computing hosts. We have assumed the task as 
the computational unit to execute on the allocated 
VM. The task model refered in this chapter are 
with following assumption.
•	
A task represents a user’s computing or 
service request.
•	
A task is an independent scheduling entity 
and its execution cannot be preempted.
•	
The tasks can be executed on any node.
•	
Arriving task tj is associated with a task 
ID, arrival time, CPU utilization, and ex-
pected time to compute as shown in Table 
1 for example.
•	
Tasks arrival rate is Poisson.
•	
Resource utilization by task is normal dis-
tribution between 10% and 100%.
•	
The resource allocated to a particular task 
must sufficiently provide the resource us-
age for that task. If resources are not suf-
ficient, providing the resource usage for a 
particular task, then task putted in waiting 
queue.
As shown in Table 1 one row of the task arrival 
list contains the task id, task arrival time, resource 
utilization by task and estimated execution times 
for a given task on each machine.
The ETC(tj, 1) indicates the task id, ETC(tj, 2) 
indicates the task arrival time which is poisson, 
ETC(tj, 3) indicates the resource utilization by 
the task tj and ETC(tj, 4) indicates the estimated 
execution times on VM1, and so on.
Energy efficient resource allocation for cloud 
computing can be represented as a linear pro-
gramming problem to minimize the total energy 
consumed E, and represented as Equation 4.
Minimize E =
( )
=
=
∑∑
τ
τ
τ
1
1
i
m
i
E
	
Subjected to:
E
P
P
u
P
i
max
min
min
τ
τ

i
( ) =
−
(
)
(
) +
 
*
,
100
	
U
u i j
peakload at
R
Rand
t
T
i
i
n
i
j
( )
( , )
,
τ
τ
=
≤
∀
∈
∀
∈
=∑
1
	
u i j,
;
(
) = 0  
when the task j is not assigned to node R i.
	

247
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
u i j
uij
,
;
(
) =
when the task j is assigned to node R .
i 	
The above Equation 4 show that the minimi-
zation of energy is subjected to the utilization of 
resources by the task for the time τ.
5. HEURISTIC TASK 
CONSOLIDATION ALGORITHMS
Heuristic and meta-heuristic algorithms are the 
most effective technology for resource allocation 
problem due to their ability to deliver high quality 
solutions in reasonable time. The selection pro-
cedure can be realized using a 2-phase heuristic. 
In this section, we present the greedy heuristic 
algorithms for task allocation in a data center. The 
general form of task allocation algorithms for the 
resource utilization of cloud server resources is 
presented in Algorithm-4.
This algorithm allocates tasks to the physical 
resource and maintain the utilization matrix. The 
Algorithm-4 operates by finding the task which 
uses mthe task queueource from the currently 
available task in task queue.
The function TaskChoosingPolicy() returns the 
task from the task queue tempQ and the function 
Table 1. Example of arrival tasks list
Task ID
Task
Resource
Task Execution Time on VM
Arrival 
time
Utilization (%)
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
M7
M8
M9
M10
1
1
54
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
2
1
62
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
3
1
31
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
4
1
51
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
5
1
97
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
6
2
59
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
7
2
57
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
8
2
31
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
9
2
54
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
2
66
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
11
2
71
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
12
3
45
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
17
13
3
43
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
13
14
3
99
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
15
3
13
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
16
3
90
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
17
4
93
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
18
4
82
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
19
4
18
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
20
4
33
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14
14

248
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
ResourceChoosingPolicy() returns the resource 
for the task tj for which maximum threshold value 
less then or equal to 100%. If no such fit found, 
it returns null. If resource Ri is found such that 
utilization is maximum for task tj and utilization 
is not exceeding 100%. After allocating task j to 
resource Ri, the task is removed from the task 
queue mainQ and temporary queue tempQ. If no 
suitable fit is found, then the task j is removed 
from the temporary queue, but not from main 
queue, this process proceeds to a new iteration. 
These heuristic algorithms are simple to realize 
with very little computational cost in comparison 
to the effort by resource allocation algorithm (See 
Algorithm 1).
5.1 FCFS to Random 
Utilized (FcfsRand)
The FsfsRand heuristic is the first two-phase 
heuristic algorithms in our scenario, this algo-
rithm select task in first phase in First Come First 
Serve (FCFS) basis of the global task waiting 
queue. This selection method is very simple and 
has lowest time complexity to choose the items 
from the queue.
In Second phase the resource is selected for 
appropriate tasks. The selection methods for 
resource in our algorithm is random (using uni-
form distribution) among the available VMs. The 
selected resource is allocated to the task only if 
Algorithm 1. General task allocation algorithm
Input: Task Matrix
Output: Utilization Matrix
1: Initialize τ 
2: Initialize Utilization Matrix, U*← Ø 
3: R* ← Ø 
4: while mainQ ≠ Ø do
5:   tempQ ← All jobs from main queue, mainQ, where arrival time ≤ τ.
6:                     while tempQ ≠ Ø do
7:                              j ← TaskChoosingPolicy()
8:                               i ← ResourceChoosingPolicy ()
9:                               if i ≠ Null then
10:                                         Assign task tj to Ri
11:                                         Update Utilization Matrix U( τ, i).
12:                                         Remove task tj from mainQ and tempQ.
13:                               else
14:                                         Remove task tj from tempQ.
15:                               end if
16:                     end while
17:           Increment τ. 
18: end while
19: return U.
20: end algorithm.

249
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
the resource utilization, including selected task 
in phase-1 is not exceeded threshold value. The 
threshold value in our case is 100%. i.e. The task 
is assigned to the Virtual Machine Ri, if and only if 
Ri utilization is not exceeding the threshold value 
100% including the currently selected task. Itera-
tion continues till all tasks are allocated to VMs.
5.2 FCFS to Round-Robin 
Utilized (FcfsRr)
The FcfsRr heuristic algorithm works similarly in 
phase-1 as FcfsRand, it selects the task in FCFS 
basis from the global waiting task queue and in 
phase-2 the resource is allocated to the task using 
Round Robin(RR) basis among the available VMs. 
The selected resource is allocated to the task only 
if the resource utilization, including selected task 
in phase- 1 is not exceeded threshold value. The 
threshold value in our case is 100%. i.e. The task 
is assigned to the Virtual Machine Ri, if and only if 
Ri utilization is not exceeding the threshold value 
100% including the currently selected task. Itera-
tion continues till all tasks are allocated to VMs.
5.3 FCFS to Minimum 
Utilized (FcfsMin)
In the FcfsMin heuristic algorithm, the task se-
lection process also follows FCFS principle in 
phase- 1. In phase- 2, the resource is allocated to the 
selected task. The appropriate resource is selected 
by finding the current minimum utilized resource 
among the available active resources. The VM 
with minimum utilization is selected among the 
available VMs. The utilization of selected resource 
is computed by adding the resource utilization by 
task. The selected resource is allocated to the task 
only if the resource utilization, including selected 
task in phase- 1 is not exceeded threshold value. 
If the selected resource has not enough room for 
the task, then the next task is processed with the 
selected resource. The threshold value in our case 
is 100%. i.e The task is assigned to the Virtual 
Machine Ri, if and only if Ri utilization is not 
exceeding the threshold value 100% including the 
currently selected task. Iteration continues till all 
tasks are allocated to VMs.
5.4 FCFS to Maximum 
Utilized (FcfsMax)
In the FcfsMax heuristic algorithm, the task 
selection process also follows FCFS principle in 
phase- 1. In phase- 2, the resource is allocated to the 
selected task. The appropriate resource is selected 
by finding the current maximum utilized resource 
among the available active resources. The VM 
with maximum utilization is selected among the 
available VMs. The utilization of selected resource 
is computed by adding the resource utilization by 
task. The selected resource is allocated to the task 
only if the resource utilization, including selected 
task in phase- 1 is not exceeded threshold value. If 
the selected resource has not enough room for the 
task, then the next maximum utilized resource is 
selected. The threshold value in our case is 100%. 
i.e The task is assigned to the Virtual Machine 
Ri, if and only if Ri utilization is not exceeding 
the threshold value 100% including the currently 
selected task. Iteration continues till all tasks are 
allocated to VMs.
5.5 Minimum to Minimum 
Utilized (MinMin)
Above four heuristic algorithms uses the same 
techniques, FCFS, in phase- 1 for selecting the 
task. This MinMin heuristic algorithm finds the 
task in phase- 1, which required the minimum 
resource utilization. In phase- 2, to the current 
minimum utilizing resources is chosen. The 
appropriate resource is selected by finding the 
current minimum utilized resource among the 
available active resources. The VM with minimum 
utilization is selected among the available VMs. 
The utilization of selected resource is computed 
by adding the resource utilization by task. The 

250
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
selected resource is allocated to the task only if 
the resource utilization, including selected task in 
phase- 1 is not exceeded threshold value. If the 
selected resource has not enough room for the 
task, then the system will wait for one or more pre 
allocated task to be finished. The threshold value 
in our case is 100%. i.e The task is assigned to the 
Virtual Machine Ri, if and only if Ri utilization is 
not exceeding the threshold value 100% including 
the currently selected task. Iteration continues till 
all tasks are allocated to VMs.
5.6 Median to Minimum 
Utilized (MedianMin)
The MedianMin heuristic algorithm finds the task 
in phase- 1, which required the median resource 
utilization among the tasks. In phase- 2, to the 
current minimum utilizing resources is chosen. 
The appropriate resource is selected by finding 
the current minimum utilized resource among the 
available active resources. The VM with minimum 
utilization is selected among the available VMs. 
The utilization of selected resource is computed 
by adding the resource utilization by task. The 
selected resource is allocated to the task only if 
the resource utilization, including selected task in 
phase- 1 is not exceeded threshold value. If the 
selected resource has not enough room for the 
task, then the next near to median task is selected 
which required less utilization of resource. The 
threshold value in our case is 100%. i.e The task is 
assigned to the Virtual Machine Ri, if and only if 
Ri utilization is not exceeding the threshold value 
100% including the currently selected task. Itera-
tion continues till all tasks are allocated to VMs.
5.7 Maximum to Minimum 
Utilized (MaxMin)
The MaxMin heuristic algorithm finds the task in 
phase- 1, which required the maximum resource 
utilization among the tasks. In phase- 2, to the 
current minimum utilizing resources is chosen. 
The appropriate resource is selected by finding 
the current minimum utilized resource among the 
available active resources. The VM with minimum 
utilization is selected among the available VMs. 
The utilization of selected resource is computed 
by adding the resource utilization by task. The 
selected resource is allocated to the task only if 
the resource utilization, including selected task 
in phase- 1 is not exceeded threshold value. If 
the selected resource has not enough room for 
the task, then the next task is selected which re-
quired next maximum utilization of resource. The 
threshold value in our case is 100%. I.e the task is 
assigned to the Virtual Machine Ri, if and only if 
Ri utilization is not exceeding the threshold value 
100% including the currently selected task. Itera-
tion continues till all tasks are allocated to VMs.
5.8 Minimum to Maximum 
Utilized (MinMax)
The MinMax heuristic algorithm finds the task in 
pahse- 1, which required the minimum resource 
utilization among the tasks. In phase- 2, to the 
current maximum utilizing resources is chosen. 
The appropriate resource is selected by finding 
the current maximum utilized resource among the 
available active resources. The VM with maximum 
utilization is selected among the available VMs. 
The utilization of selected resource is computed 
by adding the resource utilization by task. The 
selected resource is allocated to the task only if 
the resource utilization, including selected task in 
phase- 1 is not exceeded threshold value. If the 
selected resource has not enough room for the 
task, then the next maximum utilizing resource is 
selected. The threshold value in our case is 100%. 
i.e The task is assigned to the Virtual Machine 
Ri, if and only if Ri utilization is not exceeding 
the threshold value 100% including the currently 
selected task. Iteration continues till all tasks are 
allocated to VMs.

251
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
5.9 Median to Maximum 
Utilized (MedianMax)
The MedianMax heuristic algorithm finds the task 
in phase- 1, which required the median resource 
utilization among the sorted tasks (ordered by 
resource utilization). In phase- 2, to the current 
minimum utilizing resources is chosen. The 
appropriate resource is selected by finding the 
current maximum utilized resource among the 
available active resources. The VM with maximum 
utilization is selected among the available VMs. 
The utilization of selected resource is computed 
by adding the resource utilization by task. The 
selected resource is allocated to the task only if 
the resource utilization, including selected task in 
phase- 1 is not exceeded threshold value. If the 
selected resource has not enough room for the 
task, then the next near to median task is selected 
which required less utilization of resource. The 
threshold value in our case is 100%. i.e The task is 
assigned to the Virtual Machine Ri, if and only if 
Ri utilization is not exceeding the threshold value 
100% including the currently selected task. Itera-
tion continues till all tasks are allocated to VMs.
5.10 Maximum to Maximum 
Utilized (MaxMax)
This MaxMax heuristic algorithm finds the task in 
phase- 1, which required the maximum resource 
utilization. In phase- 2, to the current maximum 
utilizing resources is chosen if it has enough room 
for the task. The appropriate resource is selected 
by finding the current maximum utilized resource 
among the available active resources. The VM 
with maximum utilization is selected among the 
available VMs. The utilization of selected resource 
is computed by adding the resource utilization by 
task. The selected resource is allocated to the task 
only if the resource utilization, including selected 
task in phase- 1 is not exceeded threshold value. 
If the selected resource has not enough room for 
the task, then the next maximum utilized resource 
is selected. If no resource has enough room for 
the task, then the next maximum required task 
is selected for processing. Otherwise the cloud 
infrastructure will wait for one or more pre allo-
cated task to be finished. The threshold value in 
our case is 100%. i.e The task is assigned to the 
Virtual Machine Ri, if and only if Ri utilization is 
not exceeding the threshold value 100% including 
the currently selected task. Iteration continues till 
all tasks are allocated to VMs.
The pseudo-code for the 2-phase proposed 
MaxMax algorithm for the task required maximum 
utilization of the maximum utilized resource is 
allocated in cloud computing infrastructure is 
presented in Algorithm-4.10. This algorithm 
allocates tasks (which required the maximum 
resource utilization) to the current maximum 
utilizing resources. First the algorithm operated 
on task queue, which is the resulted on arrival of 
task till the time of selection. The task is selected 
from the task queue having maximum resource 
utilization. The Algorithm 3 MaxResourceUti-
lizingTask (temQ) return the maximum resource 
utilizing task from the task queue tempQ and the 
Algorithm 4 MaxUtilizedResource (U, τ, j) return 
the resource which has maximum utilization of 
resources for task tj, but less then or equal to maxi-
mum threshold value 100% if no such fit found 
it return 0 value. If resource Ri is found such that 
utilization is maximum for task tj and utilization 
is not exceeding 100%. After allocating task j to 
resource Ri, the task is removed from the main 
queue mainQ and temporary queue tempQ. If no 
suitable fit is found then the task j will be removed 
from temporary queue but not from main queue, 
the iterative process continue till the successful 
allocation of all tasks to VMs.
Allocation list in Table 2 is obtained by using 
Algorithm 4 on allocating 20 tasks on 10 VMs in 
cloud. Table 2 shows the allocation of 20 tasks to 
10 VMs. The corresponding utilization at a time 
for 10 VMs is shown in Table 3.

252
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
Example of Maximum to Maximum Utilized 
allocations and utilization are shown in Table 2 
and 3 for allocation of 20 tasks to 10VMs.
6. EXPERIMENTAL 
EVALUATION AND RESULT
We have simulated the discrete event simulator 
for performance analysis of ten task consolida-
tion greedy heuristic with 5000 tasks. The tasks 
are generated for different set of VMs using an 
inconsistent ETC generation algorithm suggested 
by Ali, Siegel, Maheswaran, and Hensgen (2000).
The experiment has been conducted using in 
house simulator designed using Matlab for 5000 
task on two- phases resource allocations. The 
tasks are arriving with a rate λ to the central server 
queue having an infinite queue length. We have 
considered task arrival interval is 1 unit of time 
and arrival rate to be 60 for our experiments. We 
observed the following experiments:
Algorithm 2. MaxMax task allocation algorithm
Input: Task Matrix
Output: Utilization Matrix
1: Initialize τ 
2: Initialize Utilization Matrix, U*← Ø 
3: R* ← Ø 
4: while mainQ ≠ Ø do
5:           tempQ ← All jobs from mainQ where arrival time ≤ τ.
6:                     while tempQ ≠ Ø do
7:                              j ← MaxResourceUtilizingTask(temQ)
8:                               i ← MaxUtilizedResource(U, τ, j)
9:                               if i ≠ Null then
10:                                         Assign task tj to Ri
11:                                         Update Utilization Matrix U( τ, i).
12:                                         Remove task tj from mainQ and tempQ.
13:                               else
14:                                         Remove task tj from tempQ.
15:                               end if
16:                     end while
17:           Increment τ. 
18: end while
19: return U.
20: end Algorithm
Algorithm 3. MaxResourceUtilizingTask algorithm
Input: Task Queue, Tq
Output: Task id
1: Sort Task queue(Tq) by utilization in descending order,T 
2: retrun (Task id of T(1))
3: end Algorithm

253
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
Algorithm 4. MaxUtilizedResource Algorithm
Input: Utilization Matrix, U;  τ ;  and Task id, j.
Output: Resource id, if fit found otherwise return 0.
1: Temp Utilization Matrix, TempU = Ø 
2: pt = expected time to execute on each machine for task j. 
3: for i = 1 to n do
4:           for k = 1 to pt(I) do
5:             update utilization matrix, tempU(k) = U(τ + k) + utilization(j) 
6:           end for
7: end for
8: Remove the resource id, if utilization is more then peakload from tempU. 
9: find best fit resource id with maximum utilization, [ c, i ] = max (sum 
(tempU)) 
10: return, i
11: end Algorithm
Table 2. Example of maximum required to maximum utilized, tasks allocation table for 20 tasks on 10 VMs
Time/ 
VM
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
M7
M8
M9
M10
1
[ 5 ]
[ 2 ]
[ 1, 3 ]
[ 4 ]
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
[ 5 ]
[ 2 ]
[ 1, 3 ]
[ 4 ]
[ 11 ]
[ 10, 8 ]
[ 6 ]
[ 7 ]
[ 9 ]
-
3
[ 5 ]
[ 2 ]
[ 1, 3, 15 ]
[ 4, 12 ]
[ 11 ]
[ 10, 8 ]
[ 6 ]
[ 7, 13 ]
[ 9 ]
[ 14 ]
4
[ 5 ]
[ 2 ]
[ 1, 3, 15 ]
[ 4, 12]
[ 11, 19 ]
[ 10, 8 ]
[ 6 ]
[ 7, 13 ]
[ 9, 20 ]
[ 14 ]
5
[ 5 ]
[ 2 ]
[ 1, 3, 15 ]
[ 4, 12 ]
[ 11, 19 ]
[ 10, 8 ]
[ 6 ]
[ 7, 13 ]
[ 9, 20 ]
[ 14 ]
6
[ 5 ]
[ 17 ]
[ 1, 3, 15 ]
[ 4, 12 ]
[ 11, 19 ]
[ 10, 8 ]
[ 6 ]
[ 7, 13 ]
[ 9, 20 ]
[ 14 ]
7
[ 5 ]
[ 17 ]
[ 1, 3, 15 ]
[ 4, 12 ]
[ 11, 19 ]
[ 10, 8 ]
[ 6 ]
[ 7, 13 ]
[ 9, 20 ]
[ 14 ]
8
[ 5 ]
[ 17 ]
[ 1, 15 ]
[ 4, 12 ]
[ 11, 19 ]
[ 10, 8 ]
[ 6 ]
[ 7, 13 ]
[ 9, 20 ]
[ 14 ]
9
[ 5 ]
[ 17 ]
[ 1, 15 ]
[ 4, 12 ]
[ 11, 19 ]
[ 10, 8 ]
[ 6 ]
[ 7, 13 ]
[ 9, 20 ]
[ 14 ]
10
[ 16 ]
[ 17 ]
[ 1 ]
[ 4, 12 ]
[ 11 ]
[ 10 ]
[ 18 ]
[ 7, 13 ]
[ 9, 20 ]
[ 14 ]
11
[ 16 ]
[ 17 ]
[ 1 ]
[ 4, 12 ]
[ 11 ]
[ 10 ]
[ 18 ]
[ 7, 13 ]
[ 9, 20 ]
[ 14 ]
12
[ 16 ]
[ 17 ]
[ 1 ]
[ 4, 12 ]
[ 11 ]
-
[ 18 ]
[ 7, 13 ]
[ 20 ]
-
13
[ 16 ]
[ 17 ]
-
[ 12 ]
[ 11 ]
-
[ 18 ]
[ 13 ]
[ 20 ]
-
14
[ 16 ]
[ 17 ]
-
[ 12 ]
[ 11 ]
-
[ 18 ]
[ 13 ]
[ 20 ]
-
15
[ 16 ]
[ 17 ]
-
[ 12 ]
[ 11 ]
-
[ 18 ]
[ 13 ]
[ 20 ]
-
16
[ 16 ]
[ 17 ]
-
[ 12 ]
[ 11 ]
-
[ 18 ]
-
[ 20 ]
-
17
[ 16 ]
[ 17 ]
-
[ 12 ]
[ 11 ]
-
[ 18 ]
-
[ 20 ]
-
18
[ 16 ]
-
-
[ 12 ]
[ 11 ]
-
[ 18 ]
-
-
-
19
[ 16 ]
-
-
[ 12 ]
-
-
[ 18 ]
-
-
-
20
[ 16 ]
-
-
-
-
-
[ 18 ]
-
-
-
21
[ 16 ]
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-

254
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
•	
Resource utilization with ten different heu-
ristic algorithms on 128 VMs, arrival in-
terval 1 and arrival rate 60 with 5000 tasks 
are observed.
•	
Energy consumption with ten different 
heuristic algorithms on 128 VMs, arrival 
interval 1 and arrival rate 60 with 5000 
tasks are observed.
•	
Energy saving with ten different heuristic 
algorithms on 128 VMs, arrival interval 
1 and arrival rate 60 with 5000 tasks are 
observed.
The name of ten greedy heuristic algorithms 
used in this chapter are listed in Table 4.
Table 3. Example of maximum to maximum resources utilized, resource allocation table for 20 tasks 
on 10 VMs
Time/VM
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
M7
M8
M9
M10
1
97
62
85
51
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
97
62
85
51
71
97
59
57
54
0
3
97
62
98
96
71
97
59
100
54
99
4
97
62
98
96
89
97
59
100
87
99
5
97
62
98
96
89
97
59
100
87
99
6
97
93
98
96
89
97
59
100
87
99
7
97
93
98
96
89
97
59
100
87
99
8
97
93
67
96
89
97
59
100
87
99
9
97
93
67
96
89
97
59
100
87
99
10
90
93
54
96
71
66
82
100
87
99
11
90
93
54
96
71
66
82
100
87
99
12
90
93
54
96
71
0
82
100
33
0
13
90
93
0
45
71
0
82
43
33
0
14
90
93
0
45
71
0
82
43
33
0
15
90
93
0
45
71
0
82
43
33
0
16
90
93
0
45
71
0
82
0
33
0
17
90
93
0
45
71
0
82
0
33
0
18
90
0
0
45
71
0
82
0
0
0
19
90
0
0
45
0
0
82
0
0
0
20
90
0
0
0
0
0
82
0
0
0
21
90
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Table 4. 10 greedy heuristic algorithms
  Stage 1 
  Task Selection
  Stage 2 
  Resource Selection
  Algorithm 
  Name
  FCFS
  Random
  FcfsRand
  FCFS
  Round Robin
  FcfsRr
  FCFS
  MIN
  FcfsMin
  FCFS
  MAX
  FcfsMax
  MIN
  MIN
  MinMin
  Median
  MIN
  MedianMin
  MAX
  MIN
  MaxMin
  MIN
  MAX
  MinMax
  Median
  MAX
  MedianMax
  MAX
  MAX
  MaxMax

255
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
The resource utilization graph of our simula-
tion using the in-house simulator for 5000 tasks 
on 128 VMs are presented in Figure 2. The com-
parative analysis of resource utilization by the ten 
different algorithms has been presented for 5000 
tasks. The simulation process terminates after the 
successful execution of 5000 allocated tasks. The 
maximum resource utilization is due to MaxMax 
and completed in minimum time compared to 
others 2-phase greedy heuristic algorithms.
The simulation results for energy consump-
tion for 5000 tasks on 128 VMs are presented in 
Figure 2. Resource utilization by 5000 tasks on 128 VMs

256
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
Figure 3. The comparative analysis of total energy 
consumption of the ten different algorithms has 
been presented for 5000 tasks indicates the least 
energy consumed by MaxMax.
The simulation results for energy consump-
tion for 5000 tasks on 128 VMs are presented in 
Figure 3. The comparative analysis of total energy 
consumption of the ten different algorithms has 
been presented for 5000 tasks indicates the least 
energy consumed by MaxMax. In Figure 4 percent-
age of energy saving has been shown for different 
heuristic algorithms. The maximum energy saved 
is 11.5% by MaxMax compared to FcfsRand.
Figure 4. Energy saving comparison
Figure 3. Energy consumption by 5000 tasks on 128 VMs

257
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
7. CONCLUSION AND 
FUTURE WORKS
This chapter introduced the basic concepts of 
the task consolidation problem in the cloud 
computing system. Task consolidation problem 
allocates the VMs to the tasks. This problem on 
cloud computing environments is represented as 
a linear programming problem, with the objective 
to minimize the total energy consumed. Model for 
energy consumed in a cloud computing environ-
ment has been presented as the sum of the energy 
consumed by the hosts. A 2-phase greedy heuristic 
algorithm framework has been presented. The 
experimental evaluation of ten different heuristic 
is also presented to study the performance of dif-
ferent task consolidation algorithms.
In future work, the scope of designing task 
consolidation algorithm using evolutionary al-
gorithms like Genetic algorithm (GA), Particle 
swarm optimization (PSO), Ant colony optimiza-
tion (ACO), Simulated annealing (SA) etc.
The task consolidation problem in cloud com-
puting may also be represented in more general 
form with multiobjective like memory, network, 
and storage.
REFERENCES
Ali, S., Siegel, H. J., Maheswaran, M., & Hensgen, 
D. (2000). Task execution time modeling for het-
erogeneous computing systems. In Heterogeneous 
Computing Workshop, 2000. (HCW 2000) Pro-
ceedings. 9th, (pp. 185-199). IEEE. doi:10.1109/
HCW.2000.843743
Beloglazov, A., Abawajy, J., & Buyya, R. (2012). 
Energy-aware resource allocation heuristics for 
efficient management of data centers for cloud 
computing. Future Generation Computer Systems, 
28(5), 755–768. doi:10.1016/j.future.2011.04.017
Black, P. E. (2005). Greedy algorithm. Dictionary 
of Algorithms and Data Structures.
Buyya, R., Beloglazov, A., & Abawajy, J. (2010a). 
Energy-efficient management of data center 
resources for cloud computing: A vision, archi-
tectural elements, and open challenges. arXiv 
preprint arXiv: 1006.0308.
Buyya, R., Broberg, J., & Goscinski, A. M. 
(2010b). Cloud computing: Principles and para-
digms (volume 87).
Calheiros, R. N., Buyya, R., & De Rose, C. A. 
(2009). A heuristic for mapping virtual machines 
and links in emulation testbeds. In International 
Conference on Parallel Processing, 2009 (pp. 518-
525). ICPP’09. IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICPP.2009.7
Cardosa, M., Korupolu, M. R., & Singh, A. (2009). 
Shares and utilities based power consolidation in 
virtualized server environments. In IFIP/IEEE 
International Symposium on Integrated Network 
Management, 2009 (pp. 327-334). IM’ 09. IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/INM.2009.5188832
Chedid, W., Yu, C., & Lee, B. (2005). Power analy-
sis and optimization techniques for energy efficient 
computer systems. Advances in Computers, 63, 
129–164. doi:10.1016/S0065-2458(04)63004-X
Eberhart, R. C., & Kennedy, J. (1995, October). 
A new optimizer using particle swarm theory. In 
Proceedings of the sixth international symposium 
on micro machine and human science (Vol. 1, pp. 
39-43). doi:10.1109/MHS.1995.494215
Galloway, J. M., Smith, K. L., & Vrbsky, S. S. 
(2011). Power aware load balancing for cloud com-
puting. In Proceedings of the World Congress on 
Engineering and Computer Science, 1 (pp. 19–21).
Gray, L., Kumar, A., & Li, H. (2008). Charac-
terization of specpower_ssj2008 benchmark. In 
SPEC Benchmark Workshop.
Guo, L., Zhao, S., Shen, S., & Jiang, C. (2012). 
Task scheduling optimization in cloud computing 
based on heuristic algorithm. Journal of Networks, 
7(3), 547–553. doi:10.4304/jnw.7.3.547-553

258
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
Hwang, K., Fox, G., & Dongarra, J. (2012). 
Distributed and Cloud Computing: From Paral-
lel Processing to the Internet of Things. Morgan 
Kaufmann.
ITU. F. (2012). Fg cloud technical report v1.0. 
International Telecommunication Union.
Jing, S.-Y., Ali, S., She, K., & Zhong, Y. (2013). 
State-of-the-art research study for green cloud 
computing. The Journal of Supercomputing, 1–24.
Juhnke, E., Dornemann, T., Bock, D., & Freisle-
ben, B. (2011, July). Multi-objective scheduling 
of BPEL workflows in geographically distributed 
clouds. In Cloud Computing (CLOUD), 2011 
IEEE International Conference on (pp. 412-419). 
IEEE.
Kołodziej, J., & Xhafa, F. (2011). Modern ap-
proaches to modeling user requirements on 
resource and task allocation in hierarchical 
computational grids. International Journal of 
Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, 
21(2), 243–257. doi:10.2478/v10006-011-0018-x
Kusic, D., Kephart, J. O., Hanson, J. E., Kandasa-
my, N., & Jiang, G. (2009). Power and performance 
management of virtualized computing environ-
ments via lookahead control. Cluster Computing, 
12(1), 1–15. doi:10.1007/s10586-008-0070-y
Lee, Y. C., & Zomaya, A. Y. (2012). Energy ef-
ficient utilization of resources in cloud computing 
systems. The Journal of Supercomputing, 60(2), 
268–280. doi:10.1007/s11227-010-0421-3
Li, J., Qiu, M., Ming, Z., Quan, G., Qin, X., & 
Gu, Z. (2012). Online optimization for schedul-
ing preemptable tasks on IaaS cloud systems. 
Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, 
72(5), 666–677. doi:10.1016/j.jpdc.2012.02.002
Li, J. F., Peng, J., Cao, X., & Li, H. Y. (2011). A 
task scheduling algorithm based on improved ant 
colony optimization in cloud computing environ-
ment. Energy Procedia, 13, 6833–6840.
Liu, H., Abraham, A., Snášel, V., & McLoone, 
S. (2012). Swarm scheduling approaches for 
work-flow applications with security constraints 
in distributed data-intensive computing environ-
ments. Information Sciences, 192, 228–243. 
doi:10.1016/j.ins.2011.12.032
Liu, L., Wang, H., Liu, X., Jin, X., He, W. B., 
Wang, Q. B., & Chen, Y. (2009). Greencloud: 
a new architecture for green data center. In 
Proceedings of the 6th international conference 
industry session on Autonomic computing and 
communications industry session, (pp. 29–38). 
ACM. doi:10.1145/1555312.1555319
Mell, P. & Grance, T. (2011). The NIST definition 
of cloud computing (draft). NIST special publica-
tion, 800(145):7.
Mezmaz, M., Melab, N., Kessaci, Y., Lee, Y. C., 
Talbi, E.-G., Zomaya, A. Y., & Tuyttens, D. (2011). 
A parallel bi-objective hybrid metaheuristic for 
energy-aware scheduling for cloud computing 
systems. Journal of Parallel and Distributed 
Computing, 71(11), 1497–1508. doi:10.1016/j.
jpdc.2011.04.007
Minas, L. & Ellison, B. (2009). The problem of 
power consumption in servers. Intel Corporation. 
Dr. Dobb’s.
Packard, H. (2011). Power regulator for proliant 
servers.
Ramezani, F., Lu, J., & Hussain, F. K. (2014). 
Task-Based System Load Balancing in Cloud 
Computing Using Particle Swarm Optimization. 
International Journal of Parallel Programming, 
42(5), 739–754. doi:10.1007/s10766-013-0275-4
Rodero, I., Jaramillo, J., Quiroz, A., Parashar, M., 
Guim, F., & Poole, S. (2010). Energy-efficient 
application-aware online provisioning for virtual-
ized clouds and data centers. In 2010 International 
Green Computing Conference (pp. 31–45). IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/GREENCOMP.2010.5598283

259
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
Rosenblum, M. (2004). The reincarna-
tion of virtual machines. Queue, 2(5), 34. 
doi:10.1145/1016998.1017000
Song, B., Hassan, M. M., & Huh, E. N. (2010, 
November). A novel heuristic-based task selection 
and allocation framework in dynamic collabora-
tive cloud service platform. In Cloud Computing 
Technology and Science (CloudCom), 2010 
IEEE Second International Conference on (pp. 
360-367). IEEE.
Song, Y., Wang, H., Li, Y., Feng, B., & Sun, Y. 
(2009). Multi-tiered on-demand resource schedul-
ing for vm-based data center. In Proceedings of 
the 2009 9th IEEE/ACM International Sympo-
sium on Cluster Computing and the Grid, (pp. 
148–155). IEEE Computer Society. doi:10.1109/
CCGRID.2009.11
SPECpower (2013). Benchmark results summary 
of hitachi model no: Ha8000/ss10 (dl2).
Srikantaiah, S., Kansal, A., & Zhao, F. (2008). 
Energy aware consolidation for cloud computing. 
In Proceedings of the 2008 conference on Power 
aware computing and systems, 10. USENIX As-
sociation.
Taheri, J., Choon Lee, Y., Zomaya, A. Y., & Siegel, 
H. J. (2013). A Bee Colony based optimization 
approach for simultaneous job scheduling and 
data replication in grid environments. Comput-
ers & Operations Research, 40(6), 1564–1578. 
doi:10.1016/j.cor.2011.11.012
Venkatachalam, V., & Franz, M. (2005). Power 
reduction techniques for microprocessor sys-
tems. ACM Computing Surveys, 37(3), 195–237. 
doi:10.1145/1108956.1108957
Verma, A., Ahuja, P., & Neogi, A. (2008). pmap-
per: power and migration cost aware application 
placement in virtualized systems. In Middleware 
2008 (pp. 243–264). Springer.
VmWare (2012). Vmware.
Ye, K., Huang, D., Jiang, X., Chen, H., & Wu, S. 
(2010). Virtual machine based energy-efficient 
data center architecture for cloud computing: a 
performance perspective. In Proceedings of the 
2010 IEEE/ACM Int’l Conference on Green Com-
puting and Communications & Int’l Conference 
on Cyber, Physical and Social Computing (pp. 
171–178). IEEE Computer Society. doi:10.1109/
GreenCom-CPSCom.2010.108
Yeo, C. S., & Buyya, R. (2006). A taxonomy 
of market-based resource management systems 
for utility-driven cluster computing. Software, 
Practice & Experience, 36(13), 1381–1419. 
doi:10.1002/spe.725
Zhang, L., Chen, Y., Sun, R., Jing, S., & Yang, 
B. (2008). A task scheduling algorithm based on 
PSO for grid computing. International Journal 
of Computational Intelligence Research, 4(1), 
37–43. doi:10.5019/j.ijcir.2008.123
Zhao, C., Zhang, S., Liu, Q., Xie, J., & Hu, J. 
(2009, September). Independent tasks scheduling 
based on genetic algorithm in cloud computing. 
In Wireless Communications, Networking and 
Mobile Computing, 2009. WiCom’09. 5th Inter-
national Conference on (pp. 1-4). IEEE.
Zomaya, A. Y., & Teh, Y. H. (2001). Observa-
tions on using genetic algorithms for dynamic 
load-balancing. Parallel and Distributed Systems. 
IEEE Transactions on, 12(9), 899–911.
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Cloud Computing: Cloud computing infra-
structures are designed to support the accessibil-
ity and deployment of various service oriented 
applications by the users. The concept of cloud 
computing has been emerging from the concept of 
heterogeneous distributed computing, grid com-
puting, utility computing and autonomic comput-
ing. To meet the growing demand for computations 

260
Heuristic Task Consolidation Techniques for Energy Efficient Cloud Computing
﻿
and large volume of data, the cloud computing 
environment provides high performance servers 
and high speed mass storage devices.
Energy Efficient: It is a way to managing 
energy consumption in the organization. If the 
systems deliver more services for the same energy 
input, the system is more energy efficient.
Greedy Algorithm: A greedy algorithm fol-
lows heuristic techniques to making the locally 
optimal choice at each stage with the hope of 
finding a global optimum.
Green Computing: In Green Computing, 
organizations adopt such policy for the setup 
and operations to produce the minimal carbon 
footprint. Green computing, also called green 
technology, is the environmentally responsible 
use of computers and related resources.
Heuristics: A heuristic is a technique for 
getting a approximate solution more quickly 
than solving with classic methods. Heuristic and 
meta-heuristic algorithms are the most effective 
technology for resource allocation problem due 
to their ability to deliver high quality solutions in 
reasonable time.
Server Consolidation: Server consolidation 
is mainly used to reduce the number of servers 
required in computations in an organization.
Task Consolidation: Task consolidation is a 
way of maximizing cloud computing resources.

261
Copyright © 2015, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
Chapter  12
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-8339-6.ch012
Virtual Machine Placement 
Strategy for Cloud Data Center
ABSTRACT
The data center is the physical infrastructure layer in cloud architecture. To run a large data center requires 
a huge amount of power. A proper strategy can minimize the number of servers used. Minimization of 
active servers caused minimization of power consumption. But the maximum number of virtual machine 
placement will be a monetary benefit for cloud service providers. To earn maximum revenue, the CSP 
is to maximize resource utilization. VM placement is one of the major issues to achieve minimum power 
consumption as well as to earn maximum revenue by CSP. In this research chapter, we have formulated 
an optimization problem for initial VM placement in the data center. An iterative heuristic using simu-
lated annealing has been used for VM placement problem. The proposed heuristic has been analysis 
to be scalable and the coding scheme shows that the proposed technique is outperforming traditional 
FFD on bin packing technique.
1. INTRODUCTION
Cloud computing is an emerging computing tech-
nology that uses the Internet and central remote 
servers to maintain data and applications. This 
technology is expected to be much more efficient 
computing than the presently available technology 
by centralizing the storage, memory, processing 
and bandwidth. It allows consumers and busi-
nesses to use applications without installation 
and access their personal files on any computer 
with the help of Internet. A list of a few organiza-
tions and their contribution in the field of cloud 
computing is shown in Table 1 (Marston et al., 
2011). Some of the dominant cloud computing 
products are Amazon EC2, Microsoft Window 
Sourav Kanti Addya
National Institute of Technology, India
Bibhudutta Sahoo
National Institute of Technology, India
Ashok Kumar Turuk
National Institute of Technology, India

262
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
Azure platform, Google App engine, etc. Over 
the past few years IBM, Google, Amazon and 
Microsoft are able to provide powerful, efficient 
and reliable cloud computing infrastructures. The 
major benefits that are achieved from the cloud 
computing infrastructures are No up-front invest-
ment, Lowering operating cost, Highly scalable, 
easy access, Improved automation and Sustain-
ability (Zhang et al., 2010).
Some renowned organization, such that The 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST) (NIST, n.d), Cisco (Bakshi, 2009) made 
standard definition for cloud computing.
•	
NIST Definition: Cloud computing is a 
model for enabling convenient, on-demand 
network access to a shared pool of configu-
rable computing resources (e.g., networks, 
servers, storage, applications and services) 
that can be rapidly provisioned and re-
leased with minimal management effort of 
service provider interaction.
•	
Cisco Definition: IT resources and services 
that are abstracted from the underlying in-
frastructure and provide “on-demand” and 
“at scale” in a multitenant environment.
Setting up and maintaining the IT infrastructure 
for any small or large scale organization to meet 
their IT need is a difficult task, especially for non 
IT organization. The up-front, operational and 
maintenance cost is higher which may not be actu-
ally need for the organization. Cloud computing 
offers the solutions for these types of problem as 
well as maintain the client data and information 
secure. Public cloud offers on-demand storage 
and virtual host (VM) to the client at a low rate. 
Beside these, the few other cloud environment 
offers the development environment without 
complete purchase of the application.
Two main important characteristic to imple-
ment a large scale cloud data centers are a great 
deal of flexibility and agility. In the real time 
scenario, the needs of computer resources to be 
available in a short time period for the dynamic 
scaling and shrinking requirement. At the time 
of overloaded condition of hardware resources, 
the dynamic transfer is required for some load to 
another system with a minimum downtime for 
the users’ service. Virtualization technology can 
provide this kind of flexibility.
Characteristics
The cloud computing, grid computing, high per-
formance computing (HPC) / supercomputing, and 
data center computing all belongs to the family 
of parallel computing. HPC focuses on scientific 
Table 1. Contribution of Different organization in cloud computing
Organization 
Name
Cloud Name
Remarks
IBM
Blue Cloud
By using this cloud they access those tools that allow all to manage large scale of 
application and database. The organization spends $400 million and try to expand the 
number of researchers in the area of cloud computing
Google
App Engine
This cloud mainly offers client organizations access to company’s platform by which 
they can build and host web applications.
Microsoft
Windows Azure
It is a cloud operating system mainly build on the concept of PaaS to appear in early 
2010. Addition with this the organization creating a windows azure operating system to 
provide different client access several Microsoft product like .NET, SQL, LIVE etc.
AT & T
Synaptic Hosting 
Synaptic storage
By this all clients will be able to store Windows server and Linux client server 
applications. Along with they also able to store various we applications. 
IT is enabling clients to store their data on AT&T’s cloud.

263
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
computing, which is computationally intensive 
and delay sensitive. Grid computing is based on 
HPC center in which many HPC centers form a 
large grid, which owns a powerful underlying 
service oriented architectures (SOA) concept. 
Some other creative and impressive concepts 
like utility computing and autonomic computing 
do not come into reality. The cloud computing, 
which is based on data center is more widely ac-
cepted than grid computing. Data centers, which 
only pursue powerful processing performance and 
low delay is more balanced than HPC center. The 
comparable characteristics of cloud computing 
and grid computing are listed in Table - 2. The 
Half in the Table - 2 means not owning the whole 
characteristic to a certain extent. This paper doesn’t 
pay much attention on the similarities and differ-
ence between them and focuses on the essential 
characteristics of cloud computing. For detailed 
comparisons on grid and cloud computing, refer 
(Gonzalez et al., 2009).
Some of the advantages of cloud computing 
are: (i) Increased Storage: Organization can store 
more data than on their private computer systems, 
(ii) Reduced Cost: Cloud technology is paid in-
crementally (you pay only for what you need), 
saving organizations money which can be used 
for other important resources, (iii) More Mobility: 
Employees can access information wherever they 
are, rather than having to remain at their desks, 
(iv) Highly Automated: IT personnel need not 
keep their software up-to-date as the maintenance 
is left to the cloud the service provider, and (v) 
Allows IT to Shift Focus: No longer having to 
worry about constant server updates and other 
computing issues, government organizations will 
be free to concentrate on innovations.
Few of the demerits of cloud computing are: 
(i) Security: There is no security standard, (ii) 
Cost of transition: This is the cost associated with 
moving from the existing architecture to the cloud 
architecture, (iii) Reliance on 3rd Party: Control 
over own data is lost in the hands of a “difficult-
to- rust” provider, and (iv) Uncertainty of benefits: 
The question of any long term benefits.
The benefits of cloud computing include:
1. 	
In a cloud computing environment the cli-
ent would able to access their data and ap-
plications at any time and from anywhere 
using just any computer with an Internet 
connection.
2. 	
As the data is being stored in the server 
there is no need of installing any substantial 
amount of memory on the client system. This 
will effectively reduce expenditure.
3. 	
There is no need to purchase software 
or software licenses for every employee. 
Consumption is usually billed on a utility 
(resources consumed, like electricity) or 
subscription (time-based, like a newspaper) 
basis with little or no upfront cost.
Table 2. Characteristics: cloud computing vs. grid computing
Characteristic
Cloud Computing
Grid Computing
Server Oriented
Yes
Yes
Loose Coupling
Yes
Half
Strong Fault Tolerant
Yes
Half
Business Model
Yes
No
Ease Use
Yes
Half
TCP/IP based
Yes
Half
High Security
Half
Half
Virtualization
Yes
Half

264
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
Cloud Architecture
Cloud architecture is yet to be standardized. Ev-
ery enterprise is using a different architecture for 
their development and research. Current trends 
in cloud computing architecture are shown in 
Figure 1. Cloud architecture, mainly consists of 
two layers: Resource Layer and Service Layer. 
Resource Layer contains all physical resources 
and consists of two sub-layers: Virtual Resource 
Layer and Physical Resource Layer. All hardware 
components are included in the resource layer. 
Service Layer is mainly used to provide specific 
services to the users. Service layer can be split into 
three sub-layers, each providing specific service 
to the users. A brief description about service 
layers are given below:
1. 	
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS): This 
sub-layer support computing resources and 
storage resources for the users. In the case of 
a particular service constrains, IaaS provides 
an intermediate platform to run arbitrary 
operating systems and software.
2. 	
Platform as a Service (PaaS): This sub-
layer provides a a more personalized hard-
ware and software services, and a lot of 
infrastructure module, such as a remote call 
module, distributed data module, building 
module, etc.
3. 	
Software as a Service (SaaS): This sub-
layer provides application, which is closest 
to the user service and allows deploying 
the software in the network environment. It 
allows software to run under the multi-user 
platform.
Classification of Cloud Computing
Cloud computing is broadly classified into three 
types: Public, Private and Hybrid Cloud. A brief 
description about these classifications is explained 
below:
1. 	
Public Cloud: A public cloud is a model 
which allows users’ access to the cloud via 
interfaces using mainstream web browsers. 
It is typically based on a pay-per-use model, 
similar to a prepaid electricity metering 
system which is flexible enough to cater for 
spikes in demand for cloud optimization. 
This helps cloud clients to better match their 
Figure 1. Layred architecture

265
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
IT expenditure at an operational level by 
decreasing their capital expenditure on IT 
infrastructure (March, 2010). Public clouds 
are less secure than the other cloud models 
because it places an additional burden of 
ensuring all applications and data accessed 
on the public cloud are not subjected to ma-
licious attacks. Therefore trust and privacy 
concerns are rife when dealing with public 
clouds with the cloud service layer architec-
ture (SLA) at its core. A key management 
consideration, which needs to be answered 
within the SLA deals with ensuring that 
ample security controls are put in place. 
One option for both the cloud vendor and 
client is to mutually agree in sharing joint 
responsibility in enforcing cloud checks 
and validation are performed across their 
own systems. The alternative option will 
be for each party to set out individual roles 
and responsibilities in dealing with cloud 
computing security within their utilization 
boundaries.
2. 	
Private Cloud: A private cloud is set up 
within an organization’s internal enterprise 
data center. It is easier to align with security, 
compliance, and regulatory requirements, 
and provides more enterprise control over 
deployment and use. In a private cloud, 
scalable resources and virtual applications 
provided by the cloud vendor are pooled to-
gether and available for cloud users to share 
and use. It differs from the public cloud in that 
all the cloud resources and applications are 
managed by the organization itself, similar 
to Internet functionality. Utilization on the 
private cloud can be much more secure than 
in the public cloud because of its specified 
internal exposure. Only the organization and 
designated stakeholders may have access to 
operate on a specific private cloud (Dooley, 
2010).
3. 	
Hybrid Cloud: A hybrid cloud is a private 
cloud linked to one or more external cloud 
services, centrally managed, provisioned as 
a single unit, and circumscribed by a secure 
network (Ramgovind, 2010). It provides 
virtual IT solutions through a mix of both 
public and private clouds. Hybrid clouds 
provide a more secure control of data and 
applications, and allows various parties to ac-
cess information over the Internet. It also has 
an open architecture that allows interfacing 
with other management systems. On cloud 
deployment model- networking platform, 
storage, and software infrastructure are 
provided as services that scales up or down 
depending on the demand (Lofstrand, 2009). 
In deciding which type of cloud to deploy, 
business managers need to holistically assess 
the security considerations from an enter-
prise architectural point of view, taking into 
account the information security differences 
of each cloud deployment model mentioned 
above.
This chapter illustrates Virtual Machine Place-
ment Strategy in the public Cloud Data Center.
Background Technologies: 
Virtualization
Virtualization is the most important technology 
among the technologies such as virtualization, 
cyber-infrastructure, and service orient infrastruc-
ture that made cloud computing feasible (Vouk, 
2008). It provides a promising approach through 
which resources can be partitioned into multiple 
execution environments. Virtualization partitions 
the resources of one or more machines into multiple 
execution environments, each of which act as a 
complete system. Each of these logical isolated 
platforms is called a virtual machine (VM). It 
enhances system impregnability, software interop-
erability and platform versatility. Virtualization 
enables dynamic sharing of physical resources 
in cloud environments. Through virtualization, 
physical resources such as CPU, memory, disk 

266
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
space are made available to applications on demand 
(Kusic et al., 2009). It also enables a cloud service 
provider (CSP) can ensure the quality-of-service 
(QoS) delivered to the users while achieving a 
high server utilization and energy efficiency. The 
idea is to maintain a separation between hardware 
and software for better system level efficiency. 
For example, by the concept of virtual memory, 
a user gained access to much enlarged memory 
space. Similarly, this virtualization can be used to 
enhance the use of computing resources.
Virtual Machine: In modern virtualization 
technology not only applied to subsystem like, 
disk, but it can be applied to an entire machine. 
To support the desired architecture, the VM de-
velopers add a new layer to a real machine. This 
entire new model is implemented as a virtual 
machine and it can circumvent hardware resource 
constraints and real machine compatibility. The 
term virtual machine was originated in early 1970s 
(Creasy, 1981) during the development of system 
VMs. The requirement for development of these 
VMs to share very large and expensive mainframe 
hardware among the numbers of users, who can 
install different operating systems.
Though the term “virtual” is associated with 
the name of the VM, but there is no significant 
difference with it and computer architecture. By 
understanding the meaning of “machine” from 
both a system and process, prospective, it can be 
easily described what a VM is.
A system VM is a complete, persistent system 
environment that supports an operating system 
along with its application processes. It provides 
the guest OS with access to virtual hardware re-
sources, I/O network, etc. In contrast, a process 
VM is a virtual platform that helps to execute an 
individual process. This process VM is created and 
terminated with process creation a termination.
The underlying platform that supports the VM 
is the host, while the system or process that runs 
on VM is the guest. The software which is respon-
sible for virtualizing a process or system VM are 
typically called” runtime software” and “virtual 
machine monitor” respectively. In this chapter, we 
mainly deal with system VM and VMM.
System Virtual Machine: Like a complete 
physical system, a system also provides a complete 
environment where an operating system, applica-
tion software etc. is available. Multiple system 
VMs can be hosted on the single host hardware 
platform. An isolated guest operating system 
can be created by installing a different operating 
system in different VMs. Figure 2 shows the with 
and without VM in any physical host. The left side 
picture shows a normal physical machine where 
a general operating system is running on the top 
of hardware resources. All application software 
is expected on operating system. The right side 
picture shows two numbers of VMs are placed on 
a hypervisor (VMM) which is basically an inter 
mediator between VMs and hardware resources. 
Different operating system can install on different 
VMs when utilizing same hardware resources. Ap-
plications can be run on these operating systems 
and those are independent for different VMs.
In the modern age of computer, the system 
VMs are required to share the server or server 
farms among many users or groups access from 
geographically different location. System VMs 
provides the isolation between multiple systems 
executing concurrently on the same hardware 
environment. Another important characteristic 
of it is security. If any guest OS is compromised 
or any system failure occurs, but the application 
software running in other guest operating system 
will run smoothly.
The process of mapping virtual machines to 
physical machines (PM) is called Virtual ma-
chine placement. VM placement is an important 
approach for improving power efficiency and 
resource utilization of cloud infrastructures. Prop-
erly placed VM onto the cloud infrastructure can 
decrease the energy consumption of data centers 
and increase the revenue earned by the cloud 
service provider. The importance of placing VMs 

267
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
appropriately in a data center has been addressed 
by several researches (Cardosa et al., 2009; Gao 
et al., 2013).
There are some well-known global industries 
who introduced their won virtual machine place-
ment tool. Few of them are IBM WebSphere 
CloudBurst (WebSphere, n.d), VMware Capacity 
Planner (VMware, n.d), Novell PlateSpin Recon 
(Novell, n.d). These tools automatically distribute 
the virtual machines in data center based on the 
requirements of the CPU, physical memory, etc. 
These tools partially consider the security require-
ment of users and SLA for cloud service providers 
as well as they do not consider the demands of 
application awareness. The Less secure VM can 
motivate the user to opt a new service provider 
and other hand partial SLA can caused for CSP 
in less profit.
Data center management is a big issue in 
Cloud Computing. It is reported that about 75% 
of the operational cost of a data center is spent 
to meet the energy bill where 25% is spent on the 
IT infrastructure. The high energy consumption is 
attributed not only to the power consumed by the 
IT resources and the cooling system, but also due 
to the inefficient usages of IT resources. In 2006, 
data centers in the US consumed more than 1.5% 
of the total energy generated in that year, and the 
percentage is projected to grow 18% annually. An 
average data center consumes as much energy as 
5,000 households, hence; infrastructure providers 
are under enormous pressure to reduce energy 
consumption. Thus, more recently researchers 
have focused on reducing power consumption 
in the data center. Efficient power management 
technique can reduce power consumption of IT 
resources. The cloud data center runs numerous 
servers to provide different business oriented ser-
vices to the users. Many techniques are proposed 
in the literature to reduce the power consumption. 
One way to reduce power consumption in a data 
center is to consolidate the active servers. That is, 
to minimize the number of active servers, without 
violating the service level agreement between the 
user and the cloud service provider (CSP). There 
exist a few techniques for server consolidation. 
Proper and efficient resource (virtual machine) 
distribution among data centers is one of them. 
It is reported that although servers are usually not 
idle, utilization rarely approaches 100%, and most 
of the time servers operate at 10 to 50% of their 
full capacity. Therefore, optimized distribution 
Figure 2. With and without VM

268
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
of virtual machines among data centers causes 
minimization of power consumption. In order to 
run the data centers, more energy is consumed 
and more CO2 is released to the environment. To 
reduce the energy cost, efforts should be made 
to minimize the power consumption in a data 
center. This effort is also in the direction of green 
computing.
The use of online application or use of the 
Internet has been incremented massively in last 
one decade. The access of increment of online 
application caused the increase of the number of 
servers in data centers, energy consumption and 
CO2 emission. Recent survey says that an equal 
amount of energy consumes from the average 
data center than 25,000 households and data 
center CO2 emissions is predicted to be double 
by next six to seven years (Buyya & Abawajy, 
2010). It is possible to reduce an organization’s 
and overall carbon footprint by using green IT 
technology. A recent study on energy use of data 
center (Thibodeau, 2011) shows it is 2% of total 
US energy consumption. Among the total power 
consumption, almost half of it consumes by active 
servers in data centers and the rest half consume 
by data center cooling systems, n/w communica-
tion etc.
This chapter presents an optimization problem 
model for initial VM placements in a data center 
have been formulated. The objective of the model 
to minimize the total energy consumption on a 
cloud data center in a particular time frame. The 
VM placement problem has been reduced to a 
multi-dimensional bin packing problem, which 
is a well-known combinatorial NP-Hard problem 
(Yao, 1980; Feller et al., 2011; Bksi et al., 2000). 
The problem is therefore intractable with number 
VMs or computing machines exceeds a few units. 
Then the n number VMs can be mapped to m 
number of servers at most with m.2n trials. The 
VM placement problem has been evenly treated, in 
both the fields of computer science and theory of 
optimization/ operational research. The algorithm 
approaches used for VM placement problem are 
roughly classified as (i) exact algorithms and (ii) 
heuristic algorithms (Gamal et al., 2004; Karatza, 
2002). In this chapter, we have used simulated 
annealing as a heuristic to design VM placement 
strategy.
The remainder of this chapter is structured 
as follows. In Section 2 formal model of data 
center and application and formalize the place-
ment problem have been discussed. Heuristic 
for placement problem is discussed in Section 3. 
Section 4 provides simulation results and analysis 
the proposed heuristic. Section 5 summarized dif-
ferent placement strategies available in literature 
and final conclusion in Section 6.
2. PLACEMENT MODEL
This section presents a model for optimal place-
ment of VMs in a data center, in order to achieve 
energy efficiency and cost effectiveness. Cloud 
data center architecture for the proposed VM 
placement heuristics is shown in Figure 3. Here 
the proposed cloud model is partitioned by three 
main layers. All organizations or individual us-
ers belong to uppermost layers. Requests for VM 
placement are generated from this layer and passes 
to next bottom layer. All entities of this layer are 
true cloud service seekers. The next layer is an 
intermediate layer, which seeking services from 
cloud infrastructure unit called ”data center” and 
provide service to upper user layer. The actors of 
this intermediate layer are two types, (i) Global 
Resource manager or cloud broker and (ii) Cloud 
Service provider (CSP). A Cloud broker man-
ages the SLA with end users according to user’s 
demand and service available from different CSP. 
After fixing up the SLA, cloud broker passes all 
requests to respective CSP for further process.

269
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
Server capacity constraints and user require-
ment constraint as well as SLA between the CSP 
and user in the process have been considered. 
The formulations are introduced firstly, and then 
modeling works will be detailed in the following 
subsections.
Placement Problem
To run a large data center needs huge amount of 
power. The cooling systems and huge number of 
servers consume most of the power in data centers 
(Tang et al., 2008). Power consumes by cooling 
systems is hard to minimize but a proper strategy 
with appropriate techniques can minimize the 
number of servers used in a particular time frame. 
Minimization of active servers caused minimiza-
tion of power consumption. The total revenue 
earned by cloud service providers (CSP) mainly 
depends on the number of VMs request placed in 
different servers. To maximize the revenue, the 
goal of CSP is to map maximum VM requests onto 
a server, at the same time turn off the idle servers.
VM placement is categorized into two types: 
(i) initial placement and (ii) migration. In this 
work we have considered only the initial place-
ment. The following three structural constraints 
are considered for initial placement:
Figure 3. Proposed cloud datacenter architecture

270
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
1. 	
Assignment Constraint: For placement the 
assignment constraint is the lower bound 
of resource allocation for each VM where 
SLA required to meet for service of each of 
it. A set of resource demands (e.g., CPU, 
memory, #cores) is given by each VM where 
the requested demands should provide by 
the placement plan.
2. 	
Capacity Constraint: It is defined as the 
total resource requirements by all requested 
VMs will less than or equal to total avail-
able resources in all dimensions (e.g., CPU, 
memory, #cores). Capacity for data center:
Total resourcerequirmentof all
requestedVMs foralldime
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
nsions
Totalavailableresourcecapacity
of activeserver
∑
≤
 
 
 
 
 
s foralldimensions
 
 
 
∑
	
3. 	
Placement Constraint: It is defined that 
one VM can only be assigned and should be 
assigned to the one server subject to meet 
the capacity requirement in all dimensions.
Placement Scenario Description
In this proposed model we introduced different 
layers in a cloud data center. Fig 2 show details 
layered architecture of the proposed cloud model. 
Organizations or individual users may opt for mul-
tiple VMs with associated different constraints in 
demand. A user’s request for VMs will distributed 
in different data centers, located in various places 
in the Globe. In any data center, total number 
of VMs to be placed, will generate in the VM 
set from the user’s request passing through CSP 
layer. Before final deployment of VMs in physical 
servers, will pass different layers in the proposed 
cloud model. VM set indicates total number of 
VM to be placed and their individual requirements 
for placement in a particular time frame. Here, 
total number of VMs in VM set will be more or 
equal to the total number of the user’s request 
for VM. Because it is considered that one user 
or organization may request for one or more VM. 
The lower most layers in a data center are physical 
machine layer where VMs are to be placed. The 
layer between VM set and physical machine set 
is a virtual machine control layer. The job of this 
layer is to keep all the information about both 
upper and lower layers of it.
Mainly, this layer plays a major role for VM 
placement. Availability of resource capacity of 
different physical machines in a lower layer and 
resource requirement for VMs will be compared in 
this layer. After comparison of resource capacity 
and require a placement decision will be made.
One Dimensional Approach
To solve the objective a heuristic algorithm 1 over 
traditional Bin Packing optimization technique has 
been used. Proposed technique has been compared 
with existing First Fit Decreasing (FFD). The 
general idea behind FFD is the items process in 
arbitrary order. Each item attempts to place in 
the first bin that can accommodate it. If the bin 
is not found, then it moves to a new bin and puts 
the selected item within the new bin.
Three sets of data are used for this proposed 
one-dimensional experiment where average 
resource requirement vs. number of servers has 
been plotted for a fixed number of VMs 5, 10, 20 
respectively in Figures 4, 5,6. In this proposed 
algorithm all VMs and servers are one dimen-
sional in nature. But in real scenario all VMs and 
Servers in data centers are multi-dimensional, i.e. 
CPU, i/o etc. A multi-dimensional optimization 
problem has been considered in subsection 2.4.
For one dimensional approach simulation 
has been performed with 5, 10 and 20 number 
of VMs respectively. It is clearly shown that the 
proposed algorithm is performing better than the 
existing FFD.

271
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
Figure 4. Average resource requirement vs. number of servers used when number of VMs=5
Algorithm 1. Algorithm for VM placement
Input: Vm number, resource requirement, server number, server capacity
Result: Vm placement
1 s=0; 
2 t=0; 
3 Sort VM set with resource requirement; 
4 while s < total servers do
5           while t < total VMs do
6                     if Server capacity >= VM requirement then
7                               Server ← VM; 
8                               Server capacity = Server capacity − VM requirement; 
9                               save the configuration; 
10                     else
11                              break; 
12                     end
13                     t=t+1; 
14           end
15           s=s+1; 
16 end

272
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
Figure 5. Average resource requirement vs. number of servers used when number of VMs=10
Figure 6. Average resource requirement vs. number of servers used when number of VMs=20

273
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
Multidimensional Approach
In multi-dimensional approach VMs capacity 
requirement and server’s capacity available are 
in multi dimension such as CPU, memory, n/w 
bandwidth, etc. Few important notations of our 
proposed model are described in table 3.
There are two decision variables Bij
v  and Dv . 
Bij
v  = 1 if vi  is placed in S j , otherwise the 
value is zero and if the request vi Included into 
placement, then value of another decision variable 
Dv  = 1 or zero otherwise. A set VM will gener-
ate where any VM v
VM
i ∈
, 1≤≤
i
n  and 
v
Cv
={
} where a vector Cv  Is capacity require-
ments of the virtual machine v . A capacity re-
quirement is a property in multiple dimension (d) 
for any v  where r can be cpu core, cpu speed, 
memory etc. and is Cv
d
d ( )  returns the required 
values of each dimension (e.g. 2 core, 2.1 GHz, 
4 GB). A physical server S j  exists only at the 
lower layer physical machine set (S) of a data 
center with a capacity vectorCS
j
r ( ) . Capacity 
vector denotes the available capacity of server j 
with r dimensions. A capacity is a property in 
multiple dimension (r) of a physical server S j , 
where r can be cpu core, cpu speed, memory etc. 
and CS
j
r ( )  returns the available value of each 
dimension (e.g. 12 core, 2.1 GHz, 32 GB).
Table 3. Important notations
Notation
Description and Condition
S
Set of physical server in a data center
S
S
j ∈
Any server in set S , where 1≤
≤
j
m
VM
Set of virtual machine
vi  ∈ VM
Any vm  in set VM , where 1≤≤
i
n
v
Cv
={
}
Information carried by any virtual machine
Cv
Capacity requirements by virtual machine v
Cv
i
d ( )
Capacity requirement by of vmi  with d  dimensions
CS
j
r ( )
Available capacity of server j with r  dimensions
u
j
r ( )
Percentage of utilization by r  dimensions in S j
ej
Total energy consumption by server S j
e
j
max ( )
Total energy consumption by server S j  when u
j
r ( ) =100%
e
j
idle ( )
Total energy consumption by server S j  when u
j
r ( )  = 0%

274
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
Calculation of Utilization and 
Energy Consumption
Utilization of cpu for any server Sj can be cal-
culated by
u
j
Cv
i
B
CS
j
cpu
i
n
cpu
ij
v
cpu
( ) =
( )×
( )
=
∑




1
	
(1)
Energy consumption ej  by any server S j can 
be calculated (Kusic et al., 2009) by:
e
e
j
e
j
U
j
e
j
max
idle
cpu
idle
=
( )−
( )
(
)×
( ) +
 
 
 
 
 
 
	
(2)
ILP Formulation
Minimize
e
j
m
j

=∑
1
	
(3)
The objective of the above algorithm is total energy 
consumption by active servers in the data center 
will be minimized.
j
m
ij
v
B
i
n
=∑
=
∀∈
…
{
}
1
1
1
;   ,
,
	
(4)
If it is considered that all requested VMs in 
VM set will be placed in physical servers, then 
equation 4 will be 1 and one VM will be placed 
in one server only.
i
n
d
ij
v
r
Cv
i
B
CS
j
j
d
r
=∑
( )
≤
( ) ∀∀
∀
1
.
;
;
;
	
(5)
Equation 5 describes the capacity requirement 
in all dimensions (e.g., CPU, #cores, memory) for 
all placed VMs will be less or equal to the capacity 
available in all dimensions for all active servers.
D
q
R
t
w
q
n
v
t

,
; 
,
,
;

,
,
;
,
,
;

∈{
}
∈
…
{
}
∈
…
{
}
∈
…
{
}
0 1
1
1
1
	
(6)
The virtual machine placement problem, as 
stated earlier, is an NP-Hard problem. To find an 
optimal solution is infeasible to such a problem 
because as the problem size will increase the 
solution space will also increase exponentially. 
Randomized algorithm is one way to address this 
problem. Simulated annealing, one of the popular 
randomized algorithm. Discussion about SA is in 
following section.
3. ALGORITHM FORMULATIONS 
FOR MULTI-DIMENSIONAL 
APPROACH
We solve our bi-objective problem using the 
Simulated Annealing optimization technique. 
The motivation behind using simulated annealing 
is, an exceptionally simple evolution technique 
which is significantly more robust and faster in 
numerical optimization and more likely to find a 
function’s for true global optimum. It is a heuristic 
method that has been implemented to obtain good 
solutions for an objective function. The simulated 
annealing method mimics the physical process of 
heating a material and then slowly lowering the 
temperature (cooling) to decrease defects so as 
to minimize the system energy. There are mainly 
four steps for SA. We mapped those steps with 
our proposed model and describe accordingly in 
following subsections.
Initial Configuration
The first step is to generate an initial configu-
ration of VM placement which may not be an 
optimal placement, but satisfying all mentioned 
constrained and it must provide objective value. 

275
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
All virtual machines in set VM have to place in 
server set S. It is assumed that one VM can place 
in one server only. To represent the placement 
scenario a linear array is used. Equation 7 shows 
general structure of the VM linear array and 
Figure 7 describe how linear array is constructed. 
In this example, there are 15 VM will be placed 
in four servers, which are numbered from 1 to 4. 
After placement the of the array represents the 
VM number and the value of indexed represented 
as server number where that particular VM has 
been placed.
VM
v v
v
v
i
n
= {
}
1
2
,
,....,
,....,
	
(7)
The index of the linear array is the VM number 
and the value indexed by the VM number in the 
array is the server number to which the VM is 
placed. For example, we have 15 VMs indexed 
from 1 to 15 and 4 servers numbered from 1 to 
4. In S1 virtual machine v1, v3, v6, got placed. 
The length of the array is the maximum number 
of tasks in the window, also termed as WinSize. 
This will denote the number of VM to place in one 
allocation step from n number of virtual machine 
set VM. It is assumed that number of task n is an 
integer multiple of WinSize. Linear array helps the 
index to be used as a VM number in the window 
so that a one dimensional list representation is 
possible for the solution. Simulated annealing 
based dynamic placement in Algorithm 5 operates 
in batch mode and selects a batch of VM B[i] in 
every iteration. Algorithm 6 is executed to produce 
an optimal schedule for the selected batch of VM 
B [I] in a fixed number of iterations.
New Neighboring Configuration
After generation of initial configuration the next 
step for SA is generation of new neighboring 
configuration. The objective of a new configu-
ration is to achieve a better placement solution. 
To accept the new solution after initial solution, 
there are certain acceptance criteria discussed in 
the next subsection. For a generation of next new 
configuration of initial configuration we define 
a new neighborhood state as the new VM place-
ment array generated by randomly picking three 
algorithms namely, (i) inversion, (ii) translation 
and (iii) switching. These algorithms are used to 
produce new configuration VM′ on each iteration 
from the neighborhood of current solutions VM.
1. 	
Inversion: The inversion process applied 
to a VM placement array to create a new 
Figure 7. VM array representation

276
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
placement array by swapping few positions. 
Here, we selected four randomly chosen 
consecutive positions and replace them in 
reverse order of the pattern. The inversion 
process describes in Algorithm 2.
2. 	
Translation: To generate new configura-
tion VM′, translation process removes two 
or more consecutive nodes from the VM 
placement array and place those nodes in 
between any two randomly selected con-
secutive nodes. This process performed by 
Algorithm 3.
3. 	
Switching: New configuration VM′ can 
be constructed using switching technique 
as describe in algorithm 4. It is randomly 
selected two nodes and switches them in an 
array.
Acceptance Criteria
After generation of new configuration the criteria 
will decide which configuration will become the 
next new state. In this proposed model a new 
configuration is feasible and accepted as new 
states, if it fulfills all constraints defined by equa-
tion 4, 5, 6, and the value of the objective function 
will be min than the previous state. The simu-
lated annealing framework in Algorithm 6 uses a 
fixed number of iteration max. The VMP (VM) 
is the objective function that computes a fitness 
value for the initial solution VM. Starting from 
the initial solution, the algorithm computes a new 
solution VM′ on each iteration from the neighbor-
hood of the current solution VM. The value of 
the objective function of the two solutions is 
compared to select the solution to be used for the 
next iteration. If the current computed solution is 
worse than the previous solution, it can be ac-
cepted with a certain probability with reference 
to current temperature value. The cooling sched-
ule starts with initial temperature T0, and decrease 
by a factor ´ ∈(
)
0 1
,
 and takes a constant value 
for the fixed number of iterations. The cooling 
process of temperature is realized with 

T
T
k
k
←
0δ . 
The cooling process continues for k = 1, 2, 3, 
...,max to meet the termination condition.
Temperature Scheduling
In the simulated annealing methodology, one of 
the very important aspects is temperature sched-
Algorithm 2. Inversion (VM, WinSize)
Input: VM = (vm1, vm2, vm3, ..., vm10): VM placement array, WinSize= Size of the 
VM 
Result: VM* = (vm1, vm2, vm3, ..., vm10): new VM placement array
generate a random number S1 to represent the starting 1 point and another 
random number L1 for the length of the substring; 
2 let SS = StringReverse(SubString VM, S1,L1);
3 for i = 1 to WinSize do
4           if i < S1 or (i > S1 and i _ S1 + L1) then
5                     S = concat(S,VM(i)) ; 
6           end
7           if i == S1 then
8                     S = concat(S,SS); 
9           end
10 end
11 return(VM);

277
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
uling. The result will be far from optimal one 
because of quick quenching [[Kirkpatrick et al. 
1983]. Temperature is used as a control parameter 
in SA and decreases gradually with each itera-
tion. This decides the probability of accepting a 
worse solution at any step and commonly used 
as a stopping criterion. The initial temperature 
used is an integer value and decreased by a rate 
called annealing schedule. For this experiment the 
upper bound of temperature sets at 1000 degrees 
and it reduces towards lower bound at 0 degrees 
by each time 5 degree.
4. EVALUATION AND ANALYSIS
All mentioned algorithm has been implemented by 
in house simulation using JAVA on a workstation 
computer with Intel (R) core (TM) 2 Duo CPU of 
3.00 GHz and 4.00 GB memory. The test data used 
Algorithm 3. Translation (VM, WinSize)
Input: VM = (vm1, vm2, vm3, ..., vm10): VM placement array, WinSize= Size of the 
VM 
Result: VM* = (vm1, vm2, vm3, ..., vm10): new VM placement array
generate a random number S1 to represent the starting 1 point and another 
random number L1 for the length of the substring; 
2 generate a random number I1 for the insertion point; 
3 let SS = StringReverse(SubString(VM, S1,L1);
4 for i = 1 to WinSize do
5           if (i < I1) or (i > S1 and i _ S1 + L1) then
6                     S = concat(S,VM(i)); 
7           end
8           if i == S1 then
9                     S = concat(VM,SS); 
10           end
11           if (i > I1) or (i < S1 and i _ S1 + L1) then
12                     S = concat(S,VM(i)); 
13           end
14 end
15 return(VM);
Algorithm 4. Switching (VM, WinSize)
Input: VM = (vm1, vm2, vm3, ..., vm10): VM placement array,
          WinSize = Size of the VM 
Result: VM* = (vm1, vm2, vm3, ..., vm10): new VM placement array
1 generate a random number i to represent the VM 1 and another random 
   number j to represent VM 2; 
2 swap(VM(i),VM(j));
3 return(VM);

278
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
for this simulation study uses eleven set of virtual 
machines on a fixed number of servers equal to 30. 
In order to check the scalability of the proposed 
set of algorithms using simulated annealing, a 
plot of the execution time curve for the situation 
when the number of virtual machines in VM sets 
increased from 10 to 150 with an incremental of 
10 whereas the number of servers was fixed in 30. 
Figure 8 shows the observation inform of a line 
graph, showing the execution time of the proposed 
algorithms increases very close to linearly when 
the number of VMs increases and the number of 
servers is fixed. Thus, it can be concluded that the 
proposed set of algorithm is scalable with respect 
to the number of virtual machines.
The experiment result of a number of virtual 
machine vs. energy cost has been plotted in Figure 
9. A comparison has given to the FFD algorithm 
with the same set of test data as mentioned in 
Table 4. From graph 7 it is clearly shown that the 
proposed placement model significantly outper-
forms than exiting FFD algorithm.
The reason behind this is, in the FFD, beams 
are placed onto the first server, where they first 
fit. This placement is non-optimal though it al-
lows for faster placement. FFD placement is a 
deterministic one, it does not attempt to minimize 
the number of servers used. The proposed model, 
attempts to minimize the number of servers used 
by looking all possible solutions.
5. BACKGROUND
Provide broad definitions and discussions of the 
topic and incorporate views of others (literature 
review) into the discussion to support, refute or 
demonstrate your position on the topic.1
In this section, we made an investigation of 
different VM placement strategies in data centers. 
There are two types of VM-placement decisions 
are made in a cloud data center. They are:(i) initial 
placement of vms (Cardosa et al., 2011; Meng et 
al., 2010; Xu & Fortes, 2010; Bellur & Rao, 2010; 
Sindelar et al., 2011; Mark et al., 2011; Kantarci 
et al., 2012; Chaisiri et al., 2009; Speitkamp & 
Bichler, 2010) and (ii) migration (and/or resizing) 
of VMs over time (Wood et al., 2007; Shrivastava 
et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2012; Clark et al., 2005; 
Zhao & Figueiredo, 2007; Wood et al., 2009). As 
the availability of physical machine (PM) changes 
over time, necessitates the consolidation of VMs 
to conserve power, as well as to meet the required 
service level agreement (SLA). We describe below 
the schemes reported in the literatures for initial 
VM placement.
Algorithm 5. VM Schedular
Input: n: number of VM, m: number of server, batch size: WinSize
Result: L: placement
1 Lj ←  0 for all servers;
2 for i = 1 to n/WinSize do
3           select a batch of VM B[i]; 
4           call Algorithm 6: VMP(B[i],WinSize); 
5           assign VM in B[i] to servers as per VM; 
6           update information of the assigned server; 
7           update placement time for each server; 
8 end
9 L  ← maxj Lj return placement: L

279
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
Algorithm 6. Virtual machine placement
Input: VM number, capacity requirement, Server capacity, Initial
            temperature, temperature cooling schedule 
Result: Placement of Virtual Machine, Energy saved, Revenue earned
             randomly generate initial solution 1 VM for a batch of VM B[i]; 
2 initialize T0, max;
3 k  ← 0;
4 while T0 > 0 do
5    set i=0; 
6           for i = 1, 2, ...,max do
7              generate a random integer m from the set 1,2,3; 
8                     if m = 1 then
9                               VM′←   INV ERSION(VM,WinSize);
10                     end
11                     if m = 2 then
12                               VM′←   TRANSLAT ION(VM,WinSize);
13                     end
14                     if m = 3 then
15                               VM′←   SWITCHING(VM,WinSize);
16                     end
17                     if (VMP(VM′) − VMP(VM) < 0) then
18                               set VM   ← VM′ ;
19                               Save the placement if it is least objectives so 
far; 
20                     else
21                               generate random x uniformly in the range [0,1]; 
22                               

T
T
k
k
←
0δ  ;
If    x < exp
VMP VM
VMP VM
Tk
'
(
)−
(
)
 then
24                                     set S ←  S′ ;
25                               end
26                     end
27           end
28 decrement T0 ;
29 k ←  k + 1;
30 end
31 return VM and VMP(VM);

280
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
Figure 8. VM vs. Time when server = 30
Figure 9. Number of Vm vs. energy cost when server = 30

281
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
Initial VM Placement
A number of heuristics have been proposed in the 
literature for initial VM placement of VMs in a 
cloud data center. A few of them are described 
below. The bin packing problem is the very well-
known technique to solve optimization problems. It 
has been used several times for VM placement with 
different heuristics. First Fit Decreasing (FFD) is 
among popular algorithm for it (Yao, 1980; Feller 
et al., 2011; Bksi et al., 2000). However, FFD has 
its some limitations. In FFD all bins are in one 
dimension, where all servers in data centers are 
multi-dimensional.
Genetic Algorithm has been used for solv-
ing VM placement optimization problem (Xu 
& Fortes, 2010; Mi et al., 2010). Fewest GA ap-
proaches give good result of energy efficient VM 
placement. A modified genetic algorithm with 
fuzzy multi-objective evaluation was proposed 
for efficiently searching the large solution space 
and conveniently combining possibly conflicting 
objectives (Xu & Fortes, 2010).
Liner Programming is another analytical ap-
proach for VM placement (Kantarci et al., 2012; 
Chaisiri et al., 2009; Speitkamp & Bichler, 2010). 
The authors described linear programming for-
mulations of server consolidation problems. They 
considered the existence of both reservation and 
on-demand payment plans for hosting the virtual 
machines. Given that only the probability distri-
bution of the future demand and resource pricing 
is known, the algorithm stochastically finds the 
optimal allocation that minimizes the costs spent 
using these plans.
Constraint programming methods have also 
been applied for VM placement in various en-
vironments (Van et al., 2010; Hermenier et al., 
2009). The Authors expressed VM provisioning 
and placement problems as two constraint satis-
faction problem. They proposed Entropy resource 
manager, which performs dynamic consolidation 
based on constraint programming and takes into 
account both the problems of allocating the VMs 
to the available nodes and the problem of how to 
migrate the VMs to these nodes.
These previous works achieved many issues in 
different point of view and motivates us to handle 
the virtual machine problem using optimization 
theory.
6. CONCLUSION AND 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The cloud service providers are trying to maximize 
the resource available with their data centers by 
meeting the users’ requirements with the mini-
mum use physical resources which leads to the 
minimization of the energy consumed by these 
resources. The ongoing research on data center 
management in cloud computing emphasizes the 
use of online resources has been increased gradu-
ally in last one decade. It ceased to increase the 
number of servers in data centers.
To run this huge number of servers needs huge 
power consumption. Virtualization provides the 
proper resource utilization. Optimally placed VMs 
on the server can minimize the power consump-
tion in the data center. The simulated annealing 
optimization technique has been implemented in 
this proposed model. The motivation behind using 
Table 4. Test data
SL. NO.
VM
SERVER
1
10
30
2
20
30
3
30
30
4
40
30
5
50
30
6
60
30
7
80
30
8
100
30
9
120
30
10
140
30
11
150
30

282
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
simulated annealing is, an exceptionally simple 
evolution technique which is significantly more 
robust and faster in numerical optimization and 
more likely to find a function’s for true global 
optimum. The proposed model of this research 
document for VM placement gives a significantly 
better performance than existing FFD technique.
The idea of virtual machine contract may 
introduce as future work in order to enhance 
the overall data center management for virtual 
machine placement. A virtual machine contract 
(VMC) is a platform independent way of auto-
mating the communication and management of 
users’ resource requirements. Basically, VMC is 
adding management metadata to the package in 
which VMs are stored and communicated (Mat-
thews et al., 2009).
Another important research area in this di-
rection is the service level agreement (SLA) 
based virtual machine management. Today, all 
data centers run various types of applications on 
different VMs without a prior knowledge of dif-
ferential SLA requirements, which leads to SLA 
violation and mismanagement between different 
cloud service providers. A proper strategy for ef-
ficient resource management scheme for avoiding 
such type of problem.
7. MORE THEORY: 
SIMULATED ANNEALING
The simulated annealing method resembles the 
cooling process of molten metals through an-
nealing. At high temperature, the atoms in the 
molten metal can move freely with respect to 
each other, but as the temperature is reduced, 
the movement of the atoms gets restricted. The 
atoms start to get ordered and final form crystals 
having the minimum possible energy. However, 
the formulation of the crystal, mostly depends on 
the cooling rate. If the temperature is reduced at 
a very fast rate, the crystalline state may not be 
achieved at all; instead, the system may end up in 
a polycrystalline state, which may have a higher 
energy state than the crystalline state. Therefore, 
in order to achieve the absolute minimum energy 
state, the temperature needs to be reduced at a 
slow rate. The process of slow cooling is known 
as annealing in metallurgical parlance.
The simulated annealing procedure simu-
lates this process of slow cooling molten metal 
to achieve the minimum function value in a 
minimization problem. The cooling phenom-
enon is simulated by controlling a temperature 
like parameter introduced to the concept of the 
Boltzmann probability distribution. According to 
the Boltzmann probability distribution, a system 
in thermal equilibrium at a temperature T has its 
energy distributed probabilistically according to 
P(E) = exp(−E/kT), when k is the Boltzmann 
constant. This expression suggests that a system 
at a high temperature has an almost uniform prob-
ability of being in any energy state, but at a low 
temperature it has a small probability of being in 
a high energy state. Therefore, by controlling the 
temperature T and assuming that the search process 
follows the Boltzmann probability distribution, 
the convergence of an algorithm can be controlled.
Simulated annealing is a point-by-point 
method. The algorithm begins with an initial point 
and a high temperature T. A second point is cre-
ated at random in the vicinity of the initial point 
and the difference in the function values (∆E) 
at these two points is calculated. If the second 
point has a smaller functional value, the point is 
accepted; otherwise the point is accepted with a 
probability exp(−∆ E/T). This completes one 
iteration of the simulated annealing procedure. In 
the next generation, another point is created at 
random in the neighborhood of the current point 
and the Metropolis algorithm is used to accept or 

283
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
reject the point. In order to simulate the thermal 
equilibrium at every temperature, a number of 
points (n) are usually tested at a particular tem-
perature, before reducing the temperature. The 
algorithm is terminated when a sufficient small 
temperature is obtained or a small enough change 
in function values is found.
REFERENCES
A Platform Computing Whitepaper (March 2010) ;
Bakshi, K. (2009). Cisco Cloud Computing: Data 
Center Strategy, Architecture, and Solutions (1st 
edition, pp. 1-16). white paper for U.S public 
sector, Cisco System, Inc. 
Bksi, J., Galambos, G., & Kellerer, H. (2000). A 
5/4 linear time bin packing algorithm. Journal of 
Computer and System Sciences, 60(1), 145–160. 
doi:10.1006/jcss.1999.1667
Buyya, R., & Abawajy, A. B. (2010). Energy ef-
ficient management of data center resources for 
cloud computing: A vision, architectural elements, 
and open challenges. In 2010 International Con-
ference on Parallel and Distributed Processing 
Techniques and Applications. PDPTA.
Cardosa, M., Korupolu, M. R., & Singh, A. (2009), 
Shares and utilities based power consolidation in 
virtualized server environments, In Proceedings of 
the 11th IFIP/IEEE International Conference on 
Symposium on Integrated Network Management, 
IM’09 (pp. 327–334), Piscataway, NJ, USA. IEEE 
Press. doi:10.1109/INM.2009.5188832
Cardosa, M., Singh, A., Pucha, H., & Chandra, 
A. (2011), Exploiting spatiotemporal tradeoffs 
for energy-aware mapreduce in the cloud. In 
Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE 4th International 
Conference on Cloud Computing, CLOUD ’11 
(pages 251–258). Washington, DC, USA. IEEE 
Computer Society. doi:10.1109/CLOUD.2011.68
Algorithm 7. Simulated annealing template
Step 1 Choose an initial point x(0), a termination criterion  ∈. Set T a suffi-
ciently high value, number of    
           iteration to be performed at a particular temperature n, and set t 
= 0.; 
Step 2 Calculate a neighboring point xt+1 = N(x(t)). Usually, a random point in 
the neighborhood is   
           created.;  
Step 3 If ∆ = E(xt+1) − E(x(t)) < 0, set t = t + 1; 
           Else create a random number (r) in the range (0, 1). If r ≤ exp(−
∆/T)
           set t = t + 1; 
           Else go to Step 2. 
Step 4 If |x(t+1) – x(t) | < ∈.  and T is small, Terminate ;
           Else if (t mod n) = 0 then lower T according to a cooling schedule. 
Go to Step 2; 
           Else go to Step 2.

284
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
Chaisiri, S., Lee, B.-S., & Niyato, D. (2009), Op-
timal virtual machine placement across multiple 
cloud providers, In Services Computing Confer-
ence, 2009. APSCC 2009. IEEE Asia Pacific, 
(pp. 103–110).
Clark, C., Fraser, K., Hand, S., Hansen, J. G., 
Jul, E., Limpach, C., ... Warfield, A. (2005). Live 
migration of virtual machines. In Proceedings of 
the 2nd Conference on Symposium on Networked 
Systems Design & Implementation - Volume 2, 
NSDI’05, (pp. 273–286). Berkeley, CA, USA. 
USENIX Association.
Creasy, R. (1981, September). The origin of 
the vm/370 timesharing system. IBM Journal 
of Research and Development, 25(5), 483–490. 
doi:10.1147/rd.255.0483
Dooley, B., (2010), Architectural Requirements 
Of The Hybrid Cloud, Information Management 
Online; 10.
Enterprise Cloud Computing:Transforming IT; 
13; 6.
Feller, E., Rilling, L., & Morin, C. (2011), 
Energy-aware ant colony based workload place-
ment in clouds. In 12th IEEE/ACM International 
Conference on Grid Computing (GRID), 2011, 
(pp. 26–33).
Gamal, A., & Yskandar, H. (2004). Two phase 
algorithm for load balancing in heterogeneous 
distributed systems. In Proceedings of the 12th 
Euromicro Conference on Parallel, Distributed 
and Network-Based Processing, 2004, (pp. 434-
439). IEEE.
Gao, Y., Guan, H., Qi, Z., Hou, Y., & Liu, L. (2013). 
A multi-objective ant colony system algorithm for 
virtual machine placement in cloud computing. 
Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 79(8), 
1230–1242. doi:10.1016/j.jcss.2013.02.004
Gonzalez, L. M. V., Rodero-Merino, L., Cace-
res, J., & Lindner, M. A. (2009). A break in the 
clouds: Towards a cloud definition. Computer 
Communication Review, 39(1), 50–55.
Helen, D., & Karatza, R., & Hilzer., C. (2002). 
Load Sharing in Heterogeneous Distributed 
Systems. In Proceeding of the winter simulation 
conference (pp. 489-496).
Hermenier, F., Lorca, X., Menaud, J.-M., Muller, 
G., & Lawall, J. (2009). Entropy: A consolida-
tion manager for clusters. In Proceedings of the 
2009 ACM SIGPLAN/SIGOPS International 
Conference on Virtual Execution Environments, 
VEE ’09 (pp. 41–50). New York, NY, USA. ACM. 
doi:10.1145/1508293.1508300
Kantarci, B., Foschini, L., Corradi, A., & 
Mouftah, H. (2012). Inter-and-intra data center 
vm-placement for energy-efficient large scale 
cloud systems. In Globecom Workshops (GC 
Wkshps), 2012, (pp. 708–713). IEEE.
Kirkpatrick, S., Gelatt, C. D., & Vecchi, M. P. 
(1983). Optimization by simulated annealing. 
Science, 220(4598), 671–680. doi:10.1126/sci-
ence.220.4598.671 PMID:17813860
Kusic, D., Kephart, J. O., Hanson, J. E., Kandasa-
my, N., & Jiang, G. (2009). Power and performance 
management of virtualized computing environ-
ments via lookahead control. Cluster Computing, 
12(1), 1–15. doi:10.1007/s10586-008-0070-y
Lee, Y. C., & Zomaya, A. Y. (2012). Energy ef-
ficient utilization of resources in cloud computing 
systems. The Journal of Supercomputing, 60(2), 
268–280. doi:10.1007/s11227-010-0421-3
Lofstrand M. (2009) The VeriScale Architecture: 
Elasticity and Efficiency for Private Clouds”; Sun 
BluePrint; Sun Microsystems; Online, Revision 
1.1, Part No 821-0248-11.

285
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
Mark, C., Niyato, D., & Chen-Khong, T. (2011). 
Evolutionary optimal virtual machine placement 
and demand forecaster for cloud computing. In 
Advanced Information Networking and Applica-
tions (AINA), 2011 IEEE International Conference 
on, pages 348–355.
Marston, S., Li, Z., Bandyopadhyay, S., & Ghal-
sasi, A. (2011). Cloud computing the business 
perspective. In HICSS (pp. 1–11). IEEE Computer 
Society.
Matthews, J., Garfinkel, T., Hoff, C., & Wheeler, 
J. Virtual Machine Contracts for Data Center and 
Cloud Computing Environments. In Proceedings 
of the 1st Workshop on Automated Control for 
Datacenters and Clouds. New York, NY, USA. 
ACM. pages 25-30. 2009
Meng, X., Pappas, V., & Zhang, L. (2010). Im-
proving the scalability of data center networks 
with traffic-aware virtual machine placement. In 
INFOCOM, Proceedings IEEE, pages 1–9.
Mi, H., Wang, H., Yin, G., Zhou, Y., Shi, D., 
& Yuan, L. (2010). Online self-reconfiguration 
with performance guarantee for energy efficient 
large-scale cloud computing data centers. In Ser-
vices Computing (SCC), 2010 IEEE International 
Conference on, pages 514–521.
NIST. (n.d) Definition of Cloud Computing v 
15, csrc.nist.gov/groups/SNS/cloud-computing/
cloud-def-v 15.doc
Novell (1983). Platespin recon. http://www.novell.
com/products/recon/
Ramgovind, S., Eloff, M. M., & Smith, E. The 
Management of Security in Cloud Computing”; 
Information Security for South Africa (ISSA); 
IEEE; 1-7. 2010
Shrivastava, V., Zerfos, P., Lee, K.-W., Jamjoom, 
H., Liu, Y.-H., & Banerjee, S. (2011). Application-
aware virtual machine migration in data centers. 
In INFOCOM, 2011 Proceedings IEEE, pages 
66–70.
Sindelar, M., Sitaraman, R. K., & Shenoy, P. 
(2011). Sharing-aware algorithms for virtual 
machine colocation. In Proceedings of the 23rd 
ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms 
and Architectures, SPAA ’11, pages 367–378, 
New York, NY, USA. ACM.
Speitkamp, B., & Bichler, M. (2010). A math-
ematical programming approach for server con-
solidation problems in virtualized data centers. 
Services Computing. IEEE Transactions on, 3(4), 
266–278.
Tang, Q., Gupta, S. K. S., & Varsamopoulos, G. 
(2008). Energy-efficient thermal aware task sched-
uling for homogeneous high performance com-
puting data centers: A cyber-physical approach. 
IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed 
Systems, 19(11), 1458–1472.
Thibodeau, P. (August 03, 2011). Data centers use 
2% of u.s. energy, below forecast. Computer world.
Umesh, B. & S, R. C. (2010). Optimal placement 
algorithms for virtual machines. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1011.5064.
Van, H. N., Tran, F., & Menaud, J.-M. (2010). 
Performance and power management for cloud 
infrastructures. In Cloud Computing (CLOUD), 
2010 IEEE 3rd International Conference on, 
pages 329–336.
VMware. (1983). Capacity planner. http://www.
vmware.com/products/capacityplanner/

286
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
Vouk, M. A. (2008). Virtualization of information 
technology resources. In Electronic Commerce: A 
Managerial Perspective 2008 (5th ed.). Prentice-
Hall Business Publishing.
WebSphere. I. (1983). Cloudburst. http://www-01.
ibm.com/software/webservers/cloudburst/
Wood, T., Shenoy, P. J., Venkataramani, A., & 
Yousif, M. S. (2007). Black-box and gray-box 
strategies for virtual machine migration. In NSDI, 
volume 7, pages 229–242.
Wood, T., Tarasuk-Levin, G., Shenoy, P., Des-
noyers, P., Cecchet, E., & Corner, M. D. (2009). 
Memory buddies: Exploiting page shar- ing for 
smart colocation in virtualized data centers. In 
Proceedings of the 2009 ACM SIGPLAN/SIGOPS 
International Conference on Virtual Execution 
Environments, VEE ’09, pages 31–40, New York, 
NY, USA. ACM.
Xu, J., & Fortes, J. A. B. (2010). Multi-objective 
virtual machine placement in virtualized data cen-
ter environments. In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE/
ACM Int’L Conference on Green Computing and 
Communications & Int’L Conference on Cyber, 
Physical and Social Computing, GREENCOM-
CPSCOM ’10, pages 179–188, Washington, DC, 
USA. IEEE Computer Society.
Yao, A. C.-C. (1980). New algorithms for bin 
packing. Journal of the ACM, 27(2), 207–227.
York, NY, USA. ACM.
Zhang, X., Shae, Z.-Y., Zheng, S., & Jamjoom, 
H. (2012). Virtual machine migration in an over-
committed cloud. In Network Operations and 
Management Symposium (NOMS), 2012 IEEE, 
pages 196–203.
Zhang Qi, Cheng Lu & Boutaba Raouf (2010). 
Cloud computing: state-of-the-art and research 
challenges. Journal of Internet Services and 
Applications. Springer-Verlag. 1(1), pages 7-18.
Zhao, M., & Figueiredo, R. J. (2007). Experimental 
study of virtual machine migration in support of 
reservation of cluster resources. In Proceedings of 
the 2Nd International Workshop on Virtualization 
Technology in Distributed Computing, VTDC ’07, 
pages 5:1–5:8, New
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Cloud Computing: Cloud computing is 
a model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, 
on-demand network access to a shared pool of 
configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, 
servers, storage, applications, and services) that 
can be rapidly provisioned and released with 
minimal management effort or service provider 
interaction.
Data Center: A data center is a centralized 
repository, either physical or virtual, for the stor-
age, management, and dissemination of data and 
information organized around a particular body of 
knowledge or pertaining to a particular business.
Hypervisor: It is also known as a Virtual 
Machine Monitor (VMM), which is basically an 
intermediate layer between VMs and hardware 
resources. It manages all VMs, depending upon 
hardware resource availability.
Simulated Annealing: Simulated annealing is 
a method of finding optimal values numerically. 
Simulated annealing is a search method as opposed 
to a gradient based algorithm. It chooses a new 
point, and (for optimization) all uphill points are 
accepted while some downhill points are accepted 
depending on a probabilistic criteria.
Virtual Machine (VM): A virtual machine 
is a software computer that, like a physical 
computer, runs an operating system and applica-
tions. The virtual machine is comprised of a set 
of specification and configuration files and is 
backed by the physical resources of a host. Every 
virtual machine has virtual devices that provide 

287
Virtual Machine Placement Strategy for Cloud Data Center
﻿
the same functionality as physical hardware and 
have additional benefits in terms of portability, 
manageability, and security.
Virtualization: Virtualization is the concept 
that hides the physical behavior of a computational 
platform from the end user mainly, instead pre-
senting an abstract and emulated computational 
platform.
VM Placement: The process of mapping 
VMs to Physical Machines (PM) is called Virtual 
machine placement. One hypervisor layer is exists 
between VMs and physical resources, such that 
cpu, memory, storage etc. VM placement is an im-
portant approach for improving power efficiency 
and resource utilization of cloud Data center.

﻿
Related References
﻿
Aalmink, J., von der Dovenmühle, T., & Gómez, 
J. M. (2013). Enterprise tomography: Mainte-
nance and root-cause-analysis of federated erp 
in enterprise clouds. In P. Ordóñez de Pablos, 
H. Nigro, R. Tennyson, S. Gonzalez Cisaro, & 
W. Karwowski (Eds.), Advancing information 
management through semantic web concepts and 
ontologies (pp. 133–153). Hershey, PA: Informa-
tion Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2494-8.ch007
Abu, S. T., & Tsuji, M. (2011). The development 
of ICT for envisioning cloud computing and in-
novation in South Asia. International Journal of 
Innovation in the Digital Economy, 2(1), 61–72. 
doi:10.4018/jide.2011010105
Abu, S. T., & Tsuji, M. (2012). The develop-
ment of ICT for envisioning cloud computing 
and innovation in South Asia. In Grid and cloud 
computing: Concepts, methodologies, tools and 
applications (pp. 453–465). Hershey, PA: Infor-
mation Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-0879-5.ch207
Abu, S. T., & Tsuji, M. (2013). The development 
of ICT for envisioning cloud computing and in-
novation in South Asia. In I. Oncioiu (Ed.), Busi-
ness innovation, development, and advancement 
in the digital economy (pp. 35–47). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-2934-9.ch003
Adams, R. (2013). The emergence of cloud stor-
age and the need for a new digital forensic process 
model. In K. Ruan (Ed.), Cybercrime and cloud 
forensics: Applications for investigation processes 
(pp. 79–104). Hershey, PA: Information Science 
Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2662-1.
ch004
Adeyeye, M. (2013). Provisioning converged 
applications and services via the cloud. In D. 
Kanellopoulos (Ed.), Intelligent multimedia tech-
nologies for networking applications: Techniques 
and tools (pp. 248–269). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2833-5.ch010
Aggarwal, A. (2013). A systems approach to cloud 
computing services. In A. Bento & A. Aggarwal 
(Eds.), Cloud computing service and deployment 
models: Layers and management (pp. 124–136). 
Hershey, PA: Business Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2187-9.ch006
Ahmed, K., Hussain, A., & Gregory, M. A. (2013). 
An efficient, robust, and secure SSO architecture 
for cloud computing implemented in a service 
oriented architecture. In X. Yang & L. Liu (Eds.), 
Principles, methodologies, and service-oriented 
approaches for cloud computing (pp. 259–282). 
Hershey, PA: Business Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2854-0.ch011
To continue our tradition of advancing information science and technology research, we have compiled 
a list of recommended IGI Global readings. These references will provide additional information and 
guidance to further enrich your knowledge and assist you with your own research and future publications.
288

Related References
Ahuja, S. P., & Mani, S. (2013). Empirical perfor-
mance analysis of HPC benchmarks across varia-
tions in cloud computing. International Journal of 
Cloud Applications and Computing, 3(1), 13–26. 
doi:10.4018/ijcac.2013010102
Ahuja, S. P., & Rolli, A. C. (2011). Survey of the 
state-of-the-art of cloud computing. International 
Journal of Cloud Applications and Computing, 
1(4), 34–43. doi:10.4018/ijcac.2011100103
Ahuja, S. P., & Rolli, A. C. (2013). Survey of 
the state-of-the-art of cloud computing. In S. Al-
jawarneh (Ed.), Cloud computing advancements 
in design, implementation, and technologies (pp. 
252–262). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1879-4.ch018
Ahuja, S. P., & Sridharan, S. (2012). Performance 
evaluation of hypervisors for cloud computing. 
International Journal of Cloud Applications 
and Computing, 2(3), 26–67. doi:10.4018/ij-
cac.2012070102
Akyuz, G. A., & Rehan, M. (2013). A generic, 
cloud-based representation for supply chains 
(SC’s). International Journal of Cloud Applica-
tions and Computing, 3(2), 12–20. doi:10.4018/
ijcac.2013040102
Al-Aqrabi, H., & Liu, L. (2013). IT security and 
governance compliant service oriented comput-
ing in cloud computing environments. In X. Yang 
& L. Liu (Eds.), Principles, methodologies, and 
service-oriented approaches for cloud computing 
(pp. 143–163). Hershey, PA: Business Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2854-0.ch006
Al-Zoube, M., & Wyne, M. F. (2012). Building 
integrated e-learning environment using cloud 
services and social networking sites. In Q. Jin 
(Ed.), Intelligent learning systems and advance-
ments in computer-aided instruction: Emerging 
studies (pp. 214–233). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-
483-3.ch013
Alam, N., & Karmakar, R. (2014). Cloud comput-
ing and its application to information centre. In 
S. Dhamdhere (Ed.), Cloud computing and vir-
tualization technologies in libraries (pp. 63–76). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4631-5.ch004
Alhaj, A., Aljawarneh, S., Masadeh, S., & Abu-
Taieh, E. (2013). A secure data transmission 
mechanism for cloud outsourced data. Interna-
tional Journal of Cloud Applications and Comput-
ing, 3(1), 34–43. doi:10.4018/ijcac.2013010104
Alharbi, S. T. (2012). Users’ acceptance of cloud 
computing in Saudi Arabia: An extension of tech-
nology acceptance model. International Journal 
of Cloud Applications and Computing, 2(2), 1–11. 
doi:10.4018/ijcac.2012040101
Ali, S. S., & Khan, M. N. (2013). ICT infrastruc-
ture framework for microfinance institutions 
and banks in Pakistan: An optimized approach. 
International Journal of Online Marketing, 3(2), 
75–86. doi:10.4018/ijom.2013040105
Aljawarneh, S. (2011). Cloud security engineer-
ing: Avoiding security threats the right way. 
International Journal of Cloud Applications 
and Computing, 1(2), 64–70. doi:10.4018/ij-
cac.2011040105
Aljawarneh, S. (2013). Cloud security engineer-
ing: Avoiding security threats the right way. In S. 
Aljawarneh (Ed.), Cloud computing advancements 
in design, implementation, and technologies (pp. 
147–153). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1879-4.ch010
Alshattnawi, S. (2013). Utilizing cloud comput-
ing in developing a mobile location-aware tourist 
guide system. International Journal of Advanced 
Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing, 5(2), 9–18. 
doi::10.4018/japuc.2013040102
289

Related References
Alsmadi, I. (2013). Software development method-
ologies for cloud computing. In K. Buragga & N. 
Zaman (Eds.), Software development techniques 
for constructive information systems design (pp. 
110–117). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-3679-8.ch006
Anand, V. (2013). Survivable mapping of virtual 
networks onto a shared substrate network. In X. 
Yang & L. Liu (Eds.), Principles, methodolo-
gies, and service-oriented approaches for cloud 
computing (pp. 325–343). Hershey, PA: Business 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2854-0.ch014
Antonova, A. (2013). Green, sustainable, or clean: 
What type of IT/IS technologies will we need in 
the future? In P. Ordóñez de Pablos (Ed.), Green 
technologies and business practices: An IT ap-
proach (pp. 151–162). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
1972-2.ch008
Ardissono, L., Bosio, G., Goy, A., Petrone, G., 
Segnan, M., & Torretta, F. (2011). Collaboration 
support for activity management in a personal 
cloud environment. International Journal of Dis-
tributed Systems and Technologies, 2(4), 30–43. 
doi:10.4018/jdst.2011100103
Ardissono, L., Bosio, G., Goy, A., Petrone, G., 
Segnan, M., & Torretta, F. (2013). Collabora-
tion support for activity management in a per-
sonal cloud environment. In N. Bessis (Ed.), 
Development of distributed systems from design 
to application and maintenance (pp. 199–212). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2647-8.ch012
Argiolas, M., Atzori, M., Dessì, N., & Pes, B. 
(2012). Dataspaces enhancing decision sup-
port systems in clouds. International Journal 
of Web Portals, 4(2), 35–55. doi:10.4018/
jwp.2012040103
Arinze, B., & Anandarajan, M. (2012). Factors 
that determine the adoption of cloud comput-
ing: A global perspective. In M. Tavana (Ed.), 
Enterprise Information Systems and Advancing 
Business Solutions: Emerging Models (pp. 210–
223). Hershey, PA: Business Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1761-2.ch012
Arinze, B., & Sylla, C. (2012). Conducting 
research in the cloud. In L. Chao (Ed.), Cloud 
computing for teaching and learning: Strate-
gies for design and implementation (pp. 50–63). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0957-0.ch004
Arshad, J., Townend, P., & Xu, J. (2011). An 
abstract model for integrated intrusion detection 
and severity analysis for clouds. International 
Journal of Cloud Applications and Computing, 
1(1), 1–16. doi:10.4018/ijcac.2011010101
Arshad, J., Townend, P., & Xu, J. (2013). An 
abstract model for integrated intrusion detection 
and severity analysis for clouds. In S. Aljawarneh 
(Ed.), Cloud computing advancements in design, 
implementation, and technologies (pp. 1–17). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1879-4.ch001
Arshad, J., Townend, P., Xu, J., & Jie, W. (2012). 
Cloud computing security: Opportunities and pit-
falls. International Journal of Grid and High Per-
formance Computing, 4(1), 52–66. doi:10.4018/
jghpc.2012010104
Baars, T., & Spruit, M. (2012). Designing a secure 
cloud architecture: The SeCA model. International 
Journal of Information Security and Privacy, 6(1), 
14–32. doi:10.4018/jisp.2012010102
Bai, X., Gao, J. Z., & Tsai, W. (2013). Cloud 
scalability measurement and testing. In S. Til-
ley & T. Parveen (Eds.), Software testing in the 
cloud: Perspectives on an emerging discipline (pp. 
356–381). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2536-5.ch017
290

Related References
Baldini, G., & Stirparo, P. (2014). A cognitive ac-
cess framework for security and privacy protection 
in mobile cloud computing. In J. Rodrigues, K. 
Lin, & J. Lloret (Eds.), Mobile networks and cloud 
computing convergence for progressive services 
and applications (pp. 92–117). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-4781-7.ch006
Balduf, S., Balke, T., & Eymann, T. (2012). 
Cultural differences in managing cloud comput-
ing service level agreements. In Grid and cloud 
computing: Concepts, methodologies, tools and 
applications (pp. 1237–1263). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-0879-5.ch512
Banerjee, S., Sing, T. Y., Chowdhury, A. R., & 
Anwar, H. (2013). Motivations to adopt green ICT: 
A tale of two organizations. International Journal 
of Green Computing, 4(2), 1–11. doi:10.4018/
jgc.2013070101
Barreto, J., Di Sanzo, P., Palmieri, R., & Romano, 
P. (2013). Cloud-TM: An elastic, self-tuning 
transactional store for the cloud. In D. Kyriazis, 
A. Voulodimos, S. Gogouvitis, & T. Varvarigou 
(Eds.), Data intensive storage services for cloud 
environments (pp. 192–224). Hershey, PA: Busi-
ness Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
3934-8.ch013
Belalem, G., & Limam, S. (2011). Fault tolerant 
architecture to cloud computing using adaptive 
checkpoint. International Journal of Cloud Appli-
cations and Computing, 1(4), 60–69. doi:10.4018/
ijcac.2011100105
Belalem, G., & Limam, S. (2013). Fault tolerant 
architecture to cloud computing using adaptive 
checkpoint. In S. Aljawarneh (Ed.), Cloud com-
puting advancements in design, implementation, 
and technologies (pp. 280–289). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-1879-4.ch020
Ben Belgacem, M., Abdennadher, N., & Niini-
maki, M. (2012). Virtual EZ grid: A volunteer 
computing infrastructure for scientific medical 
applications. International Journal of Handheld 
Computing Research, 3(1), 74–85. doi:10.4018/
jhcr.2012010105
Bhatt, S., Chaudhary, S., & Bhise, M. (2013). 
Migration of data between cloud and non-cloud 
datastores. In A. Ionita, M. Litoiu, & G. Lewis 
(Eds.), Migrating legacy applications: Challenges 
in service oriented architecture and cloud com-
puting environments (pp. 206–225). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2488-7.ch009
Biancofiore, G., & Leone, S. (2014). Google apps 
as a cloud computing solution in Italian munici-
palities: Technological features and implications. 
In S. Leone (Ed.), Synergic integration of formal 
and informal e-learning environments for adult 
lifelong learners (pp. 244–274). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-4655-1.ch012
Bibi, S., Katsaros, D., & Bozanis, P. (2012). 
How to choose the right cloud. In Grid and cloud 
computing: Concepts, methodologies, tools and 
applications (pp. 1530–1552). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-0879-5.ch701
Bibi, S., Katsaros, D., & Bozanis, P. (2012). How 
to choose the right cloud. In X. Liu & Y. Li (Eds.), 
Advanced design approaches to emerging software 
systems: Principles, methodologies and tools (pp. 
219–240). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-735-7.ch010
291

Related References
Bitam, S., Batouche, M., & Talbi, E. (2012). A 
bees life algorithm for cloud computing services 
selection. In S. Ali, N. Abbadeni, & M. Batouche 
(Eds.), Multidisciplinary computational intelli-
gence techniques: Applications in business, engi-
neering, and medicine (pp. 31–46). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-1830-5.ch003
Bittencourt, L. F., Madeira, E. R., & da Fonseca, 
N. L. (2014). Communication aspects of resource 
management in hybrid clouds. In H. Mouftah & B. 
Kantarci (Eds.), Communication infrastructures 
for cloud computing (pp. 409–433). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-4522-6.ch018
Bonelli, L., Giudicianni, L., Immediata, A., & 
Luzzi, A. (2013). Compliance in the cloud. In 
D. Kyriazis, A. Voulodimos, S. Gogouvitis, & 
T. Varvarigou (Eds.), Data intensive storage 
services for cloud environments (pp. 109–131). 
Hershey, PA: Business Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-3934-8.ch008
Boniface, M., Nasser, B., Surridge, M., & Oli-
veros, E. (2012). Securing real-time interactive 
applications in federated clouds. In Grid and 
cloud computing: Concepts, methodologies, tools 
and applications (pp. 1822–1835). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-0879-5.ch806
Boukhobza, J. (2013). Flashing in the cloud: 
Shedding some light on NAND flash memory 
storage systems. In D. Kyriazis, A. Voulodimos, 
S. Gogouvitis, & T. Varvarigou (Eds.), Data inten-
sive storage services for cloud environments (pp. 
241–266). Hershey, PA: Business Science Refer-
ence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-3934-8.ch015
Bracci, F., Corradi, A., & Foschini, L. (2014). 
Cloud standards: Security and interoperability 
issues. In H. Mouftah & B. Kantarci (Eds.), Com-
munication infrastructures for cloud computing 
(pp. 465–495). Hershey, PA: Information Science 
Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4522-6.
ch020
Brown, A. W. (2013). Experiences with cloud 
technology to realize software testing factories. In 
S. Tilley & T. Parveen (Eds.), Software testing in 
the cloud: Perspectives on an emerging discipline 
(pp. 1–27). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2536-5.ch001
Calcavecchia, N. M., Celesti, A., & Di Nitto, E. 
(2012). Understanding decentralized and dynamic 
brokerage in federated cloud environments. In M. 
Villari, I. Brandic, & F. Tusa (Eds.), Achieving fed-
erated and self-manageable cloud infrastructures: 
Theory and practice (pp. 36–56). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-1631-8.ch003
Calero, J. M., König, B., & Kirschnick, J. (2012). 
Cross-layer monitoring in cloud computing. In 
H. Rashvand & Y. Kavian (Eds.), Using cross-
layer techniques for communication systems (pp. 
328–348). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0960-0.ch014
Cardellini, V., Casalicchio, E., & Silvestri, L. 
(2012). Service level provisioning for cloud-
based applications service level provisioning for 
cloud-based applications. In A. Pathan, M. Pathan, 
& H. Lee (Eds.), Advancements in distributed 
computing and internet technologies: Trends and 
issues (pp. 363–385). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Publishing: doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-
110-8.ch017
292

Related References
Cardellini, V., Casalicchio, E., & Silvestri, L. 
(2012). Service level provisioning for cloud-based 
applications service level provisioning for cloud-
based applications. In Grid and cloud computing: 
Concepts, methodologies, tools and applications 
(pp. 1479–1500). Hershey, PA: Information Sci-
ence Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0879-5.
ch611
Carlin, S., & Curran, K. (2013). Cloud computing 
security. In K. Curran (Ed.), Pervasive and ubiq-
uitous technology innovations for ambient intel-
ligence environments (pp. 12–17). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2041-4.ch002
Carlton, G. H., & Zhou, H. (2011). A survey 
of cloud computing challenges from a digital 
forensics perspective. International Journal of 
Interdisciplinary Telecommunications and Net-
working, 3(4), 1–16. doi:10.4018/jitn.2011100101
Carlton, G. H., & Zhou, H. (2012). A survey of 
cloud computing challenges from a digital foren-
sics perspective. In Grid and cloud computing: 
Concepts, methodologies, tools and applications 
(pp. 1221–1236). Hershey, PA: Information Sci-
ence Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0879-5.
ch511
Carlton, G. H., & Zhou, H. (2013). A survey of 
cloud computing challenges from a digital foren-
sics perspective. In M. Bartolacci & S. Powell 
(Eds.), Advancements and innovations in wireless 
communications and network technologies (pp. 
213–228). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2154-1.ch016
Carpen-Amarie, A., Costan, A., Leordeanu, C., 
Basescu, C., & Antoniu, G. (2012). Towards a 
generic security framework for cloud data man-
agement environments. International Journal 
of Distributed Systems and Technologies, 3(1), 
17–34. doi:10.4018/jdst.2012010102
Casola, V., Cuomo, A., Villano, U., & Rak, M. 
(2012). Access control in federated clouds: The 
cloudgrid case study. In M. Villari, I. Brandic, 
& F. Tusa (Eds.), Achieving Federated and Self-
Manageable Cloud Infrastructures: Theory and 
Practice (pp. 395–417). Hershey, PA: Business 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
1631-8.ch020
Casola, V., Cuomo, A., Villano, U., & Rak, M. 
(2013). Access control in federated clouds: The 
cloudgrid case study. In IT policy and ethics: Con-
cepts, methodologies, tools, and applications (pp. 
148–169). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2919-6.ch008
Celesti, A., Tusa, F., & Villari, M. (2012). Toward 
cloud federation: Concepts and challenges. In M. 
Villari, I. Brandic, & F. Tusa (Eds.), Achieving fed-
erated and self-manageable cloud infrastructures: 
Theory and practice (pp. 1–17). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-1631-8.ch001
Chaka, C. (2013). Virtualization and cloud com-
puting: Business models in the virtual cloud. In A. 
Loo (Ed.), Distributed computing innovations for 
business, engineering, and science (pp. 176–190). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2533-4.ch009
Chang, J. (2011). A framework for analysing the 
impact of cloud computing on local government in 
the UK. International Journal of Cloud Applica-
tions and Computing, 1(4), 25–33. doi:10.4018/
ijcac.2011100102
Chang, J. (2013). A framework for analysing the 
impact of cloud computing on local government 
in the UK. In S. Aljawarneh (Ed.), Cloud com-
puting advancements in design, implementation, 
and technologies (pp. 243–251). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-1879-4.ch017
293

Related References
Chang, J., & Johnston, M. (2012). Cloud comput-
ing in local government: From the perspective 
of four London borough councils. International 
Journal of Cloud Applications and Computing, 
2(4), 1–15. doi:10.4018/ijcac.2012100101
Chang, K., & Wang, K. (2012). Efficient support 
of streaming videos through patching proxies 
in the cloud. International Journal of Grid and 
High Performance Computing, 4(4), 22–36. 
doi:10.4018/jghpc.2012100102
Chang, R., Liao, C., & Liu, C. (2013). Choosing 
clouds for an enterprise: Modeling and evalua-
tion. International Journal of E-Entrepreneur-
ship and Innovation, 4(2), 38–53. doi:10.4018/
ijeei.2013040103
Chang, V., De Roure, D., Wills, G., & Walters, R. 
J. (2011). Case studies and organisational sustain-
ability modelling presented by cloud computing 
business framework. International Journal of 
Web Services Research, 8(3), 26–53. doi:10.4018/
JWSR.2011070102
Chang, V., Li, C., De Roure, D., Wills, G., Walters, 
R. J., & Chee, C. (2011). The financial clouds 
review. International Journal of Cloud Applica-
tions and Computing, 1(2), 41–63. doi:10.4018/
ijcac.2011040104
Chang, V., Li, C., De Roure, D., Wills, G., Walters, 
R. J., & Chee, C. (2013). The financial clouds 
review. In S. Aljawarneh (Ed.), Cloud comput-
ing advancements in design, implementation, 
and technologies (pp. 125–146). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-1879-4.ch009
Chang, V., Walters, R. J., & Wills, G. (2012). 
Business integration as a service. International 
Journal of Cloud Applications and Computing, 
2(1), 16–40. doi:10.4018/ijcac.2012010102
Chang, V., & Wills, G. (2013). A University of 
Greenwich case study of cloud computing: Edu-
cation as a service. In D. Graham, I. Manikas, & 
D. Folinas (Eds.), E-logistics and e-supply chain 
management: Applications for evolving business 
(pp. 232–253). Hershey, PA: Business Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-3914-0.ch013
Chang, V., Wills, G., Walters, R. J., & Currie, 
W. (2012). Towards a structured cloud ROI: The 
University of Southampton cost-saving and user 
satisfaction case studies. In W. Hu & N. Kaabouch 
(Eds.), Sustainable ICTs and management systems 
for green computing (pp. 179–200). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-1839-8.ch008
Chang, Y., Lee, Y., Juang, T., & Yen, J. (2013). 
Cost evaluation on building and operating cloud 
platform. International Journal of Grid and 
High Performance Computing, 5(2), 43–53. 
doi:10.4018/jghpc.2013040103
Chao, L. (2012). Cloud computing solution for 
internet based teaching and learning. In L. Chao 
(Ed.), Cloud computing for teaching and learn-
ing: Strategies for design and implementation (pp. 
210–235). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0957-0.ch015
Chao, L. (2012). Overview of cloud computing 
and its application in e-learning. In L. Chao (Ed.), 
Cloud computing for teaching and learning: Strat-
egies for design and implementation (pp. 1–16). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0957-0.ch001
Chauhan, S., Raman, A., & Singh, N. (2013). A 
comparative cost analysis of on premises IT in-
frastructure and cloud-based email services in an 
Indian business school. International Journal of 
Cloud Applications and Computing, 3(2), 21–34. 
doi:10.4018/ijcac.2013040103
294

Related References
Chen, C., Chao, H., Wu, T., Fan, C., Chen, J., Chen, 
Y., & Hsu, J. (2011). IoT-IMS communication 
platform for future internet. International Journal 
of Adaptive, Resilient and Autonomic Systems, 
2(4), 74–94. doi:10.4018/jaras.2011100105
Chen, C., Chao, H., Wu, T., Fan, C., Chen, J., 
Chen, Y., & Hsu, J. (2013). IoT-IMS communica-
tion platform for future internet. In V. De Florio 
(Ed.), Innovations and approaches for resilient 
and adaptive systems (pp. 68–86). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2056-8.ch004
Chen, C. C. (2013). Cloud computing in case-
based pedagogy: An information systems success 
perspective. International Journal of Dependable 
and Trustworthy Information Systems, 2(3), 1–16. 
doi:10.4018/jdtis.2011070101
Cheney, A. W., Riedl, R. E., Sanders, R., & 
Tashner, J. H. (2012). The new company water 
cooler: Use of 3D virtual immersive worlds to 
promote networking and professional learning 
in organizations. In Organizational learning 
and knowledge: Concepts, methodologies, tools 
and applications (pp. 2848-2861). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi::10.4018/978-
1-60960-783-8.ch801
Chiang, C., & Yu, S. (2013). Cloud-enabled soft-
ware testing based on program understanding. In S. 
Tilley & T. Parveen (Eds.), Software testing in the 
cloud: Perspectives on an emerging discipline (pp. 
54–67). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2536-5.ch003
Chou, Y., & Oetting, J. (2011). Risk assessment for 
cloud-based IT systems. [IJGHPC]. International 
Journal of Grid and High Performance Comput-
ing, 3(2), 1–13. doi:10.4018/jghpc.2011040101
Chou, Y., & Oetting, J. (2012). Risk assessment 
for cloud-based IT systems. In Grid and cloud 
computing: Concepts, methodologies, tools and 
applications (pp. 272–285). Hershey, PA: Infor-
mation Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-0879-5.ch113
Chou, Y., & Oetting, J. (2013). Risk assessment 
for cloud-based IT systems. In E. Udoh (Ed.), 
Applications and developments in grid, cloud, 
and high performance computing (pp. 1–14). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2065-0.ch001
Cohen, F. (2013). Challenges to digital forensic 
evidence in the cloud. In K. Ruan (Ed.), Cy-
bercrime and cloud forensics: Applications for 
investigation processes (pp. 59–78). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2662-1.ch003
Cossu, R., Di Giulio, C., Brito, F., & Petcu, D. 
(2013). Cloud computing for earth observation. 
In D. Kyriazis, A. Voulodimos, S. Gogouvitis, 
& T. Varvarigou (Eds.), Data intensive storage 
services for cloud environments (pp. 166–191). 
Hershey, PA: Business Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-3934-8.ch012
Costa, J. E., & Rodrigues, J. J. (2014). Mobile 
cloud computing: Technologies, services, and 
applications. In J. Rodrigues, K. Lin, & J. Lloret 
(Eds.), Mobile networks and cloud computing 
convergence for progressive services and ap-
plications (pp. 1–17). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
4781-7.ch001
295

Related References
Creaner, G., & Pahl, C. (2013). Flexible coordi-
nation techniques for dynamic cloud service col-
laboration. In G. Ortiz & J. Cubo (Eds.), Adaptive 
web services for modular and reusable software 
development: Tactics and solutions (pp. 239–252). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2089-6.ch009
Crosbie, M. (2013). Hack the cloud: Ethical 
hacking and cloud forensics. In K. Ruan (Ed.), 
Cybercrime and cloud forensics: Applications for 
investigation processes (pp. 42–58). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2662-1.ch002
Curran, K., Carlin, S., & Adams, M. (2012). 
Security issues in cloud computing. In L. Chao 
(Ed.), Cloud computing for teaching and learn-
ing: Strategies for design and implementation (pp. 
200–208). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0957-0.ch014
Dahbur, K., & Mohammad, B. (2011). Toward 
understanding the challenges and countermea-
sures in computer anti-forensics. International 
Journal of Cloud Applications and Computing, 
1(3), 22–35. doi:10.4018/ijcac.2011070103
Dahbur, K., Mohammad, B., & Tarakji, A. B. 
(2011). Security issues in cloud computing: A 
survey of risks, threats and vulnerabilities. Inter-
national Journal of Cloud Applications and Com-
puting, 1(3), 1–11. doi:10.4018/ijcac.2011070101
Dahbur, K., Mohammad, B., & Tarakji, A. B. 
(2012). Security issues in cloud computing: A 
survey of risks, threats and vulnerabilities. In 
Grid and cloud computing: Concepts, method-
ologies, tools and applications (pp. 1644–1655). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0879-5.ch707
Dahbur, K., Mohammad, B., & Tarakji, A. B. 
(2013). Security issues in cloud computing: A 
survey of risks, threats and vulnerabilities. In S. 
Aljawarneh (Ed.), Cloud computing advancements 
in design, implementation, and technologies (pp. 
154–165). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1879-4.ch011
Daim, T., Britton, M., Subramanian, G., Brenden, 
R., & Intarode, N. (2012). Adopting and integrat-
ing cloud computing. In E. Eyob & E. Tetteh 
(Eds.), Customer-oriented global supply chains: 
Concepts for effective management (pp. 175–197). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0246-5.ch011
Davis, M., & Sedsman, A. (2012). Grey areas: 
The legal dimensions of cloud computing. In C. 
Li & A. Ho (Eds.), Crime prevention technologies 
and applications for advancing criminal investi-
gation (pp. 263–273). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
1758-2.ch017
De Coster, R., & Albesher, A. (2013). The develop-
ment of mobile service applications for consumers 
and intelligent networks. In I. Lee (Ed.), Mobile 
services industries, technologies, and applications 
in the global economy (pp. 273–289). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-1981-4.ch017
De Filippi, P. (2014). Ubiquitous computing in the 
cloud: User empowerment vs. user obsequity. In 
J. Pelet & P. Papadopoulou (Eds.), User behavior 
in ubiquitous online environments (pp. 44–63). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4566-0.ch003
296

Related References
De Silva, S. (2013). Key legal issues with cloud 
computing: A UK law perspective. In A. Bento & 
A. Aggarwal (Eds.), Cloud computing service and 
deployment models: Layers and management (pp. 
242–256). Hershey, PA: Business Science Refer-
ence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2187-9.ch013
Deed, C., & Cragg, P. (2013). Business impacts 
of cloud computing. In A. Bento & A. Aggarwal 
(Eds.), Cloud computing service and deployment 
models: Layers and management (pp. 274–288). 
Hershey, PA: Business Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2187-9.ch015
Deng, M., Petkovic, M., Nalin, M., & Baroni, I. 
(2013). Home healthcare in cloud computing. In 
M. Cruz-Cunha, I. Miranda, & P. Gonçalves (Eds.), 
Handbook of research on ICTs and management 
systems for improving efficiency in healthcare and 
social care (pp. 614–634). Hershey, PA: Medical 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-3990-4.ch032
Desai, A. M., & Mock, K. (2013). Security in 
cloud computing. In A. Bento & A. Aggarwal 
(Eds.), Cloud computing service and deployment 
models: Layers and management (pp. 208–221). 
Hershey, PA: Business Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2187-9.ch011
Deshpande, R. M., Patle, B. V., & Bhoskar, R. 
D. (2014). Planning and implementation of cloud 
computing in NIT’s in India: Special reference to 
VNIT. In S. Dhamdhere (Ed.), Cloud computing 
and virtualization technologies in libraries (pp. 
90–106). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4631-5.ch006
Dhamdhere, S. N., & Lihitkar, R. (2014). The 
university cloud library model and the role of the 
cloud librarian. In S. Dhamdhere (Ed.), Cloud 
computing and virtualization technologies in 
libraries (pp. 150–161). Hershey, PA: Informa-
tion Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
4631-5.ch009
Di Martino, S., Ferrucci, F., Maggio, V., & Sarro, 
F. (2013). Towards migrating genetic algorithms 
for test data generation to the cloud. In S. Til-
ley & T. Parveen (Eds.), Software testing in the 
cloud: Perspectives on an emerging discipline (pp. 
113–135). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2536-5.ch006
Di Sano, M., Di Stefano, A., Morana, G., & Zito, 
D. (2013). FSaaS: Configuring policies for manag-
ing shared files among cooperating, distributed 
applications. International Journal of Web Portals, 
5(1), 1–14. doi:10.4018/jwp.2013010101
Dippl, S., Jaeger, M. C., Luhn, A., Shulman-Peleg, 
A., & Vernik, G. (2013). Towards federation and 
interoperability of cloud storage systems. In D. 
Kyriazis, A. Voulodimos, S. Gogouvitis, & T. 
Varvarigou (Eds.), Data intensive storage services 
for cloud environments (pp. 60–71). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-3934-8.ch005
Distefano, S., & Puliafito, A. (2012). The cloud@
home volunteer and interoperable cloud through 
the future internet. In M. Villari, I. Brandic, & 
F. Tusa (Eds.), Achieving federated and self-
manageable cloud infrastructures: Theory and 
practice (pp. 79–96). Hershey, PA: Business 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
1631-8.ch005
Djoleto, W. (2013). Cloud computing and ecom-
merce or ebusiness: “The now it way” – An over-
view. In Electronic commerce and organizational 
leadership: perspectives and methodologies (pp. 
239–254). Hershey, PA: Business Science Refer-
ence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2982-0.ch010
Dollmann, T. J., Loos, P., Fellmann, M., Thomas, 
O., Hoheisel, A., Katranuschkov, P., & Scherer, R. 
(2011). Design and usage of a process-centric col-
laboration methodology for virtual organizations 
in hybrid environments. International Journal of 
Intelligent Information Technologies, 7(1), 45–64. 
doi:10.4018/jiit.2011010104
297

Related References
Dollmann, T. J., Loos, P., Fellmann, M., Thomas, 
O., Hoheisel, A., Katranuschkov, P., & Scherer, R. 
(2013). Design and usage of a process-centric col-
laboration methodology for virtual organizations 
in hybrid environments. In V. Sugumaran (Ed.), 
Organizational efficiency through intelligent in-
formation technologies (pp. 45–64). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2047-6.ch004
Dreher, P., & Vouk, M. (2012). Utilizing open 
source cloud computing environments to provide 
cost effective support for university education 
and research. In L. Chao (Ed.), Cloud computing 
for teaching and learning: Strategies for design 
and implementation (pp. 32–49). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-0957-0.ch003
Drum, D., Becker, D., & Fish, M. (2013). Tech-
nology adoption in troubled times: A cloud 
computing case study. Journal of Cases on Infor-
mation Technology, 15(2), 57–71. doi:10.4018/
jcit.2013040104
Dunaway, D. M. (2013). Creating virtual collab-
orative learning experiences for aspiring teachers. 
In R. Hartshorne, T. Heafner, & T. Petty (Eds.), 
Teacher education programs and online learning 
tools: Innovations in teacher preparation (pp. 
167–180). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1906-7.ch009
Dykstra, J. (2013). Seizing electronic evidence 
from cloud computing environments. In K. Ruan 
(Ed.), Cybercrime and cloud forensics: Applica-
tions for investigation processes (pp. 156–185). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2662-1.ch007
El-Refaey, M., & Rimal, B. P. (2012). Grid, SOA 
and cloud computing: On-demand computing 
models. In Grid and cloud computing: Concepts, 
methodologies, tools and applications (pp. 12–51). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0879-5.ch102
El-Refaey, M., & Rimal, B. P. (2012). Grid, SOA 
and cloud computing: On-demand computing 
models. In N. Preve (Ed.), Computational and data 
grids: Principles, applications and design (pp. 
45–85). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-113-9.ch003
Elnaffar, S., Maamar, Z., & Sheng, Q. Z. (2013). 
When clouds start socializing: The sky model. 
International Journal of E-Business Research, 
9(2), 1–7. doi:10.4018/jebr.2013040101
Elwood, S., & Keengwe, J. (2012). Microbursts: 
A design format for mobile cloud computing. 
International Journal of Information and Com-
munication Technology Education, 8(2), 102–110. 
doi:10.4018/jicte.2012040109
Emeakaroha, V. C., Netto, M. A., Calheiros, R. 
N., & De Rose, C. A. (2012). Achieving flexible 
SLA and resource management in clouds. In M. 
Villari, I. Brandic, & F. Tusa (Eds.), Achieving fed-
erated and self-manageable cloud infrastructures: 
Theory and practice (pp. 266–287). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-1631-8.ch014
Etro, F. (2013). The economics of cloud comput-
ing. In A. Bento & A. Aggarwal (Eds.), Cloud 
computing service and deployment models: Layers 
and management (pp. 296–309). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2187-9.ch017
Ezugwu, A. E., Buhari, S. M., & Junaidu, S. 
B. (2013). Virtual machine allocation in cloud 
computing environment. International Journal of 
Cloud Applications and Computing, 3(2), 47–60. 
doi:10.4018/ijcac.2013040105
Fauzi, A. H., & Taylor, H. (2013). Secure com-
munity trust stores for peer-to-peer e-commerce 
applications using cloud services. International 
Journal of E-Entrepreneurship and Innovation, 
4(1), 1–15. doi:10.4018/jeei.2013010101
298

Related References
Ferguson-Boucher, K., & Endicott-Popovsky, B. 
(2013). Forensic readiness in the cloud (FRC): 
Integrating records management and digital fo-
rensics. In K. Ruan (Ed.), Cybercrime and cloud 
forensics: Applications for investigation processes 
(pp. 105–128). Hershey, PA: Information Science 
Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2662-1.
ch005
Ferraro de Souza, R., Westphall, C. B., dos San-
tos, D. R., & Westphall, C. M. (2013). A review 
of PACS on cloud for archiving secure medical 
images. International Journal of Privacy and 
Health Information Management, 1(1), 53–62. 
doi:10.4018/ijphim.2013010104
Firdhous, M., Hassan, S., & Ghazali, O. (2013). 
Statistically enhanced multi-dimensional trust 
computing mechanism for cloud computing. 
International Journal of Mobile Computing 
and Multimedia Communications, 5(2), 1–17. 
doi:10.4018/jmcmc.2013040101
Formisano, C., Bonelli, L., Balraj, K. R., & 
Shulman-Peleg, A. (2013). Cloud access control 
mechanisms. In D. Kyriazis, A. Voulodimos, S. 
Gogouvitis, & T. Varvarigou (Eds.), Data inten-
sive storage services for cloud environments (pp. 
94–108). Hershey, PA: Business Science Refer-
ence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-3934-8.ch007
Frank, H., & Mesentean, S. (2012). Efficient 
communication interfaces for distributed energy 
resources. In E. Udoh (Ed.), Evolving develop-
ments in grid and cloud computing: Advancing 
research (pp. 185–196). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
0056-0.ch013
Gallina, B., & Guelfi, N. (2012). Reusing transac-
tion models for dependable cloud computing. In 
H. Yang & X. Liu (Eds.), Software reuse in the 
emerging cloud computing era (pp. 248–277). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0897-9.ch011
Garofalo, D. A. (2013). Empires of the future: 
Libraries, technology, and the academic environ-
ment. In E. Iglesias (Ed.), Robots in academic 
libraries: Advancements in library automation 
(pp. 180–206). Hershey, PA: Information Sci-
ence Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-3938-6.
ch010
Gebremeskel, G. B., He, Z., & Jing, X. (2013). 
Semantic integrating for intelligent cloud data 
mining platform and cloud based business intel-
ligence for optimization of mobile social networks. 
In V. Bhatnagar (Ed.), Data mining in dynamic 
social networks and fuzzy systems (pp. 173–211). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4213-3.ch009
Gentleman, W. M. (2013). Using the cloud for 
testing NOT adjunct to development. In S. Til-
ley & T. Parveen (Eds.), Software testing in the 
cloud: Perspectives on an emerging discipline (pp. 
216–230). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2536-5.ch010
Ghafoor, K. Z., Mohammed, M. A., Abu Bakar, 
K., Sadiq, A. S., & Lloret, J. (2014). Vehicular 
cloud computing: Trends and challenges. In J. 
Rodrigues, K. Lin, & J. Lloret (Eds.), Mobile 
networks and cloud computing convergence 
for progressive services and applications (pp. 
262–274). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4781-7.ch014
Giannakaki, M. (2012). The “right to be forgotten” 
in the era of social media and cloud computing. In 
C. Akrivopoulou & N. Garipidis (Eds.), Human 
rights and risks in the digital era: Globalization 
and the effects of information technologies (pp. 
10–24). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0891-7.ch002
299

Related References
Gillam, L., Li, B., & O’Loughlin, J. (2012). 
Teaching clouds: Lessons taught and lessons 
learnt. In L. Chao (Ed.), Cloud computing for 
teaching and learning: Strategies for design 
and implementation (pp. 82–94). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-0957-0.ch006
Gonsowski, D. (2013). Compliance in the cloud 
and the implications on electronic discovery. In 
K. Ruan (Ed.), Cybercrime and cloud forensics: 
Applications for investigation processes (pp. 
230–250). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2662-1.ch009
Gonzalez-Sanchez, J., Conley, Q., Chavez-
Echeagaray, M., & Atkinson, R. K. (2012). 
Supporting the assembly process by leveraging 
augmented reality, cloud computing, and mobile 
devices. International Journal of Cyber Behav-
ior, Psychology and Learning, 2(3), 86–102. 
doi:10.4018/ijcbpl.2012070107
Gopinath, R., & Geetha, B. (2013). An e-learning 
system based on secure data storage services in 
cloud computing. International Journal of Infor-
mation Technology and Web Engineering, 8(2), 
1–17. doi:10.4018/jitwe.2013040101
Gossin, P. C., & LaBrie, R. C. (2013). Data center 
waste management. In P. Ordóñez de Pablos (Ed.), 
Green technologies and business practices: An IT 
approach (pp. 226–235). Hershey, PA: Informa-
tion Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
1972-2.ch014
Goswami, V., Patra, S. S., & Mund, G. B. (2012). 
Performance analysis of cloud computing cen-
ters for bulk services. International Journal of 
Cloud Applications and Computing, 2(4), 53–65. 
doi:10.4018/ijcac.2012100104
Goswami, V., & Sahoo, C. N. (2013). Optimal 
resource usage in multi-cloud computing environ-
ment. International Journal of Cloud Applica-
tions and Computing, 3(1), 44–57. doi:10.4018/
ijcac.2013010105
Gräuler, M., Teuteberg, F., Mahmoud, T., & Gó-
mez, J. M. (2013). Requirements prioritization and 
design considerations for the next generation of 
corporate environmental management information 
systems: A foundation for innovation. Interna-
tional Journal of Information Technologies and 
Systems Approach, 6(1), 98–116. doi:10.4018/
jitsa.2013010106
Grieve, G. P., & Heston, K. (2012). Finding liquid 
salvation: Using the cardean ethnographic method 
to document second life residents and religious 
cloud communities. In N. Zagalo, L. Morgado, 
& A. Boa-Ventura (Eds.), Virtual worlds and 
metaverse platforms: New communication and 
identity paradigms (pp. 288–305). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-60960-854-5.ch019
Grispos, G., Storer, T., & Glisson, W. B. (2012). 
Calm before the storm: The challenges of cloud 
computing in digital forensics. International 
Journal of Digital Crime and Forensics, 4(2), 
28–48. doi:10.4018/jdcf.2012040103
Grispos, G., Storer, T., & Glisson, W. B. (2013). 
Calm before the storm: The challenges of cloud 
computing in digital forensics. In C. Li (Ed.), 
Emerging digital forensics applications for crime 
detection, prevention, and security (pp. 211–233). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4006-1.ch015
Guster, D., & Lee, O. F. (2011). Enhancing the 
disaster recovery plan through virtualization. 
Journal of Information Technology Research, 
4(4), 18–40. doi:10.4018/jitr.2011100102
Hanawa, T., & Sato, M. (2013). D-Cloud: Software 
testing environment for dependable distributed 
systems using cloud computing technology. In S. 
Tilley & T. Parveen (Eds.), Software testing in the 
cloud: Perspectives on an emerging discipline (pp. 
340–355). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2536-5.ch016
300

Related References
Hardy, J., Liu, L., Lei, C., & Li, J. (2013). Internet-
based virtual computing infrastructure for cloud 
computing. In X. Yang & L. Liu (Eds.), Principles, 
methodologies, and service-oriented approaches 
for cloud computing (pp. 371–389). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-2854-0.ch016
Hashizume, K., Yoshioka, N., & Fernandez, E. 
B. (2013). Three misuse patterns for cloud com-
puting. In D. Rosado, D. Mellado, E. Fernandez-
Medina, & M. Piattini (Eds.), Security engineering 
for cloud computing: Approaches and tools (pp. 
36–53). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2125-1.ch003
Hassan, Q. F., Riad, A. M., & Hassan, A. E. (2012). 
Understanding cloud computing. In H. Yang & 
X. Liu (Eds.), Software reuse in the emerging 
cloud computing era (pp. 204–227). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-0897-9.ch009
Hasselmeyer, P., Katsaros, G., Koller, B., & Wie-
der, P. (2012). Cloud monitoring. In M. Villari, 
I. Brandic, & F. Tusa (Eds.), Achieving feder-
ated and self-manageable cloud infrastructures: 
Theory and practice (pp. 97–116). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-1631-8.ch006
Hertzler, B. T., Frost, E., Bressler, G. H., & 
Goehring, C. (2011). Experience report: Using a 
cloud computing environment during Haiti and 
Exercise24. International Journal of Information 
Systems for Crisis Response and Management, 
3(1), 50–64. doi:10.4018/jiscrm.2011010104
Hertzler, B. T., Frost, E., Bressler, G. H., & 
Goehring, C. (2013). Experience report: Using a 
cloud computing environment during Haiti and 
Exercise24. In M. Jennex (Ed.), Using social and 
information technologies for disaster and crisis 
management (pp. 52–66). Hershey, PA: Informa-
tion Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2788-8.ch004
Ho, R. (2013). Cloud computing and enterprise 
migration strategies. In A. Loo (Ed.), Distributed 
computing innovations for business, engineering, 
and science (pp. 156–175). Hershey, PA: Informa-
tion Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2533-4.ch008
Hobona, G., Jackson, M., & Anand, S. (2012). 
Implementing geospatial web services for cloud 
computing. In Grid and cloud computing: Con-
cepts, methodologies, tools and applications (pp. 
615–636). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0879-5.ch305
Hochstein, L., Schott, B., & Graybill, R. B. (2011). 
Computational engineering in the cloud: Benefits 
and challenges. Journal of Organizational and 
End User Computing, 23(4), 31–50. doi:10.4018/
joeuc.2011100103
Hochstein, L., Schott, B., & Graybill, R. B. (2013). 
Computational engineering in the cloud: Benefits 
and challenges. In A. Dwivedi & S. Clarke (Eds.), 
Innovative strategies and approaches for end-
user computing advancements (pp. 314–332). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2059-9.ch017
Honarvar, A. R. (2013). Developing an elastic 
cloud computing application through multi-agent 
systems. International Journal of Cloud Applica-
tions and Computing, 3(1), 58–64. doi:10.4018/
ijcac.2013010106
Hossain, S. (2013). Cloud computing terms, 
definitions, and taxonomy. In A. Bento & A. 
Aggarwal (Eds.), Cloud computing service and 
deployment models: Layers and management (pp. 
1–25). Hershey, PA: Business Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2187-9.ch001
301

Related References
Hudzia, B., Sinclair, J., & Lindner, M. (2013). 
Deploying and running enterprise grade ap-
plications in a federated cloud. In Supply chain 
management: Concepts, methodologies, tools, 
and applications (pp. 1350–1370). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-2625-6.ch080
Hung, S., Shieh, J., & Lee, C. (2011). Migrating 
android applications to the cloud. International 
Journal of Grid and High Performance Comput-
ing, 3(2), 14–28. doi:10.4018/jghpc.2011040102
Hung, S., Shieh, J., & Lee, C. (2013). Migrating 
android applications to the cloud. In E. Udoh (Ed.), 
Applications and developments in grid, cloud, 
and high performance computing (pp. 307–322). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2065-0.ch020
Islam, S., Mouratidis, H., & Weippl, E. R. (2013). 
A goal-driven risk management approach to sup-
port security and privacy analysis of cloud-based 
system. In D. Rosado, D. Mellado, E. Fernandez-
Medina, & M. Piattini (Eds.), Security engineering 
for cloud computing: Approaches and tools (pp. 
97–122). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2125-1.ch006
Itani, W., Kayssi, A., & Chehab, A. (2013). 
Hardware-based security for ensuring data pri-
vacy in the cloud. In D. Rosado, D. Mellado, E. 
Fernandez-Medina, & M. Piattini (Eds.), Security 
engineering for cloud computing: Approaches and 
tools (pp. 147–170). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2125-1.ch008
Jackson, A., & Weiland, M. (2013). Cloud comput-
ing for scientific simulation and high performance 
computing. In X. Yang & L. Liu (Eds.), Principles, 
methodologies, and service-oriented approaches 
for cloud computing (pp. 51–70). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-2854-0.ch003
Jaeger, M. C., & Hohenstein, U. (2013). Content 
centric storage and current storage systems. In 
D. Kyriazis, A. Voulodimos, S. Gogouvitis, & T. 
Varvarigou (Eds.), Data intensive storage services 
for cloud environments (pp. 27–46). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-3934-8.ch003
James, J. I., Shosha, A. F., & Gladyshev, P. 
(2013). Digital forensic investigation and cloud 
computing. In K. Ruan (Ed.), Cybercrime and 
cloud forensics: Applications for investigation 
processes (pp. 1–41). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2662-1.ch001
Jena, R. K. (2013). Green computing to green 
business. In P. Ordóñez de Pablos (Ed.), Green 
technologies and business practices: An IT ap-
proach (pp. 138–150). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
1972-2.ch007
Jeyarani, R., & Nagaveni, N. (2012). A heuristic 
meta scheduler for optimal resource utilization 
and improved QoS in cloud computing environ-
ment. International Journal of Cloud Applica-
tions and Computing, 2(1), 41–52. doi:10.4018/
ijcac.2012010103
Jeyarani, R., Nagaveni, N., & Ram, R. V. (2011). 
Self adaptive particle swarm optimization for 
efficient virtual machine provisioning in cloud. 
International Journal of Intelligent Informa-
tion Technologies, 7(2), 25–44. doi:10.4018/
jiit.2011040102
Jeyarani, R., Nagaveni, N., & Ram, R. V. (2013). 
Self adaptive particle swarm optimization for 
efficient virtual machine provisioning in cloud. 
In V. Sugumaran (Ed.), Organizational efficiency 
through intelligent information technologies (pp. 
88–107). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2047-6.ch006
302

Related References
Jeyarani, R., Nagaveni, N., Sadasivam, S. K., & 
Rajarathinam, V. R. (2011). Power aware meta 
scheduler for adaptive VM provisioning in IaaS 
cloud. International Journal of Cloud Applica-
tions and Computing, 1(3), 36–51. doi:10.4018/
ijcac.2011070104
Jeyarani, R., Nagaveni, N., Sadasivam, S. K., & 
Rajarathinam, V. R. (2013). Power aware meta 
scheduler for adaptive VM provisioning in IaaS 
cloud. In S. Aljawarneh (Ed.), Cloud comput-
ing advancements in design, implementation, 
and technologies (pp. 190–204). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-1879-4.ch014
Jiang, J., Huang, X., Wu, Y., & Yang, G. (2013). 
Campus cloud storage and preservation: From 
distributed file system to data sharing service. In 
X. Yang & L. Liu (Eds.), Principles, methodolo-
gies, and service-oriented approaches for cloud 
computing (pp. 284–301). Hershey, PA: Business 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2854-0.ch012
Jing, S. (2012). The application exploration of 
cloud computing in information technology 
teaching. International Journal of Advanced Per-
vasive and Ubiquitous Computing, 4(4), 23–27. 
doi:10.4018/japuc.2012100104
Johansson, D., & Wiberg, M. (2012). Conceptu-
ally advancing “application mobility” towards 
design: Applying a concept-driven approach to 
the design of mobile IT for home care service 
groups. International Journal of Ambient Com-
puting and Intelligence, 4(3), 20–32. doi:10.4018/
jaci.2012070102
Jorda, J., & M’zoughi, A. (2013). Securing cloud 
storage. In D. Rosado, D. Mellado, E. Fernandez-
Medina, & M. Piattini (Eds.), Security engineering 
for cloud computing: Approaches and tools (pp. 
171–190). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2125-1.ch009
Juiz, C., & Alexander de Pous, V. (2014). Cloud 
computing: IT governance, legal, and public policy 
aspects. In I. Portela & F. Almeida (Eds.), Orga-
nizational, legal, and technological dimensions of 
information system administration (pp. 139–166). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4526-4.ch009
Kaisler, S. H., Money, W., & Cohen, S. J. (2013). 
Cloud computing: A decision framework for 
small businesses. In A. Bento & A. Aggarwal 
(Eds.), Cloud computing service and deployment 
models: Layers and management (pp. 151–172). 
Hershey, PA: Business Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2187-9.ch008
Kanamori, Y., & Yen, M. Y. (2013). Cloud comput-
ing security and risk management. In A. Bento & 
A. Aggarwal (Eds.), Cloud computing service and 
deployment models: Layers and management (pp. 
222–240). Hershey, PA: Business Science Refer-
ence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2187-9.ch012
Karadsheh, L., & Alhawari, S. (2011). Applying 
security policies in small business utilizing cloud 
computing technologies. International Journal of 
Cloud Applications and Computing, 1(2), 29–40. 
doi:10.4018/ijcac.2011040103
Karadsheh, L., & Alhawari, S. (2013). Apply-
ing security policies in small business utilizing 
cloud computing technologies. In S. Aljawarneh 
(Ed.), Cloud computing advancements in design, 
implementation, and technologies (pp. 112–124). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1879-4.ch008
Kaupins, G. (2012). Laws associated with 
mobile computing in the cloud. [IJWNBT]. 
International Journal of Wireless Networks and 
Broadband Technologies, 2(3), 1–9. doi:10.4018/
ijwnbt.2012070101
303

Related References
Kemp, M. L., Robb, S., & Deans, P. C. (2013). 
The legal implications of cloud computing. In 
A. Bento & A. Aggarwal (Eds.), Cloud com-
puting service and deployment models: Layers 
and management (pp. 257–272). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2187-9.ch014
Khan, N., Ahmad, N., Herawan, T., & Inayat, Z. 
(2012). Cloud computing: Locally sub-clouds 
instead of globally one cloud. International Jour-
nal of Cloud Applications and Computing, 2(3), 
68–85. doi::10.4018/ijcac.2012070103
Khan, N., Noraziah, A., Ismail, E. I., Deris, M. M., 
& Herawan, T. (2012). Cloud computing: Analysis 
of various platforms. International Journal of 
E-Entrepreneurship and Innovation, 3(2), 51–59. 
doi:10.4018/jeei.2012040104
Khansa, L., Forcade, J., Nambari, G., Para-
suraman, S., & Cox, P. (2012). Proposing an 
intelligent cloud-based electronic health record 
system. International Journal of Business Data 
Communications and Networking, 8(3), 57–71. 
doi:10.4018/jbdcn.2012070104
Kierkegaard, S. (2012). Not every cloud brings 
rain: Legal risks on the horizon. In M. Gupta, J. 
Walp, & R. Sharman (Eds.), Strategic and practical 
approaches for information security governance: 
Technologies and applied solutions (pp. 181–194). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0197-0.ch011
Kifayat, K., Shamsa, T. B., Mackay, M., Merabti, 
M., & Shi, Q. (2013). Real time risk management 
in cloud computation. In D. Rosado, D. Mellado, E. 
Fernandez-Medina, & M. Piattini (Eds.), Security 
engineering for cloud computing: Approaches and 
tools (pp. 123–145). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2125-1.ch007
King, T. M., Ganti, A. S., & Froslie, D. (2013). 
Towards improving the testability of cloud appli-
cation services. In S. Tilley & T. Parveen (Eds.), 
Software testing in the cloud: Perspectives on an 
emerging discipline (pp. 322–339). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2536-5.ch015
Kipp, A., Schneider, R., & Schubert, L. (2013). 
Encapsulation of complex HPC services. In C. 
Rückemann (Ed.), Integrated information and 
computing systems for natural, spatial, and social 
sciences (pp. 153–176). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2190-9.ch008
Kldiashvili, E. (2012). The cloud computing as 
the tool for implementation of virtual organization 
technology for ehealth. Journal of Information 
Technology Research, 5(1), 18–34. doi:10.4018/
jitr.2012010102
Kldiashvili, E. (2013). Implementation of telecy-
tology in georgia for quality assurance programs. 
Journal of Information Technology Research, 6(2), 
24–45. doi:10.4018/jitr.2013040102
Kosmatov, N. (2013). Concolic test generation 
and the cloud: deployment and verification 
perspectives. In S. Tilley & T. Parveen (Eds.), 
Software testing in the cloud: Perspectives on an 
emerging discipline (pp. 231–251). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2536-5.ch011
Kotamarti, R. M., Thornton, M. A., & Dunham, 
M. H. (2012). Quantum computing approach for 
alignment-free sequence search and classification. 
In S. Ali, N. Abbadeni, & M. Batouche (Eds.), 
Multidisciplinary computational intelligence 
techniques: Applications in business, engineer-
ing, and medicine (pp. 279–300). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-1830-5.ch017
304

Related References
Kremmydas, D., Petsakos, A., & Rozakis, S. 
(2012). Parametric optimization of linear and 
non-linear models via parallel computing to en-
hance web-spatial DSS interactivity. International 
Journal of Decision Support System Technology, 
4(1), 14–29. doi:10.4018/jdsst.2012010102
Krishnadas, N., & Pillai, R. R. (2013). Cloud 
computing diagnosis: A comprehensive study. In 
X. Yang & L. Liu (Eds.), Principles, methodolo-
gies, and service-oriented approaches for cloud 
computing (pp. 1–18). Hershey, PA: Business 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2854-0.ch001
Kübert, R., & Katsaros, G. (2011). Using free 
software for elastic web hosting on a private 
cloud. International Journal of Cloud Applica-
tions and Computing, 1(2), 14–28. doi:10.4018/
ijcac.2011040102
Kübert, R., & Katsaros, G. (2013). Using free 
software for elastic web hosting on a private 
cloud. In S. Aljawarneh (Ed.), Cloud computing 
advancements in design, implementation, and 
technologies (pp. 97–111). Hershey, PA: Infor-
mation Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-1879-4.ch007
Kumar, P. S., Ashok, M. S., & Subramanian, 
R. (2012). A publicly verifiable dynamic secret 
sharing protocol for secure and dependable data 
storage in cloud computing. International Journal 
of Cloud Applications and Computing, 2(3), 1–25. 
doi:10.4018/ijcac.2012070101
Lasluisa, S., Rodero, I., & Parashar, M. (2013). 
Software design for passing sarbanes-oxley in 
cloud computing. In C. Rückemann (Ed.), Inte-
grated information and computing systems for 
natural, spatial, and social sciences (pp. 27–42). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2190-9.ch002
Lasluisa, S., Rodero, I., & Parashar, M. (2014). 
Software design for passing sarbanes-oxley in 
cloud computing. In Software design and de-
velopment: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and 
applications (pp. 1659–1674). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-4301-7.ch080
Lee, W. N. (2013). An economic analysis of cloud: 
“Software as a service” (saas) computing and 
“virtual desktop infrastructure” (VDI) models. 
In A. Bento & A. Aggarwal (Eds.), Cloud com-
puting service and deployment models: Layers 
and management (pp. 289–295). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2187-9.ch016
Levine, K., & White, B. A. (2011). A crisis at 
hafford furniture: Cloud computing case study. 
Journal of Cases on Information Technology, 
13(1), 57–71. doi:10.4018/jcit.2011010104
Levine, K., & White, B. A. (2013). A crisis at 
Hafford furniture: Cloud computing case study. 
In M. Khosrow-Pour (Ed.), Cases on emerging 
information technology research and applications 
(pp. 70–87). Hershey, PA: Information Science 
Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-3619-4.
ch004
Li, J., Meng, L., Zhu, Z., Li, X., Huai, J., & Liu, 
L. (2013). CloudRank: A cloud service ranking 
method based on both user feedback and service 
testing. In X. Yang & L. Liu (Eds.), Principles, 
methodologies, and service-oriented approaches 
for cloud computing (pp. 230–258). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-2854-0.ch010
Liang, T., Lu, F., & Chiu, J. (2012). A hybrid 
resource reservation method for workflows in 
clouds. International Journal of Grid and High 
Performance Computing, 4(4), 1–21. doi:10.4018/
jghpc.2012100101
305

Related References
Lorenz, M., Rath-Wiggins, L., Runde, W., Mes-
sina, A., Sunna, P., Dimino, G., & Borgotallo, 
R. et al. (2013). Media convergence and cloud 
technologies: Smart storage, better workflows. 
In D. Kyriazis, A. Voulodimos, S. Gogouvitis, 
& T. Varvarigou (Eds.), Data intensive storage 
services for cloud environments (pp. 132–144). 
Hershey, PA: Business Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-3934-8.ch009
M., S. G., & G., S. K. (2012). An enterprise mashup 
integration service framework for clouds. Interna-
tional Journal of Cloud Applications and Comput-
ing, 2(2), 31-40. doi:10.4018/ijcac.2012040103
Maharana, S. K., Mali, P. B., Prabhakar, G. J. S., 
& Kumar, V. (2011). Cloud computing applied 
for numerical study of thermal characteristics 
of SIP. International Journal of Cloud Applica-
tions and Computing, 1(3), 12–21. doi:10.4018/
ijcac.2011070102
Maharana, S. K., Mali, P. B., Prabhakar, G. J. S., 
& Kumar, V. (2013). Cloud computing applied 
for numerical study of thermal characteristics 
of SIP. In S. Aljawarneh (Ed.), Cloud comput-
ing advancements in design, implementation, 
and technologies (pp. 166–175). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-1879-4.ch012
Maharana, S. K., P, G. P., & Bhati, A. (2012). A 
study of cloud computing for retinal image process-
ing through MATLAB. International Journal of 
Cloud Applications and Computing, 2(2), 59–69. 
doi:10.4018/ijcac.2012040106
Maharana, S. K., Prabhakar, P. G., & Bhati, A. 
(2013). A study of cloud computing for retinal 
image processing through MATLAB. In Image 
processing: Concepts, methodologies, tools, 
and applications (pp. 101–111). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-3994-2.ch006
Mahesh, S., Landry, B. J., Sridhar, T., & Walsh, K. 
R. (2011). A decision table for the cloud computing 
decision in small business. Information Resources 
Management Journal, 24(3), 9–25. doi:10.4018/
irmj.2011070102
Mahesh, S., Landry, B. J., Sridhar, T., & Walsh, K. 
R. (2013). A decision table for the cloud computing 
decision in small business. In M. Khosrow-Pour 
(Ed.), Managing information resources and tech-
nology: Emerging Applications and theories (pp. 
159–176). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-3616-3.ch012
Marquezan, C. C., Metzger, A., Pohl, K., Engen, 
V., Boniface, M., Phillips, S. C., & Zlatev, Z. 
(2013). Adaptive future internet applications: 
Opportunities and challenges for adaptive web 
services technology. In G. Ortiz & J. Cubo (Eds.), 
Adaptive web services for modular and reusable 
software development: Tactics and solutions (pp. 
333–353). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2089-6.ch014
Marshall, P. J. (2012). Cloud computing: Next 
generation education. In L. Chao (Ed.), Cloud 
computing for teaching and learning: Strategies 
for design and implementation (pp. 180–185). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0957-0.ch012
Martinez-Ortiz, A. (2012). Open cloud technolo-
gies. In L. Vaquero, J. Cáceres, & J. Hierro (Eds.), 
Open source cloud computing systems: Practices 
and paradigms (pp. 1–17). Hershey, PA: Informa-
tion Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
0098-0.ch001
Massonet, P., Michot, A., Naqvi, S., Villari, M., 
& Latanicki, J. (2013). Securing the external in-
terfaces of a federated infrastructure cloud. In IT 
policy and ethics: Concepts, methodologies, tools, 
and applications (pp. 1876–1903). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2919-6.ch082
306

Related References
Mavrogeorgi, N., Gogouvitis, S. V., Voulodimos, 
A., & Alexandrou, V. (2013). SLA management in 
storage clouds. In D. Kyriazis, A. Voulodimos, S. 
Gogouvitis, & T. Varvarigou (Eds.), Data inten-
sive storage services for cloud environments (pp. 
72–93). Hershey, PA: Business Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-3934-8.ch006
Mehta, H. K. (2013). Cloud selection for e-busi-
ness a parameter based solution. In K. Tarnay, S. 
Imre, & L. Xu (Eds.), Research and development 
in e-business through service-oriented solutions 
(pp. 199–207). Hershey, PA: Business Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4181-5.ch009
Mehta, H. K., & Gupta, E. (2013). Economy based 
resource allocation in IaaS cloud. International 
Journal of Cloud Applications and Computing, 
3(2), 1–11. doi:10.4018/ijcac.2013040101
Miah, S. J. (2012). Cloud-based intelligent DSS 
design for emergency professionals. In S. Ali, 
N. Abbadeni, & M. Batouche (Eds.), Multidisci-
plinary computational intelligence techniques: 
Applications in business, engineering, and 
medicine (pp. 47–60). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
1830-5.ch004
Miah, S. J. (2013). Cloud-based intelligent DSS 
design for emergency professionals. In Data 
mining: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and 
applications (pp. 991–1003). Hershey, PA: In-
formation Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2455-9.ch050
Mikkilineni, R. (2012). Architectural resiliency 
in distributed computing. International Journal 
of Grid and High Performance Computing, 4(4), 
37–51. doi:10.4018/jghpc.2012100103
Millham, R. (2012). Software asset re-use: Migra-
tion of data-intensive legacy system to the cloud 
computing paradigm. In H. Yang & X. Liu (Eds.), 
Software reuse in the emerging cloud computing 
era (pp. 1–27). Hershey, PA: Information Sci-
ence Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0897-9.
ch001
Mircea, M. (2011). Building the agile enterprise 
with service-oriented architecture, business 
process management and decision management. 
International Journal of E-Entrepreneurship 
and Innovation, 2(4), 32–48. doi:10.4018/
jeei.2011100103
Modares, H., Lloret, J., Moravejosharieh, A., 
& Salleh, R. (2014). Security in mobile cloud 
computing. In J. Rodrigues, K. Lin, & J. Lloret 
(Eds.), Mobile networks and cloud computing 
convergence for progressive services and appli-
cations (pp. 79–91). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
4781-7.ch005
Moedjiono, S., & Mas’at, A. (2012). Cloud com-
puting implementation strategy for information 
dissemination on meteorology, climatology, air 
quality, and geophysics (MKKuG). Journal of 
Information Technology Research, 5(3), 71–84. 
doi:10.4018/jitr.2012070104
Moiny, J. (2012). Cloud based social network sites: 
Under whose control? In A. Dudley, J. Braman, 
& G. Vincenti (Eds.), Investigating cyber law and 
cyber ethics: Issues, impacts and practices (pp. 
147–219). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-132-0.ch009
307

Related References
Moreno, I. S., & Xu, J. (2011). Energy-efficiency 
in cloud computing environments: Towards en-
ergy savings without performance degradation. 
International Journal of Cloud Applications 
and Computing, 1(1), 17–33. doi:10.4018/ij-
cac.2011010102
Moreno, I. S., & Xu, J. (2013). Energy-efficiency 
in cloud computing environments: Towards energy 
savings without performance degradation. In S. 
Aljawarneh (Ed.), Cloud computing advancements 
in design, implementation, and technologies (pp. 
18–36). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1879-4.ch002
Muñoz, A., Maña, A., & González, J. (2013). 
Dynamic security properties monitoring archi-
tecture for cloud computing. In D. Rosado, D. 
Mellado, E. Fernandez-Medina, & M. Piattini 
(Eds.), Security engineering for cloud computing: 
Approaches and tools (pp. 1–18). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2125-1.ch001
Mvelase, P., Dlodlo, N., Williams, Q., & Adigun, 
M. O. (2011). Custom-made cloud enterprise 
architecture for small medium and micro enter-
prises. International Journal of Cloud Applica-
tions and Computing, 1(3), 52–63. doi:10.4018/
ijcac.2011070105
Mvelase, P., Dlodlo, N., Williams, Q., & Adigun, 
M. O. (2012). Custom-made cloud enterprise ar-
chitecture for small medium and micro enterprises. 
In Grid and cloud computing: Concepts, meth-
odologies, tools and applications (pp. 589–601). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0879-5.ch303
Mvelase, P., Dlodlo, N., Williams, Q., & Adigun, 
M. O. (2013). Custom-made cloud enterprise 
architecture for small medium and micro enter-
prises. In S. Aljawarneh (Ed.), Cloud computing 
advancements in design, implementation, and 
technologies (pp. 205–217). Hershey, PA: Infor-
mation Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-1879-4.ch015
Naeem, M. A., Dobbie, G., & Weber, G. (2014). 
Big data management in the context of real-time 
data warehousing. In W. Hu & N. Kaabouch 
(Eds.), Big data management, technologies, and 
applications (pp. 150–176). Hershey, PA: Infor-
mation Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-4699-5.ch007
Ofosu, W. K., & Saliah-Hassane, H. (2013). Cloud 
computing in the education environment for de-
veloping nations. International Journal of Inter-
disciplinary Telecommunications and Networking, 
5(3), 54–62. doi:10.4018/jitn.2013070106
Oliveros, E., Cucinotta, T., Phillips, S. C., Yang, 
X., Middleton, S., & Voith, T. (2012). Monitor-
ing and metering in the cloud. In D. Kyriazis, T. 
Varvarigou, & K. Konstanteli (Eds.), Achieving 
real-time in distributed computing: From grids to 
clouds (pp. 94–114). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-
827-9.ch006
Orton, I., Alva, A., & Endicott-Popovsky, B. 
(2013). Legal process and requirements for cloud 
forensic investigations. In K. Ruan (Ed.), Cyber-
crime and cloud forensics: Applications for inves-
tigation processes (pp. 186–229). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2662-1.ch008
308

Related References
Pakhira, A., & Andras, P. (2013). Leveraging the 
cloud for large-scale software testing – A case 
study: Google Chrome on Amazon. In S. Til-
ley & T. Parveen (Eds.), Software testing in the 
cloud: Perspectives on an emerging discipline (pp. 
252–279). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2536-5.ch012
Pal, K., & Karakostas, B. (2013). The use of cloud 
computing in shipping logistics. In D. Graham, 
I. Manikas, & D. Folinas (Eds.), E-logistics and 
e-supply chain management: Applications for 
evolving business (pp. 104–124). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-3914-0.ch006
Pal, S. (2013). Cloud computing: Security con-
cerns and issues. In A. Bento & A. Aggarwal 
(Eds.), Cloud computing service and deployment 
models: Layers and management (pp. 191–207). 
Hershey, PA: Business Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2187-9.ch010
Pal, S. (2013). Storage security and technical 
challenges of cloud computing. In D. Kyriazis, 
A. Voulodimos, S. Gogouvitis, & T. Varvarigou 
(Eds.), Data intensive storage services for cloud 
environments (pp. 225–240). Hershey, PA: Busi-
ness Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
3934-8.ch014
Palanivel, K., & Kuppuswami, S. (2014). A cloud-
oriented reference architecture to digital library 
systems. In S. Dhamdhere (Ed.), Cloud computing 
and virtualization technologies in libraries (pp. 
230–254). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4631-5.ch014
Paletta, M. (2012). Intelligent clouds: By means 
of using multi-agent systems environments. In L. 
Chao (Ed.), Cloud computing for teaching and 
learning: Strategies for design and implementa-
tion (pp. 254–279). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
0957-0.ch017
Pallot, M., Le Marc, C., Richir, S., Schmidt, C., 
& Mathieu, J. (2012). Innovation gaming: An 
immersive experience environment enabling co-
creation. In M. Cruz-Cunha (Ed.), Handbook of 
research on serious games as educational, busi-
ness and research tools (pp. 1–24). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-0149-9.ch001
Pankowska, M. (2011). Information technology 
resources virtualization for sustainable develop-
ment. International Journal of Applied Logistics, 
2(2), 35–48. doi:10.4018/jal.2011040103
Pankowska, M. (2013). Information technology 
resources virtualization for sustainable develop-
ment. In Z. Luo (Ed.), Technological solutions for 
modern logistics and supply chain management 
(pp. 248–262). Hershey, PA: Business Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2773-4.ch016
Parappallil, J. J., Zarvic, N., & Thomas, O. (2012). 
A context and content reflection on business-IT 
alignment research. International Journal of IT/
Business Alignment and Governance, 3(2), 21–37. 
doi:10.4018/jitbag.2012070102
Parashar, V., Vishwakarma, M. L., & Parashar, R. 
(2014). A new framework for building academic 
library through cloud computing. In S. Dhamdhere 
(Ed.), Cloud computing and virtualization tech-
nologies in libraries (pp. 107–123). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-4631-5.ch007
Pendyala, V. S., & Holliday, J. (2012). Cloud as 
a computer. In X. Liu & Y. Li (Eds.), Advanced 
design approaches to emerging software sys-
tems: Principles, methodologies and tools (pp. 
241–249). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-735-7.ch011
Petruch, K., Tamm, G., & Stantchev, V. (2012). De-
riving in-depth knowledge from IT-performance 
data simulations. International Journal of Knowl-
edge Society Research, 3(2), 13–29. doi:10.4018/
jksr.2012040102
309

Related References
Philipson, G. (2011). A framework for green com-
puting. International Journal of Green Computing, 
2(1), 12–26. doi:10.4018/jgc.2011010102
Philipson, G. (2013). A framework for green 
computing. In K. Ganesh & S. Anbuudayasankar 
(Eds.), International and interdisciplinary studies 
in green computing (pp. 12–26). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2646-1.ch002
Phythian, M. (2013). The ‘cloud’ of unknowing 
– What a government cloud may and may not 
offer: A practitioner perspective. International 
Journal of Technoethics, 4(1), 1–10. doi:10.4018/
jte.2013010101
Pym, D., & Sadler, M. (2012). Information stew-
ardship in cloud computing. In Grid and cloud 
computing: Concepts, methodologies, tools and 
applications (pp. 185–202). Hershey, PA: Infor-
mation Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-0879-5.ch109
Pym, D., & Sadler, M. (2012). Information stew-
ardship in cloud computing. In S. Galup (Ed.), 
Technological applications and advancements 
in service science, management, and engineering 
(pp. 52–69). Hershey, PA: Business Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1583-0.ch004
Qiu, J., Ekanayake, J., Gunarathne, T., Choi, J. 
Y., Bae, S., & Ruan, Y. … Tang, H. (2013). Data 
intensive computing for bioinformatics. In Bio-
informatics: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and 
applications (pp. 287-321). Hershey, PA: Medical 
Information Science Reference. doi::10.4018/978-
1-4666-3604-0.ch016
Rabaey, M. (2012). A public economics approach 
to enabling enterprise architecture with the 
government cloud in Belgium. In P. Saha (Ed.), 
Enterprise architecture for connected e-govern-
ment: Practices and innovations (pp. 467–493). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1824-4.ch020
Rabaey, M. (2013). A complex adaptive system 
thinking approach of government e-procurement 
in a cloud computing environment. In P. Ordóñez 
de Pablos, J. Lovelle, J. Gayo, & R. Tennyson 
(Eds.), E-procurement management for success-
ful electronic government systems (pp. 193–219). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2119-0.ch013
Rabaey, M. (2013). Holistic investment framework 
for cloud computing: A management-philosophi-
cal approach based on complex adaptive systems. 
In A. Bento & A. Aggarwal (Eds.), Cloud com-
puting service and deployment models: Layers 
and management (pp. 94–122). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2187-9.ch005
Rak, M., Ficco, M., Luna, J., Ghani, H., Suri, N., 
Panica, S., & Petcu, D. (2012). Security issues 
in cloud federations. In M. Villari, I. Brandic, 
& F. Tusa (Eds.), Achieving federated and self-
manageable cloud infrastructures: Theory and 
practice (pp. 176–194). Hershey, PA: Business 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
1631-8.ch010
Ramanathan, R. (2013). Extending service-
driven architectural approaches to the cloud. In 
R. Ramanathan & K. Raja (Eds.), Service-driven 
approaches to architecture and enterprise inte-
gration (pp. 334–359). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
4193-8.ch013
Ramírez, M., Gutiérrez, A., Monguet, J. M., & 
Muñoz, C. (2012). An internet cost model, as-
signment of costs based on actual network use. 
International Journal of Web Portals, 4(4), 19–34. 
doi:10.4018/jwp.2012100102
310

Related References
Rashid, A., Wang, W. Y., & Tan, F. B. (2013). 
Value co-creation in cloud services. In A. Lin, J. 
Foster, & P. Scifleet (Eds.), Consumer information 
systems and relationship management: Design, 
implementation, and use (pp. 74–91). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-4082-5.ch005
Ratten, V. (2012). Cloud computing services: 
Theoretical foundations of ethical and entrepre-
neurial adoption behaviour. International Journal 
of Cloud Applications and Computing, 2(2), 
48–58. doi:10.4018/ijcac.2012040105
Ratten, V. (2013). Exploring behaviors and 
perceptions affecting the adoption of cloud com-
puting. International Journal of Innovation in 
the Digital Economy, 4(3), 51–68. doi:10.4018/
jide.2013070104
Ravi, V. (2012). Cloud computing paradigm for 
Indian education sector. International Journal of 
Cloud Applications and Computing, 2(2), 41–47. 
doi:10.4018/ijcac.2012040104
Rawat, A., Kapoor, P., & Sushil, R. (2014). Ap-
plication of cloud computing in library informa-
tion service sector. In S. Dhamdhere (Ed.), Cloud 
computing and virtualization technologies in 
libraries (pp. 77–89). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
4631-5.ch005
Reich, C., Hübner, S., & Kuijs, H. (2012). Cloud 
computing for on-demand virtual desktops and 
labs. In L. Chao (Ed.), Cloud computing for 
teaching and learning: strategies for design and 
implementation (pp. 111–125). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-0957-0.ch008
Rice, R. W. (2013). Testing in the cloud: Balanc-
ing the value and risks of cloud computing. In S. 
Tilley & T. Parveen (Eds.), Software testing in the 
cloud: Perspectives on an emerging discipline (pp. 
404–416). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2536-5.ch019
Ruan, K. (2013). Designing a forensic-enabling 
cloud ecosystem. In K. Ruan (Ed.), Cybercrime 
and cloud forensics: Applications for investigation 
processes (pp. 331–344). Hershey, PA: Informa-
tion Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2662-1.ch014
Sabetzadeh, F., & Tsui, E. (2011). Delivering 
knowledge services in the cloud. International 
Journal of Knowledge and Systems Science, 2(4), 
14–20. doi:10.4018/jkss.2011100102
Sabetzadeh, F., & Tsui, E. (2013). Delivering 
knowledge services in the cloud. In G. Yang 
(Ed.), Multidisciplinary studies in knowledge 
and systems science (pp. 247–254). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-3998-0.ch017
Saedi, A., & Iahad, N. A. (2013). Future research on 
cloud computing adoption by small and medium-
sized enterprises: A critical analysis of relevant 
theories. International Journal of Actor-Network 
Theory and Technological Innovation, 5(2), 1–16. 
doi:10.4018/jantti.2013040101
Saha, D., & Sridhar, V. (2011). Emerging areas of 
research in business data communications. Inter-
national Journal of Business Data Communica-
tions and Networking, 7(4), 52–59. doi:10.4018/
IJBDCN.2011100104
Saha, D., & Sridhar, V. (2013). Platform on 
platform (PoP) model for meta-networking: A 
new paradigm for networks of the future. Inter-
national Journal of Business Data Communica-
tions and Networking, 9(1), 1–10. doi:10.4018/
jbdcn.2013010101
Sahlin, J. P. (2013). Cloud computing: Past, 
present, and future. In X. Yang & L. Liu (Eds.), 
Principles, methodologies, and service-oriented 
approaches for cloud computing (pp. 19–50). 
Hershey, PA: Business Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2854-0.ch002
311

Related References
Salama, M., & Shawish, A. (2012). Libraries: From 
the classical to cloud-based era. International 
Journal of Digital Library Systems, 3(3), 14–32. 
doi::10.4018/jdls.2012070102
Sánchez, C. M., Molina, D., Vozmediano, R. M., 
Montero, R. S., & Llorente, I. M. (2012). On the 
use of the hybrid cloud computing paradigm. In M. 
Villari, I. Brandic, & F. Tusa (Eds.), Achieving fed-
erated and self-manageable cloud infrastructures: 
Theory and practice (pp. 196–218). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-1631-8.ch011
Sasikala, P. (2011). Architectural strategies for 
green cloud computing: Environments, infra-
structure and resources. International Journal of 
Cloud Applications and Computing, 1(4), 1–24. 
doi:10.4018/ijcac.2011100101
Sasikala, P. (2011). Cloud computing in higher 
education: Opportunities and issues. International 
Journal of Cloud Applications and Computing, 
1(2), 1–13. doi:10.4018/ijcac.2011040101
Sasikala, P. (2011). Cloud computing towards 
technological convergence. International Jour-
nal of Cloud Applications and Computing, 1(4), 
44–59. doi:10.4018/ijcac.2011100104
Sasikala, P. (2012). Cloud computing and e-
governance: Advances, opportunities and chal-
lenges. International Journal of Cloud Applica-
tions and Computing, 2(4), 32–52. doi:10.4018/
ijcac.2012100103
Sasikala, P. (2012). Cloud computing in higher 
education: Opportunities and issues. In Grid and 
cloud computing: Concepts, methodologies, tools 
and applications (pp. 1672–1685). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-0879-5.ch709
Sasikala, P. (2012). Cloud computing towards 
technological convergence. In Grid and cloud 
computing: Concepts, methodologies, tools and 
applications (pp. 1576–1592). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-0879-5.ch703
Sasikala, P. (2013). Architectural strategies for 
green cloud computing: Environments, infrastruc-
ture and resources. In S. Aljawarneh (Ed.), Cloud 
computing advancements in design, implementa-
tion, and technologies (pp. 218–242). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-1879-4.ch016
Sasikala, P. (2013). Cloud computing in higher 
education: Opportunities and issues. In S. Al-
jawarneh (Ed.), Cloud computing advancements 
in design, implementation, and technologies (pp. 
83–96). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1879-4.ch006
Sasikala, P. (2013). Cloud computing towards 
technological convergence. In S. Aljawarneh 
(Ed.), Cloud computing advancements in design, 
implementation, and technologies (pp. 263–279). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1879-4.ch019
Sasikala, P. (2013). New media cloud comput-
ing: Opportunities and challenges. International 
Journal of Cloud Applications and Computing, 
3(2), 61–72. doi:10.4018/ijcac.2013040106
Schrödl, H., & Wind, S. (2013). Requirements 
engineering for cloud application development. 
In A. Bento & A. Aggarwal (Eds.), Cloud com-
puting service and deployment models: Layers 
and management (pp. 137–150). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2187-9.ch007
312

Related References
Sclater, N. (2012). Legal and contractual issues of 
cloud computing for educational institutions. In 
L. Chao (Ed.), Cloud computing for teaching and 
learning: Strategies for design and implementa-
tion (pp. 186–199). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
0957-0.ch013
Sen, J. (2014). Security and privacy issues in cloud 
computing. In A. Ruiz-Martinez, R. Marin-Lopez, 
& F. Pereniguez-Garcia (Eds.), Architectures 
and protocols for secure information technology 
infrastructures (pp. 1–45). Hershey, PA: Informa-
tion Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
4514-1.ch001
Shah, B. (2013). Cloud environment controls 
assessment framework. In IT policy and ethics: 
Concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications 
(pp. 1822–1847). Hershey, PA: Information Sci-
ence Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2919-6.
ch080
Shah, B. (2013). Cloud environment controls as-
sessment framework. In S. Tilley & T. Parveen 
(Eds.), Software testing in the cloud: Perspec-
tives on an emerging discipline (pp. 28–53). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2536-5.ch002
Shang, X., Zhang, R., & Chen, Y. (2012). In-
ternet of things (IoT) service architecture and 
its application in e-commerce. Journal of Elec-
tronic Commerce in Organizations, 10(3), 44–55. 
doi:10.4018/jeco.2012070104
Shankararaman, V., & Kit, L. E. (2013). Integrating 
the cloud scenarios and solutions. In A. Bento & 
A. Aggarwal (Eds.), Cloud computing service and 
deployment models: Layers and management (pp. 
173–189). Hershey, PA: Business Science Refer-
ence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2187-9.ch009
Sharma, A., & Maurer, F. (2013). A roadmap for 
software engineering for the cloud: Results of a 
systematic review. In X. Wang, N. Ali, I. Ramos, & 
R. Vidgen (Eds.), Agile and lean service-oriented 
development: Foundations, theory, and practice 
(pp. 48–63). Hershey, PA: Information Science 
Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2503-7.
ch003
Sharma, A., & Maurer, F. (2014). A roadmap 
for software engineering for the cloud: Results 
of a systematic review. In Software design and 
development: Concepts, methodologies, tools, and 
applications (pp. 1–16). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
4301-7.ch001
Sharma, S. C., & Bagoria, H. (2014). Libraries 
and cloud computing models: A changing para-
digm. In S. Dhamdhere (Ed.), Cloud computing 
and virtualization technologies in libraries (pp. 
124–149). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4631-5.ch008
Shawish, A., & Salama, M. (2013). Cloud com-
puting in academia, governments, and industry. In 
X. Yang & L. Liu (Eds.), Principles, methodolo-
gies, and service-oriented approaches for cloud 
computing (pp. 71–114). Hershey, PA: Business 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2854-0.ch004
Shebanow, A., Perez, R., & Howard, C. (2012). 
The effect of firewall testing types on cloud se-
curity policies. International Journal of Strategic 
Information Technology and Applications, 3(3), 
60–68. doi:10.4018/jsita.2012070105
Sheikhalishahi, M., Devare, M., Grandinetti, L., & 
Incutti, M. C. (2012). A complementary approach 
to grid and cloud distributed computing paradigms. 
In Grid and cloud computing: Concepts, method-
ologies, tools and applications (pp. 1929–1942). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0879-5.ch811
313

Related References
Sheikhalishahi, M., Devare, M., Grandinetti, L., & 
Incutti, M. C. (2012). A complementary approach 
to grid and cloud distributed computing paradigms. 
In N. Preve (Ed.), Computational and data grids: 
Principles, applications and design (pp. 31–44). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-61350-113-9.ch002
Shen, Y., Li, Y., Wu, L., Liu, S., & Wen, Q. 
(2014). Cloud computing overview. In Y. Shen, 
Y. Li, L. Wu, S. Liu, & Q. Wen (Eds.), Enabling 
the new era of cloud computing: Data security, 
transfer, and management (pp. 1–24). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-4801-2.ch001
Shen, Y., Li, Y., Wu, L., Liu, S., & Wen, Q. 
(2014). Main components of cloud computing. In 
Y. Shen, Y. Li, L. Wu, S. Liu, & Q. Wen (Eds.), 
Enabling the new era of cloud computing: Data 
security, transfer, and management (pp. 25–50). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4801-2.ch002
Shen, Y., Yang, J., & Keskin, T. (2014). Impact 
of cultural differences on the cloud computing 
ecosystems in the USA and China. In Y. Shen, Y. 
Li, L. Wu, S. Liu, & Q. Wen (Eds.), Enabling the 
new era of cloud computing: Data security, trans-
fer, and management (pp. 269–283). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-4801-2.ch014
Shetty, S., & Rawat, D. B. (2013). Cloud com-
puting based cognitive radio networking. In N. 
Meghanathan & Y. Reddy (Eds.), Cognitive radio 
technology applications for wireless and mobile 
ad hoc networks (pp. 153–164). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-4221-8.ch008
Shi, Z., & Beard, C. (2014). QoS in the mobile 
cloud computing environment. In J. Rodrigues, K. 
Lin, & J. Lloret (Eds.), Mobile networks and cloud 
computing convergence for progressive services 
and applications (pp. 200–217). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-4781-7.ch011
Shuster, L. (2013). Enterprise integration: Chal-
lenges and solution architecture. In R. Ramanathan 
& K. Raja (Eds.), Service-driven approaches 
to architecture and enterprise integration (pp. 
43–66). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4193-8.ch002
Siahos, Y., Papanagiotou, I., Georgopoulos, A., 
Tsamis, F., & Papaioannou, I. (2012). An archi-
tecture paradigm for providing cloud services 
in school labs based on open source software to 
enhance ICT in education. International Jour-
nal of Cyber Ethics in Education, 2(1), 44–57. 
doi:10.4018/ijcee.2012010105
Simon, E., & Estublier, J. (2013). Model driven 
integration of heterogeneous software artifacts in 
service oriented computing. In A. Ionita, M. Litoiu, 
& G. Lewis (Eds.), Migrating legacy applications: 
Challenges in service oriented architecture and 
cloud computing environments (pp. 332–360). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2488-7.ch014
Singh, J., & Kumar, V. (2013). Compliance and 
regulatory standards for cloud computing. In R. 
Khurana & R. Aggarwal (Eds.), Interdisciplinary 
perspectives on business convergence, computing, 
and legality (pp. 54–64). Hershey, PA: Business 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
4209-6.ch006
314

Related References
Singh, V. V. (2012). Software development us-
ing service syndication based on API handshake 
approach between cloud-based and SOA-based 
reusable services. In H. Yang & X. Liu (Eds.), 
Software reuse in the emerging cloud computing 
era (pp. 136–157). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
0897-9.ch006
Smeitink, M., & Spruit, M. (2013). Maturity for 
sustainability in IT: Introducing the MITS. In-
ternational Journal of Information Technologies 
and Systems Approach, 6(1), 39–56. doi:10.4018/
jitsa.2013010103
Smith, P. A., & Cockburn, T. (2013). Socio-digital 
technologies. In Dynamic leadership models for 
global business: Enhancing digitally connected 
environments (pp. 142–168). Hershey, PA: Busi-
ness Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2836-6.ch006
Sneed, H. M. (2013). Testing web services in the 
cloud. In S. Tilley & T. Parveen (Eds.), Software 
testing in the cloud: Perspectives on an emerging 
discipline (pp. 136–173). Hershey, PA: Informa-
tion Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2536-5.ch007
Solomon, B., Ionescu, D., Gadea, C., & Litoiu, M. 
(2013). Geographically distributed cloud-based 
collaborative application. In A. Ionita, M. Litoiu, 
& G. Lewis (Eds.), Migrating legacy applications: 
Challenges in service oriented architecture and 
cloud computing environments (pp. 248–274). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2488-7.ch011
Song, W., & Xiao, Z. (2013). An infrastructure-
as-a-service cloud: On-demand resource provi-
sioning. In X. Yang & L. Liu (Eds.), Principles, 
methodologies, and service-oriented approaches 
for cloud computing (pp. 302–324). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-2854-0.ch013
Sood, S. K. (2013). A value based dynamic re-
source provisioning model in cloud. International 
Journal of Cloud Applications and Computing, 
3(1), 1–12. doi:10.4018/ijcac.2013010101
Sotiriadis, S., Bessis, N., & Antonopoulos, N. 
(2012). Exploring inter-cloud load balancing by 
utilizing historical service submission records. 
International Journal of Distributed Systems 
and Technologies, 3(3), 72–81. doi:10.4018/
jdst.2012070106
Soyata, T., Ba, H., Heinzelman, W., Kwon, M., & 
Shi, J. (2014). Accelerating mobile-cloud com-
puting: A survey. In H. Mouftah & B. Kantarci 
(Eds.), Communication infrastructures for cloud 
computing (pp. 175–197). Hershey, PA: Informa-
tion Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
4522-6.ch008
Spyridopoulos, T., & Katos, V. (2011). Re-
quirements for a forensically ready cloud stor-
age service. International Journal of Digital 
Crime and Forensics, 3(3), 19–36. doi:10.4018/
jdcf.2011070102
Spyridopoulos, T., & Katos, V. (2013). Data recov-
ery strategies for cloud environments. In K. Ruan 
(Ed.), Cybercrime and cloud forensics: Applica-
tions for investigation processes (pp. 251–265). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2662-1.ch010
Srinivasa, K. G., S, H. R. C., H, M. K. S., & 
Venkatesh, N. (2012). MeghaOS: A framework 
for scalable, interoperable cloud based operating 
system. International Journal of Cloud Applica-
tions and Computing, 2(1), 53–70. doi:10.4018/
ijcac.2012010104
Stantchev, V., & Stantcheva, L. (2012). Extend-
ing traditional IT-governance knowledge towards 
SOA and cloud governance. International Journal 
of Knowledge Society Research, 3(2), 30–43. 
doi:10.4018/jksr.2012040103
315

Related References
Stantchev, V., & Tamm, G. (2012). Reducing 
information asymmetry in cloud marketplaces. 
International Journal of Human Capital and In-
formation Technology Professionals, 3(4), 1–10. 
doi:10.4018/jhcitp.2012100101
Steinbuß, S., & Weißenberg, N. (2013). Service 
design and process design for the logistics mall 
cloud. In X. Yang & L. Liu (Eds.), Principles, 
methodologies, and service-oriented approaches 
for cloud computing (pp. 186–206). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-2854-0.ch008
Stender, J., Berlin, M., & Reinefeld, A. (2013). 
XtreemFS: A file system for the cloud. In D. Kyria-
zis, A. Voulodimos, S. Gogouvitis, & T. Varvari-
gou (Eds.), Data intensive storage services for 
cloud environments (pp. 267–285). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-3934-8.ch016
Sticklen, D. J., & Issa, T. (2011). An initial exami-
nation of free and proprietary software-selection in 
organizations. International Journal of Web Por-
tals, 3(4), 27–43. doi:10.4018/jwp.2011100103
Sun, Y., White, J., Gray, J., & Gokhale, A. (2012). 
Model-driven automated error recovery in cloud 
computing. In Grid and cloud computing: Con-
cepts, methodologies, tools and applications (pp. 
680–700). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0879-5.ch308
Sun, Z., Yang, Y., Zhou, Y., & Cruickshank, H. 
(2014). Agent-based resource management for 
mobile cloud. In J. Rodrigues, K. Lin, & J. Lloret 
(Eds.), Mobile networks and cloud computing 
convergence for progressive services and appli-
cations (pp. 118–134). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
4781-7.ch007
Sutherland, S. (2013). Convergence of interoper-
ability of cloud computing, service oriented archi-
tecture and enterprise architecture. International 
Journal of E-Entrepreneurship and Innovation, 
4(1), 43–51. doi:10.4018/jeei.2013010104
Takabi, H., & Joshi, J. B. (2013). Policy manage-
ment in cloud: Challenges and approaches. In D. 
Rosado, D. Mellado, E. Fernandez-Medina, & 
M. Piattini (Eds.), Security engineering for cloud 
computing: Approaches and tools (pp. 191–211). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2125-1.ch010
Takabi, H., & Joshi, J. B. (2013). Policy manage-
ment in cloud: Challenges and approaches. In IT 
policy and ethics: Concepts, methodologies, tools, 
and applications (pp. 814–834). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2919-6.ch037
Takabi, H., Joshi, J. B., & Ahn, G. (2013). Secu-
rity and privacy in cloud computing: Towards a 
comprehensive framework. In X. Yang & L. Liu 
(Eds.), Principles, methodologies, and service-
oriented approaches for cloud computing (pp. 
164–184). Hershey, PA: Business Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2854-0.ch007
Takabi, H., Zargar, S. T., & Joshi, J. B. (2014). 
Mobile cloud computing and its security and 
privacy challenges. In D. Rawat, B. Bista, & G. 
Yan (Eds.), Security, privacy, trust, and resource 
management in mobile and wireless communica-
tions (pp. 384–407). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
4691-9.ch016
316

Related References
Teixeira, C., Pinto, J. S., Ferreira, F., Oliveira, A., 
Teixeira, A., & Pereira, C. (2013). Cloud comput-
ing enhanced service development architecture for 
the living usability lab. In R. Martinho, R. Rijo, 
M. Cruz-Cunha, & J. Varajão (Eds.), Information 
systems and technologies for enhancing health and 
social care (pp. 33–53). Hershey, PA: Medical 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-3667-5.ch003
Thimm, H. (2012). Cloud-based collaborative 
decision making: Design considerations and archi-
tecture of the GRUPO-MOD system. International 
Journal of Decision Support System Technology, 
4(4), 39–59. doi:10.4018/jdsst.2012100103
Thomas, P. (2012). Harnessing the potential of 
cloud computing to transform higher education. 
In L. Chao (Ed.), Cloud computing for teaching 
and learning: Strategies for design and implemen-
tation (pp. 147–158). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
0957-0.ch010
T.M. K., & Gopalakrishnan, S. (2014). Green 
economic and secure libraries on cloud. In S. 
Dhamdhere (Ed.), Cloud computing and virtu-
alization technologies in libraries (pp. 297-315). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi::10.4018/978-1-4666-4631-5.ch017
Toka, A., Aivazidou, E., Antoniou, A., & Arvani-
topoulos-Darginis, K. (2013). Cloud computing in 
supply chain management: An overview. In D. Gra-
ham, I. Manikas, & D. Folinas (Eds.), E-logistics 
and e-supply chain management: Applications for 
evolving business (pp. 218–231). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-3914-0.ch012
Torrealba, S. M., Morales, P. M., Campos, J. M., 
& Meza, S. M. (2013). A software tool to sup-
port risks analysis about what should or should 
not go to the cloud. In D. Rosado, D. Mellado, E. 
Fernandez-Medina, & M. Piattini (Eds.), Security 
engineering for cloud computing: Approaches 
and tools (pp. 72–96). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2125-1.ch005
Trivedi, M., & Suthar, V. (2013). Cloud computing: 
A feasible platform for ICT enabled health science 
libraries in India. International Journal of User-
Driven Healthcare, 3(2), 69–77. doi:10.4018/
ijudh.2013040108
Truong, H., Pham, T., Thoai, N., & Dustdar, S. 
(2012). Cloud computing for education and re-
search in developing countries. In L. Chao (Ed.), 
Cloud computing for teaching and learning: 
Strategies for design and implementation (pp. 
64–80). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0957-0.ch005
Tsirmpas, C., Giokas, K., Iliopoulou, D., & 
Koutsouris, D. (2012). Magnetic resonance imag-
ing and magnetic resonance spectroscopy cloud 
computing framework. International Journal of 
Reliable and Quality E-Healthcare, 1(4), 1–12. 
doi:10.4018/ijrqeh.2012100101
Turner, H., White, J., Reed, J., Galindo, J., Porter, 
A., Marathe, M., & Gokhale, A. et al. (2013). 
Building a cloud-based mobile application test-
bed. In IT policy and ethics: Concepts, method-
ologies, tools, and applications (pp. 879–899). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2919-6.ch040
317

Related References
Turner, H., White, J., Reed, J., Galindo, J., Porter, 
A., Marathe, M., & Gokhale, A. et al. (2013). 
Building a cloud-based mobile application test-
bed. In S. Tilley & T. Parveen (Eds.), Software 
testing in the cloud: Perspectives on an emerging 
discipline (pp. 382–403). Hershey, PA: Informa-
tion Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2536-5.ch018
Tusa, F., Paone, M., & Villari, M. (2012). 
CLEVER: A cloud middleware beyond the 
federation. In M. Villari, I. Brandic, & F. Tusa 
(Eds.), Achieving federated and self-manageable 
cloud infrastructures: Theory and practice (pp. 
219–241). Hershey, PA: Business Science Refer-
ence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1631-8.ch012
Udoh, E. (2012). Technology acceptance model 
applied to the adoption of grid and cloud tech-
nology. International Journal of Grid and High 
Performance Computing, 4(1), 1–20. doi:10.4018/
jghpc.2012010101
Vannoy, S. A. (2011). A structured content analytic 
assessment of business services advertisements in 
the cloud-based web services marketplace. Inter-
national Journal of Dependable and Trustworthy 
Information Systems, 2(1), 18–49. doi:10.4018/
jdtis.2011010102
Vaquero, L. M., Cáceres, J., & Morán, D. (2011). 
The challenge of service level scalability for the 
cloud. International Journal of Cloud Applica-
tions and Computing, 1(1), 34–44. doi:10.4018/
ijcac.2011010103
Vaquero, L. M., Cáceres, J., & Morán, D. (2013). 
The challenge of service level scalability for the 
cloud. In S. Aljawarneh (Ed.), Cloud computing 
advancements in design, implementation, and 
technologies (pp. 37–48). Hershey, PA: Informa-
tion Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
1879-4.ch003
Venkatraman, R., Venkatraman, S., & Asaith-
ambi, S. P. (2013). A practical cloud services 
implementation framework for e-businesses. In 
K. Tarnay, S. Imre, & L. Xu (Eds.), Research 
and development in e-business through service-
oriented solutions (pp. 167–198). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-4181-5.ch008
Venkatraman, S. (2013). Software engineering 
research gaps in the cloud. Journal of Information 
Technology Research, 6(1), 1–19. doi:10.4018/
jitr.2013010101
Vijaykumar, S., Rajkarthick, K. S., & Priya, J. 
(2012). Innovative business opportunities and 
smart business management techniques from green 
cloud TPS. International Journal of Asian Busi-
ness and Information Management, 3(4), 62–72. 
doi:10.4018/jabim.2012100107
Wang, C., Lam, K. T., & Kui Ma, R. K. (2012). 
A computation migration approach to elasticity 
of cloud computing. In J. Abawajy, M. Pathan, 
M. Rahman, A. Pathan, & M. Deris (Eds.), Net-
work and traffic engineering in emerging dis-
tributed computing applications (pp. 145–178). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-1888-6.ch007
Wang, D., & Wu, J. (2014). Carrier-grade dis-
tributed cloud computing: Demands, challenges, 
designs, and future perspectives. In H. Mouftah & 
B. Kantarci (Eds.), Communication infrastructures 
for cloud computing (pp. 264–281). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-4522-6.ch012
318

Related References
Wang, H., & Philips, D. (2012). Implement virtual 
programming lab with cloud computing for web-
based distance education. In L. Chao (Ed.), Cloud 
computing for teaching and learning: Strategies 
for design and implementation (pp. 95–110). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0957-0.ch007
Warneke, D. (2013). Ad-hoc parallel data process-
ing on pay-as-you-go clouds with nephele. In A. 
Loo (Ed.), Distributed computing innovations for 
business, engineering, and science (pp. 191–218). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2533-4.ch010
Wei, Y., & Blake, M. B. (2013). Adaptive web 
services monitoring in cloud environments. In-
ternational Journal of Web Portals, 5(1), 15–27. 
doi:10.4018/jwp.2013010102
White, S. C., Sedigh, S., & Hurson, A. R. (2013). 
Security concepts for cloud computing. In X. Yang 
& L. Liu (Eds.), Principles, methodologies, and 
service-oriented approaches for cloud computing 
(pp. 116–142). Hershey, PA: Business Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2854-0.ch005
Williams, A. J. (2013). The role of emerging 
technologies in developing and sustaining diverse 
suppliers in competitive markets. In Enterprise re-
source planning: Concepts, methodologies, tools, 
and applications (pp. 1550–1560). Hershey, PA: 
Business Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-4153-2.ch082
Williams, A. J. (2013). The role of emerging 
technologies in developing and sustaining diverse 
suppliers in competitive markets. In J. Lewis, A. 
Green, & D. Surry (Eds.), Technology as a tool 
for diversity leadership: Implementation and 
future implications (pp. 95–105). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2668-3.ch007
Wilson, L., Goh, T. T., & Wang, W. Y. (2012). Big 
data management challenges in a meteorological 
organisation. International Journal of E-Adoption, 
4(2), 1–14. doi:10.4018/jea.2012040101
Wu, R., Ahn, G., & Hu, H. (2012). Towards 
HIPAA-compliant healthcare systems in cloud 
computing. International Journal of Computa-
tional Models and Algorithms in Medicine, 3(2), 
1–22. doi:10.4018/jcmam.2012040101
Xiao, J., Wang, M., Wang, L., & Zhu, X. (2013). 
Design and implementation of C-iLearning: A 
cloud-based intelligent learning system. Interna-
tional Journal of Distance Education Technolo-
gies, 11(3), 79–97. doi:10.4018/jdet.2013070106
Xing, R., Wang, Z., & Peterson, R. L. (2011). 
Redefining the information technology in the 
21st century. International Journal of Strategic 
Information Technology and Applications, 2(1), 
1–10. doi:10.4018/jsita.2011010101
Xu, L., Huang, D., Tsai, W., & Atkinson, R. K. 
(2012). V-lab: A mobile, cloud-based virtual labo-
ratory platform for hands-on networking courses. 
International Journal of Cyber Behavior, Psy-
chology and Learning, 2(3), 73–85. doi:10.4018/
ijcbpl.2012070106
Xu, Y., & Mao, S. (2014). Mobile cloud media: 
State of the art and outlook. In J. Rodrigues, K. 
Lin, & J. Lloret (Eds.), Mobile networks and cloud 
computing convergence for progressive services 
and applications (pp. 18–38). Hershey, PA: In-
formation Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-4781-7.ch002
Xu, Z., Yan, B., & Zou, Y. (2013). Beyond ha-
doop: Recent directions in data computing for 
internet services. In S. Aljawarneh (Ed.), Cloud 
computing advancements in design, implementa-
tion, and technologies (pp. 49–66). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-1879-4.ch004
319

Related References
Yan, Z. (2014). Trust management in mobile 
cloud computing. In Trust management in mobile 
environments: Autonomic and usable models (pp. 
54–93). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4765-7.ch004
Yang, D. X. (2012). QoS-oriented service comput-
ing: Bringing SOA into cloud environment. In X. 
Liu & Y. Li (Eds.), Advanced design approaches 
to emerging software systems: Principles, meth-
odologies and tools (pp. 274–296). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-60960-735-7.ch013
Yang, H., Huff, S. L., & Tate, M. (2013). Manag-
ing the cloud for information systems agility. In 
A. Bento & A. Aggarwal (Eds.), Cloud comput-
ing service and deployment models: Layers and 
management (pp. 70–93). Hershey, PA: Business 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2187-9.ch004
Yang, M., Kuo, C., & Yeh, Y. (2011). Dynamic 
rightsizing with quality-controlled algorithms in 
virtualization environments. International Journal 
of Grid and High Performance Computing, 3(2), 
29–43. doi:10.4018/jghpc.2011040103
Yang, X. (2012). QoS-oriented service computing: 
Bringing SOA into cloud environment. In Grid and 
cloud computing: Concepts, methodologies, tools 
and applications (pp. 1621–1643). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-0879-5.ch706
Yang, Y., Chen, J., & Hu, H. (2012). The conver-
gence between cloud computing and cable TV. 
International Journal of Technology Diffusion, 
3(2), 1–11. doi:10.4018/jtd.2012040101
Yassein, M. O., Khamayseh, Y. M., & Hatamleh, 
A. M. (2013). Intelligent randomize round robin 
for cloud computing. International Journal of 
Cloud Applications and Computing, 3(1), 27–33. 
doi:10.4018/ijcac.2013010103
Yau, S. S., An, H. G., & Buduru, A. B. (2012). 
An approach to data confidentiality protection 
in cloud environments. International Journal of 
Web Services Research, 9(3), 67–83. doi:10.4018/
jwsr.2012070104
Yu, W. D., Adiga, A. S., Rao, S., & Panakkel, M. 
J. (2012). A SOA based system development meth-
odology for cloud computing environment: Using 
uhealthcare as practice. International Journal of 
E-Health and Medical Communications, 3(4), 
42–63. doi:10.4018/jehmc.2012100104
Yu, W. D., & Bhagwat, R. (2011). Modeling 
emergency and telemedicine heath support sys-
tem: A service oriented architecture approach 
using cloud computing. International Journal of 
E-Health and Medical Communications, 2(3), 
63–88. doi::10.4018/jehmc.2011070104
Yu, W. D., & Bhagwat, R. (2013). Modeling 
emergency and telemedicine health support sys-
tem: A service oriented architecture approach 
using cloud computing. In J. Rodrigues (Ed.), 
Digital advances in medicine, e-health, and com-
munication technologies (pp. 187–213). Hershey, 
PA: Medical Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2794-9.ch011
Yuan, D., Lewandowski, C., & Zhong, J. (2012). 
Developing a private cloud based IP telephony 
laboratory and curriculum. In L. Chao (Ed.), Cloud 
computing for teaching and learning: Strategies 
for design and implementation (pp. 126–145). 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0957-0.ch009
Yuvaraj, M. (2014). Cloud libraries: Issues and 
challenges. In S. Dhamdhere (Ed.), Cloud comput-
ing and virtualization technologies in libraries (pp. 
316–338). Hershey, PA: Information Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4631-5.ch018
320

Related References
Zaman, M., Simmers, C. A., & Anandarajan, M. 
(2013). Using an ethical framework to examine 
linkages between “going green” in research 
practices and information and communication 
technologies. In B. Medlin (Ed.), Integrations 
of technology utilization and social dynamics 
in organizations (pp. 243–262). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-1948-7.ch015
Zapata, B. C., & Alemán, J. L. (2013). Security 
risks in cloud computing: An analysis of the main 
vulnerabilities. In D. Rosado, D. Mellado, E. 
Fernandez-Medina, & M. Piattini (Eds.), Security 
engineering for cloud computing: Approaches 
and tools (pp. 55–71). Hershey, PA: Information 
Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2125-1.ch004
Zapata, B. C., & Alemán, J. L. (2014). Security 
risks in cloud computing: An analysis of the 
main vulnerabilities. In Software design and 
development: Concepts, methodologies, tools, 
and applications (pp. 936–952). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-4301-7.ch045
Zardari, S., Faniyi, F., & Bahsoon, R. (2013). 
Using obstacles for systematically modeling, 
analysing, and mitigating risks in cloud adoption. 
In I. Mistrik, A. Tang, R. Bahsoon, & J. Stafford 
(Eds.), Aligning enterprise, system, and software 
architectures (pp. 275–296). Hershey, PA: Busi-
ness Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-
2199-2.ch014
Zech, P., Kalb, P., Felderer, M., & Breu, R. 
(2013). Threatening the cloud: Securing services 
and data by continuous, model-driven negative 
security testing. In S. Tilley & T. Parveen (Eds.), 
Software testing in the cloud: Perspectives on an 
emerging discipline (pp. 280–304). Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-2536-5.ch013
Zhang, F., Cao, J., Cai, H., & Wu, C. (2011). 
Provisioning virtual resources adaptively in elastic 
compute cloud platforms. International Journal of 
Web Services Research, 8(3), 54–69. doi:10.4018/
jwsr.2011070103
Zhang, G., Li, C., Xue, S., Liu, Y., Zhang, Y., 
& Xing, C. (2012). A new electronic commerce 
architecture in the cloud. Journal of Electronic 
Commerce in Organizations, 10(4), 42–56. 
doi:10.4018/jeco.2012100104
Zhang, J., Yao, J., Chen, S., & Levy, D. (2011). 
Facilitating biodefense research with mobile-cloud 
computing. International Journal of Systems 
and Service-Oriented Engineering, 2(3), 18–31. 
doi:10.4018/jssoe.2011070102
Zhang, J., Yao, J., Chen, S., & Levy, D. (2013). 
Facilitating biodefense research with mobile-
cloud computing. In D. Chiu (Ed.), Mobile and 
web innovations in systems and service-oriented 
engineering (pp. 318–332). Hershey, PA: Infor-
mation Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-2470-2.ch017
Zheng, S., Chen, F., Yang, H., & Li, J. (2013). 
An approach to evolving legacy software system 
into cloud computing environment. In X. Yang 
& L. Liu (Eds.), Principles, methodologies, and 
service-oriented approaches for cloud computing 
(pp. 207–229). Hershey, PA: Business Science Ref-
erence. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2854-0.ch009
Zhou, J., Athukorala, K., Gilman, E., Riekki, J., & 
Ylianttila, M. (2012). Cloud architecture for dy-
namic service composition. International Journal 
of Grid and High Performance Computing, 4(2), 
17–31. doi:10.4018/jghpc.2012040102
321

﻿
Compilation of References
﻿
Römer, U., & Schulze, R. (Eds.). (2010). Patterns, mean-
ingful units and specialized discourses. Philadephia. John 
Benjamins. doi:10.1075/bct.22
A Platform Computing Whitepaper (March 2010) ;
Adrains, P., & Zantinge, D. (1999). Data Mining. England: 
Addison Wesley Longman.
Adriansyah, A., van Dongen, B., & van der Aalst, W. 
(2010). Towards robust conformance checking. In M. 
Muehlen & J. Su (Eds.), Business Process Management 
Workshops (pp. 122–133). Berlin, Germany: Springer.
Afgan, E., Chapman, B., Jadan, M., Franke, V., & Taylor, 
J. (2012). Using cloud computing infrastructure with 
CloudBioLinux, CloudMan, and Galaxy. Current Pro-
tocols in Bioinformatics, 38, 11.9.1-11.9.20.
Aggarwal, C., & Han, J. (2013). A Survey of RFID Data 
Processing. In C. Aggarwal (Ed.), Managing and Mining 
Sensor Data (pp. 349–382). New York, NY: Springer US. 
doi:10.1007/978-1-4614-6309-2_11
Agostinho, C., Jardim-Goncalves, R., & Steiger-Garcao, 
A. (2011). Using neighboring domains towards setting 
the foundations for Enterprise Interoperability science. 
In Callaos, N. et al. (Eds.) International Symposium on 
Collaborative Enterprises in the Context of the 15th 
World-Multi-Conference on Systemic, Cybernetics and 
Informatics (pp. 258-264, vol. II). Winter Garden, FL: 
International Institute of Informatics and Systemics.
Ahn, H. J., & Lee, H. (2004). An agent-based dynamic 
information network for supply chain management. 
BT Technology Journal, 22(2), 18–27. doi:10.1023/
B:BTTJ.0000033467.83300.c0
Alberta Education. (2012). Bring your own device: A 
guide for schools. Retrieved April 2, 2014, from https://
education.alberta.ca/media/6749210/byod%20guide%20
revised%202012-09-05.pdf
Ali, S., Siegel, H. J., Maheswaran, M., & Hensgen, D. 
(2000). Task execution time modeling for heterogeneous 
computing systems. In Heterogeneous Computing Work-
shop, 2000. (HCW 2000) Proceedings. 9th, (pp. 185-199). 
IEEE. doi:10.1109/HCW.2000.843743
Aliei, M., Sazvar, A., & Ashrafi, B. (2012). Assessment of 
information technology effects on management of supply 
chain based on fuzzy logic in Iran tail industries. Interna-
tional Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 
63(1-4), 215–223. doi:10.1007/s00170-012-3900-2
Allen, J. H. Barnum, S. Ellison, S. R. et al., (2008). Soft-
ware Security Engineering: A Guide for Project Managers. 
Addison Wesley Professional.
Alshamaila, Y., Papagiannidis, S., & Li, F. (2013). 
Cloud computing adoption by SMEs in the north east 
of England: A multi-perspective framework. Journal of 
Enterprise Information Management, 26(3), 250–275. 
doi:10.1108/17410391311325225
Anderson, E., .... (2014, May 13). Forecast Analysis: Pub-
lic Cloud Services, Worldwide, 1Q14 Update. Document 
ref. G00261940. Stamford, CT: Gartner. Retrieved May 
31, 2014 from https://www.gartner.com/doc/2738817/
forecast-analysis-public-cloud-services
Andres, C. (1999). Great Web Architecture. Foster City, 
CA: IDG Books World Wide.
322

Compilation of References
Anschuetz, L., Keirnan, T., & Rosenbaum, S. (2002). 
Combining Usability Research with Documentation 
Development for Improved User Support. In Proceed-
ings of the SIGDOC. Toronto, Canada: The Association 
of Computing Machinery.
Aoyama, T., & Sakai, H. (2011). Inter-cloud comput-
ing. Business & Information Systems Engineering, 3(3), 
173–177. doi:10.1007/s12599-011-0158-4
Arlbjørn, J. S., de Haas, H., & Munksgaard, K. B. (2013). 
Exploring supply chain innovation. Logistics Research, 
3(1), 3–18. doi:10.1007/s12159-010-0044-3
Armbrust, M., Stoica, I., Zaharia, M., Fox, A., Griffith, 
R., Joseph, A. D., & Rabkin, A. et al. (2010). A View of 
Cloud Computing. Communications of the ACM, 53(4), 
50–58. doi:10.1145/1721654.1721672
Arutyunov, V. V. (2012). Cloud computing: Its history 
of development, modern state, and future considerations. 
Scientific and Technical Information Processing, 39(3), 
173–178. doi:10.3103/S0147688212030082
Assuncao, M., Costanzo, A., & Buyya, R. (2009). Evalu-
ating the cost-benefit of using cloud computing to extend 
the capacity of clusters. Paper presented at the 18th ACM 
International Symposium on High Performance Distrib-
uted Computing, Garching, Germany.
Athanasopoulos, G., Tsalgatidou, A., & Pantazoglou, M. 
(2006). Interoperability among Heterogeneous Services, 
in International Conference on Services Computing (pp. 
174-181). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Computer Society Press.
Attwood, T. K., & Parry, S. D. J. (2005). Introduction to 
Bioinformatics; New Delhi: Pearson Education. Singa-
pore: Private Limited.
Auewarkul, P. (2008). The Past and Present Threat of Avian 
Influenza in Thailand. In E. M. Yichenlu & B. Roberts 
(Eds.), Emerging Infections in Asia (pp. 31–34). New 
York, NY: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-0-387-75722-3_2
Auramo, J., Kauremaa, J., & Tanskanen, K. (2005). Ben-
efits of it in supply chain management: An explorative 
study of progressive companies. International Journal of 
Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 35(2), 
82–100. doi:10.1108/09600030510590282
Autry, C. W., Grawe, S. J., Daugherty, P., & Richey, R. 
G. (2010). The effects of technological turbulence and 
breadth on supply chain technology acceptance and adop-
tion. Journal of Operations Management, 28(6), 522–536. 
doi:10.1016/j.jom.2010.03.001
Aziz, S., Shamim, M., Aziz, M. F., & Avais, P. (2013). 
The impact of texting/SMS language on academic writ-
ing of students - What do we need to panic about? Elixir 
Linguistics and Translation, 55, 12884–12890.
Babat, M., & Chauhan, M. (2011). A Tale of Migration 
to Cloud Computing for Sharing Experiences and Obser-
vations. Workshop on Software Engineering for Cloud 
Computing. Honolulu, HI: IEEE.
Bagozzi, R. P. (2007). The legacy of the technology accep-
tance model and a proposal for a paradigm shift. Journal 
of the Association for Information Systems, 8(4), 244–254.
Bajgoric, N. (2014). Business continuity management: 
A systemic framework for implementation. Kybernetes, 
43(2), 156–177. doi:10.1108/K-11-2013-0252
Bakshi, K. (2009). Cisco Cloud Computing: Data Center 
Strategy, Architecture, and Solutions (1st edition, pp. 1-16). 
white paper for U.S public sector, Cisco System, Inc. 
Bandopadhyay, D. (2013, December). A Technology Lead 
Business Model for Pharma: Collaborative Patient Care. 
CSI Communications Journal, 37(9), 12–26.
Bardhan, I. R., Demirkan, H., Kannan, P. K., Kauffman, 
R., & Sougstad, R. (2010). An interdisciplinary perspective 
on IT services management and service science. Jour-
nal of Management Information Systems, 26(4), 13–64. 
doi:10.2753/MIS0742-1222260402
Barham, P. T., Dragovic, B., Fraser, K., Hand, S., Harris, 
T. L., Ho, A., . . . Warfield, A. (2003). Xen and the art 
of virtualization. In Symposium on Operating System 
Principles (SOSP). 19, 20, 28
Barney, J. B. (2012). Purchasing, supply chain man-
agement and sustained competitive advantage: The 
relevance of resource-based theory. Journal of Supply 
Chain Management, 18(2), 3–6. doi:10.1111/j.1745-
493X.2012.03265.x
323

Compilation of References
Bayo-Moriones, A., & Lera-Lopez, F. (2007). A firm-
level analysis of determinants of ICT adoption in Spain. 
Technovation, 27(6-7), 352–366. doi:10.1016/j.technova-
tion.2007.01.003
Becker, S., & Mottay, F. (2001, January). A global perspec-
tive on website usability. IEEE Software, 18(1), 61–54. 
doi:10.1109/52.903167
Behrend, T. S., Wiebe, E. N., London, J. E., & Johnson, E. 
C. (2010). Cloud computing adoption and usage in com-
munity colleges. Behaviour & Information Technology, 
30(2), 231–240. doi:10.1080/0144929X.2010.489118
Beloglazov, A., Abawajy, J., & Buyya, R. (2012). Energy-
aware resource allocation heuristics for efficient manage-
ment of data centers for cloud computing. Future Genera-
tion Computer Systems, 28(5), 755–768. doi:10.1016/j.
future.2011.04.017
Ben Arfa Rabai, L., Jouini, M., Ben Aissa, A., & Mili, 
A. (2013). A cybersecurity model in cloud computing 
environments, Journal of King Saud University: Computer 
and Information Sciences.
Bergeron, B. (2003). Bioinformatics Computing; New 
Delhi: Pearson Education. Singapore: Private Limited.
Berre, A. et al.. (2007). The ATHENA Interoperability 
Framework. In R. Gonçalves, J. Müller, K. Mertins, 
& M. Zelm (Eds.), Enterprise Interoperability II (pp. 
569–580). London, UK: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-1-
84628-858-6_62
Bhandarkar, M. (2013, April). Big Data Systems: Past, 
Present & (Possibly) Future. CSI Communications Jour-
nal, 37(1), 7–16.
Binz, T., Breiter, G., Leyman, F., & Spatzier, T. (2012). 
Portable cloud services using Tosca. IEEE Internet Com-
puting, 16(3), 80–85. doi:10.1109/MIC.2012.43
Bist, M., Wariya, M., & Agarwal, A. (2013). Comparing 
delta, open stack and Xen Cloud Platforms: A survey on 
open source IaaS. In KalraB.GargD.PrasadR.KumarS. 
(Eds.) 3rd International Advance Computing Conference 
(pp. 96-100). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Computer Society 
Press. doi:10.1109/IAdCC.2013.6514201
Bksi, J., Galambos, G., & Kellerer, H. (2000). A 5/4 linear 
time bin packing algorithm. Journal of Computer and Sys-
tem Sciences, 60(1), 145–160. doi:10.1006/jcss.1999.1667
Black, P. E. (2005). Greedy algorithm. Dictionary of 
Algorithms and Data Structures.
Blair, G., Kon, F., Cirne, W., Milojicic, D., Ramakrishnan, 
R., Reed, D., & Silva, D. (2011). Perspectives on cloud 
computing: Interviews with five leading scientists from 
the cloud community. Journal of Internet Services and 
Applications, 2(1), 3–9. doi:10.1007/s13174-011-0023-1
Boehm, B. Huang, L. Jain, A., & Madachy, R. (2004). 
The Nature of Information System Dependability: A Stake-
holder/Value Approach. USC-CSSE Technical Report. 
Bowersox, D. J., Closs, D. J., & Stank, T. P. (2000). Ten 
mega-trends that will revolutionize supply chain logistics. 
Journal of Business Logistics, 21(2), 1–15.
Bowersox, D. J., & Daugherty, P. J. (1995). Logistics 
paradigms: The impact of information technology. Journal 
of Business Logistics, 16(1), 65–80.
Boyer, K. K., & Hult, G. T. M. (2005). Extending the 
supply chain: Integrating operations and marketing in the 
online grocery industry. Journal of Operations Manage-
ment, 23(6), 642–661. doi:10.1016/j.jom.2005.01.003
Boylan, M. (2004). Questioning (in) school mathematics: 
Lifeworlds and ecologies of practice (Unpublished doc-
toral dissertation). Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield.
Brah, S. A., & Lim, H. Y. (2006). The effects of 
technology and TQM on the performance of logistics 
companies. International Journal of Physical Dis-
tribution & Logistics Management, 36(3), 192–209. 
doi:10.1108/09600030610661796
Brandenburg, M., & Seuring, S. (2011). Impacts of sup-
ply chain management on company value: Benchmarking 
companies from the fast moving consumer goods industry. 
Logistics Research, 3(4), 233–248. doi:10.1007/s12159-
011-0056-7
Brewer, P. C., & Speh, T. W. (2000). Using the balanced 
scorecard to measure supply chain performance. Journal 
of Business Logistics, 21(1), 75–95.
324

Compilation of References
Brooke, C. (2009). Lingua fracta: Towards a rhetoric of 
new media. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Brynjolfsson, E., Hofmann, P., & Jordan, J. (2010). 
Cloud computing and electricity: Beyond the util-
ity model. Communications of the ACM, 53(5), 32–34. 
doi:10.1145/1735223.1735234
Bu, Y., & Wang, L. (2011). Leveraging cloud computing to 
enhance supply chain management in automobile industry. 
Paper presented at the 2011 International Conference on 
Business Computing and Global Informatization (BCGIn 
2011), Shanghai, China.
Buck, A. (2012). Examining digital literacy practices on 
social network sites. Research in the Teaching of English, 
47(1), 9–38. http://www.ncte.org/library/NCTEFiles/
Resources/Journals/RTE/0471-aug2012/RTE0471Ex-
amining.pdf Retrieved April 2, 2014
Buecker, A., Guézo, L., Lodewijkx, K., Moss, H., Skapi-
netz, K., & Waidner, M. (2009). Cloud Computing: guide 
de la sécurité Recommandations d’IBM pour la sécurisa-
tion de l’informatique en nuage.
Burkhardt, J., Henn, H., Hepper, S., Rintdorff, K., & 
Schack, T. (2005). Pervasive Computing New Delhi: 
Pearson Education. Singapore: Private Limited.
Burman, E., & Parker, I. (1993). Introduction - discourse 
analysis: The turn to the text. In E. Burman & I. Parker 
(Eds.), Discourse analytic research: Repertoires and 
readings of texts in action (pp. 1–13). London: Routledge.
Burmeister, B. (2014, February27). Benefits (and risks) 
of the mobile organisation. Finweek, 3, 7.
Butrico, M., Silva, D., & Youseff, L. (2008). Toward a 
unified ontology of cloud computing.Grid Computing 
Environments Workshop. Austin, TX: IEEE.
Buyya, R., & Abawajy, A. B. (2010). Energy efficient 
management of data center resources for cloud computing: 
A vision, architectural elements, and open challenges. In 
2010 International Conference on Parallel and Distributed 
Processing Techniques and Applications. PDPTA.
Buyya, R., Beloglazov, A., & Abawajy, J. (2010). Energy-
efficient management of data center resources for cloud 
computing: A vision, architectural elements, and open 
challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv: 1006.0308.
Buyya, R., Broberg, J., & Goscinski, A. M. (2010). Cloud 
computing: Principles and paradigms (volume 87).
Buyya, R., Chee Shin, Y., & Venugopal, S. (2008). High 
performance computing and communications. Paper 
presented at the 10th IEEE International Conference, 
Dalian, China.
Buyya, R., Ranjan, R., & Calheiros, R. N. (2009). Modeling 
and simulation of scalable Cloud computing environments 
and the CloudSim toolkit: Challenges and opportunities. In 
High Performance Computing & Simulation, June 2009. 
HPCS’09. International Conference on (pp. 1-11). IEEE.
Buyya, R., & Sukumar, K. (2011, May). Platforms for 
Building and Deploying Applications for Cloud Comput-
ing. CSI Communications Journal, 35(2), 6–11.
Buyya, R., Vecchiola, C., & Selvi, T. S. (2013). Mastering 
Cloud Computing. New Delhi: McGraw Hill Education. 
India: Private Limited.
Buyya, R., Yeo, C. S., Venugopal, S., Broberg, J., & Bran-
dic, I. (2009). Cloud computing and emerging IT platforms: 
Vision, hype, and reality for delivering computing as the 
5th utility. Future Generation Computer Systems, 25(6), 
599–616. doi:10.1016/j.future.2008.12.001
Calheiros, R. N., Buyya, R., & De Rose, C. A. (2009). 
A heuristic for mapping virtual machines and links in 
emulation testbeds. In International Conference on Par-
allel Processing, 2009 (pp. 518-525). ICPP’09. IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/ICPP.2009.7
Calheiros, R. N., Ranjan, R., Beloglazov, A., De Rose, C. 
A. F., & Buyya, R. (2011). CloudSim: A toolkit for model-
ing and simulation of cloud computing environments and 
evaluation of resource provisioning algorithms. Software, 
Practice & Experience, 41(1), 23–50. doi:10.1002/spe.995
Camarinha-Matos, L., Afsarmanesh, H., Garita, C., & Lima, 
C. (1999). Hierarchical Coordination in Virtual Enterprise 
Infrastructures. Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, 
26(3/4), 267–287. doi:10.1023/A:1008137110347
Cardosa, M., Korupolu, M. R., & Singh, A. (2009). Shares 
and utilities based power consolidation in virtualized server 
environments. In IFIP/IEEE International Symposium on 
Integrated Network Management, 2009 (pp. 327-334). 
IM’ 09. IEEE. doi:10.1109/INM.2009.5188832
325

Compilation of References
Cardosa, M., Singh, A., Pucha, H., & Chandra, A. (2011), 
Exploiting spatiotemporal tradeoffs for energy-aware 
mapreduce in the cloud.InProceedings of the 2011 IEEE 
4th International Conference on Cloud Computing, 
CLOUD ’11 (pages 251–258). Washington, DC, USA. 
IEEE Computer Society. doi:10.1109/CLOUD.2011.68
Carlin, S., & Curran, K. (2011). Cloud computing secu-
rity. International Journal of Ambient Computing and 
Intelligence, 3(1), 14–19. doi:10.4018/jaci.2011010102
Carr, N. (2004). Does IT matter?: information technology 
and the corrosion of competitive advantage. Boston, MA: 
Harvard Business Press.
Carroll, M., Kotze, P., & van der Merwe, A. (2010). 
Securing virtual and cloud environments. In I. Ivanov, 
M. van Sinderen, & B. Shishkov (Eds.), Cloud comput-
ing and services science (pp. 73–90). Berlin, Germany: 
Springer-Verlag.
Carvalho, H., Azevedo, S., & Cruz-Machado, V. (2012). 
Agile and resilient approaches to supply chain manage-
ment: Influence on performance and competitiveness. 
Logistics Research, 4(1-2), 49–62. doi:10.1007/s12159-
012-0064-2
Carvalho, V. R., & Cohen, W. W. (2007) Preventing 
Information Leaks in Email.Proceedings of the SIAM 
International Conference on Data Mining, Minneapolis.
Casey, G., Cegielski, L., Jones-Farmer, A., Wu, Y., 
& Hazen, B. T. (2012). Adoption of cloud comput-
ing technologies in supply chains. International 
Journal of Logistics Management, 23(2), 184–211. 
doi:10.1108/09574091211265350
Castro, C. M. C., & Chala, P. A. (2013). Undertaking 
the act of writing as a situated social practice: Going 
beyond the linguistic and the textual. Colombian Applied 
Linguistics Journal, 15(1), 25–42. doi:10.14483/udistrital.
jour.calj.2013.1.a02
Chaisiri, S., Lee, B.-S., & Niyato, D. (2009), Optimal 
virtual machine placement across multiple cloud providers, 
In Services Computing Conference, 2009. APSCC 2009. 
IEEE Asia Pacific, (pp. 103–110).
Chaka, C. (2012). Mobiles for sustainable learning envi-
ronments: Mobile phones and MXit with a South African 
school context. Journal for Community Communication 
and Information Impact, 17, 161–182.
Chaka, C. (2013). Virtualization and cloud computing: 
Business models in the virtual cloud. In A. W. Loo (Ed.), 
Distributed computing innovations for business, engineer-
ing, and science (pp. 176–190). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2533-4.ch009
Chaka, C. (2013). Digitization and consumerization of 
identity, culture, and power among Gen Mobinets in 
South Africa. In R. Luppicini (Ed.), Handbook of research 
on technoself: Identity in a technological society (pp. 
77–96). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-2211-1.ch022
Chaka, C. (2014). Facebook’s cloud value chain for higher 
education. Infosys Labs Briefings, 11(4), 84–89.
Chaka, C. (2014). Social media as technologies for 
asynchronous formal writing and synchronous paragraph 
writing in the South African higher education context. In 
V. Benson & S. Morgan (Eds.), Cutting-edge technologies 
and social media use in higher education (pp. 213–241). 
Hershey, PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-5174-
6.ch009
Chaka, C., & Ngesi, N. (2010). Mobile writing: Using 
SMSes to write short paragraphs in English. In R. Guy 
(Ed.), Mobile learning: Pilot projects and initiatives 
(pp. 185–233). Santa Rosa, California: Informing Sci-
ence Press.
Chandler, D. (2007). Semiotics: the basics. New York, 
NY: Routledge.
Chandra, A. H., & Ghosh, S. K. (2006). Image Interpre-
tation, Remote sensing and Geographical Information 
System. New Delhi: Narosa Publishing House.
Chang, H. H., Hung, C. J., Wong, K. H., & Lee, C. H. 
(2013). Using the balanced scorecard on supply chain 
integration performance: A case study of service busi-
nesses. Service Business, 7(4), 539–561. doi:10.1007/
s11628-012-0175-5
326

Compilation of References
Chedid, W., Yu, C., & Lee, B. (2005). Power analysis and 
optimization techniques for energy efficient computer sys-
tems. Advances in Computers, 63, 129–164. doi:10.1016/
S0065-2458(04)63004-X
Chen, Y., Paxson, V., & Katz, R. H. (2010). What’s new 
about cloud computing security? Technical Report UCB/
EECS-2010-5, Electrical Engineering and Computer Sci-
ences, University of California at Berkeley.
Chen, D. (2006). Enterprise interoperability framework. 
In MissikoffM.De NicolaA.D’AntonioF. (Eds.) Open In-
terop Workshop on Enterprise Modelling and Ontologies 
for Interoperability. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Chen, D., Doumeingts, G., & Vernadat, F. (2008). Ar-
chitectures for enterprise integration and interoperability: 
Past, present and future. Computers in Industry, 59(7), 
647–659. doi:10.1016/j.compind.2007.12.016
Chen, H. C., Violetta, M. A., & Yang, C. Y. (2013). Contract 
RBAC in cloud computing. The Journal of Supercomput-
ing, 66(2), 1111–1131. doi:10.1007/s11227-013-1017-5
Chen, H., & Li, S. (2010). SRC: A Service Registry on 
Cloud Providing Behavior-aware and QoS-aware Service 
Discovery. In International Conference on Service-
Oriented Computing and Applications. Perth, Australia: 
IEEE. doi:10.1109/SOCA.2010.5707179
Chen, K. Y., & Chang, M. L. (2013). User acceptance of 
“near field communication” mobile phone service: An 
investigation based on the unified theory of acceptance 
and use of technology model. Service Industries Journal, 
33(6), 609–623. doi:10.1080/02642069.2011.622369
Chen, M., Wu, Y., & Vasilakos, A. V. (2014). Advances in 
mobile cloud computing. Mobile Networks and Applica-
tions, 19(2), 131–132. doi:10.1007/s11036-014-0503-1
Chen, S. J., & Huang, E. (2007). A systematic approach for 
supply chain improvement using design structure matrix. 
Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 18(2), 285–299. 
doi:10.1007/s10845-007-0022-z
Chen, Y., Zhang, R., Li, H., Li, R., & Gao, Y. (2011). 
CALIS-based cloud library services platform model. AISS: 
Advances in Information Sciences and Service Sciences, 
3(6), 204–212. doi:10.4156/aiss.vol3.issue6.25
Cheston, R. W. (2012). BYOD & consumerization: Why the 
cloud is key to a viable implementation. Retrieved May 10, 
2014, from https://kapost-files-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/
uploads/direct/20130709-2006-19803-4221/BYOD-Con-
sumerization-White-Paper-Rich-Cheston-Aug-2012.pdf
Choate, P. (2005). Hot Property: The Stealing of Ideas 
in an Age of Globalization. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Choi, T. Y., Dooley, K. J., & Rungtusanatham, M. (2001). 
Supply networks and complex adaptive systems: Control 
versus emergence. Journal of Operations Management, 
19(3), 351–366. doi:10.1016/S0272-6963(00)00068-1
Choi, T. Y., & Hong, Y. (2002). Unveiling the structure 
of supply networks: Case studies in Honda, Acura, and 
DaimlerChrysler. Journal of Operations Management, 
20(5), 469–493. doi:10.1016/S0272-6963(02)00025-6
Choi, T. Y., & Krause, D. R. (2006). The supply base 
and its complexity: Implications for transaction costs, 
risks, responsiveness, and innovation. Journal of Op-
erations Management, 24(5), 637–652. doi:10.1016/j.
jom.2005.07.002
Chonka, A., Xiang, Y., Zhou, W., & Bonti, A. (2011). 
Cloud security defence to protect cloud computing 
against HTTP-DOS and XML-DOS attacks. Journal of 
Network and Computer Applications, 34(4), 1097–1107. 
doi:10.1016/j.jnca.2010.06.004
Chorafas, D. N. (2011). Cloud Computing Strategies. Boca 
Raton: CRC Press Taylor & Francis Group.
Christodorescu, M., Sailer, R., Schales, D. L., Sgandurra, 
D., & Zamboni, D. (2009). Cloud security is not (just) 
virtualization security: a short paper. In Proceedings of 
the 2009 ACM Workshop on Cloud Computing Security 
(pp. 97–102). doi:10.1145/1655008.1655022
Christopher, M. (2012). Logistics and supply chain man-
agement: Creating value-adding networks. Dorchester, 
UK: Financial Times Prentice-Hall.
Christopher, M., & Lee, H. (2004). Mitigating supply chain 
risk through improved confidence. International Journal 
of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 34(5), 
388–396. doi:10.1108/09600030410545436
327

Compilation of References
Christopher, M., Lowson, R., & Peck, H. (2004). Creating 
agile supply chains in the fashion industry. International 
Journal of Retail & Distribution Management, 32(8), 
367–376. doi:10.1108/09590550410546188
Christopher, M., & Peck, H. (2004). Building the resilient 
supply chain. International Journal of Logistics Manage-
ment, 15(2), 1–13. doi:10.1108/09574090410700275
Chun, S. H., & Choi, B. S. (2014). Service models and 
pricing schemes for cloud computing. Cluster Computing, 
17(2), 529–535. doi:10.1007/s10586-013-0296-1
Clark, C., Fraser, K., Hand, S., Hansen, J. G., Jul, E., 
Limpach, C., ... Warfield, A. (2005). Live migration of 
virtual machines. In Proceedings of the 2nd Conference 
on Symposium on Networked Systems Design & Imple-
mentation - Volume 2, NSDI’05, (pp. 273–286). Berkeley, 
CA, USA. USENIX Association.
Closs, D. J., Goldsby, T. J., & Clinton, S. R. (1997). 
Information technology influences on world class 
logistics capability. International Journal of Physical 
Distribution & Logistics Management, 27(1), 4–17. 
doi:10.1108/09600039710162259
Closs, D. J., & Savitskie, K. (2003). Internal and external 
logistic information technology integration. Interna-
tional Journal of Logistics Management, 14(1), 63–76. 
doi:10.1108/09574090310806549
Closs, D. J., Speier, C., & Meacham, N. (2011). Sus-
tainability to support end-to-end value chains: The role 
of supply chain management. Journal of the Academy 
of Marketing Science, 39(1), 101–116. doi:10.1007/
s11747-010-0207-4
Cloud Security Alliance (CSA). (2010). Top threats to 
cloud computing v1.0. Retrieved on 3th June 2014, from 
https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/topthreats/csathreats.
v1.0.pdf
Cloud Security Alliance. (2009). Security Guidance for 
Critical Areas of Focus in Cloud Computing V2.1. 
Cloud Security Alliance. (2010). Top Threats to Cloud 
Computing V 1.0.
Cooke, N., & Gillam, L. (2011). Clowns, Crowds and 
Clouds: A Cross-Enterprise Approach to Detecting In-
formation Leakage without Leaking Information. In Z. 
Mahmood & R. Hill (Eds.), Cloud Computing for Enter-
prise Architectures. London: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-
1-4471-2236-4_16
Craig, T., & Ludlof, M. E. (2013). Privacy and Big Data. 
Mumbai: Shroff Publishers & Distributors Private Limited.
Creasy, R. (1981, September). The origin of the vm/370 
timesharing system. IBM Journal of Research and De-
velopment, 25(5), 483–490. doi:10.1147/rd.255.0483
Crotty, M. (1998). The foundations of social research: 
Meaning and perspective in the research process. Sage 
(Atlanta, Ga.).
Dabbebi, O., Badonnel, R., & Festor, O. (2014). Leverag-
ing countermeasures as a service for VoIP security in the 
cloud. International Journal of Network Management, 
24(1), 70–84. doi:10.1002/nem.1853
Davis, F. D., Bagozzi, R. P., & Warshaw, P. R. (1989). 
User acceptance of computer technology: A comparison 
of two theoretical models. Management Science, 35(8), 
982–1003. doi:10.1287/mnsc.35.8.982
Davis, K., & Patterson, D. (2012). Ethics of Big Data. 
Mumbai: Shroff Publishers & Distributors Private Limited.
Defee, C. C., & Stank, T. P. (2005). Applying the strategy-
structure-performance paradigm to the supply chain envi-
ronment. International Journal of Logistics Management, 
16(1), 28–50. doi:10.1108/09574090510617349
Defee, C. C., Stank, T. P., Esper, T. L., & Men-
tzer, J. T. (2009). The role of followers in supply 
chains. Journal of Business Logistics, 30(2), 65–84. 
doi:10.1002/j.2158-1592.2009.tb00112.x
Dell Inc. (2012). University enhances education through 
the cloud. Retrieved May 10, 2014, from http://i.
dell.com/sites/doccontent/corporate/case-studies/en/
Documents/2012-europea-madrid-10011452.pdf
328

Compilation of References
Demchenko, Y., Makkes, M., Strijkers, R., & de Laat, C. 
(2012). Intercloud Architecture for interoperability and 
integration. In 4th International Conference on Cloud 
Computing Technology and Science (pp.666-674). Pis-
cataway, NJ: IEEE Computer Society Press. doi:10.1109/
CloudCom.2012.6427607
Demirkan, H., Cheng, H. K., & Bandyopadhyay, S. (2010). 
Coordination strategies in an SaaS supply chain. Journal 
of Management Information Systems, 26(4), 119–143. 
doi:10.2753/MIS0742-1222260405
Dooley, B., (2010), Architectural Requirements Of The 
Hybrid Cloud, Information Management Online; 10.
Dooley, J., Spanoudakis, G., & Zisman, A. (2008). Pro-
active Runtime Service Discovery. In Proceedings of 
IEEE 2008 International Service Computing Conference. 
Honolulu, HI: IEEE.
Drake, M. J., & Schlachter, J. T. (2008). A virtue-ethics 
analysis of supply chain collaboration. Journal of Business 
Ethics, 82(4), 851–864. doi:10.1007/s10551-007-9597-8
DTMF. (2012). Open Virtualization Format Specification. 
Document Number: DSP0243, version 2.0.0. Portland, 
OR: Distributed Management Task Force, Inc. Retrieved 
May 30, 2014 from http://www.dmtf.org/sites/default/
files/standards/documents/DSP0243_2.0.0.pdf
DTMF. (2013). Cloud Infrastructure Management Inter-
face (CIMI) Model and REST Interface over HTTP Speci-
fication. Document Number: DSP0263, version 1.1.0. 
Portland, OR: Distributed Management Task Force, Inc. 
Retrieved May 30, 2014 from http://www.dmtf.org/sites/
default/files/standards/documents/DSP0263_1.1.0.pdf
DuBay, W. H. (2004). The principles of readability. Re-
trieved April 10, 2014, from http://en.copian.ca/library/
research/readab/readab.pdf
Dudin, E. B., & Smetanin, Y. G. (2011). A review of cloud 
computing. Scientific and Technical Information Process-
ing, 38(4), 280–284. doi:10.3103/S0147688211040083
Duranti, L. (2013). Records in the Cloud (RiC) User Survey 
Report, Records in the Cloud (RiC). Project University 
of British Columbia.
Durao, F., Carvalho, J. F. S., Fonseka, A., & Garcia, V. 
C. (2014). A systematic review on cloud computing. 
The Journal of Supercomputing, 68(3), 1321–1346. 
doi:10.1007/s11227-014-1089-x
Durowoju, O. A., Chan, H. K., & Wang, X. (2011). The 
impact of security and scalability of cloud service on sup-
ply chain performance. Journal of Electronic Commerce 
Research, 12(4), 243–256.
Dzida, W., Herda, S., & Itzfelt, W. (1978). User-perceived 
quality of interactive systems. IEEE Transactions on 
Software Engineering, SE-4(4), 270–276. doi:10.1109/
TSE.1978.231511
Eberhart, R. C., & Kennedy, J. (1995, October). A new 
optimizer using particle swarm theory. In Proceedings 
of the sixth international symposium on micro machine 
and human science (Vol. 1, pp. 39-43). doi:10.1109/
MHS.1995.494215
Edmonds, A., Metsch, T., & Papaspyrou, A. (2011). Open 
Cloud Computing Interface in Data Management-Related 
Setups. In S. Fiore & G. Aloisio (Eds.), Grid and Cloud 
Database Management (pp. 23–48). Berlin, Germany: 
Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-20045-8_2
Edwards, P., Peters, M., & Sharman, G. (2001). The 
effectiveness of information systems in supporting the 
extended supply chain. Journal of Business Logistics, 
22(1), 1–27. doi:10.1002/j.2158-1592.2001.tb00157.x
EIF. (2010). European Interoperability Framework 
(EIF) for European Public Services, Annex 2 to the 
Communication from the Commission to the European 
Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and 
Social Committee and the Committee of Regions ‘Towards 
interoperability for European public services. Retrieved 
May 30, 2014 from http://ec.europa.eu/isa/documents/
isa_annex_ii_eif_en.pdf
El Raheb, K. et al.. (2011). Paving the Way for Interop-
erability in Digital Libraries: The DL.org Project. In A. 
Katsirikou & C. Skiadas (Eds.), New Trends in Qualitive 
and Quantitative Methods in Libraries (pp. 345–352). 
Singapore: World Scientific Publishing Company.
329

Compilation of References
Ellinger, A. E., Ellinger, A. D., & Keller, S. B. (2002). 
Logistics managers’ learning environments and firm 
performance. Journal of Business Logistics, 23(1), 19–37. 
doi:10.1002/j.2158-1592.2002.tb00014.x
Ellram, L. M., & Cooper, M. C. (2014). Supply chain 
management: It’s all about the journey, not the destina-
tion. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 50(1), 8–20. 
doi:10.1111/jscm.12043
Emmanuel, G., & Sife, A. (2008). Challenges of managing 
information and communication technologies for educa-
tion: Experiences from Sokoine National Agricultural 
Library. International Journal of Education and Develop-
ment using ICT, 4(3).
ENISA. (2010). Cloud computing: Benefits, risks and 
recommendations for information security. Retrieved from 
http://www.enisa.europa.eu/act/rm/files/deliverables/
cloud-computingrisk-assessment
Enterprise Cloud Computing:Transforming IT; 13; 6.
Epstein, R. A., & Macvoy, S. P. (2011). Making A 
Scene in the Brain. In L. R. Harris & M. R. M. Jen-
kin (Eds.), Vision in 3D Environments (pp. 270–273). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/
CBO9780511736261.012
Erl, T. (2008). SOA: Principles of Service Design. Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall PTR.
Esper, T. L., Defee, C. C., & Mentzer, J. T. (2010). A 
framework of supply chain orientation. International 
Journal of Logistics Management, 21(2), 161–179. 
doi:10.1108/09574091011071906
Esposito, E., & Evangelista, P. (2014). Investigating vir-
tual enterprise models: Literature review and empirical 
findings. International Journal of Production Economics, 
148, 145–157. doi:10.1016/j.ijpe.2013.10.003
Euzenat, J., & Shvaiko, P. (2007). Ontology matching. 
Berlin, Germany: Springer.
Fadel, A., & Fayoumi, A. (2013). Cloud Resource Provi-
sioning and Bursting Approaches. In TakahashiS.LeeR. 
(Eds.) 14th ACIS International Conference on Software 
Engineering, Artificial Intelligence, Networking and 
Parallel/Distributed Computing (pp. 59-64). Piscataway, 
NJ: IEEE Computer Society Press.
Faisal, C. M. M., Azher, E. M. K., Ramzan, E. B., & Ma-
lik, M. S. A. (2011). Cloud computing: SMEs issues and 
UGI based integrated collaborative information system to 
support Pakistani textile SMEs. Interdisciplinary Journal 
of Contemporary Research in Business, 3(1), 564–573.
Fawcett, S., Wallin, C., Allred, C., Fawcett, A. M., & Mag-
nan, G. M. (2011). Information technology as an enabler 
of supply chain collaboration: A dynamic-capabilities 
perspective. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 47(1), 
38–59. doi:10.1111/j.1745-493X.2010.03213.x
Feller, E., Rilling, L., & Morin, C. (2011), Energy-aware 
ant colony based workload placement in clouds. In 12th 
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Grid Computing 
(GRID), 2011, (pp. 26–33).
Ferguson, D. F., & Hadar, E. (2011). Optimizing the IT 
business supply chain utilizing cloud computing. In Paper 
presented at the 8th International Conference & Expo on 
Emerging Technologies for a Smarter World (CEWIT 
2011), Hauppauge, NY.
Fernando, N., Loke, S., & Rahayu, W. (2013). Mobile 
cloud computing: A survey. Future Generation Computer 
Systems, 29(1), 84–106. doi:10.1016/j.future.2012.05.023
Fielding, R. (2000). Architectural Styles and the Design 
of Network-based Software Architectures. Doctoral dis-
sertation. University of California at Irvine, CA.
Firesmith, D. (2004). Specifying Reusable Security Re-
quirements. Journal of Object Technology, 3(1), 61–75. 
doi:10.5381/jot.2004.3.1.c6
Forman, H., & Lippert, S. K. (2005). Toward the 
development of an integrated model of technology 
internalization within the supply chain context. Interna-
tional Journal of Logistics Management, 16(1), 4–27. 
doi:10.1108/09574090510617330
Forslund, H. (2006). Performance gaps in the dyadic order 
fulfillment process. International Journal of Physical 
Distribution & Logistics Management, 36(8), 580–595. 
doi:10.1108/09600030610702871
Foster, I., Zhao, Y., Raicu, I., & Lu, S. (2008). Cloud 
computing and grid computing 360 degree compared.
InProceedings grid computing environments workshop: 
GCE 2008, 1-10. DOI doi:10.1109/GCE.2008.4738445
330

Compilation of References
Fox, R. (2009). Library in the clouds. OCLC Systems & Ser-
vices, 25(3), 156–161. doi:10.1108/10650750910982539
Franks, B. (2014). Taming the Big Data Tidal Wave. New 
Delhi: Wiley India Private Limited.
Franqueira, V. N. L., van Cleeff, A., van Eck, P., & 
Wieringa, R. (2010). External Insider Threat: A Real 
Security Challenge in Enterprise Value Webs. In Pro-
ceedings of Availability, Reliability, and Security (pp. 
446–453). ARES.
Furht, B., & Escalante, A. (2010). Handbook of cloud 
computing. New York: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-1-
4419-6524-0
Galbraith, J. R. (1974). Organization design: An informa-
tion processing view. Interfaces, 4(3), 28–36. doi:10.1287/
inte.4.3.28
Galloway, J. M., Smith, K. L., & Vrbsky, S. S. (2011). 
Power aware load balancing for cloud computing. In 
Proceedings of the World Congress on Engineering and 
Computer Science, 1 (pp. 19–21).
Galvin, D., & Sun, M. (2012). Avoiding the death zone: 
Choosing and running a library project in the cloud. Library 
Hi Tech, 30(3), 418–427. doi:10.1108/07378831211266564
Gamal, A., & Yskandar, H. (2004). Two phase algorithm 
for load balancing in heterogeneous distributed systems. 
In Proceedings of the 12th Euromicro Conference on 
Parallel, Distributed and Network-Based Processing, 
2004, (pp. 434-439). IEEE.
Ganguly, A., Nilchiani, R., & Farr, J. (2009). Evaluating 
agility in corporate enterprises. International Journal of 
Production Economics, 118(2), 410–423. doi:10.1016/j.
ijpe.2008.12.009
Gao, T., Rohm, A. J., Sultan, F., & Huang, S. (2012). 
Antecedents of consumer attitudes toward mobile market-
ing: A comparative study of youth markets in the United 
States and China. Thunderbird International Business 
Review, 54(2), 211–225. doi:10.1002/tie.21452
Gao, Y., Guan, H., Qi, Z., Hou, Y., & Liu, L. (2013). 
A multi-objective ant colony system algorithm for vir-
tual machine placement in cloud computing. Journal 
of Computer and System Sciences, 79(8), 1230–1242. 
doi:10.1016/j.jcss.2013.02.004
Gartner. (2013). Will Private Cloud Adoption Increase by 
2015? Gartner Research Note G00250893 (12 May 2013).
Géczy, P., Izumi, N., & Hasida, K. (2012). Cloudsourcing: 
Managing Cloud Adoption. Global Journal of Business 
Research, 6(2), 57–70.
Gendron, M. S. (2014). Business intelligence and 
the cloud. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 
doi:10.1002/9781118915240
Gentry, C. (2009) Fully homomorphic encryption using 
ideal lattices. In Proceedings of the Symposium on the 
Theory of Computing (STOC), 2009 (pp. 169-178).
George, D. R., & Dellasega, C. (2011). Use of social 
media in graduate-level medical humanities education: 
Two pilot studies from Penn State College of Medicine. 
Medical Teacher, 33(8), e429–e434. doi:10.3109/01421
59X.2011.586749 PMID:21774639
Gimenez, C., & Ventura, E. (2003). Supply chain man-
agement as a competitive advance in the Spanish grocery 
sector. International Journal of Logistics Management, 
14(1), 77–88. doi:10.1108/09574090310806558
Golden, B. (June 2010). How Cloud Computing Can 
Transform Business. Boston, MA, USA: Harvard Busi-
ness Review
Goldner, M. R. (2010). Winds of change: Libraries and 
cloud computing. BIBLIOTHEK Forschung und Praxis, 
34(3), 270–275. doi:10.1515/bfup.2010.042
Gonzalez, L. M. V., Rodero-Merino, L., Caceres, J., & 
Lindner, M. A. (2009). A break in the clouds: Towards 
a cloud definition. Computer Communication Review, 
39(1), 50–55.
Google Cloud Platform (GCP). (2014). Retrieved from 
https://cloud.google.com/
Gottschalk, I., & Kirn, S. (2013). Cloud computing as a 
tool for enhancing ecological goals? Business & Informa-
tion Systems Engineering, 5(5), 299–313. doi:10.1007/
s12599-013-0284-2
Gottschalk, P., & Solli-Sæther, H. (2008). Stages of 
e-government interoperability. Electronic Government. 
International Journal (Toronto, Ont.), 5(3), 310–320.
331

Compilation of References
Govil, D., & Prohit, N. (2011). Health Care Systems 
in India. In H. S. Rout (Ed.), Health Care Systems – A 
Global Survey (pp. 576–612). New Delhi: New Century 
Publications.
Gray, L., Kumar, A., & Li, H. (2008). Characterization 
of specpower_ssj2008 benchmark. In SPEC Benchmark 
Workshop.
Green, J. (2007). A guide to using qualitative research 
methodology. Retrieved May 30, 2014, from http://
fieldresearch.msf.org/msf/bitstream/10144/84230/1/
Qualitative%20research%20methodology.pdf
Grefen, P., Mehandjiev, N., Kouvas, G., Weichhart, 
G., & Eshuis, R. (2009). Dynamic business network 
process management in instant virtual enterprises. 
Computers in Industry, 60(2), 86–103. doi:10.1016/j.
compind.2008.06.006
Griffee, D. T. (2012). An introduction to second lan-
guage research methods: Design and data. Retrieved 
June 24, 2014, from http://www.tesl-ej.org/pdf/ej60/
sl_research_methods.pdf
Grigoriu, A. (2009). The Cloud Enterprise. Wokingham: 
BP Trends Publications United Kingdom.
Grman, J. & Ravas, R. (2011). Improved Implementation 
for Finding Text Similarities in Large Collections of Data. 
Notebook for Uncovering Plagiarism, Authorship, and 
Social Software Misuse (PAN) at CLEF.
Grobauer, B., Walloschek, T., & Stocker, E. (2011). Un-
derstanding Cloud Computing Vulnerabilities Security & 
Privacy, IEEE, 9(2), 50–57. doi:10.1109/MSP.2010.115
Grozev, N., & Buyya, R. (2014). Inter-Cloud architec-
tures and application brokering: Taxonomy and survey. 
Software, Practice & Experience, 44(3), 369–390. 
doi:10.1002/spe.2168
Guo, L., Zhao, S., Shen, S., & Jiang, C. (2012). Task 
scheduling optimization in cloud computing based on 
heuristic algorithm. Journal of Networks, 7(3), 547–553. 
doi:10.4304/jnw.7.3.547-553
Gustin, C. M., Daugherty, P. J., & Stank, T. P. (1995). The 
effects of information availability on logistics integration. 
Journal of Business Logistics, 16(1), 1–21.
Hagel, J., & Brown, J. S. (2010). Cloud Computing’s 
Stormy Future. Boston: Harvard Business Review M 
A USA.
Hameed, M. A., Counsell, S., & Swift, S. (2012). A con-
ceptual model for the process of IT innovation adoption 
in organizations. Journal of Engineering and Technology 
Management, 29(3), 358–390. doi:10.1016/j.jengtec-
man.2012.03.007
Hamlen, K., Kantarcioglu, M., Khan, L., & Thuraising-
ham, B. (2010). Security issues for cloud computing. 
International Journal of Information Security and Privacy, 
4(2), 36–48. doi:10.4018/jisp.2010040103
Han, L. (2009). Market Acceptance of Cloud Comput-
ing: An Analysis of Market Structure, Price models and 
systems management. Retrieved from http://opus4.kobv.
de/opus4-ubbayreuth/files/468/thesis_leihan.pdf
Hanna, S. (2009). Cloud Computing: Finding the silver 
lining.
Harris, A. (2012). The Legal Standing of Data in a Cloud 
Computing Environment (Doctoral dissertation, Dublin 
Institute of Technology).
Hartman, T. (2007). The changing definition of US librar-
ies. Libri, 57(1), 1–8. doi:10.1515/LIBR.2007.1
Hassan, M. Z. (2011, May). Cloud Networking. CSI 
Communications Journal, 35(2), 20–21.
Hauff, S., Huntgeburth, J., & Veit, D. (2014). Exploring 
uncertainties in a marketplace for cloud computing: A 
revelatory case study. Journal of Business Economics, 
84(3), 441–468. doi:10.1007/s11573-014-0719-3
Heeks, R. (2014). Future Priorities for Development 
Informatics Research from the Post-2015 Development 
Agenda. Working Paper Series, paper no. 57, Centre for De-
velopment Informatics - IDPM, University of Manchester, 
UK. Retrieved from http://www.seed.manchester.ac.uk/
medialibrary/IDPM/working_papers/di/di_wp57.pdf
Heiser, J., & Nicolett, M. (2008). Assessing the Security 
Risks of Cloud Computing. Gartner Research.
Helen, D., & Karatza, R., & Hilzer., C. (2002). Load Shar-
ing in Heterogeneous Distributed Systems. In Proceeding 
of the winter simulation conference (pp. 489-496).
332

Compilation of References
Helmbrecht, U. (2010). Data protection and legal compli-
ance in cloud computing. Datenschutz und Datensicher-
heit, 34(8), 554-556.
Henry Glynn, J., & Heinke Gary, W. (2004). Environ-
mental Science and Engineering; New Delhi: Pearson 
Education. Singapore: Private Limited.
Heraclitus., & Patrick, G. (Eds.). (2013) The Fragments 
of Heraclitus. New York, NY: Digireads.com Publishing.
Hermenier, F., Lorca, X., Menaud, J.-M., Muller, G., & 
Lawall, J. (2009). Entropy: A consolidation manager for 
clusters. In Proceedings of the 2009 ACM SIGPLAN/
SIGOPS International Conference on Virtual Execution 
Environments, VEE ’09 (pp. 41–50). New York, NY, USA. 
ACM. doi:10.1145/1508293.1508300
Hershock, C., & LaVaque-Manty, M. (2012). Teaching 
in the cloud: Leveraging online collaboration tools to 
enhance student engagement. Retrieved June 24, 2014, 
from http://www.crlt.umich.edu/sites/default/files/re-
source_files/CRLT_no31.pdf
He, W., Cernusca, D., & Abdous, M. H. (2011). Exploring 
cloud computing for distance learning. Online Journal of 
Distance Learning Administration, 14(3).
Hodgson, A., & Spours, K. (2009). Collaborative local 
learning ecologies: Reflections on the governance of 
lifelong learning in England. Retrieved June 24, 2014, 
http://www.niace.org.uk/lifelonglearninginquiry/docs/
IFLL-Sector-Paper6.pdf
Holmberg, S. (2000). A systems perspective on supply 
chain measurements. International Journal of Physical 
Distribution & Logistics Management, 30(10), 847–868. 
doi:10.1108/09600030010351246
Holmqvist, M. (2004). Experiential Learning Processes 
of Exploitation and Exploration Within and Between 
Organizations: An Empirical Study of Product Develop-
ment. Organization Science, 15(1), 70–81.
Holtgrewe, U. (2014). New new technologies: The future 
and the present of work in information and communica-
tion technology. New Technology, Work and Employment, 
29(1), 9–24. doi:10.1111/ntwe.12025
Horvath, L. (2001). Collaboration: The key to value 
creation in supply chain management. Supply Chain 
Management: An International Journal, 6(5), 205–207. 
doi:10.1108/EUM0000000006039
Hung, P. P., Bui, T. A., Morales, M. A. G., Nguyen, M. 
V., & Huh, E. N. (2014). Optimal collaboration of thin–
thick clients and resource allocation in cloud computing. 
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 18(3), 563–572. 
doi:10.1007/s00779-013-0673-z
Hunt, S. D., & Davis, D. F. (2012). Grounding supply chain 
management in resource-advantage theory: In defense 
of a resource-based view of the firm. Journal of Supply 
Chain Management, 48(2), 14–20. doi:10.1111/j.1745-
493X.2012.03266.x
Hurwitz J., Kaufman R., Bloor M, & Halper F. (2010). 
Cloud Computing for Dummies. New Delhi: Willey India 
Private Limited.
Hurwitz, J., Nugent, A., Halper, F., & Kaufman, M. 
(2014). Big Data for Dummies. New Delhi: Wiley India 
Private Limited.
Huth, A., & Cebula, J. (2011). The Basics of Cloud 
Computing.
Hwang, K., Fox, G., & Dongarra, J. (2012). Distributed 
and Cloud Computing: From Parallel Processing to the 
Internet of Things. Morgan Kaufmann.
IBM. (2009). The benefits of cloud computing. Retrieved 
September 6, 2014, from http://public.dhe.ibm.com/com-
mon/ssi/ecm/en/diw03004usen/DIW03004USEN.PDF
IBM. (2010). Ozyegin University: Cloud computing with 
IBM. Retrieved May 4, 2014, from http://www.ibm.com/
ibm/files/W771375B62431S24/Ozyegin_EDB03009-
USEN-00.pdf
Ibrahim, A. S., Hamlyn-Harris, J., & Grundy, J. (2010). 
Emerging security challenges of cloud virtual infrastruc-
ture. The Asia Pacific Software Engineering Conference 
2010 Cloud Workshop.
Ignacimuthu, S. (2005). Basic Informatics. New Delhi: 
Narosa Publishing House.
333

Compilation of References
Imache, R., Izza, S., & Ahmed-Nacer, M. (2012). An 
enterprise information system agility assessment model. 
Computer science and information systems, 9(1), 107-133.
ISO. (2011). CEN EN/ISO 11354-1, Advanced Automation 
Technologies and their Applications, Part 1: Framework 
for Enterprise Interoperability. Geneva, Switzerland: 
International Standards Office.
ISO/IEC. (1994). ISO/IEC 7498-1, Information technology 
– Open Systems Interconnection – Basic Reference Model: 
The Basic Model, 2nd edition. Geneva, Switzerland: 
International Standards Office. Retrieved May 31, 2014 
from http://standards.iso.org/ittf/PubliclyAvailableStan-
dards/index.html
ISO/IEC. (2012). Information technology -- Cloud Data 
Management Interface (CDMI). ISO/IEC Standard 
17826:2012. Geneva, Switzerland: International Orga-
nization for Standardization.
ITU. F. (2012). Fg cloud technical report v1.0. Interna-
tional Telecommunication Union.
Ivanov, D., & Sokolov, B. (2012). The inter-disciplinary 
modeling of supply chains in the context of collabora-
tive multi-structural cyber-physical networks. Journal of 
Manufacturing Technology Management, 23(8), 976–997. 
doi:10.1108/17410381211276835
Jackson, K. (2012). OpenStack Cloud Computing Cook-
book. Birmingham, UK: Packt Publishing Ltd.
Jaeger, P. T., Lin, J., & Grimes, J. M. (2008). Cloud 
computing and information policy: Computing in a policy 
cloud? Journal of Information Technology & Politics, 5(3), 
269–283. doi:10.1080/19331680802425479
Jain, V., Wadhwa, S., & Deshmukh, S. G. (2009). Revis-
iting information systems to support a dynamic supply 
chain: Issues and perspectives. Production Planning and 
Control, 20(1), 17–29. doi:10.1080/09537280802608019
Jakhar, S. K. (2014). Designing the green supply chain 
performance optimisation model. Global Journal of Flex-
ible Systems Management, 15(3), 235–259. doi:10.1007/
s40171-014-0069-6
Jalalvand, F., Teimoury, E., Makui, A., Aryanezhad, M. B., 
& Jolai, F. (2011). A method to compare supply chains of 
an industry. Supply Chain Management: An International 
Journal, 16(2), 82–97. doi:10.1108/13598541111115347
Janecek, P. (2007). Faceted classification in web infor-
mation architecture: A framework for using semantic 
web tools. The Electronic Library, 25(2), 219–233. 
doi:10.1108/02640470710741340
Jangra, A., & Bala, R. (2011). Spectrum of Cloud 
Computing Architecture: Adoption and Avoidance Is-
sues. International Journal of Computing and Business 
Research, 2(2).
Jardim-Goncalves, R., Agostinho, C., & Steiger-Garcao, 
A. (2012). A reference model for sustainable interoper-
ability in networked enterprises: Towards the foundation 
of EI science base. International Journal of Computer 
Integrated Manufacturing, 25(10), 855–873. doi:10.108
0/0951192X.2011.653831
Jardim-Goncalves, R., Grilo, A., Agostinho, C., Lam-
pathaki, F., & Charalabidis, Y. (2013). Systematisation 
of interoperability body of knowledge: The foundation 
for enterprise interoperability as a science. Enterprise 
Information Systems, 7(1), 7–32. doi:10.1080/1751757
5.2012.684401
Jeffrey, K. and Neidecker-Lutz, B. (2010). The Future of 
Cloud Computing: Opportunities for European Cloud 
Computing Beyond 2010: Expert Group Report. European 
Commission, Information Society and Media.
Jeng, J. (2005). Usability assessment of academic digi-
tal libraries: Effectiveness, efficiency, satisfaction, and 
learnability. Libri: International Journal of Libraries and 
Information Services, 55(2/3), 96–121.
Jennings R. (2010). Cloud Computing with the Windows 
Azure Platform. New Delhi: Wiley India Private Limited.
Jeong, B., Lee, D., Cho, H., & Lee, J. (2008). A novel 
method for measuring semantic similarity for XML 
schema matching. Expert Systems with Applications, 34(3), 
1651–1658. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2007.01.025
Jing, S.-Y., Ali, S., She, K., & Zhong, Y. (2013). State-
of-the-art research study for green cloud computing. The 
Journal of Supercomputing, 1–24.
Jones, R. H. (2012). Discourse analysis: A resource book 
for students. London: Routledge.
Jorgensen, A., Rowland-Jones, J., Welch, J., Clark, D., 
Price, C., & Brain, M. (2014). Microsoft Big Data Solu-
tions. New Delhi: Wiley India Private Limited.
334

Compilation of References
Joseph, J., & Fellenstein, F. (2004). Grid Computing New 
Delhi: Pearson Education. Singapore: Private Limited.
Jouini, M., Ben Arfa Rabai, L., Ben Aissa, A., & Mili, 
A. (2012). Towards quantitative measures of Information 
Security: A Cloud Computing case study. International 
Journal of Cyber-Security and Digital Forensics, 1(3), 
265–279.
Juhnke, E., Dornemann, T., Bock, D., & Freisleben, B. 
(2011, July). Multi-objective scheduling of BPEL work-
flows in geographically distributed clouds. In Cloud 
Computing (CLOUD), 2011 IEEE International Confer-
ence on (pp. 412-419). IEEE.
Juric, M., & Pant, K. (2008). Business Process Driven SOA 
using BPMN and BPEL: From Business Process Model-
ing to Orchestration and Service Oriented Architecture. 
Birmingham, UK: Packt Publishing.
Juttner, U. (2005). Supply chain risk management: Un-
derstanding the business requirements from a practitioner 
perspective. International Journal of Logistics Manage-
ment, 16(1), 120–141. doi:10.1108/09574090510617385
Juttner, U., Peck, H., & Christopher, M. (2003). Supply 
chain risk management: Outlining an agenda for future 
research. International Journal of Logistics Research 
and Applications, 6(4), 197–210. doi:10.1080/1367556
0310001627016
Kabilan, M. K., Ahmad, N., & Abidin, M. J. Z. (2010). 
Facebook: An online environment for learning of Eng-
lish in institutions of higher education? The Internet 
and Higher Education, 3(4), 179–187. doi:10.1016/j.
iheduc.2010.07.003
Kahn, K. B., & Mentzer, J. T. (1996). Logistics and 
interdepartmental integration. International Journal of 
Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 26(8), 
6–14. doi:10.1108/09600039610182753
Kamel, S. (2010). E-strategies for Technological Diffusion 
and Adoption: National ICT Approaches for Socioeco-
nomic Development. Information Science Reference. IGI 
Global USA. doi:10.4018/978-1-60566-388-3
Kang, A. N., Barolli, L., Park, J. H., & Jeong, Y. S. (2014). 
A strengthening plan for enterprise information security 
based on cloud computing. Cluster Computing, 17(3), 
703–710. doi:10.1007/s10586-013-0327-y
Kantarci, B., Foschini, L., Corradi, A., & Mouftah, H. 
(2012). Inter-and-intra data center vm-placement for 
energy-efficient large scale cloud systems. In Globecom 
Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2012, (pp. 708–713). IEEE.
Karakas, F., & Manisaligil, A. (2012). Reorienting self-
directed learning for the creative digital era. European 
Journal of Training and Development, 36(7), 712–731. 
doi:10.1108/03090591211255557
Karat, J. (1997). User-centered software evaluation meth-
odologies. In M. Helander, T. K. Landauer, & P. Prabhu 
(Eds.), Handbook of Human-Computer Interaction (pp. 
689–704). New York: Elsevier Press.
Karvonen, K. (2000). The beauty of simplicity. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACM Conference on Universal Usability. 
Arlington, VA: The Association of Computing Machinery.
Kasemsap, K. (2013). Unified framework: Constructing 
a causal model of Six Sigma, organizational learning, or-
ganizational innovation, and organizational performance. 
The Journal of Interdisciplinary Networks, 2(1), 268–273.
Kasemsap, K. (2013). Innovative framework: Formation 
of causal model of organizational culture, organizational 
climate, knowledge management, and job performance. 
Journal of International Business Management & Re-
search, 4(12), 21–32.
Kasemsap, K. (2014). Strategic innovation management: 
An integrative framework and causal model of knowledge 
management, strategic orientation, organizational innova-
tion, and organizational performance. In P. Ordóñez de 
Pablos & R. D. Tennyson (Eds.), Strategic approaches 
for human capital management and development in a 
turbulent economy (pp. 102–116). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4530-1.ch007
Kasemsap, K. (2014). The role of knowledge sharing on 
organisational innovation: An integrated framework. In L. 
Al-Hakim & C. Jin (Eds.), Quality innovation: Knowledge, 
theory, and practices (pp. 247–271). Hershey, PA: IGI 
Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-4769-5.ch012
Kasemsap, K. (2014). The role of social networking in 
global business environments. In P. A. C. Smith & T. 
Cockburn (Eds.), Impact of emerging digital technologies 
on leadership in global business (pp. 183–201). Hershey, 
PA: IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-6134-9.ch010
335

Compilation of References
Kasemsap, K. (2015). Implementing enterprise resource 
planning. In M. Khosrow-Pour (Ed.), Encyclopedia 
of information science and technology (3rd ed., pp. 
798–807). Hershey, PA: IGI Global; doi:10.4018/978-
1-4666-5888-2.ch076
Katz, R., Goldstein, P., & Yanosky, R. (2010). Cloud 
computing in higher education. Retrieved May 4, 2014, 
from http://net.educause.edu/section_params/conf/
ccw10/highered.pdf
Kaufmann, L., & Saw, A. A. (2014). Using a multiple-
informant approach in SCM research. International 
Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 
44(6), 511–527. doi:10.1108/IJPDLM-05-2013-0099
Kaushik, A., & Kaushik, C. P. (2006). Environmental 
Studies-A Multidisciplinary Subject: Perspectives in 
Environmental Studies. New Delhi: New Age Interna-
tional Publishers.
Kenneth Kofi, F. (2010). Cloud security requirements 
analysis and security policy development using a high-
order object-oriented modeling technique. Thesis.
Ke, W., Liu, H., Wei, K. K., Gu, J., & Chen, H. (2009). 
How do mediated and non-mediated power affect elec-
tronic supply chain management system adoption? The 
mediation effects of trust and institutional pressures. 
Decision Support Systems, 46(4), 839–851. doi:10.1016/j.
dss.2008.11.008
Khadka, R., .... (2011). Model-Driven Development of 
Service Compositions for Enterprise Interoperability. 
In van Sinderen, M., & Johnson, P. (Eds.), Enterprise 
Interoperability (pp. 177-190). Berlin, Germany: Springer-
Verlag. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-19680-5_15
Khajeh-Hosseini, A., Greenwood, D., Smith, J. W., & 
Sommerville, I. (2012). The cloud adoption toolkit: 
Supporting cloud adoption decisions in the enterprise. 
Software, Practice & Experience, 42(4), 447–465. 
doi:10.1002/spe.1072
Khasnabish, B., Huang, D., Bai, X., Bellavista, P., Mar-
tinez, G., & Antonopoulos, N. (2012). Cloud comput-
ing, networking, and services. Journal of Network and 
Systems Management, 20(4), 463–467. doi:10.1007/
s10922-012-9254-0
Kim, D., & Shen, W. (2007). An Approach to Evaluating 
Structural Pattern Conformance of UML Models. In ACM 
Symposium on Applied Computing (pp. 1404-1408). New 
York, NY: ACM Press. doi:10.1145/1244002.1244305
Kirkpatrick, S., Gelatt, C. D., & Vecchi, M. P. (1983). 
Optimization by simulated annealing. Science, 
220(4598), 671–680. doi:10.1126/science.220.4598.671 
PMID:17813860
Kokash, N., & Arbab, F. (2009). Formal Behavioral 
Modeling and Compliance Analysis for Service-Oriented 
Systems. In F. Boer, M. Bonsangue, & E. Madelaine (Eds.), 
Formal Methods for Components and Objects (pp. 21–41). 
Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag. doi:10.1007/978-3-
642-04167-9_2
Kolb, D. A., Boyatzis, R. E., and Mainemelis, C. (2001). 
Experiential learning theory: Previous research and new 
directions. Perspectives on thinking, learning, and cogni-
tive styles, 1, 227-247.
Kolb, A. Y., & Kolb, D. A. (2005). Learning styles and 
learning spaces: Enhancing experiential learning in higher 
education. Academy of Management Learning & Educa-
tion, 4(2), 193–212. doi:10.5465/AMLE.2005.17268566
Kolb, D. A. (1984). Experiential learning: Experience 
as the source of learning and development (Vol. 1). 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kołodziej, J., & Xhafa, F. (2011). Modern approaches to 
modeling user requirements on resource and task allocation 
in hierarchical computational grids. International Journal 
of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, 21(2), 
243–257. doi:10.2478/v10006-011-0018-x
Kong, L., Qi, H., Wang, S., Du, C., Wang, S. & Han, Y. 
(2012). Approaches for Candidate Document Retrieval 
and Detailed Comparison of Plagiarism Detection. Note-
book for Uncovering Plagiarism, Authorship, and Social 
Software Misuse (PAN) at CLEF.
Kotzab, H., Grant, D. B., Teller, C., & Halldorsson, A. 
(2009). Supply chain management and hypercompetition. 
Logistics Research, 1(1), 5–13. doi:10.1007/s12159-
008-0002-5
336

Compilation of References
Kraan, W., & Yuan, L. (2009). Cloud computing in 
institutions: A briefing paper. Retrieved June 24, 2014, 
from http://wiki.cetis.ac.uk/images/1/11/Cloud_comput-
ing_web.pdf
Krane, D. E., & Raymer, M. L. (2005). Fundamental 
Concepts of Bioinformatics; New Delhi: Pearson Educa-
tion. Singapore: Private Limited.
Krikos A (2010). Disruptive Technology Business Models 
in Cloud Computing. Cambridge: MIT USA.
Kruchten, P. (2004). The rational unified process: an 
introduction. Boston, MA: Pearson Education Inc.
Krug, S. (2000). Don’t Make Me Think. Indianapolis, IN: 
New Riders Publishing.
Krumeich, J., Weis, B., Werth, D., & Loos, P. (2014). 
Event-driven business process management: Where are 
we now? A comprehensive synthesis and analysis of 
literature. Business Process Management Journal, 20(4), 
615–633. doi:10.1108/BPMJ-07-2013-0092
Krutz R. L., & Vines R. D. (2010). Cloud Security. New 
Delhi: Willey India Private Limited.
Krutz, R. L., & Dean, V. R. (2010). Cloud Security. New 
Delhi: Wiley India Private Limited.
Krutz, R. L., & Vines, R. D. (2010). Cloud security: A 
comprehensive guide to secure cloud computing. John 
Wiley & Sons.
Kumar, B. R., & Karthik, S. (2011, May). Platforms for 
Building and Developing Applications for Cloud Comput-
ing. CSI Communications Journal, 35(2), 6–11.
Kumar, K. L., & Joy, J. (2013, December). Application of 
Zigbee Wireless Frequency for Patient Monitoring System; 
Mumbai. CSI Communications Journal, 37(9), 17–18.
Kumar, S., & Kumar, S. (2013, April). Big Data: A Big 
game changer. CSI Communications Journal, 37(1), 9–10.
Kushida, K. E., Murray, J., & Zysman, J. (2011). Diffusing 
the cloud: Cloud computing and implications for public 
policy. Journal of Industry, Competition and Trade, 11(3), 
209–237. doi:10.1007/s10842-011-0106-5
Kusic, D., Kephart, J. O., Hanson, J. E., Kandasamy, N., 
& Jiang, G. (2009). Power and performance management 
of virtualized computing environments via lookahead 
control. Cluster Computing, 12(1), 1–15. doi:10.1007/
s10586-008-0070-y
Lam, L. (2012). An innovative research on the usage of 
Facebook in the higher education context of Hong Kong. 
The Electronic Journal of e-Learning, 10(4), 377-386.
Lambert, D. M., & Pohlen, T. L. (2001). Supply chain 
metrics. International Journal of Logistics Management, 
12(1), 1–19. doi:10.1108/09574090110806190
Lecerof, A., & Paterno, F. (1998). Automatic Support 
for Usability Evaluation. IEEE Transactions on Software 
Engineering, 24(10), 863–888. doi:10.1109/32.729686
Lee, J., Cho, J., Seo, J., Shon, T., & Won, D. (2013). A 
novel approach to analyzing for detecting malicious net-
work activity using a cloud computing testbed. Mobile 
Networks and Applications, 18(1), 122–128. doi:10.1007/
s11036-012-0375-1
Lee, Y. C., & Zomaya, A. Y. (2012). Energy efficient 
utilization of resources in cloud computing systems. The 
Journal of Supercomputing, 60(2), 268–280. doi:10.1007/
s11227-010-0421-3
Lenssen, J. J., & Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2012). A new era 
of development: The changing role and responsibility of 
business in developing countries. Corporate Governance, 
12(4), 403–413. doi:10.1108/14720701211267766
Levin, S. (2013). Cooperation and Sustainability. In G. 
Madhavan, B. Oakley, D. Green, D. Koon, & P. Low (Eds.), 
Practicing Sustainability (pp. 39–41). New York: Springer.
Lewis, G. (2012). The Role of Standards in Cloud-Com-
puting Interoperability, Software Engineering Institute, 
Paper 682. Retrieved May 30, 2014 from http://repository.
cmu.edu/sei/682
Lewis, G., Morris, E., Simanta, S., & Wrage, L. (2008). 
Why Standards Are Not Enough To Guarantee End-to-
End Interoperability. In NcubeC.CarvalloJ. (Eds.) Seventh 
International Conference on Composition-Based Software 
Systems (pp. 164-173). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Computer 
Society Press. doi:10.1109/ICCBSS.2008.25
337

Compilation of References
Lewis, I., & Talalayevsky, A. (1997). Logistics and infor-
mation technology: A coordination perspective. Journal 
of Business Logistics, 18(1), 141–157.
Leymann, F., Fehling, C., Mietzner, R., Nowak, A., & 
Dustdar, S. (2011). Moving applications to the cloud: 
An approach based on application model enrichment. 
International Journal of Cooperative Information Sys-
tems, 20(3), 307–356. doi:10.1142/S0218843011002250
Li, Q., Zhang, X., & Chen, M. (2012). Design on enterprise 
knowledge supply chain based on cloud computing. Paper 
presented at the 2012 Fifth International Conference on 
Business Intelligence and Financial Engineering (BIFE 
2012), Gansu, China. doi:10.1109/BIFE.2012.28
Liang, Q., Wang, Y. Z., & Zhang, Y. H. (2011). Resource 
virtualization model using hybrid-graph representation 
and converging algorithm for cloud computing. Inter-
national Journal of Automation and Computing, 10(6), 
597–606. doi:10.1007/s11633-013-0758-1
Li, J. F., Peng, J., Cao, X., & Li, H. Y. (2011). A task 
scheduling algorithm based on improved ant colony 
optimization in cloud computing environment. Energy 
Procedia, 13, 6833–6840.
Li, J., Qiu, M., Ming, Z., Quan, G., Qin, X., & Gu, Z. 
(2012). Online optimization for scheduling preemptable 
tasks on IaaS cloud systems. Journal of Parallel and 
Distributed Computing, 72(5), 666–677. doi:10.1016/j.
jpdc.2012.02.002
Lindner, M., Galan, F., Chapman, C., Clayman, S., Hen-
riksson, D., & Elmroth, E. (2010). The cloud supply chain: 
A framework for information, monitoring, accounting 
and billing. Retrieved September 6, 2014, from https://
www.ee.ucl.ac.uk/,sclayman/docs/CloudComp2010.pdf
Lin, L. C., & Li, T. S. (2010). An integrated framework 
for supply chain performance measurement using six-
sigma metrics. Software Quality Journal, 18(3), 387–406. 
doi:10.1007/s11219-010-9099-2
Linthicum, D. S. (2010). Cloud Computing and SOA 
Convergence in your Enterprise New Delhi: Dorling 
Kindersley. India: Private Limited.
Lin, Y.-T., Wen, M.-L., Jou, M., & Wu, D.-W. (2013). A 
cloud-based learning environment for developing student 
reflection abilities. Computers in Human Behavior, 32, 
244–252. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2013.12.014
Liu, H., & Orban, D. (2008). Gridbatch: Cloud comput-
ing for large-scale data-intensive batch applications. 
Paper presented at the 8th IEEE International Sympo-
sium on Cluster Computing and the Grid, Lyon, France. 
doi:10.1109/CCGRID.2008.30
Liu, H., Abraham, A., Snášel, V., & McLoone, S. (2012). 
Swarm scheduling approaches for work-flow applications 
with security constraints in distributed data-intensive 
computing environments. Information Sciences, 192, 
228–243. doi:10.1016/j.ins.2011.12.032
Liu, H., Ke, W., Wei, K. K., Gu, J., & Chen, H. (2010). The 
role of institutional pressures and organizational culture 
in the firm’s intention to adopt Internet-enabled supply 
chain management systems. Journal of Operations Man-
agement, 28(5), 372–384. doi:10.1016/j.jom.2009.11.010
Liu, L., Wang, H., Liu, X., Jin, X., He, W. B., Wang, Q. 
B., & Chen, Y. (2009). Greencloud: a new architecture for 
green data center. In Proceedings of the 6th international 
conference industry session on Autonomic computing and 
communications industry session, (pp. 29–38). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/1555312.1555319
Liu, Q., Weng, C., Li, M., & Luo, Y. (2010). An In-VM 
measuring framework for increasing virtual machine 
security in clouds. IEEE Security Privacy Journal, 8(6), 
56–62. doi:10.1109/MSP.2010.143
Liu, Y. C., Ma, Y. T., Zhang, H. S., Li, D. Y., & Chen, 
G. S. (2011). A method for trust management in cloud 
computing: Data coloring by cloud watermarking. Inter-
national Journal of Automation and Computing, 8(3), 
280–285. doi:10.1007/s11633-011-0583-3
Lofstrand M. (2009) The VeriScale Architecture: Elasticity 
and Efficiency for Private Clouds”; Sun BluePrint; Sun 
Microsystems; Online, Revision 1.1, Part No 821-0248-11.
Lohr, S. (2007). Google and I.B.M. Join in “cloud 
computing” research. New York Times. Retrieved Sep-
tember 6, 2014, from http://www.csun.edu/pubrels/clips/
Oct07/10-08-07E.pdf
338

Compilation of References
Loutas, N., Kamateri, E., Bosi, F., & Tarabanis, K. (2011). 
Cloud computing interoperability: the state of play. In 
LambrinoudakisC.RizomiliotisP.WlodarczykT. (Eds.) 
International Conference on Cloud Computing Technology 
and Science (pp. 752-757). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Com-
puter Society Press. doi:10.1109/CloudCom.2011.116
Loutas, N., Peristeras, V., & Tarabanis, K. (2011). Towards 
a reference service model for the Web of Services. Data & 
Knowledge Engineering, 70(9), 753–774. doi:10.1016/j.
datak.2011.05.001
Lwoga, E. T. (2012). Building a virtual academic library 
with Web 2.0 technologies in Tanzania, IST-Africa 2012 
Conference, Dar es salaam. Retrieved on 9-11 May 2012, 
from: http://hdl.handle.net/123456789/17
Lyons, C. (2007). The library: A distinct local voice? First 
Monday, 12(3). doi:10.5210/fm.v12i3.1629
Mabert, V. A., & Venkataramanan, M. A. (1998). Special 
research focus on supply chain linkages: Challenges for 
design and management in the 21st century. Decision 
Sciences, 29(3), 537–552. doi:10.1111/j.1540-5915.1998.
tb01353.x
Mackelprang, A. W., Robinson, J. L., Bernardes, E., & 
Webb, G. S. (2014). The relationship between strategic 
supply chain integration and performance: A meta-analytic 
evaluation and implications for supply chain management 
research. Journal of Business Logistics, 35(1), 71–96. 
doi:10.1111/jbl.12023
Malik, N. (2009). Toward an Enterprise Business Motiva-
tion Model. The Architecture Journal, 19, 10–16.
Manuj, I., & Mentzer, J. T. (2008). Global supply chain 
risk management strategies. International Journal of 
Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 38(3), 
192–223. doi:10.1108/09600030810866986
Manuj, I., & Sahin, F. (2011). A model of supply chain and 
supply chain decision-making complexity. International 
Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Manage-
ment, 41(5), 511–549. doi:10.1108/09600031111138844
Mark, C., Niyato, D., & Chen-Khong, T. (2011). Evolu-
tionary optimal virtual machine placement and demand 
forecaster for cloud computing. In Advanced Information 
Networking and Applications (AINA), 2011 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on, pages 348–355.
Marston, S., Li, Z., Bandyopadhyay, S., & Ghalsasi, A. 
(2011). Cloud computing the business perspective. In 
HICSS (pp. 1–11). IEEE Computer Society.
Marston, S., Li, Z., Bandyopadhyay, S., Zhang, J., & 
Ghalsasi, A. (2011). Cloud computing: The business 
perspective. Decision Support Systems, 51(1), 176–189. 
doi:10.1016/j.dss.2010.12.006
Masson, R., Iosif, L., MacKerron, G., & Fernie, J. (2007). 
Managing complexity in agile global fashion industry 
supply chains. International Journal of Logistics Manage-
ment, 18(2), 238–254. doi:10.1108/09574090710816959
Mather, T., Kumaraswamy, S., & Latif, S. (2010). Cloud 
Security and Privacy. Mumbai: Shroff Publishers & 
Distributors Private Limited.
Mathieu, R. G., & Pal, R. (2011). The selection of sup-
ply chain management projects: A case study approach. 
Operations Management Research, 4(3-4), 164–181. 
doi:10.1007/s12063-011-0058-2
Matthews, J., Garfinkel, T., Hoff, C., & Wheeler, J. Virtual 
Machine Contracts for Data Center and Cloud Comput-
ing Environments. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop 
on Automated Control for Datacenters and Clouds. New 
York, NY, USA. ACM. pages25-30. 2009
Maxwell, J. A. (2005). Qualitative research design: An 
interactive approach. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
McCarthy, L. (2011). Adoption of Cloud Computing. 
Retrieved from http://askvisory.com/research/adoption-
of-cloudcomputing/
McDonald, D., MacDonald, A., & Breslin, C. (2010). 
Final report from the JISC review of the environmental and 
organisational implications of cloud computing in higher 
and further education. Retrieved April 2, 2014, from 
http://www.jisc.ac.uk/media/documents/programmes/
greeningict/cloudstudyreport.pdf
McGuire, M., & Dowling, S. (2003). Cyber crime: a 
review of the evidence. Home Office. Retrieved 9 July, 
2014, from https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
cyber-crime-a-review-of-the-evidence
339

Compilation of References
Mei, H., & Liu, X. Z. (2011). Internetware: An emerg-
ing software paradigm for Internet computing. Journal 
of Computer Science and Technology, 26(4), 588–599. 
doi:10.1007/s11390-011-1159-y
Meiko, J., Jorg, S., Nils, G., & Luigi, L. I. (2009). On 
Technical Security Issues in Cloud Computing.IEEE 
International Conference on Cloud Computing.
Mell, P., & Grance, T. (2011). The NIST definition of cloud 
computing. Special publication 800-145, National Institute 
of Standards and Technology. Retrieved May 30, 2014 
from http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-145/
SP800-145.pdf
Mell, P.and Grance, T. (2011). The NIST Definition of 
Cloud Computing. Recommendations of the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology, Special Publica-
tion 800-145, September 2011
Mell, P., & Grance, T. (2009). Effectively and Securely 
Using the Cloud Computing Paradigm.ACM Cloud Com-
puting Security Workshop.
Mell, P., & Grance, T. (2011). The NIST Definition of 
Cloud Computing (pp. 800–145). Gaithersburg, MD: 
NIST Special Publication.
Melville, N., & Ramirez, R. (2008). Information technol-
ogy innovation diffusion: An information requirements 
paradigm. Information Systems Journal, 18(3), 247–273. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2575.2007.00260.x
Mena, C., Humphries, A., & Choi, T. Y. (2013). Toward 
a theory of multi-tier supply chain management. Journal 
of Supply Chain Management, 49(2), 58–77. doi:10.1111/
jscm.12003
Meng, X., Pappas, V., & Zhang, L. (2010). Improving 
the scalability of data center networks with traffic-aware 
virtual machine placement. In INFOCOM, Proceedings 
IEEE, pages1–9.
Menken, I., & Blokdijk, G. (2009). Cloud Computing 
Virtualization Specialist Complete Certification Kit - 
Study Guide Book and Online Course. Emereo Pty Ltd.
Menno-Jan, K., & Ferjan, O. (2004). Cartography Vi-
sualization of Geospatial Data; New Delhi: Pearson 
Education. Singapore: Private Limited.
Mentzer, J. T., DeWitt, W., Min, S., Nix, N. W., Smith, 
C. D., & Zacharia, Z. G. (2001). Defining supply chain 
management. Journal of Business Logistics, 22(2), 1–25. 
doi:10.1002/j.2158-1592.2001.tb00001.x
Mentzer, J. T., Flint, D. J., & Kent, J. L. (1999). Develop-
ing a logistics service quality scale. Journal of Business 
Logistics, 20(1), 9–32.
Mentzer, J. T., & Gundlach, G. (2010). Exploring the 
relationship between marketing and supply chain man-
agement: Introduction to the special issue. Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science, 38(1), 1–4. doi:10.1007/
s11747-009-0150-4
Mezmaz, M., Melab, N., Kessaci, Y., Lee, Y. C., Talbi, 
E.-G., Zomaya, A. Y., & Tuyttens, D. (2011). A paral-
lel bi-objective hybrid metaheuristic for energy-aware 
scheduling for cloud computing systems. Journal of 
Parallel and Distributed Computing, 71(11), 1497–1508. 
doi:10.1016/j.jpdc.2011.04.007
Mi, H., Wang, H., Yin, G., Zhou, Y., Shi, D., & Yuan, 
L. (2010). Online self-reconfiguration with performance 
guarantee for energy efficient large-scale cloud computing 
data centers. In Services Computing (SCC), 2010 IEEE 
International Conference on, pages 514–521.
Miller, M. (2009). Cloud Computing; New Delhi: Dorling 
Kindersley. India: Private Limited.
Miller, M. (2009). Under Standing Cloud Computing; 
Cloud Computing. New Delhi: Dorling Kindersley. India: 
Private Limited.
Minas, L. & Ellison, B. (2009). The problem of power 
consumption in servers. Intel Corporation. Dr. Dobb’s.
Minelli, M., Chambers, M., & Dhiraj, A. (2014). Big 
Data Analytics. New Delhi: Wiley India Private Limited.
Minhas, U. F. (2013). Scalable and Highly Available 
Database Systems in the Cloud. PhD thesis, University 
of Waterloo.
Min, S., Mentzer, J. T., & Ladd, R. T. (2007). A market 
orientation in supply chain management. Journal of 
the Academy of Marketing Science, 35(4), 507–522. 
doi:10.1007/s11747-007-0020-x
340

Compilation of References
Mircea, M., & Andreescu, A. I. (2011). Using cloud 
computing in higher education: A strategy to improve 
agility in the current financial crisis. Communications of 
the IBIMA, 1-15. doi:10.5171/2011.875547
Misra, S. C., & Mondal, A. (2010). Identification of a 
company’s suitability for the adoption of cloud comput-
ing and modelling its corresponding return on invest-
ment. Mathematical and Computer Modelling, 53(3-4), 
504–521. doi:10.1016/j.mcm.2010.03.037
Mitchell, E. (2010). Using cloud services for library IT 
infrastructure. code4lib Journal, 9.
Mitrano, T. (2009). Outsourcing and cloud computing for 
higher education. Retrieved April 2, 2014, from http://
www.it.cornell.edu/cms/policies/publications/upload/
Memo-on-Outsourcing-and-Cloud-Computing.pdf
Modi, C., Patel, D., Borisaniya, B., Patel, A., & Rajarajan, 
M. (2012). A survey on security issues and solutions 
at different layers of Cloud computing. The Journal of 
Supercomputing, 63(2), 561–592. doi:10.1007/s11227-
012-0831-5
Monfelt, Y., Pilemalm, S., Hallberg, J., & Yngström, L. 
(2011). The 14-layered framework for including social and 
organizational aspects in security management. Informa-
tion Management & Computer Security, 19(2), 124–133. 
doi:10.1108/09685221111143060
MOOC. (2013). Mobiles for Development: A Massive 
Open Online Course for Development. Open Educational 
Resources. Retrieved on 01 January 2014, from http://
m4d.colfinder.org/node/2372
Morris, E., .... (2004). System of Systems Interoperability 
(SOSI): final report. Report No. CMU/SEI-2004-TR-004. 
Carnegie Mellon Software Engineering Institute. Re-
trieved May 31, 2014 from http://www.sei.cmu.edu/
reports/04tr004.pdf
Mtebe, J. S. (2013). Exploring the Potential of Clouds to 
Facilitate the Adoption of Blended Learning in Tanzania. 
International Journal of Education and Research, 1(8).
Mtega, W. P., Bernard, R., Msungu, A. C., & Sanare, 
R. (2012). Using mobile phones for teaching and learn-
ing purposes in higher learning institutions: The case 
of Sokoine University of Agriculture in Tanzania. In 
Proceedings and report of the 15th UbuntuNet alliance 
Annual Conference.
Myers, M. B., Griffith, D. A., Daugherty, P. J., & Lusch, R. 
F. (2004). Maximizing the human capital equation in logis-
tics: Education, experience, and skills. Journal of Business 
Logistics, 25(1), 211–232. doi:10.1002/j.2158-1592.2004.
tb00175.x
Mykkänen, J., & Tuomainen, M. (2008). An evaluation 
and selection framework for interoperability standards. 
Information and Software Technology, 50(3), 176–197. 
doi:10.1016/j.infsof.2006.12.001
Narasimhan, R., & Kim, S. W. (2001). Information 
system utilization strategy for supply chain integra-
tion. Journal of Business Logistics, 22(2), 51–75. 
doi:10.1002/j.2158-1592.2001.tb00003.x
National Bureau of Asian Research. (2013). The IP 
Commission Report: The report on the theft of Ameri-
can Intellectual Propery. Retrieved 18 March, 2014, 
from http://www.ipcommission.org/report/IP_Commis-
sion_Report_052213.pdf
Nielsen, J. (1998). Introduction to web design. In Pro-
ceedings of the SIGCHI on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. Los Angeles, CA: The Association of Comput-
ing Machinery.
Nielsen, J. (2000). Designing Web Usability. Indianapo-
lis, IN: New Riders Publishing. Nielsen, J. & Tahir, M. 
(2002). Homepage Usability: 50 Websites Deconstructed. 
Indianapolis, IN: New Riders Publishing.
NIST. (n.d) Definition of Cloud Computing v 15, csrc.nist.
gov/groups/SNS/cloud-computing/cloud-def-v 15.doc
Norris, S. (2004). Analyzing multimodal interaction: A 
methodological framework. London: Routledge.
341

Compilation of References
Novack, R. A., Rinehart, L. M., & Langley, C. J. (1996). 
A comparative assessment of senior and logistics execu-
tives’ perceptions of logistics value. Journal of Business 
Logistics, 17(1), 135–178.
Novack, R. A., & Thomas, D. J. (2004). The challenges of 
implementing the perfect order concept. Transportation 
Journal, 43(1), 5–17.
Novell (1983). Platespin recon. http://www.novell.com/
products/recon/
Nuernberg, P., Leggett, J., & McFarland, M. (2012). Cloud 
as infrastructure at the Texas Digital Library. Journal of 
Digital Information, 13(1).
Nurmi, D. et  al.. (2009). The eucalyptus open-source 
cloud-computing system. In CappelloF.WangC.BuyyaR. 
(Eds.) 9th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster 
Computing and the Grid (pp. 124-131). Piscataway, NJ: 
IEEE Computer Society Press.
O’Reilly Media Inc. (2013). Big Data Now Current Per-
spectives from O’Reilly Media. Mumbai: Shroff Publishers 
& Distributors Private Limited.
Ochara-Muganda, N., & Van Belle, J. (2010). A proposed 
framework for E-Government knowledge infrastructures 
for Africa’s transition economies. Journal of e-Government 
Studies and Best Practices, 2010, 1–9.
Ochara, N. M. (2008). Emergence of the e-Government 
artifact in an environment of social exclusion in Kenya. 
The African Journal of Information Systems, 1(1), 3.
OCSIA/Detica. (2011). The cost of cyber crime. A Detica 
report in partnership with the Office of Cyber Security and 
Information Assurance in the Cabinet Office. Retrieved 
18 March, 2014, from https://www.baesystemsdetica.
com/uploads/press_releases/THE_COST_OF_CYBER_
CRIME_SUMMARY_FINAL_14_February_2011.pdf
Oguz, F., & Sengün, A. (2011). Mystery of the unknown: 
Revisiting tacit knowledge in the organizational literature. 
Journal of Knowledge Management, 15(3), 445–461. 
doi:10.1108/13673271111137420
Olson, J. R., & Boyer, K. K. (2005). Internet ticket-
ing in a not-for-profit, service organization: Build-
ing customer loyalty. International Journal of Op-
erations & Production Management, 25(1), 74–92. 
doi:10.1108/01443570510572259
Om, K., Lee, J., & Chang, J. (2007). Using supply chain 
management to enhance industry-university collaborations 
in IT higher education in Korea. Scientometrics, 71(3), 
455–471. doi:10.1007/s11192-007-1690-3
Open Hybrid Resources (OHR). (2014). Retrieved on, 
from http://www.redhat.com/solutions/open-hybrid-
cloud/cloud-resources/
O’Rourke, C., Fishman, N., & Selkow, W. (2003). Enter-
prise architecture using the Zachman framework. Boston, 
MA: Course Technology.
OSS. (2014). Plutchak, T. S. (2012). Breaking the bar-
riers of time and space: The dawning of the great age of 
librarians. Journal of the Medical Library Association: 
JMLA, 100(1), 10. http://www.datamation.com/open-
source/60-open-source-apps-you-can-use-in-the-cloud-1.
html Retrieved on 3th June 2014
Ostadzadeh, S., & Fereidoon, S. (2011). An Architectural 
Framework for the Improvement of the Ultra-Large-Scale 
Systems Interoperability. In ArabniaH.RezaH.Deligi-
annidisL. (Eds.) International Conference on Software 
Engineering Research and Practice (pp. 212-219). Athens, 
GA: CSREA Press.
Oztemel, E., & Tekez, E. K. (2009). Interactions of 
agents in performance based supply chain management. 
Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 20(2), 159–167. 
doi:10.1007/s10845-008-0229-7
Packard, H. (2011). Power regulator for proliant servers.
Pagell, M., & Shevchenko, A. (2014). Why research in 
sustainable supply chain management should have no 
future. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 50(1), 
44–55. doi:10.1111/jscm.12037
Parkhill, D. (1966). The Challenge of the Computer 
Utility. US: Addison-Wesley Educational Publishers Inc.
Pautasso, C., Zimmermann, O., & Leymann, F. (2008). 
Restful web services vs. “big”’ web services: making the 
right architectural decision. In International conference 
on World Wide Web (pp. 805-814). ACM Press.
Pearrow, M. (2000). Web Site Usability Handbook. In-
dependence, KY: Charles River Media.
342

Compilation of References
Peck, H. (2005). Drivers of supply chain vulnerability: An 
integrated framework. International Journal of Physical 
Distribution & Logistics Management, 35(4), 210–232. 
doi:10.1108/09600030510599904
Peck, H., & Juttner, U. (2000). Strategy and relation-
ships: Defining the interface in supply chain contexts. 
International Journal of Logistics Management, 11(2), 
33–44. doi:10.1108/09574090010806146
Perera, C., Zaslavsky, A., Cristen, P., & Georgakopoulos, 
D. (2014). Sensing as a service model for smart cities 
supported by Internet of Things. Transactions on Emerg-
ing Telecommunications Technologies, 25(1), 81–93. 
doi:10.1002/ett.2704
Peristeras, V., & Tarabanis, K. (2006). The Connection, 
Communication, Consolidation, Collaboration Interop-
erability Framework (C4IF) For Information Systems 
Interoperability. International Journal of Interoperability 
in Business Information Systems, 1(1), 61–72.
Petcu, D. (2013). Multi-Cloud: expectations and current 
approaches. In International Workshop on Multi-cloud 
Applications and Federated Clouds (pp. 1-6). New York, 
NY: ACM Press. doi:10.1145/2462326.2462328
Petcu, D., Macariu, G., Panica, S., & Crăciun, C. (2013). 
Portable cloud applications—from theory to practice. 
Future Generation Computer Systems, 29(6), 1417–1430. 
doi:10.1016/j.future.2012.01.009
Petrie, C., & Bussler, C. (2003). Service agents and virtual 
enterprises: A survey. Internet Computing, 7(4), 68–78. 
doi:10.1109/MIC.2003.1215662
Plaszczak, P., & Wellner, R. Jr. (2006). Grid Computing. 
New Delhi: Elesvier.
Plummer, D. C., Bittman, T. J., Austin, T., Cearley, D. 
W., & Smith, D. M. (2008). Cloud computing: Defining 
and describing an emerging phenomenon. Retrieved 
from June 24, 2014, http://www.emory.edu/BUSINESS/
readings/CloudComputing/Gartner_cloud_comput-
ing_defining.pdf
Popa, R. A., Redfield, C. M. S., Zeldovich, N., & Bal-
akrishnan, H. (2012). CryptDB: Processing queries on an 
encrypted database. Communications of the ACM, 55(9), 
103–111. doi:10.1145/2330667.2330691
Potdar, V., Sharif, A., & Chang, E. (2009). Wireless 
sensor networks: A survey. In AwanI.YounasM.HaraT.
DurresiA. (Eds.) International Conference on Advanced 
Information Networking and Applications Workshops 
(pp. 636-641). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Computer Society 
Press. doi:10.1109/WAINA.2009.192
Potthast, M., Barrón-Cedeño, A., Stein, B., & Rosso, P. 
(2010). An Evaluation Framework for Plagiarism Detec-
tion.Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference 
on Computational Linguistics (COLING)2010, August 
23-27, Beijing, China.
Prasad, M. R., Gyani, J., & Murti, P. R. K. (2012). Mobile 
cloud computing: Implications and challenges. Journal of 
Information Engineering and Applications, 2(7), 7–16.
Premkumar, G., Ramamurthy, K., & Saunders, C. S. 
(2005). Information processing view of organizations: 
An exploratory examination of fit in the context of in-
terorganizational relationships. Journal of Management 
Information Systems, 22(1), 257–294.
Pujari Arun, K. (2004). Data mining Techniques; New 
Delhi: Universities Press. India: Private Limited.
Pujari, A. K. (2003). Data Mining Techniques; Hyderabad: 
Universities Press. India: Private Limited.
Putnik, G., & Sluga, A. (2007). Reconfigurability of 
manufacturing systems for agility implementation, part I: 
requirements and principles. In Cunha, P., & Maropoulos, 
P. (Eds.), Digital Enterprise Technology: Perspectives and 
Future Challenges (pp. 91-98). New York, NY: Springer 
Science+Business Media.
Quazi, S. A. (2009). Principles of Physical Geography. 
New Delhi: APH Publishing Corporation.
Quelch, J. A., & Kenny, D. (1994). Extend profits, not 
product lines. Harvard Business Review, 72(5), 153–160.
Rahimi, M. R., Ren, J., Liu, C. H., Vasilakos, A. V., & 
Venkatasubramanian, N. (2014). Mobile cloud comput-
ing: A survey, state of art and future directions. Mobile 
Networks and Applications, 19(2), 133–143. doi:10.1007/
s11036-013-0477-4
343

Compilation of References
Rai, A., Patnayakuni, R., & Seth, N. (2006). Firm per-
formance impacts of digitally enabled supply chain in-
tegration capabilities. Management Information Systems 
Quarterly, 30(2), 225–246.
Rajaraman, V. (2014). Cloud computing. Resonance, 
19(3), 242–258. doi:10.1007/s12045-014-0030-1
Ramezani, F., Lu, J., & Hussain, F. K. (2014). Task-Based 
System Load Balancing in Cloud Computing Using 
Particle Swarm Optimization. International Journal of 
Parallel Programming, 42(5), 739–754. doi:10.1007/
s10766-013-0275-4
Ramgovind, S., Eloff, M. M., & Smith, E. The Management 
of Security in Cloud Computing”; Information Security 
for South Africa (ISSA); IEEE; 1-7.2010
Ranjan, R., Buyya, R., & Benatallah, B. (2012). Special 
section: Software architectures and application develop-
ment environments for Cloud computing. Software, Prac-
tice & Experience, 42(4), 391–394. doi:10.1002/spe.1144
Ranjan, R., Buyya, R., Leitner, P., Haller, A., & Tai, S. 
(2014). A note on software tools and techniques for moni-
toring and prediction of cloud services. Software, Practice 
& Experience, 44(7), 771–775. doi:10.1002/spe.2266
Rao Raja, K. N. (2005). An Overview of Space and Satel-
lite: Fundamental of Satellite Communication. New Delhi: 
Prentice Hall of India.
Rasmussen, C. H., & Jochumsen, H. (2009). The fall 
and rise of the physical library. In The 17th BOBCATSSS 
Symposium. Retrieved on 01 January 2014, from http://
pure.iva.dk/files/30767688/The_Fall_and_Rise_-_Bob-
catsss_2009.pdf
Ratten, V. (2014). A US-China comparative study of cloud 
computing adoption behavior: The role of consumer inno-
vativeness, performance expectations and social influence. 
Journal of Entrepreneurship in Emerging Economies, 
6(1), 53–71. doi:10.1108/JEEE-07-2013-0019
Reese, G. (2010). Cloud Application Architecture. Mum-
bai: Shorff Publishers & Distributors Private Limited.
Reese, G. (2010). Cloud Application Architectures. Mum-
bai: Shroff Publishers and Distributors Private Limited.
Revels, J., Tojib, D., & Tsarenko, Y. (2010). Understand-
ing consumer intention to use mobile services. Austral-
asian Marketing Journal, 18(2), 74–80. doi:10.1016/j.
ausmj.2010.02.002
Rhoton, J. (2010). Cloud Computing Explained: Imple-
mentation Hand Book for Enterprises London. Recursive 
Press.
Richey, R. G. Jr, Roath, A. S., Whipple, J. M., & Fawcett, 
S. E. (2010). Exploring a governance theory of supply 
chain management: Barriers and facilitators to integra-
tion. Journal of Business Logistics, 31(1), 237–256. 
doi:10.1002/j.2158-1592.2010.tb00137.x
Richey, R. G., Tokman, M., & Wheeler, A. R. (2006). A 
supply chain manager selection methodology: Empirical 
test and suggested application. Journal of Business Lo-
gistics, 27(2), 163–190. doi:10.1002/j.2158-1592.2006.
tb00221.x
Rimal, B. P., Jukan, A., Katsaros, D., & Goeleven, Y. 
(2011). Architectural requirements for cloud computing 
systems: An enterprise cloud approach. Journal of Grid 
Computing, 9(1), 3–26. doi:10.1007/s10723-010-9171-y
Rimal, B., Choi, E., & Lumb, I. (2009). A taxonomy and 
survey of cloud computing systems. In KimJ. (Eds.) Fifth 
International Joint Conference on INC, IMS and IDC (pp. 
44-51). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Computer Society Press. 
doi:10.1109/NCM.2009.218
Rittinghouse, J. W., & Ransome, J. F. (2010). Cloud 
computing: Implementation, management, and security. 
Boca Raton: CRC Press.
Rodero, I., Jaramillo, J., Quiroz, A., Parashar, M., Guim, 
F., & Poole, S. (2010). Energy-efficient application-aware 
online provisioning for virtualized clouds and data centers. 
In 2010 International Green Computing Conference (pp. 
31–45). IEEE. doi:10.1109/GREENCOMP.2010.5598283
Rosenblum, M. (2004). The reincarnation of virtual ma-
chines. Queue, 2(5), 34. doi:10.1145/1016998.1017000
Rosenthal, A., Mork, P., Li, M. H., Stanford, J., Koester, D., 
& Reynolds, P. (2010). Cloud computing: A new business 
paradigm for biomedical information sharing. Journal of 
Biomedical Informatics, 43(2), 342–353.
344

Compilation of References
Roychoudhuri, D., Mohapatra, B., & Yadav, M. (2014, 
February). Rationalize Your Cloud Model Using Open 
Source Stack. CSI Communications Journal, 37(11), 
11–14.
Ruz, C. (2014). Cloud computing key to improving literacy 
in Africa. Retrieved from http://www.isgtw.org/feature/
cloud-computing-key-improving-literacy-africa
Ryan, M. D. (2013). Cloud computing security: The 
scientific challenge, and a survey of solutions. Journal of 
Systems and Software, 86(9), 2263–2268. doi:10.1016/j.
jss.2012.12.025
Saberi, S., Nookabadi, A. S., & Hejazi, S. R. (2012). 
Applying agent-based system and negotiation mechanism 
in improvement of inventory management and customer 
order fulfillment in multi echelon supply chain. Arabian 
Journal for Science and Engineering, 37(3), 851–861. 
doi:10.1007/s13369-012-0197-2
Sabharwal, N., & Shankar, R. (2013). Apache Cloudstack 
Cloud Computing. Birmingham, UK: Packt Publishing 
Ltd.
Sacks, H. (1994). Lectures on conversation. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E., & Jefferson, G. A. (1974). A 
simplest systematics for the organization of turn-taking 
for conversation. Language, 50(4), 696–735. doi:10.1353/
lan.1974.0010
Sagar, M., Bora, S., Gangwal, A., Gupta, P., Kumar, A., 
& Agarwal, A. (2013). Factors affecting customer loyalty 
in cloud computing: A customer defection-centric view to 
develop a void-in-customer loyalty amplification model. 
Global Journal of Flexible Systems Management, 14(3), 
143–156. doi:10.1007/s40171-013-0035-8
Sahin, F., & Robinson, E. P. Jr. (2005). Information shar-
ing and coordination in make-to-order supply chains. 
Journal of Operations Management, 23(6), 579–598. 
doi:10.1016/j.jom.2004.08.007
Sahoo, J. Mohapatra, S. & Lath, R. (2010). Virtualiza-
tion: A Survey on Concepts, Taxonomy and Associated 
Security Issues (pp. 222-226).
Sahoo, G., Shabana, M., & Rashmi, R. (2013, November). 
Applications of Cloud Computing for Agriculture Sector. 
CSI Communications Journal, 37(8), 10–17.
Salih, N. K., & Zang, T. (2012). Survey and comparison 
for Open and closed sources in cloud computing. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1207.5480.
Sanchez-Rodrigues, V., Potter, A., & Naim, M. M. (2010). 
The impact of logistics uncertainty on sustainable transport 
operations. International Journal of Physical Distribution 
& Logistics Management, 40(1-2), 61–83.
Sanders, N. R., & Premus, R. (2005). Modeling the re-
lationship between firm it capability, collaboration, and 
performance. Journal of Business Logistics, 26(1), 1–23. 
doi:10.1002/j.2158-1592.2005.tb00192.x
Sanga, C. (2010). A technique for the evaluation of free 
and open source e-learning systems. Doctoral dissertation, 
University of the Western Cape.
Sanga, C., Lwoga, E. T., & Venter, I. M. (2006). Open 
Courseware as a Tool for Teaching and Learning in Africa, 
Fourth IEEE International Workshop on Technology for 
Education in Developing Countries, 2006 (pp. 55-56).
Sarga, L. (2012). Cloud computing: An overview. Journal 
of Systems Integration, 4, 1–12.
Savitskie, K. (2007). Internal and external logistics in-
formation technologies: The performance impact in an 
international setting. International Journal of Physical 
Distribution & Logistics Management, 37(6), 454–468. 
doi:10.1108/09600030710763378
Saya, S., Pee, L., & Kankanhalli, A. (2010). The impact of 
institutional influences on perceived technological char-
acteristics and real options in cloud computing adoption. 
Paper presented at the 31st International Conference on 
Information Systems (ICIS 2010), St. Louis, Missouri.
Scale, M.-S. E. (2010). Assessing the Impact of Cloud 
Computing and Web Collaboration on the Work of Dis-
tance Library Services. Journal of Library Administra-
tion, 50(7-8), 7–8, 933–950. doi:10.1080/01930826.20
10.488995
345

Compilation of References
Scanlon, T., Schroeder, W., Snyder, C., & Spool, J. (1998). 
Websites that work: Designing with your eyes open. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems. Los Angeles, CA: The Association of 
Computing Machinery.
Schmarzo, B. (2014). Big Data Understanding How Data 
Powers Big Business. New Delhi: Wiley India Private 
Limited.
Schramm, T., Nogueira, S., & Jones, D. (2011). Cloud 
computing and supply chain: A natural fit for the future. 
Retrieved September 6, 2014, from: http://www.aberdeen.
com/aberdeen-library/7470/RA-software-service-cloud.
aspx
Seethamraju, R. (2014). Enterprise systems and demand 
chain management: A cross-sectional field study. In-
formation Technology Management, 15(3), 151–161. 
doi:10.1007/s10799-014-0178-0
Shacklett, M. (2010). Is supply chain management 
emerging from the clouds? The short answer is “yes,” 
and now’s the time to take a more serious look. World 
Trade, 23(4), 34–37.
Shadbolt, N., Hall, W., & Berners-Lee, T. (2006). The 
semantic web revisited. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 21(3), 
96–101. doi:10.1109/MIS.2006.62
Shafieezadeh, M., & Sadegheih, A. (2014). Developing 
an integrated inventory management model for multi-item 
multi-echelon supply chain. International Journal of Ad-
vanced Manufacturing Technology, 72(5-8), 1099–1119. 
doi:10.1007/s00170-014-5684-z
Sharada, V. N. (2006). Environment & Agriculture. New 
Delhi: Malhotra Publishing House.
Shikharesh, M. (2011, May). Resource Management on 
Clouds: Handling Uncertainties in Parameters and Polices. 
CSI Communications Journal, 35(2), 16–17.
Shilton, K. (2012). Participatory personal data: An emerg-
ing research challenge for the information sciences. Jour-
nal of the American Society for Information Science and 
Technology, 63(10), 1905–1915. doi:10.1002/asi.22655
Shimba, F. (2010). Cloud Computing: Strategies for Cloud 
Computing Adoption. Retrieved on 08 August 2013, from 
http://arrow.dit.ie/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1028&co
ntext=scschcomdis
Shimba, F. J., Koloseni, D., & Nungu, A. (2014). Chal-
lenges and Implications of adoption of cloud services in 
healthcare in developing countries. In A. Moumtzoglou 
(Ed.), Cloud Computing Applications for Quality Health 
Care Delivery. Hershey, PA: IGI Global Publishers.
Shokouhi, M., & Si, L. (2011). Federated Search. Founda-
tions and Trends in Information Retrieval, 5(1), 1–102. 
doi:10.1561/1500000010
Shon, T., Cho, J., Han, K., & Choi, H. (2014). Toward 
advanced mobile cloud computing for the Internet of 
Things: Current issues and future direction. Mobile Net-
works and Applications, 19(3), 404–413. doi:10.1007/
s11036-014-0509-8
Shoushtari, K. D. (2013). Redesigning a large supply 
chain management system to reduce the government 
administration: A socio-functional systems approach. 
Systemic Practice and Action Research, 26(2), 195–216. 
doi:10.1007/s11213-012-9244-x
Shrivastava, V., Zerfos, P., Lee, K.-W., Jamjoom, H., Liu, 
Y.-H., & Banerjee, S. (2011). Application-aware virtual 
machine migration in data centers. In INFOCOM, 2011 
Proceedings IEEE, pages 66–70.
Siddiqui, F., Haleem, A., & Sharma, C. (2012). The 
impact of supply chain management practices in total 
quality management practices and flexible system prac-
tices context: An empirical study in oil and gas industry. 
Global Journal of Flexible Systems Management, 13(1), 
11–23. doi:10.1007/s40171-012-0002-9
Sife, A., Lwoga, E., & Sanga, C. (2007). New technologies 
for teaching and learning: Challenges for higher learning 
institutions in developing countries. International Journal 
of Education and Development using ICT, 3(2). Retrieved 
from http://ijedict.dec.uwi.edu/viewarticle.php?id=246
Simchi-Levi, D., Kaminski, P., & Simchi-Levi, E. (2008). 
Designing and managing the supply chain: Concepts, 
strategies, and case studies. New York, NY: McGraw-
Hill/Irwin.
Sindelar, M., Sitaraman, R. K., & Shenoy, P. (2011). 
Sharing-aware algorithms for virtual machine colocation.
InProceedings of the 23rd ACM Symposium on Parallelism 
in Algorithms and Architectures, SPAA ’11, pages367–378, 
New York, NY, USA. ACM.
346

Compilation of References
Singh, A., & Wesson, J. (2009). Evaluation Criteria for 
Assessing the Usability of ERP Systems In Proceedings of 
the 2009 Annual Conference of the South African Institute 
of Computer Scientists and Information Technologists. 
Vaal River, South Africa: The Association of Computing 
Machinery. doi:10.1145/1632149.1632162
Singh, R., & Kumar, S. (2014, November). Big Data 
Visualization using Cassandra and R; Mumbai. CSI 
Communications Journal, 38(8), 15–21.
Sinkovics, R. R., & Roath, A. S. (2004). Strategic orienta-
tion, capabilities, and performance in manufacturer - 3PL 
relationships. Journal of Business Logistics, 25(2), 43–64. 
doi:10.1002/j.2158-1592.2004.tb00181.x
Soderberg, L., & Bengtsson, L. (2010). Supply chain 
management maturity and performance in SMEs. Opera-
tions Management Research, 3(1), 90–97. doi:10.1007/
s12063-010-0030-6
Sodhi, B., & Prabhakar, T. V. (2011). Application archi-
tecture considerations for cloud platforms, Communication 
Systems and Networks (COMSNETS), 2011 Third Inter-
national Conference on, 1-4, 4-8 Jan. 2011 doi:10.1109/
COMSNETS.2011.5716417
Song, B., Hassan, M. M., & Huh, E. N. (2010, Novem-
ber). A novel heuristic-based task selection and alloca-
tion framework in dynamic collaborative cloud service 
platform. In Cloud Computing Technology and Science 
(CloudCom), 2010 IEEE Second International Conference 
on (pp. 360-367). IEEE.
Song, Y., Wang, H., Li, Y., Feng, B., & Sun, Y. (2009). 
Multi-tiered on-demand resource scheduling for vm-
based data center. In Proceedings of the 2009 9th IEEE/
ACM International Symposium on Cluster Computing 
and the Grid, (pp. 148–155). IEEE Computer Society. 
doi:10.1109/CCGRID.2009.11
SPECpower (2013). Benchmark results summary of 
hitachi model no: Ha8000/ss10 (dl2).
Speitkamp, B., & Bichler, M. (2010). A mathematical 
programming approach for server consolidation problems 
in virtualized data centers. Services Computing. IEEE 
Transactions on, 3(4), 266–278.
Srikantaiah, S., Kansal, A., & Zhao, F. (2008). Energy 
aware consolidation for cloud computing. In Proceedings 
of the 2008 conference on Power aware computing and 
systems, 10. USENIX Association.
Stamper, R. (1996). Signs, Information, Norms and 
Systems. In Holmqvist, B., Andersen, P., Klein, H. and 
Posner, R. (Eds.), Signs of Work (pp. 349–397). Berlin, 
Germany: de Gruyter.
Stein, S., Ware, J., Laboy, J., & Schaffer, H. E. (2013). 
Improving K-12 pedagogy via a cloud designed for educa-
tion. International Journal of Information Management, 
33(1), 235–241. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2012.07.009
Stieninger, M., & Nedbal, D. (2014). Characteristics of 
cloud computing in the business context: A systematic 
literature review. Global Journal of Flexible Systems Man-
agement, 15(1), 59–68. doi:10.1007/s40171-013-0055-4
Stock, J. R., Boyer, S. L., & Harmon, T. (2010). Research 
opportunities in supply chain management. Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science, 38(1), 32–41. doi:10.1007/
s11747-009-0136-2
Subashini, S., & Kavitha, V. (2010). A survey on security 
issues in service delivery models of cloud computing. 
Journal of Network and Computer Applications.
Suleman, H. (2012). Why should African academics care 
about Open Access? Retrieved from http://repository.
up.ac.za/handle/2263/18808
Sultan, N. (2010). Cloud computing for education: A new 
dawn? International Journal of Information Management, 
30(2), 109–116. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2009.09.004
Sunitha, C., Kokilam, V. K., & Preethi, M. B. (2013, 
December). Medical Informatics-Perk up Health Care 
through Information; Mumbai. CSI Communications 
Journal, 37(9), 7–8.
Swarts, P., & Wachira, E. (2010). ICT in Education 
Situational Analysis. Tanzania: Global e-Schools and 
Communities Initiative. Retrieved from http://www.
gesci.org/assets/files/Knowledge Centre/Situational 
Analysis_Tanzania.pdf
347

Compilation of References
Taheri, J., Choon Lee, Y., Zomaya, A. Y., & Siegel, H. J. 
(2013). A Bee Colony based optimization approach for 
simultaneous job scheduling and data replication in grid 
environments. Computers & Operations Research, 40(6), 
1564–1578. doi:10.1016/j.cor.2011.11.012
Tang, Q., Gupta, S. K. S., & Varsamopoulos, G. (2008). 
Energy-efficient thermal aware task scheduling for ho-
mogeneous high performance computing data centers: A 
cyber-physical approach. IEEE Transactions on Parallel 
and Distributed Systems, 19(11), 1458–1472.
Teddlie, C., & Yu, F. (2007). Mixed methods sampling: 
A typology with examples. Journal of Mixed Methods 
Research, 1(1), 77–100. doi:10.1177/2345678906292430
Thakur, I. S. (2006). Introduction Environmental Bio-
technology. New Delhi: IK International.
Thibodeau, P. (August 03, 2011). Data centers use 2% of 
u.s. energy, below forecast. Computer world.
Thomas, P. Y. (2009). Cloud Computing: A potential 
paradigm for practising the scholarship of teaching and 
learning. Retrieved May 4, 2014, from http://www.ais.
up.ac.za/digi/docs/thomas_paper.pdf
Tilley, S. R., & Parveen, T. (2013). Software Testing in the 
Cloud: Perspectives on an Emerging Discipline. Informa-
tion Science Reference. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-2536-5
Tiwari, A. K. (2010). Infrastructure for Sustainable Rural 
Development. New Delhi: Regal Publications.
Torrejón, D.A.R. & Ramos, J.M.M. (2013). Text Alignment 
Module in CoReMo 2.1 Plagiarism Detector. Notebook for 
Uncovering Plagiarism, Authorship, and Social Software 
Misuse (PAN) at CLEF.
Truong, D. (2014). Cloud-based solutions for supply chain 
management: A post-adoption study. Paper presented at 
the ASBBS 21st Annual Conference, Las Vegas, CA.
Truong, D. (2010). How cloud computing enhances 
competitive advantages: A research model for small busi-
nesses. The Business Review, Cambridge, 15(1), 59–65.
Tushman, M. L., & Nadler, D. A. (1978). Information 
processing as an integrating concept in organizational 
design. Academy of Management Review, 3(3), 613–624.
Umesh, B. & S, R. C. (2010). Optimal placement algorithms 
for virtual machines. arXiv preprint arXiv:1011.5064.
University Ranking (UR). (2014). Retrieved from http://
www.webometrics.info/en/Ranking_africa/Sub_saha-
ran_Africa
Van der Vorst, J. G. A. J., & Beulens, A. J. M. (2002). 
Identifying sources of uncertainty to generate supply chain 
redesign strategies. International Journal of Physical 
Distribution & Logistics Management, 32(6), 409–430. 
doi:10.1108/09600030210437951
Van, H. N., Tran, F., & Menaud, J.-M. (2010). Performance 
and power management for cloud infrastructures. In Cloud 
Computing (CLOUD), 2010 IEEE 3rd International 
Conference on, pages 329–336.
Vaquero, L. M., Rodero-Merino, L., Caceres, J., & Lindner, 
M. (2009). Caceres J and Lindner M, A Break in the Clouds: 
Towards a Cloud Definition. Computer Communication 
Review, 39(1), 50–55. doi:10.1145/1496091.1496100
Vaughan-Nichols, S. J. (2008). Virtualization sparks 
security concerns. IEEE computer, 41(8), 13-15.
Veen, J. (2000). The Art & Science of Web Design. In-
dianapolis, IN: New Riders Publishing.
Venkatachalam, V., & Franz, M. (2005). Power reduction 
techniques for microprocessor systems. ACM Computing 
Surveys, 37(3), 195–237. doi:10.1145/1108956.1108957
Venkatesh, V. (1985). Determinants of Perceived Ease 
of Use: Integrating Control, Intrinsic Motivation, and 
Emotion into the Technology Acceptance Model. Infor-
mation Systems Research, 11(4), 342–365. doi:10.1287/
isre.11.4.342.11872
Venkatesh, V., & Davis, F. D. (2000). A theoretical 
extension of the technology acceptance model: Four 
longitudinal field studies. Management Science, 46(2), 
186–204. doi:10.1287/mnsc.46.2.186.11926
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M. G., Davis, G. B., & Davis, F. 
D. (2003). User acceptance of information technology: 
Toward a unified view. Management Information Systems 
Quarterly, 27(3), 425–478.
348

Compilation of References
Verma, A., Ahuja, P., & Neogi, A. (2008). pmapper: 
power and migration cost aware application placement in 
virtualized systems. In Middleware 2008 (pp. 243–264). 
Springer.
Vickery, S. K., Droge, C., Setia, P., & Sambamurthy, V. 
(2010). Supply chain information technologies and orga-
nizational initiatives: Complementary versus independent 
effects on agility and firm performance. International 
Journal of Production Research, 48(23), 7025–7042. 
doi:10.1080/00207540903348353
Vijayrani, S. (2013, December). Economic Health Re-
cords: An Overview. Mumbai. CSI Communications 
Journal, 37(9), 9–11.
VmWare (2012). Vmware.
VMware. (1983). Capacity planner. http://www.vmware.
com/products/capacityplanner/
VMware. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.vmware.com/
Vosloo, S. (2009). The effects of texting on literacy: 
Modern scourge or opportunity? Retrieved March 15, 
2010, from http://vosloo.net/wp-content/uploads/pubs/
texting_and_literacy_apr09_sv.pdf
Vouk, M. A. (2008). Cloud computing: Issues, research 
and implementations. Journal of Computing and Informa-
tion Technology, 16(4), 235–246.
Vouk, M. A. (2008). Virtualization of information tech-
nology resources. In Electronic Commerce: A Manage-
rial Perspective 2008 (5th ed.). Prentice-Hall Business 
Publishing.
Wakefield, J. S., Warren, S. J., & Alsobrook, M. (2011). 
Learning and teaching as communicative actions: A 
mixed-methods twitter study. Knowledge Management 
& E-Learning: An International Journal, 3(4), 563–584.
Walterbusch, M., Martens, B., & Teuteberg, F. (2013). 
Evaluating cloud computing services from a total cost of 
ownership perspective. Management Research Review, 
36(6), 613–638. doi:10.1108/01409171311325769
Wang, L., Von Laszewski, G., Kunze, M., & Tao, J. 
(2008). Cloud computing: A Perspective study. Proc. Grid 
Computing Environments (GCE) workshop. doi:10.1007/
s00354-008-0081-5
Wang, W., Tolk, A., & Wang, W. (2009). The levels of 
conceptual interoperability model: Applying systems 
engineering principles to M&S. In Wainer, G., Shaffer, 
C., McGraw, R. & Chinni, M. (Eds.), Spring Simulation 
Multiconference (article no.: 168). San Diego, CA: Society 
for Computer Simulation International.
Wang, C., Cao, N., Li, J., Ren, K., & Lou, W. (2010) 
Secure Ranked Keyword Search over Encrypted Cloud 
Data.Proceedings of the 30th International Conference 
on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS’10), Genoa, 
Italy, June 21-25, 2010. doi:10.1109/ICDCS.2010.34
Wang, E. T. G., Tai, J. C. F., & Wei, H. L. (2006). A virtual 
integration theory of improved supply-chain performance. 
Journal of Management Information Systems, 23(2), 
41–64. doi:10.2753/MIS0742-1222230203
Wang, K., & Lin, C. L. (2012). The adoption of mobile val-
ue-added services: Investigating the influence of IS quality 
and perceived playfulness. Managing Service Quality, 
22(2), 184–208. doi:10.1108/09604521211219007
Wang, M., Chen, Y., & Khan, M. J. (2014). Mobile cloud 
learning for higher education: A case study of Moodle in 
the cloud. International Review of Research in Open and 
Distance Learning, 15(2), 254–267. 
Wang, S., Liu, Z., Sun, Q., Zou, H., & Yang, F. (2014). 
Towards an accurate evaluation of quality of cloud ser-
vice in service-oriented cloud computing. Journal of 
Intelligent Manufacturing, 25(2), 283–291. doi:10.1007/
s10845-012-0661-6
Wanjiku, R. (2009). East African universities take advan-
tage of Google cloud. Info World. Retrieved from http://
news.idg.no/cw/art.cfm?id=D3ED873F-1A64-6A71-
CE3B759E5A305061
Warden, P. (2012). Big Data Glossary. Mumbai: Shroff 
Publishers & Distributors Private Limited.
Wayne, J., & Timothy, G. (2011). Guidelines on Security 
and Privacy in Public Cloud Computing. Information 
Technology Laboratory.
Webber, J., Parastatidis, S., & Robinson, I. (2010). REST 
in Practice: Hypermedia and Systems Architecture. 
Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, Inc. doi:10.1007/978-
3-642-15114-9_3
349

Compilation of References
Weber-Jahnke, J., Peyton, L., & Topaloglou, T. (2012). 
eHealth system interoperability. Information Systems 
Frontiers, 14(1), 1–3. doi:10.1007/s10796-011-9319-8
WebSphere. I. (1983). Cloudburst. http://www-01.ibm.
com/software/webservers/cloudburst/
Wiederhold, G. (1995). Digital libraries, value, and 
productivity. Communications of the ACM, 38(4), 85–96.
Willcocks, L. P., Venters, W., & Whitley, E. A. (2013). 
Cloud sourcing and innovation: Slow train coming? A 
composite research study. Strategic Outsourcing: An 
International Journal, 6(2), 184–202. doi:10.1108/SO-
04-2013-0004
Winkler, H. (2009). How to improve supply chain flex-
ibility using strategic supply chain networks. Logistics 
Research, 1(1), 15–25. doi:10.1007/s12159-008-0001-6
Wolf, J. (2011). Sustainable supply chain management 
integration: A qualitative analysis of the German manu-
facturing industry. Journal of Business Ethics, 102(2), 
221–235. doi:10.1007/s10551-011-0806-0
Wong, K. (2009). Pictures in the Cloud. Computer Graph-
ics World, 32, 42–47.
Wood, T., Shenoy, P. J., Venkataramani, A., & Yousif, M. 
S. (2007). Black-box and gray-box strategies for virtual 
machine migration. In NSDI, volume 7, pages 229–242.
Wood, T., Tarasuk-Levin, G., Shenoy, P., Desnoyers, 
P., Cecchet, E., & Corner, M. D. (2009). Memory bud-
dies: Exploiting page shar- ing for smart colocation in 
virtualized data centers.InProceedings of the 2009 ACM 
SIGPLAN/SIGOPS International Conference on Virtual 
Execution Environments, VEE ’09, pages31–40, New 
York, NY, USA. ACM.
Wooffitt, R. (2005). Conversation analysis and discourse 
analysis: A comparative and critical introduction. Lon-
don: Sage.
Wooley, P. (2011). Identifying Cloud Computing Security 
Risks.
World Wide Worx & Fuseware. (2012). South African 
social media landscape 2012 – Executive summary. 
Retrieved April 21, 2013, from http://www.worldwide-
worx.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/Exec-Summary-
Social-Media-20121.pdf
Wu, Y., Cegielski, C. G., Hazen, B. T., & Hall, D. J. 
(2013). Cloud computing in support of supply chain 
information system infrastructure: Understanding when 
to go to the cloud. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 
49(3), 25–41. doi:10.1111/j.1745-493x.2012.03287.x
Wyatt, E., Griendling, K., & Mavris, D. (2012). Ad-
dressing interoperability in military systems-of-systems 
architectures. In BeaulieuA. (Ed.) International Systems 
Conference (pp. 1-8). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Computer 
Society Press.
Wycisk, C., McKelvey, B., & Hulsmann, M. (2008). 
Smart parts, supply networks as complex adaptive sys-
tems: Analysis and implications. International Journal 
of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 38(2), 
108–125. doi:10.1108/09600030810861198
Xinping, H. (2010). The Concept of Cloud Library. Infor-
mation Studies: Theory & Application, 6, 009.
Xuan, Z., Nattapong, W., Hao, L., & Xuejie, Z. (2010). 
Information Security Risk Management Framework for the 
Cloud Computing Environments.10th IEEE International 
Conference on Computer and Information Technology 
(CIT 2010).
Xu, J., & Fortes, J. A. B. (2010). Multi-objective virtual 
machine placement in virtualized data center environ-
ments.InProceedings of the 2010 IEEE/ACM Int’L Confer-
ence on Green Computing and Communications & Int’L 
Conference on Cyber, Physical and Social Computing, 
GREENCOM-CPSCOM ’10, pages179–188, Washington, 
DC, USA. IEEE Computer Society.
Xun, X. (2012). From cloud computing to cloud manufac-
turing. Robotics and Computer-integrated Manufacturing, 
28(1), 75–86. doi:10.1016/j.rcim.2011.07.002
Yang, F., Wu, D., Liang, L., Bi, G., & Wu, D. D. (2011). 
Supply chain DEA: Production possibility set and perfor-
mance evaluation model. Annals of Operations Research, 
185(1), 195–211. doi:10.1007/s10479-008-0511-2
Yang, S. Q. (2012). Move into the Cloud, shall we? Library 
Hi Tech News, 29(1), 4–7. doi:10.1108/07419051211223417
Yao, A. C.-C. (1980). New algorithms for bin packing. 
Journal of the ACM, 27(2), 207–227.
350

Compilation of References
Ye, K., Huang, D., Jiang, X., Chen, H., & Wu, S. (2010). 
Virtual machine based energy-efficient data center archi-
tecture for cloud computing: a performance perspective. 
In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE/ACM Int’l Conference 
on Green Computing and Communications & Int’l 
Conference on Cyber, Physical and Social Computing 
(pp. 171–178). IEEE Computer Society. doi:10.1109/
GreenCom-CPSCom.2010.108
Yeo, C. S., & Buyya, R. (2006). A taxonomy of market-
based resource management systems for utility-driven 
cluster computing. Software, Practice & Experience, 
36(13), 1381–1419. doi:10.1002/spe.725
Yoo, C. S. (2011). Cloud computing: Architectural and 
policy implications. Review of Industrial Organization, 
38(4), 405–421. doi:10.1007/s11151-011-9295-7
York, NY, USA. ACM . 
Yount, W. R. (2006). Research design and statistical 
analysis for Christian ministry. Louisville: NAPCE.
Yousafzai, S. Y., Foxall, G. R., & Pallister, J. G. (2010). 
Explaining internet banking behavior: Theory of reasoned 
action, theory of planned behavior, or technology accep-
tance model? Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 40(5), 
1172–1202. doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.2010.00615.x
Yuan, L., MacNeill, S., & Kraan, W. (2008). Open educa-
tional resources—Opportunities and challenges for higher 
education. Retrieved from http://learn.creativecommons.
org/wp-content/uploads/2008/09/oer_briefing_paper.pdf
Yu, J., Sheng, Q. Z., & Han, Y. (2013). Introduction to 
special issue on cloud and service computing. Service 
Oriented Computing and Applications, 7(2), 75–76. 
doi:10.1007/s11761-013-0132-8
Zacharias, N. T. (2012). Qualitative research methods for 
second language education: A coursebook. Newcastle 
upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Zacharia, Z. G., Sanders, N. R., & Fugate, B. S. (2014). 
Evolving functional perspectives within supply chain 
management. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 
50(1), 73–88. doi:10.1111/jscm.12022
Zhang Qi, Cheng Lu & Boutaba Raouf (2010). Cloud 
computing: state-of-the-art and research challenges. 
Journal of Internet Services and Applications. Springer-
Verlag. 1(1), pages 7-18.
Zhang, L., Chen, Y., Sun, R., Jing, S., & Yang, B. (2008). A 
task scheduling algorithm based on PSO for grid comput-
ing. International Journal of Computational Intelligence 
Research, 4(1), 37–43. doi:10.5019/j.ijcir.2008.123
Zhang, Q., Cheng, L., & Boutaba, R. (2010). Cloud 
computing: State-of-the-art and research challenges. 
Journal of Internet Services and Applications, 1(1), 7–18. 
doi:10.1007/s13174-010-0007-6
Zhang, X., Shae, Z.-Y., Zheng, S., & Jamjoom, H. (2012). 
Virtual machine migration in an over-committed cloud. 
In Network Operations and Management Symposium 
(NOMS), 2012IEEE, pages196–203.
Zhao, C., Zhang, S., Liu, Q., Xie, J., & Hu, J. (2009, 
September). Independent tasks scheduling based on 
genetic algorithm in cloud computing. In Wireless 
Communications, Networking and Mobile Computing, 
2009. WiCom’09. 5th International Conference on (pp. 
1-4). IEEE.
Zhao, M., & Figueiredo, R. J. (2007). Experimental study 
of virtual machine migration in support of reservation of 
cluster resources. In Proceedings of the 2Nd International 
Workshop on Virtualization Technology in Distributed 
Computing, VTDC ’07, pages 5:1–5:8, New
Zhuge, H. (2011). Semantic linking through spaces for 
cyber-physical-socio intelligence: A methodology. Arti-
ficial Intelligence, 175(5-6), 988–1019. doi:10.1016/j.
artint.2010.09.009
Zomaya, A. Y., & Teh, Y. H. (2001). Observations on 
using genetic algorithms for dynamic load-balancing. 
Parallel and Distributed Systems. IEEE Transactions on, 
12(9), 899–911.
351

﻿
About the Contributors
﻿
N. Raghavendra Rao has a doctorate in the area of finance from University of Pune India. He is 
an advisor to FINAT Consultancy Services India. Dr. Rao has a rare distinction of having experience 
in the combined areas of Information Technology and Business applications. His rich experience in 
Industry is matched with a parallel academic experience in Management & IT in Business Schools. He 
is a visiting Professor to Business Schools in India. He has over two and half decades of experience in 
the development of application software related to manufacturing, service oriented organizations, fi-
nancial institutions and business enterprises. He presents papers related to Information technology and 
Knowledge Management at National and International conferences. He contributes articles on Informa-
tion Technology to mainstream newspapers and journals. His areas of publications related to research 
are Mobile Computing, Virtual Technology, and Commerce in Space, Ubiquitous Commerce, Cloud 
Computing, and Innovation Management.
***
Sourav Kanti Addya is pursuing a Ph.D. in Department of Computer Science Engg at National In-
stitute of Technology, Rourkela, India. He is also a visiting researcher in Department of Computer and 
Electrical Engineering at San Diego State university, USA. His area of research is cloud computing. His 
other areas of research are wireless sensor netwoks and network security. He obtained his M. Tech and 
B. Tech in computer science & Engg form NIT Rourkela, India and West Bengal University of Technol-
ogy, India respectively. He has 3 years of teaching experience. His technical interests include Algorithm 
Design, Computer Networks, Optimization techniques, Information security and Web Technologies.
Simon Broome is a published and experienced Prince certified Programme/Senior Project Manager 
with Cranfield change management accreditation, with considerable experience of managing UK based 
and offshore Projects. He is currently leading a programme of UK Technology Strategy Board (TSB) 
sponsored research and development projects at Jaguar Land Rover. Simon has managed a number of 
large publicly funded, high visibility projects with the European Regional development fund (ERDF) 
FP7 program and with the UK Technology Strategy Board competition based funded project programme, 
and has extensive experience (20 years) in leading large multinational software delivery projects with 
international teams in the Czech republic, America, France, Germany, Brazil, and a number of locations 
in India, chiefly Bangalore.
352

About the Contributors
Chaka Chaka is a senior lecturer in the Department of Applied Languages, Faculty of Humanities, 
at the Tshwane University of Technology (Pretoria), South Africa. He previously lectured at three South 
African universities. His research interests include the following areas: computer-mediated communi-
cation; electronic learning (e-learning); computer assisted language learning; mobile learning; mobile 
assisted language learning; learning and teaching through text and instant messaging; Web 2.0 learning/
Mobile Web 2.0 learning; Web 3.0/Mobile Web 3.0 learning; Semantic Web learning/Mobile Semantic 
Web learning; online genre and discourse analysis; knowledge management; and learning organization. 
He has published book chapters related to each of these research areas. One of his latest (2015) published 
book chapters is: “Digital identity, social presence technologies, and presence learning.” In Wright, R. 
D. (Ed.), Student-Teacher Interaction in Online Learning Environments (pp. 181-203). Hershey, PA.: 
IGI Global (ISBN: 978-1-4666-6462-3). He has also published articles for the Cutter IT Journal.
José C. Delgado is an Associate Professor at the Computer Science and Engineering Department of 
the Instituto Superior Técnico (University of Lisbon), in Lisbon, Portugal, where he earned the Ph.D. 
degree in 1988. He lectures courses in the areas of Computer Architecture, Information Technology, 
and Service Engineering. He has performed several management roles in his faculty, namely Director 
of the Taguspark campus, near Lisbon, and Coordinator of the B.Sc. and M.Sc. in Computer Science 
and Engineering at that campus. He has been the coordinator of and researcher in several international 
research projects. As an author, his publications include one book, 20 book chapters and more than 50 
papers in international refereed conferences and journals.
Debbie Garside is CEO and Scrum Product Owner of GeoLang’s Ascema Solution, protecting criti-
cal content across boundaries, which found its origins from within the IPCRESS project collaboration 
between GeoLang, University of Surrey and Jaguar LandRover. With 25+ years of experience running 
IT companies, Debbie is an expert in cyber security and natural language. Awarded the first Prince of 
Wales Innovation Scholarship by University of Wales, Debbie is a Senior Visiting Research Fellow at 
Glyndwr University. Debbie sits on the advisory board to HPC Wales - £40 million high performance 
computing network and was an Advisory Board Member to Wikimedia Foundation. An editor of two 
international (ISO) standards, Debbie chaired a number of BSI/ISO committees as Principle UK Expert 
and is a named contributor to related internet standards by the Internet Engineering Task Force. Debbie 
is currently writing her PhD thesis ‘Human Visual Perception in Cyber Security’ and has patented her 
Pseudo-Isochromatic CAPTCHA System.
Lee Gillam is a Senior Lecturer in the Department of Computing at the University of Surrey, and 
Chartered IT Professional Fellow of the British Computer Society (FBCS CITP). Research interests 
and teaching activities cover Cloud Computing, Information Retrieval and Information Extraction and 
Ontology Learning, and the Legal, Ethical and Professional dimensions of Computing. He is the Found-
ing Editor-in-Chief of the Springer Journal of Cloud Computing Advances, Systems and Applications 
(JoCCASA), an editor of a Springer book on Cloud Computing, and has been PI on several Cloud 
research projects with funding from industry and the UK research councils, most recently for the UK 
Technology Strategy Board.
353

About the Contributors
K. Hariharanath MBA PhD has 15+ years of experience in IT product design, development and 
implementation. He has experience in IT products ranging from enterprise suite of products to e-commerce 
products. His doctoral work is ‘Enterprise Application Integration’ as a tool for integrating IT infrastruc-
ture in companies with the business objective of linking business to Information Technology. All along 
his career, he has been at the center of teaching on a visiting professor basis at ICFAI, Hyderabad and 
SSN School of Management, Chennai. His teaching interests are strategic management and IT Business 
Strategy. He has worked on a consulting assignment in building a new generation business model based 
on social marketing outlook for a start-up e-commerce company. He is currently working as professor 
at SSN School of Management and Computer Applications, India.
Mouna Jouini is a PhD student in the Department of Computer Science at the Tunis University 
in the Higher Institute of Management (ISG). She received her Mastery diploma on computer science 
applied to management in 2008 from the University of Tunis in the Higher School of Economics and 
Management of Tunis (ESSECTT) and her master’s degree in 2010 from the Tunis University in the 
Higher Institute of Management (ISG). Her research interest includes software engineering metrics, 
cloud computing, cyber security and security measurement and quantification. She has published and 
participated in several international conferences including topics related to the computer science, cloud 
computing, and cyber security.
Kijpokin Kasemsap received his BEng degree in Mechanical Engineering from King Mongkut’s 
University of Technology Thonburi, his MBA degree from Ramkhamhaeng University, and his DBA de-
gree in Human Resource Management from Suan Sunandha Rajabhat University. He is a Special Lecturer 
at Faculty of Management Sciences, Suan Sunandha Rajabhat University based in Bangkok, Thailand. 
He is a Member of International Association of Engineers (IAENG), International Association of En-
gineers and Scientists (IAEST), International Economics Development and Research Center (IEDRC), 
International Association of Computer Science and Information Technology (IACSIT), International 
Foundation for Research and Development (IFRD), and International Innovative Scientific and Research 
Organization (IISRO). He also serves on the International Advisory Committee (IAC) for International 
Association of Academicians and Researchers (INAAR). He has numerous original research articles in 
top international journals, conference proceedings, and book chapters on business management, human 
resource management, and knowledge management published internationally.
George W. Kibirige is an Assistant Lecturer at the Department of Informatics, Sokoine University of 
Agriculture, Tanzania. He holds BSc in Information and Communication Technology Management from 
Mzumbe University and MSc. Computer Science (Information Security) from University of Technology 
Malaysia, Malaysia. His research interest is in the area of Information Security especially on awareness.
Dilip Kumar is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 
NIT Jamshedpur, INDIA. He has 15 years of teaching experience in undergraduate level in the field of 
Computer Science and Engineering. He received his B.E in Computer Science and Engineering from 
BIT Sindri and M. Tech in Computer Science from NIT Rourkela in 2014. He is doing his PhD from 
National Institute of Technology Jamshedpur in the field of Optimization in Cloud Computing. His 
technical interests include Cloud Computing, Image Processing, Algorithm and Optimization. He is 
also member of Computer Society of India and Robotic Society of India.
354

About the Contributors
Tarni Mandal received a Bachelor of Science (Hons.) in Statistics in 1977 followed by a Master of 
Science in Statistics in 1980 from Bhagalpur University. He received a Master of Science in Mathematics 
from Ranchi University in 1995 and was awarded his PhD degree from Ranchi University in 2001. He 
is working at National Institute of Technology, Jamshedpur as Associate Professor in the department of 
Mathematics. He has more than 30 years of Teaching Experience in undergraduate and graduate levels 
in the field of Mathematics & Statistics. His research interest includes Operations Research, Statistics, 
Security and Fractional Functional Programming Problem. He is also a member of ISTE and member 
of International Academy of Physical Sciences.
Scott Notley graduated from the University of Southampton in 1995 with a MEng in Electronic 
Engineering and received a Ph.D. from the University of Southampton in 2002. His thesis investigated 
the application of non-linear signal processing techniques and dynamical modelling to the problem of 
predicting epileptic seizures from EEG signals. He is currently a research fellow at the University of 
Manchester where his research interests lie mainly in the areas of signal and image processing with an 
emphasis on deriving robust quantitative scientific measurements from bio-medical data. Other particular 
active research areas of interest are pattern recognition, image segmentation, spiking neural networks 
and computational neuroscience.
Latifa Ben Arfa Rabai is a University associate professor in the Department of Computer Science 
at the Tunis University in the Higher Institute of Management (ISG). She received the computer sci-
ence Engineering diploma in 1989 from the sciences faculty of Tunis and the PhD, from The Sciences 
Faculty of Tunis in 1992. Her research interest includes software engineering trends quantification, 
quality assessment in education and e-learning, and security measurement and quantification. She has 
published in information sciences Journal, IEEE Technology and Engineering Education magazine. She 
has participated in several international conferences covering topics related to the computer science, 
E-learning, quality assessment in education, cyber security.
Bibhudatta Sahoo obtained his M. Tech. and Ph.D. degrees in Computer Engineering from NIT, 
Rourkela. He has 24 years of Teaching Experience in undergraduate and graduate levels in the field of 
Computer Science & Engineering. He is presently Assistant Professor in the Department of Computer 
Science & Engineering, NIT Rourkela, INDIA. His technical interests include Data Structures & Al-
gorithm Design, Parallel & Distributed Systems, Networks, Computational Machines, Algorithms for 
VLSI Design, Performance evaluation methods and modelling techniques Distributed computing system, 
Networking algorithms, and Web engineering. He is member of IEEE and ACM. He was also awarded 
for National Scholarship for PG study.
Camilius Sanga is an Associate Professor of Informatics in the Department of Informatics at Sokoine 
University of Agriculture (SUA), Tanzania. He is a head of Department of Informatics in the Faculty of 
Science, SUA. He has a PhD in Computer Science from University of the Western Cape, South Africa. 
Also, he holds a MSc. in Computer Science and a BSc. in Computer Science from Osmania University 
and University of Dar es Salaam respectively. His research interest is in the area of Information and Com-
munication Technology for Development (ICT4D). He has published papers in a number of International 
journals. He has also published articles in local and International conferences in the field of ICT4D. 
Furthermore, he has co-authored two books as well as a number of book chapters. Some of the research 
355

About the Contributors
projects in which Sanga has been involved are: (i) Development of Monitoring and Evaluation system 
for Projects under Enhancing Pro-poor Innovations in Natural Resources and Agricultural Value-chains 
(EPINAV) at SUA, (ii) Promoting participation of female students in Science, Technology, Engineering 
and Mathematics using e-learning and (iii) Farmer Voice Radio (FVR) Project - Building a radio - based, 
impact driven small farmer extension service system. Currently, he is an assistant project leader for the 
research titled “The role of mobile phones towards improving coverage of agricultural extension services: 
a case study of maize value chain”. Lastly, he is involved in the project titled “Assessing the impacts of 
climate variability and change on agricultural systems in Eastern Africa while enhancing the region’s 
capacity to undertake integrated assessment of vulnerabilities to future changes in climate” (2012-2014).
R. Todd Stephens is the Senior Technical Architect for the AT&T Corporation. For the past 32 years, 
Todd has worked in the Information Technology field including leadership positions at BellSouth, Coca-
Cola, Georgia-Pacific and Cingular Wireless. Todd has delivered keynotes, tutorials and educational 
sessions for a wide variety of technology conferences. Todd holds degrees in Mathematics and Computer 
Science from Columbus State University, an MBA degree from Georgia State University, and a Ph.D. 
in Information Systems from Nova Southeastern University. Todd has been awarded twelve U.S. patents 
in the field of technology and authored/co-authored several books on web-enabled applications, Open 
Source, Collaboration, and Web 2.0.
Ashok Kumar Turuk is working as an associate professor in Dept. of Computer Science & Engi-
neering at National Institute of Technology, Rourkela, India. He obtained his Ph.D. degree in Computer 
Science & Engineering from Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India and his M. Tech and B. 
Tech form National Institute of Technology, Rourkela, India. He has 18 years of Teaching Experience in 
undergraduate and graduate levels in the field of computer Science & Engineering. His current research 
area includes Optical networking, cloud computing, and wireless sensor network. He has handled several 
technical projects.
356

  357
Index
3G Textile 139-141, 149-150, 152-153
3G Textile Mills 141, 149-150, 152-153
A
Application Software 156, 219, 223, 231, 235, 266
Architecture 1, 3-4, 7-9, 14, 33, 37-40, 44, 46, 59, 
63-64, 76, 109, 115-117, 121, 128, 158-159, 
169, 193, 196, 225, 244, 261, 263-264, 266, 
268-270
B
Big Data 138, 141-149, 151-152, 154
BYOD (Bring Your Own Device) 103
C
Care plus Cure 223, 225-235
case study 50, 69, 74, 81-87, 98-99, 111, 139
Cloud Computing 1-17, 20, 22, 24, 27, 29-30, 34, 
50, 61-64, 67, 70, 74, 76-77, 79-91, 99, 103-
112, 115-116, 119-120, 123-128, 133, 138, 
141-142, 147, 149-150, 152-162, 165-166, 169, 
191-196, 199-204, 219, 221-225, 229-231, 
233-236, 238-241, 243-246, 251, 257, 259-265, 
267, 281, 286
Cloud Computing Ecosystem 79, 87, 103
Collaborative Technology 165, 221, 231, 233, 235
Compliance 26, 29, 43-45, 50, 58, 225
Conformance 26, 29, 44-45, 50, 58
Consumer 10-11, 43-44, 58-59, 64, 79, 81, 103, 128, 
150, 186, 200, 236
Consumerization 79-81, 96, 99, 103
Core Team 156, 159-162, 165, 228, 230-235
D
Data Center 1, 9, 12, 15, 161, 224-225, 239, 243, 
247, 261-263, 265, 267-270, 273-274, 278, 
281-282, 286-287
Data Cleansing 154
Data Leak 191
Data Mining 154, 165, 169, 194, 227, 231, 236
Data Ware House 147, 154, 165, 169, 226-227, 230-
231, 233, 236
Distributed Interoperability 34, 46, 59
E
Ecosystem 79-80, 87, 91, 103, 169, 200
Elasticity 157-158, 169
Electronic Library 133
end user 11, 22, 60, 62, 64-65, 67, 69-70, 73-74, 287
Energy Efficient 238-240, 246, 260, 281
Enterprise Architecture Framework 37, 39, 44, 59
Experiential Learning 107-111, 124, 128
F
Facebook 80, 84-85, 87-91, 94-99, 103, 128
G
Globalization 138, 140, 157, 159, 166, 222-223, 
225, 234-235
Greedy Algorithm 240, 242, 260
greedy heuristic 242, 247, 252, 254-255, 257
Green Computing 159, 260, 268
Grid Computing 12, 112, 195, 238, 259, 262-263
H
Heterogeneous 28, 152, 233, 238, 241-243, 259
Heuristics 68-69, 240, 260, 268, 281

358  
Index
Higher Education 79-81, 103-105, 120
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) 62, 76
human factors 62, 74
Hypervisor 12-15, 17, 266, 286-287
I
IaaS 2, 10, 12, 15, 24, 27, 61, 65, 70, 77, 83, 115, 
117-121, 123, 136, 239, 241-242
Information and Communications Technology (ICT) 
133
Information Processing 142, 192-194, 201-204, 219
Information Technology 2, 4, 9, 61, 64-65, 70, 72, 
74, 80, 103, 138, 140, 144-145, 149, 152, 154, 
157-158, 165, 169, 193, 219, 228
Intellectual Property 122, 171-173, 191
Interoperability 26-30, 32, 34-35, 37, 40, 42-46, 48, 
50-51, 59, 105, 124, 265
Interoperability Framework 26, 29-30, 32, 40, 43, 
50-51, 59
Interoperability Method 59
K
Knowledge Based System 156-157, 222, 230, 235
Kolb Experiential Learning 107-111, 124, 128
Kolb experiential learning theory 107-109, 111
L
linear programming 238, 240-241, 246, 257, 281
M
Mind Invoking 153, 234, 236
N
Natural Disasters 156, 164-165, 169
NP-Complete 240
O
Operating System 12-14, 24, 70, 152, 219, 233, 240, 
266, 286
Optimization 240-243, 257, 261, 268, 270, 274, 
281-282, 286
Outsourcing 24, 27, 33-35, 61, 196
P
PaaS 2, 10-12, 24, 27, 61, 65, 70, 77, 115, 117-121, 
123, 135, 239
personal computers 2-3, 159
Pervasive Computing 81, 142, 194, 221-222, 236
Pervasive Device 233, 236
Plagiarism Detection 171-172, 178-181, 187, 191
Post-PC Trends 80-82, 103
Predictive Analytics 148, 154
Private Cloud 9, 145, 149, 152-154, 160-161, 165, 
196, 225-233, 235-236
Protocol 30, 42, 179, 196
Provider 3-4, 10, 15-16, 43-44, 50, 58-59, 61, 64, 
105, 127-128, 195, 202, 263, 266-268, 286
Provisioning 1-2, 5, 15, 26, 61, 63, 199, 239-240, 
281
R
Registry 61-69, 76
Resource Allocation 164, 238-243, 246-248, 260
Resource Utilization 15, 238-243, 246-247, 249-
251, 255, 261, 266, 281, 287
S
SaaS 2, 11, 25, 35, 61, 65, 70, 77, 86, 115-116, 118-
121, 123, 135, 172, 239
Scalability 2, 11, 142, 157-158, 169, 193-194, 278
Security Risk 25, 186
Server Consolidation 239-240, 260, 267, 281
Service Model 77, 172
Service Orchestration 60, 64-65, 67, 77
Simulated Annealing 257, 261, 268, 274-276, 278, 
281-282, 286
social networking 79, 81, 85-88, 91, 98, 103, 148
Software Tool 147, 236
“Stakeholder” or “User” or “Actor” 133
Stitching 184-185, 187, 191
Streaming Data 145, 148, 154
Supply Chain 28, 34, 148, 171-172, 174-177, 182, 
185-186, 191-194, 196-198, 200-204, 219
Supply Chain Management 192, 194, 196, 201, 204, 
219
T
Task Consolidation 238-240, 247, 252, 257, 260
Textile Mills 139, 141, 149-150, 152-153

  359
Index
Twitter 79-80, 83-84, 87-89, 91, 98-99, 103, 122, 
143, 149
U
Unstructured Data 145, 154
Urbanization 162, 169
V
Virtualization 1, 4, 9-10, 12-17, 22, 25-26, 34, 86, 
106, 120, 141, 153, 157, 234, 239-240, 243, 
262, 265-266, 281, 287
Virtual Machine (VM) 261, 266, 268-270, 274-275, 
278, 281-282, 287
Virtual Reality 138, 141-142, 150, 152-153, 221-
222, 225-226, 231-233, 236

